
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8374. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional interplay between cylindromatosis and histone deacetylase 6 in ciliary
homeostasis revealed by phenotypic analysis of double knockout mice.

Ran J(1,)(2), Yu F(2), Qin J(2), Zhang Y(2), Yang Y(2), Li D(2), Zhou J(1,)(2),
Liu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Life Sciences, Key Laboratory of 
Animal Resistance of Shandong Province, Key Laboratory of Molecular and Nano
Probes of the Ministry of Education, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Cilia are present in most vertebrate tissues with a wide variety of functions,
and abnormalities of cilia are linked to numerous human disorders. However, the
molecular events underlying ciliary homeostasis are poorly understood. In this
study, we generated double knockout (DKO) mice for the deubiquitinase
cylindromatosis (CYLD) and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), two critical ciliary
regulators. The Cyld/Hdac6 DKO mice were phenotypically normal and showed no
obvious variances in weight or behavior compared with their wild-type
littermates. Strikingly, Cyld loss-induced ciliary defects in the testis,
trachea, and kidney were abrogated in the Cyld/Hdac6 DKO mice. In addition, the
diminished a-tubulin acetylation and impaired sonic hedgehog signaling caused by 
loss of Cyld were largely restored by simultaneous deletion of Hdac6. We further 
found by immunofluorescence microscopy a colocalization of CYLD and HDAC6 at the 
centrosome/basal body and, interestingly, loss of Cyld promoted the localization 
of HDAC6 at the centrosome/basal body. These findings provide physiological
insight into the ciliary role of the CYLD/HDAC6 axis and suggest a functional
interplay between these two proteins in ciliary homeostasis.

PMID: 27028867  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Mar 18. pii: mjw009. [Epub ahead of print]

Kindlin1 regulates microtubule function to ensure normal mitosis.

Patel H(1), Stavrou I(2), Shrestha RL(3), Draviam V(3), Frame MC(2), Brunton
VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Genetics & Molecular Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh, EH4 2XR, UK
v.brunton@ed.ac.uk h.patel@ed.ac.uk. (2)Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre,
Institute of Genetics & Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road
South, Edinburgh, EH4 2XR, UK. (3)Department of Genetics, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EH, UK.

Loss of Kindlin 1 (Kin1) results in the skin blistering disorder Kindler Syndrome
(KS), whose symptoms also include skin atrophy and reduced keratinocyte
proliferation. Kin1 binds to integrins to modulate their activation and more
recently it has been shown to regulate mitotic spindles and cell survival in a
Plk1-dependent manner. Here we report that short-term Kin1 deletion in mouse skin
results in impaired mitosis, which is associated with reduced acetylated tubulin 
(ac-tub) levels and cell proliferation. In cells, impaired mitosis and reduced
ac-tub levels are also accompanied by reduced microtubule stability, all of which
are rescued by HDAC6 inhibition. The ability of Kin1 to regulate HDAC6-dependent 
cellular ac-tub levels is dependent on its phosphorylation by Plk1. Taken
together, these data define a novel role for Kin1 in microtubule acetylation and 
stability and offer a mechanistic insight into how certain KS phenotypes, such as
skin atrophy and reduced cell proliferation, arise.

© The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS.

PMID: 26993041  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Inflamm Res. 2016 Mar 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigenetic factors MeCP2 and HDAC6 control a-tubulin acetylation in cardiac
fibroblast proliferation and fibrosis.

Tao H(1,)(2), Yang JJ(3), Shi KH(1,)(2), Li J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Second Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, 230601, China. (2)Cardiovascular Research Center, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, 230601, China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, The
Second Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. yjjncs01@126.com.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Mei Shan Road, Hefei, Anhui,
230032, China. yncs01@hotmail.com.

AIM AND OBJECTIVE: Cardiac fibrosis is an important pathological feature of
cardiac remodeling in heart diseases. Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is a
transcription inhibitor, and plays a key role in the fibrotic diseases. However, 
the precise role of MeCP2 in cardiac fibrosis remains unclear. a-tubulin plays an
essential role in cell function, whereby the acetylation state of a-Tubulin
dictates the efficiency of cell proliferation and differentiation. This study was
undertaken to investigate that MeCP2 dynamics affect the acetylation state of
a-tubulin in the cardiac fibrosis.
METHODS: Forty adult male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were randomly divided into two
groups, cardiac fibrosis was produced by common ISO. Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs)
were harvested from SD neonate rats and cultured. The expression of HDAC6, MeCP2,
a-SMA, collagen I was measured by western blotting and qRT-PCR. siRNA of HDAC6
and MeCP2 effect the proliferation of cardiac fibroblasts, and affect the
acetylation state of a-tubulin.
RESULTS: We have found the acetylation state of a-tubulin in cardiac fibroblasts 
as well as cardiac tissue from a ISO-induced rat cardiac fibrosis model and
observed a reduction in acetylated a-tubulin and an increase in the
a-tubulin-specific deacetylase, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Furthermore, we
have shown that treatment of cardiac fibroblasts with HDAC6 inhibitor Tubastatin 
A and HDAC6-siRNA can restore a-tubulin acetylation levels. In addition,
treatment of cardiac fibroblasts with MeCP2-siRNA blocked cell proliferation.
Knockdown of MeCP2 suppresses HDAC6 expression in activated cardiac fibroblasts
but increases the acetylation of a-tubulin.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that MeCP2 may negatively control the acetylation of
a-tubulin through HDAC6 in cardiac fibroblast proliferation and fibrosis. This
study indicated that MeCP2 could be a potentially new therapeutic option for
cardiac fibrosis.

PMID: 26975406  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 14. pii: jbc.M115.700047. [Epub ahead of print]

Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase 10 (USP10) Deubiquitinates and Stabilizes MutS
Homolog 2 (MSH2) to Regulate Cellular Sensitivity to DNA Damage.

Zhang M(1), Hu C(1), Tong D(2), Xiang S(1), Williams K(1), Bai W(1), Li GM(3),
Bepler G(4), Zhang X(5).

Author information: 
(1)USF Morsani College of Medicine, United States; (2)University of Toxicology
and Cancer Biology, United States; (3)University of Southern California, United
States; (4)Karmanos Cancer Institute, United States. (5)Karmanos Cancer
Institute, United States zhangx@karmanos.org.

MSH2 is a key DNA mismatch repair protein, which plays an important role in
genomic stability. In addition to its DNA repair function, MSH2 serves as a
sensor for DNA base analogs-provoked DNA replication errors and binds to various 
DNA damage-induced adducts to trigger cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. Loss or
depletion of MSH2 from cells renders resistance to certain DNA-damaging agents.
Therefore, the level of MSH2 determines DNA damage response. Previous studies
showed that the level of MSH2 protein is modulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway, and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) serves as an ubiquitin E3 ligase.
However, the deubiquitinating enzymes which regulate MSH2 remain unknown. Here we
report that ubiquitin-specific peptidase 10 (USP10) interacts with and stabilizes
MSH2. USP10 deubiquitinates MSH2 in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the protein
level of MSH2 is positively correlated with the USP10 protein level in a panel of
lung cancer cell lines. Knockdown of USP10 in lung cancer cells exhibits
increased cell survival and decreased apoptosis upon the treatment of DNA
methylating agent N-methyl-N-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) and antimetabolite
6-thioguanine (6-TG). The above phenotypes can be rescued by ectopic expression
of MSH2. In addition, knockdown of MSH2 decreases the cellular mismatch repair
activity. Overall, our results suggest a novel USP10-MSH2 pathway regulating DNA 
damage response and DNA mismatch repair.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26975374  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Pathogens. 2016 Feb 14;5(1). pii: E20. doi: 10.3390/pathogens5010020.

Histone Deacetylase 6 Regulates Bladder Architecture and Host Susceptibility
to Uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Lewis AJ(1), Dhakal BK(2), Liu T(3), Mulvey MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, 15 N. Medical Drive E., Salt Lake
City, UT 84112, USA. adam.lewis@path.utah.edu. (2)Department of Pathology,
University of Utah, 15 N. Medical Drive E., Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
bijayadhakal@gmail.com. (3)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, 2000
Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA. ting.liu@path.utah.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, 15 N. Medical Drive E., Salt Lake
City, UT 84112, USA. mulvey@path.utah.edu.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a non-canonical, mostly cytosolic histone
deacetylase that has a variety of interacting partners and substrates. Previous
work using cell-culture based assays coupled with pharmacological inhibitors and 
gene-silencing approaches indicated that HDAC6 promotes the actin- and
microtubule-dependent invasion of host cells by uropathogenic Escherichia coli
(UPEC). These facultative intracellular pathogens are the major cause of urinary 
tract infections. Here, we examined the involvement of HDAC6 in bladder
colonization by UPEC using HDAC6 knockout mice. Though UPEC was unable to invade 
HDAC6(-/-) cells in culture, the bacteria had an enhanced ability to colonize the
bladders of mice that lacked HDAC6. This effect was transient, and by six hours
post-inoculation bacterial titers in the HDAC6(-/-) mice were reduced to
levels seen in wild type control animals. Subsequent analyses revealed that the
mutant mice had greater bladder volume capacity and fluid retention, along with
much higher levels of acetylated a-tubulin. In addition, infiltrating neutrophils
recovered from the HDAC6(-/-) bladder harbored significantly more viable bacteria
than their wild type counterparts. Cumulatively, these changes may negate
any inhibitory effects that the lack of HDAC6 has on UPEC entry into individual
host cells, and suggest roles for HDAC6 in other urological disorders such as
urinary retention.

PMID: 26907353  [PubMed]


6. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2015 Nov;33(11):816-21.

[Inhibition effect of N-acetyl-seryl-aspartyl-lysyl-proline on myofibroblast
differentiation by regulating acetylated tubulin a in silicotic rat model].

[Article in Chinese]

Li S(1), Gao X(1), Xu D(1), Wang X(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang L(1), Deng H(1), Wei Z(1),
Tian J(1), Xu H(1), Yang F(2).

Author information: 
(1)North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan 063000, China.
(2)North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan 063000, China;
E-mail: fangyang1955@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the inhibition effect and mechanism of
N-acetyl-seryl-aspartyl-lysyl-proline (Ac-SDKP)on myofibroblast differentiation
via regulating acetylated tubulin a (Ac-Tub a)in vivo and in vitro.
METHODS: Silicotic model were made by SiO2 douched and divided into 6 groups as
follows: control (4w, 8w)group, silicotic model (4w, 8w)group and post-or
pre-treatment by Ac-SDKP group. Pulmonary fibroblasts were divided into 5 groups:
(1) control; (2) Ang II; (3) Ang II+Ac-SDKP; (4) Ang II+Valsartan; (5) Ang II+TCS
histone deacetylase (HDAC)6 20b. The localization of Ac-Tub a and a-smooth muscle
actin (SMA) were observed by immunohistochemical (IHC) and immunofluorescence
staining. The protein levels of Ac-Tub a, a-SMA, collagen type I (col I) and
HDAC6 were measured by western blot.
RESULTS: In silicotic nodules and interstitial fibrosis area, positive expression
of a-SMA, a classical marker of myofibroblast, was ob-served by IHC, accompanied 
with absence expression of Ac-Tub a. Furthermore, Ac-SDKP post-treatment could
attenuate the levels of col I, a-SMA and HDAC6 to 48.39%, 52.63% and 70.18%
compared with the silicotic 8w group respectively. And in Ac-SDKP pre-treatment
group, compared with the silicotic 8w group, these protein levels were decreased 
to 32.26%, 64.91% and 54.39% respectively (P<0.05). The up-regulation of Ac-Tub a
was found in Ac-SDKP post-and pre-treatment and increased to 3.00 and 2.90 folds 
compared with the silicotic 8w group. Compared with control group, the levels of 
a-SMA, HDAC6 and col I in Ang II group were up-regulated to 1.66, 3.56 and 4.00
folds accompanied with down-regulation of Ac-Tub by 44.44% (P<0.05).
Pre-treatment with Valsartan, TCS HDAC6 20b or Ac-SDKP could inhibited all this
changes induced by Ang II in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Ac-SDKP can inhibit the myofibroblast differentiation and collagen
deposition via sup-press HDAC6 and up-regulate the expression of Ac-Tub a in vivo
and in vitro.

PMID: 26887263  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cell Signal. 2016 May;28(5):506-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.02.006. Epub 2016
Feb 11.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress mutant p53 transcription via HDAC8/YY1
signals in triple negative breast cancer cells.

Wang ZT(1), Chen ZJ(2), Jiang GM(3), Wu YM(4), Liu T(5), Yi YM(6), Zeng J(7), Du 
J(4), Wang HS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China; Department of Medical 
Genetics & Cell Biology, School of Basic Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou 511436, China. (2)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China. Electronic address: chenzhj@sysucc.org.cn.
(3)Hunan Cancer Hospital & The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, Changsha 410013, China. (4)Department of
Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China. (5)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer
Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China. (6)Department of Histology
and Embryology, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang 524023, China. (7)Department
of Medical Genetics & Cell Biology, School of Basic Sciences, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou 511436, China. (8)Department of Microbial and Biochemical
Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou
510006, China. Electronic address: whongsh@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

There is an urgent need to investigate the potential targeted therapy approach
for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Our present study reveals that histone 
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) suberoyl anilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and
sodium butyrate (NaB) significantly inhibit cell proliferation, arrest cell cycle
at G0/G1 phase, and induce mitochondrial related apoptosis of TNBC cells.
Further, SAHA and NaB decrease the phosphorylation, protein and mRNA levels of
mutant p53 (mtp53) in TNBC cells. While SAHA or NaB has no similar inhibition
effect on wild type p53 (wtp53). The inhibition apparently occurs at the level of
transcription because the down regulation of precursor p53 transcription is much 
more rapid (less than 2h) and sharp than that of mature p53. The knockdown of
HDAC8, while not HDAC6, inhibits the transcription of mtp53 in TNBC cells. The
luciferase assay and ChIP analysis reveal that both SAHA and NaB can reduce the
binding of transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) with the -102 to -96 position of
human p53 promoter. Knockdown of YY1 also significantly inhibits the
transcription of mtp53 in TNBC cells. Further, SAHA and NaB can inhibit the
association of HDAC8 and YY1, increase acetylation of residues 170-200 of YY1,
then decrease its transcription activities, and finally suppress YY1 induced p53 
transcription. Together, our data establish that SAHA and NaB can be considered
as drug candidates for TNBC patients, and HDAC8/YY1/mtp53 signals act as an
important target for TNBC treatment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876786  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Cell Sci. 2016 Apr 1;129(7):1305-11. doi: 10.1242/jcs.180885. Epub 2016 Feb 11.

HDAC6 regulates the dynamics of lytic granules in cytotoxic T lymphocytes.

Núñez-Andrade N(1), Iborra S(2), Trullo A(3), Moreno-Gonzalo O(1), Calvo E(4),
Catalán E(5), Menasche G(6), Sancho D(2), Vázquez J(4), Yao TP(7),
Martín-Cófreces NB(1), Sánchez-Madrid F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, UAM, IIS-IP,
Madrid 28006, Spain Laboratory of Intercellular communication, Fundación CNIC,
Madrid 28029, Spain. (2)Immunobiology of inflammation, Fundación CNIC, Madrid
28029, Spain. (3)Microscopy and Dynamic Imaging Unit, Fundación CNIC, Madrid
28029, Spain Spettroscopia biomedica in fluorescenza dinamica, Center of
Experimental Imaging, Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan 20132, Italy. (4)Proteomic
Unit, Fundación CNIC, Madrid 28029, Spain. (5)Dept. Biochemistry and Molecular
and Cell Biology, Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza 50009, Spain. (6)Laboratory
of Normal and Pathological Homeostasis of the Immune System, INSERM Unité Mixte
de Recherche, Paris 1163, France. (7)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer
Biology Duke University, Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. (8)Servicio de
Inmunología, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, UAM, IIS-IP, Madrid 28006,
Spain Laboratory of Intercellular communication, Fundación CNIC, Madrid 28029,
Spain fsmadrid@salud.madrid.org.

HDAC6 is a tubulin deacetylase involved in many cellular functions related to
cytoskeleton dynamics, including cell migration and autophagy. In addition, HDAC6
affects antigen-dependent CD4(+)T cell activation. In this study, we show that
HDAC6 contributes to the cytotoxic function of CD8(+)T cells. Immunization
studies revealed defective cytotoxic activityin vivoin the absence of HDAC6.
Adoptive transfer of wild-type orHdac6(-/-)CD8(+)T cells toRag1(-/-)mice
demonstrated specific impairment in CD8(+)T cell responses against vaccinia
infection. Mechanistically, HDAC6-deficient cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) showed
defectivein vitrocytolytic activity related to altered dynamics of lytic
granules, inhibited kinesin-1-dynactin-mediated terminal transport of lytic
granules to the immune synapse and deficient exocytosis, but not to target cell
recognition, T cell receptor (TCR) activation or interferon (IFN)<U+03B3> production.
Our results establish HDAC6 as an effector of the immune cytotoxic response that 
acts by affecting the dynamics, transport and secretion of lytic granules by
CTLs.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26869226  [PubMed - in process]


9. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 2. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7134. [Epub ahead of print]

Oncogenic K-ras confers SAHA resistance by up-regulating HDAC6 and c-myc
expression.

Wang Q(1), Tan R(2), Zhu X(3), Zhang Y(3), Tan Z(3), Su B(1,)(2,)(4), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Hunan, 
China. (3)Clinical Center for Gene Diagnosis and Therapy of The State Key
Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Hunan, China. (4)Department of Immunobiology and 
The Vascular Biology and Therapeutics Program, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) represent a new class of anticancer drugs. 
Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), the first HDI approved for the treatment 
of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL), is currently being tested in clinical trials
for other cancers. However, SAHA has been ineffective against solid tumors in
many clinical trials. A better understanding of molecular mechanisms of SAHA
resistance may provide the basis for improved patient selection and the
enhancement of clinical efficacy. Here we demonstrate that oncogenic K-ras
contributes to SAHA resistance by upregulating HDAC6 and c-myc expression. We
find that the high levels of HDAC6 expression are associated with activated K-ras
mutant in colon cancer patients. And expressions of HDAC6 and c-myc are increased
in fibroblasts transformed with activated K-ras. Surprisingly, we find that
activated K-ras transformed cells are more resistant to SAHA inhibition on cell
growth and anchorage-independent colony formation. We show that a K-ras inhibitor
sensitizes K-ras mutated lung cancer cells to SAHA induced growth inhibition. We 
also find that mutant K-ras induces HDAC6 expression by a MAP kinase dependent
pathway. Our study suggests that combined treatment with SAHA and K-ras
inhibitors may represent an effective strategy to overcome SAHA resistance.

PMID: 26848526  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Br J Dermatol. 2016 Feb 2. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14427. [Epub ahead of print]

Phase II Multicenter Trial of Oral Quisinostat, a Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor, 
in Patients with Previously Treated Stage IB-IVA Mycosis Fungoides/Sézary
Syndrome.

Child F(1), Ortiz-Romero PL(2), Alvarez R(3), Bagot M(4), Stadler R(5),
Weichenthal M(6), Alves R(7), Quaglino P(8), Beylot-Barry M(9), Cowan R(10),
Geskin LJ(11), Pérez-Ferriols A(12), Hellemans P(13), Elsayed Y(14), Phelps
C(14), Forslund A(13), Kamida M(15), Zinzani PL(16).

Author information: 
(1)St John's Institute of Dermatology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK. (2)Department of Dermatology, 12 de Octubre Hospital, Institute i+12,
Medical School, Complutense University, Madrid, Spain. (3)Portuguese Institute of
Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal. (4)Department of Dermatology, Saint-Louis Hospital,
Paris 7 University, Paris, France. (5)Johannes Wesling Medical Center, Department
of Dermatology, Minden, Germany. (6)University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein,
Department of Dermatology, Kiel, Germany. (7)Department of Dermatology, Hospital 
de Santo António - Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (8)University of 
Turin, Department of Medical Sciences and Human Oncology Section of Dermatology, 
Turin, Italy. (9)University Hospital of Bordeaux, Department of Dermatology,
Pessac, France. (10)Christie Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
Manchester, UK. (11)University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, Department of
Dermatology, Pittsburgh, USA. (12)Department of Dermatology, University General
Hospital, Valencia, Spain. (13)Janssen Research & Development, Beerse, Belgium.
(14)Janssen Research & Development, New Jersey, USA. (15)Janssen Pharmaceutical
K.K., Tokyo, Japan. (16)Institute of Hematology "Seràgnoli", University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Quisinostat is a hydroxamate, second-generation, orally available
pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor.
OBJECTIVES: This phase II trial evaluated the efficacy and safety of oral
quisinostat in patients with previously treated cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL).
METHODS: Patients received oral quisinostat 8 mg or 12 mg on days 1, 3 and 5 of
each week in 21-day treatment cycles. The primary efficacy endpoint was the
overall cutaneous response rate (RR) based on the modified Severity Weighted
Assessment Tool (mSWAT). Key secondary endpoints included global RR, duration of 
response (DOR) in skin, progression-free survival (PFS), pruritus relief, safety 
and pharmacodynamic markers.
RESULTS: Eight of 26 enrolled (25 evaluable) patients achieved =50% reduction in 
mSWAT score at least once, with confirmed cutaneous response in 6 patients (RR = 
24%). There was a low global RR of 8% versus the cutaneous RR of 24%. The DOR in 
skin ranged from 2.8 to 6.9 months. The median PFS was 5.1 months. Pruritus
relief was reported more frequently in cutaneous responders versus nonresponders 
(67% versus 32%). Serial tumor biopsies revealed an increase in acetylated
tubulin, indicating a target effect of HDAC6. Twenty-one out of 26 (81%) patients
were withdrawn from the study before or at clinical cutoff; 5 (19%) patients
continued to receive treatment with quisinostat and entered the long-term
extension at the time of clinical cutoff. The most common drug-related adverse
events were nausea, diarrhea, asthenia, hypertension, thrombocytopenia, and
vomiting. Grade 3 drug-related adverse events included hypertension, lethargy,
pruritus, chills, hyperkalemia, and pyrexia reported by 5 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Quisinostat at 12 mg dose on a 3 times weekly schedule is active in 
the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory CTCL, and has an acceptable
safety profile. Combination therapy with other drugs active in CTCL may be
appropriate. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26836950  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Org Biomol Chem. 2016 Feb 16;14(8):2537-49. doi: 10.1039/c5ob02625c.

Synthesis and SAR assessment of novel Tubathian analogs in the pursuit of potent 
and selective HDAC6 inhibitors.

De Vreese R(1), Depetter Y(1), Verhaeghe T(2), Desmet T(2), Benoy V(3), Haeck
W(3), Van Den Bosch L(3), D Hooghe M(1).

Author information: 
(1)SynBioC Research Group, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University,
Coupure Links 653, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. matthias.dhooghe@UGent.be. (2)Centre
for Industrial Biotechnology and Biocatalysis, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering,
Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. (3)Laboratory of
Neurobiology and Vesalius Research Center (VIB), Research Institute for
Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), KU Leuven, Belgium.

The synthesis of novel isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors is considered to be an
important, emerging field in medicinal chemistry. In this paper, the preparation 
and assessment of thirteen selective HDAC6 inhibitors is disclosed, elaborating
on a previously developed thiaheterocyclic Tubathian series. All compounds were
evaluated in vitro for their ability to inhibit HDAC6, and a selection of five
potent compounds was further screened toward all HDAC isoforms (HDAC1-11). The
capability of these Tubathian analogs to inhibit a-tubulin deacetylation was
assessed as well, and ADME/Tox data were collected. This thorough SAR evaluation 
revealed that the oxidized, para-substituted hydroxamic acids can be recognized
as valuable lead structures in the pursuit of novel potent and selective HDAC6
inhibitors.

PMID: 26822143  [PubMed - in process]


12. Eur J Med Chem. 2016 Feb 15;109:350-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2016.01.013. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Identification of N-(6-mercaptohexyl)-3-(4-pyridyl)-1H-pyrazole-5-carboxamide and
its disulfide prodrug as potent histone deacetylase inhibitors with in vitro and 
in vivo anti-tumor efficacy.

Wen J(1), Bao Y(2), Niu Q(1), Yang J(1), Fan Y(1), Li J(1), Jing Y(3), Zhao L(4),
Liu D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drugs Design & Discovery of Ministry of
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. (2)School 
of Life Sciences and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University,
Shenyang 110016, China. (3)School of Life Sciences and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang
Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China; Department of Medicine, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address:
yongkui.jing@mssm.edu. (4)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drugs Design &
Discovery of Ministry of Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 
110016, China. Electronic address: linxiang.zhao@vip.sina.com. (5)Key Laboratory 
of Structure-Based Drugs Design & Discovery of Ministry of Education, Shenyang
Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. Electronic address:
sammyld@163.com.

In this study, a collection of
N-(6-mercaptohexyl)-3-substituted-1H-pyrazole-5-carboxamide HDAC inhibitors was
developed. Among them, 15k was identified as the most potent inhibitor against
total HDACs with IC50 of 0.008 µM. Further isoenzyme assays revealed that 15k and
its analogs have a preference for HDAC1-3 (class I) and HDAC6 (class IIb)
isoforms. The enzyme-based potencies of 15k were 2- to 11-fold higher than those 
of Vorinostat. The disulfide prodrug 18 was found to be potent cytotoxic agent
against a panel of seven tumor cells, causing hyper-acetylation of histone and
non-histone proteins in cellular level. In addition, 18 demonstrated a notable
in vivo anti-tumor activity in HCT-116 xenografted model. This study provides
further possibility of developing novel thiol-based HDAC inhibitors for the
treatment of cancer.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26814680  [PubMed - in process]


13. Chem Commun (Camb). 2016 Feb 11;52(15):3219-22. doi: 10.1039/c5cc10301k.

Rational design and diversity-oriented synthesis of peptoid-based selective HDAC6
inhibitors.

Diedrich D(1), Hamacher A(1), Gertzen CG(1), Alves Avelar LA(1), Reiss GJ(2),
Kurz T(1), Gohlke H(1), Kassack MU(1), Hansen FK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazeutische und Medizinische Chemie,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf,
Germany. finn.hansen@hhu.de. (2)Institut für Anorganische Chemie und
Strukturchemie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 
Düsseldorf, Germany.

A mini library of HDAC inhibitors with peptoid-based cap groups was synthesized
using an efficient multicomponent approach. Four compounds were identified as
potent HDAC6 inhibitors with a selectivity over other HDAC isoforms. The most
potent HDAC6 inhibitor revealed remarkable chemosensitizing properties and
completely reverted the cisplatin resistance in Cal27 CisR cells.

PMID: 26810607  [PubMed - in process]


14. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 21;6:19626. doi: 10.1038/srep19626.

Tubastatin A, an HDAC6 inhibitor, alleviates stroke-induced brain infarction and 
functional deficits: potential roles of a-tubulin acetylation and FGF-21
up-regulation.

Wang Z(1,)(2), Leng Y(2), Wang J(2), Liao HM(2), Bergman J(3), Leeds P(2),
Kozikowski A(3), Chuang DM(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Shanghai 201203, P.R. China. (2)Molecular Neurobiology Section, National
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-1363, USA. (3)Drug Discovery Program, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6 exists exclusively in cytoplasm and deacetylates
cytoplasmic proteins such as a-tubulin. HDAC6 dysfunction is associated with
several pathological conditions in the central nervous system. This study
investigated the beneficial effects of tubastatin A (TubA), a novel specific
HDAC6 inhibitor, in a rat model of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) and an in vitro model of excitotoxicity. Post-ischemic TubA treatment
robustly improved functional outcomes, reduced brain infarction, and ameliorated 
neuronal cell death in MCAO rats. These beneficial effects lasted at least three 
days after MCAO. Notably, when given at 24<U+2009>hours after MCAO, TubA still exhibited
significant protection. Levels of acetylated a-tubulin were decreased in the
ischemic hemisphere on Days 1 and 3 after MCAO, and were significantly restored
by TubA. MCAO markedly downregulated fibroblast growth factor-21 (FGF-21) and
TubA significantly reversed this downregulation. TubA also mitigated impaired
FGF-21 signaling in the ischemic hemisphere, including up-regulating ß-Klotho,
and activating ERK and Akt/GSK-3ß signaling pathways. In addition, both TubA and 
exogenous FGF-21 conferred neuroprotection and restored mitochondrial trafficking
in rat cortical neurons against glutamate-induced excitotoxicity. Our findings
suggest that the neuroprotective effects of TubA likely involve HDAC6 inhibition 
and the subsequent up-regulation of acetylated a-tubulin and FGF-21.

PMCID: PMC4726180
PMID: 26790818  [PubMed - in process]


15. Autoimmunity. 2016 Jan 20:1-11. [Epub ahead of print]

Histone deacetylase inhibitors restore IL-10 expression in
lipopolysaccharide-induced cell inflammation and reduce IL-1ß and IL-6 production
in breast silicone implant in C57BL/6J wild-type murine model.

Di Liddo R(1), Valente S(2), Taurone S(3), Zwergel C(2), Marrocco B(2), Turchetta
R(3), Conconi MT(1), Scarpa C(4), Bertalot T(1), Schrenk S(1), Mai A(2,)(5),
Artico M(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Dipartimento Scienze del Farmaco , Università di Padova , Padova , Italy .
(2)b Dipartimento di Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco , Sapienza Università di
Roma , Roma , Italy . (3)c Dipartimento Organi di Senso , Sapienza Università di 
Roma , Roma , Italy . (4)d Dipartimento di Neuroscienze , Clinica di Chirurgia
Plastica, Università di Padova, Padova , Italy , and. (5)e Istituto Pasteur -
Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Sapienza Università di Roma , Roma , Italy.

Among epigenetic enzymes, histone deacetylases (HDACs) are responsible for
regulating the expression of an extensive array of genes by reversible
deacetylation of nuclear histones as well as a large number of non-histone
proteins. Initially proposed for cancer therapy, recently the interest for HDAC
inhibitors (HDACi) as orally active, safe, and anti-inflammatory agents is rising
due to their ability in reducing the severity of inflammatory and autoimmune
diseases. In particular, selective HDAC3, HDAC6, and HDAC8 inhibitors have been
described to downregulate the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-a,
TGF-ß, IL-1ß, and IL-6). Herein, using KB31, C2C12, and 3T3-J2 cell lines, we
demonstrated that, under lipopolysaccharide-induced in vitro inflammation,
HDAC3/6/8 inhibitor MC2625 and HDAC6-selective inhibitor MC2780 were effective at
a concentration of 30<U+2009>ng/mL to downregulate mRNA expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines (IL-1ß and IL-6) and to promote the transcription of IL-10 gene,
without affecting the cell viability. Afterwards, we investigated by
immunohistochemistry the activity of MC2625 and MC2780 at a concentration of
60<U+2009>ng/kg animal weight to regulate silicone-triggered immune response in C57BL/6J
female mice. Our findings evidenced the ability of such inhibitors to reduce host
inflammation in silicone implants promoting a thickness reduction of peri-implant
fibrous capsule, upregulating IL-10 expression, and reducing the production of
both IL-1ß and IL-6. These results underline the potential application of MC2625 
and MC2780 in inflammation-related diseases.

PMID: 26789595  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 19;7:10420. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10420.

The Shp2-induced epithelial disorganization defect is reversed by HDAC6
inhibition independent of Cdc42.

Tien SC(1), Lee HH(2), Yang YC(1), Lin MH(3), Chen YJ(3), Chang ZF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, No. 155, Section 2, Linong Street,Taipei 11221, Taiwan. (2)Department
of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming University,
No. 155, Section 2, Linong Street,Taipei 11221, Taiwan. (3)Institute of
Chemistry, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia Road, Section 2, Nankang, Taipei 11529, 
Taiwan.

Regulation of Shp2, a tyrosine phosphatase, critically influences the development
of various diseases. Its role in epithelial lumenogenesis is not clear. Here we
show that oncogenic Shp2 dephosphorylates Tuba to decrease Cdc42 activation,
leading to the abnormal multi-lumen formation of epithelial cells. HDAC6
suppression reverses oncogenic Shp2-induced multiple apical domains and spindle
mis-orientation during division in cysts to acquire normal lumenogenesis.
Intriguingly, Cdc42 activity is not restored in this rescued process. We present 
evidence that simultaneous reduction in myosin II and ERK1/2 activity by HDAC6
inhibition is responsible for the reversion. In HER2-positive breast cancer
cells, Shp2 also mediates Cdc42 repression, and HDAC6 inhibition or
co-suppression of ERK/myosin II promotes normal epithelial lumen phenotype
without increasing Cdc42 activity. Our data suggest a mechanism of epithelial
disorganization by Shp2 deregulation, and reveal the cellular context where HDAC6
suppression is capable of establishing normal epithelial lumenogenesis
independent of Cdc42.

PMCID: PMC4735695
PMID: 26783207  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Oncol. 2016 Jan 6. pii: S1574-7891(15)00248-3. doi:
10.1016/j.molonc.2015.12.012. [Epub ahead of print]

Essential role of HDAC6 in the regulation of PD-L1 in melanoma.

Lienlaf M(1), Perez-Villarroel P(1), Knox T(1), Pabon M(1), Sahakian E(1), Powers
J(1), Woan KV(1), Lee C(2), Cheng F(1), Deng S(1), Smalley KS(1), Montecino M(3),
Kozikowski A(4), Pinilla-Ibarz J(1), Sarnaik A(1), Seto E(5), Weber J(6),
Sotomayor EM(5), Villagra A(7).

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, United States. (2)All Children's Hospital, Johns
Hopkins Medicine, United States. (3)Center for Biomedical Research and FONDAP
Center for Genome Regulation, Faculty of Biological Sciences and Faculty of
Medicine, Universidad Andres Bello, Chile. (4)University of Illinois at Chicago, 
United States. (5)George Washington University, United States. (6)Perlmutter
Cancer Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, United States. (7)George Washington
University, United States. Electronic address: avillagra@gwu.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs), originally described as histone modifiers, have
more recently been demonstrated to target a variety of other proteins unrelated
to the chromatin environment. In this context, our present work demonstrates that
the pharmacological or genetic abrogation of HDAC6 in primary melanoma samples
and cell lines, down-regulates the expression of PD-L1, an important
co-stimulatory molecule expressed in cancer cells, which activates the inhibitory
regulatory pathway PD-1 in T-cells. Our data suggests that this novel mechanism
of PD-L1 regulation is mainly mediated by the influence of HDAC6 over the
recruitment and activation of STAT3. Additionally, we observed that selective
HDAC6 inhibitors impairs tumor growth and reduce the in vivo expression of
several inhibitory check-point molecules and other regulatory pathways involved
in immunosurveillance. Most importantly, these results provide a key pre-clinical
rationale and justification to further study isotype selective HDAC6 inhibitors
as potential immuno-modulatory agents in cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26775640  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Jan 13. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2787. [Epub ahead of print]

Class I and IIa HDACs Mediate HIF-1a Stability through PHD2-Dependent Mechanism
while HDAC6, a Class IIb Member, Promotes HIF-1a Transcriptional Activity in
Nucleus Pulposus Cells of the Intervertebral Disc.

Schoepflin ZR(1), Shapiro IM(1), Risbud MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Graduate Program in Cell and
Developmental Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, 19107.

The objective of this study was to determine the role of histone deacetylases
(HDACs) in regulating HIF-1a protein stability and activity in nucleus pulposus
(NP) cells. Treatment of NP cells with pan-HDAC inhibitor TSA resulted in
decreased HIF-1a levels under both normoxia and hypoxia in a dose-dependent
fashion. TSA-mediated HIF-1a degradation was rescued by concomitant inhibition of
not only the 26S proteasome but also PHD2 function. Moreover, TSA treatment of
PHD2(-/-) cells had little effect on HIF-1a levels, supporting the notion that
inhibition of PHD2 function by HDACs contributed to HIF-1a stabilization.
Surprisingly, class-specific HDAC-inhibitors did not affect HIF-1a protein
stability, indicating that multiple HDACs controlled HIF-1a stability by
regulating HIF-1a-PHD2 interaction in NP cells. Interestingly, lower-dose TSA
that did not affect HIF-1a stability decreased its activity and target gene
expression. Likewise, rescue of TSA-mediated HIF-1a protein degradation by
blocking proteasomal or PHD activity did not restore HIF-1 activity, suggesting
that HDACs independently regulate HIF-1a stability and activity. Noteworthy,
selective inhibition of HDAC6 and not of class I and IIa HDACs decreased
HIF-1-mediated transcription under hypoxia, to a similar extent as lower-dose
TSA, contrasting the reported role of HDAC6 as a transcriptional repressor in
other cell types. Moreover, HDAC6 inhibition completely blocked TSA effects on
HIF-1 activity. HDAC6 associated with and deacetylated HSP90, an important
cofactor for HIF-1 function in NP cells, and HDAC6 inhibition decreased p300
transactivation in NP cells. Taken together, these results suggest that while
multiple Class I and Class IIa HDACs control HIF-1 stability, HDAC6, a class IIb 
HDAC, is a novel mediator of HIF-1 activity in NP cells possibly through
promoting action of critical HIF-1 cofactors. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26765925  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 4;291(10):5396-405. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.713123. Epub 2016
Jan 13.

Loss of a-Tubulin Acetylation Is Associated with TGF-ß-induced
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition.

Gu S(1), Liu Y(1), Zhu B(1), Ding K(1), Yao TP(2), Chen F(1), Zhan L(3), Xu P(1),
Ehrlich M(4), Liang T(5), Lin X(1), Feng XH(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Life Sciences Institute, and Innovation Center for Cell Signaling
Network, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China. (2)Department of 
Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical School, Durham, North
Carolina 27710. (3)Institute of Nutritional Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (4)Department of Cell Research and Immunology, 
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel. (5)Department of Hepatobiliary and
Pancreatic Surgery and the Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310009, China, and. (6)From the Life Sciences Institute, and Innovation 
Center for Cell Signaling Network, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310058, China, Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, and Department of
Molecular & Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030
xhfeng@zju.edu.cn xfeng@bcm.edu.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process by which
differentiated epithelial cells reprogram gene expression, lose their junctions
and polarity, reorganize their cytoskeleton, increase cell motility and assume a 
mesenchymal morphology. Despite the critical functions of the microtubule (MT) in
cytoskeletal organization, how it participates in EMT induction and maintenance
remains poorly understood. Here we report that acetylated a-tubulin, which plays 
an important role in microtubule (MT) stabilization and cell morphology, can
serve as a novel regulator and marker of EMT. A high level of acetylated
a-tubulin was correlated with epithelial morphology and it profoundly decreased
during TGF-ß-induced EMT. We found that TGF-ß increased the activity of HDAC6, a 
major deacetylase of a-tubulin, without affecting its expression levels.
Treatment with HDAC6 inhibitor tubacin or TGF-ß type I receptor inhibitor
SB431542 restored the level of acetylated a-tubulin and consequently blocked EMT.
Our results demonstrate that acetylated a-tubulin can serve as a marker of EMT
and that HDAC6 represents an important regulator during EMT process.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4777869 [Available on 2017-03-04]
PMID: 26763233  [PubMed - in process]


20. J Transl Med. 2016 Jan 8;14(1):7. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0753-0.

Both HDAC5 and HDAC6 are required for the proliferation and metastasis of
melanoma cells.

Liu J(1), Gu J(2), Feng Z(3), Yang Y(4), Zhu N(5), Lu W(6), Qi F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 180
Fenglin Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. liujiaqi1213@yahoo.com. (2)Department of
Plastic Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 180 Fenglin Road,
Shanghai, 200032, China. gu.jianying@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (3)Department of Plastic 
Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 180 Fenglin Road, Shanghai,
200032, China. feng.zihao@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (4)Division of Anti-tumor
Pharmacology, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Rd, Shanghai, 201203,
China. shouhunv@hotmail.com. (5)Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 12 Middle
Urumqi Rd, Shanghai, 200040, China. drnwzhu@126.com. (6)Department of
Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, 826 Zhangheng Rd, Shanghai, 
201203, China. wylu@shmu.edu.cn. (7)Department of Plastic Surgery, Zhongshan
Hospital, Fudan University, 180 Fenglin Road, Shanghai, 200032, China.
qi.fazhi@zs-hospital.sh.cn.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are widely used in clinical
investigation as novel drug targets. For example, panobinostat and vorinostat
have been used to treat patients with melanoma. However, HDAC inhibitors are
small-molecule compounds without a specific target, and their mechanism of action
is unclear. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate which HDACs are required
for the proliferation and metastasis of melanoma cells.
METHODS: We used overexpression and knocking down lentivirus to clarify the
influence of HDAC5 and HDAC6 in melanoma development. Also, we introduced stable 
HDAC5 or HDAC6 knockdown cells into null mice and found that the knockdown cells 
were unable to form solid tumors. Finally, we tested HDAC5 and HDAC6 expression
and sub-location in clinical melanoma tissues and tumor adjacent tissues.
RESULTS: In this study, and found that HDAC5 and HDAC6 were highly expressed in
melanoma cells but exhibited low expression levels in normal skin cells.
Furthermore, we knocked down HDAC5 or HDAC6 in A375 cells and demonstrated that
both HDAC5 and HDAC6 contributed to the proliferation and metastasis of melanoma 
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated both HDAC5 and HDAC6 were required for
melanoma cell proliferation and metastasis through different signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC4706654
PMID: 26747087  [PubMed - in process]


21. EMBO J. 2016 Feb 15;35(4):429-42. doi: 10.15252/embj.201592586. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

HDAC6 regulates cellular viral RNA sensing by deacetylation of RIG-I.

Choi SJ(1), Lee HC(2), Kim JH(2), Park SY(1), Kim TH(2), Lee WK(3), Jang DJ(2),
Yoon JE(4), Choi YI(5), Kim S(5), Ma J(6), Kim CJ(2), Yao TP(7), Jung JU(8), Lee 
JY(9), Lee JS(10).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Analytical Science and Technology (GRAST), Chungnam
National University, Daejeon, Korea. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine (BK21 Plus
Program), Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea. (3)College of Medicine,
Inha University, Incheon, Korea. (4)Foot and Mouth Disease Division, Animal
Quarantine and Inspection Agency, Anyang, Korea. (5)CKD Research Institute,
Yongin-si Gyeonggi-do, Korea. (6)Korean Medicine (KM) Based Herbal Drug
Development Group, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA. (8)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (9)Graduate
School of Analytical Science and Technology (GRAST), Chungnam National
University, Daejeon, Korea leejooyong@cnu.ac.kr jongsool@cnu.ac.kr. (10)College
of Veterinary Medicine (BK21 Plus Program), Chungnam National University,
Daejeon, Korea leejooyong@cnu.ac.kr jongsool@cnu.ac.kr.

RIG-I is a key cytosolic sensor that detects RNA viruses through its C-terminal
region and activates the production of antiviral interferons (IFNs) and
proinflammatory cytokines. While posttranslational modification has been
demonstrated to regulate RIG-I signaling activity, its significance for the
sensing of viral RNAs remains unclear. Here, we first show that the RIG-I
C-terminal region undergoes deacetylation to regulate its viral RNA-sensing
activity and that the HDAC6-mediated deacetylation of RIG-I is critical for viral
RNA detection. HDAC6 transiently bound to RIG-I and removed the lysine 909
acetylation in the presence of viral RNAs, promoting RIG-I sensing of viral RNAs.
Depletion of HDAC6 expression led to impaired antiviral responses against RNA
viruses, but not against DNA viruses. Consequently, HDAC6 knockout mice were
highly susceptible to RNA virus infections compared to wild-type mice. These
findings underscore the critical role of HDAC6 in the modulation of the
RIG-I-mediated antiviral sensing pathway.

© 2016 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4755110 [Available on 2017-02-15]
PMID: 26746851  [PubMed - in process]


22. Neurotox Res. 2015 Dec 31. [Epub ahead of print]

An Acute Methamphetamine Injection Downregulates the Expression of Several
Histone Deacetylases (HDACs) in the Mouse Nucleus Accumbens: Potential Regulatory
Role of HDAC2 Expression.

Torres OV(1), Ladenheim B(1), Jayanthi S(1), McCoy MT(1), Krasnova IN(1), Vautier
FA(2), Cadet JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, DHHS/NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD,
21224, USA. (2)Transgenic Core Facility, DHHS/NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD,
21224, USA. (3)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, DHHS/NIH/NIDA
Intramural Research Program, National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview
Boulevard, Baltimore, MD, 21224, USA. jcadet@intra.nida.nih.gov.

Methamphetamine (METH) administration alters gene expression in the nucleus
accumbens (NAc). We recently demonstrated that an acute METH injection produced
prolonged increases in the expression of immediate early genes in the NAc of
HDAC2-deficient mice, suggesting that HDAC2 might be an important regulator of
gene expression in the rodent brain. Here, we tested the possibility that HDAC2
deletion might also impact METH-induced changes in the expression of various HDAC
classes in the NAc. Wild-type (WT) and HDAC2 knockout (KO) mice were given a METH
(20 mg/kg) injection, and NAc tissue was collected at 1, 2, and 8 h post
treatment. We found that METH decreased HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC7, HDAC8, and HDAC11
mRNA expression but increased HDAC6 mRNA levels in the NAc of WT mice. In
contrast, the METH injection increased HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC7, HDAC8, and HDAC11
mRNA levels in HDAC2KO mice. These observations suggest that METH may induce
large-scale transcriptional changes in the NAc by regulating the expression of
several HDACs, in part, via HDAC2-dependent mechanisms since some of the HDACs
showed differential responses between the two genotypes. Our findings further
implicate HDACs as potential novel therapeutic targets for neurotoxic
complications associated with the abuse of certain psychostimulants.

PMID: 26721795  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Cilia. 2015 Dec 29;4:12. doi: 10.1186/s13630-015-0021-1. eCollection 2015.

Current topics of functional links between primary cilia and cell cycle.

Izawa I(1), Goto H(2), Kasahara K(3), Inagaki M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8681 Japan. (2)Division of Biochemistry, Aichi
Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1 Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8681
Japan ; Department of Cellular Oncology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550 Japan. (3)Division of
Biochemistry, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1 Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, 
Nagoya, 464-8681 Japan ; Department of Oncology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8603 Japan.

Primary cilia, microtubule-based sensory structures, orchestrate various critical
signals during development and tissue homeostasis. In view of the rising interest
into the reciprocal link between ciliogenesis and cell cycle, we discuss here
several recent advances to understand the molecular link between the individual
step of ciliogenesis and cell cycle control. At the onset of ciliogenesis (the
transition from centrosome to basal body), distal appendage proteins have been
established as components indispensable for the docking of vesicles at the mother
centriole. In the initial step of axonemal extension, CP110, Ofd1, and
trichoplein, key negative regulators of ciliogenesis, are found to be removed by 
a kinase-dependent mechanism, autophagy, and ubiquitin-proteasome system,
respectively. Of note, their disposal functions as a restriction point to decide 
that the axonemal nucleation and extension begin. In the elongation step, Nde1, a
negative regulator of ciliary length, is revealed to be ubiquitylated and
degraded by CDK5-SCF(Fbw7) in a cell cycle-dependent manner. With regard to
ciliary length control, it has been uncovered in flagellar shortening of
Chlamydomonas that cilia itself transmit a ciliary length signal to cytoplasm. At
the ciliary resorption step upon cell cycle re-entry, cilia are found to be
disassembled not only by Aurora A-HDAC6 pathway but also by Nek2-Kif24 and
Plk1-Kif2A pathways through their microtubule-depolymerizing activity. On the
other hand, it is becoming evident that the presence of primary cilia itself
functions as a structural checkpoint for cell cycle re-entry. These data suggest 
that ciliogenesis and cell cycle intimately link each other, and further
elucidation of these mechanisms will contribute to understanding the pathology of
cilia-related disease including cancer and discovering targets of therapeutic
interventions.

PMCID: PMC4696186
PMID: 26719793  [PubMed]


24. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 11;291(11):5484-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.707091. Epub 2015
Dec 30.

Structural and Mechanistic Insights into the Regulation of the Fundamental Rho
Regulator RhoGDIa by Lysine Acetylation.

Kuhlmann N(1), Wroblowski S(1), Knyphausen P(1), de Boor S(1), Brenig J(1),
Zienert AY(2), Meyer-Teschendorf K(2), Praefcke GJ(3), Nolte H(1), Krüger M(1),
Schacherl M(4), Baumann U(4), James LC(5), Chin JW(5), Lammers M(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular
Stress Responses in Aging-associated Diseases (CECAD), Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse
26, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany. (2)the Institute for Genetics,
Zülpicher Strasse 47a, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany. (3)the
Institute for Genetics, Zülpicher Strasse 47a, University of Cologne, 50674
Cologne, Germany, the Paul-Ehrlich-Institute, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 51-59, 63225
Langen, Germany, and. (4)the Institute for Biochemistry, Zülpicher Strasse 47,
University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany. (5)the Medical Research Council
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge Biomedical
Campus, Cambridge CB2 0QH, United Kingdom. (6)From the Institute for Genetics and
Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-associated
Diseases (CECAD), Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, University of Cologne, 50931
Cologne, Germany, michael.lammers@uni-koeln.de.

Rho proteins are small GTP/GDP-binding proteins primarily involved in
cytoskeleton regulation. Their GTP/GDP cycle is often tightly connected to a
membrane/cytosol cycle regulated by the Rho guanine nucleotide dissociation
inhibitor a (RhoGDIa). RhoGDIa has been regarded as a housekeeping regulator
essential to control homeostasis of Rho proteins. Recent proteomic screens showed
that RhoGDIa is extensively lysine-acetylated. Here, we present the first
comprehensive structural and mechanistic study to show how RhoGDIa function is
regulated by lysine acetylation. We discover that lysine acetylation impairs Rho 
protein binding and increases guanine nucleotide exchange factor-catalyzed
nucleotide exchange on RhoA, these two functions being prerequisites to
constitute a bona fide GDI displacement factor. RhoGDIa acetylation interferes
with Rho signaling, resulting in alteration of cellular filamentous actin.
Finally, we discover that RhoGDIa is endogenously acetylated in mammalian cells, 
and we identify CBP, p300, and pCAF as RhoGDIa-acetyltransferases and Sirt2 and
HDAC6 as specific deacetylases, showing the biological significance of this
post-translational modification.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4786691 [Available on 2017-03-11]
PMID: 26719334  [PubMed - in process]


25. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Dec 28;60(3):1521-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01876-15.

Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors Promote Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species
Production and Bacterial Clearance by Human Macrophages.

Ariffin JK(1), das Gupta K(1), Kapetanovic R(1), Iyer A(1), Reid RC(1), Fairlie
DP(1), Sweet MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, IMB Centre for Inflammation and Disease
Research and Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (2)Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, IMB Centre for Inflammation and Disease Research and Australian
Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia m.sweet@imb.uq.edu.au.

Broad-spectrum histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are used clinically as
anticancer agents, and more isoform-selective HDACi have been sought to modulate 
other conditions, including chronic inflammatory diseases. Mouse studies suggest 
that HDACi downregulate immune responses and may compromise host defense.
However, their effects on human macrophage antimicrobial responses are largely
unknown. Here, we show that overnight pretreatment of human macrophages with
HDACi prior to challenge with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium or
Escherichia coli results in significantly reduced intramacrophage bacterial
loads, which likely reflect the fact that this treatment regime impairs
phagocytosis. In contrast, cotreatment of human macrophages with HDACi at the
time of bacterial challenge did not impair phagocytosis; instead, HDACi
cotreatment actually promoted clearance of intracellular S. Typhimurium and E.
coli. Mechanistically, treatment of human macrophages with HDACi at the time of
bacterial infection enhanced mitochondrial reactive oxygen species generation by 
these cells. The capacity of HDACi to promote the clearance of intracellular
bacteria from human macrophages was abrogated when cells were pretreated with
MitoTracker Red CMXRos, which perturbs mitochondrial function. The
HDAC6-selective inhibitor tubastatin A promoted bacterial clearance from human
macrophages, whereas the class I HDAC inhibitor MS-275, which inhibits HDAC1 to
-3, had no effect on intracellular bacterial loads. These data are consistent
with HDAC6 and/or related HDACs constraining mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species production from human macrophages during bacterial challenge. Our
findings suggest that, whereas long-term HDACi treatment regimes may potentially 
compromise host defense, selective HDAC inhibitors may have applications in
treating acute bacterial infections.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26711769  [PubMed - in process]


26. J Med Chem. 2016 Jan 28;59(2):655-70. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01525. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Design, Synthesis, and Pharmacological Evaluation of Novel N-Acylhydrazone
Derivatives as Potent Histone Deacetylase 6/8 Dual Inhibitors.

Rodrigues DA, Ferreira-Silva GÀ(1), Ferreira AC(2), Fernandes RA(2), Kwee JK(2), 
Sant'Anna CM(3), Ionta M(1), Fraga CA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Animal Integrativa, Departamento de Biologia Celular e
do Desenvolvimento, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade Federal de
Alfenas , 37130-000 Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (2)Coordenação de Pesquisa,
Instituto Nacional de Câncer , 20231-050 Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
(3)Departamento de Química, Instituto de Ciências Exatas, Universidade Federal
Rural do Rio de Janeiro , 23970-000 Seropédica, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

This manuscript describes a novel class of N-acylhydrazone (NAH) derivatives that
act as histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6/8 dual inhibitors and were designed from the 
structure of trichostatin A (1). Para-substituted phenyl-hydroxamic acids
presented a more potent inhibition of HDAC6/8 than their meta analogs. In
addition, the effect of compounds
(E)-4-((2-(4-(dimethylamino)benzoyl)hydrazono)methyl)-N-hydroxybenzamide (3c) and
(E)-4-((2-(4-(dimethylamino)benzoyl)-2-methylhydrazono)methyl)-N-hydroxybenzamide
(3f) on the acetylation of a-tubulin revealed an increased level of acetylation. 
These two compounds also affected cell migration, indicating their inhibition of 
HDAC6. An analysis of the antiproliferative activity of these compounds, which
presented the most potent activity, showed that compound 3c induced cell cycle
arrest and 3g induced apoptosis through caspase 3/7 activation. These results
suggest HDAC6/8 as a potential target of future molecular therapies for cancer.

PMID: 26705137  [PubMed - in process]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 23;10(12):e0134556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134556.
eCollection 2015.

2-Benzazolyl-4-Piperazin-1-Ylsulfonylbenzenecarbohydroxamic Acids as Novel
Selective Histone Deacetylase-6 Inhibitors with Antiproliferative Activity.

Wang L(1), Kofler M(2), Brosch G(3), Melesina J(4), Sippl W(4), Martinez
ED(1,)(5), Easmon J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, UT Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX, United States of America. (2)Institute of Pharmacy,
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Center for Chemistry and Biomedicine,
University of Innsbruck, Innrain 80-82, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. (3)Division of
Molecular Biology, Center for Chemistry and Biomedicine, Innsbruck Medical
University Innrain 80-82, A-6020 Innsbruck Austria. (4)Institute of Pharmacy,
Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg,
D-06099 Halle/Saale, Germany. (5)Department of Pharmacology, UT Southwestern
Medical center, Dallas, TX, United States of America.

We have screened our compound collection in an established cell based assay that 
measures the derepression of an epigenetically silenced transgene, the locus
derepression assay. The screen led to the identification of
4-[4-(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)piperazin-1-yl]sulfonylbenzenecarbohydroxamic
acid (9b) as an active which was found to inhibit HDAC1. In initial structure
activity relationships study, the 1-methylbenzimidazole ring was replaced by the 
isosteric heterocycles benzimidazole, benzoxazole, and benzothiazole and the
position of the hydroxamic acid substituent on the phenyl ring was varied.
Whereas compounds bearing a para substituted hydroxamic acid (9a-d) were active
HDAC inhibitors, the meta substituted analogues (8a-d) were appreciably inactive.
Compounds 9a-d selectively inhibited HDAC6 (IC50 = 0.1-1.0µM) over HDAC1 (IC50 = 
0.9-6µM) and moreover, also selectively inhibited the growth of lung cancer cells
vs. patient matched normal cells. The compounds induce a cell cycle arrest in the
S-phase while induction of apoptosis is neglible as compared to controls.
Molecular modeling studies uncovered that the MM-GBSA energy for interaction of
9a-d with HDAC6 was higher than for HDAC1 providing structural rationale for the 
HDAC6 selectivity.

PMCID: PMC4689404
PMID: 26698121  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015 Dec;79(6):905-10. doi:
10.1097/TA.0000000000000784.

Selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 promotes survival in a rat model of
hemorrhagic shock.

Chang Z(1), Li Y, He W, Liu B, Halaweish I, Bambakidis T, Liang Y, Alam HB.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgical ICU (Z.C.), Beijing Hospital Ministry of
Health, Beijing; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery (W.H.), Zhongda Hospital,
School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing; and The First Hospital
(Y.Lia.), China Medical University, Shengyang, China; and Department of Surgery
(Z.C., Y.Li., W.H., B.L., I.H., T.B., Y.Lia., H.B.A.), University of Michigan
Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: Hemorrhage is the leading cause of preventable trauma-related deaths.
We have previously shown that treatment with Tubastatin A (Tub A), a histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibitor, can improve survival in a rodent model of septic
shock. The aims of the present study were to determine whether selective
inhibition of HDAC6 can promote survival in a model of hemorrhagic shock (HS).
METHODS: In Experiment I (survival study), Wistar-Kyoto rats were subjected to HS
(55% volume blood loss), followed by intraperitoneal injection of either Tub A
(70 mg/kg) dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or DMSO only (vehicle group) (n
= 8 per group). Survival was monitored for 24 hours. In Experiment II
(physiologic study), rats were subjected to a sublethal HS (40% blood loss),
followed by the same treatment with Tub A (treatment group) or DMSO only (vehicle
group, n = 5 per group). All animals were sacrificed 6 hours after hemorrhage,
and the heart and liver tissues were harvested. Sham animals were not subjected
to hemorrhage and treatment (sham group, n = 5 per group). Cardiac mitochondria
were isolated to study the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH, an essential enzyme for
adenosine triphosphate production) activity. Liver tissue lysates were analyzed
for markers of apoptosis (cytochrome c, cleaved caspase 3) and inflammation
(high-mobility group box 1) by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Severe HS (55% blood loss) was associated with 75% mortality, which was 
significantly improved by Tub A treatment (37.5% mortality in 24 hours, p =
0.048). Tub A also significantly enhanced the cardiac PDH activity compared with 
the vehicle group, while suppressing the hepatic high-mobility group box 1
expression, cytochrome c release, and caspase 3 activation.
CONCLUSION: Our study has demonstrated for the first time that selective
inhibition of HDAC6 can improve survival in a rodent model of HS. The potential
mechanisms include enhanced PDH activity, decreased inflammatory drive, and
attenuated cellular apoptosis.

PMID: 26680133  [PubMed - in process]


29. Pharmacol Res. 2016 Jan;103:328-39. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.11.024. Epub 2015
Dec 3.

Pharmacological modulation of HDAC1 and HDAC6 in vivo in a zebrafish model:
Therapeutic implications for Parkinson's disease.

Pinho BR(1), Reis SD(1), Guedes-Dias P(1), Leitão-Rocha A(1), Quintas C(1),
Valentão P(2), Andrade PB(2), Santos MM(3), Oliveira JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)REQUIMTE/LAQV, Department of Drug Sciences, Pharmacology Lab, Faculty of
Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (2)REQUIMTE/LAQV, Department of
Chemistry, Pharmacognosy Lab, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal. (3)CIMAR/CIIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental
Research, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; FCUP, Department of Biology,
Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (4)REQUIMTE/LAQV,
Department of Drug Sciences, Pharmacology Lab, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal. Electronic address: jorgemao@ff.up.pt.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are key epigenetic enzymes and emerging drug targets
in cancer and neurodegeneration. Pan-HDAC inhibitors provided neuroprotection in 
Parkinson's Disease (PD) models, however, the HDAC isoforms with highest
neuroprotective potential remain unknown. Zebrafish larvae (powerful
pharmacological testing tools bridging cellular and in vivo studies) have thus
far been used in PD modelling with limited phenotypic characterization. Here we
characterize the behavioural and metabolic phenotypes of a zebrafish PD model
induced with MPP(+), assess the feasibility of targeting zebrafish HDAC1 and
HDAC6 isoforms, and test the in vivo effects of their selective inhibitors MS-275
and tubastatin A, respectively. MPP(+) induced a concentration-dependent decrease
in metabolic activity and sensorimotor reflexes, and induced locomotor
impairments rescuable by the dopaminergic agonist apomorphine. Zebrafish HDAC1
and HDAC6 isoforms show high sequence identity with mammalian homologues at the
deacetylase active sites, and pharmacological inhibition increased acetylation of
their respective histone and tubulin targets. MS-275 and tubastatin rescued the
MPP(+)-induced decrease in diencephalic tyrosine hydroxylase immunofluorescence
and in whole-larvae metabolic activity, without modifying mitochondrial complex
activity or biogenesis. MS-275 or tubastatin alone modulated spontaneous
locomotion. When combined with MPP(+), however, neither MS-275 nor tubastatin
rescued locomotor impairments, although tubastatin did ameliorate the head-reflex
impairment. This study demonstrates the feasibility of pharmacologically
targeting the zebrafish HDAC1 and HDAC6 isoforms, and indicates that their
inhibition can rescue cellular metabolism in a PD model. Absence of improvement
in locomotion, however, suggests that monotherapy with either HDAC1 or HDAC6
inhibitors is unlikely to provide strong benefits in PD. This study highlights
parameters dependent on the integrity of zebrafish neuronal circuits as a
valuable complement to cell-based studies. Also, the demonstrated feasibility of 
pharmacologically targeting HDAC1 and HDAC6 in this organism paves the way for
future studies investigating HDAC inhibitors in other diseases modelled in
zebrafish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26657418  [PubMed - in process]


30. Oncogene. 2015 Dec 14. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.476. [Epub ahead of print]

Deacetylation of tumor-suppressor MST1 in Hippo pathway induces its degradation
through HBXIP-elevated HDAC6 in promotion of breast cancer growth.

Li L(1), Fang R(1), Liu B(1), Shi H(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang X(2), Ye
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Department of
Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's
Republic of China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology,
Department of Cancer Research, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University,
Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

Reduction or loss of tumor-suppressor mammalian STE20-like kinase 1 (MST1) in
Hippo pathway contributes to the tumorigenesis. However, the mechanism leading to
reduction of MST1 in cancers remains poorly understood. In this study, we
explored the hypothesis that the oncoprotein hepatitis B X-interacting protein
(HBXIP) is involved in the reduction of MST1 in breast cancer.
Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue microarrays revealed that the expression
of HBXIP was negatively associated with that of MST1 in 98 clinical breast tissue
samples. Then we found that HBXIP could posttranslationally downregulate MST1 in 
breast cancer cells. Mechanistically, we identified that MST1 could be acetylated
on its lysine 35 residue in the cells. Strikingly, the treatment with
trichostatin A, an inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACs), markedly increased 
the levels of MST1 acetylation and protein in the cells. Interestingly, the
oncoprotein HBXIP could significantly inhibit acetylation of MST1, resulting in
the reduction of MST1 protein. Notably, we revealed that the HDAC6 could reduce
the protein levels of MST1 through deacetylation modification of MST1 in the
cells. Moreover, our data revealed that HBXIP upregulated HDAC6 at the levels of 
mRNA and protein by activating transcription factor nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B.
Deacetylation of MST1 promoted the interaction of MST1 with HSC70 in the cells,
resulting in a lysosome-dependent degradation of MST1 via chaperone-mediated
autophagy (CMA). Functionally, the reduction of tumor-suppressor MST1 mediated by
HBXIP promoted the growth of breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Thus we
conclude that the deacetylation of MST1 mediated by HBXIP-enhanced HDAC6 results 
in MST1 degradation in a CMA manner in promotion of breast cancer growth. Our
finding provides new insights into the mechanism of tumor-suppressor MST1
reduction in breast cancer.Oncogene advance online publication, 14 December 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.476.

PMID: 26657153  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. J Med Chem. 2016 Feb 25;59(4):1545-55. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01493. Epub
2015 Dec 22.

Synthesis and Biological Investigation of Oxazole Hydroxamates as Highly
Selective Histone Deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) Inhibitors.

Senger J(1), Melesina J(2), Marek M(3), Romier C(3), Oehme I(4), Witt O(4), Sippl
W(2), Jung M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg ,
Albertstraße 25, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Institute of Pharmacy,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg , Wolfgang-Langenbeck-Straße 4, 06120
Halle (Saale), Germany. (3)Département de Biologie Structurale Intégrative,
Institut de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Université
de Strasbourg (UDS), CNRS, INSERM, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch Cedex,
France. (4)Clinical Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology, German Cancer Research
Centre (DKFZ) , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) catalyzes the removal of an acetyl group from
lysine residues of several non-histone proteins. Here we report the preparation
of thiazole-, oxazole-, and oxadiazole-containing biarylhydroxamic acids by a
short synthetic procedure. We identified them as selective HDAC6 inhibitors by
investigating the inhibition of recombinant HDAC enzymes and the protein
acetylation in cells by Western blotting (tubulin vs histone acetylation). The
most active compounds exhibited nanomolar potency and high selectivity for HDAC6.
For example, an oxazole hydroxamate inhibits HDAC6 with an IC50 of 59 nM and has 
a selectivity index of >200 against HDAC1 and HDAC8. This is the first report
showing that the nature of a heterocycle directly connected to a zinc binding
group (ZBG) can be used to modulate subtype selectivity and potency for HDAC6
inhibitors to such an extent. We rationalize the high potency and selectivity of 
the oxazoles by molecular modeling and docking.

PMID: 26653328  [PubMed - in process]


32. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Feb;37(2):114-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2015.11.002. Epub
2015 Dec 2.

Ciliopathies: Does HDAC6 Represent a New Therapeutic Target?

Yu F(1), Ran J(1), Zhou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal
Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071,
China. Electronic address: junzhou@nankai.edu.cn.

Cilia are cellular appendages with critical roles in sensing and transducing
environmental signals and guiding fluid flow. Consistent with these diverse
activities, defects in ciliary structure or function have been implicated in a
variety of human diseases, collectively known as 'ciliopathies'. Histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a unique cytoplasmic enzyme that regulates many
biological processes through its deacetylase and ubiquitin-binding activities.
There is accumulating evidence that HDAC6 is a major driver of ciliary
disassembly. Small-molecule compounds that inhibit HDAC6 have been demonstrated
to restore ciliary structure and function in several different ciliopathies.
Here, we discuss recent findings that highlight the important role for HDAC6 in
mediating ciliary disassembly and the potential for HDAC6-selective inhibitors as
therapeutics for specific ciliopathies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26651415  [PubMed - in process]


33. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2016;2016:7263736. doi: 10.1155/2016/7263736. Epub 2015 Nov
15.

HDAC6 Regulates the Chaperone-Mediated Autophagy to Prevent Oxidative Damage in
Injured Neurons after Experimental Spinal Cord Injury.

Su M(1), Guan H(2), Zhang F(2), Gao Y(3), Teng X(4), Yang W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215006, China ; Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou
215123, China. (2)Department of Orthopaedics, First Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. (3)Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, China. (4)Institute for Cardiovascular Science,
Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. (5)Department of Rehabilitation, First 
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.

Hypoxia-ischemia- (HI-) induced oxidative stress plays a role in secondary
pathocellular processes of acute spinal cord injury (SCI) due to HI from many
kinds of mechanical trauma. Increasing evidence suggests that the histone
deacetylase-6 (HDAC6) plays an important role in cell homeostasis in both
physiological and abnormal, stressful, pathological conditions. This paper found 
that inhibition of HDAC6 accelerated reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and
cell apoptosis in response to the HI. Deficiency of HDAC6 hindered the
chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) activity to resistance of HI-induced oxidative
stress. Furthermore, this study provided the experimental evidence for the
potential role of HDAC6 in the regulation of CMA by affecting HSP90 acetylation. 
Therefore, HDAC6 plays an important role in the function of CMA pathway under the
HI stress induced by SCI and it may be a potential therapeutic target in acute
SCI model.

PMCID: PMC4663006
PMID: 26649145  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Labelled Comp Radiopharm. 2016 Jan;59(1):9-13. doi: 10.1002/jlcr.3360. Epub
2015 Dec 8.

Exploration of the labeling of [(11) C]tubastatin A at the hydroxamic acid site
with [(11) C]carbon monoxide.

Lu S(1), Zhang Y(1), Kalin JH(2), Cai L(1), Kozikowski AP(2), Pike VW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Imaging Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and
Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

We aimed to label tubastatin A (1) with carbon-11 (t1/2 <U+2009>=<U+2009>20.4<U+2009>min) in the
hydroxamic acid site to provide a potential radiotracer for imaging histone
deacetylase 6 in vivo with positron emission tomography. Initial attempts at a
one-pot Pd-mediated insertion of [(11) C]carbon monoxide between the aryl iodide 
(2) and hydroxylamine gave low radiochemical yields (<5%) of [(11) C]1. Labeling 
was achieved in useful radiochemical yields (16.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>5.6%, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>4) through a
two-step process based on Pd-mediated insertion of [(11) C]carbon monoxide
between the aryl iodide (2) and p-nitrophenol to give the [(11) C]p-nitrophenyl
ester ([(11) C]5), followed by ultrasound-assisted hydroxyaminolysis of the
activated ester with excess hydroxylamine in a DMSO/THF mixture in the presence
of a strong phosphazene base P1 -t-Bu. However, success in labeling the
hydroxamic acid group of [(11) C]tubastatin A was not transferable to the
labeling of three other model hydroxamic acids.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4715750 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26647018  [PubMed - in process]


35. Cardiovasc Res. 2016 Apr 1;109(4):519-26. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv265. Epub 2015 Dec 
8.

Keeping up the balance: role of HDACs in cardiac proteostasis and therapeutic
implications for atrial fibrillation.

Zhang D(1), Hu X(1), Henning RH(1), Brundel BJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University Medical Centre
Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, PO Box 30 001, 9700RB
Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 
University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, PO
Box 30 001, 9700RB Groningen, The Netherlands Department of Physiology, Institute
for Cardiovascular Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands B.J.J.M.Brundel@umcg.nl.

Cardiomyocytes are long-lived post-mitotic cells with limited regenerative
capacity. Proper cardiomyocyte function depends critically on the maintenance of 
a healthy homeostasis of protein expression, folding, assembly, trafficking,
function, and degradation, together commonly referred to as proteostasis.
Impairment of proteostasis has a prominent role in the pathophysiology of
ageing-related neurodegenerative diseases including Huntington's, Parkinson's,
and Alzheimer's disease. Emerging evidence reveals also a role for impaired
proteostasis in the pathophysiology of common human cardiac diseases such as
cardiac hypertrophy, dilated and ischaemic cardiomyopathies, and atrial
fibrillation (AF). Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have recently been recognized as 
key modulators which control cardiac proteostasis by deacetylating various
proteins. By deacetylating chromatin proteins, including histones, HDACs modulate
epigenetic regulation of pathological gene expression. Also, HDACs exert a broad 
range of functions outside the nucleus by deacetylating structural and
contractile proteins. The cytosolic actions of HDACs result in changed protein
function through post-translational modifications and/or modulation of their
degradation. This review describes the mechanisms underlying the derailment of
proteostasis in AF and subsequently focuses on the role of HDACs herein. In
addition, the therapeutic potential of HDAC inhibition to maintain a healthy
proteostasis resulting in a delay in AF onset and progression is discussed.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26645980  [PubMed - in process]


36. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015 Dec 6. pii: 1535370215618518. [Epub ahead of print]

HDAC6 activity is not required for basal autophagic flux in metastatic prostate
cancer cells.

Watson GW(1), Wickramasekara S(2), Fang Y(3), Maier CS(2), Williams DE(4),
Dashwood RH(5), Perez VI(6), Ho E(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR
97331, USA Biological and Population Health Sciences, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. (3)Genetics, Bioinformatics & Computational Biology,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA. (4)Environmental and Molecular
Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA Linus Pauling
Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. (5)Center for
Epigenetics and Disease Prevention, Institute of Biosciences and Technology,
Texas A&M Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA Department of Nutrition & Food
Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77030, USA Department of
Clinical Cancer Prevention, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Department of Molecular & Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M University College of
Medicine, College Station, TX 77030, USA. (6)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon
State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. (7)Biological and 
Population Health Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
emily.ho@oregonstate.edu.

Histone deacetylase 6 is a multifunctional lysine deacetylase that is recently
emerging as a central facilitator of response to stress and may play an important
role in cancer cell proliferation. The histone deacetylase 6-inhibitor tubacin
has been shown to slow the growth of metastatic prostate cancer cells and
sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents. However, the proteins histone 
deacetylase 6 interacts with, and thus its role in cancer cells, remains poorly
characterized. Histone deacetylase 6 deacetylase activity has recently been shown
to be required for efficient basal autophagic flux. Autophagy is often
dysregulated in cancer cells and may confer stress resistance and allow for cell 
maintenance and a high proliferation rate. Tubacin may therefore slow cancer cell
proliferation by decreasing autophagic flux. We characterized the histone
deacetylase 6-interacting proteins in LNCaP metastatic prostate cancer cells and 
found that histone deacetylase 6 interacts with proteins involved in several
cellular processes, including autophagy. Based on our interaction screen, we
assessed the impact of the histone deacetylase 6-inhibitor tubacin on autophagic 
flux in two metastatic prostate cancer cell lines and found that tubacin does not
influence autophagic flux. Histone deacetylase 6 therefore influences cell
proliferation through an autophagy-independent mechanism.

© 2015 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 26643866  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Dec 8;17(1):149. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0658-0.

HDAC6 activity is a non-oncogene addiction hub for inflammatory breast cancers.

Putcha P(1), Yu J(2), Rodriguez-Barrueco R(3,)(4), Saucedo-Cuevas L(5),
Villagrasa P(6), Murga-Penas E(7), Quayle SN(8), Yang M(9), Castro V(10),
Llobet-Navas D(11), Birnbaum D(12), Finetti P(13), Woodward WA(14), Bertucci
F(15), Alpaugh ML(16), Califano A(17,)(18,)(19), Silva J(20).

Author information: 
(1)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 1130 St.
Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA. preeti.putcha@gmail.com. (2)Department
of Biomedical Informatics, Department of Systems Biology, Center for
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Columbia University, New York, NY, 10032, USA. yujiyang@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, 10029-6574, USA. ruth.rodriguez-barrueco@mssm.edu. (4)Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
ruth.rodriguez-barrueco@mssm.edu. (5)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029-6574, USA.
laura.saucedo-cuevas@mssm.edu. (6)Department of Pathology, Columbia University
Medical Center, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
patricia.villagrasa@gmail.com. (7)Department of Pathology, Columbia University
Medical Center, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
emurga@medgen.uni-kiel.de. (8)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 70 Fargo St, Suite 
205, Boston, MA, 02210, USA. squayle@acetylon.com. (9)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., 70 Fargo St, Suite 205, Boston, MA, 02210, USA. myang@acetylon.com.
(10)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, 630 West 168th
Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA. vc2252@gmail.com. (11)Department of Pathology, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029-6574, USA.
david.llobet@mssm.edu. (12)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille,
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
daniel.birnbaum@inserm.fr. (13)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, 
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
FINETTIP@ipc.unicancer.fr. (14)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. wwoodward@mdanderson.org.
(15)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes,
Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France. BERTUCCIF@ipc.unicancer.fr.
(16)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
10065, USA. alpaughm@mskcc.org. (17)Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Department of Systems Biology, Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, 10032, USA. califano@c2b2.columbia.edu. (18)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia
University, New York, NY, 10032, USA. califano@c2b2.columbia.edu. (19)Herbert
Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 1130 St. Nicholas
Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA. califano@c2b2.columbia.edu. (20)Department of
Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029-6574,
USA. jose.silva@mssm.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most lethal form of breast 
cancers with a 5-year survival rate of only 40 %. Despite its lethality, IBC
remains poorly understood which has greatly limited its therapeutic management.
We thus decided to utilize an integrative functional genomic strategy to identify
the Achilles' heel of IBC cells.
METHODS: We have pioneered the development of genetic tools as well as
experimental and analytical strategies to perform RNAi-based loss-of-function
studies at a genome-wide level. Importantly, we and others have demonstrated that
these functional screens are able to identify essential functions linked to
certain cancer phenotypes. Thus, we decided to use this approach to identify IBC 
specific sensitivities.
RESULTS: We identified and validated HDAC6 as a functionally necessary gene to
maintain IBC cell viability, while being non-essential for other breast cancer
subtypes. Importantly, small molecule inhibitors for HDAC6 already exist and are 
in clinical trials for other tumor types. We thus demonstrated that Ricolinostat 
(ACY1215), a leading HDAC6 inhibitor, efficiently controls IBC cell proliferation
both in vitro and in vivo. Critically, functional HDAC6 dependency is not
associated with genomic alterations at its locus and thus represents a
non-oncogene addiction. Despite HDAC6 not being overexpressed, we found that its 
activity is significantly higher in IBC compared to non-IBC cells, suggesting a
possible rationale supporting the observed dependency.
CONCLUSION: Our finding that IBC cells are sensitive to HDAC6 inhibition provides
a foundation to rapidly develop novel, efficient, and well-tolerated targeted
therapy strategies for IBC patients.

PMCID: PMC4672555
PMID: 26643555  [PubMed - in process]


38. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2016 Mar 8:1-18. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular dynamics of zinc-finger ubiquitin binding domains: a comparative study 
of histone deacetylase 6 and ubiquitin-specific protease 5.

Dos Santos Passos C(1), Simões-Pires CA(1), Carrupt PA(1), Nurisso A(1).

Author information: 
(1)a School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Geneva, University of
Lausanne , 30 Quai Ernest-Ansermet, CH-1211 , Geneva 4 , Switzerland.

HDAC6 is a unique cytoplasmic histone deacetylase characterized by two
deacetylase domains, and by a zinc-finger ubiquitin binding domain (ZnF-UBP) able
to recognize ubiquitin (Ub). The latter has recently been demonstrated to be
involved in the progression of neurodegenerative diseases and in mediating
infection by the influenza A virus. Nowadays, understanding the dynamic and
energetic features of HDAC6 ZnF-UBP-Ub recognition is considered as a crucial
step for the conception of HDAC6 potential modulators. In this study, the atomic,
solvent-related, and thermodynamic features behind HDAC6 ZnF-UBP-Ub recognition
have been analyzed through molecular dynamics simulations. The behavior was then 
compared to the prototypical ZnF-UBP from ubiquitin-specific protease 5 (USP5) in
order to spot relevant differences useful for selective drug design. Principal
component analysis highlighted flapping motions of the L2A loop which were
lowered down upon Ub binding in both systems. While polar and nonpolar
interactions involving Ub G75 and G76 residues were also common features
stabilizing both complexes, salt bridges showed a different pattern, more
significant in HDAC6 ZnF-UBP-Ub, whose energetic contribution in USP5 ZnF-UBP-Ub 
was compensated by the presence of a more stable bridging water molecule. Whereas
molecular mechanics/Poisson-Boltzmann surface area (MM-PBSA) free energies of
binding were comparable for both systems, in agreement with experiments,
computational alanine scanning and free energy decomposition data revealed that
HDAC6 E1141 and D1178 are potential hotspots for the design of selective HDAC6
modulators.

PMID: 26619262  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2015 Oct 5;6(11):1156-61. doi: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.5b00303.
eCollection 2015.

Thiol-Based Potent and Selective HDAC6 Inhibitors Promote Tubulin Acetylation and
T-Regulatory Cell Suppressive Function.

Segretti MC(1), Vallerini GP(1), Brochier C(2), Langley B(2), Wang L(3), Hancock 
WW(3), Kozikowski AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry & Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois at
Chicago , Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States. (2)Burke-Cornell Medical
Research Institute , White Plains, New York 10605, United States ; Department of 
Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical College of Cornell University , New
York, New York 10065, United States. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Division of Transplant Immunology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia 
and University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States.

Several new mercaptoacetamides were synthesized and studied as HDAC6 inhibitors. 
One compound, 2b, bearing an aminoquinoline cap group, was found to show 1.3 nM
potency at HDAC6, with >3000-fold selectivity over HDAC1. 2b also showed
excellent efficacy at increasing tubulin acetylation in rat primary cortical
cultures, inducing a 10-fold increase in acetylated tubulin at 1 µM. To assess
possible therapeutic effects, compounds were assayed for their ability to
increase T-regulatory (Treg) suppressive function. Some but not all of the
compounds increased Treg function, and thereby decreased conventional T cell
activation and proliferation in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4645251 [Available on 2016-11-12]
PMID: 26617971  [PubMed]


40. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Dec 15;23(24):7597-606. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.11.005.
Epub 2015 Nov 10.

Design, synthesis and evaluation of antiestrogen and histone deacetylase
inhibitor molecular hybrids.

Mendoza-Sanchez R(1), Cotnoir-White D(2), Kulpa J(2), Jutras I(2), Pottel J(1),
Moitessier N(1), Mader S(3), Gleason JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Otto Maass Building, McGill University, 801
Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, Québec H3A 0B8, Canada. (2)Institute for
Research in Immunology and Cancer, Pavillon Marcelle-Coutu, Université de
Montréal, 2950 chemin de Polytechnique, Montréal, Québec H3T 1J4, Canada.
(3)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Pavillon Marcelle-Coutu,
Université de Montréal, 2950 chemin de Polytechnique, Montréal, Québec H3T 1J4,
Canada. Electronic address: sylvie.mader@umontreal.ca. (4)Department of
Chemistry, Otto Maass Building, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Québec H3A 0B8, Canada. Electronic address: jim.gleason@mcgill.ca.

The combination of antiestrogens and histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) has
been found to be antiproliferative in breast cancer models. We designed and
synthesized hybrid structures which combined structural features of the pure
antiestrogen ICI-164,384 and HDACi's SAHA and entinostat in a single bifunctional
molecule. The hybrids retained antiestrogenic and HDACi activity and, in the case
of benzamide hybrids, were selective for Class I HDAC3 over Class II HDAC6. The
hybrids possessed low micromolar to high nanomolar activity against both ER+
MCF-7 and ER- MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell models.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26613635  [PubMed - in process]


41. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2016 Jan 1;26(1):154-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.11.011.
Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Cross metathesis with hydroxamate and benzamide BOC-protected alkenes to access
HDAC inhibitors and their biological evaluation highlighted intrinsic activity of
BOC-protected dihydroxamates.

Zwick V(1), Nurisso A(1), Simões-Pires C(1), Bouchet S(2), Martinet N(3),
Lehotzky A(4), Ovadi J(4), Cuendet M(1), Blanquart C(5), Bertrand P(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Geneva, University of
Lausanne, 30 Quai Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland. (2)Institut de
Chimie des Milieux et Matériaux de Poitiers, UMR CNRS 7285, 4 rue Michel Brunet, 
TSA 521106, B28, 86073 Poitiers, France; Réseau Epigénétique du Cancéropôle Grand
Ouest, France. (3)Institut de chimie, UMR CNRS 7272, UNSA, F-06108 Nice, France. 
(4)Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, Magyar tudósok krt. 2, 1117 Budapest Hungary. (5)Inserm, UMR
892, Nantes F-44000, France; CNRS, UMR 6299, Nantes F-44000, France; University
of Nantes, Nantes F-44000, France; Réseau Epigénétique du Cancéropôle Grand
Ouest, France. (6)Institut de Chimie des Milieux et Matériaux de Poitiers, UMR
CNRS 7285, 4 rue Michel Brunet, TSA 521106, B28, 86073 Poitiers, France; Réseau
Epigénétique du Cancéropôle Grand Ouest, France. Electronic address:
philippe.bertrand@univ-poitiers.fr.

Conditions for the metathesis of alkenes in the convergent synthesis of HDAC
inhibitors have been improved by continuous catalyst flow injection in the
reaction media. Intermediate and target compounds obtained were tested for their 
ability to induce HDAC inhibition and tubulin acetylation, revealing the key role
of the tert-butyloxycarbonyl (BOC) group for more HDAC6 selectivity. Molecular
modelling added rationale for this BOC effect.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26611919  [PubMed - in process]


42. Clin Immunol. 2016 Jan;162:58-73. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.11.007. Epub 2015 Nov 
22.

Specific HDAC6 inhibition by ACY-738 reduces SLE pathogenesis in NZB/W mice.

Regna NL(1), Vieson MD(1), Luo XM(1), Chafin CB(1), Puthiyaveetil AG(2), Hammond 
SE(1), Caudell DL(3), Jarpe MB(4), Reilly CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences & Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, United States. (2)Department of Biotechnology, 
American University of Ras Al Khaimah, United Arab Emirates. (3)Wake Forest
University Primate Center, Department of Pathology/Comparative Medicine, Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, United States. (4)Acetylon
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 70 Fargo St., Boston, MA 02210, United States.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences & Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, United States; Edward Via College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Blacksburg, VA 24060, United States. Electronic address:
chreilly@vt.edu.

We sought to determine if a selective HDAC6 inhibitor (ACY-738) decreases disease
in NZB/W mice. From 22 to 38weeks-of-age, mice were injected intraperitoneally
with 5 or 20mg/kg of ACY-738, or vehicle control. Body weight and proteinuria
were measured every 2weeks, while sera anti-dsDNA, Ig isotypes, and cytokine
levels were measured every 4weeks. Kidney disease was determined by evaluation of
sera, urine, immune complex deposition, and renal pathology. Flow cytometric
analysis assessed thymic, splenic, bone marrow, and peripheral lymphocyte
differentiation patterns. Our results showed HDAC6 inhibition decreased SLE
disease by inhibiting immune complex-mediated glomerulonephritis, sera anti-dsDNA
levels, and inflammatory cytokine production and increasing splenic Treg cells.
Inhibition of HDAC6 increased the percentage of cells in the early-stage
developmental fractions of both pro- and pre-B cells. These results suggest that 
specific HDAC6 inhibition may be able to decrease SLE disease by altering
aberrant T and B cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26604012  [PubMed - in process]


43. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2016 Feb 17;7(2):240-58. doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00286.
Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Bicyclic-Capped Histone Deacetylase 6 Inhibitors with Improved Activity in a
Model of Axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease.

Shen S(1), Benoy V(2), Bergman JA(1), Kalin JH(1), Frojuello M(1), Vistoli G(3), 
Haeck W(2), Van Den Bosch L(2), Kozikowski AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, University of Illinois at Chicago , 833 S. Wood St.,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States. (2)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Vesalius
Research Center (VIB) and Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease 
(LIND), KU Leuven , O&N4 Herestraat 49, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. (3)Dipartimento
di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Università degli Studi di Milano , Via Mangiagalli 25, 
20133 Milano, Italy.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a disorder of the peripheral nervous system 
where progressive degeneration of motor and sensory nerves leads to motor
problems and sensory loss and for which no pharmacological treatment is
available. Recently, it has been shown in a model for the axonal form of CMT that
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) can serve as a target for the development of a
pharmacological therapy. Therefore, we aimed at developing new selective and
activity-specific HDAC6 inhibitors with improved biochemical properties. By
utilizing a bicyclic cap as the structural scaffold from which to build upon, we 
developed several analogues that showed improved potency compared to tubastatin A
while maintaining excellent selectivity compared to HDAC1. Further screening in
N2a cells examining both the acetylation of a-tubulin and histones narrowed down 
the library of compounds to three potent and selective HDAC6 inhibitors. In
mutant HSPB1-expressing DRG neurons, serving as an in vitro model for CMT2, these
inhibitors were able to restore the mitochondrial axonal transport deficits.
Combining structure-based development of HDAC6 inhibitors, screening in N2a cells
and in a neuronal model for CMT2F, and preliminary ADMET and pharmacokinetic
profiles, resulted in the selection of compound 23d that possesses improved
biochemical, functional, and druglike properties compared to tubastatin A.

PMCID: PMC4775085
PMID: 26599234  [PubMed - in process]


44. ChemMedChem. 2016 Jan;11(1):81-92. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201500456. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Identification of HDAC6-Selective Inhibitors of Low Cancer Cell Cytotoxicity.

Gaisina IN(1,)(2), Tueckmantel W(2), Ugolkov A(3), Shen S(1), Hoffen J(3),
Dubrovskyi O(3,)(4), Mazar A(3,)(4), Schoon RA(5), Billadeau D(5), Kozikowski
AP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. 
(2)Psychogenics Inc., Tarrytown, NY, 10591, USA. (3)Center for Developmental
Therapeutics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
60208, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA. (5)Department of Immunology
and Division of Oncology Research, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 13-42
Guggenheim, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. (6)Drug Discovery Program, Department of
Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. kozikowa@uic.edu.

The histone deacetylases (HDACs) occur in 11 different isoforms, and these
enzymes regulate the activity of a large number of proteins involved in cancer
initiation and progression. The discovery of isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors
(HDACIs) is desirable, as it is likely that such compounds would avoid some of
the undesirable side effects found with the first-generation inhibitors. A series
of HDACIs previously reported by us were found to display some selectivity for
HDAC6 and to induce cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells.
In the present work, we show that structural modification of these
isoxazole-based inhibitors leads to high potency and selectivity for HDAC6 over
HDAC1-3 and HDAC10, while unexpectedly abolishing their ability to block cell
growth. Three inhibitors with lower HDAC6 selectivity inhibit the growth of cell 
lines BxPC3 and L3.6pl, and they only induce apoptosis in L3.6pl cells. We
conclude that HDAC6 inhibition alone is insufficient for disruption of cell
growth, and that some degree of class 1 HDAC inhibition is required. Moreover,
the highly selective HDAC6Is reported herein that are weakly cytotoxic may find
use in cancer immune system reactivation.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26592932  [PubMed - in process]


45. Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Nov 17. doi: 10.4143/crt.2015.206. [Epub ahead of print]

Isotype-Specific Inhibition of Histone Deacetylases: Identification of Optimal
Targets for Radiosensitization.

Kim JH(1,)(2), Moon SH(1), No M(3), Kim JJ(1,)(3), Choi EJ(3), Cho BJ(3), Kim
JS(1,)(3), Kim IH(1,)(4,)(2), Kim IA(1,)(4,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Institute of Radiation Medicine, Medical Research
Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Medical Science Research
Institute, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea. (4)Cancer
Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Purpose: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors radiosensitize tumor cells. To
elucidate mechanisms underlying radiosensitization by HDAC inhibition,
understanding of differential contributions of HDAC isotypes is needed. The aim
of this study was to investigate involvement of known HDAC isotypes in modulation
of cellular radiosensitivity.
Materials and Methods: Because pharmacologic HDAC inhibitors lack
isotype-specificity, RNA interference against 11 HDAC isotypes was used to
inhibit HDAC in an isotype-specific manner. Radiation cell survival was evaluated
using a clonogenic assay in SQ20B cells transfected with small interfering RNA
specifically targeting HDAC isotypes. Immunocytochemistry was performed for
detection of <U+03B3>H2AX foci. Protein expression was measured using Western blotting.
Results: Among 11 HDAC isotypes tested, specific inhibition of 7 isotypes (HDAC1,
HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC6, HDAC7, HDAC10, and HDAC11) enhanced radiation lethality in
SQ20B cells. Radiosensitization by inhibition of these HDAC isotypes was
accompanied by delay of DNA double strand break repair. Radiosensitivity of SQ20B
cells was not altered by selective inhibition of the remaining 4 isotypes (HDAC2,
HDAC5, HDAC8, and HDAC9). Inhibition of HDAC isotypes resulted in downregulation 
of various proteins involved in pro-survival and DNA damage repair pathways.
Conclusion: s Isotype-specificity exists in HDAC inhibition-induced
radiosensitization. Different HDAC isotypes are differentially involved in
modulation of cellular radiosensitivity.

PMID: 26582395  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


46. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 19;5:16869. doi: 10.1038/srep16869.

New HDAC6-mediated deacetylation sites of tubulin in the mouse brain identified
by quantitative mass spectrometry.

Liu N(1), Xiong Y(2), Li S(2), Ren Y(1), He Q(1), Gao S(1), Zhou J(1), Shui W(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Systems Microbial 
Biotechnology, Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China.

The post-translational modifications (PTMs) occurring on microtubules have been
implicated in the regulation of microtubule properties and functions. Acetylated 
K40 of a-tubulin, a hallmark of long-lived stable microtubules, is known to be
negatively controlled by histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). However, the vital roles 
of HDAC6 in microtubule-related processes such as cell motility and cell division
cannot be fully explained by the only known target site on tubulin. Here, we
attempt to comprehensively map lysine acetylation sites on tubulin purified from 
mouse brain tissues. Furthermore, mass spectrometry-based quantitative comparison
of acetylated peptides from wild-type vs HDAC6 knockout mice allowed us to
identify six new deacetylation sites possibly mediated by HDAC6. Thus, adding new
sites to the repertoire of HDAC6-mediated tubulin deacetylation events would
further our understanding of the multi-faceted roles of HDAC6 in regulating
microtubule stability and cellular functions.

PMCID: PMC4652237
PMID: 26581825  [PubMed - in process]


47. Biochem Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 1;99:31-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.11.005. Epub 2015
Nov 5.

4-Hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives as HDAC6-specific inhibitors modulating
microtubular structure and HSP90a chaperone activity against prostate cancer.

Seidel C(1), Schnekenburger M(1), Mazumder A(2), Teiten MH(1), Kirsch G(3),
Dicato M(1), Diederich M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, 9, rue Edward Steichen, L-2540 Luxembourg, Luxembourg. (2)Department
of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, 
Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Tumor Microenvironment
Global Core Research Center, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea. (3)UMR CNRS 7565 SRSMC, Université de Lorraine,
57070 Metz, France. (4)Department of Pharmacy, Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea; Tumor Microenvironment Global Core Research Center, College of
Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: marcdiederich@snu.ac.kr.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC)6 is a unique isoenzyme targeting specific substrates
including a-tubulin and heat shock protein (HSP)90. HDAC6 is involved in protein 
trafficking and degradation, cell shape and migration. Deregulation of HDAC6
activity is associated with a variety of diseases including cancer leading to a
growing interest for developing HDAC6 inhibitors. Here, we identified two new
structurally related 4-hydroxybenzoic acids as selective HDAC6 inhibitors
reducing proliferation, colony and spheroid formation as well as viability of
prostate cancer cells. Both compounds strongly enhanced a-tubulin acetylation
leading to remodeling of microtubular organization. Furthermore, 4-hydroxybenzoic
acids decreased HSP90a regulation of the human androgen receptor in prostate
cancer cells by increasing HSP90a acetylation levels. Collectively, our data
support the potential of 4-hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives as HDAC6-specific
inhibitors with anti-cancer properties.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26549368  [PubMed - in process]


48. J Clin Invest. 2015 Nov 2;125(11):4269-80. doi: 10.1172/JCI80713. Epub 2015 Oct
20.

Histone deacetylase 6 inhibition enhances oncolytic viral replication in glioma.

Nakashima H, Kaufmann JK, Wang PY, Nguyen T, Speranza MC, Kasai K, Okemoto K,
Otsuki A, Nakano I, Fernandez S, Goins WF, Grandi P, Glorioso JC, Lawler S, Cripe
TP, Chiocca EA.

Oncolytic viral (OV) therapy, which uses genetically engineered tumor-targeting
viruses, is being increasingly used in cancer clinical trials due to the direct
cytolytic effects of this treatment that appear to provoke a robust immune
response against the tumor. As OVs enter tumor cells, intrinsic host defenses
have the potential to hinder viral replication and spread within the tumor mass. 
In this report, we show that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in tumor cells appears
to alter the trafficking of post-entry OVs from the nucleus toward lysosomes. In 
glioma cell lines and glioma-stem-like cells, HDAC6 inhibition (HDAC6i) by either
pharmacologic or genetic means substantially increased replication of oncolytic
herpes simplex virus type 1 (oHSV). Moreover, HDAC6i increased shuttling of
post-entry oHSV to the nucleus. In addition, electron microscopic analysis
revealed that post-entry oHSVs are preferentially taken up into glioma cells
through the endosomal pathway rather than via fusion at the cell surface.
Together, these findings illustrate a mechanism of glioma cell defense against an
incoming infection by oHSV and identify possible approaches to enhance oHSV
replication and subsequent lysis of tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC4639993
PMID: 26524593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Immunol. 2015 Dec 1;195(11):5421-31. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501195. Epub 2015
Oct 30.

Inhibition of Histone Deacetylases Permits Lipopolysaccharide-Mediated Secretion 
of Bioactive IL-1ß via a Caspase-1-Independent Mechanism.

Stammler D(1), Eigenbrod T(1), Menz S(2), Frick JS(2), Sweet MJ(3), Shakespear
MR(3), Jantsch J(4), Siegert I(5), Wölfle S(1), Langer JD(6), Oehme I(7),
Schaefer L(8), Fischer A(9), Knievel J(10), Heeg K(1), Dalpke AH(1), Bode KA(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Medical Microbiology and Hygiene,
Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg 69120, Germany; (2)Institute of
Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Tübingen, Tübingen 70276,
Germany; (3)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, St. Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia; (4)Institute of Clinical
Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg 93053,
Germany; Institute of Microbiology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen
91054, Germany; (5)Institute of Microbiology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen 91054, Germany; (6)Department of Molecular Membrane Biology,
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysics, Frankfurt 60438, Germany; (7)Clinical
Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg
69120, Germany; (8)Institute of Pharmacology, Goethe University Frankfurt,
Frankfurt 60590, Germany; (9)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases,
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Göttingen 37077, Germany; and. (10)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology,
and Infectious Disease, University Hospital, Heinrich Heine University of
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf 40225, Germany. (11)Department of Infectious Diseases,
Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg
69120, Germany; konrad.bode@uni-heidelberg.de.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACi) are clinically approved anticancer 
drugs that have important immune-modulatory properties. We report the surprising 
finding that HDACi promote LPS-induced IL-1ß processing and secretion in human
and murine dendritic cells and murine macrophages. HDACi/LPS-induced IL-1ß
maturation and secretion kinetics differed completely from those observed upon
inflammasome activation. Moreover, this pathway of IL-1ß secretion was dependent 
on caspase-8 but was independent of the inflammasome components NACHT, LRR, and
PYD domains-containing protein 3, apoptosis-associated speck-like protein
containing a carboxyl-terminal caspase-recruitment domain, and caspase-1. Genetic
studies excluded HDAC6 and HDAC10 as relevant HDAC targets in this pathway,
whereas pharmacological inhibitor studies implicated the involvement of HDAC11.
Treatment of mice with HDACi in a dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis model
resulted in a strong increase in intestinal IL-1ß, confirming that this pathway
is also operative in vivo. Thus, in addition to the conventional
inflammasome-dependent IL-1ß cleavage pathway, dendritic cells and macrophages
are capable of generating, secreting, and processing bioactive IL-1ß by a novel, 
caspase-8-dependent mechanism. Given the widespread interest in the therapeutic
targeting of IL-1ß, as well as the use of HDACi for anti-inflammatory
applications, these findings have substantial clinical implications.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26519528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016 Jan;80(1):26-33. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000896.

Histone deactylase gene expression profiles are associated with outcomes in blunt
trauma patients.

Sillesen M(1), Bambakidis T, Dekker SE, Fabricius R, Svenningsen P, Bruhn PJ,
Svendsen LB, Hillingsø J, Alam HB.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Surgical Gastroenterology (M.S., P.S., P.J.B., L.B.S.,
J.H.), and Surgery (R.F.), and Institute for Inflammation Research (M.S.),
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Denmark; Division of Trauma,
Emergency Surgery and Surgical Critical Care (M.S.), Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Surgery (T.B., S.E.D., H.B.A.),
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Department of Anesthesiology
(S.E.D.), Institute for Cardiovascular Research, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, such as
valproic acid, increases survival in animal models of trauma and sepsis. Valproic
acid is a pan-inhibitor that blocks most of the known HDAC isoforms. Targeting
individual HDAC isoforms may increase survival and reduce complications, but
little is known of the natural history of HDAC gene expression following trauma. 
We hypothesized that distinct HDAC isoform gene expression patterns would be
associated with differences in outcomes following trauma.
METHODS: Twenty-eight-day longitudinal HDAC leukocyte gene expression profiles in
172 blunt trauma patients were extracted from the Inflammation and the Host
Response to Injury (Glue Grant) data set. Outcome was classified as complicated
(death or no recovery by Day 28, n = 51) or uncomplicated (n = 121). Mixed
modeling was used to compare the HDAC expression trajectories between the groups,
corrected for Injury Severity Score (ISS), base deficit, and volume of blood
products transfused during the initial 12 hours following admission. Weighted
gene correlation network analysis identified modules of genes with significant
coexpression, and HDAC genes were mapped to these modules. Biologic function of
these modules was investigated using the Gene Ontology database.
RESULTS: Elevated longitudinal HDAC expression trajectories for HDAC1, HDAC3,
HDAC6, and HDAC11 were associated with complicated outcomes. In contrast,
suppressed expression of Sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) was associated with adverse outcome (p
< 0.01). Weighted gene correlation network analysis identified significant
coexpression of HDAC and SIRT genes with genes involved in ribosomal function and
down-regulation of protein translation in response to stress (HDAC1), T-cell
signaling, and T-cell selection (HDAC3) as well as coagulation and hemostasis
(SIRT3). No coexpression of HDAC11 was identified.
CONCLUSION: Expression trajectories of HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC6, HDAC11, and SIRT3
correlate with outcomes following trauma and may potentially serve as biomarkers.
They may also be promising targets for pharmacologic intervention. The effects of
HDAC and SIRT gene expression in trauma may be mediated through pathways involved
in ribosomal and T-cell function as well as coagulation and hemostasis.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic study, level III.

PMID: 26517778  [PubMed - in process]


51. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2015 Dec;8(12):1184-91. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-15-0119. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Sulforaphane Bioavailability and Chemopreventive Activity in Women Scheduled for 
Breast Biopsy.

Atwell LL(1), Zhang Z(2), Mori M(3), Farris PE(2), Vetto JT(4), Naik AM(4), Oh
KY(5), Thuillier P(6), Ho E(7), Shannon J(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Population Health Sciences, Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, Oregon. Department of Nutrition and Food Science, California State
University, Chico, California. (2)School of Public Health, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, Oregon. (3)School of Public Health, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, Oregon. Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, Oregon. (4)Division of Surgical Oncology, Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon. (5)Department of Radiology, Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon. (6)School of Public Health, Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon. Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon. Department of Dermatology, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon. (7)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon
State University, Corvallis, Oregon. Moore Family Center for Whole Grain Foods,
Nutrition and Preventive Health, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon.
(8)School of Public Health, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon.
shannoja@ohsu.edu.

Epidemiologic studies suggest a protective effect of cruciferous vegetables on
breast cancer. Sulforaphane (SFN), an active food component derived from
crucifers, has been shown to be effective in breast cancer chemoprevention. This 
study evaluated the chemopreventive effect of SFN on selective biomarkers from
blood and breast tissues. In a 2- to 8-week double-blinded, randomized controlled
trial, 54 women with abnormal mammograms and scheduled for breast biopsy were
randomized to consume a placebo or a glucoraphanin (GFN) supplement providing SFN
(n = 27). Plasma and urinary SFN metabolites, peripheral blood mononuclear cell
(PBMC) histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity, and tissue biomarkers (H3K18ac,
H3K9ac, HDAC3, HDAC6, Ki-67, p21) were measured before and after the intervention
in benign, ductal carcinoma in situ, or invasive ductal carcinoma breast tissues.
Within the supplement group, Ki-67 (P = 0.003) and HDAC3 (P = 0.044) levels
significantly decreased in benign tissue. Pre-to-postintervention changes in
these biomarkers were not significantly different between treatment groups after 
multiple comparison adjustment. GFN supplementation was associated with a
significant decrease in PBMC HDAC activity (P = 0.04). No significant
associations were observed between SFN and examined tissue biomarkers when
comparing treatment groups. This study provides evidence that GFN supplementation
for a few weeks is safe but may not be sufficient for producing changes in breast
tissue tumor biomarkers. Future studies employing larger sample sizes should
evaluate alternative dosing and duration regimens to inform dietary SFN
strategies in breast cancer chemoprevention.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4670794 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26511489  [PubMed - in process]


52. Neurobiol Aging. 2016 Jan;37:91-102. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.09.021.
Epub 2015 Oct 9.

HDAC6 alleviates prion peptide-mediated neuronal death via modulating
PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway.

Zhu T(1), Zhao D(1), Song Z(1), Yuan Z(1), Li C(1), Wang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Yin
X(1), Hassan MF(1), Yang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology, Key Lab of Animal Epidemiology
and Zoonosis, Ministry of Agriculture, National Animal Transmissible Spongiform
Encephalopathy Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China. (2)State Key Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology, Key 
Lab of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis, Ministry of Agriculture, National Animal
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy Laboratory, College of Veterinary
Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China. Electronic address:
yanglf@cau.edu.cn.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) controls several major cellular responses to stress
that play a role in neurodegenerative diseases, including aggresome formation,
autophagy, and apoptosis. However, the specific role of HDAC6 in prion diseases
is not known. In this study, we examined the relationship between HDAC6 and
cellular response to the neurotoxic synthetic prion protein fragment PrP106-126. 
We determined that exposure of cerebral cortical neurons to this fragment alters 
the expression and localization of HDAC6. Suppression of HDAC6 activity or
knockdown of HDAC6 expression exacerbates the neuronal cell death induced by
PrP106-126, but that overexpression of HDAC6 alleviates PrP106-126-induced
neuronal death. We also found that this protective effect of HDAC6 involves the
activation of autophagy and modulation of PI3K-Akt-mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTOR) signaling. Overexpression of HDAC6 in neurons-induced autophagy correlated
with a reduction in phosphorylated mTOR and phosphorylated p70S6K in response to 
PrP106-126 stimulation, conversely, HDAC6 deficiency interfered with autophagy
and increased phosphorylated mTOR and phosphorylated 70S6K. In addition, HDAC6
also appears to modulate the phosphorylation of Akt; overexpression of HDAC6
increased the phosphorylated Akt, but HDAC6 deficiency resulted in further
reduction of phosphorylated Akt. Overall, we demonstrate that HDAC6 protects
neurons from toxicity of prion peptide, and that this protection occurs at
through the regulation of the PI3k-Akt-mTOR axis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26507311  [PubMed - in process]


53. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015 Dec 15;309(12):L1410-9. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00180.2015. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors prevent pulmonary endothelial hyperpermeability
and acute lung injury by regulating heat shock protein 90 function.

Joshi AD(1), Barabutis N(1), Birmpas C(1), Dimitropoulou C(1), Thangjam G(1),
Cherian-Shaw M(2), Dennison J(2), Catravas JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Frank Reidy Research Center for Bioelectrics, Old Dominion University,
Norfolk, Virginia; and. (2)Vascular Biology Center, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, Georgia. (3)Frank Reidy Research Center for Bioelectrics, Old Dominion
University, Norfolk, Virginia; and jcatrava@odu.edu.

Transendothelial hyperpermeability caused by numerous agonists is dependent on
heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and leads to endothelial barrier dysfunction (EBD).
Inhibition of Hsp90 protects and restores transendothelial permeability.
Hyperacetylation of Hsp90, as by inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC),
suppresses its chaperone function and mimics the effects of Hsp90 inhibitors. In 
this study we assessed the role of HDAC in mediating lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced transendothelial hyperpermeability and acute lung injury (ALI). We 
demonstrate that HDAC inhibition protects against LPS-mediated EBD. Inhibition of
multiple HDAC by the general inhibitors panobinostat or trichostatin provided
protection against LPS-induced transendothelial hyperpermeability, acetylated and
suppressed Hsp90 chaperone function, and attenuated RhoA activity and signaling
crucial to endothelial barrier function. Treatment with the HDAC3-selective
inhibitor RGFP-966 or the HDAC6-selective inhibitor tubastatin A provided partial
protection against LPS-mediated transendothelial hyperpermeability. Similarly,
knock down of HDAC3 and HDAC6 by specific small-interfering RNAs provided
significant protection against LPS-induced EBD. Furthermore, combined
pharmacological inhibition of both HDAC3 and -6 attenuated the inflammation,
capillary permeability, and structural abnormalities associated with LPS-induced 
ALI in mice. Together these data indicate that HDAC mediate increased
transendothelial hyperpermeability caused by LPS and that inhibition of HDAC
protects against LPS-mediated EBD and ALI by suppressing Hsp90-dependent RhoA
activity and signaling.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4683315 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26498249  [PubMed - in process]


54. Development. 2015 Dec 1;142(23):4068-79. doi: 10.1242/dev.126953. Epub 2015 Oct
22.

The NIMA-like kinase Nek2 is a key switch balancing cilia biogenesis and
resorption in the development of left-right asymmetry.

Endicott SJ(1), Basu B(2), Khokha M(3), Brueckner M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, 
Fitkin 426, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Yale
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, Fitkin 426, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA. (3)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, Fitkin 426, New Haven, CT 06520, USA Department of Pediatrics, Yale
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, Fitkin 426, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA. (4)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, Fitkin 426, New Haven, CT 06520, USA Department of Pediatrics, Yale
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, Fitkin 426, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA martina.brueckner@yale.edu.

Vertebrate left-right (LR) asymmetry originates at a transient left-right
organizer (LRO), a ciliated structure where cilia play a crucial role in breaking
symmetry. However, much remains unknown about the choreography of cilia
biogenesis and resorption at this organ. We recently identified a mutation
affecting NEK2, a member of the NIMA-like serine-threonine kinase family, in a
patient with congenital heart disease associated with abnormal LR development.
Here, we report how Nek2 acts through cilia to influence LR patterning. Both
overexpression and knockdown of nek2 in Xenopus result in abnormal LR development
and reduction of LRO cilia count and motility, phenotypes that are modified by
interaction with the Hippo signaling pathway. nek2 knockdown leads to a centriole
defect at the LRO, consistent with the known role of Nek2 in centriole
separation. Nek2 overexpression results in premature ciliary resorption in
cultured cells dependent on function of the tubulin deacetylase Hdac6. Finally,
we provide evidence that the known interaction between Nek2 and Nup98, a
nucleoporin that localizes to the ciliary base, is important for regulating
cilium resorption. Together, these data show that Nek2 is a switch balancing
ciliogenesis and resorption in the development of LR asymmetry.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712839 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26493400  [PubMed - in process]


55. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016 Jan;80(1):34-41. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000897.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 restores innate immune cells in the bone
marrow in a lethal septic model.

Zhao T(1), Li Y, Liu B, Pan B, Cheng X, Georgoff P, Alam HB.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Hospital, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.

BACKGROUND: We have previously demonstrated that Tubastatin A, a selective
inhibitor of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), improves survival and increases
circulating monocyte count and bacterial clearance in a lethal model of cecal
ligation and puncture (CLP) in mice. The aim of the present study was to
characterize the effects of inhibition of HDAC6 on the bone marrow cell
population.
METHODS: C57BL/6J mice were subjected to CLP and, 1 hour later, given an
intraperitoneal injection of either Tubastatin A (70 mg/kg) dissolved in DMSO or 
DMSO alone (n = 9 per group). Sham-operated animals were treated in an identical 
fashion, without CLP. Forty-eight hours later, bone marrow cells were flushed out
from the femurs and tibias. Erythrocytes were lysed, and a single-cell suspension
was made for analysis. Cells were washed; blocked with antimouse CD16/32; stained
with antimouse B220 PE-Cy7, CD3 APC-eFluor 780, CD11b FITC, Gr-1 PerCP-Cy5.5, and
F4/80 Antigen APC; and subjected to flow cytometry. Data were acquired on an
LSRII Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and analyzed with FlowJo
(Flowjo, LLC, Ashland, OR).
RESULTS: In comparison with the sham group, CLP animals showed decreased
percentage of innate immune cells (CD11b, 62.1% ± 3.1% vs. 32.9% ± 4.9%, p =
0.0025) and macrophages (CD11bF4/80, 44.6% ± 3.4% vs. 19.8% ± 2.6%, p = 0.0002)
as well as increased percentage of T lymphocytes (CD3, 1.1% ± 0.2% vs. 3.3% ±
0.4%, p = 0.0082) in the bone marrow 48 hours after CLP. Treatment with
Tubastatin A restored the innate immune cells (32.9% ± 4.9% vs. 54.0% ± 4.1%, p =
0.0112) and macrophages (19.8% ± 2.6% vs. 47.1% ± 4.6%, p = 0.0001) and increased
the percentage of neutrophils (CD11bGr-1, 28.4% ± 3.9% vs. 48.0% ± 4.0%, p =
0.0075). The percentages of B (B220) and T lymphocytes were not significantly
altered by Tubastatin A, compared with the vehicle-treated CLP animals.
CONCLUSION: Selective inhibition of HDAC6 in this lethal septic model restored
the innate immune cell and macrophage populations and increased the neutrophil
composition in the bone marrow. These results may explain the previously reported
beneficial effects of Tubastatin A treatment in a septic model.

PMCID: PMC4688101 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26491797  [PubMed - in process]


56. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Dec 5;242:227-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2015.10.014. Epub
2015 Oct 19.

Ginsenoside 20(s)-Rh2 as potent natural histone deacetylase inhibitors
suppressing the growth of human leukemia cells.

Liu ZH(1), Li J(1), Xia J(2), Jiang R(1), Zuo GW(3), Li XP(1), Chen Y(1), Xiong
W(1), Chen DL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Department 
of Human Anatomy, Chongqing Medical and Health School, Chongqing 400016, China.
(3)Key Laboratories of Clinical Diagnostics, Province and Ministry of Education, 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (4)Laboratory of Stem Cell
and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and Embryology, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, China. Electronic address: xinmengyuandlc@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Activation and abnormal expression of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) which is important target for cancer therapeutics are related 
to the occurrence of human leukemia. 20(s)-Ginsenoside Rh2 (20(s)-Rh2) may be a
potential HDAC inhibitor (HDACi) of leukemia, but the mechanism has not been
reported.
METHODS: The cell proliferation and apoptosis was assessed in cultured K562 and
KG-1a cells. The protein expression was measured with immunoblotting. The
activities of HDAC and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) were measured with BCA.
In vivo experiments were performed on naked mice carrying K562 cells for
assessment of tumor growth, apoptosis, protein expression, and HDAC/HAT
activities.
RESULTS: 20(s)-Rh2 effectively induced cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase and
apoptosis in K562 and KG1-a cells, decreased the levels of proteins associated
with cell proliferation (Cyclin D1, Bcl-2, ERK, p-ERK) and activated
pro-apoptotic proteins (Bax, cleaved Caspase-3, p38, p-p38, JNK, p-JNK).
20(s)-Rh2 down-regulated HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6, increased histone H3 acetylation
and HAT activity. Moreover, 20(s)-Rh2 inhibited the growth of human leukemia
xenograft tumors in vivo.
CONCLUSION: 20(s)-Rh2 inhibited the proliferation of K562 and KG1-a cell by
reducing the expression and activity of HDACs, increasing histone acetylation,
and regulating key proteins in the downstream signaling pathways. Therefore,
20(s)-Rh2 could become a potential natural HDACi for chemotherapy of leukemia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26482938  [PubMed - in process]


57. J Breast Cancer. 2015 Sep;18(3):249-55. doi: 10.4048/jbc.2015.18.3.249. Epub 2015
Sep 24.

Potential Prognostic Value of Histone Deacetylase 6 and Acetylated Heat-Shock
Protein 90 in Early-Stage Breast Cancer.

Park Y(1), Lee KS(2), Park SY(3), Kim JH(4), Kang EY(4), Kim SW(4), Eom KY(1),
Kim JS(1), Kim IA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea. ; Breast Care Center, Seoul
National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea. (4)Breast Care Center,
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea. (5)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 
; Breast Care Center, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam,
Korea.

PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is an enzyme that deacetylates heat-shock 
protein 90 (HSP90). Many studies have investigated the role of HDAC6 and HSP90 in
tumorigenesis and in the prognosis of cancer patients. This study aimed to
evaluate the prognostic value of HDAC6 and acetylated HSP90 (acetyl-HSP90) in a
cohort of breast cancer patients.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical analysis of 314 surgical specimens obtained from
patients with invasive breast cancer was carried out to assess standard
pathologic factors and the expression of HDAC6 and acetyl-HSP90. Statistical
analyses were performed to determine the association between HDAC6, acetyl-HSP90,
and conventional clinicopathological factors, and the prognostic values of these 
factors were evaluated.
RESULTS: HDAC6 expression did not show any correlation with other
clinicopathological factors, but acetyl-HSP90 was significantly correlated with
histologic grade (p=0.001) and the Ki-67 index (p=0.015). HDAC6 and acetyl-HSP90 
expression were significantly associated with each other (p=0.047). Although
HDAC6 was not prognostic for disease-free survival (DFS), some patients with high
expression of HDAC6 experienced recurrence 5 years after diagnosis, while there
was no recurrent disease after 5 years in those with low expression. Acetyl-HSP90
was significantly associated with the DFS of all patients (p=0.016) and with high
HDAC6 expression (p=0.017), but not with low expression.
CONCLUSION: Expression of HDAC6 and acetyl-HSP90 are correlated. HDAC6 is
proposed to be a possible predictive marker of late recurrence, and acetyl-HSP90 
has prognostic value in predicting the DFS of breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4600689
PMID: 26472975  [PubMed]


58. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):973-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.033. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Histone deacetylase 6 negatively regulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation.

Hwang I(1), Lee E(1), Jeon SA(1), Yu JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute for Immunology and Immunological
Diseases, Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Microbiology, Institute for Immunology and Immunological Diseases, Brain Korea 21
PLUS Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
120-752, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jewookyu@yuhs.ac.

Emerging reports demonstrate that deregulated NLRP3 inflammasome activation is
implicated in a variety of inflammatory and metabolic disorders, but the
molecular mechanism underlying NLRP3 inflammasome regulation remains uncertain.
Here, we present evidence that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibits the
activation of NLRP3 inflammasome through its direct association with NLRP3.
ShRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC6 in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs)
showed a significant increase in caspase-1 activation and interleukin-1 beta
(IL-1ß) secretion in response to NLRP3-activating stimulations, but not to absent
in melanoma 2 (AIM2)-activating stimulation. In addition, knockdown of HDAC6 in
BMDMs enhanced the oligomerization of ASC upon LPS/nigericin stimulation. The
augmented NLRP3 inflammasome activation seen in HDAC6-knockdown BMDMs is
independent of the deacetylase activity of HDAC6. Instead, HDAC6 directly
associates with NLRP3 through its ubiquitin-binding domain. Moreover, PR619
treatment (deubiquitinase inhibitor) resulted in the elevation in the interaction
of NLRP3 with HDAC6 and the decrease in NLRP3-dependent caspase-1 activation.
Taken together, our results indicate that HDAC6 negatively regulates NLRP3
inflammasome activation through its interaction to ubiquitinated NLRP3.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26471297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Dec;29(2):494-503. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.10.006.
Epub 2015 Oct 21.

HDAC expression and activity is upregulated in diseased lupus-prone mice.

Regna NL(1), Vieson MD(1), Gojmerac AM(1), Luo XM(1), Caudell DL(2), Reilly
CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences & Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24060, United States. (2)Wake Forest University
Primate Center, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, United
States; Department of Pathology/Comparative Medicine, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, United States. (3)Department of Biomedical
Sciences & Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary
Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA
24060, United States; Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine, Blacksburg, VA,
24060, United States. Electronic address: chreilly@vcom.vt.edu.

Prior studies have shown that pan-HDAC inhibition can decrease disease in lupus
mice; however, the mechanisms(s) remain to be elucidated. MRL/MpJ-Fas(lpr)
(MRL/lpr) mice develop a lupus-like disease characterized by anti-dsDNA
production, lymphoproliferation, and immune complex-mediated glomerulonephritis. 
Early- and late-disease (12 and 20weeks-of-age respectively) female MRL/lpr mice 
were compared to age-matched, healthy C57BL/6 mice for HDAC expression and
activity in bone marrow (BM) B cells, splenic B and T cells, and glomerular
cells. We found that HDAC6 was significantly overexpressed in B cells, splenic T 
cells and glomerular cells, whereas HDAC9 expression was significantly increased 
in splenic T cells, BM B cells and glomerular cells. Due to the overexpression of
HDAC6, we tested whether treatment with a selective HDAC6 inhibitor (ACY-738) or 
a pan-HDAC inhibitor (TsA) would decrease HDAC activity. ACY-738 significantly
reduced cytoplasmic HDAC activity whereas TsA significantly decreased both
nuclear and cytoplasmic HDAC activity. In vitro studies in mesangial cells showed
that ACY-738 increased a-tubulin and Hsp90 acetylation resulting in decreased
nuclear activation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Treatment of pre-B cells with ACY-738 decreased the 
Bcl-2:Bax ratio leading to a pro-apoptotic environment. These results suggest
that increased HDAC6 expression and activity contribute to SLE pathogenesis, and 
isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors may prove beneficial in the treatment of SLE by
acetylating key signaling and transcription factors in inflammation and cell
activation.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4666739 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26471208  [PubMed - in process]


60. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 3;6(34):35991-6002. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5475.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the antitumor activity of
(E)-N-hydroxy-3-(1-(4-methoxyphenylsulfonyl)-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinolin-6-yl)acry
lamide in human colorectal cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.

Chen CH(1), Lee CH(2), Liou JP(3), Teng CM(2), Pan SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical
Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Pharmacological Institute, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Upregulation of class I histone deacetylases (HDAC) correlates with poor
prognosis in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. Previous study revealed that
(E)-N-hydroxy-3-(1-(4-methoxyphenylsulfonyl)-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinolin-6-yl)acry
lamide (Compound 11) is a potent and selective class I HDAC inhibitor, exhibited 
significant anti-proliferative activity in various human cancer cell lines. In
current study, we demonstrated that compound 11 exhibited significant
anti-proliferative and cytotoxic activity in CRC cells. Notably, compound 11 was 
less potent than SAHA in inhibiting HDAC6 as evident from the lower expression of
acetyl-a-tubulin, suggesting higher selectivity for class I HDACs.
Mechanistically, compound 11 induced cell-cycle arrest at the G2/M phase,
activated both intrinsic- and extrinsic-apoptotic pathways, altered the
expression of Bcl-2 family proteins and exerted a potent inhibitory effect on
survival signals (p-Akt, p-ERK) in CRC cells. Moreover, we provide evidence that 
compound 11 suppressed motility, decreased mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin and
vimentin) and increased epithelial marker (E-cadherin) through down-regulation of
Akt. The anti-tumor activity and underlying molecular mechanisms of compound 11
were further confirmed using the HCT116 xenograft model in vivo. Our findings
provide evidence of the significant anti-tumor activity of compound 11 in a
preclinical model, supporting its potential as a novel therapeutic agent for CRC.

PMID: 26462017  [PubMed - in process]


61. Int J Rheum Dis. 2015 Oct 13. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12783. [Epub ahead of print]

Methylation and gene expression of histone deacetylases 6 in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Fang TJ(1), Lin YZ(2), Liu CC(2), Lin CH(2), Li RN(3), Wu CC(2), Ou TT(2), Tsai
WC(2), Yen JH(2,)(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)Department of Biomedical Science and
Environmental Biology, College of Life Science, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Lipid Science and Aging
Research Center, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (6)Institute of
Biomedical Science, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

AIM: The purpose of this study is to investigate the role of methylation in the
histone deacetylases 6 (HDAC6) promoter and HDAC6 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression
in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHOD: Direct bisulfite-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) sequencing was performed
to detect the HDAC6 promoter methylation in 33 patients with SLE and 35 healthy
controls. The HDAC6 mRNA expression was measured in 93 SLE patients and 84
healthy controls by using the method of quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: This study demonstrated that the methylation rates at HDAC6-680, -660
and -658 were significantly increased in the SLE patients compared with healthy
controls (P = 0.041, 0.034 and 0.029, respectively). The SLE patients also had
lower HDAC6 mRNA expression than the controls (P = 0.031). However, there was no 
significant difference in HDAC6 mRNA expression between patients with active and 
inactive SLE.
CONCLUSION: The SLE patients had higher methylation in the HDAC6 promoter and
lower HDAC6 mRNA expression than the controls. These changes may be related to
the susceptibility of SLE. However, they are not associated with the disease
activity of SLE.

© 2015 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26461065  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


62. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015 Oct 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Cigarette Smoke Disrupted Lung Endothelial Barrier Integrity and Increased
Susceptibility to Acute Lung Injury via Histone Deacetylase 6.

Borgas D(1,)(2), Chambers E(1,)(3), Newton J(1,)(4), Ko J(1,)(5), Rivera
S(1,)(6), Rounds S(1,)(7), Lu Q(1,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Brown University, Medicine, Providence, Rhode Island, United States.
(2)Providence VA Medical Center, Providence, Rhode Island, United States ;
diana_borgas@brown.edu. (3)Providence VA Medical Center, Providence, Rhode
Island, United States ; eboni_chambers@brown.edu. (4)Providence VA Medical
Center, Providence, Rhode Island, United States ; Julie_Newton_1@brown.edu.
(5)Providence VA Medical Center, Providence, Rhode Island, United States ;
junsuk_ko@brown.edu. (6)Providence VA Medical Center, Providence, Rhode Island,
United States ; stephanie.riv1@gmail.com. (7)Providence VA Medical Center,
Providence, Rhode Island, United States ; sharon_rounds@brown.edu. (8)Providence 
VA Medical Center, Providence, Rhode Island, United States ; qing_lu@brown.edu.

Epidemiologic evidence indicates that cigarette smoke (CS) is associated with the
development of acute lung injury (ALI). We have previously shown that brief CS
exposure exacerbates lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced ALI in vivo and endothelial
barrier dysfunction in vitro. In this study, we found that CS also exacerbated
Pseudomonas-induced ALI in mice. We demonstrated that lung microvascular
endothelial cells (LMVEC) isolated from mice exposed to CS had a greater
permeability or incomplete recovery following challenges by LPS and thrombin.
Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) deacetylates proteins essential for maintenance of 
endothelial barrier function. We found that HDAC6 phosphorylation at Ser-22 was
increased in lung tissues of mice exposed to CS and in lung endothelial cells
(EC) exposed to CS extract (CSE). Inhibition of HDAC6 attenuated CSE-induced
increase in EC permeability and CS priming of ALI. Similar barrier protection was
provided by the microtubule stabilizer, Taxol, which preserved a-tubulin
acetylation. CSE decreased a-tubulin acetylation and caused microtubule
depolymerization. In coordination with increased HDAC6 phosphorylation, CSE
inhibited Akt and activated glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3ß; these effects were
ameliorated by the antioxidant, N-acetyl cysteine. Our results suggest that CS
increases lung EC permeability, thereby enhancing susceptibility to ALI, likely
through oxidative stress-induced Akt inactivation and subsequent GSK-3ß
activation. Activated GSK-3ß may activate HDAC6 via phosphorylation of Ser-22,
leading to a-tubulin deacetylation and microtubule disassembly. Inhibition of
HDAC6 may be a novel therapeutic option for ALI in cigarette smokers.

PMID: 26452072  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


63. Brain Behav. 2015 Sep;5(9):e00361. doi: 10.1002/brb3.361. Epub 2015 Jun 24.

Genetic deletion of the Histone Deacetylase 6 exacerbates selected behavioral
deficits in the R6/1 mouse model for Huntington's disease.

Ragot A(1), Pietropaolo S(1), Vincent J(1), Delage P(1), Zhang H(2), Allinquant
B(3), Leinekugel X(4), Fischer A(5), Cho YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives et Intégratives d'Aquitaine, CNRS UMR
5287 Avenue des Facultés, 33405, Talence Cedex, France ; University of Bordeaux
146, rue Léo-Saignat, 33077, Bordeaux, France. (2)University of Bordeaux 146, rue
Léo-Saignat, 33077, Bordeaux, France ; Interdisciplinary Institute for
Neuroscience, CNRS UMR 5297 33000, Bordeaux, France. (3)Faculté de Médecine,
Laboratoire INSERM, UMR 894- Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité
Paris, France. (4)University of Bordeaux 146, rue Léo-Saignat, 33077, Bordeaux,
France ; Neurocentre Magendie 146, rue Léo-Saignat, 33077, Bordeaux, France.
(5)Department for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center
Göttingen Grisebachstr. 5, 37077, Göttingen, Germany ; German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Göttingen Grisebachstr. 5, 37077, Göttingen,
Germany.

INTRODUCTION: The inhibition of the Histone Deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) increases
tubulin acetylation, thus stimulating intracellular vesicle trafficking and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) release, that is, cellular processes
markedly reduced in Huntington's disease (HD).
METHODS: We therefore tested that reducing HDAC6 levels by genetic manipulation
would attenuate early cognitive and behavioral deficits in R6/1 mice, a mouse
model which develops progressive HD-related phenotypes.
RESULTS: In contrast to our initial hypothesis, the genetic deletion of HDAC6 did
not reduce the weight loss or the deficits in cognitive abilities and
nest-building behavior shown by R6/1 mice, and even worsened their social
impairments, hypolocomotion in the Y-maze, and reduced ultrasonic vocalizations.
CONCLUSIONS: These results weaken the validity of HDAC6 reduction as a possible
therapeutic strategy for HD. The data are discussed in terms of additional
cellular consequences and anatomical specificity of HDAC6 that could explain
these unexpected effects.

PMCID: PMC4589808
PMID: 26445700  [PubMed - in process]


64. J Med Chem. 2016 Feb 25;59(4):1455-70. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01342. Epub
2015 Oct 13.

Discovery of Selective Histone Deacetylase 6 Inhibitors Using the Quinazoline as 
the Cap for the Treatment of Cancer.

Yang Z(1,)(2), Wang T(2), Wang F(2), Niu T(3), Liu Z(4), Chen X(4), Long C(4),
Tang M(2), Cao D(2), Wang X(2), Xiang W(2), Yi Y(3), Ma L(2), You J(1), Chen
L(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy/Collaborative Innovation Center of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
610064, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy/Collaborative Innovation
Center of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, Chengdu, 610041, China. (3)Department of Hematology and Research
Laboratory of Hematology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University , Chengdu,
610041, China. (4)Guangdong Zhongsheng Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Dongguan,
Guangdong 523325, China.

Novel selective histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibitors using the quinazoline as
the cap were designed, synthesized, and evaluated for HDAC enzymatic assays.
N-Hydroxy-4-(2-methoxy-5-(methyl(2-methylquinazolin-4-yl)amino)phenoxy)butanamide
, 23bb, was the most potent selective inhibitor for HDAC6 with an IC50 of 17 nM
and showed 25-fold and 200-fold selectivity relative to HDAC1 and HDAC8,
respectively. In vitro, 23bb presented low nanomolar antiproliferative effects
against panel of cancer cell lines. Western blot analysis further confirmed that 
23bb increased acetylation level of a-tubulin in vitro. 23bb has a good
pharmacokinetic profile with oral bioavailability of 47.0% in rats. In in vivo
efficacy evaluations of colorectal HCT116, acute myelocytic leukemia MV4-11, and 
B cell lymphoma Romas xenografts, 23bb more effectively inhibited the tumor
growth than SAHA even at a 4-fold reduced dose or ACY-1215 at the same dose. Our 
results indicated that 23bb is a potent oral anticancer candidate for selective
HDAC6 inhibitor and deserves further investigation.

PMID: 26443078  [PubMed - in process]


65. Biol Chem. 2016 Jan;397(1):75-83. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2015-0215.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) promotes the epithelial mesenchymal
transition of triple negative breast cancer cells via HDAC8/FOXA1 signals.

Wu S, Luo Z, Yu PJ, Xie H, He YW.

Inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACIs) have great therapeutic value for
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Interestingly, our present study
reveals that suberoyl anilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), one of the most advanced
pan-HDAC inhibitor, can obviously promote in vitro motility of MDA-MB-231 and
BT-549 cells via induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). SAHA
treatment significantly down-regulates the expression of epithelial markers
E-cadherin (E-Cad) while up-regulates the mesenchymal markers N-cadherin (N-Cad),
vimentin (Vim) and fibronectin (FN). However, SAHA has no effect on the
expression and nuclear translocation of EMT related transcription factors
including Snail, Slug, Twist and ZEB. While SAHA treatment down-regulates the
protein and mRNA expression of FOXA1 and then decreases its nuclear
translocation. Over-expression of FOXA1 markedly attenuates SAHA induced EMT of
TNBC cells. Further, silence of HDAC8, while not HDAC6, alleviates the
down-regulation of FOXA1 and up-regulation of N-Cad and Vim in MDA-MB-231 cells
treated with SAHA. Collectively, our present study reveals that SAHA can promote 
EMT of TNBC cells via HDAC8/FOXA1 signals, which suggests that more attention
should be paid when SAHA is used as anti-cancer agent for cancer treatment.

PMID: 26431101  [PubMed - in process]


66. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 3;6(34):36383-99. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5799.

SP600125 has a remarkable anticancer potential against undifferentiated thyroid
cancer through selective action on ROCK and p53 pathways.

Grassi ES(1), Vezzoli V(1), Negri I(2,)(3), Lábadi Á(4), Fugazzola L(5,)(6),
Vitale G(1,)(2,)(7), Persani L(1,)(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)DISCCO, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Endocrine and Metabolic Research, Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Cusano Milanino, Italy. (3)Current address: IRIBHM,
Institute of Interdisciplinary Research in Molecular Human Biology, Université
Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. (5)Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. (6)Endocrine Unit-Fondazione 
IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milan, Italy. (7)Division of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, 
Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Milan, Italy.

Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy with increasing incidence 
worldwide.The majority of thyroid cancer cases are well differentiated with
favorable outcome. However, undifferentiated thyroid cancers are one of the most 
lethal human malignancies because of their invasiveness, metastatization and
refractoriness even to the most recently developed therapies.In this study we
show for the first time a significant hyperactivation of ROCK/HDAC6 pathway in
thyroid cancer tissues, and its negative correlation with p53 DNA binding
ability.We demonstrate that a small compound, SP600125 (SP), is able to induce
cell death selectively in undifferentiated thyroid cancer cell lines by
specifically acting on the pathogenic pathways of cancer development. In detail, 
SP acts on the ROCK/HDAC6 pathway involved in dedifferentiation and invasiveness 
of undifferentiated human cancers, by restoring its physiological activity level.
As main consequence, cancer cell migration is inhibited and, at the same time,
cell death is induced through the mitotic catastrophe. Moreover, SP exerts a
preferential action on the mutant p53 by increasing its DNA binding ability. In
TP53-mutant cells that survive mitotic catastrophe this process results in p21
induction and eventually lead to premature senescence. In conclusion, SP has been
proved to be able to simultaneously block cell replication and migration, the two
main processes involved in cancer development and dissemination, making it an
ideal candidate for developing new drugs against anaplastic thyroid cancer.

PMID: 26415230  [PubMed - in process]


67. Cardiology. 2016;133(1):18-26. doi: 10.1159/000438781. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

HDAC6 Promotes Cardiac Fibrosis Progression through Suppressing RASSF1A
Expression.

Tao H(1), Yang JJ, Hu W, Shi KH, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Second Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, PR China.

OBJECTIVES: Cardiac fibrosis is characterized by net accumulation of
extracellular matrix proteins in the cardiac interstitium, and contributes to
both systolic and diastolic dysfunction in many cardiac pathophysiologic
conditions. HDAC6 is a transcriptional regulator of the histone deacetylase
family, subfamily 2. Previous studies have shown that HDAC6 plays critical roles 
in transcription regulation and proliferation events. However, the precise
mechanisms of how HDAC is associated with cardiac fibrosis progression have not
yet been elucidated.
METHODS: Fifty adult male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were randomly divided into two
groups. Cardiac fibrosis was produced by common isoprenaline and cardiac
fibroblasts were harvested from SD neonate rats and cultured. The expression of
HDAC6, RASSF1A, a-SMA and collagen I were measured by Western blotting and
qRT-PCR. Small interfering (si)RNA of HDAC6 affects the proliferation of cardiac 
fibroblasts and the regulation of RASSF1A/ERK1/2 signaling pathways.
RESULTS: In this study, we found that mRNA and protein levels of HDAC6 were
upregulated in cardiac fibrosis tissues and activated cardiac fibroblast cells.
Inhibition of HDAC6 by siRNA or the inhibitor tubacin attenuated the
TGF-ß1-induced myofibroblast markers. In contrast, HDAC6 knockdown using siRNA
inhibited cardiac fibroblast cell proliferation. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that knockdown of HDAC6 elevated RASSF1A expression in activated cardiac
fibroblasts, and treatment of cardiac fibroblasts with the HDAC6 inhibitor
tubacin also elevated RASSF1A expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that a previously unknown
mechanism of HDAC6 inactivation of RASSF1A controls cardiac fibroblast
proliferation and fibrosis.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26401643  [PubMed - in process]


68. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):31767-79. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5167.

Targeting HSF1 disrupts HSP90 chaperone function in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Ganguly S(1), Home T(1), Yacoub A(1), Kambhampati S(1), Shi H(2), Dandawate P(1),
Padhye S(3), Saluja AK(4), McGuirk J(1), Rao R(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, KS, USA. (2)Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. (3)Interdisciplinary Science and Technology
Research Academy, University of Pune, Pune, Maharashtra, India. (4)University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

CLL is a disease characterized by chromosomal deletions, acquired copy number
changes and aneuploidy. Recent studies have shown that overexpression of Heat
Shock Factor (HSF) 1 in aneuploid tumor cells can overcome deficiencies in heat
shock protein (HSP) 90-mediated protein folding and restore protein homeostasis. 
Interestingly, several independent studies have demonstrated that HSF1 expression
and activity also affects the chaperoning of HSP90 kinase clients, although the
mechanism underlying this observation is unclear. Here, we determined how HSF1
regulates HSP90 function using CLL as a model system. We report that HSF1 is
overexpressed in CLL and treatment with triptolide (a small molecule inhibitor of
HSF1) induces apoptosis in cultured and primary CLL B-cells. We demonstrate that 
knockdown of HSF1 or its inhibition with triptolide results in the reduced
association of HSP90 with its kinase co-chaperone cell division cycle 37 (CDC37),
leading to the partial depletion of HSP90 client kinases, Bruton's Tyrosine
Kinase (BTK), c-RAF and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4). Treatment with
triptolide or HSF1 knockdown disrupts the cytosolic complex between HSF1, p97,
HSP90 and the HSP90 deacetylase- Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Consequently,
HSF1 inhibition results in HSP90 acetylation and abrogation of its chaperone
function. Finally, tail vein injection of Mec-1 cells into Rag2-/-IL2R<U+03B3>c-/- mice 
followed by treatment with minnelide (a pro-drug of triptolide), reduced
leukemia, increased survival and attenuated HSP90-dependent survival signaling in
vivo. In conclusion, our study provides a strong rationale to target HSF1 and
test the activity of minnelide against human CLL.

PMCID: PMC4741638
PMID: 26397138  [PubMed - in process]


69. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):30263-76. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4749.

Nuclear HDAC6 inhibits invasion by suppressing NF-<U+03BA>B/MMP2 and is inversely
correlated with metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer.

Yang CJ(1,)(2,)(3), Liu YP(4,)(5), Dai HY(6), Shiue YL(7), Tsai CJ(7), Huang
MS(1,)(2), Yeh YT(8,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung
Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Genome Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Center for Infectious Disease and Cancer
Research, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (6)Department of
Medical Laboratory Sciences and Biotechnology, Fooyin University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (7)Institute of Biomedical Science, National Sun Yat-Sen University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (8)Cancer Center, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a unique member of the histone deacetylase
family. Although HDAC6 is mainly localized in the cytoplasm, it can regulate the 
activities of the transcription factors in the nucleus. However, a correlation of
intracellular distribution of HDAC6 with tumor progression is lacking. In this
study, we found that a low frequency of nuclear HDAC6-positive cells in tumors
was associated with distant metastasis and a worse overall survival in 134
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Ectopic expression of wild-type
HDAC6 promoted migration and invasion of A549 and H661 cells. However, the
enforced expression of nuclear export signal-deleted HDAC6 inhibited the invasion
but not the migration of both cell lines. The inhibitory effect of nuclear HDAC6 
on invasion was mediated by the deacetylation of the p65 subunit of nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B, which decreased its DNA-binding activity to the MMP2 promoter, leading
to the downregulation of MMP2 expression. Our findings indicated that the loss of
nuclear HDAC6 may be a potential biomarker for predicting metastasis in patients 
with NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4745796
PMID: 26388610  [PubMed - in process]


70. BMC Cell Biol. 2015 Sep 18;16:24. doi: 10.1186/s12860-015-0070-8.

EGF-induced sodium influx regulates EGFR trafficking through HDAC6 and tubulin
acetylation.

Lee SJ(1), Li Z(2), Litan A(3), Yoo S(4), Langhans SA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Nemours Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for
Children, 1701 Rockland Road, Wilmington, DE, 19803, USA. lee346@mailbox.sc.edu. 
(2)Nemours Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for
Children, 1701 Rockland Road, Wilmington, DE, 19803, USA. li@medsci.udel.edu.
(3)Nemours Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for
Children, 1701 Rockland Road, Wilmington, DE, 19803, USA. alitan@udel.edu.
(4)Nemours Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for
Children, 1701 Rockland Road, Wilmington, DE, 19803, USA. yoo@medsci.udel.edu.
(5)Nemours Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for
Children, 1701 Rockland Road, Wilmington, DE, 19803, USA.
langhans@nemoursresearch.org.

BACKGROUND: Endocytosis of activated EGF receptor (EGFR) to specific endocytic
compartments is required to terminate EGF signaling. Trafficking of EGFR relies
on microtubule tracks that transport the cargo vesicle to their intermediate and 
final destinations and can be modulated through posttranslational modification of
tubulin including acetylation. Na,K-ATPase maintains intracellular sodium
homeostasis, functions as a signaling scaffold and interacts with EGFR.
Na,K-ATPase also binds to and is regulated by acetylated tubulin but whether
there is a functional link between EGFR, Na,K-ATPase and tubulin acetylation is
not known.
RESULTS: EGF-induced sodium influx regulates EGFR trafficking through increased
microtubule acetylation. Increased sodium influx induced either by sodium
ionophores or Na,K-ATPase blockade mimicked the EGF-induced effects on EGFR
trafficking through histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6 inactivation and accumulation of
acetylated tubulin. In turn, blocking sodium influx reduced tubulin acetylation
and EGF-induced EGFR turnover. Knockdown of HDAC6 reversed the effect of sodium
influx indicating that HDAC6 is necessary to modulate sodium-dependent tubulin
acetylation.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide a novel regulatory mechanism to attenuate EGFR
signaling in which EGF modulates EGFR trafficking through intracellular
sodium-mediated HDAC6 inactivation and tubulin acetylation.

PMCID: PMC4574528
PMID: 26382850  [PubMed - in process]


71. Muscle Nerve. 2015 Dec;52(6):1098-101. doi: 10.1002/mus.24912. Epub 2015 Oct 10.

Differential expression of HDAC and HAT genes in atrophying skeletal muscle.

Beharry AW(1), Judge AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, 101 S. Newell Drive, P.O. Box 100154,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA, 32610.

INTRODUCTION: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins, which counter the activity of 
histone acetyltransferases (HATs), are necessary for normal muscle atrophy in
response to several pathophysiological conditions. Despite this, it remains
unknown whether a common or unique transcriptional profile of HDAC and HAT genes 
exist during the progression of muscle atrophy.
METHODS: Muscles were harvested from cast immobilized, denervated, or nutrient
deprived animals for quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
analysis of HDAC and HAT gene expression.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of Hdac2, Hdac4, Hdac6, Sirt1, p300, Cbp, and Pcaf
increased, and Hdac7 decreased in skeletal muscle in each experimental model of
muscle atrophy. Hdac1 and Hdac3 were increased only in cast immobilized and
denervated muscles.
CONCLUSIONS: While specific HDACs and HATs are increased in multiple models of
muscle atrophy, increased expression of class I HDACs was unique to muscle
disuse, reinforcing that specific HDAC inhibitors may be more effective than
pan-HDAC inhibitors at countering muscle atrophy. Muscle Nerve 52: 1098-1101,
2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4715560 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26372908  [PubMed - in process]


72. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 29;112(39):12005-10. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1515882112. Epub 2015 Sep 14.

Creation of a histone deacetylase 6 inhibitor and its biological effects
[corrected].

Lee JH(1), Yao Y(2), Mahendran A(2), Ngo L(1), Venta-Perez G(1), Choy ML(1),
Breslow R(3), Marks PA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065; (2)Department of Chemistry, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10027. (3)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, 
New York, NY 10027 rb33@columbia.edu marksp@mskcc.org. (4)Department of Cell
Biology, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065; rb33@columbia.edu marksp@mskcc.org.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 27;112(43):E5899.

We report the development of a potent, selective histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)
inhibitor. This HDAC6 inhibitor blocks growth of normal and transformed cells but
does not induce death of normal cells. The HDAC6 inhibitor alone is as effective 
as paclitaxel in anticancer activity in tumor-bearing mice.

PMCID: PMC4593111
PMID: 26371309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochimie. 2015 Sep 10. pii: S0300-9084(15)00286-2. doi:
10.1016/j.biochi.2015.09.011. [Epub ahead of print]

The size of the primary cilium and acetylated tubulin are modulated during
adipocyte differentiation: Analysis of HDAC6 functions in these processes.

Forcioli-Conti N(1), Estève D(2), Bouloumié A(2), Dani C(1), Peraldi P(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, UFR Sciences, Nice, F-06108, France;
CNRS, UMR7277, F-06108, France; Inserm, U1091, Nice, F-06108, France. (2)Inserm, 
UMR1048, Team 1, Institute of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases, Toulouse
Cedex 4, France; Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse Cedex 9, France.
(3)University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, UFR Sciences, Nice, F-06108, France;
CNRS, UMR7277, F-06108, France; Inserm, U1091, Nice, F-06108, France. Electronic 
address: peraldi@unice.fr.

The primary cilium is an organelle present in most of the cells of the organism. 
Ciliopathies, such as the Bardet Biedl and the Alstrom syndromes are associated
with obesity. We, and others, have shown that the primary cilium undergoes size
modifications during adipocyte differentiation of human adipose stromal cells. We
show here that the levels of acetylated a-tubulin, a constituent of the primary
cilium, and the expression of HDAC6, the enzyme that deacetylates a-tubulin and
is responsible for the loss of the cilium during mitosis, are modulated during
adipogenesis. Moreover, during adipocyte differentiation cells that express
higher level of HDAC6 are the first to lose their primary cilium. We have
investigated the function of HDAC6 on adipocyte differentiation and on the
primary cilium. We observe that inhibition of HDAC6 activity leads to a decrease 
in adipocyte differentiation. This is associated with an inhibition of the
initial elongation of the cilium. Interestingly, overexpression of HDAC6 inhibits
adipocyte differentiation and blunts the elongation of the primary cilium. In
both situations, inhibition of adipocyte differentiation was not associated with 
an inhibition of the glucocorticoid receptor activity. This indicates that HDAC6 
controls adipogenesis through the levels of acetylated a-tubulin. Moreover, we
show that although HDAC6 expression increases during adipocyte differentiation it
is not sufficient to provoke the loss of the cilium. This suggests the existence 
of a novel mechanism for the loss of the cilium. Together, these data indicate
that HDAC6, and acetylated a-tubulin, are important regulator of adipocyte
differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 26363102  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


74. J Biol Chem. 2015 Oct 23;290(43):26051-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.653568. Epub 2015
Sep 11.

Potassium Bisperoxo(1,10-phenanthroline)oxovanadate (bpV(phen)) Induces Apoptosis
and Pyroptosis and Disrupts the P62-HDAC6 Protein Interaction to Suppress the
Acetylated Microtubule-dependent Degradation of Autophagosomes.

Chen Q(1), Yue F(2), Li W(2), Zou J(2), Xu T(3), Huang C(3), Zhang Y(4), Song
K(2), Huang G(2), Xu G(2), Huang H(2), Li J(5), Liu L(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei,
Anhui Province 230032, China, the Department of Anesthesiology, Second Hospital
of Anhui Medical University, 678 Furong Road, Hefei, Anhui Province, 230601,
China, the Center for Translational Cancer Research, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, and. (2)the
Center for Translational Cancer Research, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, and. (3)From
the School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui
Province 230032, China. (4)the Department of Anesthesiology, Second Hospital of
Anhui Medical University, 678 Furong Road, Hefei, Anhui Province, 230601, China. 
(5)From the School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei,
Anhui Province 230032, China, lj@ahmu.edu.cn. (6)the Center for Translational
Cancer Research, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, and the Department of Molecular and
Cellular Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center, College 
Station, Texas 77843 lliu@ibt.tamhsc.edu.

Autophagy is a cellular process that controls and executes the turnover of
dysfunctional organelles and misfolded or abnormally aggregated proteins.
Phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) activates the
initiation of autophagy. Autophagosomes migrate along acetylated microtubules to 
fuse with lysosomes to execute the degradation of the engulfed substrates that
usually bind with sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1, p62). Microtubule-associated protein 1 
light chain 3 (LC3) traces the autophagy process by converting from the LC3-I to 
the LC3-II isoform and serves as a major marker of autophagy flux. Potassium
bisperoxo(1,10-phenanthroline)oxovanadate (bpV(phen)) is an insulin mimic and a
PTEN inhibitor and has the potential to treat different diseases. Here we show
that bpV(phen) enhances the ubiquitination of p62, reduces the stability of p62, 
disrupts the interaction between p62 and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), activates
the deacetylase activity of HDAC6 on a-tubulin, and impairs stable acetylated
microtubules. Microtubular destabilization leads to the blockade of
autophagosome-lysosome fusion and accumulation of autophagosomes. Autophagy
defects lead to oxidative stress and lysosomal rupture, which trigger different
types of cell death, including apoptosis and pyroptosis. The consistent results
from multiple systems, including mouse and different types of mammalian cells,
are different from the predicted function of bpV(phen) as a PTEN inhibitor to
activate autophagy flux. In addition, levels of p62 are reduced but not elevated 
when autophagosomal degradation is blocked, revealing a novel function of p62 in 
autophagy regulation. Therefore, it is necessary to pay attention to the roles of
bpV(phen) in autophagy, apoptosis, and pyroptosis when it is developed as a drug.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646258 [Available on 2016-10-23]
PMID: 26363065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Neurodegener Dis. 2015;15(6):339-49. doi: 10.1159/000437208. Epub 2015 Sep 12.

Uncoupling of Protein Aggregation and Neurodegeneration in a Mouse Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis Model.

Lee JY(1), Kawaguchi Y, Li M, Kapur M, Choi SJ, Kim HJ, Park SY, Zhu H, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Analytical Science and Technology (GRAST), Chungnam
National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Aberrant accumulation of protein aggregates is a pathological hallmark of many
neurodegenerative diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Although a buildup of protein aggregates frequently leads to cell death, whether 
it is the key pathogenic factor in driving neurodegenerative disease remains
controversial. HDAC6, a cytosolic ubiquitin-binding deacetylase, has emerged as
an important regulator of ubiquitin-dependent quality control autophagy, a
lysosome-dependent degradative system responsible for the disposal of misfolded
protein aggregates and damaged organelles. Here, we show that in cell models
HDAC6 plays a protective role against multiple disease-associated and
aggregation-prone cytosolic proteins by facilitating their degradation. We
further show that HDAC6 is required for efficient localization of lysosomes to
protein aggregates, indicating that lysosome targeting to autophagic substrates
is regulated. Supporting a critical role of HDAC6 in protein aggregate disposal
in vivo, genetic ablation of HDAC6 in a transgenic SOD1G93A mouse, a model of
ALS, leads to dramatic accumulation of ubiquitinated SOD1G93A protein aggregates.
Surprisingly, despite a robust buildup of SOD1G93A aggregates, deletion of HDAC6 
only moderately modified the motor phenotypes. These findings indicate that
SOD1G93A aggregation is not the only determining factor to drive
neurodegeneration in ALS, and that HDAC6 likely modulates neurodegeneration
through additional mechanisms beyond protein aggregate clearance.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC4807135 [Available on 2016-09-12]
PMID: 26360702  [PubMed - in process]


76. Public Health Nutr. 2015 Sep 2:1-8. [Epub ahead of print]

Associations between cruciferous vegetable intake and selected biomarkers among
women scheduled for breast biopsies.

Zhang Z(1), Atwell LL(2), Farris PE(1), Ho E(3), Shannon J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1School of Public Health,Oregon Health & Science University,3181 SW Sam
Jackson Park Road,MC: GH153,Portland,OR 97239,USA. (2)2School of Biological and
Population Health Sciences,Oregon State University,Corvallis,OR,USA. (3)3Linus
Pauling Institute,Oregon State University,Corvallis,OR,USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between dietary cruciferous vegetable
intake and selected tumour biomarkers for histone acetylation (H3K9ac, H3K18ac,
HDAC3 and HDAC6), proliferation (Ki-67) and cell-cycle regulation (p21) from
breast tissue.
DESIGN: The study used baseline data of women recruited to participate in a
clinical trial of sulforaphane supplement. Dietary cruciferous vegetable intake
was collected through a validated Arizona Cruciferous Vegetable Intake
Questionnaire. Breast tissue was obtained from biopsy samples. Spearman
correlations were calculated between intake of specific cruciferous vegetables
and biomarkers. Tissue biomarkers were log2-transformed to obtain approximate
normality. Linear regression analyses were conducted to examine associations
between cruciferous vegetable intake and biomarkers adjusting for age and use of 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. False discovery rate (FDR) was used to
account for multiple comparisons.
SETTING: Clinical trial baseline.
SUBJECTS: Fifty-four women who had abnormal mammogram findings and were scheduled
for breast biopsy.
RESULTS: Mean intake of total cruciferous vegetables from all food sources was
81·7 (sd 57·3) g/d. Mean urinary total sulforaphane metabolites was 0·08 (sd
0·07) µm/mm creatinine. Total cruciferous vegetable intake was inversely
associated with Ki-67 protein expression in breast ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) tissue (ß=-0·004; se=0·001; FDR q value=0·03), but not in benign or
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) tissue. No association was found for other
biomarkers measured (HDAC3, HDAC6, H3K9, H3K18 and p21) in all tissues examined
(benign, DCIS and IDC).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study sought to provide additional evidence for the
potential role of sulforaphane in histone acetylation and cell proliferation.
Here, we report that total cruciferous vegetable intake is associated with
decreased cell proliferation in breast DCIS tissue.

PMID: 26329135  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


77. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(9):1434-7. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00364.

Regulation of Histone Deacetylase 6 Activity via S-Nitrosylation.

Okuda K(1), Ito A, Uehara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University.

Nitric oxide (NO) is a gaseous regulatory factor produced by NO synthases (NOS)
and it plays several critical roles via S-nitrosylation of protein cysteine
residues. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) functions in the maintenance/balance of
chromatin acetylation and contributes to transcriptional supression. It has been 
reported that S-nitrosylation of HDAC2 is involved in the regulation of
deacetylase activity. However, it remains unknown whether other subtypes of the
HDAC family are S-nitrosylated. In the present study, we found that HDAC6 is a
target of NO. A biotin-switch assay revealed that endogenous HDAC6 is
S-nitrosylated by both NO donors and NO derived from the inducible type of NOS in
cells treated with cytokines. NO led to suppressed deacetylase activity in vitro 
and increased acetylated a-tubulin, a major substrate for HDAC6, in A549 cells.
These findings suggest that S-nitrosylation of HDAC6 plays a pivotal role in the 
regulation of protein acetylation.

PMID: 26328501  [PubMed - in process]


78. Org Biomol Chem. 2015 Oct 28;13(40):10226-35. doi: 10.1039/c5ob01509j. Epub 2015 
Aug 26.

Pyrimidinedione-mediated selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors with
antitumor activity in colorectal cancer HCT116 cells.

Liu YM(1), Lee HY, Lai MJ, Pan SL, Huang HL, Kuo FC, Chen MC, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wuxing
Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. jpl@tmu.edu.tw.

We synthesized a series of pyrimidinedione derivatives and evaluated their
activities. The results indicate that compound 6,
4-[5-fluoro-2,6-dioxo-3-(tetrahydro-furan-2-yl)-3,6-dihydro-2H-pyrimidin-1-ylmeth
yl]-N-hydroxy-benzamide, exhibits potent antiproliferative activity, apoptosis
induction with cleavage of caspase and PARP, and enhanced tendency to inhibit
HDAC6 (IC50 = 12.4 nM) activity over HDAC1 (IC50 = 1710 nM) and HDAC2 (IC50 =
5500 nM). Compound 6 also inhibits tumor growth and is less toxic than parent 4
in vivo. These data provide compelling evidence that compound 6 is a potential
antitumor compound with HDAC6 targeted inhibitory activity and may be tested for 
preclinical investigation for cancer treatment.

PMID: 26309122  [PubMed - in process]


79. Pharmacology. 2015;96(3-4):184-91. doi: 10.1159/000438864. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Novel Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Modulates Cardiac Peroxisome
Proliferator-Activated Receptors and Inflammatory Cytokines in Heart Failure.

Lkhagva B(1), Lin YK, Kao YH, Chazo TF, Chung CC, Chen SA, Chen YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) affects cardiac metabolism and inflammation.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a critical role in cardiac pathophysiology.
This study investigated whether HDAC inhibition can regulate HF by modifying
cardiac inflammation and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
isoforms.
METHODS: Echocardiography, electrocardiography, ELISA and Western blot were
performed in rats with isoproterenol-induced HF, with and without orally
administered MPT0E014 (a novel HDAC inhibitor, 50 mg/kg for 7 consecutive days).
RESULTS: The left ventricles (LVs) of HF rats expressed significantly higher
levels of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC4 and HDAC6 than the healthy LVs did. HF rats 
treated with MPT0E014 exhibited improved cardiac fraction shortening with
reducing chamber size. The MPT0E014-treated HF LVs exhibited a smaller increase
in the expression of interleukin (IL)-6, p22, SMAD2/3, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, PPAR isoforms and circulatory tumor growth factor-ß1
than the untreated HF LVs did. Moreover, MPT0E014-treated HF LVs expressed less
fibroblast growth factor receptor than untreated HF LVs did.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC inhibition can improve cardiac function and attenuate the
effects of HF on cardiac metabolism and inflammation, which might contribute to
the beneficial effects of HDAC inhibition in HF.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26304494  [PubMed - in process]


80. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Nov;1852(11):2484-93. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.08.012. Epub 2015 Aug 21.

HDAC6 inhibition induces mitochondrial fusion, autophagic flux and reduces
diffuse mutant huntingtin in striatal neurons.

Guedes-Dias P(1), de Proença J(2), Soares TR(2), Leitão-Rocha A(2), Pinho BR(2), 
Duchen MR(3), Oliveira JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)REQUIMTE/LAQV, Department of Drug Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of
Porto, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (2)REQUIMTE/LAQV, Department of
Drug Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, 4050-313 Porto,
Portugal. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College
London, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (4)REQUIMTE/LAQV, Department of Drug Sciences,
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal. Electronic
address: jorgemao@ff.up.pt.

Striatal neurons are vulnerable to Huntington's disease (HD). Decreased levels of
acetylated alpha-tubulin and impaired mitochondrial dynamics, such as reduced
motility and excessive fission, are associated with HD; however, it remains
unclear whether and how these factors might contribute to the preferential
degeneration of striatal neurons. Inhibition of the alpha-tubulin deacetylase
HDAC6 has been proposed as a therapeutic strategy for HD, but remains
controversial - studies in neurons show improved intracellular transport, whereas
studies in cell-lines suggest it may impair autophagosome-lysosome fusion, and
reduce clearance of mutant huntingtin (mHtt) and damaged mitochondria
(mitophagy). Using primary cultures of rat striatal and cortical neurons, we show
that mitochondria are intrinsically less motile and more balanced towards fission
in striatal than in cortical neurons. Pharmacological inhibition of the HDAC6
deacetylase activity with tubastatin A (TBA) increased acetylated alpha-tubulin
levels, and induced mitochondrial motility and fusion in striatal neurons to
levels observed in cortical neurons. Importantly, TBA did not block neuronal
autophagosome-lysosome fusion, and did not change mitochondrial DNA levels,
suggesting no impairment in autophagy or mitochondrial clearance. Instead, TBA
increased autophagic flux and reduced diffuse mHtt in striatal neurons, possibly 
by promoting transport of initiation factors to sites of autophagosomal
biogenesis. This study identifies the pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6
deacetylase activity as a potential strategy to reduce the vulnerability of
striatal neurons to HD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26300485  [PubMed - in process]


81. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Sep 15;23(18):6157-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.07.069. Epub
2015 Aug 1.

Synthesis of 1,2-benzisoxazole tethered 1,2,3-triazoles that exhibit anticancer
activity in acute myeloid leukemia cell lines by inhibiting histone deacetylases,
and inducing p21 and tubulin acetylation.

Ashwini N(1), Garg M(2), Mohan CD(1), Fuchs JE(3), Rangappa S(4), Anusha S(5),
Swaroop TR(1), Rakesh KS(1), Kanojia D(2), Madan V(2), Bender A(3), Koeffler
HP(2), Basappa(5), Rangappa KS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Studies in Chemistry, University of Mysore, Manasagangotri,
Mysore 570 006, India. (2)Genomic Oncology Programme, Cancer Science Institute of
Singapore, National University of Singapore, 117 599, Singapore. (3)Centre for
Molecular Science Informatics, Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, 
Lensfield Road, CB2 1EW Cambridge, United Kingdom. (4)Frontier Research Center
for Post-genome Science and Technology Hokkaido University, Japan. (5)Laboratory 
of Chemical Biology, Department of Chemistry, Bangalore University, Palace Road, 
Bangalore 560001, India. (6)Department of Studies in Chemistry, University of
Mysore, Manasagangotri, Mysore 570 006, India. Electronic address:
rangappaks@yahoo.com.

1,2,3-Triazole-based heterocycles have previously been shown to possess
significant anticancer activity in various tumor models. In the present study, we
attached a 1,2,3-triazole moiety to the third position of a 1,2-benzisoxazole
heterocycle via copper(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) with
various alkynes and established for the title compounds significant
antiproliferative effect against human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. Among 
the tested compounds,
3-(4-(4-phenoxyphenyl)-1H-1,2,3-triazol-1-yl)benzo[d]isoxazole (PTB) was found to
be the most potent antiproliferative agent with an IC50 of 2 µM against MV4-11
cells using MTT assay. Notably, PTB induced cytotoxicity in MOLM13, MOLM14 and
MV4-11 cells with selectivity over normal bone marrow cells (C57BL/6).
Furthermore, PTB was found to induce cytotoxicity by increasing apoptosis of AML 
cells (MOLM13, MOLM14 and MV4-11) as well as sub-G1 cell population and apoptotic
cells at submicromolar concentrations, as shown by flow cytometry and Annexin-V
staining, respectively. On the protein level we suggested histone deacetylases
(HDACs) as the potential protein target of those compounds in silico, and the
predicted target was next experimentally validated by measuring the variations in
the levels of p21, cyclin D and acetylation of histone H3 and tubulin. Molecular 
docking analysis of the title compounds with the second deacetylase domain of
HDAC6 displayed high degree of shape complementarity to the binding site of the
enzyme, forming multiple molecular interactions in the hydrophobic region as well
as a hydrogen bond to the phenol side-chain of Tyr-782. Thus, 1,2,3-triazole
derivatives appear to represent a class of novel, biologically active ligands
against histone deacetylases which deserve to be further evaluated in their
applications in the cancer field.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26299825  [PubMed - in process]


82. Nat Commun. 2015 Aug 20;6:8087. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9087.

Nek2 activation of Kif24 ensures cilium disassembly during the cell cycle.

Kim S(1), Lee K(1), Choi JH(2,)(3), Ringstad N(2,)(3), Dynlacht BD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University Cancer Institute, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA. (2)Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Molecular Neurobiology Program, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA. (3)Department of
Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016,
USA.

Many proteins are known to promote ciliogenesis, but mechanisms that promote
primary cilia disassembly before mitosis are largely unknown. Here we identify a 
mechanism that favours cilium disassembly and maintains the disassembled state.
We show that co-localization of the S/G2 phase kinase, Nek2 and Kif24 triggers
Kif24 phosphorylation, inhibiting cilia formation. We show that Kif24, a
microtubule depolymerizing kinesin, is phosphorylated by Nek2, which stimulates
its activity and prevents the outgrowth of cilia in proliferating cells,
independent of Aurora A and HDAC6. Our data also suggest that cilium assembly and
disassembly are in dynamic equilibrium, but Nek2 and Kif24 can shift the balance 
toward disassembly. Further, Nek2 and Kif24 are overexpressed in breast cancer
cells, and ablation of these proteins restores ciliation in these cells, thereby 
reducing proliferation. Thus, Kif24 is a physiological substrate of Nek2, which
regulates cilia disassembly through a concerted mechanism involving
Kif24-mediated microtubule depolymerization.

PMCID: PMC4545512
PMID: 26290419  [PubMed - in process]


83. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.293. [Epub ahead of print]

PTEN activation through K163 acetylation by inhibiting HDAC6 contributes to
tumour inhibition.

Meng Z(1), Jia LF(2), Gan YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Central Laboratory, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology,
Beijing, China [2] Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Peking University 
School and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, China. (2)Central Laboratory, Peking
University School and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, China.

Phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN), an important
tumour-suppressor gene, is mutated, downregulated or dysfunctional in many
tumours. The phosphatase activity of PTEN depends on membrane translocation
(activation). As promising anti-cancer agents, histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors, particularly trichostatin A (TSA), can promote PTEN membrane
translocation, but the underlying mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we
revealed that non-selective HDAC inhibitors, namely, TSA or suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA), induced PTEN membrane translocation through PTEN
acetylation at K163 by inhibiting HDAC6. K163 acetylation inhibited the
interaction of the PTEN C-tail with the remaining part of PTEN, resulting in PTEN
membrane translocation. Overexpression of wild-type PTEN, but not K163-mutated
PTEN, facilitated the inhibition of cell proliferation, migration and invasion,
as well as xenograft tumour growth, induced by SAHA or tubastatin A, an
HDAC6-specific inhibitor. These results indicated that PTEN activation by
inhibiting HDAC6 significantly contributed to tumour inhibition. Therefore,
non-selective HDAC or HDAC6-specific inhibitors may be more clinically suitable
to treat tumours without PTEN mutations or deletions.Oncogene advance online
publication, 17 August 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.293.

PMID: 26279303  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


84. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Oct 1;25(19):4320-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.07.065. 
Epub 2015 Jul 26.

Discovery of 1-hydroxypyridine-2-thiones as selective histone deacetylase
inhibitors and their potential application for treating leukemia.

Muthyala R(1), Shin WS(2), Xie J(3), Sham YY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Orphan Drug Research, University of Minnesota, 717 Delaware St SE, 
Minneapolis, MN 55455, United States; Department of Experimental & Clinical
Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, 717 Delaware St SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
United States. Electronic address: muthy003@umn.edu. (2)Center for Drug Design,
Academic Health Center, University of Minnesota, 516 Delaware St SE, Minneapolis,
MN 55455, United States; Biomedical Informatics and Computational Biology
Program, United States. (3)Center for Drug Design, Academic Health Center,
University of Minnesota, 516 Delaware St SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, United
States. (4)Center for Drug Design, Academic Health Center, University of
Minnesota, 516 Delaware St SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, United States; Biomedical
Informatics and Computational Biology Program, United States. Electronic address:
shamx002@umn.edu.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) is a validated target for pursuing anticancer agents. 
However, obtaining a selective inhibitor against a given HDAC member remains a
significant challenge. We report here the use of 1-hydroxypyridine-2-thione
(1HPT) as a key pharmacophore for zinc-binding can result in highly selective
HDAC inhibitors. 1HPT-6-carboxylic acid exhibits selective inhibition of HDAC6
with an IC50 of 150 nM that corresponds to a remarkable 0.9 ligand efficiency.
Two analogs with simple amino acids shows nearly 600-fold selectivity among the
eleven zinc-dependent HDACs. At low micromolar concentration these compounds
inhibit the growth of HDAC8-overexpressing chronic myelogenous leukemia cells and
specific form of acute myelogenous leukemia cells. Their potential mode of
binding was examined by molecular docking and their stability was assessed in
mouse and human plasma. Together the results suggest 1HPT analogs exhibit
promising therapeutic potential for further development as anticancer agents to
treat leukemia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26264503  [PubMed - in process]


85. Blood. 2015 Oct 1;126(14):1670-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-05-646182. Epub 2015
Aug 10.

SUMOylation-disrupting WAS mutation converts WASp from a transcriptional
activator to a repressor of NF-<U+03BA>B response genes in T cells.

Sarkar K(1), Sadhukhan S(1), Han SS(1), Vyas YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of Iowa Children's
Hospital, Iowa City, IA.

In Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), immunodeficiency and autoimmunity often
comanifest, yet how WAS mutations misregulate chromatin-signaling in Thelper (TH)
cells favoring development of auto-inflammation over protective immunity is
unclear. Previously, we identified an essential promoter-specific, coactivator
role of nuclear-WASp in TH1 gene transcription. Here we identify small
ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO)ylation as a novel posttranslational
modification of WASp, impairment of which converts nuclear-WASp from a
transcriptional coactivator to a corepressor of nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B response
genes in human (TH)1-differentiating cells. V75M, one of many disease-causing
mutations occurring in SUMO*motif (72-<U+03C8><U+03C8><U+03C8><U+03C8>KDxxxxSY-83) of WASp, compromises
WASp-SUMOylation, associates with COMMD1 to attenuate NF-<U+03BA>B signaling, and
recruits histone deacetylases-6 (HDAC6) to p300-marked promoters of NF-<U+03BA>B
response genes that pattern immunity but not inflammation. Consequently, proteins
mediating adaptive immunity (IFNG, STAT1, TLR1) are deficient, whereas those
mediating auto-inflammation (GM-CSF, TNFAIP2, IL-1ß) are paradoxically increased 
in TH1 cells expressing SUMOylation-deficient WASp. Moreover,
SUMOylation-deficient WASp favors ectopic development of the TH17-like phenotype 
(<U+2191>IL17A, IL21, IL22, IL23R, RORC, and CSF2) under TH1-skewing conditions,
suggesting a role for WASp in modulating TH1/TH17 plasticity. Notably,
pan-histone deacetylase inhibitors lift promoter-specific repression imposed by
SUMOylation-deficient WASp and restore misregulated gene expression. Our findings
uncovering a SUMOylation-based mechanism controlling WASp's dichotomous roles in 
transcription may have implications for personalized therapy for patients
carrying mutations that perturb WASp-SUMOylation.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4591791 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26261240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 6;5:12917. doi: 10.1038/srep12917.

Deacetylation of a-tubulin and cortactin is required for HDAC6 to trigger ciliary
disassembly.

Ran J(1), Yang Y(1), Li D(1), Liu M(1), Zhou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Cilia play important roles in sensing extracellular signals and directing fluid
flow. Ciliary dysfunction is associated with a variety of diseases known as
ciliopathies. Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) has recently emerged as a major
driver of ciliary disassembly, but little is known about the downstream players. 
Here we provide the first evidence that HDAC6-mediated deacetylation of a-tubulin
and cortactin is critical for its induction of ciliary disassembly. HDAC6 is
localized in the cytoplasm and enriched at the centrosome and basal body.
Overexpression of HDAC6 decreases the levels of acetylated a-tubulin and
cortactin without affecting the expression or localization of known ciliary
regulators. We also find that overexpression of a-tubulin or cortactin or their
acetylation-deficient mutants enhances the ability of HDAC6 to induce ciliary
disassembly. In addition, acetylation-mimicking mutants of a-tubulin and
cortactin counteract HDAC6-induced ciliary disassembly. Furthermore, HDAC6
stimulates actin polymerization, and inhibition of actin polymerization abolishes
the activity of HDAC6 to trigger ciliary disassembly. These findings provide
mechanistic insight into the ciliary role of HDAC6 and underscore the importance 
of reversible acetylation in regulating ciliary homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4526867
PMID: 26246421  [PubMed - in process]


87. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 21;6(24):20555-69.

Jak3, STAT3, and STAT5 inhibit expression of miR-22, a novel tumor suppressor
microRNA, in cutaneous T-Cell lymphoma.

Sibbesen NA(1), Kopp KL(1), Litvinov IV(2), Jønson L(3), Willerslev-Olsen A(1),
Fredholm S(1), Petersen DL(1), Nastasi C(1), Krejsgaard T(1), Lindahl LM(4),
Gniadecki R(5), Mongan NP(6), Sasseville D(2), Wasik MA(7), Iversen L(4),
Bonefeld CM(1), Geisler C(1), Woetmann A(1), Odum N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Division of Dermatology, McGill University Health Centre,
Montréal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Departmen of Molecular Medicine, Copenhagen
University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Department of
Dermatology, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark. (5)Departmen of
Dermatology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Bispebjerg, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, School of Veterinary Medicine and
Science, University of Nottingham, Loughborough, United Kingdom. (7)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.

Aberrant activation of Janus kinase-3 (Jak3) and its key down-stream effectors,
Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription-3 (STAT3) and STAT5, is a key
feature of malignant transformation in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). However,
it remains only partially understood how Jak3/STAT activation promotes
lymphomagenesis. Recently, non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in 
the pathogenesis of this malignancy. Here, we show that (i) malignant T cells
display a decreased expression of a tumor suppressor miRNA, miR-22, when compared
to non-malignant T cells, (ii) STAT5 binds the promoter of the miR-22 host gene, 
and (iii) inhibition of Jak3, STAT3, and STAT5 triggers increased expression of
pri-miR-22 and miR-22. Curcumin, a nutrient with anti-Jak3 activity and histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) also trigger increased expression of pri-miR-22
and miR-22. Transfection of malignant T cells with recombinant miR-22 inhibits
the expression of validated miR-22 targets including NCoA1, a transcriptional
co-activator in others cancers, as well as HDAC6, MAX, MYCBP, PTEN, and CDK2,
which have all been implicated in CTCL pathogenesis. In conclusion, we provide
the first evidence that de-regulated Jak3/STAT3/STAT5 signalling in CTCL cells
represses the expression of the gene encoding miR-22, a novel tumor suppressor
miRNA.

PMCID: PMC4653025
PMID: 26244872  [PubMed - in process]


88. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Nov;72(22):4237-55. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-2000-5. Epub 
2015 Jul 31.

Tubulin acetylation: responsible enzymes, biological functions and human
diseases.

Li L(1,)(2), Yang XJ(3,)(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A3,
Canada. (2)Department of Medicine, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A3, Canada. (3)Rosalind and
Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A3, Canada.
xiang-jiao.yang@mcgill.ca. (4)Department of Medicine, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A3,
Canada. xiang-jiao.yang@mcgill.ca. (5)Department of Biochemistry, McGill
University, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A3, Canada. xiang-jiao.yang@mcgill.ca. (6)McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A3, Canada.
xiang-jiao.yang@mcgill.ca.

Microtubules have important functions ranging from maintenance of cell morphology
to subcellular transport, cellular signaling, cell migration, and formation of
cell polarity. At the organismal level, microtubules are crucial for various
biological processes, such as viral entry, inflammation, immunity, learning and
memory in mammals. Microtubules are subject to various covalent modifications.
One such modification is tubulin acetylation, which is associated with stable
microtubules and conserved from protists to humans. In the past three decades,
this reversible modification has been studied extensively. In mammals, its level 
is mainly governed by opposing actions of a-tubulin acetyltransferase 1 (ATAT1)
and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Knockout studies of the mouse enzymes have
yielded new insights into biological functions of tubulin acetylation. Abnormal
levels of this modification are linked to neurological disorders, cancer, heart
diseases and other pathological conditions, thereby yielding important
therapeutic implications. This review summarizes related studies and concludes
that tubulin acetylation is important for regulating microtubule architecture and
maintaining microtubule integrity. Together with detyrosination, glutamylation
and other modifications, tubulin acetylation may form a unique 'language' to
regulate microtubule structure and function.

PMID: 26227334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22795-804. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.612945. Epub
2015 Jul 28.

Histone deacetylase 10 regulates DNA mismatch repair and may involve the
deacetylation of MutS homolog 2.

Radhakrishnan R(1), Li Y(1), Xiang S(2), Yuan F(3), Yuan Z(1), Telles E(1), Fang 
J(1), Coppola D(4), Shibata D(4), Lane WS(5), Zhang Y(3), Zhang X(6), Seto E(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Molecular Oncology and. (2)the Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology, University of South Florida (USF) Morsani College of Medicine, 
Tampa, Florida 33612. (3)the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, and.
(4)Gastroenterology, and H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute,
Tampa, Florida 33612. (5)the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Resource
Laboratory, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138. (6)From the
Departments of Molecular Oncology and the Department of Pathology and Cell
Biology, University of South Florida (USF) Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa,
Florida 33612, xzhang1@health.usf.edu. (7)From the Departments of Molecular
Oncology and ed.seto@moffitt.org.

MutS homolog 2 (MSH2) is an essential DNA mismatch repair (MMR) protein. It
interacts with MSH6 or MSH3 to form the MutSa or MutSß complex, respectively,
which recognize base-base mispairs and insertions/deletions and initiate the
repair process. Mutation or dysregulation of MSH2 causes genomic instability that
can lead to cancer. MSH2 is acetylated at its C terminus, and histone deacetylase
(HDAC6) deacetylates MSH2. However, whether other regions of MSH2 can be
acetylated and whether other histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) are involved in MSH2 deacetylation/acetylation is
unknown. Here, we report that MSH2 can be acetylated at Lys-73 near the N
terminus. Lys-73 is highly conserved across many species. Although several Class 
I and II HDACs interact with MSH2, HDAC10 is the major enzyme that deacetylates
MSH2 at Lys-73. Histone acetyltransferase HBO1 might acetylate this residue.
HDAC10 overexpression in HeLa cells stimulates cellular DNA MMR activity, whereas
HDAC10 knockdown decreases DNA MMR activity. Thus, our study identifies an
HDAC10-mediated regulatory mechanism controlling the DNA mismatch repair function
of MSH2.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566250 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26221039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 4;464(4):1235-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.111. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

HDAC6 maintains mitochondrial connectivity under hypoxic stress by suppressing
MARCH5/MITOL dependent MFN2 degradation.

Kim HJ(1), Nagano Y(2), Choi SJ(1), Park SY(1), Kim H(3), Yao TP(4), Lee JY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Analytical Science and Technology, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon, 305-764, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Clinical
Neuroscience and Therapeutics, Hiroshima University Graduate School of Biomedical
and Health Sciences, Hiroshima, 734-8551, Japan. (3)Department of Biological
Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon, 440-746, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA. Electronic address: tsopang.yao@duke.edu. (5)Graduate School of
Analytical Science and Technology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon,
305-764, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: leejooyong@cnu.ac.kr.

Mitochondria undergo fusion and fission in response to various metabolic
stresses. Growing evidences have suggested that the morphological change of
mitochondria by fusion and fission plays a critical role in protecting
mitochondria from metabolic stresses. Here, we showed that hypoxia treatment
could induce interaction between HDAC6 and MFN2, thus protecting mitochondrial
connectivity. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that a mitochondrial ubiquitin
ligase MARCH5/MITOL was responsible for hypoxia-induced MFN2 degradation in HDAC6
deficient cells. Notably, genetic abolition of HDAC6 in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis model mice showed MFN2 degradation with MARCH5 induction. Our results
indicate that HDAC6 is a critical regulator of MFN2 degradation by MARCH5, thus
protecting mitochondrial connectivity from hypoxic stress.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26210454  [PubMed - in process]


91. Eur J Pharmacol. 2015 Oct 5;764:554-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.07.045. Epub
2015 Jul 21.

SIRT2 regulates microtubule stabilization in diabetic cardiomyopathy.

Yuan Q(1), Zhan L(2), Zhou QY(3), Zhang LL(3), Chen XM(4), Hu XM(5), Yuan XC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical College, Wuhan University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430065, China; Brain and Cognitive Dysfunction Laboratory
Medical College, Medical College,Wuhan University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430065, China; Drug Research Base of Cardiovascular and Cerebral Vascular, 
Medical College, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430065, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Medical College, Wuhan University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430065, China. (3)Department of Histology and Embryology,
Medical College, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430065, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hunan
University Of Chinese Medicine, Changsha 410208, China. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, Medical College, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 
430065, China; Brain and Cognitive Dysfunction Laboratory Medical College,
Medical College,Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430065, China. 
(6)Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical College, Wuhan University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430065, China. Electronic address: y5307@126.com.

Stable microtubules (MTs) is involved the mechanism of diabetic cardiomyopathy
(DCM), which is induced by acetylation of a-tubulin. The present study
investigated whether SIRT2, a deacetylase, regulates MT stability through
a-tubulin deacetylation in DCM and whether the receptor of advanced glycation end
products (AGEs) signaling pathway is involved in this effect. Type 1 diabetic
mellitus (T1DM) rats model was established by a single intraperitoneal injection 
of streptozotocin (STZ, 65 mg/kg), and neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were also
cultured. Heart function was detected by Doppler. MT stability was elevated by
ß-tubulin expression density. The protein expression of SIRT2, acetylated
a-tubulin and AGEs receptor were detected by immunohistochemistry or Western
blots. The interaction of SIRT2 and acetylated a-tubulin was detected by
Co-immunoprecipitation. In an animal model of T1DM, Western blots and
immunohistochemistry revealed downregulation of SIRT2 but upregulation of the
acetylated a-tubulin protein. These effects were reduced by treatment of
aminoguanidine, an inhibitor of AGEs production. HDAC6 expression did not
regulated in heart. In primary cultures of neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, the AGEs 
treatment impaired the SIRT2/acetylated a-tubulin signaling pathway, and
SIRT2-overexpression reversed the function of AGEs on cardiomyocytes. In
addition, gene silencing of AGEs receptor alleviated the impairment effect of
AGEs on cardiomyocytes. In conclusion, these data demonstrate that AGEs/AGEs
receptor promote MT stabilization via the suppression of the SIRT2/acetylated
a-tubulin signaling pathway in DCM development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26209361  [PubMed - in process]


92. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Oct;22(5):777-92. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0302. Epub 2015
Jul 23.

RhoB upregulation leads to either apoptosis or cytostasis through differential
target selection.

Marlow LA(1), Bok I(1), Smallridge RC(2), Copland JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal MedicineDivision of
EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, 
Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA. (2)Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal
MedicineDivision of EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic,
4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA Departments of Cancer
BiologyInternal MedicineDivision of EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working
GroupMayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA
Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal MedicineDivision of EndocrinologyEndocrine 
Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida
32224, USA. (3)Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal MedicineDivision of
EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, 
Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal
MedicineDivision of EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic,
4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA copland.john@mayo.edu.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is a highly aggressive undifferentiated carcinoma
with a mortality rate near 100% due to an assortment of genomic abnormalities
which impede the success of therapeutic options. Our laboratory has previously
identified that RhoB upregulation serves as a novel molecular therapeutic target 
and agents upregulating RhoB combined with paclitaxel lead to antitumor synergy. 
Knowing that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) transcriptionally suppresses RhoB, we 
sought to extend our findings to other HDACs and to identify the HDAC inhibitor
(HDACi) that optimally synergize with paclitaxel. Here we identify HDAC6 as a
newly discovered RhoB repressor. By using isoform selective HDAC inhibitors
(HDACi) and shRNAs, we show that RhoB has divergent downstream signaling
partners, which are dependent on the HDAC isoform that is inhibited. When RhoB
upregulates only p21 (cyclin kinase inhibitor) using a class I HDACi
(romidepsin), cells undergo cytostasis. When RhoB upregulates BIMEL using class
II/(I) HDACi (belinostat or vorinostat), apoptosis occurs. Combinatorial synergy 
with paclitaxel is dependent upon RhoB and BIMEL while upregulation of RhoB and
only p21 blocks synergy. This bifurcated regulation of the cell cycle by RhoB is 
novel and silencing either p21 or BIMEL turns the previously silenced pathway on,
leading to phenotypic reversal. This study intimates that the combination of
belinostat/vorinostat with paclitaxel may prove to be an effective therapeutic
strategy via the novel observation that class II/(I) HDACi antagonize
HDAC6-mediated suppression of RhoB and subsequent BIMEL, thereby promoting
antitumor synergy. These overall observations may provide a mechanistic
understanding of optimal therapeutic response.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4559850 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26206775  [PubMed - in process]


93. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 22;6:7781. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8781.

HDAC6 and RhoA are novel players in Abeta-driven disruption of neuronal polarity.

Tsushima H(1), Emanuele M(1), Polenghi A(1), Esposito A(1), Vassalli M(2),
Barberis A(1), Difato F(1), Chieregatti E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, Genoa 16163, Italy. (2)Institute of Biophysics, National Research
Council of Italy, Genoa, Italy.

Maintenance of neuronal polarity and regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics are
vital during development and to uphold synaptic activity in neuronal networks.
Here we show that soluble ß-amyloid (Aß) disrupts actin and microtubule (MT)
dynamics via activation of RhoA and inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)
in cultured hippocampal neurons. The contact of Aß with the extracellular
membrane promotes RhoA activation, leading to growth cone collapse and neurite
retraction, which might be responsible for hampered neuronal pathfinding and
migration in Alzheimer's disease (AD). The inhibition of HDAC6 by Aß increases
the level of heterodimeric acetylated tubulin and acetylated tau, both of which
have been found altered in AD. We also find that the loss of HDAC6 activity
perturbs the integrity of axon initial segment (AIS), resulting in
mislocalization of ankyrin G and increased MT instability in the AIS concomitant 
with loss of polarized localization of tau and impairment of action potential
firing.

PMID: 26198811  [PubMed - in process]


94. Neurosci Bull. 2015 Aug;31(4):459-68. doi: 10.1007/s12264-015-1539-3. Epub 2015
Jul 11.

Histone deacetylase 6 delays motor neuron degeneration by ameliorating the
autophagic flux defect in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.

Chen S(1), Zhang XJ, Li LX, Wang Y, Zhong RJ, Le W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder
characterized by the selective loss of motor neurons. Abnormal protein
aggregation and impaired protein degradation are believed to contribute to the
pathogenesis of this disease. Our previous studies showed that an autophagic flux
defect is involved in motor neuron degeneration in the SOD1(G93A) mouse model of 
ALS. Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a class II deacetylase that promotes
autophagy by inducing the fusion of autophagosomes to lysosomes. In the present
study, we showed that HDAC6 expression was decreased at the onset of disease and 
became extremely low at the late stage in ALS mice. Using lentivirus-HDAC6 gene
injection, we found that HDAC6 overexpression prolonged the lifespan and delayed 
the motor neuron degeneration in ALS mice. Moreover, HDAC6 induced the formation 
of autolysosomes and accelerated the degradation of SOD1 protein aggregates in
the motor neurons of ALS mice. Collectively, our results indicate that HDAC6 has 
neuroprotective effects in an animal model of ALS by improving the autophagic
flux in motor neurons, and autophagosome-lysosome fusion might be a therapeutic
target for ALS.

PMID: 26164555  [PubMed - in process]


95. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Jul 10;8:82. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0176-7.

The synergic effect of vincristine and vorinostat in leukemia in vitro and in
vivo.

Chao MW(1), Lai MJ(2), Liou JP(3), Chang YL(1), Wang JC(4), Pan SL(5), Teng
CM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Institute, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
No. 1, Jen-Ai Road, Sec. 1, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Center for Translational Medicine,
Taipei Medical University, No. 250, Wu-hsing Street, Taipei, 11031, Taiwan.
(3)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, No. 250,
Wu-hsing Street, Taipei, 11031, Taiwan. (4)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology
and Drug Discovery, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical
University, No. 250, Wu-hsing St., Taipei, 11031, Taiwan. (5)The Ph.D. Program
for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical Science and Technology,
Taipei Medical University, No. 250, Wu-hsing St., Taipei, 11031, Taiwan.
slpan@tmu.edu.tw. (6)Pharmacological Institute, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, No. 1, Jen-Ai Road, Sec. 1, Taipei, Taiwan. cmteng@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy is a key strategy for minimizing drug resistance,
a common problem in cancer therapy. The microtubule-depolymerizing agent
vincristine is widely used in the treatment of acute leukemia. In order to
decrease toxicity and chemoresistance of vincristine, this study will investigate
the effects of combination vincristine and vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid (SAHA)), a pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor, on human acute T cell
lymphoblastic leukemia cells.
METHODS: Cell viability experiments were determined by
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, and
cell cycle distributions as well as mitochondria membrane potential were analyzed
by flow cytometry. In vitro tubulin polymerization assay was used to test tubulin
assembly, and immunofluorescence analysis was performed to detect microtubule
distribution and morphology. In vivo effect of the combination was evaluated by a
MOLT-4 xenograft model. Statistical analysis was assessed by Bonferroni's t test.
RESULTS: Cell viability showed that the combination of vincristine and SAHA
exhibited greater cytotoxicity with an IC50 value of 0.88 nM, compared to each
drug alone, 3.3 and 840 nM. This combination synergically induced G2/M arrest,
followed by an increase in cell number at the sub-G1 phase and caspase
activation. Moreover, the results of vincristine combined with an HDAC6 inhibitor
(tubastatin A), which acetylated a-tubulin, were consistent with the effects of
vincristine/SAHA co-treatment, thus suggesting that SAHA may alter microtubule
dynamics through HDAC6 inhibition.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the combination of vincristine and SAHA 
on T cell leukemic cells resulted in a change in microtubule dynamics
contributing to M phase arrest followed by induction of the apoptotic pathway.
These data suggest that the combination effect of vincristine/SAHA could have an 
important preclinical basis for future clinical trial testing.

PMCID: PMC4504084
PMID: 26156322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec;36(12):9661-5. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3747-x. Epub 2015
Jul 7.

Histone deacetylase 6 promotes growth of glioblastoma through inhibition of SMAD2
signaling.

Li S(1,)(2), Liu X(1), Chen X(3), Zhang L(4), Wang X(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Zhujiang Hospital, The National Key Clinic
Specialty, The Neurosurgery Institute of Guangdong Province, Guangdong Provincial
Key Laboratory on Brain Function Repair and Regeneration, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510282, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Affiliated
Hospital of North Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong, 637000, China. (3)Department
of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University,
Quanzhou, 362000, China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Jinan University, 613 West Huangpu Road, Guangzhou, 510630, China.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Zhujiang Hospital, The National Key Clinic
Specialty, The Neurosurgery Institute of Guangdong Province, Guangdong Provincial
Key Laboratory on Brain Function Repair and Regeneration, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510282, China. xiangyu_wang14@163.com. (6)Department of
Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, 613 West Huangpu
Road, Guangzhou, 510630, China. xiangyu_wang14@163.com.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a role in the tumorigenesis of glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM), whereas the underlying mechanism has not been elucidated. Here,
we reported significantly higher HDAC6 levels in GBM from the patients. GBM cell 
growth was significantly inhibited by ACY-1215, a specific HDAC6 inhibitor.
Further analyses show that HDAC6 may promote growth of GBM cells through
inhibition of SMAD2 phosphorylation to downregulate p21. Thus, our data
demonstrate a previously unrecognized regulation pathway in that HDAC6 increases 
GBM growth through attenuating transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) receptor
signaling.

PMID: 26150340  [PubMed - in process]


97. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2015;18(7):693-700.

Discovery of a Novel HDAC2 Inhibitor by a Scaffold-Merging Hybrid Query.

Basant N, Lin X, Reid TE, Karla PK, Wang XS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Howard University,
2300 4th St. NW, Washington, DC 20059, USA. x.simon.wang@gmail.com.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are part of a vast family of enzymes with crucial
roles in numerous biological processes, largely through their repressive
influence on transcription, with serious implications in a variety of human
diseases. Among different isoforms, human HDAC2 in particular draws attention as 
a promising target for the treatment of cancer and memory deficits associated
with neurodegenerative diseases. Now the challenge is to obtain a compound that
is structurally novel and truly selective to HDAC2 because most current HDAC2
inhibitors do not show isoforms selectivity and suffer from metabolic
instability. In order to identify novel, and isoform-selective inhibitors for
human HDAC2, we designed a shape-based hybrid query from multiple scaffolds of
known chemical classes and validated it to be a more effective approach to
discover diverse scaffolds than single-molecule query. The hybrid query-based
screening rendered a hit compound with the N-benzylaniline scaffold which showed 
moderate inhibitory activity against HDAC2, and its chemical structure is diverse
compared to known HDAC2 inhibitors. Notably, this compound shows the selectivity 
against the HDAC6, a Class II enzyme, thus has the potential to further develop
into the class- and isoform-selective inhibitors. Our present study supplies an
useful approach to identifying novel HDAC2 inhibitors, and can be extended to the
inquires of other important biomedical targets as well.

PMCID: PMC4677828
PMID: 26144283  [PubMed - in process]


98. Mol Cells. 2015 Aug;38(8):705-14. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2015.0086. Epub 2015 Jul
1.

Tubulin Beta3 Serves as a Target of HDAC3 and Mediates Resistance to
Microtubule-Targeting Drugs.

Kim Y(1), Kim H(1), Jeoung D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National
University, Chunchon 200-701, Korea.

We investigated the role of HDAC3 in anti-cancer drug-resistance. The expression 
of HDAC3 was decreased in cancer cell lines resistant to anti-cancer drugs such
as celastrol and taxol. HDAC3 conferred sensitivity to these anti-cancer drugs.
HDAC3 activity was necessary for conferring sensitivity to these anti-cancer
drugs. The down-regulation of HDAC3 increased the expression of MDR1 and
conferred resistance to anti-cancer drugs. The expression of tubulin ß3 was
increased in drug-resistant cancer cell lines. ChIP assays showed the binding of 
HDAC3 to the promoter sequences of tubulin ß3 and HDAC6. HDAC6 showed an
interaction with tubulin ß3. HDAC3 had a negative regulatory role in the
expression of tubulin ß3 and HDAC6. The down-regulation of HDAC6 decreased the
expression of MDR1 and tubulin ß3, but did not affect HDAC3 expression. The
down-regulation of HDAC6 conferred sensitivity to taxol. The down-regulation of
tubulin ß3 did not affect the expression of HDAC6 or MDR1. The down-regulation of
tubulin ß3 conferred sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs. Our results showed that
tubulin ß3 serves as a downstream target of HDAC3 and mediates resistance to
microtubule-targeting drugs. Thus, the HDAC3-HDAC6-Tubulin ß axis can be employed
for the development of anti-cancer drugs.

PMCID: PMC4546942
PMID: 26126538  [PubMed - in process]


99. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 24;35(12):1517-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.214. Epub 2015 Jun
29.

Deacetylation of HSPA5 by HDAC6 leads to GP78-mediated HSPA5 ubiquitination at
K447 and suppresses metastasis of breast cancer.

Chang YW(1), Tseng CF(1,)(2), Wang MY(3), Chang WC(4), Lee CC(5), Chen LT(1),
Hung MC(6), Su JL(1,)(4,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Zhunan, Taiwan. (2)Graduate Program of Biotechnology in Medicine College of Life 
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Graduate
Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Core 
Facilities for Protein Structural Analysis, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (7)Center for Molecular Medicine, China
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (8)Department of Biotechnology,
Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Heat-shock protein 5 (HSPA5) is a marker for poor prognosis in breast cancer
patients and has an important role in cancer progression, including promoting
drug resistance and metastasis. In this study, we identify that the specific
lysine residue 447 (K447) of HSPA5 could be modified with polyubiquitin for
subsequent degradation through the ubiquitin proteasomal system, leading to the
suppression of cell migration and invasion of breast cancer. We further found
that GP78, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, interacted with the C-terminal region of HSPA5
and mediated HSPA5 ubiquitination and degradation. Knock down of GP78
significantly increased the expression of HSPA5 and enhanced migration/invasive
ability of breast cancer cells. Knock down of histone deacetylase-6 (HDAC6)
increased the acetylation of HSPA5 at lysine residues 353 (K353) and reduced
GP78-mediated ubiquitination of HSPA5 at K447 and then increased cell
migration/invasion. In addition, we demonstrate that E3 ubiquitin ligase GP78
preferentially binds to deacetylated HSPA5. Notably, the expression levels of
GP78 inversely correlated with HSPA5 levels in breast cancer patients. Patients
with low GP78 expression significantly correlated with invasiveness of breast
cancer, advanced tumor stages and poor clinical outcome. Taken together, our
results provide new mechanistic insights into the understanding that
deacetylation of HSPA5 by HDAC6 facilitates GP78-mediated HSPA5 ubiquitination
and suggest that post-translational regulation of HSPA5 protein is critical for
HSPA5-mediated metastatic properties of breast cancer.

PMID: 26119938  [PubMed - in process]


100. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 15;21(20):4663-75. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3068. 
Epub 2015 Jun 26.

Dual Targeting of Protein Degradation Pathways with the Selective HDAC6 Inhibitor
ACY-1215 and Bortezomib Is Synergistic in Lymphoma.

Amengual JE(1), Johannet P(2), Lombardo M(2), Zullo K(2), Hoehn D(3), Bhagat
G(3), Scotto L(2), Jirau-Serrano X(2), Radeski D(2), Heinen J(2), Jiang H(4),
Cremers S(4), Zhang Y(5), Jones S(6), O'Connor OA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lymphoid Malignancies, Department of Medicine, Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York, New York. jea2149@columbia.edu. (2)Center for Lymphoid 
Malignancies, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, New York. (3)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology and Cell 
Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York. (4)Division of
Clinical Pathology, Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, New York. (5)Department of Biostatistics, Mailman
School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York. (6)Acetylon
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: Pan-class histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are effective treatments
for select lymphomas. Isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors are emerging as
potentially more targeted agents. HDAC6 is a class IIb deacetylase that
facilitates misfolded protein transport to the aggresome for degradation. We
investigated the mechanism and therapeutic impact of the selective HDAC6
inhibitor ACY-1215 alone and in combination with bortezomib in preclinical models
of lymphoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Concentration-effect relationships were defined for ACY-1215
across 16 lymphoma cell lines and for synergy with bortezomib. Mechanism was
interrogated by immunoblot and flow cytometry. An in vivo xenograft model of
DLBCL was used to confirm in vitro findings. A collection of primary lymphoma
samples were surveyed for markers of the unfolded protein response (UPR).
RESULTS: Concentration-effect relationships defined maximal cytotoxicity at 48
hours with IC50 values ranging from 0.9 to 4.7 µmol/L. Strong synergy was
observed in combination with bortezomib. Treatment with ACY-1215 led to
inhibition of the aggresome evidenced by acetylated a-tubulin and accumulated
polyubiquitinated proteins and upregulation of the UPR. All pharmacodynamic
effects were enhanced with the addition of bortezomib. Findings were validated in
vivo where mice treated with the combination demonstrated significant tumor
growth delay and prolonged overall survival. Evaluation of a collection of
primary lymphoma samples for markers of the UPR revealed increased HDAC6, GRP78, 
and XBP-1 expression as compared with reactive lymphoid tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: These data are the first results to demonstrate that dual targeting 
of protein degradation pathways represents an innovative and rational approach
for the treatment of lymphoma.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4609274 [Available on 2016-10-15]
PMID: 26116270  [PubMed - in process]


101. Int J Exp Pathol. 2015 Aug;96(4):248-54. doi: 10.1111/iep.12132. Epub 2015 Jun
26.

Expression and significance of cortactin and HDAC6 in human prostatic foamy gland
carcinoma.

Hou H(1), Zhao L(2), Chen W(3), Li J(2), Zuo Q(4), Zhang G(1), Zhang X(1), Li
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University 
College of Medicine, Xi'an, China. (2)Center for Translational Medicine, First
Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University College of Medicine, Xi'an, China.
(3)Center for Laboratory Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University College of Medicine, Xi'an, China. (4)Shaanxi Blood Center, Xi'an,
China.

Cortactin, the cytoplasmic substrate of HDAC6, is known to play an actin
cytoskeletal regulatory role which is implicated in the motility of cancer cells,
and thus in cancer progression. Its activity is found to be regulated by HDAC6.
However, the significance of cortactin and HDAC6 remains unclear in uncommon
histologic variant human prostatic foamy gland carcinoma (PfCa). In this study,
we aimed to identify the expression and potential role of cortactin and HDAC6 in 
PfCa. Therefore, 16 PfCa specimens containing 48 foci with distinctive lesions
were collected to identify the status of cortactin and HDAC6 by
immunohistochemistry. Their correlation between clinicopathological
characteristics and prognostic values were further analysed. The effect of
cortactin and HDAC6 on prostate cancer cell migration and invasion was then
evaluated in IA8 cells. The results showed that expression of cortactin and HDAC6
was significantly higher in PfCa foci, compared to that of high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) foci and benign foci (P < 0.05). Cortactin and 
HDAC6 were associated with poor prognosis of patients with PfCa (P < 0.05).
Multivariable Cox regression analysis showed HDAC6 level was a significant
prognostic factor for survival of patients with PfCa (ß = 1.200, Wald value =
7.282, P = 0.007, 95% CI = 1.389-7.941, P < 0.01, ß > 0). Both knocking down
cortactin and inhibition of HDAC6 activity with tubacin reduced in vitro
migration and invasion ability of IA8 cells substantially. Furthermore, HDAC6 has
prognostic value for patients with PfCa. Dysregulation of cortactin and HDAC6 is 
implicated in the invasiveness and migration of prostate cancer cells.

© 2015 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology © 2015
International Journal of Experimental Pathology.

PMCID: PMC4561561 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26112958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. FEBS Lett. 2015 Jul 8;589(15):1771-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.017. Epub
2015 Jun 22.

Cep70 regulates microtubule stability by interacting with HDAC6.

Shi X(1), Yao Y(2), Wang Y(2), Zhang Y(2), Huang Q(2), Zhou J(3), Liu M(3), Li
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Disease, Institute of Life
Sciences, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. Electronic address:
xingjuanshi@seu.edu.cn. (2)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human
Disease, Institute of Life Sciences, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China.
(3)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, China. (4)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College
of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. Electronic address:
dwli@nankai.edu.cn.

Microtubules, highly dynamic components of the cytoskeleton, are involved in
mitosis, cell migration and intracellular trafficking. Our previous work has
shown that the centrosomal protein Cep70 regulates microtubule organization and
mitotic spindle orientation in mammalian cells. However, it remains elusive
whether Cep70 is implicated in microtubule stability. Here we demonstrate that
Cep70 enhances microtubule resistance to cold or nocodazole treatment. Our data
further show that Cep70 promotes microtubule stability by regulating tubulin
acetylation, and plays an important role in stabilizing microtubules. Mechanistic
studies reveal that Cep70 interacts and colocalizes with histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) in the cytoplasm. These findings suggest that Cep70 promotes microtubule 
stability by interaction with HDAC6 and regulation of tubulin acetylation.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26112604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Retrovirology. 2015 Jun 24;12:53. doi: 10.1186/s12977-015-0181-5.

The HDAC6/APOBEC3G complex regulates HIV-1 infectiveness by inducing Vif
autophagic degradation.

Valera MS(1), de Armas-Rillo L(2), Barroso-González J(3), Ziglio S(4), Batisse
J(5), Dubois N(6), Marrero-Hernández S(7), Borel S(8), García-Expósito L(9),
Biard-Piechaczyk M(10), Paillart JC(11), Valenzuela-Fernández A(12).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología Celular y Viral, Unidad de Farmacología,
Departamento de Medicina Física y Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
de La Laguna (ULL), Campus de Ofra s/n, 38071, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.
missmariasoledad@gmail.com. (2)Laboratorio de Inmunología Celular y Viral, Unidad
de Farmacología, Departamento de Medicina Física y Farmacología, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de La Laguna (ULL), Campus de Ofra s/n, 38071, La Laguna,
Tenerife, Spain. laura.spm@gmail.com. (3)Laboratorio de Inmunología Celular y
Viral, Unidad de Farmacología, Departamento de Medicina Física y Farmacología,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de La Laguna (ULL), Campus de Ofra s/n, 38071, 
La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain. jbarrosox@gmail.com. (4)Laboratorio de Inmunología
Celular y Viral, Unidad de Farmacología, Departamento de Medicina Física y
Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de La Laguna (ULL), Campus de
Ofra s/n, 38071, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain. serena.ziglio@gmail.com.
(5)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Université de Strasbourg, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084, Strasbourg,
France. julien.batisse@igbmc.fr. (6)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, CNRS,
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université de Strasbourg, 15 rue 
René Descartes, 67084, Strasbourg, France. Noe.dubois1990@gmail.com.
(7)Laboratorio de Inmunología Celular y Viral, Unidad de Farmacología,
Departamento de Medicina Física y Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
de La Laguna (ULL), Campus de Ofra s/n, 38071, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.
saramh222@gmail.com. (8)Centre d'études d'agents Pathogènes et Biotechnologies
pour la Santé (CPBS) UMR5236 CNRS UMSF, 1919 route de Mende, 34293, Montpellier
Cedex 5, France. sophieborel1@hotmail.com. (9)Laboratorio de Inmunología Celular 
y Viral, Unidad de Farmacología, Departamento de Medicina Física y Farmacología, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de La Laguna (ULL), Campus de Ofra s/n, 38071, 
La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain. lauratfe@gmail.com. (10)Centre d'études d'agents
Pathogènes et Biotechnologies pour la Santé (CPBS) UMR5236 CNRS UMSF, 1919 route 
de Mende, 34293, Montpellier Cedex 5, France. Martine.Biard@cpbs.cnrs.fr.
(11)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire
et Cellulaire, Université de Strasbourg, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084,
Strasbourg, France. jc.paillart@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr. (12)Laboratorio de
Inmunología Celular y Viral, Unidad de Farmacología, Departamento de Medicina
Física y Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de La Laguna (ULL),
Campus de Ofra s/n, 38071, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain. avalenzu@ull.edu.es.

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) has evolved a complex
strategy to overcome the immune barriers it encounters throughout an organism
thanks to its viral infectivity factor (Vif), a key protein for HIV-1 infectivity
and in vivo pathogenesis. Vif interacts with and promotes "apolipoprotein B
mRNA-editing enzyme-catalytic, polypeptide-like 3G" (A3G) ubiquitination and
subsequent degradation by the proteasome, thus eluding A3G restriction activity
against HIV-1.
RESULTS: We found that cellular histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) directly interacts 
with A3G through its C-terminal BUZ domain (residues 841-1,215) to undergo a
cellular co-distribution along microtubules and cytoplasm. The HDAC6/A3G complex 
occurs in the absence or presence of Vif, competes for Vif-mediated A3G
degradation, and accounts for A3G steady-state expression level. In fact, HDAC6
directly interacts with and promotes Vif autophagic clearance, thanks to its
C-terminal BUZ domain, a process requiring the deacetylase activity of HDAC6.
HDAC6 degrades Vif without affecting the core binding factor ß (CBF-ß), a
Vif-associated partner reported to be key for Vif- mediated A3G degradation. Thus
HDAC6 antagonizes the proviral activity of Vif/CBF-ß-associated complex by
targeting Vif and stabilizing A3G. Finally, in cells producing virions, we
observed a clear-cut correlation between the ability of HDAC6 to degrade Vif and 
to restore A3G expression, suggesting that HDAC6 controls the amount of Vif
incorporated into nascent virions and the ability of HIV-1 particles of being
infectious. This effect seems independent on the presence of A3G inside virions
and on viral tropism.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identifies for the first time a new cellular complex,
HDAC6/A3G, involved in the autophagic degradation of Vif, and suggests that HDAC6
represents a new antiviral factor capable of controlling HIV-1 infectiveness by
counteracting Vif and its functions.

PMCID: PMC4479245
PMID: 26105074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Aug 15;336(2):263-75. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.06.008. Epub
2015 Jun 19.

4-(1-Ethyl-4-anisyl-imidazol-5-yl)-N-hydroxycinnamide - A new pleiotropic HDAC
inhibitor targeting cancer cell signalling and cytoskeletal organisation.

Mahal K(1), Kahlen P(2), Biersack B(3), Schobert R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Organic Chemistry Laboratory, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 
95440 Bayreuth, Germany. Electronic address: katharina.mahal@uni-bayreuth.de.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95440 
Bayreuth, Germany. Electronic address: philip.kahlen@uni-bayreuth.de. (3)Organic 
Chemistry Laboratory, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95440
Bayreuth, Germany. Electronic address: bernhard.biersack@yahoo.com. (4)Organic
Chemistry Laboratory, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95440
Bayreuth, Germany. Electronic address: rainer.schobert@uni-bayreuth.de.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) which play a crucial role in cancer cell
proliferation are promising drug targets. However, HDAC inhibitors (HDACi)
modelled on natural hydroxamic acids such as trichostatin A frequently lead to
resistance or even an increased agressiveness of tumours. As a workaround we
developed 4-(1-ethyl-4-anisyl-imidazol-5-yl)-N-hydroxycinnamide (etacrox), a
hydroxamic acid that combines HDAC inhibition with synergistic effects of the
4,5-diarylimidazole residue. Etacrox proved highly cytotoxic against a panel of
metastatic and resistant cancer cell lines while showing greater specificity for 
cancer over non-malignant cells when compared to the approved HDACi vorinostat.
Like the latter, etacrox and the closely related imidazoles bimacroxam and
animacroxam acted as pan-HDACi yet showed some specificity for HDAC6. Akt
signalling and interference with nuclear beta-catenin localisation were elicited 
by etacrox at lower concentrations when compared to vorinostat. Moreover, etacrox
disrupted the microtubule and focal adhesion dynamics of cancer cells and
inhibited the proteolytic activity of prometastatic and proangiogenic matrix
metalloproteinases. As a consequence, etacrox acted strongly antimigratory and
antiinvasive against various cancer cell lines in three-dimensional transwell
invasion assays and also antiangiogenic in vivo with respect to blood vessel
formation in the chorioallantoic membrane assay. These pleiotropic effects and
its water-solubility and tolerance by mice render etacrox a promising new HDACi
candidate.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26101158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19743-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.647685. Epub 2015
Jun 19.

Rescuing Trafficking Mutants of the ATP-binding Cassette Protein, ABCA4, with
Small Molecule Correctors as a Treatment for Stargardt Eye Disease.

Sabirzhanova I(1), Lopes Pacheco M(1), Rapino D(1), Grover R(1), Handa JT(2),
Guggino WB(3), Cebotaru L(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, Physiology Center for Retinal Biology,
and. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231. (3)From the Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205. (4)From the Division of
Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205, Physiology Center for Retinal Biology, and Department of
Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21231
lcebotaru@jhmi.edu.

Stargardt disease is the most common form of early onset macular degeneration.
Mutations in ABCA4, a member of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family, are
associated with Stargardt disease. Here, we have examined two disease-causing
mutations in the NBD1 region of ABCA4, R1108C, and R1129C, which occur within
regions of high similarity with CFTR, another ABC transporter gene, which is
associated with cystic fibrosis. We show that R1108C and R1129C are both
temperature-sensitive processing mutants that engage the cellular quality control
mechanism and show a strong interaction with the chaperone Hsp 27. Both mutant
proteins also interact with HDCAC6 and are degraded in the aggresome. We also
demonstrate that novel corrector compounds that are being tested as treatment for
cystic fibrosis, such as VX-809, can rescue the processing of the ABCA4 mutants, 
particularly their expression at the cell surface, and can reduce their binding
to HDAC6. Thus, our data suggest that VX-809 can potentially be developed as a
new therapy for Stargardt disease, for which there is currently no treatment.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4528136 [Available on 2016-08-07]
PMID: 26092729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Jun 18. doi: 10.1002/mc.22345. [Epub ahead of print]

Downregulation of HDAC6 promotes angiogenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma cells
and predicts poor prognosis in liver transplantation patients.

Lv Z(1), Weng X(2), Du C(1), Zhang C(2), Xiao H(1), Cai X(2), Ye S(2), Cheng
J(1,)(2), Ding C(1,)(2), Xie H(2), Zhou L(2), Wu J(1), Zheng S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Ministry of
Public Health, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

HDAC6, a member of histone deacetylation family, is reported to play critical
roles in transcription regulation, cell cycle progression, and cancer
development. However, the expression status and significance of HDAC6 in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is still controversial, and little is known about 
the role of HDAC6 in HCC angiogenesis and the correlation between expression of
HDAC6 and prognosis of HCC patients with liver transplantation (LT). Our
experiments showed HDAC6 was significantly downregulated in HCC tissues
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025), and low expression of HDAC6 was found to be closely associated with 
recurrence (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006), and could predict poor recurrence-free survival
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.047) for HCC patients with LT. Moreover, knockdown of HDAC6 could promote 
HUVEC migration, proliferation, and tube formation in vitro, and suppress HCC
cell apoptosis, and promote HCC cell proliferation in hypoxia. Remarkably,
knockdown of HDAC6 could significantly up-regulate the expression of HIF-1a and
VEGFA in vivo and in vitro, which facilitated HIF-1a mediated angiogenesis in
HCC. Further study showed that HDAC6 was down-regulated under hypoxia in a time
dependent manner. Hence, the present findings suggested a role for suppression of
HDAC6 in promoting the angiogenesis in HCC by HIF-1a/VEGFA axis. HDAC6 may serve 
as a recurrence predictive factor for HCC after LT and pharmacological or genetic
activation of HDAC6 could be a novel anti-angiogenesis approach for HCC therapy. 
© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26086159  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


107. Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 1;397(3):185-94. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2015-0157.

Protein aggregate formation in oligodendrocytes: tau and the cytoskeleton at the 
intersection of neuroprotection and neurodegeneration.

Richter-Landsberg C.

Oligodendrocytes are dependent on an intact, dynamic microtubule (MT) network,
which participates in the elaboration and stabilization of myelin forming
extensions, and is essential for cellular sorting processes. The
microtubule-associated protein tau is constituent of oligodendrocytes. During
culture maturation it is developmentally regulated and important for MT
stability, MT formation and intracellular trafficking. Downregulation of tau
impairs process outgrowth and the transport of myelin basic protein (MBP) mRNA to
the cell periphery. Cells fail to differentiate into MBP-expressing,
sheet-forming oligodendrocytes. Tau-positive inclusions originating in
oligodendrocytes and white matter pathology are prominent in frontotemporal
dementias, such as Pick's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy and
corticobasal degeneration. An impairment or overload of the proteolytic
degradation systems, i.e. the ubiquitin proteasomal system and the lysosomal
degradation pathway, has been connected to the formation of protein aggregates.
Large protein aggregates are excluded from the proteasome and degraded by
autophagy, which is a highly selective process and requires receptor proteins for
ubiquitinated proteins, including histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). HDAC6 is present
in oligodendrocytes, and a-tubulin and tau are substrates of HDAC6. In this
review our current knowledge of the role of tau and protein aggregate formation
in oligodendrocyte cell culture systems is summarized.

PMID: 26083267  [PubMed - in process]


108. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 30;112(26):E3374-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418603112. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Nuclear matrix-associated protein SMAR1 regulates alternative splicing via
HDAC6-mediated deacetylation of Sam68.

Nakka KK(1), Chaudhary N(2), Joshi S(2), Bhat J(3), Singh K(4), Chatterjee S(3), 
Malhotra R(5), De A(5), Santra MK(6), Dilworth FJ(7), Chattopadhyay S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Disease Biology Laboratory, National Centre for Cell Science,
Pune 411007, India; Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital
Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L6, Canada; (2)Chromatin and Disease Biology
Laboratory, National Centre for Cell Science, Pune 411007, India; (3)Department
of Biophysics, Bose Institute, Kolkata 700054, India; (4)Sprott Centre for Stem
Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L6, Canada;
(5)Advanced Center for Treatment, Education and Research, Tata Memorial Centre,
Navi Mumbai 410210, India; (6)Cancer and Epigenetics Lab, National Centre for
Cell Science, Pune 411007, India; (7)Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L6, Canada; Department of Cellular 
and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L6, Canada.
(8)Chromatin and Disease Biology Laboratory, National Centre for Cell Science,
Pune 411007, India; samit@nccs.res.in.

Pre-mRNA splicing is a complex regulatory nexus modulated by various
trans-factors and their posttranslational modifications to create a dynamic
transcriptome through alternative splicing. Signal-induced phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of trans-factors are known to regulate alternative splicing.
However, the role of other posttranslational modifications, such as
deacetylation/acetylation, methylation, and ubiquitination, that could modulate
alternative splicing in either a signal-dependent or -independent manner remain
enigmatic. Here, we demonstrate that Scaffold/matrix-associated region-binding
protein 1 (SMAR1) negatively regulates alternative splicing through histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)-mediated deacetylation of RNA-binding protein Sam68
(Src-associated substrate during mitosis of 68 kDa). SMAR1 is enriched in nuclear
splicing speckles and associates with the snRNAs that are involved in splice site
recognition. ERK-MAPK pathway that regulates alternative splicing facilitates
ERK-1/2-mediated phosphorylation of SMAR1 at threonines 345 and 360 and localizes
SMAR1 to the cytoplasm, preventing its interaction with Sam68. We showed that
endogenously, SMAR1 through HDAC6 maintains Sam68 in a deacetylated state.
However, knockdown or ERK-mediated phosphorylation of SMAR1 releases the
inhibitory SMAR1-HDAC6-Sam68 complex, facilitating Sam68 acetylation and
alternative splicing. Furthermore, loss of heterozygosity at the Chr.16q24.3
locus in breast cancer cells, wherein the human homolog of SMAR1 (BANP) has been 
mapped, enhances Sam68 acetylation and CD44 variant exon inclusion. In addition, 
tail-vein injections in mice with human breast cancer MCF-7 cells depleted for
SMAR1 showed increased CD44 variant exon inclusion and concomitant metastatic
propensity, confirming the functional role of SMAR1 in regulation of alternative 
splicing. Thus, our results reveal the complex molecular mechanism underlying
SMAR1-mediated signal-dependent and -independent regulation of alternative
splicing via Sam68 deacetylation.

PMCID: PMC4491761
PMID: 26080397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Virus Res. 2015 Nov 2;209:118-27. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2015.05.026. Epub 2015 
Jun 7.

Host cell targets for African swine fever virus.

Muñoz-Moreno R(1), Galindo I(2), Cuesta-Geijo MÁ(3), Barrado-Gil L(4), Alonso
C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología 
Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
raquel.munoz@mssm.edu. (2)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de
Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: galindo@inia.es. (3)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto
Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: cuesta.miguel@inia.es. (4)Department of
Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y
Alimentaria (INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
barrado.lucia@inia.es. (5)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de
Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: calonso@inia.es.

Viruses are strict intracellular pathogens that require the cellular environment 
to complete a successful infection. Among them, African swine fever virus (ASFV) 
is an evolutionary ancient DNA virus, endemic in Africa, which is nowadays
causing an emergent disease in Europe with a potential high economic impact in
the pig industry. It is well known that host-cell components are critical
crossroads mapping the virus path for a productive infection, some of them at the
endocytic pathway. Considering that ASFV infectious cycle strongly relies in
several factors from the host cell, the study of virus-host interactions remains 
crucial as they will reveal the obstacles, routes and tracks, hints and the
target waypoint in the virus journey to destination.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26057710  [PubMed - in process]


110. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Aug 1;23(15):5035-49. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.05.011. Epub 
2015 May 14.

Optimization of histone deacetylase inhibitor activity in non-secosteroidal
vitamin D-receptor agonist hybrids.

Kaldre D(1), Wang TT(2), Fischer J(1), White JH(3), Gleason JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke W., Montreal,
Quebec H3A 0B8, Canada. (2)Department of Physiology, McGill University, 3655
Promenade Sir William Osler, Montreal, Québec H3G 1Y6, Canada. (3)Department of
Physiology, McGill University, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler, Montreal, Québec
H3G 1Y6, Canada; Department of Medicine, McGill University, 3655 Promenade Sir
William Osler, Montreal, Québec H3G 1Y6, Canada. Electronic address:
john.white@mcgill.ca. (4)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801
Sherbrooke W., Montreal, Quebec H3A 0B8, Canada. Electronic address:
jim.gleason@mcgill.ca.

The combination of (1a,25)-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) and histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDACi) trichostatin A is highly antiproliferative in numerous cancer
cell lines. We have previously prepared novel non-secosteroidal hybrid molecules 
which simultaneously act as both vitamin D receptor (VDR) agonists and HDACi.
These molecules function as cytostatic and cytotoxic agents in 1,25D-resistant
SCC4 squamous carcinoma cells. Here we have extended the scope of the hybrids by 
making several modifications to the diarylpentane core and to the aliphatic
spacer unit to develop molecules with increased potency towards HDACs while
maintaining VDR agonist activity. Notably, hybrid DK-366 (33a), a direct analog
of first-generation hybrids but lacking a methyl group on one aryl ring possesses
low micromolar potency for HDAC3 and HDAC6 and is a highly effective
antiproliferative agent in SCC4 cells. Chain extended hybrids such as DK-367
(33c) possess even greater HDAC potency and are also highly antiproliferative.
These results show that we can optimize HDACi potency in hybrid molecules without
sacrificing VDR agonism.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26048026  [PubMed - in process]


111. Glia. 2015 Jun 1. doi: 10.1002/glia.22865. [Epub ahead of print]

HDAC6 mediates HIV-1 tat-induced proinflammatory responses by regulating
MAPK-NF-kappaB/AP-1 pathways in astrocytes.

Soo Youn G(1), Ju SM(1), Choi SY(1), Park J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Research Institute for Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Hallym University, Chunchon, Kangwon-Do, Republic of Korea.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 transactivator of transcription (Tat) is a
viral protein that induces extensive neuroinflammation by up-regulating
proinflammatory mediators, including cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion
molecules. Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) has been implicated in the
transcriptional regulation of inflammatory genes. In this study, we investigated 
the possible role of HDAC6 in HIV-1 Tat-induced up-regulation of proinflammatory 
mediators in astrocytes. HIV-1 Tat augmented HDAC6 expression, which was
correlated with a reduction in acetylated a-tubulin in CRT-MG human astroglioma
cells and primary mouse astrocytes. Knockdown and pharmacological inhibition of
HDAC6 significantly inhibited HIV-1 Tat-induced expression of CCL2, CXCL8, and
CXCL10 chemokines; adhesion molecules; and subsequent adhesion of monocytes to
astrocytes. HDAC6 knockdown attenuated HIV-1 Tat-induced activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase species, including ERK, JNK, and p38.
Furthermore, HDAC6 knockdown suppressed HIV-1 Tat-induced activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and
AP-1. Thus, HDAC6 is involved in HIV-1 Tat-induced expression of proinflammatory 
genes by regulating mitogen-activated protein kinase-NF-<U+03BA>B/AP-1 pathways and
serves as a molecular target for HIV-1 Tat-mediated neuroinflammation GLIA 2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26031809  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


112. Nature. 2015 Jul 16;523(7560):352-6. doi: 10.1038/nature14430. Epub 2015 May 25.

Improving survival by exploiting tumour dependence on stabilized mutant p53 for
treatment.

Alexandrova EM(1), Yallowitz AR(1), Li D(1), Xu S(1), Schulz R(2), Proia DA(3),
Lozano G(4), Dobbelstein M(2), Moll UM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, 
USA. (2)Institute of Molecular Oncology, University of Göttingen, 37077
Göttingen, Germany. (3)Synta Pharmaceuticals Corp., Lexington, Massachusetts
02421, USA. (4)Department of Cancer Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (5)1] Department of Pathology, Stony
Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA [2] Institute of Molecular
Oncology, University of Göttingen, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2015 Nov 19;527(7578):398.

Missense mutations in p53 generate aberrant proteins with abrogated tumour
suppressor functions that can also acquire oncogenic gain-of-function activities 
that promote malignant progression, invasion, metastasis and chemoresistance.
Mutant p53 (mutp53) proteins undergo massive constitutive stabilization
specifically in tumours, which is the key requisite for the acquisition of
gain-of-functions activities. Although currently 11 million patients worldwide
live with tumours expressing highly stabilized mutp53, it is unknown whether
mutp53 is a therapeutic target in vivo. Here we use a novel mutp53 mouse model
expressing an inactivatable R248Q hotspot mutation (floxQ) to show that tumours
depend on sustained mutp53 expression. Upon tamoxifen-induced mutp53 ablation,
allotransplanted and autochthonous tumours curb their growth, thus extending
animal survival by 37%, and advanced tumours undergo apoptosis and tumour
regression or stagnation. The HSP90/HDAC6 chaperone machinery, which is
significantly upregulated in cancer compared with normal tissues, is a major
determinant of mutp53 stabilization. We show that long-term HSP90 inhibition
significantly extends the survival of mutp53 Q/- (R248Q allele) and H/H (R172H
allele) mice by 59% and 48%, respectively, but not their corresponding p53(-/-)
littermates. This mutp53-dependent drug effect occurs in H/H mice treated with
17DMAG+SAHA and in H/H and Q/- mice treated with the potent Hsp90 inhibitor
ganetespib. Notably, drug activity correlates with induction of mutp53
degradation, tumour apoptosis and prevention of T-cell lymphomagenesis. These
proof-of-principle data identify mutp53 as an actionable cancer-specific drug
target.

PMCID: PMC4506213
PMID: 26009011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Medchemcomm. 2015 Apr 1;6(4):613-618.

Discovery of a new class of histone deacetylase inhibitors with a novel zinc
binding group.

Li Y(1), Woster PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences, South Carolina College
of Pharmacy, Medical University of South Carolina, 70 President St., Charleston, 
SC 29425.

Small molecules featuring a hydroxamic acid or a benzamide zinc binding group
(ZBG) are the most thoroughly studied histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors.
However, concerns about the pharmacokinetic liabilities of the hydroxamic acid
moiety and potential metabolic toxicity of the aniline portion of benzamide HDAC 
inhibitors have stimulated research efforts aimed at discovering alternative
ZBGs. Here we report the 2-(oxazol-2-yl)phenol moiety as a novel ZBG that can be 
used to produce compounds that are potent HDAC inhibitors. A series of analogues 
with this novel ZBG have been synthesized, and these analogues exhibit selective 
inhibition against HDAC1 as well as the class IIb HDACs (HDAC6 and HDAC10).
Compound 10 possesses an IC50 value of 7.5 µM in the MV-4-11 leukemia cell line, 
and induces a comparable amount of acetylated histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and
p21Waf1/CIP1 as 0.5 µM of SAHA. Modeling of compound 10 in the active site of
HDAC2 demonstrates that the 2-(oxazol-2-yl)phenol moiety has a zinc-binding
pattern similar to benzamide HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4440699
PMID: 26005563  [PubMed]


114. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jul;34(1):359-67. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4005. Epub 2015 May 25.

Participation of autophagy in the cytotoxicity against breast cancer cells by
cisplatin.

Shen M(1), Duan WM(1), Wu MY(1), Wang WJ(1), Liu L(1), Xu MD(1), Zhu J(1), Li
DM(1), Gui Q(1), Lian L(1), Gong FR(2), Chen K(1), Li W(1), Tao M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P.R. China. (2)Department of Hematology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P.R. China.

Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers affecting women worldwide.
Conventional chemotherapy is still one of the major approaches to the treatment
of breast cancer. Autophagy, also termed as type II programmed cell death (PCD), 
exhibits either a protumorigenic or antitumorigenic function. In the present
study, we investigated whether autophagy could be involved in the effect of
chemotherapy against breast cancer. Epirubicin, docetaxel, methotrexate,
cyclophosphamide, fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin were applied in the present
investigation. All of these chemotherapeutics presented cytotoxicity against
breast cancer cells. DsRed-LC3 reporter assay revealed that only docetaxel and
cisplatin induced autophagy. Autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine (3-MA)
strengthened the cytotoxicity of docetaxel, yet impaired the cytotoxicity of
cisplatin, suggesting that docetaxel stimulates protumorigenic autophagy, while
cisplatin-induced autophagy could be antitumorigenic. Real-time PCR revealed that
cisplatin upregulated multiple autophagy-related genes, including AMBRA1, ATG3,
ATG4C, ATG4D, ATG5, ATG7, ATG13, ATG14, ATG16L2, Beclin1, DRAM1, GABARAP,
GABARAPL1, GABARAPL2, HDAC6, IRGM, MAP1LC3B and ULK1, indicating that cisplatin
induced autophagy through a multiple mechanism involved manner.

PMID: 26005215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biomed Sci Instrum. 2015;51:423-30.

Blast Induced Neurotrauma Leads To Changes In The Epigenome.

Bailey ZS(1), Sujith Sajja VS, Hubbard WB, VandeVord PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Tech.

Blast induced neurotrauma (BINT) leads to widespread aberrant gene expression and
molecular changes resulting in cognitive impairment. Enzymes such as HDAC2,
HDAC6, SIRT1, DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b control histone acetylation and DNA
methylation which play a major role in regulation of the transcriptome. Changes
in the expression of these enzymes have been implicated in the pathology of
traumatic brain injury (TBI) and Alzheimer<U+0092>s disease (AD). We hypothesize that
blast exposure will lead to changes in the expression of these enzymes which play
a key role in injury progression and pathology. This study looked to identify
epigenome changes in the acute stages of BINT using an established rodent model. 
Real time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analyses were used to assess
gene expression and protein level changes compared to sham. No significant
changes were seen 24 hours after blast exposure. However, several changes were
observed at 72 hours following blast exposure. There was a significant increase
in expression of HDAC2 and HDAC6 in the hippocampus which correlated with
elevated HDAC2 protein levels. SIRT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b levels were all reduced
in the hippocampus. In the medial prefrontal cortex, DNMT1 and DNMT3b were
significantly reduced. The results indicated that blast exposure causes acute
changes in gene expression and protein levels of epigenetic markers which
correlate with changes observed in AD pathology. These epigenomic changes could
provide novel targets for therapeutic interventions following BINT.

PMID: 25996748  [PubMed]


116. Chem Commun (Camb). 2015 Jun 18;51(48):9868-71. doi: 10.1039/c5cc03295d.

Synthesis of benzothiophene-based hydroxamic acids as potent and selective HDAC6 
inhibitors.

De Vreese R(1), Van Steen N, Verhaeghe T, Desmet T, Bougarne N, De Bosscher K,
Benoy V, Haeck W, Van Den Bosch L, D'hooghe M.

Author information: 
(1)SynBioC Research Group, Department of Sustainable Organic Chemistry and
Technology, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure Links
653, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. matthias.dhooghe@UGent.be.

A small library of 3-[(4-hydroxycarbamoylphenyl)aminomethyl]benzothiophenes was
prepared and assessed as a novel class of HDAC6 inhibitors, leading to the
identification of three representatives as potent and selective HDAC6 inhibitors.
Further tests with regard to inflammatory responses indicated that HDAC6
inhibition can be uncoupled from transcriptional inhibition at the level of
activated NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1, and GR.

PMID: 25994553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Oncotarget. 2015 May 20;6(14):12481-92.

Induction of c-Cbl contributes to anti-cancer effects of HDAC inhibitor in lung
cancer.

Wei TT(1), Lin YC(1,)(2), Lin PH(1), Shih JY(3), Chou CW(1), Huang WJ(4), Yang
YC(5), Hsiao PW(5), Chen CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Far-Eastern Memorial
Hospital, New Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Agricultural Biotechnology Research
Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Here we found loss of c-Cbl, an E3 ligase, expression in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) compared with its adjacent normal tissue in patient specimens.
HDAC inhibition by WJ or knockdown of HDAC 1, HDAC2, HDAC3 or HDAC6 all induced
c-Cbl. Ectopic expression of c-Cbl induced decreased EGFR, inhibited growth in
NSCLC cells. Knockdown of EGFR inhibited NSCLC growth. Mutation of EGFR at Y1045 
decreased WJ-induced growth inhibition as well as in vivo anti-cancer effect and 
EGFR degradation mediated by WJ. Time-lapse confocal analysis showed
co-localization of c-Cbl and EGFR after WJ treatment. Furthermore, WJ inhibited
lung tumor growth through c-Cbl induction in orthotopic and tail vein injected
models. C-Cbl up-regulation induced by HDACi is a potential strategy for NSCLC
treatment.

PMCID: PMC4494952
PMID: 25980579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Blood Cancer J. 2015 May 15;5:e312. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2015.38.

Rational combination treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors and
immunomodulatory drugs in multiple myeloma.

Hideshima T(1), Cottini F(1), Ohguchi H(1), Jakubikova J(1), Gorgun G(1), Mimura 
N(1), Tai YT(1), Munshi NC(1), Richardson PG(1), Anderson KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) thalidomide, lenalidomide (Len) and pomalidomide
trigger anti-tumor activities in multiple myeloma (MM) by targetting cereblon and
thereby impacting IZF1/3, c-Myc and IRF4. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) 
also downregulate c-Myc. We therefore determined whether IMiDs with HDACi trigger
significant MM cell growth inhibition by inhibiting or downregulating c-Myc.
Combination treatment of Len with non-selective HDACi suberoylanilide hydroxamic 
acid or class-I HDAC-selective inhibitor MS275 induces synergic cytotoxicity,
associated with downregulation of c-Myc. Unexpectedly, we observed that decreased
levels of cereblon (CRBN), a primary target protein of IMiDs, was triggered by
these agents. Indeed, sequential treatment of MM cells with MS275 followed by Len
shows less efficacy than simultaneous treatment with this combination.
Importantly ACY1215, an HDAC6 inhibitor with minimal effects on class-I HDACs,
together with Len induces synergistic MM cytotoxicity without alteration of CRBN 
expression. Our results showed that only modest class-I HDAC inhibition is able
to induce synergistic MM cytotoxicity in combination with Len. These studies may 
provide the framework for utilizing HDACi in combination with Len to both avoid
CRBN downregulation and enhance anti-MM activities.

PMCID: PMC4476017
PMID: 25978432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):2661-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3779. Epub 2015 May 13.

Inhibiting histone deacetylase 6 partly protects cultured rat cortical neurons
from oxygen-glucose deprivation-induced necroptosis.

Yuan L(1), Wang Z(2), Liu L(3), Jian X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Medical College of Hunan Normal University, Changsha,
Hunan 410013, P.R. China. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Xiangya
School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Nursing, Medical College of Hunan Normal University, Changsha,
Hunan 410013, P.R. China.

Necroptosis has an important role in ischemia-reperfusion damage. The expression 
of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is upregulated in neurons following
ischemia-reperfusion, however, whether HDAC6 is closely involved in the
necroptosis, which occurs during ischemia-reperfusion damage remains to be
elucidated. In the present study, the roles of HDAC6 in the necroptosis of
cultured rat cortical neurons were investigated in a oxygen-glucose deprivation
(OGD) model. The results demonstrated that OGD induced marked necroptosis of
cultured rat cortical neurons and upregulated the expression of HDAC6 in the
cultured neurons, compared with the control (P<0.05). The necroptosis inhibitor, 
necrostatin-1 (Nec-1), decreased The expression of HDAC6 in the OGD-treated
cultured neurons, accompanied by the inhibition of necroptosis. Further
investigation revealed that, compared with OGD treatment alone, inhibiting the
activity of HDAC6 with tubacin, a specific HDAC6 inhibitor, reduced the
OGD-induced necroptosis of the cultured rat cortical neurons (P<0.05), which was 
similar to the change following treatment with Nec-1 (P>0.05). In addition,
inhibiting the activity of HDAC6 reversed the OGD-induced increase of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and the OGD-induced decrease of acetylated tubulin in the
cultured rat cortical neurons (P<0.05), compared with the neurons treated with
OGD alone). The levels of acetylated tubulin in the cultured neurons following
treatment with OGD and tubacin were significantly higher than those in the
control (P<0.05). These results suggested that HDAC6 was involved in the
necroptosis of neurons during ischemia-reperfusion by modulating the levels of
ROS and acetylated tubulin.

PMCID: PMC4464447
PMID: 25976407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Neurosci. 2015 May 13;35(19):7538-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0260-15.2015.

ApoE4 and Aß Oligomers Reduce BDNF Expression via HDAC Nuclear Translocation.

Sen A(1), Nelson TJ(2), Alkon DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Blanchette Rockefeller Neurosciences Institute, Morgantown, West Virginia
26505 asen@brni.org. (2)Blanchette Rockefeller Neurosciences Institute,
Morgantown, West Virginia 26505.

Apolipoprotein E4 (ApoE4) is a major genetic risk factor for several
neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). Epigenetic
dysregulation, including aberrations in histone acetylation, is also associated
with AD. We show here for the first time that ApoE4 increases nuclear
translocation of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in human neurons, thereby reducing 
BDNF expression, whereas ApoE3 increases histone 3 acetylation and upregulates
BDNF expression. Amyloid-ß (Aß) oligomers, which have been implicated in AD,
caused effects similar to ApoE4. Blocking low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein 1 (LRP-1) receptor with receptor-associated protein
(RAP) or LRP-1 siRNA abolished the ApoE effects. ApoE3 also induced expression of
protein kinase C e (PKCe) and PKCe retained HDACs in the cytosol. PKCe activation
and ApoE3 supplementation prevented ApoE4-mediated BDNF downregulation. PKCe
activation also reversed Aß oligomer- and ApoE4-induced nuclear import of HDACs, 
preventing the loss in BDNF. ApoE4 induced HDAC6-BDNF promoter IV binding, which 
reduced BDNF exon IV expression. Nuclear HDAC4 and HDAC6 were more abundant in
the hippocampus of ApoE4 transgenic mice than in ApoE3 transgenic mice or
wild-type controls. Nuclear translocation of HDA6 was also elevated in the
hippocampus of AD patients compared with age-matched controls. These results
provide new insight into the cause of synaptic loss that is the most important
pathologic correlate of cognitive deficits in AD.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357538-14$15.00/0.

PMID: 25972179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Gene. 2015 Aug 1;567(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.086. Epub 2015 May 9.

Preclinical and clinical studies of the NEDD9 scaffold protein in cancer and
other diseases.

Shagisultanova E(1), Gaponova AV(2), Gabbasov R(3), Nicolas E(2), Golemis EA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA; Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. (2)Program in Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase
Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. (3)Program in Molecular Therapeutics,
Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA; Department of Genetics,
Kazan Federal University (Volga Region), Kazan, Tatarstan, Russia. (4)Program in 
Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.
Electronic address: Erica.Golemis@fccc.edu.

Cancer progression requires a significant reprogramming of cellular signaling to 
support the essential tumor-specific processes that include hyperproliferation,
invasion (for solid tumors) and survival of metastatic colonies. NEDD9 (also
known as CasL and HEF1) encodes a multi-domain scaffolding protein that assembles
signaling complexes regulating multiple cellular processes relevant to cancer.
These include responsiveness to signals emanating from the T and B cell
receptors, integrins, chemokine receptors, and receptor tyrosine kinases, as well
as cytoplasmic oncogenes such as BCR-ABL and FAK- and SRC-family kinases.
Downstream, NEDD9 regulation of partners including CRKL, WAVE, PI3K/AKT, ERK,
E-cadherin, Aurora-A (AURKA), HDAC6, and others allow NEDD9 to influence
functions as pleiotropic as migration, invasion, survival, ciliary resorption,
and mitosis. In this review, we summarize a growing body of preclinical and
clinical data that indicate that while NEDD9 is itself non-oncogenic, changes in 
expression of NEDD9 (most commonly elevation of expression) are common features
of tumors, and directly impact tumor aggressiveness, metastasis, and response to 
at least some targeted agents inhibiting NEDD9-interacting proteins. These data
strongly support the relevance of further development of NEDD9 as a biomarker for
therapeutic resistance. Finally, we briefly discuss emerging evidence supporting 
involvement of NEDD9 in additional pathological conditions, including stroke and 
polycystic kidney disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4458429 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25967390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Oral Oncol. 2015 Jul;51(7):674-82. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2015.04.010. Epub 
2015 May 8.

miR-433 inhibits oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell growth and metastasis
by targeting HDAC6.

Wang XC(1), Ma Y(1), Meng PS(1), Han JL(1), Yu HY(1), Bi LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, The Fourth College, Harbin Medical University,
China. (2)Department of Stomatology, The Fourth College, Harbin Medical
University, China. Electronic address: biliangjia1001@126.com.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine expression levels of miR-433
in oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCCs) and adjacent normal tissues, and explore
its biological functions in OSCCs.
METHODS: miR-433 level in oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCCs) and adjacent
normal tissues was tested by real-time qPCR. The effect of miR-433 on cell growth
was detected by MTT and colony formation assays. The tumorigenicity of miR-433
transfected OSCCs was evaluated in nude mice model. Transwell and wound healing
assays were performed to detect the effect of miR-433 on OSCCs cell invasion and 
migration. Luciferase reporter gene assays were performed to identify the
interaction between miR-433 and 3'UTR of HDAC6 mRNA. The protein level of HDAC6, 
BCL2, CCNE1, MMP1 and MMP9 was determined by Western blotting.
Immunohistochemistry analysis was performed to detect the expression of HDAC6 in 
oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCCs) and adjacent normal tissues.
RESULTS: We found that miR-433 was frequently down-regulated in OSCCs compared
with adjacent normal tissues. Restoring miR-433 expression in OSCC cells
dramatically suppressed cells growth, invasion and migration. Importantly, our
data showed that miR-433 downregulated the expression of HDAC6 through directly
targeting its 3'UTR.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that miR-433 exerts its tumor suppressor function by
targeting HDAC6, leading to the inhibition of OSCC cell growth, invasion and
migration, which suggest that miR-433 may be potential target for diagnostic and 
therapeutic applications in OSCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25962939  [PubMed - in process]


123. PLoS One. 2015 May 11;10(5):e0126592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126592.
eCollection 2015.

Quantification of histone deacetylase isoforms in human frontal cortex, human
retina, and mouse brain.

Anderson KW(1), Chen J(2), Wang M(2), Mast N(3), Pikuleva IA(3), Turko IV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, Rockville, Maryland,
United States of America; Biomolecular Measurement Division, National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, United States of America;
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland, United States of America. (2)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology
Research, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America; Biomolecular Measurement
Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland,
United States of America. (3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition has promise as a therapy for Alzheimer's
disease (AD) and other neurodegenerative diseases. Currently, therapeutic HDAC
inhibitors target many HDAC isoforms, a particularly detrimental approach when
HDAC isoforms are known to have different and specialized functions. We have
developed a multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry assay using
stable isotope-labeled QconCATs as internal standards to quantify HDAC isoforms. 
We further determined a quantitative pattern of specific HDACs expressed in
various human and mouse neural tissues. In human AD frontal cortex, HDAC1,2
decreased 32%, HDAC5 increased 47%, and HDAC6 increased 31% in comparison to
age-matched controls. Human neural retina concentrations of HDAC1, 2, HDAC5,
HDAC6, and HDAC7 decreased in age-related macular degeneration (AMD)-affected
donors and exhibited a greater decrease in AD-affected donors in comparison to
age-matched control neural retinas. Additionally, HDAC concentrations were
measured in whole hemisphere of brain of 5XFAD mice, a model of ß-amyloid
deposition, to assess similarity to AD in human frontal cortex. HDAC profiles of 
human frontal cortex and mouse hemisphere had noticeable differences and
relatively high concentrations of HDAC3 and HDAC4 in mice, which were
undetectable in humans. Our method for quantification of HDAC isoforms is a
practical and efficient technique to quantify isoforms in various tissues and
diseases. Changes in HDAC concentrations reported herein contribute to the
understanding of the pathology of neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC4427357
PMID: 25962138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Oncol. 2015 Aug;9(7):1447-57. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2015.04.002. Epub 2015
Apr 24.

Targeting histone deacetylase 6 mediates a dual anti-melanoma effect: Enhanced
antitumor immunity and impaired cell proliferation.

Woan KV(1), Lienlaf M(1), Perez-Villaroel P(1), Lee C(2), Cheng F(1), Knox T(1), 
Woods DM(1), Barrios K(1), Powers J(1), Sahakian E(1), Wang HW(1), Canales J(1), 
Marante D(1), Smalley KS(1), Bergman J(3), Seto E(1), Kozikowski A(3),
Pinilla-Ibarz J(1), Sarnaik A(1), Celis E(4), Weber J(1), Sotomayor EM(1),
Villagra A(5).

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, USA. (2)All Children's Hospital, Johns Hopkins
Medicine, USA. (3)University of Illinois at Chicago, USA. (4)Georgia Regents
University, USA. (5)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, USA. Electronic address:
alejandro.villagra@moffitt.org.

The median survival for metastatic melanoma is in the realm of 8-16 months and
there are few therapies that offer significant improvement in overall survival.
One of the recent advances in cancer treatment focuses on epigenetic modifiers to
alter the survivability and immunogenicity of cancer cells. Our group and others 
have previously demonstrated that pan-HDAC inhibitors induce apoptosis, cell
cycle arrest and changes in the immunogenicity of melanoma cells. Here we
interrogated specific HDACs which may be responsible for this effect. We found
that both genetic abrogation and pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC6 decreases
in vitro proliferation and induces G1 arrest of melanoma cell lines without
inducing apoptosis. Moreover, targeting this molecule led to an important
upregulation in the expression of tumor associated antigens and MHC class I,
suggesting a potential improvement in the immunogenicity of these cells. Of note,
this anti-melanoma activity was operative regardless of mutational status of the 
cells. These effects translated into a pronounced delay of in vivo melanoma tumor
growth which was, at least in part, dependent on intact immunity as evidenced by 
the restoration of tumor growth after CD4+ and CD8+ depletion. Given our
findings, we provide the initial rationale for the further development of
selective HDAC6 inhibitors as potential therapeutic anti-melanoma agents.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4523430 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25957812  [PubMed - in process]


125. Molecules. 2015 May 4;20(5):8000-19. doi: 10.3390/molecules20058000.

NBM-T-BBX-OS01, Semisynthesized from Osthole, Induced G1 Growth Arrest through
HDAC6 Inhibition in Lung Cancer Cells.

Pai JT(1), Hsu CY(2), Hua KT(3), Yu SY(4), Huang CY(5), Chen CN(6), Liao CH(7),
Weng MS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Tao-Yuan General Hospital, Ministry of
Health and Welfare, Taoyuan City 33004, Taiwan. jihtungpai@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Nutritional Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City
24205, Taiwan. sandy0805w@hotmail.com. (3)Graduate Institute of Toxicology,
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10051, Taiwan.
d94447003@gmail.com. (4)Department of Nutritional Science, Fu Jen Catholic
University, New Taipei City 24205, Taiwan. j06103@hotmail.com. (5)NatureWise
Biotech and Medicals Corporation, Taipei 11559, Taiwan. naturewisecyh@gmail.com. 
(6)NatureWise Biotech and Medicals Corporation, Taipei 11559, Taiwan.
alex_chen@gnt.com.tw. (7)Division of Drug and New Technology Product, Food and
Drug Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare, Executive Yuan, Taipei
11516, Taiwan. cedar@fda.gov.tw. (8)Department of Nutritional Science, Fu Jen
Catholic University, New Taipei City 24205, Taiwan. 078670@mail.fju.edu.tw.

Disrupting lung tumor growth via histone deacetylases (HDACs) inhibition is a
strategy for cancer therapy or prevention. Targeting HDAC6 may disturb the
maturation of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) mediated cell cycle regulation. In
this study, we demonstrated the effects of semisynthesized NBM-T-BBX-OS01 (TBBX) 
from osthole on HDAC6-mediated growth arrest in lung cancer cells. The results
exhibited that the anti-proliferative activity of TBBX in numerous lung cancer
cells was more potent than suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a clinically
approved pan-HDAC inhibitor, and the growth inhibitory effect has been mediated
through G1 growth arrest. Furthermore, the protein levels of cyclin D1, CDK2 and 
CDK4 were reduced while cyclin E and CDK inhibitor, p21Waf1/Cip1, were
up-regulated in TBBX-treated H1299 cells. The results also displayed that TBBX
inhibited HDAC6 activity via down-regulation HDAC6 protein expression. TBBX
induced Hsp90 hyper-acetylation and led to the disruption of cyclin D1/Hsp90 and 
CDK4/Hsp90 association following the degradation of cyclin D1 and CDK4 proteins
through proteasome. Ectopic expression of HDAC6 rescued TBBX-induced G1 arrest in
H1299 cells. Conclusively, the data suggested that TBBX induced G1 growth arrest 
may mediate HDAC6-caused Hsp90 hyper-acetylation and consequently increased the
degradation of cyclin D1 and CDK4.

PMID: 25946558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Jun 1;25(11):2382-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.04.016. 
Epub 2015 Apr 16.

Pyridine hydroxamic acids are specific anti-HCV agents affecting HDAC6.

Kozlov MV(1), Kleymenova AA(2), Romanova LI(3), Konduktorov KA(2), Kamarova
KA(2), Smirnova OA(2), Prassolov VS(2), Kochetkov SN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Vavilov Str. 32, 119991 Moscow, Russia. Electronic address: kozlovmv@hotmail.com.
(2)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Vavilov Str. 32, 119991 Moscow, Russia. (3)Chumakov Institute of Poliomyelitis,
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 142782 Moscow Region, Russia.

Recently we reported benzohydroxamic acids (BHAs) as potent and selective
inhibitors of hepatitis C virus (HCV) replicon propagation. In this work 12
pyridine hydroxamic acids (PHAs) were synthesized and tested in full-genome
replicon assay. It was found that PHAs possessed very similar anti-HCV properties
compared to BHAs. Both classes of hydroxamic acids caused hyperacetylation of
a-tubulin pointing to inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) as part of
their antiviral activity. The tested compounds did not inhibit the growth of
poliovirus, displaying high selectivity against HCV.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25937017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Jan;50(1):7-14.

[Histone deacetylase 6: structure, functions and development of selective
inhibitors].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu RS, Fang H.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is an unique subtype of histone deacetylases with
two tandem deacetylase domains and substrate specificity for non-histone
proteins. It is involved in many important physiological and pathological
processes and has become a promising therapeutic target in recent decades.
Different kinds of potent HDAC6-selective inhibitors have been reported around
the world. This paper reviews the progress in the study of structure and
functions of HDAC6 as well as the development of HDAC6-selective inhibitors.

PMID: 25924468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Vascul Pharmacol. 2015 Sep;72:130-40. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2015.04.006. Epub 2015
Apr 25.

Tubastatin A suppresses renal fibrosis via regulation of epigenetic histone
modification and Smad3-dependent fibrotic genes.

Choi SY(1), Ryu Y(1), Kee HJ(2), Cho SN(1), Kim GR(1), Cho JY(1), Kim HS(3), Kim 
IK(4), Jeong MH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Heart Research Center of Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju
501-757, Republic of Korea. (2)Heart Research Center of Chonnam National
University Hospital, Gwangju 501-757, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
sshjkee@hanmail.net. (3)Department of Anatomy, Chonnam National University
Medical School, Gwangju 501-757, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Kyungpook National University
School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (5)Heart Research Center of Chonnam
National University Hospital, Gwangju 501-757, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: myungho@chollian.net.

Inflammation and fibrosis are implicated in the pathogenesis of hypertensive
kidney damage. We previously demonstrated that a nonspecific histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) inhibitor attenuates cardiac fibrosis in deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt 
hypertensive rats, which induces HDAC6 protein and enzymatic activity. However,
the HDAC inhibitor's effect and mechanism have not yet been demonstrated. We
sought to determine whether an HDAC6-selective inhibitor could treat hypertension
and kidney damage in angiotensin II-infused mice. Hypertension was induced by
infusion of ANG in mice. Tubastatin A, an HDAC6 selective inhibitor, did not
regulate blood pressure. Hypertensive stimuli enhanced the expression of HDAC6 in
vivo and in vitro. We showed that the inhibition of HDAC6 prevents fibrosis and
inflammation as determined by quantitative real-time PCR, western blot, and
immunohistochemistry. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) against HDAC6 or Smad3
attenuated hypertensive stimuli-induced fibrosis and inflammation, whereas Smad2 
siRNA failed to inhibit fibrosis. Interestingly, the combination of the HDAC6
inhibitor and Smad3 knockdown synergistically blocked transforming growth factor 
ß (TGF-ß) or ANG-induced fibrosis. We also demonstrated for the first time, to
our knowledge, that acetylation of collagen type I can be regulated by HDAC6/p300
acetyltransferase. The chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that the
HDAC6 inhibitor suppressed TGF-ß-induced acetylated histone H4 or phospho-Smad2/3
to Smad3 binding elements in the fibrosis-associated gene promoters including
collagen type I. These results suggest that HDAC6 may be a valuable therapeutic
target for the treatment of hypertension-induced kidney fibrosis and
inflammation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25921924  [PubMed - in process]


129. Curr Drug Targets. 2015 Apr 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Therapeutic Targets In Polycystic Liver Disease.

Masyuk TV, Masyuk AI, La Russo NF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Mayo Clinic College of Medicine
200 First Street, SW Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. larusso.nicholas@mayo.edu.

Polycystic liver diseases (PLD) are a group of genetic disorders initiated by
mutations in several PLDrelated genes and characterized by the presence of
multiple cholangiocyte-derived hepatic cysts that progressively replace liver
tissue. PLD co-exists with Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD)
and Autosomal Recessive PKD as well as occurs alone (i.e., Autosomal Dominant
Polycystic Liver Disease [ADPLD]). PLD associated with ADPKD and ARPKD belong to 
a group of disorders known as cholangiociliopathies since many disease-causative 
and disease-related proteins are expressed in primary cilia of cholangiocytes.
Aberrant expression of these proteins in primary cilia affects their structures
and functions promoting cystogenesis. Current medical therapies for PLD include
symptomatic management and surgical interventions. To date, the only available
drug treatment for PLD patients that halt disease progression and improve quality
of life are somatostatin analogs. However, the modest clinical benefits, need for
long-term maintenance therapy, and the high cost of treatment justify the
necessity for more effective treatment options. Substantial evidence suggests
that experimental manipulations with components of the signaling pathways that
influence cyst development (e.g., cAMP, intracellular calcium, receptor tyrosine 
kinase, transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 4 (TRPV4) 
channel, mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), histone deacetylase (HDAC6),
Cdc25A phosphatase, miRNAs and metalloproteinases) attenuate growth of hepatic
cysts. Many of these targets have been evaluated in pre-clinical trials
suggesting their value as potential new therapies. This review outlines the
current clinical and preclinical treatment strategies for PLD.

PMID: 25915482  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


130. J Med Chem. 2015 May 28;58(10):4325-38. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00317. Epub
2015 May 7.

Design, synthesis, and antitumor evaluation of novel histone deacetylase
inhibitors equipped with a phenylsulfonylfuroxan module as a nitric oxide donor.

Duan W(1), Li J(1), Inks ES(2), Chou CJ(2), Jia Y(3), Chu X(4), Li X(1), Xu W(1),
Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shandong University,
Ji'nan, Shandong 250012, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Drug
Discovery and Biomedical Sciences, South Carolina College of Pharmacy, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, United States.
(3)§Shandong Academy of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ji'nan, Shandong 250101,
People's Republic of China. (4)<U+2225>Weifang Bochuang International Biological
Medicinal Institute, Weifang, Shandong 261061, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    J Med Chem. 2015 Aug 13;58(15):6319.

On the basis of the strategy of creating multifunctional drugs, a novel series of
phenylsulfonylfuroxan-based hydroxamates with histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitory and nitric oxide (NO) donating activities were designed, synthesized, 
and evaluated. The most potent NO donor-HDAC inhibitor (HDACI) hybrid, 5c,
exhibited a much greater in vitro antiproliferative activity against the human
erythroleukemia (HEL) cell line than that of the approved drug SAHA (Vorinostat),
and its antiproliferative activity was diminished by the NO scavenger hemoglobin 
in a dose-dependent manner. Further mechanism studies revealed that 5c strongly
induced cellular apoptosis and G1 phase arrest in HEL cells. Animal experiment
identified 5c as an orally active agent with potent antitumor activity in a HEL
cell xenograft model. Interestingly, although compound 5c was remarkably
HDAC6-selective at the molecular level, it exhibited pan-HDAC inhibition in a
western blot assay, which is likely due to class I HDACs inhibition caused by NO 
release at the cellular level.

PMCID: PMC4548859 [Available on 2016-05-28]
PMID: 25906087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 29;290(22):14045-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.640482. Epub
2015 Apr 14.

Novel Interaction of Class IIb Histone Deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) with Class IIa HDAC9
Controls Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Neuronal Cell Survival and
Movement.

Salian-Mehta S(1), Xu M(1), McKinsey TA(2), Tobet S(3), Wierman ME(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes and. (2)Division 
of Cardiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado 80523. (4)From the Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes
and Research Service Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, Colorado 80220, and
margaret.wierman@ucdenver.edu.

The impact of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the control of gonadotropin
releasing hormone (GnRH) neuronal development is unknown. We identified an
increase in many HDACs in GT1-7 (differentiated) compared with NLT
(undifferentiated) GnRH neuronal cell lines. Increased HDAC9 mRNA and protein and
specific deacetylase activity in GT1-7 cells suggested a functional role.
Introduction of HDAC9 in NLT cells protected from serum withdrawal induced
apoptosis and impaired basal neuronal cell movement. Conversely, silencing of
endogenous HDAC9 in GT1-7 cells increased apoptosis and cell movement. Comparison
of WT and mutant HDAC9 constructs demonstrated that the HDAC9 pro-survival
effects required combined cytoplasmic and nuclear localization, whereas the
effects on cell movement required a cytoplasmic site of action.
Co-immunoprecipitation demonstrated a novel interaction of HDAC9 selectively with
the Class IIb HDAC6. HDAC6 was also up-regulated at the mRNA and protein levels, 
and HDAC6 catalytic activity was significantly increased in GT1-7 compared with
NLT cells. HDAC9 interacted with HDAC6 through its second catalytic domain.
Silencing of HDAC6, HDAC9, or both, in GT1-7 cells augmented apoptosis compared
with controls. HDAC6 and -9 had additive effects to promote cell survival via
modulating the BAX/BCL2 pathway. Silencing of HDAC6 resulted in an activation of 
movement of GT1-7 cells with induction in acetylation of a-tubulin. Inhibition of
HDAC6 and HDAC9 together resulted in an additive effect to increase cell movement
but did not alter the acetylation of atubulin. Together, these studies identify a
novel interaction of Class IIa HDAC9 with Class IIb HDAC6 to modulate cell
movement and survival in GnRH neurons.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4447976 [Available on 2016-05-29]
PMID: 25873389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 10;10(4):e0123191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123191.
eCollection 2015.

aPKC phosphorylation of HDAC6 results in increased deacetylation activity.

Du Y(1), Seibenhener ML(1), Yan J(2), Jiang J(3), Wooten MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Cellular and Molecular Biosciences Program,
Auburn University, AL, 36849, United States of America. (2)Graduate Center for
Toxicology, Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky College of Medicine,
Lexington, KY, 40536, United States of America. (3)James L. Winkle College of
Pharmacy, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 45267, United States of
America.

The Class II histone deacetylase, HDAC6, has been shown to be involved in cell
motility, aggresome formation and mitochondria transport. HDAC6 deacetylase
activity regulates a-tubulin acetylation levels and thus plays a critical role in
these processes. In turn, HDAC6 activity can be regulated by interaction with
various proteins including multiple kinases. Kinase mediated phosphorylation of
HDAC6 can lead to either increased or reduced activity. Our previous research has
shown that sequestosome1/p62 (SQSTM1/p62) interacts with HDAC6 and regulates its 
activity. As SQSTM1/p62 is a scaffolding protein known to interact directly with 
the zeta isoform of Protein Kinase C (PKC<U+03B6>), we sought to examine if HDAC6 could 
be a substrate for PKC<U+03B6> phosphorylation and if so, how its activity might be
regulated. Our data demonstrate that HDAC6 is not only present in a protein
complex with PKC<U+03B6> but can also be phosphorylated by PKC<U+03B6>. We also show that
specific phosphorylation of HDAC6 by PKC<U+03B6> increases HDAC6 deacetylase activity
resulting in reduced acetylated tubulin levels. Our findings provide novel
insight into the molecular mechanism by which HDAC6, PKC<U+03B6> and SQSTM1/p62 function
together in protein aggregate clearance. These results also highlight a new
research direction which may prove fruitful for understanding the underlying
cause of several neurodegenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC4393284
PMID: 25860570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Viruses. 2015 Apr 8;7(4):1823-31. doi: 10.3390/v7041823.

Analysis of HDAC6 and BAG3-aggresome pathways in African swine fever viral
factory formation.

Muñoz-Moreno R(1,)(2,)(3), Barrado-Gil L(4), Galindo I(5), Alonso C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología 
Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain. raquel.munoz@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
10029 NY, USA. raquel.munoz@mssm.edu. (3)Global Health and Emerging Pathogens
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 10029 NY, USA.
raquel.munoz@mssm.edu. (4)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de
Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain.
barrado.lucia@inia.es. (5)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de
Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain.
galindo@inia.es. (6)Department of Biotechnology, Instituto Nacional de
Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain.
calonso@inia.es.

African swine fever virus (ASFV) is a double-stranded DNA virus causing a
hemorrhagic fever disease with high mortality rates and severe economic losses in
pigs worldwide. ASFV replicates in perinuclear sites called viral factories (VFs)
that are morphologically similar to cellular aggresomes. This fact raises the
possibility that both VFs and aggresomes may be the same structure. However,
little is known about the process involved in the formation of these viral
replication platforms. In order to expand our knowledge on the assembly of ASFV
replication sites, we have analyzed the involvement of both canonical aggresome
pathways in the formation of ASFV VFs: HDAC6 and BAG3. HDAC6 interacts with a
component of the dynein motor complex (dynactin/p150Glued) and ubiquitinated
proteins, transporting them to the microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) and
leading to aggresome formation, while BAG3 is mediating the recruitment of
non-ubiquitinated proteins through a similar mechanism. Tubacin-mediated HDAC6
inhibition and silencing of BAG3 pathways, individually or simultaneously, did
not prevent ASFV VF formation. These findings show that HDAC6 and Bag3 are not
required for VFs formation suggesting that aggresomes and VFs are not the same
structures. However, alternative unexplored pathways may be involved in the
formation of aggresomes.

PMCID: PMC4411678
PMID: 25856634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Surg Res. 2015 Jul;197(1):39-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2015.02.070. Epub 2015 Mar 
6.

Selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibition prolongs survival in a lethal two-hit 
model.

Cheng X(1), Liu Z(2), Liu B(1), Zhao T(1), Li Y(1), Alam HB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Surgery, University of
Michigan Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Electronic address: alamh@med.umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: Hemorrhagic shock (HS) followed by a subsequent insult ("second hit")
often initiates an exaggerated systemic inflammatory response and multiple organ 
failure. We have previously demonstrated that valproic acid, a pan histone
deacetylase inhibitor, could improve survival in a rodent "two-hit" model. In the
present study, our goal was to determine whether selective inhibition of histone 
deacetylase 6 with Tubastatin A (Tub-A) could prolong survival in a two-hit model
where HS was followed by sepsis from cecal ligation and puncture (CLP).
METHODS: C57Bl/6J mice were subjected to sublethal HS (30% blood loss) and then
randomly divided into two groups (n = 13 per group) such as Tub-A group
(treatment) and vehicle (VEH) group (control). The Tub-A group was given an
intraperitoneal injection of Tub-A (70 mg/kg) dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO). The VEH group was injected with DMSO (1 µl/g body weight). After 24 h,
all mice were subjected CLP followed immediately by another dose of Tub-A or
DMSO. Survival was monitored for 10 d. In a parallel study, peritoneal irrigation
fluid and liver tissue from Tub-A- or DMSO-treated mice were collected 3 h after 
CLP. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was performed to quantify activity of the 
myeloperoxidase and concentrations of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) and
interleukin 6 (IL-6) in the peritoneal irrigation fluid. RNA was isolated from
the liver tissue, and real-time polymerase chain reaction was performed to
measure relative messenger RNA levels of TNF-a and IL-6.
RESULTS: Treatment with Tub-A significantly improved survival compared with that 
of the control (69.2% versus 15.4%). In addition, Tub-A significantly suppressed 
myeloperoxidase activity (169.9 ± 8.4 ng/mL versus 70.4 ± 17.4 ng/mL; P < 0.01)
and reduced levels of cytokines TNF-a and IL-6 in the peritoneal fluid (TNF-a:
105.7 ± 4.7 versus 7.4 ± 2.4 pg/mL; IL-6: 907.4 ± 2.3 versus 483.6 ± 1.6 pg/mL; P
< 0.01) compared with those in the VEH control. Gene expression measured by
real-time polymerase chain reaction confirmed that Tub-A inhibits transcription
of TNF-a and IL-6.
CONCLUSIONS: Tub-A treatment significantly improves survival, attenuates
inflammation, and downregulates TNF-a and IL-6 gene expression in a rodent
two-hit model.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4606460 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25837686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Hepatol. 2015 Aug;63(2):408-19. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.03.019. Epub 2015 Mar 
25.

MicroRNA-221 governs tumor suppressor HDAC6 to potentiate malignant progression
of liver cancer.

Bae HJ(1), Jung KH(1), Eun JW(1), Shen Q(1), Kim HS(1), Park SJ(1), Shin WC(1),
Yang HD(1), Park WS(1), Lee JY(1), Nam SW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; Functional RNomics Research Center, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of 
Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, 
Republic of Korea; Functional RNomics Research Center, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; Cancer Evolution Research Center, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: swnam@catholic.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Most common reason behind changes in histone deacetylase
(HDAC) function is its overexpression in cancer. However, among HDACs in liver
cancer, HDAC6 is uniquely endowed with a tumor suppressor, but the mechanism
underlying HDAC6 inactivation has yet to be uncovered.
METHODS: Microarray profiling and target prediction programs were used to
identify miRNAs targeting HDAC6. A series of inhibitors, activators and siRNAs
was introduced to validate regulatory mechanisms for microRNA-221-3p (miR-221)
governing HDAC6 in hepatocarcinogenesis.
RESULTS: Comprehensive miRNA profiling analysis identified seven putative
endogenous miRNAs that are significantly upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC). While miR-221 was identified as a suppressor of HDAC6 by ectopic
expression of miRNA mimics in Dicer knockdown cells, targeted-disruption of
miR-221 repressed cancer cell growth through derepressing HDAC6 expression.
Suppression of HDAC6 via miR-221 was induced by JNK/c-Jun signaling in liver
cancer cells but not in normal hepatic cells. Additionally, cytokine-induced
NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 independently regulated miR-221, thereby suppressing HDAC6 expression in
HCC cells. HCC tissues derived from chemical-induced rat and H-ras12V transgenic 
mice liver cancer models validated that JNK/c-Jun activation and NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 nuclear
translocation are essential for the transcription of miR-221 leading to
repression of HDAC6 in HCC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the functional loss or suppression of the 
tumor suppressor HDAC6 is caused by induction of miR-221 through coordinated
JNK/c-Jun- and NF-<U+03BA>B-signaling pathways during liver tumorigenesis, providing a
novel target for the molecular treatment of liver malignancies.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25817558  [PubMed - in process]


136. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):e0121574. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121574.
eCollection 2015.

Sulforaphane epigenetically regulates innate immune responses of porcine
monocyte-derived dendritic cells induced with lipopolysaccharide.

Qu X(1), Pröll M(1), Neuhoff C(1), Zhang R(1), Cinar MU(2), Hossain MM(3),
Tesfaye D(1), Große-Brinkhaus C(1), Salilew-Wondim D(1), Tholen E(1), Looft C(1),
Hölker M(1), Schellander K(1), Uddin MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher Allee 15, 53115
Bonn, Germany. (2)Institute of Animal Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher
Allee 15, 53115 Bonn, Germany; Department of Animal Science, Faculty of
Agriculture, Erciyes University, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey. (3)Institute of Animal
Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher Allee 15, 53115 Bonn, Germany; Department
of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Faculty of Animal Husbandry, Bangladesh
Agricultural University, Mymensingh-2202, Bangladesh.

Histone acetylation, regulated by histone deacetylases (HDACs) is a key
epigenetic mechanism controlling gene expressions. Although dendritic cells (DCs)
are playing pivotal roles in host immune responses, the effect of epigenetic
modulation of DCs immune responses remains unknown. Sulforaphane (SFN) as a HDAC 
inhibitor has anti-inflammatory properties, which is used to investigate the
epigenetic regulation of LPS-induced immune gene and HDAC family gene expressions
in porcine monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs). SFN was found to inhibit the
lipopolysaccharide LPS induced HDAC6, HDAC10 and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT3a)
gene expression, whereas up-regulated the expression of DNMT1 gene. Additionally,
SFN was observed to inhibit the global HDAC activity, and suppressed moDCs
differentiation from immature to mature DCs through down-regulating the CD40,
CD80 and CD86 expression and led further to enhanced phagocytosis of moDCs. The
SFN pre-treated of moDCs directly altered the LPS-induced TLR4 and MD2 gene
expression and dynamically regulated the TLR4-induced activity of transcription
factor NF-<U+03BA>B and TBP. SFN showed a protective role in LPS induced cell apoptosis 
through suppressing the IRF6 and TGF-ß1 production. SFN impaired the
pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-a and IL-1ß secretion into the cell culture
supernatants that were induced in moDCs by LPS stimulation, whereas SFN increased
the cellular-resident TNF-a accumulation. This study demonstrates that through
the epigenetic mechanism the HDAC inhibitor SFN could modulate the LPS induced
innate immune responses of porcine moDCs.

PMCID: PMC4368608
PMID: 25793534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 20;5:9087. doi: 10.1038/srep09087.

Gene expression mapping of histone deacetylases and co-factors, and correlation
with survival time and 1H-HRMAS metabolomic profile in human gliomas.

Dali-Youcef N(1), Froelich S(2), Moussallieh FM(3), Chibbaro S(2), Noël G(4),
Namer IJ(3), Heikkinen S(5), Auwerx J(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpitaux Universitaires
de Strasbourg, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, 1 place de l'hôpital, 67091 Strasbourg
Cedex, France [2] Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire 
(IGBMC)/CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U 964/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries,
67404 Illkirch, France. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Hôpitaux Universitaires de
Strasbourg, avenue Molière, 67085 Strasbourg Cedex, France. (3)Department of
Biophysics and Nuclear Medicine, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, CHU de
Hautepierre, avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg Cedex, France. (4)Centre Paul
Strauss, 3 rue de la porte de l'Hôpital 67065 Strasbourg, Cedex, France.
(5)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC)/CNRS
UMR 7104/INSERM U 964/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries, 67404
Illkirch, France. (6)1] Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire (IGBMC)/CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U 964/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue
Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch, France [2] Institut Clinique de la Souris, 1 rue
Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch, France.

Primary brain tumors are presently classified based on imaging and
histopathological techniques, which remains unsatisfaying. We profiled here by
quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) the transcripts of eighteen histone
deacetylases (HDACs) and a subset of transcriptional co-factors in non-tumoral
brain samples from 15 patients operated for epilepsia and in brain tumor samples 
from 50 patients diagnosed with grade II oligodendrogliomas (ODII, n = 9), grade 
III oligodendrogliomas (ODIII, n = 22) and glioblastomas (GL, n = 19). Co-factor 
transcripts were significantly different in tumors as compared to non-tumoral
samples and distinguished different molecular subgroups of brain tumors,
regardless of tumor grade. Among all patients studied, the expression of HDAC1
and HDAC3 was inversely correlated with survival, whereas the expression of
HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC11 and SIRT1 was significantly and positively correlated
with survival time of patients with gliomas. (1)H-HRMAS technology revealed
metabolomically distinct groups according to the expression of HDAC1, HDAC4 and
SIRT1, suggesting that these genes may play an important role in regulating brain
tumorigenesis and cancer progression. Our study hence identified different
molecular fingerprints for subgroups of histopathologically similar brain tumors 
that may enable the prediction of outcome based on the expression level of
co-factor genes and could allow customization of treatment.

PMCID: PMC4367156
PMID: 25791281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Jun;83:14-20. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.03.010. Epub
2015 Mar 16.

Non-sirtuin histone deacetylases in the control of cardiac aging.

Ferguson BS(1), McKinsey TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado,
Denver, 12700 E. 19th Ave Aurora, CO 80045-0508, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, 
Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado, Denver, 12700 E. 19th Ave Aurora,
CO 80045-0508, USA. Electronic address: timothy.mckinsey@ucdenver.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the removal of acetyl-groups from lysine
residues within nucelosomal histone tails and thousands of non-histone proteins. 
The 18 mammalian HDACs are grouped into four classes. Classes I, II and IV HDACs 
employ zinc as a co-factor for catalytic activity, while class III HDACs (also
known as sirtuins) require NAD+ for enzymatic function. Small molecule inhibitors
of zinc-dependent HDACs are efficacious in multiple pre-clinical models of
pressure overload and ischemic cardiomyopathy, reducing pathological hypertrophy 
and fibrosis, and improving contractile function. Emerging data have revealed
numerous mechanisms by which HDAC inhibitors benefit the heart, including
suppression of oxidative stress and inflammation, inhibition of MAP kinase
signaling, and enhancement of cardiac protein aggregate clearance and autophagic 
flux. Here, we summarize recent findings with zinc-dependent HDACs and HDAC
inhibitors in the heart, focusing on newly described functions for distinct HDAC 
isoforms (e.g. HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC6). Potential for pharmacological HDAC
inhibition as a means of treating age-related cardiac dysfunction is also
discussed. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: CV Aging.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4459895 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25791169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Mar 13;16(3):5886-99. doi: 10.3390/ijms16035886.

Accurate splicing of HDAC6 pre-mRNA requires SON.

Battini VP(1), Bubulya A(2), Bubulya PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, 
USA. battini.2@wright.edu. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Wright State
University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA. athanasios.bubulya@wright.edu. (3)Department
of Biological Sciences, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA.
paula.bubulya@wright.edu.

Pre-mRNA splicing requires proper splice site selection mediated by many factors 
including snRNPs and serine-arginine rich (SR) splicing factors. Our lab
previously reported that the SR-like protein SON maintains organization of
pre-mRNA splicing factors in nuclear speckles as well as splicing of many human
transcripts including mRNAs coding for the chromatin-modifying enzymes HDAC6, ADA
and SETD8. However, the mechanism by which SON maintains accurate splicing is
unknown. To build tools for understanding SON-dependent pre-mRNA splicing, we
constructed a minigene reporter plasmid driving expression of the genomic
sequence spanning exons 26 through 29 of HDAC6. Following SON depletion, we
observed altered splicing of HDAC6 reporter transcripts that showed exclusion of 
exons 27 and 28, reflecting the splicing patterns of endogenous HDAC6 mRNA.
Importantly, loss of HDAC6 biological function was also observed, as indicated by
truncated HDAC6 protein and corresponding absence of aggresome assembly
activities of HDAC6 binding-of-ubiquitin zinc finger (BUZ) domain. We therefore
propose that SON-mediated splicing regulation of HDAC6 is essential for
supporting protein degradation pathways that prevent human disease.

PMCID: PMC4394511
PMID: 25782155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0121247. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121247.
eCollection 2015.

Down-regulation of deacetylase HDAC6 inhibits the melanoma cell line A375.S2
growth through ROS-dependent mitochondrial pathway.

Bai J(1), Lei Y(1), An GL(1), He L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital, The
Third affiliated Hospital of the School of Medicine Xi'an JiaoTong University,
Xi'an, P. R. China.

Previous studies have shown that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) plays critical
roles in many cellular processes related to cancer. However, its biological roles
in the development of melanoma remain unexplored. Our aim was to investigate
whether HDAC6 has a biological role in human melanoma development and to
understand its underlying mechanism. In the present study, HDAC6 expression was
up-regulated in melanoma tissues and cell lines. Knockdown of HDAC6 significantly
inhibited the proliferation and colony formation ability of A375.S2 cells,
promoted cell arrest at G0/G1 phase and apoptosis. Additionally, western blotting
assay showed that HDAC6 silencing suppressed Bcl-2 level and enhanced Bax level, 
then activated caspase-9 and caspase-3, and further activated the release of
cytochrome c from mitochondria to cytoplasm, finally induced cell apoptosis
involving the mitochondrial pathway. Knockdown of HDAC6 triggered a significant
generation of ROS and disruption of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP).
Furthermore, ROS inhibitor, NAC reduced HDAC6 siRNA-induced ROS production, and
blocked HDAC6 siRNA-induced loss of MMP and apoptosis. NAC also significantly
blocked HDAC6 siRNA-induced mtDNA copy number decrease and mitochondrial
biogenesis and degradation imbalance. In conclusion, the results showed that
knockdown of HDAC6 induced apoptosis in human melanoma A375.S2 cells through a
ROS-dependent mitochondrial pathway.

PMCID: PMC4361412
PMID: 25774669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 15;290(20):12487-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.607580. Epub
2015 Mar 13.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) promotes the pro-survival activity of 14-3-3<U+03B6> via
deacetylation of lysines within the 14-3-3<U+03B6> binding pocket.

Mortenson JB(1), Heppler LN(1), Banks CJ(1), Weerasekara VK(1), Whited MD(1),
Piccolo SR(2), Johnson WE(3), Thompson JW(4), Andersen JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry and. (2)Biology, Brigham
Young University, Provo, Utah 84602. (3)the Division of Computational
Biomedicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
and. (4)the Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University, Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710. (5)From the Departments of Chemistry and
Biochemistry and jandersen@chem.byu.edu.

The phospho-binding protein 14-3-3<U+03B6> acts as a signaling hub controlling a network
of interacting partners and oncogenic pathways. We show here that lysines within 
the 14-3-3<U+03B6> binding pocket and protein-protein interface can be modified by
acetylation. The positive charge on two of these lysines, Lys(49) and Lys(120),
is critical for coordinating 14-3-3<U+03B6>-phosphoprotein interactions. Through
screening, we identified HDAC6 as the Lys(49)/Lys(120) deacetylase. Inhibition of
HDAC6 blocks 14-3-3<U+03B6> interactions with two well described interacting partners,
Bad and AS160, which triggers their dephosphorylation at Ser(112) and Thr(642),
respectively. Expression of an acetylation-refractory K49R/K120R mutant of
14-3-3<U+03B6> rescues both the HDAC6 inhibitor-induced loss of interaction and
Ser(112)/Thr(642) phosphorylation. Furthermore, expression of the K49R/K120R
mutant of 14-3-3<U+03B6> inhibits the cytotoxicity of HDAC6 inhibition. These data
demonstrate a novel role for HDAC6 in controlling 14-3-3<U+03B6> binding activity.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4432270 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25770209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Mar 12;6:e1692. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.584.

NIK is required for NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated induction of BAG3 upon inhibition of
constitutive protein degradation pathways.

Rapino F(1), Abhari BA(1), Jung M(2), Fulda S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research in Pediatrics, Goethe-University,
Frankfurt, Germany. (2)1] Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
Heidelberg, Germany [3] German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. (3)1] Institute for Experimental Cancer Research in Pediatrics,
Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
Heidelberg, Germany [3] German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany.

Recently, we reported that induction of the co-chaperone Bcl-2-associated
athanogene 3 (BAG3) is critical for recovery of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cells
after proteotoxic stress upon inhibition of the two constitutive protein
degradation pathways, that is, the ubiquitin-proteasome system by Bortezomib and 
the aggresome-autophagy system by histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibitor ST80.
In the present study, we investigated the molecular mechanisms mediating BAG3
induction under these conditions. Here, we identify nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-<U+03BA>B)-inducing kinase (NIK) as a key mediator of ST80/Bortezomib-stimulated
NF-<U+03BA>B activation and transcriptional upregulation of BAG3. ST80/Bortezomib
cotreatment upregulates mRNA and protein expression of NIK, which is accompanied 
by an initial increase in histone H3 acetylation. Importantly, NIK silencing by
siRNA abolishes NF-<U+03BA>B activation and BAG3 induction by ST80/Bortezomib.
Furthermore, ST80/Bortezomib cotreatment stimulates NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional
activity and upregulates NF-<U+03BA>B target genes. Genetic inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B by
overexpression of dominant-negative I<U+03BA>Ba superrepressor (I<U+03BA>Ba-SR) or by knockdown
of p65 blocks the ST80/Bortezomib-stimulated upregulation of BAG3 mRNA and
protein expression. Interestingly, inhibition of lysosomal activity by
Bafilomycin A1 inhibits ST80/Bortezomib-stimulated I<U+03BA>Ba degradation, NF-<U+03BA>B
activation and BAG3 upregulation, indicating that I<U+03BA>Ba is degraded via the
lysosome in the presence of Bortezomib. Thus, by demonstrating a critical role of
NIK in mediating NF-<U+03BA>B activation and BAG3 induction upon ST80/Bortezomib
cotreatment, our study provides novel insights into mechanisms of resistance to
proteotoxic stress in RMS.

PMCID: PMC4385908
PMID: 25766331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Front Oncol. 2015 Feb 24;5:47. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00047. eCollection 2015.

Misfolded proteins: from little villains to little helpers in the fight against
cancer.

Brüning A(1), Jückstock J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Ludwig-Maximilians-University , Munich ,
Germany.

The application of cytostatic drugs targeting the high proliferation rates of
cancer cells is currently the most commonly used treatment option in cancer
chemotherapy. However, severe side effects and resistance mechanisms may occur as
a result of such treatment, possibly limiting the therapeutic efficacy of these
agents. In recent years, several therapeutic strategies have been developed that 
aim at targeting not the genomic integrity and replication machinery of cancer
cells but instead their protein homeostasis. During malignant transformation, the
cancer cell proteome develops vast aberrations in the expression of mutated
proteins, oncoproteins, drug- and apoptosis-resistance proteins, etc. A complex
network of protein quality-control mechanisms, including chaperoning by heat
shock proteins (HSPs), not only is essential for maintaining the extravagant
proteomic lifestyle of cancer cells but also represents an ideal cancer-specific 
target to be tackled. Furthermore, the high rate of protein synthesis and
turnover in certain types of cancer cells can be specifically directed by
interfering with the proteasomal and autophagosomal protein recycling and
degradation machinery, as evidenced by the clinical application of proteasome
inhibitors. Since proteins with loss of their native conformation are prone to
unspecific aggregations and have proved to be detrimental to normal cellular
function, specific induction of misfolded proteins by HSP inhibitors, proteasome 
inhibitors, hyperthermia, or inducers of endoplasmic reticulum stress represents 
a new method of cancer cell killing exploitable for therapeutic purposes. This
review describes drugs - approved, repurposed, or under investigation - that can 
be used to accumulate misfolded proteins in cancer cells, and particularly
focuses on the molecular aspects that lead to the cytotoxicity of misfolded
proteins in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4338749
PMID: 25759792  [PubMed]


144. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015 Feb;78(2):378-85. doi:
10.1097/TA.0000000000000510.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 improves long-term survival in a lethal
septic model.

Li Y(1), Zhao T, Liu B, Halaweish I, Mazitschek R, Duan X, Alam HB.

Author information: 
(1)From the General Surgery (Y.L., T.Z., B.L., I.H., H.B.A.), Department of
Surgery, University of Michigan Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Center for Systems
Biology (R.M.), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; and Chemical Biology
Program (R.M.), the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts;
and Department of Pathology (X.D.), Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood,
Illinois.

BACKGROUND: We recently demonstrated that suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, a
broad-spectrum histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that inhibits HDACs 1, 2, 3, 
and 6, improves survival in a mouse model of cecal ligation and puncture
(CLP)-induced lethal sepsis. The current study was undertaken to determine the
effect of selective inhibition of HDAC isoform on survival, key cytokine
production, organ injury, bacteria clearance, and cell apoptosis.
METHODS: In Experiment 1, C57BL/6J mice were subjected to CLP and, 1 hour later, 
given intraperitoneal injections of (1) Tubastatin A (inhibitor of HDAC6)
dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), (2) MS-275 (inhibitor of HDACs 1, 2, and 
3) in DMSO, and (3) DMSO only. Survival was monitored for 10 days. In Experiment 
2, 1 hour after CLP, animals were treated with DMSO vehicle or Tubastatin A.
Sham-operated animals served as control. Peritoneal fluid and blood samples were 
collected for measurement of cytokines at 24 hours or 48 hours. Blood at 48 hours
was also used to determine bacteria load. Liver was harvested to evaluate acute
liver injury. In Experiment 3, Primary splenocytes were used to assess cytokine
responses and phagocytosis. Macrophages were cultured and harvested 3 hours and 6
hours after lipopolysaccharide stimulation in the absence or presence of
Tubastatin A to analyze cell apoptosis.
RESULTS: Animals treated with Tubastatin A, but not MS-275, displayed a
significant improvement in survival. Moreover, Tubastatin A significantly
inhibited cytokine production in peritoneal fluid and plasma as well as in
supernatant from splenocytes stimulated with lipopolysaccharide. Tubastatin A
significantly attenuated acute liver injury, increased blood bacteria clearance
and splenocyte phagocytosis, and decreased macrophage apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: HDAC6 inhibition significantly improves survival, reduces "cytokine
storm," attenuates acute livery injury, increases bacteria clearance and immune
cell phagocytosis, and inhibits macrophage apoptosis in a lethal mouse CLP model.

PMCID: PMC4357277
PMID: 25757125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nat Biotechnol. 2015 Apr;33(4):415-23. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3130. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

Acetylation site specificities of lysine deacetylase inhibitors in human cells.

Schölz C(1), Weinert BT(1), Wagner SA(1), Beli P(1), Miyake Y(2), Qi J(3), Jensen
LJ(4), Streicher W(5), McCarthy AR(6), Westwood NJ(7), Lain S(6), Cox J(8),
Matthias P(2), Mann M(8), Bradner JE(3), Choudhary C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Proteomics, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein
Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research,
Basel, Switzerland. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Department of
Protein Science and Technology, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein
Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. (5)Department of Disease Systems Biology, The Novo Nordisk Foundation
Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (6)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell
Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (7)School of Chemistry and
Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, EaStCHEM, University of St. Andrews, St.
Andrews, Scotland, UK. (8)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max
Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

Lysine deacetylases inhibitors (KDACIs) are used in basic research, and many are 
being investigated in clinical trials for treatment of cancer and other diseases.
However, their specificities in cells are incompletely characterized. Here we
used quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) to obtain acetylation signatures for 19 
different KDACIs, covering all 18 human lysine deacetylases. Most KDACIs
increased acetylation of a small, specific subset of the acetylome, including
sites on histones and other chromatin-associated proteins. Inhibitor treatment
combined with genetic deletion showed that the effects of the pan-sirtuin
inhibitor nicotinamide are primarily mediated by SIRT1 inhibition. Furthermore,
we confirmed that the effects of tubacin and bufexamac on cytoplasmic proteins
result from inhibition of HDAC6. Bufexamac also triggered an HDAC6-independent,
hypoxia-like response by stabilizing HIF1-a, providing a possible mechanistic
explanation of its adverse, pro-inflammatory effects. Our results offer a systems
view of KDACI specificities, providing a framework for studying function of
acetylation and deacetylases.

PMID: 25751058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Crit Rev Oncog. 2015;20(1-2):65-81.

HDAC6-Dependent Functions in Tumor Cells: Crossroad with the MAPK Pathways.

Haakenson J(1), Wu JY(1), Xiang S(1), Williams KA(1), Bai W(2), Zhang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of South Florida, Tampa, FL. (2)University of South Florida, Tampa,
FL; H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is emerging as a novel therapeutic target in cancer
treatment. HDAC6 plays an important role in cell migration, cell transformation, 
and DNA damage response. Our and others' studies have linked HDAC6's functions
and HDAC6's regulation to the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways.
In particular, HDAC6's activity has been found to be regulated by
EGF-EGFR-Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling. Inversely, HDAC6 has been reported to
modulate the functions of EGFR and Ras. In this review, we summarize the
literature on HDAC6 and MAPK pathways, and emphasize the interaction between
HDAC6 and the ERK-MAPK signaling cascade.

PMID: 25746105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Med Chem. 2015 Mar 26;58(6):2809-20. doi: 10.1021/jm502011f. Epub 2015 Mar 13.

Design and synthesis of orally bioavailable aminopyrrolidinone histone
deacetylase 6 inhibitors.

Lin X(1), Chen W(1), Qiu Z(1), Guo L(1), Zhu W(1), Li W(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang
W(1), Zhang Z(1), Rong Y(1), Zhang M(1), Yu L(1), Zhong S(1), Zhao R(1), Wu X(1),
Wong JC(1), Tang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center
Shanghai, 720 Cailun Road, Shanghai 201203, China.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) removes the acetyl group from lysine residues in a 
number of non-histone substrates and plays important roles in microtubule
dynamics and chaperone activities. There is growing interest in identifying
HDAC6-selective inhibitors as chemical biology tools and ultimately as new
therapeutic agents. Herein we report the design, synthesis, and phenotypic
screening of a novel class of 3-aminopyrrolidinone-based hydroxamic acids as
HDAC6 inhibitors. In particular, the a-methyl-substituted enantiomer 33 (3-S)
showed significant in-cell tubulin acetylation (Tub-Ac) with an EC50 of 0.30 µM
but limited impact on p21 levels at various concentrations. In enzyme inhibition 
assays, 33 demonstrated high selectivity for HDAC6 with an IC50 of 0.017 µM and
selectivity indexes of 10 against HDAC8 and over 4000 against HDAC1-3 isoforms.
Moreover, 33 has suitable drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics properties
compared with other hydroxamic acid-based HDAC inhibitors, warranting further
biological studies and development as a selective HDAC6 inhibitor.

PMID: 25734520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;45(2):373-86. doi: 10.3233/JAD-150150.

Loss of TDP-43 Inhibits Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis-Linked Mutant SOD1
Aggresome Formation in an HDAC6-Dependent Manner.

Xia Q(1), Wang H, Zhang Y, Ying Z, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Translational Research and Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases and College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal, adult-onset, and progressive
neurodegenerative disorder with no cure. Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) was
the first identified protein associated with familial ALS; and aggresome
formation of misfolded SOD1 is closely associated with ALS pathogenesis. HDAC6,
one of the histone deacetylase family members, has already been demonstrated to
play an important role in regulating aggresome formation of misfolded proteins
and protecting cells against the toxicity induced by misfolded proteins. In this 
study, we found that in a cellular model with impaired proteasome activity, the
TAR DNA-binding protein 43, which is closely linked with ALS and associated with 
various neurodegenerative disorders such as frontotemporal lobar degeneration,
Alzheimers disease, and Parkinsons disease, can regulate mutant SOD1 aggresome 
formation through an HDAC6-dependent manner. TDP-43 deficiency did not affect
poly-ubiquitination of mutant SOD1, whereas it greatly decreased the expression
level of HDAC6, which is required for aggresome formation of ALS-linked mutant
SOD1. Moreover, overexpression of siRNA-resistant HDAC6 restored mutant SOD1
aggresome formation in TDP-43-knockdown cells. Thus, our data provide evidence
that TDP-43 plays an important role in mutant SOD1 aggresome formation through
its regulation of HDAC6.

PMID: 25720411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 10;290(15):9455-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.627950. Epub 2015
Feb 24.

Chaperone-mediated 26S proteasome remodeling facilitates free K63 ubiquitin chain
production and aggresome clearance.

Nanduri P(1), Hao R(1), Fitzpatrick T(1), Yao TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina 27710. (2)From the Department of Pharmacology and Cancer
Biology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27710 tsopang.yao@duke.edu.

Efficient elimination of misfolded proteins by the proteasome system is critical 
for proteostasis. Inadequate proteasome capacity can lead to aberrant aggregation
of misfolded proteins and inclusion body formation, a hallmark of
neurodegenerative disease. The proteasome system cannot degrade aggregated
proteins; however, it stimulates autophagy-dependent aggregate clearance by
producing unanchored lysine (K)63-linked ubiquitin chains via the proteasomal
deubiquitinating enzyme Poh1. The canonical function of Poh1, which removes
ubiquitin chains en bloc from proteasomal substrates prior to their degradation, 
requires intact 26S proteasomes. Here we present evidence that during aggresome
clearance, 20S proteasomes dissociate from protein aggregates, while Poh1 and
selective subunits of 19S proteasomes are retained. The dissociation of 20S
proteasome components requires the molecular chaperone Hsp90. Hsp90 inhibition
suppresses 26S proteasome remodeling, unanchored ubiquitin chain production, and 
aggresome clearance. Our results suggest that 26S proteasomes undergo active
remodeling to generate a Poh1-dependent K63-deubiquitinating enzyme to facilitate
protein aggregate clearance.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4392251 [Available on 2016-04-10]
PMID: 25713068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Br J Haematol. 2015 May;169(3):423-34. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13315. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Ricolinostat (ACY-1215) induced inhibition of aggresome formation accelerates
carfilzomib-induced multiple myeloma cell death.

Mishima Y(1), Santo L, Eda H, Cirstea D, Nemani N, Yee AJ, O'Donnell E, Selig MK,
Quayle SN, Arastu-Kapur S, Kirk C, Boise LH, Jones SS, Raje N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Proteasome inhibition induces the accumulation of aggregated
misfolded/ubiquitinated proteins in the aggresome; conversely, histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibition blocks aggresome formation. Although this
rationale has been the basis of proteasome inhibitor (PI) and HDAC6 inhibitor
combination studies, the role of disruption of aggresome formation by HDAC6
inhibition has not yet been studied in multiple myeloma (MM). The present study
aimed to evaluate the impact of carfilzomib (CFZ) in combination with a selective
HDAC6 inhibitor (ricolinostat) in MM cells with respect to the
aggresome-proteolysis pathway. We observed that combination treatment of CFZ with
ricolinostat triggered synergistic anti-MM effects, even in bortezomib-resistant 
cells. Immunofluorescent staining showed that CFZ increased the accumulation of
ubiquitinated proteins and protein aggregates in the cytoplasm, as well as the
engulfment of aggregated ubiquitinated proteins by autophagosomes, which was
blocked by ricolinostat. Electron microscopy imaging showed increased autophagy
triggered by CFZ, which was inhibited by the addition of ACY-1215. Finally, an in
vivo mouse xenograft study confirmed a decrease in tumour volume, associated with
apoptosis, following treatment with CFZ in combination with ricolinostat. Our
results suggest that ricolinostat inhibits aggresome formation, caused by
CFZ-induced inhibition of the proteasome pathway, resulting in enhanced apoptosis
in MM cells.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25709080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Toxicol Lett. 2015 Apr 16;234(2):131-8. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.02.011. Epub
2015 Feb 19.

Methamphetamine promotes a-tubulin deacetylation in endothelial cells: the
protective role of acetyl-l-carnitine.

Fernandes S(1), Salta S(2), Summavielle T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Rua Alfredo Allen, Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade
do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; Rua do Campo Alegre, 823, Addiction Biology
Group, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Universidade do Porto,
4150-180 Porto, Portugal; Rua Valente Perfeito, 322, School of Allied Health
Sciences - Polytechnic Institute of Porto (ESTSP-IPP), 4400-330 Vila Nova de
Gaia, Portugal; Alameda Prof. Hernâni Monteiro, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade do Porto (FMUP), 4200-319 Porto, Portugal. Electronic address:
silvia.fernandes@ibmc.up.pt. (2)Rua Alfredo Allen, Instituto de Investigação e
Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; Rua do Campo 
Alegre, 823, Addiction Biology Group, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular
(IBMC), Universidade do Porto, 4150-180 Porto, Portugal; Rua Valente Perfeito,
322, School of Allied Health Sciences - Polytechnic Institute of Porto
(ESTSP-IPP), 4400-330 Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal. Electronic address:
sofia.salta@ibmc.up.pt. (3)Rua Alfredo Allen, Instituto de Investigação e
Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; Rua do Campo 
Alegre, 823, Addiction Biology Group, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular
(IBMC), Universidade do Porto, 4150-180 Porto, Portugal; Rua Valente Perfeito,
322, School of Allied Health Sciences - Polytechnic Institute of Porto
(ESTSP-IPP), 4400-330 Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal. Electronic address:
tsummavi@ibmc.up.pt.

Methamphetamine (METH) is a powerful psychostimulant drug used worldwide for its 
reinforcing properties. In addition to the classic long-lasting
monoaminergic-disrupting effects extensively described in the literature, METH
has been consistently reported to increase blood brain barrier (BBB)
permeability, both in vivo and in vitro, as a result of tight junction and
cytoskeleton disarrangement. Microtubules play a critical role in cell stability,
which relies on post-translational modifications such as a-tubulin acetylation.
As there is evidence that psychostimulants drugs modulate the expression of
histone deacetylases (HDACs), we hypothesized that in endothelial cells
METH-mediation of cytoplasmatic HDAC6 activity could affect tubulin acetylation
and further contribute to BBB dysfunction. To validate our hypothesis, we exposed
the bEnd.3 endothelial cells to increasing doses of METH and verified that it
leads to an extensive a-tubulin deacetylation mediated by HDACs activation.
Furthermore, since we recently reported that acetyl-l-carnitine (ALC), a natural 
occurring compound, prevents BBB structural loss in a context of METH exposure,
we reasoned that ALC could also preserve the acetylation of microtubules under
METH action. The present results confirm that ALC is able to prevent METH-induced
deacetylation providing effective protection on microtubule acetylation. Although
further investigation is still needed, HDACs regulation may become a new
therapeutic target for ALC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25703822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2348-58. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1290. 
Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Selective Inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 as a Potential Therapeutic Option for
B-ALL.

Stubbs MC(1), Kim W(2), Bariteau M(2), Davis T(2), Vempati S(2), Minehart J(3),
Witkin M(3), Qi J(4), Krivtsov AV(5), Bradner JE(4), Kung AL(6), Armstrong SA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. mstubbs@incyte.com. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer 
Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Human Oncology
and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer 
Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Human Oncology and 
Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
(6)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have recently emerged as
efficacious therapies that target epigenetic mechanisms in hematologic
malignancies. One such hematologic malignancy, B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (B-ALL), may be highly dependent on epigenetic regulation for leukemia
development and maintenance, and thus sensitive to small-molecule inhibitors that
target epigenetic mechanisms.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A panel of B-ALL cell lines was tested for sensitivity to
HDACi with varying isoform sensitivity. Isoform-specific shRNAs were used as
further validation of HDACs as relevant therapeutic targets in B-ALL. Mouse
xenografts of B-cell malignancy-derived cell lines and a pediatric B-ALL were
used to demonstrate pharmacologic efficacy.
RESULTS: Nonselective HDAC inhibitors were cytotoxic to a panel of B-ALL cell
lines as well as to xenografted human leukemia patient samples. Assessment of
isoform-specific HDACi indicated that targeting HDAC1-3 with class I
HDAC-specific inhibitors was sufficient to inhibit growth of B-ALL cell lines.
Furthermore, shRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC1 or HDAC2 resulted in growth
inhibition in these cells. We then assessed a compound that specifically inhibits
only HDAC1 and HDAC2. This compound suppressed growth and induced apoptosis in
B-ALL cell lines in vitro and in vivo, whereas it was far less effective against 
other B-cell-derived malignancies.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we show that HDAC inhibitors are a potential therapeutic
option for B-ALL, and that a more specific inhibitor of HDAC1 and HDAC2 could be 
therapeutically useful for patients with B-ALL.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4433811 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25688158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Epigenomics. 2015;7(1):103-18. doi: 10.2217/epi.14.69.

Histone deacetylase 6 in health and disease.

Seidel C(1), Schnekenburger M, Dicato M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular & Cellular Biology of Cancer, Hôpital Kirchberg,
L-2540 Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC)6 is a member of the class IIb HDAC family. This enzyme
is zinc-dependent and mainly localized in the cytoplasm. HDAC6 is a unique
isoenzyme with two functional catalytic domains and specific physiological roles.
Indeed, HDAC6 deacetylates various substrates including a-tubulin and HSP90a, and
is involved in protein trafficking and degradation, cell shape and migration.
Consequently, deregulation of HDAC6 activity was associated to a variety of
diseases including cancer, neurodegenerative diseases and pathological autoimmune
response. Therefore, HDAC6 represents an interesting potential therapeutic
target. In this review, we discuss structural features of this histone
deacetylase, regulation of its expression and activity, biological functions,
implication in human disease initiation and progression. Finally will describe
novel and selective HDAC6 inhibitors.

PMID: 25687470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Brain. 2015 Apr;138(Pt 4):974-91. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv005. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Peptidylprolyl isomerase A governs TARDBP function and assembly in heterogeneous 
nuclear ribonucleoprotein complexes.

Lauranzano E(1), Pozzi S(1), Pasetto L(2), Stucchi R(1), Massignan T(1), Paolella
K(2), Mombrini M(2), Nardo G(3), Lunetta C(4), Corbo M(5), Mora G(6), Bendotti
C(3), Bonetto V(7).

Author information: 
(1)1 Dulbecco Telethon Institute, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche
'Mario Negri', Via La Masa 19, 20156 Milano, Italy. (2)2 Department of Molecular 
Biochemistry and Pharmacology, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche 'Mario
Negri', Via La Masa 19, 20156 Milano, Italy. (3)3 Department of Neuroscience,
IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche 'Mario Negri', Via La Masa 19, 20156
Milano, Italy. (4)4 NeuroMuscular Omnicentre (NEMO), Niguarda Cà Granda Hospital,
Piazza Ospedale Maggiore, 3, 20162 Milano, Italy. (5)5 Department of
Neurorehabilitation Sciences, Casa Cura Policlinico, Via Dezza 48, 20144 Milano, 
Italy. (6)6 IRCCS Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, Via Camaldoli 64, 20138 Milano,
Italy. (7)1 Dulbecco Telethon Institute, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche
Farmacologiche 'Mario Negri', Via La Masa 19, 20156 Milano, Italy
valentina.bonetto@marionegri.it.

Peptidylprolyl isomerase A (PPIA), also known as cyclophilin A, is a
multifunctional protein with peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity. PPIA
is also a translational biomarker for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and is
enriched in aggregates isolated from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and
frontotemporal lobar degeneration patients. Its normal function in the central
nervous system is unknown. Here we show that PPIA is a functional interacting
partner of TARDBP (also known as TDP-43). PPIA regulates expression of known
TARDBP RNA targets and is necessary for the assembly of TARDBP in heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein complexes. Our data suggest that perturbation of
PPIA/TARDBP interaction causes 'TDP-43' pathology. Consistent with this model, we
show that the PPIA/TARDBP interaction is impaired in several pathological
conditions. Moreover, PPIA depletion induces TARDBP aggregation, downregulates
HDAC6, ATG7 and VCP, and accelerates disease progression in the SOD1(G93A) mouse 
model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Targeting the PPIA/TARDBP interaction may
represent a novel therapeutic avenue for conditions involving TARDBP/TDP-43
pathology, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar
degeneration.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25678563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 11;10(2):e0117068. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117068.
eCollection 2015.

Alteration of histone acetylation pattern during long-term serum-free culture
conditions of human fetal placental mesenchymal stem cells.

Zhu Y(1), Song X(2), Han F(2), Li Y(2), Wei J(2), Liu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Conservation and Utilization
of Special Biological Resources in Western China, Ningxia University, Yinchuan,
750021, China; Human Stem Cell Institute of General Hospital, Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan, 750004, China. (2)Human Stem Cell Institute of General
Hospital, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, 750004, China; School of
Laboratory Medicine, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, 750004, China.

Increasing evidence suggests that the mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) derived from 
placenta of fetal origin (fPMSCs) are superior to MSCs of other sources for cell 
therapy. Since the initial number of isolated MSCs is limited, in vitro
propagation is often required to reach sufficient numbers of cells for
therapeutic applications, during which MSCs may undergo genetic and/or epigenetic
alterations that subsequently increase the probability of spontaneous malignant
transformation. Thus, factors that influence genomic and epigenetic stability of 
MSCs following long-term expansions need to be clarified before cultured MSCs are
employed for clinical settings. To date, the genetic and epigenetic stability of 
fPMSCs after long-term in vitro expansion has not been fully investigated. In
this report, alterations to histone acetylation and consequence on the expression
pattern of fPMSCs following in vitro propagation under serum-free conditions were
explored. The results show that fPMSCs maintain their MSC characteristics before 
they reached a senescent state. Furthermore, acetylation modification patterns
were changed in fPMSCs along with gradually increased global histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) activity and expression of HDAC subtypes HDAC4, HDAC5 and HDAC6, as well
as a down-regulated global histone H3/H4 acetylation during in vitro culturing.
In line with the acetylation alterations, the expression of oncogenes Oct4, Sox2 
and TERT were significantly decreased over the propagation period. Of note, the
down-regulation of Oct4 was strongly associated with changes in acetylation.
Intriguingly, telomere length in fPMSCs did not significantly change during the
propagating process. These findings suggest that human fPMSCs may be a safe and
reliable resource of MSCs and can be propagated under serum-free conditions with 
less risk of spontaneous malignancy, and warrants further validation in clinical 
settings.

PMCID: PMC4324636
PMID: 25671548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Feb 27;43(4):2057-73. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv088. Epub 2015 
Feb 8.

MicroRNA-26a induced by hypoxia targets HDAC6 in myogenic differentiation of
embryonic stem cells.

Lee SW(1), Yang J(2), Kim SY(2), Jeong HK(2), Lee J(2), Kim WJ(3), Lee EJ(1), Kim
HS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Innovative Research Institute for Cell
Therapy, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea Biomedical Research
Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of
Internal Medicine and Innovative Research Institute for Cell Therapy, Seoul
National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (3)National Research Laboratory of
Regenerative Sexual Medicine, Department of Urology, Inha University School of
Medicine, Incheon, Korea. (4)Department of Internal Medicine and Innovative
Research Institute for Cell Therapy, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate
School of Convergence Science and Technology, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea hyosoo@snu.ac.kr.

The importance of epigenetic regulation for maintenance of embryonic stem cell
(ESC) pluripotency or for initiation of differentiation is widely accepted.
However, the molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. We recently reported
that a hypoxic microenvironment induces ESC differentiation. In the present
study, we found that hypoxia-responsive histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) performs an
essential signaling function for myogenic differentiation of ESCs. HDAC6 was
downregulated in hypoxic ESCs or during differentiation. A knock-down of HDAC6 in
ESCs resulted in induction of myogenic markers, including Pax7. Suppression of
HDAC6 increased acetylation of core histones H3 and H4, leading to enhanced
binding of RNA polymerase II to the Pax7 promoter. Transplantation of HDAC6
knock-down cells facilitated muscle regeneration in vivo. Importantly, the
downregulation of HDAC6 by hypoxia was not mediated by HIF1a or HIF2a, master
transcription regulators under hypoxia, but by induction of microRNA-26a that
directly targeted the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of HDAC6. A point mutation 
of the microRNA-26a-binding sequence in the HDAC6 3'-UTR diminished the
luciferase reporter activity. Taken together, these results suggest that
environmental cues of differentiation modulate the epigenetic machinery and guide
stem cells to commit to a specific lineage.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4344521
PMID: 25662604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Formos Med Assoc. 2015 May;114(5):446-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2014.12.004. Epub
2015 Jan 31.

(+)-Naloxone inhibits morphine-induced chemotaxis via prevention of heat shock
protein 90 cleavage in microglia.

Tsai RY(1), Cheng YC(2), Wong CS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Da-Yeh University, Changhua, Taiwan; Department of
Anesthesiology, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Medical
Research, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Anesthesiology, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; School of Medicine,
Fu-Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medical
Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
w82556@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Microglia have a crucial role in maintaining neuronal
homeostasis in the central nervous system. Immune factors released from microglia
have important roles in nociceptive signal transduction. Activation of microglia 
seems to be a shared mechanism in pathological pain and morphine tolerance
because pharmacological attenuation of microglia activation provides satisfactory
management in both situations.
METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the effect of 1nM (+)-naloxone,
which is not an opioid receptor antagonist, on morphine-induced activation of
microglia EOC13.31 cells.
RESULTS: Our results showed that 1µM morphine enhanced microglia activation and
migration, decreased a-tubulin acetylation, and induced heat shock protein 90
(HSP90) fragmentation and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) expression.
Morphine-induced a-tubulin deacetylation and HSP90 fragmentation were
HDAC6-dependent. Pretreatment with (+)-naloxone (1nM) inhibited morphine-evoked
microglia activation and chemotaxis and prevented a-tubulin deacetylation and
HSP90 fragmentation by inhibiting HDAC6 expression.
CONCLUSION: Based on the findings of the present study, we suggest that
(+)-naloxone inhibits morphine-induced microglia activation by regulating
HDAC6-dependent a-tubulin deacetylation and HSP90 fragmentation.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25649471  [PubMed - in process]


158. DNA Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;34(4):290-5. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2713. Epub 2015 Jan
26.

STAT3 association with microtubules and its activation are independent of HDAC6
activity.

Yan B(1), Xie S, Liu Z, Luo Y, Zhou J, Li D, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)1 State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Nankai University , Tianjin, China .

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is an important
oncogenic transcription factor residing in the cytoplasm in the resting cells.
Upon stimulation, STAT3 is activated and translocated to the nucleus to regulate 
target genes. Although the canonical transcriptional function of STAT3 has been
intensively studied, less is known about its cytoplasmic localization. In this
study, by immunoprecipitation, microtubule cosedimentation, and
immunofluorescence assays, we present the first evidence that cytoplasmic STAT3
interacts with both tubulin and microtubules. By using small-molecule inhibitor
approaches, we further demonstrate that the localization of STAT3 on microtubules
and its activation are independent of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) activity. In 
addition, disruption of microtubule dynamics does not alter the activation and
nuclear translocation of STAT3 in response to interleukin-6 treatment. These
findings reveal that cytoplasmic STAT3 is physically associated with
microtubules, whereas its activation and nuclear translocation are independent of
microtubule dynamics, implicating that the association of STAT3 with microtubules
might be involved in the regulation of noncanonical functions of STAT3 in the
cytoplasm.

PMCID: PMC4390050
PMID: 25621430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Apr;75(4):691-700. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2685-z. Epub 2015 Jan 25.

Biological evaluation of 4,5-diarylimidazoles with hydroxamic acid appendages as 
novel dual mode anticancer agents.

Mahal K(1), Schruefer S, Steinemann G, Rausch F, Schobert R, Biersack B, Höpfner 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Chemistry Laboratory, University Bayreuth, 95440, Bayreuth, Germany.

PURPOSE: New (4-aryl-1-methylimidazol-5-yl)cinnamoylhydroxamic acids were
prepared as potential dual mode anticancer agents combining the antivascular
effect of the 4,5-diarylimidazole moiety and the histone deacetylases (HDAC)
inhibition by the cinnamoyl hydroxamate.
METHODS: Their antiproliferative activity against a panel of primary cells and
cancer cell lines was determined by MTT assays and their apoptosis induction by
caspase-3 activation. Their ability to reduce the activity of HDAC was measured
by enzymatic assays and Western blot analyses of cellular HDAC substrates.
Additional effects on cancer cell migration were ascertained via
immunofluorescence staining of cytoskeleton components and three-dimensional
migration assays. The chorioallantoic membrane assay was used as an in vivo model
to assess their antiangiogenic properties.
RESULTS: The 4-phenyl- and 4-(p-methoxyphenyl)-imidazole derivatives had a
greater antiproliferative and apoptosis inducing effect in a variety of cancer
cell lines when compared with the approved HDAC inhibitor SAHA, and most
distinctly so in non-malignant human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Like SAHA,
both compounds acted as pan-HDAC inhibitors. In 518A2 melanoma cells, they led to
hyperacetylation of histones and of the cytoplasmic HDAC6 substrate
alpha-tubulin. As a consequence, they inhibited the migration and invasion of
these cells in transwell invasion assays. In keeping with its pronounced impact
on endothelial cells, the 4-phenyl-imidazole derivative also inhibited the growth
and sprouting of blood vessels in the chorioallantoic membrane of fertilized hen 
eggs.
CONCLUSIONS: The 4-phenyl- and 4-(p-methoxyphenyl)-imidazole compounds combine
the antivascular effects of 4,5-diarylimidazoles with HDAC inhibition by
cinnamoyl hydroxamates and show additional antimetastatic activity. They are
promising candidates for pleiotropic HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 25618416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;17(2):113-22. doi: 10.1038/ncb3091. Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Lineage specificity of primary cilia in the mouse embryo.

Bangs FK(1), Schrode N(1), Hadjantonakis AK(1), Anderson KV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue New York, New York 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;17(2):109-11.

Primary cilia are required for vertebrate cells to respond to specific
intercellular signals. Here we define when and where primary cilia appear in the 
mouse embryo using a transgenic line that expresses ARL13B-mCherry in cilia and
Centrin 2-GFP in centrosomes. Primary cilia first appear on cells of the epiblast
at E6.0 and are subsequently present on all derivatives of the epiblast. In
contrast, extraembryonic cells of the visceral endoderm and trophectoderm
lineages have centrosomes but no cilia. Stem cell lines derived from embryonic
lineages recapitulate the in vivo pattern: epiblast stem cells are ciliated,
whereas trophoblast stem cells and extraembryonic endoderm (XEN) stem cells lack 
cilia. Basal bodies in XEN cells are mature and can form cilia when the
AURKA-HDAC6 cilium disassembly pathway is inhibited. The lineage-dependent
distribution of cilia is stable throughout much of gestation, defining which
cells in the placenta and yolk sac are able to respond to Hedgehog ligands.

PMCID: PMC4406239
PMID: 25599390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Planta Med. 2015 Feb;81(3):222-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1396149. Epub 2015 Jan 15.

Aceroside VIII is a new natural selective HDAC6 inhibitor that synergistically
enhances the anticancer activity of HDAC inhibitor in HT29 cells.

Ryu HW(1), Lee DH(1), Shin DH(1), Kim SH(1), Kwon SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Yonsei Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Yonsei
University, Incheon, Republic of Korea.

The identification of new isoform-specific histone deacetylase inhibitors is
important for revealing the biological functions of individual histone
deacetylase and for determining their potential use as therapeutic agents. Among 
the 11 zinc-dependent histone deacetylases that have been identified in humans,
histone deacetylase 6 is a structurally and functionally unique enzyme. Here, we 
tested the inhibitory activity of diarylheptanoids isolated from Betula
platyphylla against histone deacetylase 6. Aceroside VIII selectively inhibited
histone deacetylase 6 catalytic activity and the combined treatment of aceroside 
VIII or (-)-centrolobol with A452, another selective histone deacetylase 6
inhibitor, led to a synergistic increase in levels of acetylated a-tubulin.
Aceroside VIII, paltyphyllone, and (-)-centrolobol synergistically enhanced the
induction of apoptosis and growth inhibition by A452. Consistent with these
results, A452 in combination with aceroside VIII, paltyphyllone, or
(-)-centrolobol was more potent than either drug alone for the induction of
apoptosis. Together, these findings indicate that aceroside VIII is a specific
histone deacetylase 6 inhibitor and points to a mechanism by which natural
histone deacetylase 6-selective inhibitors may enhance the efficacy of other
histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors in colon cancer cells.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 25590368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Mar;14(3):727-39. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0481. Epub 
2014 Dec 31.

Histone deacetylase 6 represents a novel drug target in the oncogenic Hedgehog
signaling pathway.

Dhanyamraju PK(1), Holz PS(1), Finkernagel F(1), Fendrich V(2), Lauth M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Philipps University, Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), 
Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Marburg, Germany. (2)Department of
Surgery, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany. (3)Philipps University, Institute
of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor Biology and
Immunology, Marburg, Germany. lauth@imt.uni-marburg.de.

Uncontrolled Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is the cause of several malignancies,
including the pediatric cancer medulloblastoma, a neuroectodermal tumor affecting
the cerebellum. Despite the development of potent Hh pathway antagonists,
medulloblastoma drug resistance is still an unresolved issue that requires the
identification of novel drug targets. Following up on our observation that
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) expression was increased in Hh-driven
medulloblastoma, we found that this enzyme is essential for full Hh pathway
activation. Intriguingly, these stimulatory effects of HDAC6 are partly
integrated downstream of primary cilia, a known HDAC6-regulated structure. In
addition, HDAC6 is also required for the complete repression of basal Hh target
gene expression. These contrasting effects are mediated by HDAC6's impact on Gli2
mRNA and GLI3 protein expression. As a result of this complex interaction with Hh
signaling, global transcriptome analysis revealed that HDAC6 regulates only a
subset of Smoothened- and Gli-driven genes, including all well-established Hh
targets such as Ptch1 or Gli1. Importantly, medulloblastoma cell survival was
severely compromised by HDAC6 inhibition in vitro and pharmacologic HDAC6
blockade strongly reduced tumor growth in an in vivo allograft model. In summary,
our data describe an important role for HDAC6 in regulating the mammalian Hh
pathway and encourage further studies focusing on HDAC6 as a novel drug target in
medulloblastoma.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25552369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Breast Cancer. 2014 Dec;17(4):323-31. doi: 10.4048/jbc.2014.17.4.323. Epub 2014
Dec 26.

Expression of Histone Deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6 in Invasive
Ductal Carcinomas of the Breast.

Seo J(1), Min SK(1), Park HR(1), Kim DH(1), Kwon MJ(1), Kim LS(2), Ju YS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym
University College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea. (2)Division of Breast and
Endocrine Surgery, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University
College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea. (3)Department of Occupation and Environmental
Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University College of
Medicine, Anyang, Korea.

PURPOSE: DNA deacetylation by histone deacetylase (HDAC) is an important
mechanism involved in the oncogenic tumorigenesis of breast cancer. Previous
studies have reported an association of the estrogen receptor (ER) with HDACs and
demonstrated the efficacy of HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of breast cancers 
via in vitro experiments. In this study, we examined the association of HDAC
expression with clinicopathological parameters and disease-specific survival.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6 was
performed using tissue microarrays in 300 invasive ductal carcinomas. IHC scoring
was determined by multiplication of the intensity (0 to 3) and the proportion (0 
to 4) of staining, and we classified tumors into low- and high-HDAC expression
groups.
RESULTS: High expression of HDAC1 was correlated with the molecular subtype
(p=0.001) and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) amplification (p=0.012).
High expression of HDAC6 was correlated with a younger age (p<0.001), ER
expression (p=0.025), progesterone receptor expression (p=0.034), molecular
subtype (p=0.023), and HER2 amplification (p=0.011). High HDAC1 expression was
correlated with luminal A tumors (p=0.001), while high HDAC6 expression was more 
common in luminal B tumors (p=0.023). Although the expression of HDACs did not
exhibit prognostic significance in the entire cohort, high expression of HDAC1
and HDAC6 was associated with improved overall survival (OS) in patients with
ER-positive tumors (p=0.017 and p=0.029, respectively), and high expression of
HDAC2 was correlated with improved OS in ER-negative tumors (p=0.048) on
univariate analysis. Furthermore, high HDAC6 expression was associated with
improved disease-free survival (p=0.048) on multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: HDAC1 expression is significantly correlated with the molecular
subtypes of tumors, with the highest expression being observed in luminal A
tumors. HDAC6 is a significantly correlated with ER expression and the molecular 
subtype, thereby supporting the estrogen regulatory property of HDAC6. HDAC1 and 
HDAC6 expression are good prognostic factors for ER-positive tumors.

PMCID: PMC4278050
PMID: 25548579  [PubMed]


164. Cancer Cell Int. 2014 Dec 5;14(1):139. doi: 10.1186/s12935-014-0139-z.
eCollection 2014.

Histone deacetylase 6 activity is critical for the metastasis of Burkitt's
lymphoma cells.

Ding N(1), Ping L(1), Feng L(1), Zheng X(1), Song Y(1), Zhu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Lymphoma, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, No.52 Fucheng Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100142 China.

BACKGROUND: Burkitt's lymphoma is an aggressive malignancy with high risk of
metastasis to extranodal sites, such as bone marrow and central nervous system.
The prognosis of metastatic Burkitt's lymphoma is poor. Here we sought to
identify a role of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in the metastasis of Burkitt's
lymphoma cells.
METHODS: Burkitt's lymphoma cells were pharmacologically treated with niltubacin,
tubacin or sodium butyrate (NaB) or transfected with siRNAs to knock down the
expression of HDAC6. Cell migration and invasion ability were measured by
transwell assay, and cell cycle progression was analyzed by flow cytometry. Cell 
adhesion and proliferation was determined by CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell
viability assay kit. Cell morphological alteration and microtubule stability were
analyzed by immunofluorescence staining. Effect of niltubacin, tubacin and NaB on
acetylated tubulin and siRNA efficacy were measured by western blotting.
RESULTS: Suppression of histone deacetylase 6 activity significantly compromised 
the migration and invasion of Burkitt's lymphoma cells, without affecting cell
proliferation and cell cycle progression. Mechanistic study revealed that HDAC6
modulated chemokine induced cell shape elongation and cell adhesion probably
through its action on microtubule dynamics.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a critical role of HDAC6 in the metastasis of
Burkitt's lymphoma cells, suggesting that pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6
could be a promising strategy for the management of metastatic Burkitt's
lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC4276069
PMID: 25546298  [PubMed]


165. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):883-90. doi: 10.1021/cb500838r. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

HDAC6 inhibitors modulate Lys49 acetylation and membrane localization of
ß-catenin in human iPSC-derived neuronal cells.

Iaconelli J(1,)(2), Huang JH(1,)(2), Berkovitch SS(1,)(2), Chattopadhyay
S(2,)(3), Mazitschek R(2,)(4), Schreiber SL(2,)(5), Haggarty SJ(1), Karmacharya
R(1,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Drugs and Diagnostics, Psychiatric and
Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, Harvard
Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114,
United States. (2)Center for the Science of Therapeutics, Broad Institute of
Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United States. (3)<U+2225>MGH Cancer
Center, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, United States. (4)<U+22A5>Center for Systems Biology, Harvard
Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114,
United States. (5)#Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and
Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, United
States. (6)§Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder Program, McLean Hospital, Belmont,
Massachusetts 02478, United States.

We examined the effects of isoform-specific histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
on ß-catenin posttranslational modifications in neural progenitor cells (NPCs)
derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). ß-catenin is a
multifunctional protein with important roles in the developing and adult central 
nervous system. Activation of the Wnt pathway results in stabilization and
nuclear translocation of ß-catenin, resulting in activation of multiple target
genes. In addition, ß-catenin forms a complex with cadherins at the plasma
membrane as part of the adherens junctions. The N-terminus of ß-catenin has
phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and acetylation sites that regulate its
stability and signaling. In the absence of a Wnt signal, Ser33, Ser37, and Thr41 
are constitutively phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK3ß).
ß-Catenin phosphorylated at these sites is recognized by ß-transducin
repeat-containing protein (ßTrCP), which results in ubiquitination and
degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The N-terminal regulatory domain
of ß-catenin also includes Ser45, a phosphorylation site for Casein Kinase 1a
(CK1a) and Lys49, which is acetylated by the acetyltransferase
p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF). The relevance of Lys49 acetylation and Ser45
phosphorylation to the function of ß-catenin is an active area of investigation. 
We find that HDAC6 inhibitors increase Lys49 acetylation and Ser45
phosphorylation but do not affect Ser33, Ser37, and Thr41 phosphorylation. Lys49 
acetylation results in decreased ubiquitination of ß-catenin in the presence of
proteasome inhibition. While increased Lys49 acetylation does not affect total
levels of ß-catenin, it results in increased membrane localization of ß-catenin.

PMCID: PMC4372110
PMID: 25546293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014 Dec 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Loss of TDP-43 Inhibits Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis-Linked Mutant SOD1
Aggresome Formation in an HDAC6-Dependent Manner.

Xia Q(1), Wang H(1), Zhang Y(1), Ying Z(1), Wang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Translational Research and Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases and College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal, adult-onset, and progressive
neurodegenerative disorder with no cure. Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) was
the first identified protein associated with familial ALS; and aggresome
formation of misfolded SOD1 is closely associated with ALS pathogenesis. HDAC6,
one of the histone deacetylase family members, has already been demonstrated to
play an important role in regulating aggresome formation of misfolded proteins
and protecting cells against the toxicity induced by misfolded proteins. In this 
study, we found that in a cellular model with impaired proteasome activity, the
TAR DNA-binding protein 43, which is closely linked with ALS and associated with 
various neurodegenerative disorders such as frontotemporal lobar degeneration,
Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease, can regulate mutant SOD1 aggresome 
formation through an HDAC6-dependent manner. TDP-43 deficiency did not affect
poly-ubiquitination of mutant SOD1, whereas it greatly decreased the expression
level of HDAC6, which is required for aggresome formation of ALS-linked mutant
SOD1. Moreover, overexpression of siRNA-resistant HDAC6 restored mutant SOD1
aggresome formation in TDP-43-knockdown cells. Thus, our data provide evidence
that TDP-43 plays an important role in mutant SOD1 aggresome formation through
its regulation of HDAC6.

PMID: 25537013  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


167. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 13;290(7):4215-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.600916. Epub 2014 
Dec 15.

Histone deacetylase 6 is a FoxO transcription factor-dependent effector in
skeletal muscle atrophy.

Ratti F(1), Ramond F(1), Moncollin V(1), Simonet T(1), Milan G(2), Méjat A(1),
Thomas JL(1), Streichenberger N(3), Gilquin B(4), Matthias P(5), Khochbin S(4),
Sandri M(2), Schaeffer L(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon; CNRS UMR 5239; Equipe
Différenciation Neuromusculaire, Université de Lyon, 46 allée d'Italie 69364 Lyon
cedex 07, France, Université Lyon 1; Hospices civils de Lyon. (2)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, 35131 Padova, Italy, and Dulbecco
Telethon Institute, Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, 35129 Padova,
Italy. (3)Université Lyon 1; Hospices civils de Lyon. (4)INSERM U309, Institut
Albert Bonniot, 38706 La Tronche Cedex, France. (5)Friedrich Miescher Institute, 
Maulbeerstrasse 66, 4058 Basel, Switzerland. (6)From the Ecole Normale Supérieure
de Lyon; CNRS UMR 5239; Equipe Différenciation Neuromusculaire, Université de
Lyon, 46 allée d'Italie 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France, Université Lyon 1; Hospices 
civils de Lyon, Laurent.Schaeffer@ens-lyon.fr.

Skeletal muscle atrophy is a severe condition of muscle mass loss. Muscle atrophy
is caused by a down-regulation of protein synthesis and by an increase of protein
breakdown due to the ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy activation.
Up-regulation of specific genes, such as the muscle-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase 
MAFbx, by FoxO transcription factors is essential to initiate muscle protein
ubiquitination and degradation during atrophy. HDAC6 is a particular HDAC, which 
is functionally related to the ubiquitin proteasome system via its ubiquitin
binding domain. We show that HDAC6 is up-regulated during muscle atrophy. HDAC6
activation is dependent on the transcription factor FoxO3a, and the inactivation 
of HDAC6 in mice protects against muscle wasting. HDAC6 is able to interact with 
MAFbx, a key ubiquitin ligase involved in muscle atrophy. Our findings
demonstrate the implication of HDAC6 in skeletal muscle wasting and identify
HDAC6 as a new downstream target of FoxO3a in stress response. This work provides
new insights in skeletal muscle atrophy development and opens interesting
perspectives on HDAC6 as a valuable marker of muscle atrophy and a potential
target for pharmacological treatments.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4326830
PMID: 25516595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;15(11):1561-70. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.956632.

HDAC6 regulates neuroblastoma cell migration and may play a role in the invasion 
process.

Zhang L(1), Liu N, Xie S, He X, Zhou J, Liu M, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology; College of Life Sciences
; Nankai University ; Tianjin China.

Neuroblastoma is one of the most prevalent pediatric extracranial solid tumors
and is often diagnosed after dissemination has occurred. Despite recent advances 
in multimodal therapies of this malignancy, its therapeutic efficacy remains
poor. Novel treatment strategies are thus in great need. Herein, we demonstrate
that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a member of the deacetylase family that is
localized predominantly in the cytoplasm, is involved in neuroblastoma
dissemination. HDAC6 expression in neuroblastoma tissue samples varied with the
site of the tumor. HDAC6 showed little impact on the proliferation of
neuroblastoma cells. Instead, downregulation of HDAC6 expression by RNA
interference or inhibition of its catalytic activity by the pharmacological
inhibitor tubacin significantly decreased the migration of 3 human malignant
neuroblastoma cell lines and reduced the invasion ability of one of the 3 cell
lines, but only slightly affected the migration and invasion of human normal
brain glial cells. Our data further revealed that the regulation of neuroblastoma
cell migration by HDAC6 was mediated by its effects on cell polarization and
adhesion. These findings suggest a role for HDAC6 in neuroblastoma dissemination 
and a potential of using HDAC6 inhibitors for the treatment of this malignancy.

PMID: 25482939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Epigenetics. 2014 Nov;9(11):1511-20. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.983367.

Dysregulated Class I histone deacetylases are indicators of poor prognosis in
multiple myeloma.

Mithraprabhu S(1), Kalff A, Chow A, Khong T, Spencer A.

Author information: 
(1)a Myeloma Research Group; Division of Blood Cancers; Australian Center for
Blood Diseases; Alfred Hospital; Monash University ; Melbourne , Australia.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) control gene expression through their ability to
acetylate proteins, thereby influencing a diverse range of cellular functions.
Class I HDAC (HDAC1-3 and 8) and HDAC6 are predominantly upregulated in
malignancies and their altered expression in some cancers has a significant
prognostic implication. The expression and prognostic consequence of dysregulated
Class I HDAC and HDAC6, key players in multiple myeloma (MM), are unknown. This
study hypothesized that HDAC are dysregulated in MM and patients with high
expression have significantly poorer prognostic outcomes. Quantitative PCR for 11
HDAC (Class I, II, and IV) was performed in genetically heterogeneous human
myeloma cell lines (HMCL) and primary MM and compared to normal plasma cells
(PC). In HMCL, HDAC1-3 and 8 (Class I), and HDAC5 and HDAC10 (Class II) were
significantly upregulated compared to normal PC. In primary MM, the median
expression level of all of the HDAC, except HDAC1 and HDAC11, were elevated when 
compared to normal PC. Patients with higher levels of HDAC1-3, HDAC4, HDAC6, and 
HDAC11 transcripts demonstrated a significantly shorter progression-free survival
(PFS). Immunohistochemical staining for HDAC1 and HDAC6 on bone marrow trephines 
from a uniformly treated cohort of transplant eligible MM patients revealed that 
HDAC1 protein was detectable in most patients and that higher levels of MM cell
HDAC1 protein expression (=90 % versus =20 % MM cell positivity) correlated with 
both shorter PFS (P = 0 .07) and shorter overall survival (P = 0 .003).
Conversely, while the majority of patients expressed HDAC6, there was no
correlation between HDAC6 levels and patient outcome. Together, these results
indicate that overexpression of Class I HDAC, particularly HDAC1, is associated
with poor prognosis in MM.

PMCID: PMC4622977
PMID: 25482492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Protein Cell. 2015 Feb;6(2):152-6. doi: 10.1007/s13238-014-0120-6.

Overexpression of Hdac6 enhances resistance to virus infection in embryonic stem 
cells and in mice.

Wang D(1), Meng Q, Huo L, Yang M, Wang L, Chen X, Wang J, Li Z, Ye X, Liu N, Li
Q, Dai Z, Ouyang H, Li N, Zhou J, Chen L, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, China.

PMCID: PMC4312767
PMID: 25482409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Methods. 2015 Jan;71:146-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.11.015. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Benchmarking methods and data sets for ligand enrichment assessment in virtual
screening.

Xia J(1), Tilahun EL(2), Reid TE(2), Zhang L(3), Wang XS(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China; Molecular Modeling and
Drug Discovery Core for District of Columbia Developmental Center for AIDS
Research (DC D-CFAR), Laboratory of Cheminformatics and Drug Design, Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Howard University, Washington,
DC 20059, USA. (2)Molecular Modeling and Drug Discovery Core for District of
Columbia Developmental Center for AIDS Research (DC D-CFAR), Laboratory of
Cheminformatics and Drug Design, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College
of Pharmacy, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China. Electronic address:
liangren@bjmu.edu.cn. (4)Molecular Modeling and Drug Discovery Core for District 
of Columbia Developmental Center for AIDS Research (DC D-CFAR), Laboratory of
Cheminformatics and Drug Design, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College
of Pharmacy, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA. Electronic address:
x.simon.wang@gmail.com.

Retrospective small-scale virtual screening (VS) based on benchmarking data sets 
has been widely used to estimate ligand enrichments of VS approaches in the
prospective (i.e. real-world) efforts. However, the intrinsic differences of
benchmarking sets to the real screening chemical libraries can cause biased
assessment. Herein, we summarize the history of benchmarking methods as well as
data sets and highlight three main types of biases found in benchmarking sets,
i.e. "analogue bias", "artificial enrichment" and "false negative". In addition, 
we introduce our recent algorithm to build maximum-unbiased benchmarking sets
applicable to both ligand-based and structure-based VS approaches, and its
implementations to three important human histone deacetylases (HDACs) isoforms,
i.e. HDAC1, HDAC6 and HDAC8. The leave-one-out cross-validation (LOO CV)
demonstrates that the benchmarking sets built by our algorithm are
maximum-unbiased as measured by property matching, ROC curves and AUCs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4278665
PMID: 25481478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 May;135(5):1228-39. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.10.002.
Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Histone deacetylase 6 inhibition impairs effector CD8 T-cell functions during
skin inflammation.

Tsuji G(1), Okiyama N(1), Villarroel VA(1), Katz SI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md. (2)Dermatology Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Md. Electronic address: katzs@od.niams.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Broad-spectrum histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are useful in
the treatment of allergic and autoimmune diseases and malignancy. However, use of
more specific HDAC inhibitors might limit the toxicities caused by HDAC
inhibition. HDAC6, a member of the HDAC family, is highly expressed on CD8 T
cells and has been shown to regulate immune responses through interactions
between T cells and antigen-presenting cells. However, the mechanism by which
HDAC6 inhibition affects the activation and functions of CD8 T cells is unclear.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated the role or roles of HDAC6 in CD8 T-cell activation
and functions during skin inflammation in vitro and in vivo and examined the
mechanism by which HDAC6 inhibition modifies T-cell receptor signaling in vitro.
METHODS: We assessed the clinical and biological effects of ACY-1215, an
HDAC6-specific inhibitor, by using murine CD8 T cell-related skin disease models,
including contact hypersensitivity (CHS) and experimental graft-versus-host
disease (GVHD)-like disease.
RESULTS: ACY-1215, an HDAC6 inhibitor, prevented the development of CHS and
GVHD-like disease in vivo by modulating CD8 T-cell activation and functions;
abrogated the induction of effector T cells from naive CD8 T cells by means of
anti-CD3/CD28 antibody- or antigen-specific stimulation in vitro; and enhanced
the binding of acetylated heat shock protein 90 to lymphocyte-specific protein
tyrosine kinase in vitro, disrupting lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase 
phosphorylation and leading to impairment of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway.
CONCLUSION: HDAC6, a key modifier of T-cell receptor signaling, might represent a
novel target for the treatment of CD8 T cell-related skin diseases, including CHS
and GVHD.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4426217 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25458911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Dec 1;24(23):5450-4.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors derived from
1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyrrolo[1,2-a]pyrazine and related heterocycles selective for
the HDAC6 isoform.

Blackburn C, Barrett C, Brunson M, Chin J, England D, Garcia K, Gigstad K, Gould 
A, Gutierrez J, Hoar K, Rowland RS, Tsu C, Ringeling J, Wager K, Xu H.

Acyl derivatives of 4-(aminomethyl)-N-hydroxybenzamide are potent sub-type
selective HDAC6 inhibitors. Constrained heterocyclic analogs based on
1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyrrolo[1,2-a]pyrazine show further enhanced HDAC6 selectivity 
and inhibitory activity in cells. Homology models suggest that the heterocyclic
spacer can more effectively access the wider catalytic channel of HDAC6 compared 
to other HDAC sub-types.

PMID: 25454270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Neurotoxicology. 2014 Dec;45:178-84. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2014.10.008. Epub 2014 
Oct 27.

Differential effects of binge methamphetamine injections on the mRNA expression
of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the rat striatum.

Omonijo O(1), Wongprayoon P(2), Ladenheim B(1), McCoy MT(1), Govitrapong P(2),
Jayanthi S(1), Cadet JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIDA Intramural Research Program,
251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224, United States. (2)Research Center for
Neuroscience, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Thailand.
(3)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIDA Intramural Research Program,
251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224, United States. Electronic address:
jcadet@intra.nida.nih.gov.

Methamphetamine use disorder is characterized by recurrent binge episodes. Humans
addicted to methamphetamine experience various degrees of cognitive deficits and 
show evidence of neurodegenerative processes in the brain. Binge injections of
METH to rodents also cause significant toxic changes in the brain. In addition,
this pattern of METH injections can alter gene expression in the dorsal striatum.
Gene expression is regulated, in part, by histone deacetylation. We thus tested
the possibility that METH toxic doses might cause changes in the mRNA levels of
histone deacetylases (HDACs). We found that METH did produce significant
decreases in the mRNA expression of HDAC8, which is a class I HDAC. METH also
decreased expression of HDAC6, HDAC9, and HDAC10 that are class II HDACs. The
expression of the class IV HDAC, HDAC11, was also suppressed by METH. The
expression of Sirt2, Sirt5, and Sirt6 that are members of class III HDACs was
also downregulated by METH injections. Our findings implicate changes in HDAC
expression may be an early indicator of impending METH-induced neurotoxicity in
the striatum. This idea is consistent with the accumulated evidence that some
HDACs are involved in neurodegenerative processes in the brain.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4306289
PMID: 25452209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Ethnopharmacol. 2015 Jan 15;159:102-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.10.062. Epub
2014 Nov 15.

Neuroprotective effect of water extract of Panax ginseng on
corticosterone-induced apoptosis in PC12 cells and its underlying molecule
mechanisms.

Jiang Y(1), Li Z(1), Liu Y(1), Liu X(1), Chang Q(1), Liao Y(1), Pan R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, China. (2)Institute of Medicinal
Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address: rlpan@implad.ac.cn.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The root of Panax ginseng C.A. Meyer (Family
Araliaceae) is an important medicinal plant which has been employed as a panacea 
for more than 2,000 years in China. It has the actions of invigorating primordial
qi, recovering pulse and desertion, engendering liquid, and calming spirit. The
water extract of Panax ginseng (WEG) has been used to treat kinds of central
nervous system disorders, such as depression, insomnia, Alzheimer<U+05F3>s disease and
Parkinson<U+05F3>s disease. Our previous work has demonstrated that WEG possessed
antidepressant-like activities in both acute and chronic stress models of
depression. Nevertheless, there are no studies on the cytoprotection and
potential mechanisms of WEG on corticosterone-induced apoptosis. The present
study focuses on cytoprotection against corticosterone-induced neurotoxicity in
PC12 cells and its underlying molecule mechanisms of the antidepressant-like
effect of WEG.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PC12 cells were treated with 250 µmol/L corticosterone
in the absence or presence of WEG for 24h, then 3-(4,5-dimethy
thiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) detection, Hoechst33342 staining and TUNEL staining were investigated to
confirm the neuroprotection of WEG. Then, mitochondrial permeability transition
pore (mPTP), mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), intracellular Ca(2+)
([Ca(2+)]i), reactive oxygen species (ROS) concentration, and the expression
level of glucocorticoid receptor (GR), heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), histone
deactylase 6 (HDAC6), glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), growth arrest and DNA
damage inducible protein 153 (GADD153), X-box DNA-binding protein-1 (XBP-1),
caspase-12, cytochrome C, inhibitor of caspase-activated deoxyribonuclease
(ICAD), caspase-3 and caspase-9 were assessed by Western Blot analysis to
understand the molecule mechanisms of neuroprotection of WEG.
RESULTS: WEG partly reversed corticosterone-induced damage in PC12 cells, which
increased cell viability, decreased LDH release, and attenuated
corticosterone-induced apoptosis as compared with the corticosterone-treated
group. Mechanistically, compared with the corticosterone-treated group, WEG
strongly attenuated [Ca(2+)]i overload and ROS level, and restored mitochondrial 
function, including mPTP and MMP. Furthermore, WEG strongly up-regulated the
expression of GR and HDAC6, and down-regulated the expression of Hsp90,
cytochrome C, ICAD, caspase-3, caspase-9 as well as endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-related proteins, such as GADD153, GRP78, XBP-1, and caspase-12.
CONCLUSION: WEG possessed neuroprotection against corticosterone-induced damage
in PC12 cells, and the underlying molecule mechanisms was depended on the
intervening of HDAC6 and HSP90 of the GR-related function proteins, and
subsequent restoration of ER and mitochondria functions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb 15;77(4):345-55. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.07.036.
Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Enhancement of stress resilience through histone deacetylase 6-mediated
regulation of glucocorticoid receptor chaperone dynamics.

Jochems J(1), Teegarden SL(1), Chen Y(1), Boulden J(1), Challis C(1), Ben-Dor
GA(1), Kim SF(1), Berton O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia Pennsylvania. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of
Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia Pennsylvania.. Electronic
address: bertonol@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb 15;77(4):310-1.

BACKGROUND: Acetylation of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) regulates downstream
hormone signaling via the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), but the role of this
molecular mechanism in stress homeostasis is poorly understood. We tested whether
acetylation of Hsp90 in the brain predicts and modulates the behavioral sequelae 
of a mouse model of social stress.
METHODS: Mice subjected to chronic social defeat stress were stratified into
resilient and vulnerable subpopulations. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
function was probed using a dexamethasone/corticotropin-releasing factor test.
Measurements of Hsp90 acetylation, Hsp90-GR interactions, and GR translocation
were performed in the dorsal raphe nucleus. To manipulate Hsp90 acetylation, we
pharmacologically inhibited histone deacetylase 6, a known deacetylase of Hsp90, 
or overexpressed a point mutant that mimics the hyperacetylated state of Hsp90 at
lysine K294.
RESULTS: Lower acetylated Hsp90, higher GR-Hsp90 association, and enhanced GR
translocation were observed in dorsal raphe nucleus of vulnerable mice after
chronic social defeat stress. Administration of ACY-738, a histone deacetylase
6-selective inhibitor, led to Hsp90 hyperacetylation in brain and in neuronal
culture. In cell-based assays, ACY-738 increased the relative association of
Hsp90 with FK506 binding protein 51 versus FK506 binding protein 52 and inhibited
hormone-induced GR translocation. This effect was replicated by overexpressing
the acetylation-mimic point mutant of Hsp90. In vivo, ACY-738 promoted resilience
to chronic social defeat stress, and serotonin-selective viral overexpression of 
the acetylation-mimic mutant of Hsp90 in raphe neurons reproduced the behavioral 
effect of ACY-738.
CONCLUSIONS: Hyperacetylation of Hsp90 is a predictor and causal molecular
determinant of stress resilience in mice. Brain-penetrant histone deacetylase 6
inhibitors increase Hsp90 acetylation and modulate GR chaperone dynamics offering
a promising strategy to curtail deleterious socioaffective effects of stress and 
glucocorticoids.

Copyright © 2015 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4297530
PMID: 25442004  [PubMed - in process]


177. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Apr;55(4):1031-46. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0460-y. Epub 2014
Dec 2.

Inhibition of HDAC6 modifies tau inclusion body formation and impairs autophagic 
clearance.

Leyk J(1), Goldbaum O, Noack M, Richter-Landsberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Molecular Neurobiology, University of Oldenburg, 
POB 2503, 26111, Oldenburg, Germany.

Proteinaceous inclusions in nerve cells and glia are a defining neuropathological
hallmark in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's
disease, Parkinson's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and
corticobasal degeneration (CBD). Their occurrence may be related to malfunctions 
of the proteolytic degradation systems. In cultured oligodendrocytes, proteasomal
inhibition leads to protein aggregate formation resembling coiled bodies, which
are characteristic for PSP and CBD. Large protein aggregates are excluded from
the proteasome and can only be degraded by autophagy, a lysosomal pathway.
Autophagy is a highly selective process, which requires a variety of receptor
proteins for ubiquitinated proteins, such as p62 and histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6). HDAC6 is mainly localized in the cytoplasm, and alpha-tubulin is its
major substrate. HDAC6 is considered as a sensor of proteasomal stress; it is
involved in the autophagosomal pathway and can mediate the retrograde transport
of ubiquitinated proteins along the microtubules. As we have shown recently,
HDAC6 is present in oligodendrocytes and its inhibition leads to morphological
alterations, microtubule bundling, modulation of acetylation, and phosphorylation
of the microtubule-associated protein tau. The present study was undertaken to
investigate whether HDAC6 is involved in protein aggregate formation in
oligodendrocytes and whether its inhibition modifies the consequences of
MG-132-induced inhibition of the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). The data show
that HDAC6 and acetylated tau are recruited to protein aggregates after
proteasomal inhibition. Pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 by the selective
inhibitor tubastatin A (TST) and its small hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated
downregulation alters the assembly of MG-132-induced compact protein aggregates. 
After TST treatment, they appear more diffusely dispersed throughout the
cytoplasm. This is not a protective means but promotes the onset of apoptotic
cell death. Furthermore, the heat shock response is altered, and TST suppresses
the MG-132-stimulated induction of HSP70. To test whether the alteration of
protein aggregate formation is related to the influence of HDAC6 on the
autophagic degradation system, an oligodendroglial cell line, i.e., OLN-93 cells 
stably expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)-microtubule associated protein 
light chain 3 (LC3) and tau, was used. During autophagosome formation, endogenous
LC3 is processed to LC3-I, which is then converted to LC3-II. An increase of
LC3-II is used as a reliable marker for autophagosome formation and abundance. It
is demonstrated that inhibition of HDAC6 leads to the accumulation of
LC3-positive autophagosomal vacuoles and an increase in LC3-II immunoreactivity, 
but the autophagic flux is rather impaired. Hence, the inhibition or
dysregulation of HDAC6 contributes to stress responses and pathological processes
in oligodendrocytes.

PMID: 25434725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 16;290(3):1485-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.593871. Epub 2014 
Nov 26.

Interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) and ISG15-linked proteins can associate
with members of the selective autophagic process, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)
and SQSTM1/p62.

Nakashima H(1), Nguyen T(1), Goins WF(2), Chiocca EA(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Harvey Cushing Neuro-oncology Laboratories, Harvard Institutes of
Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery and Institute for the Neurosciences at the
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and. (2)Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219. (3)From the Harvey Cushing Neuro-oncology
Laboratories, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery and
Institute for the Neurosciences at the Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115 and EAChiocca@partners.org.

The ubiquitin-like interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) and its specific
E1, E2, and E3 enzymes are transcriptionally induced by type I IFNs. ISG15
conjugates newly synthesized proteins. ISG15 linkage to proteins appears to be an
important downstream IFN signaling event that discriminates cellular and
pathogenic proteins synthesized during IFN stimulation from existing proteins.
This eliminates potentially pathogenic proteins as the cell attempts to return to
normal homeostasis after IFN "stressed" conditions. However, the molecular events
that occur in this process are not well known. Here, we show that the C-terminal 
LRLRGG of ISG15 interacts with the binder of ubiquitin zinc finger (BUZ) domain
of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Because HDAC6 is involved in the autophagic
clearance of ubiquitinated aggregates during which SQSTM1/p62 plays a major role 
as a cargo adapter, we also were able to confirm that p62 binds to ISG15 protein 
and its conjugated proteins upon forced expression. Both HDAC6 and p62
co-localized with ISG15 in an insoluble fraction of the cytosol, and this
co-localization was magnified by the proteasome inhibitor MG132. In addition,
ISG15 was degraded via the lysosome. Overexpression of ISG15, which leads to an
increased conjugation level of the cellular proteome, enhanced autophagic
degradation independently of IFN signaling transduction. These results thus
indicate that ISG15 conjugation marks proteins for interaction with HDAC6 and p62
upon forced stressful conditions likely as a step toward autophagic clearance.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4340396
PMID: 25429107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Int J Oncol. 2015 Feb;46(2):474-86. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2773. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Targeting the integrated networks of aggresome formation, proteasome, and
autophagy potentiates ER stress-mediated cell death in multiple myeloma cells.

Moriya S(1), Komatsu S(2), Yamasaki K(1), Kawai Y(1), Kokuba H(3), Hirota A(1),
Che XF(1), Inazu M(4), Gotoh A(5), Hiramoto M(1), Miyazawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Breast Oncology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Electron Microscopy, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Hematology, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.

The inhibitory effects of macrolide antibiotics including clarithromycin (CAM) on
autophagy flux have been reported. Although a macrolide antibiotic exhibits no
cytotoxicity, its combination with bortezomib (BZ), a proteasome inhibitor, for
the simultaneous blocking of the ubiquitin (Ub)-proteasome and autophagy-lysosome
pathways leads to enhanced multiple myeloma (MM) cell apoptosis induction via
stress overloading of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). As misfolded protein cargo 
is recruited by histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) to dynein motors for aggresome
transport, serving to sequester misfolded proteins, we further investigated the
cellular effects of targeting proteolytic pathways and aggresome formation
concomitantly in MM cells. Pronounced apoptosis was induced by the combination of
vorinostat [suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA); potently inhibits HDAC6] with
CAM and BZ compared with each reagent or a 2-reagent combination. CAM/BZ
treatment induced vimentin positive-aggresome formation along with the
accumulation of autolysosomes in the perinuclear region, whereas they were
inhibited in the presence of SAHA. The SAHA/CAM/BZ combination treatment
maximally upregulated genes related to ER stress including C/EBP homologous
protein (CHOP). Similarly to MM cell lines, enhanced cytotoxicity with CHOP
upregulation following SAHA/CAM/BZ treatment was shown by a wild-type murine
embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cell line; however, a CHOP-deficient MEF cell line
almost completely canceled this pronounced cytotoxicity. Knockdown of HDAC6 with 
siRNA exhibited further enhanced CAM/BZ-induced cytotoxicity and CHOP induction
along with the cancellation of aggresome formation. Targeting the integrated
networks of aggresome, proteasome, and autophagy is suggested to induce efficient
ER stress-mediated apoptosis in MM cells.

PMCID: PMC4277245
PMID: 25422130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cell Tissue Res. 2015 Feb;359(2):665-78. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-2039-x. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

HDAC6 deacetylates alpha tubulin in sperm and modulates sperm motility in
Holtzman rat.

Parab S(1), Shetty O, Gaonkar R, Balasinor N, Khole V, Parte P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gamete Immunobiology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health (ICMR), Mumbai, 400012, India.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is an alpha (a)-tubulin deacetylase and its
over-expression has been demonstrated to promote chemotactic cell movement.
Motility in sperm is driven by the flagella, the cytoskeletal structure
comprising the microtubules, which are heterodimers of a- and ß-tubulins. We have
hypothesized that HDAC6, by virtue of being an a-tubulin deacetylase, might
modulate sperm motility. However, the presence of HDAC6 on sperm has hitherto not
been reported. In this study, we have demonstrated, for the first time, the
presence of HDAC6 transcript and protein in the testicular and caudal sperm of
rat. We have observed a significantly overlapping expression of HDAC6 with acetyl
a-tubulin (Ac a-tubulin) in the mid-piece and principal piece of sperm flagella, 
and the co-precipitation of a-tubulin and Ac a-tubulin together with HDAC6 and
vice versa in sperm lysates. This indicates that HDAC6 interacts with a-tubulin. 
The HDAC6 activity of sperm, sperm motility and status of Ac a-tubulin
investigated in the presence of HDAC inhibitors Trichostatin A, Tubastatin A and 
sodium butyrate demonstrate that HDAC6 in sperm is catalytically active and that 
inhibitors of HDAC6 increase acetylation and restrict sperm motility. Thus, we
show that (1) active HDAC6 enzyme is present in sperm, (2) HDAC6 in sperm is able
to deacetylate a-tubulin, (3) inhibition of HDAC6 results in increased Ac
a-tubulin expression and (4) HDAC6 inhibition affects sperm motility. This
evidence suggests that HDAC6 is involved in modulating sperm movement.

PMID: 25411052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 2;111(48):E5178-86. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1415589111. Epub 2014 Nov 17.

Tubulin hyperacetylation is adaptive in cardiac proteotoxicity by promoting
autophagy.

McLendon PM(1), Ferguson BS(2), Osinska H(1), Bhuiyan MS(1), James J(1), McKinsey
TA(2), Robbins J(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Molecular
Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229; and. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology,
Anschutz Medical Campus, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045. (3)The 
Heart Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Molecular Cardiovascular
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229; and
jeff.robbins@cchmc.org.

Proteinopathy causes cardiac disease, remodeling, and heart failure but the
pathological mechanisms remain obscure. Mutated aB-crystallin (CryAB(R120G)),
when expressed only in cardiomyocytes in transgenic (TG) mice, causes
desmin-related cardiomyopathy, a protein conformational disorder. The disease is 
characterized by the accumulation of toxic misfolded protein species that present
as perinuclear aggregates known as aggresomes. Previously, we have used the
CryAB(R120G) model to determine the underlying processes that result in these
pathologic accumulations and to explore potential therapeutic windows that might 
be used to decrease proteotoxicity. We noted that total ventricular protein is
hypoacetylated while hyperacetylation of a-tubulin, a substrate of histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) occurs. HDAC6 has critical roles in protein trafficking and
autophagy, but its function in the heart is obscure. Here, we test the hypothesis
that tubulin acetylation is an adaptive process in cardiomyocytes. By modulating 
HDAC6 levels and/or activity genetically and pharmacologically, we determined the
effects of tubulin acetylation on aggregate formation in CryAB(R120G)
cardiomyocytes. Increasing HDAC6 accelerated aggregate formation, whereas
siRNA-mediated knockdown or pharmacological inhibition ameliorated the process.
HDAC inhibition in vivo induced tubulin hyperacetylation in CryAB(R120G) TG
hearts, which prevented aggregate formation and significantly improved cardiac
function. HDAC6 inhibition also increased autophagic flux in cardiomyocytes, and 
increased autophagy in the diseased heart correlated with increased tubulin
acetylation, suggesting that autophagy induction might underlie the observed
cardioprotection. Taken together, our data suggest a mechanistic link between
tubulin hyperacetylation and autophagy induction and points to HDAC6 as a viable 
therapeutic target in cardiovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC4260547
PMID: 25404307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 14;9(11):e112754. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112754.
eCollection 2014.

Differential control of interleukin-6 mRNA levels by cellular distribution of
YB-1.

Kang S(1), Lee TA(1), Ra EA(1), Lee E(1), Choi Hj(1), Lee S(1), Park B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems biology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology,
Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea.

Cytokine production is essential for innate and adaptive immunity against
microbial invaders and must be tightly controlled. Cytokine messenger RNA (mRNA) 
is in constant flux between the nucleus and the cytoplasm and in transcription,
splicing, or decay; such processes must be tightly controlled. Here, we report a 
novel function of Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) in modulating interleukin-6
(IL-6) mRNA levels in a cell type-specific manner. In lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-stimulated macrophages, YB-1 interacts with IL-6 mRNA and actively
transports it to the extracellular space by YB-1-enriched vesicles, resulting in 
the proper maintenance of intracellular IL-6 mRNA levels. YB-1 secretion occurs
in a cell type-specific manner. Whereas macrophages actively secret YB-1,
dendritic cells maintain it predominantly in the cytoplasm even in response to
LPS. Intracellular YB-1 has the distinct function of regulating IL-6 mRNA
stability in dendritic cells. Moreover, because LPS differentially regulates the 
expression of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in macrophages and dendritic cells,
this stimulus might control YB-1 acetylation differentially in both cell types.
Taken together, these results suggest a unique feature of YB-1 in controlling
intracellular IL-6 mRNA levels in a cell type-specific manner, thereby leading to
functions that are dependent on the extracellular and intracellular distribution 
of YB-1.

PMCID: PMC4232504
PMID: 25398005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Jan;19(1):143-54. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12345. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

HDAC-inhibitor (S)-8 disrupts HDAC6-PP1 complex prompting A375 melanoma cell
growth arrest and apoptosis.

Balliu M(1), Guandalini L, Romanelli MN, D'Amico M, Paoletti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Firenze, Italy.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are agents capable of inducing growth
arrest and apoptosis in different tumour cell types. Previously, we reported a
series of novel HDACi obtained by hybridizing SAHA or oxamflatin with
1,4-benzodiazepines. Some of these hybrids proved effective against
haematological and solid cancer cells and, above all, compound (S)-8 has emerged 
for its activities in various biological systems. Here, we describe the
effectiveness of (S)-8 against highly metastatic human A375 melanoma cells by
using normal PIG1 melanocytes as control. (S)-8 prompted: acetylation of histones
H3/H4 and a-tubulin; G0 /G1 and G2 /M cell cycle arrest by rising p21 and
hypophos-phorylated RB levels; apoptosis involving the cleavage of PARP and
caspase 9, BAD protein augmentation and cytochrome c release; decrease in cell
motility, invasiveness and pro-angiogenic potential as shown by results of
wound-healing assay, down-regulation of MMP-2 and VEGF-A/VEGF-R2, besides
TIMP-1/TIMP-2 up-regulation; and also intracellular accumulation of melanin and
neutral lipids. The pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk, but not the antioxidant
N-acetyl-cysteine, contrasted these events. Mechanistically, (S)-8 allows the
disruption of cytoplasmic HDAC6-protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) complex in A375 cells
thus releasing the active PP1 that dephosphorylates AKT and blocks its downstream
pro-survival signalling. This view is consistent with results obtained by:
inhibiting PP1 with Calyculin A; using PPP1R2-transfected cells with impaired PP1
activity; monitoring drug-induced HDAC6-PP1 complex re-shuffling; and, abrogating
HDAC6 expression with specific siRNA. Altogether, (S)-8 proved very effective
against melanoma A375 cells, but not normal melanocytes, and safe to normal mice 
thus offering attractive clinical prospects for treating this aggressive
malignancy.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4288358
PMID: 25376115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Jan;41(1):26-38. doi: 10.1111/apt.13008. Epub 2014
Nov 4.

Review article: selective histone deacetylase isoforms as potential therapeutic
targets in inflammatory bowel diseases.

Felice C(1), Lewis A, Armuzzi A, Lindsay JO, Silver A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Digestive Diseases, Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK; IBD Unit, Internal Medicine and
Gastroenterology, Complesso Integrato Columbus, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: A link between histone deacetylases (HDACs) and intestinal
inflammation has been established. HDAC inhibitors that target gut-selective
inflammatory pathways represent a potential new therapeutic strategy in patients 
with refractory inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD).
AIMS: To review the use of selective HDAC inhibitors to treat gut inflammation
and to highlight potential improvements in selectivity/sensitivity by additional 
targeting of HDAC-regulating microRNAs (miRNAs).
METHODS: Original articles and reviews have been identified using PubMed search
terms: 'histone deacetylase', 'HDAC inhibitor', 'inflammatory bowel disease',
'gut inflammation,' and 'microRNA and HDAC'.
RESULTS: The use of butyrate in distal colitis provided the first evidence that
inhibition of HDACs decreases intestinal inflammation in IBD. HDAC inhibitors,
such as valproic acid, vorinostat and givinostat, reduce inflammation and tissue 
damage in experimental murine colitis. Potential mechanisms of action for HDAC
inhibitors include increased apoptosis, reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokine
release, regulation of transcription factors and modulation of HDAC-regulatory
miRNAs. HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC6, HDAC9 and HDAC10 isoforms seem to be specifically
involved in chronic intestinal inflammation, justifying the use of selective
inhibitors as new therapeutic strategies in IBD. Controlling miRNAs for these
isoforms can be identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The pro-inflammatory influence of HDACs in the gut has been
confirmed, but mostly in murine studies. Considerably more human data are
required to permit development of selective HDAC inhibitors for IBD treatment.
Inhibition of key HDAC isoforms in combination with modulation of HDAC-regulatory
miRNAs has potential as a novel therapeutic approach.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25367825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 4;5:5370. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6370.

The MST1/2-SAV1 complex of the Hippo pathway promotes ciliogenesis.

Kim M(1), Kim M(1), Lee MS(2), Kim CH(2), Lim DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National Creative Research Initiatives
Center, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon
305-701, Korea. (2)Department of Biology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon
305-764, Korea.

Primary cilia are microtubule-based organelles that protrude from polarized
epithelial cells. Although many structural and trafficking molecules that
regulate ciliogenesis have been discovered, signalling proteins are not well
defined. Here we show that the MST1/2-SAV1 complex, a core component of the Hippo
pathway, promotes ciliogenesis. MST1 is activated during ciliogenesis and
localizes to the basal body of cilia. Depletion of MST1/2 or SAV1 impairs
ciliogenesis in cultured cells and induces ciliopathy phenotypes in zebrafish.
MST1/2-SAV1 regulates ciliogenesis through two independent mechanisms: MST1/2
binds and phosphorylates Aurora kinase A (AURKA), leading to dissociation of the 
AURKA/HDAC6 cilia-disassembly complex; and MST1/2-SAV1 associates with the NPHP
transition-zone complex, promoting ciliary localization of multiple ciliary
cargoes. Our results suggest that components of the Hippo pathway contribute to
establish a polarized cell structure in addition to regulating proliferation.

PMID: 25367221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Science. 2014 Oct 24;346(6208):473-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1257037.

Influenza A virus uses the aggresome processing machinery for host cell entry.

Banerjee I(1), Miyake Y(2), Nobs SP(3), Schneider C(3), Horvath P(4), Kopf M(3), 
Matthias P(5), Helenius A(6), Yamauchi Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zurich, 
Switzerland. (2)Epigenetics, Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical
Research, Basel, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, ETH
Zurich, Switzerland. (4)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Biological Research
Center, Szeged, Hungary. (5)Epigenetics, Friedrich Miescher Institute for
Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland. Faculty of Sciences, University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (6)Institute of Biochemistry, Eidgenossische
Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zurich, Switzerland. ari.helenius@bc.biol.ethz.ch
yohei.yamauchi@bc.biol.ethz.ch.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Oct 24;346(6208):427-8.

During cell entry, capsids of incoming influenza A viruses (IAVs) must be
uncoated before viral ribonucleoproteins (vRNPs) can enter the nucleus for
replication. After hemagglutinin-mediated membrane fusion in late endocytic
vacuoles, the vRNPs and the matrix proteins dissociate from each other and
disperse within the cytosol. Here, we found that for capsid disassembly, IAV
takes advantage of the host cell's aggresome formation and disassembly machinery.
The capsids mimicked misfolded protein aggregates by carrying unanchored
ubiquitin chains that activated a histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)-dependent
pathway. The ubiquitin-binding domain was essential for recruitment of HDAC6 to
viral fusion sites and for efficient uncoating and infection. That other
components of the aggresome processing machinery, including dynein, dynactin, and
myosin II, were also required suggested that physical forces generated by
microtubule- and actin-associated motors are essential for IAV entry.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25342804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Science. 2014 Oct 24;346(6208):427-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1261509.

Virology. Unanchored ubiquitin in virus uncoating.

Rajsbaum R(1), García-Sastre A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas Medical
Branch, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.
adolfo.garcia-sastre@mssm.edu rirajsba@utmb.edu. (2)Department of Microbiology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 
10029, USA. Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L.
Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. adolfo.garcia-sastre@mssm.edu
rirajsba@utmb.edu.

Comment on
    Science. 2014 Oct 24;346(6208):473-7.

PMID: 25342790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cell Res. 2014 Nov;24(11):1342-53. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.136. Epub 2014 Oct 24.

CYLD mediates ciliogenesis in multiple organs by deubiquitinating Cep70 and
inactivating HDAC6.

Yang Y(1), Ran J(1), Liu M(1), Li D(1), Li Y(1), Shi X(1), Meng D(2), Pan J(2),
Ou G(2), Aneja R(3), Sun SC(4), Zhou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. (2)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. (3)Department of Biology, Georgia State
University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA. (4)Department of Immunology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cilia are hair-like organelles extending from the cell surface with important
sensory and motility functions. Ciliary defects can result in a wide range of
human diseases known as ciliopathies. However, the molecular mechanisms
controlling ciliogenesis remain poorly defined. Here we show that cylindromatosis
(CYLD), a tumor suppressor protein harboring deubiquitinase activity, plays a
critical role in the assembly of both primary and motile cilia in multiple
organs. CYLD knockout mice exhibit polydactyly and various ciliary defects, such 
as failure in basal body anchorage and disorganization of basal bodies and
axenomes. The ciliary function of CYLD is partially attributed to its
deconjugation of the polyubiquitin chain from centrosomal protein of 70 kDa
(Cep70), a requirement for Cep70 to interact with <U+03B3>-tubulin and localize at the
centrosome. In addition, CYLD-mediated inhibition of histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6), which promotes tubulin acetylation, constitutes another mechanism for
the ciliary function of CYLD. Small-molecule inhibitors of HDAC6 could partially 
rescue the ciliary defects in CYLD knockout mice. These findings highlight the
importance of protein ubiquitination in the modulation of ciliogenesis, identify 
CYLD as a crucial regulator of this process, and suggest the involvement of CYLD 
deficiency in ciliopathies.

PMCID: PMC4220159
PMID: 25342559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 16;9(10):e110718. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110718.
eCollection 2014.

HDAC6 deacetylase activity is critical for lipopolysaccharide-induced activation 
of macrophages.

Yan B(1), Xie S(1), Liu Z(2), Ran J(1), Li Y(1), Wang J(1), Yang Y(1), Zhou J(1),
Li D(1), Liu M(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment
and Disease of the Ministry of Education, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

Activated macrophages play an important role in both innate and adaptive immune
responses, and aberrant activation of macrophages often leads to inflammatory and
immune disorders. However, the molecular mechanisms of how macrophages are
activated are not fully understood. In this study, we identify a novel role for
histone deacetylse 6 (HDAC6) in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced macrophage
activation. Our data show that suppression of HDAC6 activity significantly
restrains LPS-induced activation of macrophages and production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines. Further study reveals that the regulation of
macrophage activation by HDAC6 is independent of F-actin polymerization and
filopodium formation; instead, it is mediated by the effects of HDAC6 on cell
adhesion and microtubule acetylation. These data thus suggest that HDAC6 is an
important regulator of LPS-induced macrophage activation and might be a potential
target for the management of inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC4199742
PMID: 25330030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;74(24):7475-86. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0197. Epub 
2014 Oct 15.

Syntheses and discovery of a novel class of cinnamic hydroxamates as histone
deacetylase inhibitors by multimodality molecular imaging in living subjects.

Chan CT(1), Qi J(2), Smith W(2), Paranol R(2), Mazitschek R(3), West N(2), Reeves
R(1), Chiosis G(4), Schreiber SL(5), Bradner JE(6), Paulmurugan R(1), Gambhir
SS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California. Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford (MIPS), Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California. Bio-X Program, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (2)Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. Broad
Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts. (4)Department of Medicine and Program in
Molecular Pharmacology and Medical Chemistry, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York. (5)Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(6)Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(7)Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California. Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford (MIPS), Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California. Bio-X Program, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California. Department of Bioengineering, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California. Division of Nuclear
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
sgambhir@stanford.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) that regulate gene expression are being explored as
cancer therapeutic targets. In this study, we focused on HDAC6 based on its
ability to inhibit cancerous Hsp90 chaperone activities by disrupting Hsp90/p23
interactions. To identify novel HDAC6 inhibitors, we used a dual-luciferase
reporter system in cell culture and living mice by bioluminescence imaging (BLI).
On the basis of existing knowledge, a library of hydrazone compounds was
generated for screening by coupling cinnamic hydroxamates with aldehydes and
ketones. Potency and selectivity were determined by in vitro HDAC profiling
assays, with further evaluation to inhibit Hsp90(a/ß)/p23 interactions by BLI. In
this manner, we identified compound 1A12 as a dose-dependent inhibitor of
Hsp90(a/ß)/p23 interactions, UKE-1 myeloid cell proliferation, p21(waf1)
upregulation, and acetylated histone H3 levels. 1A12 was efficacious in tumor
xenografts expressing Hsp90(a)/p23 reporters relative to carrier control-treated 
mice as determined by BLI. Small animal (18)F-FDG PET/CT imaging on the same
cohort showed that 1A12 also inhibited glucose metabolism relative to control
subjects. Ex vivo analyses of tumor lysates showed that 1A12 administration
upregulated acetylated-H3 by approximately 3.5-fold. Taken together, our results 
describe the discovery and initial preclinical validation of a novel selective
HDAC inhibitor.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4315624
PMID: 25320008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 15;5:5245. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6245.

Increasing microtubule acetylation rescues axonal transport and locomotor
deficits caused by LRRK2 Roc-COR domain mutations.

Godena VK(1), Brookes-Hocking N(2), Moller A(3), Shaw G(3), Oswald M(4), Sancho
RM(2), Miller CC(2), Whitworth AJ(1), De Vos KJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield, Firth Court,
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK [2] The Bateson Centre, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK [3] Centre for Membrane Interactions and
Dynamics, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. (2)Department of Basic 
and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, 
King's College London, De Crespigny Park, Denmark Hill, London SE5 8AF, UK.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience
(SITraN), University of Sheffield, 385a Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2HQ, UK.
(4)1] Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield, Firth Court,
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK [2] The Bateson Centre, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. (5)1] Centre for Membrane Interactions and
Dynamics, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK [2] Department of
Neuroscience, Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN),
University of Sheffield, 385a Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2HQ, UK.

Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most common genetic cause 
of Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 is a multifunctional protein affecting many
cellular processes and has been described to bind microtubules. Defective
microtubule-based axonal transport is hypothesized to contribute to Parkinson's
disease, but whether LRRK2 mutations affect this process to mediate pathogenesis 
is not known. Here we find that LRRK2 containing pathogenic Roc-COR domain
mutations (R1441C, Y1699C) preferentially associates with deacetylated
microtubules, and inhibits axonal transport in primary neurons and in Drosophila,
causing locomotor deficits in vivo. In vitro, increasing microtubule acetylation 
using deacetylase inhibitors or the tubulin acetylase aTAT1 prevents association 
of mutant LRRK2 with microtubules, and the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A
(TSA) restores axonal transport. In vivo knockdown of the deacetylases HDAC6 and 
Sirt2, or administration of TSA rescues both axonal transport and locomotor
behavior. Thus, this study reveals a pathogenic mechanism and a potential
intervention for Parkinson's disease.

PMCID: PMC4208097
PMID: 25316291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Cancer Res Ther. 2014 Jul-Sep;10(3):469-78. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.137937.

Epigenetic therapy of cancer with histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Lakshmaiah KC, Jacob LA, Aparna S(1), Lokanatha D, Saldanha SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kidwai Memorial Institute of Oncology,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.

Epigenetics is the study of heritable alterations in gene expression that are not
accompanied by the corresponding change in DNA sequence. Three interlinked
epigenetic processes regulate gene expression at the level of chromatin, namely
DNA methylation, nucleosomal remodeling and histone covalent modifications.
Post-translational modifications that occur on certain amino acid residues of the
tails of histone proteins modify chromatin structure and form the basis for
"histone code". The enzymes Histone Acetyl Transferase (HAT) and Histone
Deacetylase (HDAC) control the level of acetylation of histones and thereby alter
gene expression. In many cancers, the balance between HAT and HDAC is altered.
HDAC enzymes are grouped into four different classes namely Class I (HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8), Class II (HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC7, HDAC9, and
HDAC10), Class III HDAC and Class IV (HDAC11). Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors
(HDACI) exert anticancer activity by promoting acetylation of histones as well as
by promoting acetylation of non-histone protein substrates. The effects of HDACI 
on gene transcription are complex. They cause cell cycle arrest, inhibit DNA
repair, induce apoptosis and acetylate non histone proteins causing downstream
alterations in gene expression. HDACI are a diverse group of compounds, which
vary in structure, biological activity, and specificity. In general, HDACIs
contain a zinc-binding domain, a capping group, and a straight chain linker
connecting the two. They are classified into four classes namely short chain
fatty acids, hydroxamic acids, cyclic peptides and synthetic benzamides. This
review describes the clinical utility of HDACI as monotherapy as well as
combination therapy with other treatment modalities such as chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Adverse effects and shortcomings of treatment with HDACI are also
discussed in detail.

PMID: 25313724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Mar;26(3):553-64. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013090984. Epub 2014
Oct 13.

ß-catenin links von Hippel-Lindau to aurora kinase A and loss of primary cilia in
renal cell carcinoma.

Dere R(1), Perkins AL(1), Bawa-Khalfe T(2), Jonasch D(1), Walker CL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Cancer Research, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, Texas; and. (2)Department
of Cardiology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(3)Center for Translational Cancer Research, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, Texas; and
cwalker@ibt.tamhsc.edu.

von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene mutations are associated with clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma (ccRCC). A hallmark of ccRCC is loss of the primary cilium. Loss of
this key organelle in ccRCC is caused by loss of VHL and associated with
increased Aurora kinase A (AURKA) and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) activities,
which drive disassembly of the primary cilium. However, the underlying mechanism 
by which VHL loss increases AURKA levels has not been clearly elucidated,
although it has been suggested that hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) mediates
increased AURKA expression in VHL-null cells. By contrast, we found that elevated
AURKA expression is not increased by HIF-1a, suggesting an alternate mechanism
for AURKA dysregulation in VHL-null cells. We report here that AURKA expression
is driven by ß-catenin transcription in VHL-null cells. In a panel of RCC cell
lines, we observed nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin and increased AURKA
signaling to HDAC6. Moreover, HIF-1a inhibited AURKA expression by inhibiting
ß-catenin transcription. VHL knockdown activated ß-catenin and elevated AURKA
expression, decreased primary cilia formation, and caused significant shortening 
of cilia length in cells that did form cilia. The ß-catenin responsive
transcription inhibitor iCRT14 reduced AURKA levels and rescued ciliary defects, 
inducing a significant increase in primary cilia formation in VHL-deficient
cells. These data define a role for ß-catenin in regulating AURKA and formation
of primary cilia in the setting of VHL deficiency, opening new avenues for
treatment with ß-catenin inhibitors to rescue ciliogenesis in ccRCC.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4341469
PMID: 25313256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Protein Cell. 2015 Jan;6(1):42-54. doi: 10.1007/s13238-014-0102-8. Epub 2014 Oct 
15.

Proteomic identification and functional characterization of MYH9, Hsc70, and
DNAJA1 as novel substrates of HDAC6 deacetylase activity.

Zhang L(1), Liu S, Liu N, Zhang Y, Liu M, Li D, Seto E, Yao TP, Shui W, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, China.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a predominantly cytoplasmic protein deacetylase,
participates in a wide range of cellular processes through its deacetylase
activity. However, the diverse functions of HDAC6 cannot be fully elucidated with
its known substrates. In an attempt to explore the substrate diversity of HDAC6, 
we performed quantitative proteomic analyses to monitor changes in the abundance 
of protein lysine acetylation in response to HDAC6 deficiency. We identified 107 
proteins with elevated acetylation in the liver of HDAC6 knockout mice. Three
cytoplasmic proteins, including myosin heavy chain 9 (MYH9), heat shock cognate
protein 70 (Hsc70), and dnaJ homolog subfamily A member 1 (DNAJA1), were verified
to interact with HDAC6. The acetylation levels of these proteins were negatively 
regulated by HDAC6 both in the mouse liver and in cultured cells. Functional
studies reveal that HDAC6-mediated deacetylation modulates the actin-binding
ability of MYH9 and the interaction between Hsc70 and DNAJA1. These findings
consolidate the notion that HDAC6 serves as a critical regulator of protein
acetylation with the capability of coordinating various cellular functions.

PMCID: PMC4286133
PMID: 25311840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Nov;54(11):1513-20. doi: 10.1002/mc.22224. Epub 2014 Oct 12.

The effect of sulforaphane on histone deacetylase activity in keratinocytes:
Differences between in vitro and in vivo analyses.

Dickinson SE(1,)(2), Rusche JJ(1), Bec SL(1), Horn DJ(1), Janda J(1), Rim SH(1), 
Smith CL(3), Bowden GT(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Arizona Cancer Center, The University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona. (2)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The University of Arizona,
Tucson, Arizona. (4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The University
of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.

Sulforaphane is a natural product found in broccoli, which is known to exert many
different molecular effects in the cell, including inhibition of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes. Here, we examine for the first time the potential for
sulforaphane to inhibit HDACs in HaCaT keratinocytes and compare our results with
those found using HCT116 colon cancer cells. Significant inhibition of HDAC
activity in HCT116 nuclear extracts required prolonged exposure to sulforaphane
in the presence of serum. Under the same conditions HaCaT nuclear extracts did
not exhibit reduced HDAC activity with sulforaphane treatment. Both cell types
displayed down-regulation of HDAC protein levels by sulforaphane treatment.
Despite these reductions in HDAC family member protein levels, acetylation of
marker proteins (acetylated Histone H3, H4, and tubulin) was decreased by
sulforaphane treatment. Time-course analysis revealed that HDAC6, HDAC3, and
acetylated histone H3 protein levels are significantly inhibited as early as 6<U+2009>h 
into sulforaphane treatment. Transcript levels of HDAC6 are also suppressed after
48<U+2009>h of treatment. These results suggest that HDAC activity noted in nuclear
extracts is not always translated as expected to target protein acetylation
patterns, despite dramatic inhibition of some HDAC protein levels. In addition,
our data suggest that keratinocytes are at least partially resistant to the
nuclear HDAC inhibitory effects of sulforaphane, which is exhibited in HCT116 and
other cells.

© 2014 The Authors. Molecular Carcinogenesis published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4394046 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 25307283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 9;5:e1447. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.397.

SMAR1 coordinates HDAC6-induced deacetylation of Ku70 and dictates cell fate upon
irradiation.

Chaudhary N(1), Nakka KK(1), Chavali PL(1), Bhat J(2), Chatterjee S(2),
Chattopadhyay S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Disease Biology Laboratory, National Centre for Cell Science,
Pune University Campus, Pune, India. (2)Department of Biophysics, Bose Institute,
Kolkata, India.

Acetylation status of DNA end joining protein Ku70 dictates its function in DNA
repair and Bax-mediated apoptosis. Despite the knowledge of HDACs and HATs that
are reported to modulate the acetylation dynamics of Ku70, very little is known
about proteins that critically coordinate these key modifications. Here, we
demonstrate that nuclear matrix-associated protein scaffold/matrix-associated
region-binding protein 1 (SMAR1) is a novel interacting partner of Ku70 and
coordinates with HDAC6 to maintain Ku70 in a deacetylated state. Our studies
revealed that knockdown of SMAR1 results in enhanced acetylation of Ku70, which
leads to impaired recruitment of Ku70 in the chromatin fractions. Interestingly, 
ionizing radiation (IR) induces the expression of SMAR1 and its redistribution as
distinct nuclear foci upon ATM-mediated phosphorylation at serine 370.
Furthermore, SMAR1 regulates IR-induced G2/M cell cycle arrest by facilitating
Chk2 phosphorylation. Alternatively, SMAR1 provides radioresistance by modulating
the association of deacetylated Ku70 with Bax, abrogating the mitochondrial
translocation of Bax. Thus, we provide mechanistic insights of SMAR1-mediated
regulation of repair and apoptosis via a complex crosstalk involving Ku70, HDAC6 
and Bax.

PMCID: PMC4237237
PMID: 25299772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Dec 15;25(25):4187-94. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-06-1032. Epub
2014 Oct 8.

HDAC6-ubiquitin interaction controls the duration of HSF1 activation after heat
shock.

Pernet L(1), Faure V(1), Gilquin B(1), Dufour-Guérin S(1), Khochbin S(2), Vourc'h
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Grenoble-Alpes, CRI INSERM, U823, Institut Albert Bonniot, La
Tronche 38042, Grenoble Cedex 9, France. (2)University Grenoble-Alpes, CRI
INSERM, U823, Institut Albert Bonniot, La Tronche 38042, Grenoble Cedex 9, France
claire.vourch@ujf-grenoble.fr saadi.khochbin@ujf-grenoble.fr.

After heat shock, HSF1 controls a major cellular transcriptional response
involving the activation of early (HSP70) and late (HSP25) heat shock gene
expression. Here we show that a full response to heat shock (activation of both
HSP70 and HSP25) depends on the duration of HSF1 activation, which is itself
controlled by HDAC6, a unique deacetylase known to bind monoubiquitin and
polyubiquitin with high affinity. On the basis of a comparative analysis of the
heat shock response in cells knocked out for HDAC6 or expressing HDAC6 mutants,
we show that HDAC6 binding to ubiquitinated proteins controls the duration of
HSF1 activation after heat shock. In cells expressing HDAC6 mutated in the
ubiquitin-binding domain, the AAA ATPase factor p97/VCP mediates rapid
inactivation of HSF1, precluding late activation of the HSP25 gene. In these
cells, knockdown of p97/VCP rescues HSF1 from this rapid inactivation and
restores HSP25 expression. We present here a new regulatory circuit that adjusts 
the duration of the heat shock response to the extent of protein ubiquitination
after heat shock.

© 2014 Pernet, Faure, et al. This article is distributed by The American Society 
for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication
it is available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4263459
PMID: 25298398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Cell Death. 2014 Feb 13;7:11-3. doi: 10.4137/JCD.S13695. eCollection 2014.

Regulation of ku70-bax complex in cells.

Hada M(1), Kwok RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Biological Chemistry, University
of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Ku70, a DNA repair factor in the nucleus, also regulates cell death by binding to
the apoptotic protein Bax in the cytoplasm. Acetylation of Ku70 triggers Bax
release resulting in Bax dependent cell death. Thus dissociating Bax from Ku70,
either by inhibiting histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) that deacetylates Ku70 or by
increasing Ku70 acetylation induces cell death. Our results showed that in
neuroblastoma cells, the depletion of Ku70 results in Bax-dependent cell death.
This model provides a rationale for screening Ku70 acetylation modulators that
can be tested in clinical trials, either alone or in combination with
radiotherapy or DNA-damaging agents for the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC4167316
PMID: 25278782  [PubMed]


199. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Nov 28;12(44):8966-76. doi: 10.1039/c4ob00542b.

Effect of C7-substitution of 1-arylsulfonyl-5-(N-hydroxyacrylamide)indolines on
the selectivity towards a subclass of histone deacetylases.

Lee HY(1), Wang LT, Li YH, Pan SL, Chen YL, Teng CM, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wuxing
Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. jpl@tmu.edu.tw.

This study focused on the substitution effect at position C7 of
1-arylsulfonyl-5-(N-hydroxyacrylamide)indolines. Compound 9,
(E)-3-(7-amino-1-(4-methoxyphenylsulfonyl)indolin-5-yl)-N-hydroxyacrylamide,
displayed 4- to 14-fold more potent antiproliferative activity than vorinostat
(SAHA, 1). Notably, 9 possessed specific histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitory
activity toward HDAC1 and HDAC2, but had no effect on HDAC6, indicating that 9
has the potential to be developed as a class I HDAC inhibitor. In a xenograft
tumor model, 9 suppressed the growth of HCT116 cells at 100 mg kg(-1), which led 
to a TGI (tumor growth inhibition) of 40.3%. Taken together, the C7 substitutions
have a crucial effect on class I HDACs, which is beneficial for synthesizing
efficient anticancer agents.

PMID: 25277250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol. 2014;33(3):247-63.

Curcumin augments the efficacy of antitumor drugs used in leukemia by modulation 
of heat shock proteins via HDAC6.

Sarkar R(1), Mukherjee A(1), Mukherjee S(2), Biswas R(3), Biswas J(4), Roy M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis & Toxicology, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, Calcutta, India. (2)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis 
& Toxicology, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, Kolkata 700 026. (3)NSHM
Knowledge Campus Calcutta (Group of Institutions), (WBUT), Calcutta, India.
(4)Department of Surgical Oncology, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute,
Kolkata, India.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) are induced under
oxidative stress, which promotes oncogenesis. HSPs are regulated by heat shock
factor1 (HSF1). HDAC6, a class IIb deacetylase, plays an essential role in
tumorigenesis and cell stress response. HSPs, HSF1 and HDAC6 are up-regulated in 
cancer. In the present study, we explored the effect of curcumin, a
phytochemical, on HSPs (27, 70, 90), HSF1 and HDAC6 in two different leukemia
cell lines (K-562 and HL-60). The association between HDAC6, HSPs, and intrinsic 
oxidative stress was also investigated. Overexpression of HSPs (27, 70, 90),
HSF1, and HDAC6 in leukemia cells were down-regulated by curcumin, and the
effects on HSPs 27and 70 were less than that on HSP 90. This resulted in cell
cycle arrest at the G2/M stage, leading to apoptosis. Different cell cycle
regulatory proteins (p53, p21, cyclin B1, CDK1, Cdc25C) and some
apoptosis-related proteins (Bcl-2, Bax, Bid, Bad, Apaf1, AIF and Cyt c) were
altered by curcumin. Increased ROS levels in leukemia cells were quenched by
curcumin. A probable association between high ROS level and the overexpression of
the tumor markers was established in this study. Thus, curcumin enhanced the
efficacy of anti-tumor drugs imatinib-mesylate and cytarabine through the
inhibition of the tumor markers.

PMID: 25272063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Cell Sci. 2014 Nov 15;127(Pt 22):4954-63. doi: 10.1242/jcs.157321. Epub 2014
Sep 30.

MFN1 deacetylation activates adaptive mitochondrial fusion and protects
metabolically challenged mitochondria.

Lee JY(1), Kapur M(2), Li M(2), Choi MC(2), Choi S(3), Kim HJ(3), Kim I(3), Lee
E(3), Taylor JP(4), Yao TP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA Graduate School of Analytical Science and Technology, Chungnam
National University, Daejeon 305-764, Republic of Korea leejooyong@cnu.ac.kr
tsopang.yao@duke.edu. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke
University, Durham, NC 27710, USA. (3)Graduate School of Analytical Science and
Technology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer
Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA leejooyong@cnu.ac.kr
tsopang.yao@duke.edu.

Fasting and glucose shortage activate a metabolic switch that shifts more energy 
production to mitochondria. This metabolic adaptation ensures energy supply, but 
also elevates the risk of mitochondrial oxidative damage. Here, we present
evidence that metabolically challenged mitochondria undergo active fusion to
suppress oxidative stress. In response to glucose starvation, mitofusin 1 (MFN1) 
becomes associated with the protein deacetylase HDAC6. This interaction leads to 
MFN1 deacetylation and activation, promoting mitochondrial fusion. Deficiency in 
HDAC6 or MFN1 prevents mitochondrial fusion induced by glucose deprivation.
Unexpectedly, failure to undergo fusion does not acutely affect mitochondrial
adaptive energy production; instead, it causes excessive production of
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and oxidative damage, a defect suppressed
by an acetylation-resistant MFN1 mutant. In mice subjected to fasting, skeletal
muscle mitochondria undergo dramatic fusion. Remarkably, fasting-induced
mitochondrial fusion is abrogated in HDAC6-knockout mice, resulting in extensive 
mitochondrial degeneration. These findings show that adaptive mitochondrial
fusion protects metabolically challenged mitochondria.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4231308
PMID: 25271058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Bioorg Med Chem. 2014 Nov 1;22(21):6146-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.08.030. Epub 
2014 Sep 4.

Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of
4-anilinothieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine-based hydroxamic acid derivatives as novel
histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Yang W(1), Li L(2), Ji X(1), Wu X(1), Su M(3), Sheng L(3), Zang Y(3), Li J(4),
Liu H(5).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Road, Shanghai 201203, PR China.
(2)East China Normal University, Institutes for Advanced Interdisciplinary
Research, North Zhongshan Road Campus: 3663 N. Zhongshan Rd., Shanghai 200062, PR
China; State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica, SIBS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, PR China. (3)State
Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, SIBS,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, PR China. (4)East China Normal
University, Institutes for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, North Zhongshan
Road Campus: 3663 N. Zhongshan Rd., Shanghai 200062, PR China; State Key
Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, SIBS, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, PR China. Electronic address:
jli@mail.shcnc.ac.cn. (5)CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Road,
Shanghai 201203, PR China. Electronic address: hliu@mail.shcnc.ac.cn.

A series of 4-anilinothieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine-based hydroxamic acid derivatives as
novel HDACs inhibitors were designed, synthesized and evaluated. Most of these
compounds displayed good to excellent inhibitory activities against HDAC1, 3, 6. 
The IC50 values of compound 10r against HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC6 was 1.14 ± 0.03 nM,
3.56 ± 0.08 nM, 11.43 ± 0.12 nM. Compound 10r noticeably up-regulated the level
of histone H3 acetylation compared to the SAHA. Most of the compounds showed the 
strong anti-proliferative activity against human cancer cell lines including
RMPI8226 and HCT-116. The IC50 values of Compounds 10r and 10t against RPMI8226
was 2.39 ± 0.20 µM, 1.41 ± 0.44 µM, respectively, and the HCT-116 was sensitive
to the compounds 10h, 10 m, 10r, 10 w with the IC50 values <1.9 µM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25261927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Br J Pharmacol. 2015 Feb;172(3):829-40. doi: 10.1111/bph.12946. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Tubulin acetylation promoting potency and absorption efficacy of deacetylase
inhibitors.

Mangas-Sanjuan V(1), Oláh J, Gonzalez-Alvarez I, Lehotzky A, Tokési N, Bermejo M,
Ovádi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Engineering, Pharmacy Section, Miguel Hernandez University,
Alicante, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and silent information
regulator 2 (SIRT2) control the dynamics of the microtubule network via their
deacetylase activities. Tubulin polymerization promoting protein (TPPP/p25)
enhances microtubule acetylation by its direct binding to HDAC6. Our objective
was to characterize the multiple interactions of the deacetylases and to
establish the inhibitory potency and the pharmacokinetic features of the
deacetylase inhibitors, trichostatin A (TSA) and AGK2.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The interactions of deacetylases with tubulin and TPPP/p25
were quantified by elisa using human recombinant proteins. The effect of
inhibitors on the tubulin acetylation was established in HeLa cells transfected
with pTPPP and CG-4 cells expressing TPPP/p25 endogenously by celisa (elisa on
cells), Western blot and immunofluorescence microscopy. The pharmacokinetic
features of the inhibitors were evaluated by in situ kinetic modelling of their
intestinal transport in rats.
KEY RESULTS: Deacetylases interact with both tubulin and TPPP/p25,
notwithstanding piggy-back binding of HDAC6 or SIRT2 to the TPPP/p25-associated
tubulin was established. Much higher inhibitory potency for TSA than for AGK2 was
detected in both HeLa and CG-4 cells. Pioneer pharmacokinetic studies revealed
passive diffusion and diffusion coupled with secretion for TSA and AGK2
respectively. Both inhibitors exhibited greater permeability than some other
well-established drugs.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: TPPP/p25-directed deacetylase inhibition provides
mechanisms for the fine control of the dynamics and stability of the microtubule 
network. Deacetylase inhibitors with chemical structures similar to TSA and AGK2 
appear to be excellent candidates for oral drug absorption.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4301692
PMID: 25257800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Oct 15;24(20):4826-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2014.08.060. Epub 2014 Sep 4.

The antileishmanial activity of isoforms 6- and 8-selective histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Sodji Q(1), Patil V(1), Jain S(2), Kornacki JR(3), Mrksich M(3), Tekwani BL(4),
Oyelere AK(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Parker H. Petit for Bioengineering and
Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0400, USA.
(2)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Mississippi, University, MS 38677-1848, USA. (3)Department of Chemistry and
Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, IL
60208-3113, USA. (4)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of
Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677-1848, USA. Electronic
address: btekwani@olemiss.edu. (5)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Parker H.
Petit for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332-0400, USA. Electronic address: aoyelere@gatech.edu.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) pleiotropy is largely due to their
nonselective inhibition of various cellular HDAC isoforms. Connecting inhibition 
of a specific isoform to biological responses and/or phenotypes is essential
toward deconvoluting HDACi pleiotropy. The contribution of classes I and II HDACs
to the antileishmanial activity of HDACi was investigated using the amastigote
and promastigote forms of Leishmania donovani. We observed that the
antileishmanial activities of HDACi are largely due to the inhibition of
HDAC6-like activity. This observation could facilitate the development of HDACi
as antileishmanial agents.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4225773
PMID: 25240614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Dec;13(12):2886-97. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0220.
Epub 2014 Sep 19.

In vitro and in vivo interactions between the HDAC6 inhibitor ricolinostat
(ACY1215) and the irreversible proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib in non-Hodgkin
lymphoma cells.

Dasmahapatra G(1), Patel H(1), Friedberg J(2), Quayle SN(3), Jones SS(3), Grant
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia. (2)James T. Wilmot Cancer Center, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York. Department of Medicine, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York. Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York. (3)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals Inc., Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, Virginia. Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, Virginia. Virginia Institute of Molecular Medicine, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia. stgrant@vcu.edu.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2015 Dec 18;:NOT-OD-16-040.

Interactions between the HDAC6 inhibitor ricolinostat (ACY1215) and the
irreversible proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib were examined in non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL) models, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), mantle
cell lymphoma (MCL), and double-hit lymphoma cells. Marked in vitro synergism was
observed in multiple cell types associated with activation of cellular stress
pathways (e.g., JNK1/2, ERK1/2, and p38) accompanied by increases in DNA damage
(<U+03B3>H2A.X), G2-M arrest, and the pronounced induction of mitochondrial injury and
apoptosis. Combination treatment with carfilzomib and ricolinostat increased
reactive oxygen species (ROS), whereas the antioxidant TBAP attenuated DNA
damage, JNK activation, and cell death. Similar interactions occurred in
bortezomib-resistant and double-hit DLBCL, MCL, and primary DLBCL cells, but not 
in normal CD34(+) cells. However, ricolinostat did not potentiate inhibition of
chymotryptic activity by carfilzomib. shRNA knockdown of JNK1 (but not MEK1/2),
or pharmacologic inhibition of p38, significantly reduced
carfilzomib-ricolinostat lethality, indicating a functional contribution of these
stress pathways to apoptosis. Combined exposure to carfilzomib and ricolinostat
also markedly downregulated the cargo-loading protein HR23B. Moreover, HR23B
knockdown significantly increased carfilzomib- and ricolinostat-mediated
lethality, suggesting a role for this event in cell death. Finally, combined in
vivo treatment with carfilzomib and ricolinostat was well tolerated and
significantly suppressed tumor growth and increased survival in an MCL xenograft 
model. Collectively, these findings indicate that carfilzomib and ricolinostat
interact synergistically in NHL cells through multiple stress-related mechanisms,
and suggest that this strategy warrants further consideration in NHL.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4304772
PMID: 25239935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Med Chem. 2014 Oct 9;57(19):8026-34. doi: 10.1021/jm5008962. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Identification of a novel aminotetralin class of HDAC6 and HDAC8 selective
inhibitors.

Tang G(1), Wong JC, Zhang W, Wang Z, Zhang N, Peng Z, Zhang Z, Rong Y, Li S,
Zhang M, Yu L, Feng T, Zhang X, Wu X, Wu JZ, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center
Shanghai , 720 Cailun Road, Shanghai, 201203 China.

Herein we report the identification of a novel class of HDAC6 and HDAC8 selective
inhibitors through a unique chemistry and phenotypic screening strategy.
Tetrahydroisoquinoline 12 was identified as a potent HDAC6 and HDAC8 dual
inhibitor from a focused library through cellular tubulin acetylation and p21
induction screening assays. Scaffold hopping from 12 led to the discovery of an
aminotetralin class of HDAC inhibitors. In particular, the 3-R stereoisomer 32
showed highly potent inhibition against HDAC6 and HDAC8 with IC50 values of 50
and 80 nM, respectively. Treatment of neuroblastoma BE(2)C cells with 32 resulted
in elevated levels of acetylated tubulin, TrkA, and neurite outgrowth with only
marginal effects on p21 induction and histone H3 acetylation. Consistent with its
weak enzymatic inhibition of HDAC1, 32 showed significantly less cytotoxicity
than SAHA and moderately inhibited the growth of myeloma NCI-H929 and OPM-2
cells.

PMID: 25238284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2014 Oct;35(10):501-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2014.08.001.
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Drugging the HDAC6-HSP90 interplay in malignant cells.

Krämer OH(1), Mahboobi S(2), Sellmer A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, University Medical Center, Obere Zahlbacher Str. 67,
55131 Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: okraemer@uni-mainz.de. (2)Institute of 
Pharmacy, Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Regensburg, 93040
Regensburg, Germany.

Acetylation and deacetylation cycles regulate crucial biological processes. The
enzymes deacetylating lysine residues are termed histone deacetylases (HDACs).
Eighteen deacetylases have been isolated from mammalian cells. There is an
intense search underway for individual functions of these enzymes and for
selective histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi). HDAC6 in particular has unique 
cytoprotective functions that rely on its ability to ensure protein homeostasis
and to prevent protein aggregation. The chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP90)
also safeguards proteins and is deacetylated by HDAC6. Current data illustrate
the complexity and importance of the HDAC6-HSP90 interplay. In this review, we
discuss how recently identified HSP90-dependent regulators of posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) of HDAC6 dictate its functions, and how HDACi-induced
acetylation of HSP90 might control oncologically relevant proteins, especially in
leukemic cells. Additionally, we discuss small molecules blocking HDAC6 and how
such agents could become therapeutically relevant. We summarize
structure-function relationships that determine the specificity of drugs against 
HDAC6.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25234862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Dec;351(3):510-8. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.217315. Epub
2014 Sep 17.

Downregulation of Ca2+-activated Cl- channel TMEM16A by the inhibition of histone
deacetylase in TMEM16A-expressing cancer cells.

Matsuba S(1), Niwa S(1), Muraki K(1), Kanatsuka S(1), Nakazono Y(1), Hatano N(1),
Fujii M(1), Zhan P(1), Suzuki T(1), Ohya S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Division of Pathological Sciences, Kyoto
Pharmaceutical University, Kyoto, Japan (S.M., S.N., S.K., Y.N., M.F., S.O.);
Laboratory of Cellular Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Nagoya, Japan (K.M., N.H.); and Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan (P.Z., T.S.). (2)Department of
Pharmacology, Division of Pathological Sciences, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University,
Kyoto, Japan (S.M., S.N., S.K., Y.N., M.F., S.O.); Laboratory of Cellular
Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Aichi-Gakuin University, Nagoya, Japan (K.M.,
N.H.); and Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan (P.Z., T.S.) sohya@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp.

The Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) channel transmembrane proteins with unknown function
16 A (TMEM16A; also known as anoctamin 1 or discovered on gastrointestinal
stromal tumor 1) plays an important role in facilitating the cell growth and
metastasis of TMEM16A-expressing cancer cells. Histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors (HDACi) are useful agents for cancer therapy, but it remains unclear
whether ion channels are epigenetically regulated by them. Using real-time
polymerase chain reaction, Western blot analysis, and whole-cell patch-clamp
assays, we found a significant decrease in TMEM16A expression and its functional 
activity was induced by the vorinostat, a pan-HDACi in TMEM16A-expressing human
cancer cell lines, the prostatic cancer cell line PC-3, and the breast cancer
cell line YMB-1. TMEM16A downregulation was not induced by the chemotherapy drug 
paclitaxel in either cell type. Pharmacologic blockade of HDAC3 by 1 µM T247
[N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[1-(2-thiophen-3-ylethyl)-1H-[1],[2],[3]triazol-4-yl]benzami
de], a HDAC3-selective HDACi, elicited a large decrease in TMEM16A expression and
functional activity in both cell types, and pharmacologic blockade of HDAC2 by
AATB [4-(acetylamino)-N-[2-amino-5-(2-thienyl)phenyl]-benzamide; 300 nM] elicited
partial inhibition of TMEM16A expression (~40%) in both. Pharmacologic blockade
of HDAC1 or HDAC6 did not elicit any significant change in TMEM16A expression,
respectively. In addition, inhibition of HDAC3 induced by small interfering RNA
elicited a large decrease in TMEM16A transcripts in both cell types. Taken
together, in malignancies with a frequent gene amplification of TMEM16A, HDAC3
inhibition may exert suppressive effects on cancer cell viability via
downregulation of TMEM16A.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25232193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Sci Rep. 2014 Sep 17;4:6394. doi: 10.1038/srep06394.

A gene expression signature-based approach reveals the mechanisms of action of
the Chinese herbal medicine berberine.

Lee KH(1), Lo HL(1), Tang WC(1), Hsiao HH(1), Yang PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical
Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Berberine (BBR), a traditional Chinese herbal medicine, was shown to display
anticancer activity. In this study, we attempted to provide a global view of the 
molecular pathways associated with its anticancer effect through a gene
expression-based chemical approach. BBR-induced differentially expressed genes
obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) at the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) were analyzed using the Connectivity Map (CMAP) 
database to compare similarities of gene expression profiles between BBR and CMAP
compounds. Candidate compounds were further analyzed using the Search Tool for
Interactions of Chemicals (STITCH) database to explore chemical-protein
interactions. Results showed that BBR may inhibit protein synthesis, histone
deacetylase (HDAC), or AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways. Further
analyses demonstrated that BBR inhibited global protein synthesis and basal AKT
activity, and induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and autophagy, which was 
associated with activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). However, BBR
did not alter mTOR or HDAC activities. Interestingly, BBR induced the acetylation
of a-tubulin, a substrate of HDAC6. In addition, the combination of BBR and SAHA,
a pan-HDAC inhibitor, synergistically inhibited cell proliferation and induced
cell cycle arrest. Our results provide novel insights into the mechanisms of
action of BBR in cancer therapy.

PMID: 25227736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):4083-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400710. Epub 2014
Sep 12.

Imipramine exploits histone deacetylase 11 to increase the IL-12/IL-10 ratio in
macrophages infected with antimony-resistant Leishmania donovani and clears organ
parasites in experimental infection.

Mukherjee S(1), Mukherjee B(1), Mukhopadhyay R(1), Naskar K(1), Sundar S(2),
Dujardin JC(3), Roy S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata 700032, India; 
(2)Institute of Medical Sciences, Benaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221005,
India; and. (3)Institute of Tropical Medicine, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata 700032, India; 
sroy@iicb.res.in.

The efflux of antimony through multidrug resistance protein (MDR)-1 is the key
factor in the failure of metalloid treatment in kala-azar patients infected with 
antimony-resistant Leishmania donovani (Sb(R)LD). Previously we showed that MDR-1
upregulation in Sb(R)LD infection is IL-10-dependent. Imipramine, a drug in use
for the treatment of depression and nocturnal enuresis in children, inhibits
IL-10 production from Sb(R)LD-infected macrophages (Sb(R)LD-M<U+03D5>s) and favors
accumulation of surrogates of antimonials. It inhibits IL-10-driven nuclear
translocation of c-Fos/c-Jun, critical for enhanced MDR-1 expression. The drug
upregulates histone deacetylase 11, which inhibits acetylation of IL-10 promoter,
leading to a decrease in IL-10 production from Sb(R)LD-M<U+03D5>s. It abrogates
Sb(R)LD-mediated p50/c-Rel binding to IL-10 promoter and preferentially recruits 
p65/RelB to IL-12 p35 and p40 promoters, causing a decrease in IL-10 and
overproduction of IL-12 in Sb(R)LD-M<U+03D5>s. Histone deacetylase 11 per se does not
influence IL-12 promoter activity. Instead, a imipramine-mediated decreased IL-10
level allows optimal IL-12 production in Sb(R)LD-M<U+03D5>s. Furthermore, exogenous
rIL-12 inhibits intracellular Sb(R)LD replication, which can be mimicked by the
presence of Ab to IL-10. This observation indicated that reciprocity exists
between IL-10 and IL-12 and that imipramine tips the balance toward an increased 
IL-12/IL-10 ratio in Sb(R)LD-M<U+03D5>s. Oral treatment of infected BALB/c mice with
imipramine in combination with sodium stibogluconate cleared organ Sb(R)LD
parasites and caused an expansion of the antileishmanial T cell repertoire where 
sodium stibogluconate alone had no effect. Our study deciphers a detailed
molecular mechanism of imipramine-mediated regulation of IL-10/IL-12 reciprocity 
and its impact on Sb(R)LD clearance from infected hosts.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25217162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 30;5(16):7065-80.

Proteasome inhibition reverses hedgehog inhibitor and taxane resistance in
ovarian cancer.

Steg AD(1), Burke MR(2), Amm HM(3), Katre AA(4), Dobbin ZC(4), Jeong DH(5),
Landen CN(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL. McWhorter School of Pharmacy, Samford University, Birmingham, AL.
These authors contributed equally to this work. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. These authors
contributed equally to this work. (3)Institute of Oral Health Research,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. (4)Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Busan Paik Hospital, Inje University, 
Gimhae, South Korea. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA. These authors contributed equally to this work.

The goal of this study was to determine whether combined targeted therapies,
specifically those against the Notch, hedgehog and ubiquitin-proteasome pathways,
could overcome ovarian cancer chemoresistance. Chemoresistant ovarian cancer
cells were exposed to gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSI-I, Compound E) or the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, alone and in combination with the hedgehog
antagonist, LDE225. Bortezomib, alone and in combination with LDE225, was
evaluated for effects on paclitaxel efficacy. Cell viability and cell cycle
analysis were assessed by MTT assay and propidium iodide staining, respectively. 
Proteasome activity and gene expression were determined by luminescence assay and
qPCR, respectively. Studies demonstrated that GSI-I, but not Compound E,
inhibited proteasome activity, similar to bortezomib. Proteasome inhibition
decreased hedgehog target genes (PTCH1, GLI1 and GLI2) and increased LDE225
sensitivity in vitro. Bortezomib, alone and in combination with LDE225, increased
paclitaxel sensitivity through apoptosis and G2/M arrest. Expression of the
multi-drug resistance gene ABCB1/MDR1 was decreased and acetylation of a-tubulin,
a marker of microtubule stabilization, was increased following bortezomib
treatment. HDAC6 inhibitor tubastatin-a demonstrated that microtubule effects are
associated with hedgehog inhibition and sensitization to paclitaxel and LDE225.
These results suggest that proteasome inhibition, through alteration of
microtubule dynamics and hedgehog signaling, can reverse taxane-mediated
chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC4196184
PMID: 25216523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Mol Med (Berl). 2015 Jan;93(1):63-72. doi: 10.1007/s00109-014-1202-x. Epub 2014
Sep 12.

MeCP2 deficiency is associated with reduced levels of tubulin acetylation and can
be restored using HDAC6 inhibitors.

Gold WA(1), Lacina TA, Cantrill LC, Christodoulou J.

Author information: 
(1)NSW Centre for Rett Syndrome Research, Western Sydney Genetics Program, The
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Locked Bag 4001, Westmead, Sydney, New South
Wales, 2145, Australia.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder, predominantly caused
by loss of function mutations in the X-linked methyl-CpG-binding protein 2
(MECP2) gene. Despite the genetic cause being known in the majority of cases, the
pathophysiology of the neurological phenotype of RTT is largely unknown. Tubulin 
and the microtubule network play an essential role in neuronal function whereby
the acetylation state of microtubules dictates the efficiency of neuronal
migration and differentiation, synaptic targeting and molecular motor trafficking
of mRNA, high-energy mitochondria and brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF)-containing vesicles. Recent reports have shown perturbations in tubulin
and microtubule dynamics in MeCP2-deficient cells, suggesting a link between the 
aberrations of these cellular entities and the neurobiology of RTT. We have
interrogated the functional state of the microtubule network in fibroblasts
derived from two patients with RTT as well as cortical neurons from a RTT mouse
model and observed a reduction in acetylated a-tubulin and an increase in the
tubulin-specific deacetylase, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Furthermore, we show
that inhibition of HDAC6 by Tubastatin A can restore tubulin acetylation levels. 
We also demonstrate microtubule instability in the RTT patient fibroblasts in
response to nocodazole, which is progressively ameliorated in a
mutation-dependent manner by Tubastatin A. We conclude that Tubastatin A is
capable of counteracting the microtubule defects observed in MeCP2-deficient
cells, which could in turn lead to the restoration of molecular trafficking along
the microtubules and thus could be a potentially new therapeutic option for
RTT.KEY MESSAGE: Cells from MeCP2-deficient cells show reduced levels of
acetylated a-tubulin. Cells from two patients and a RTT mouse model have
increased levels of HDAC6 but not sirtuin 2 (SIRT2). Inhibition of HDAC6 by
Tubastatin A increases the in vitro acetylation of a-tubulin. Inhibition of HDAC6
by Tubastatin A does not increase MECP2 expression. Cells from two patients show 
microtubule instability, which is ameliorated by Tubastatin A.

PMID: 25209898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 Oct 30;86:528-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.09.009. Epub
2014 Sep 6.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of largazole analogues with modified surface 
recognition cap groups.

Bhansali P(1), Hanigan CL(2), Perera L(3), Casero RA Jr(2), Tillekeratne LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal and Biological Chemistry, College of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Toledo, 2801, W. Bancroft Street,
Toledo, OH 43606, United States. (2)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Bunting/Blaustein Cancer
Research Building 1, 1650 Orleans Street, Room 551, Baltimore, MD 21231, United
States. (3)Laboratory of Structural Biology, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human
Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, United States. (4)Department of
Medicinal and Biological Chemistry, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, The University of Toledo, 2801, W. Bancroft Street, Toledo, OH 43606,
United States. Electronic address: ltillek@utnet.utoledo.edu.

Several largazole analogues with modified surface recognition cap groups were
synthesized and their HDAC inhibitory activities were determined. The C7-epimer
12 caused negligible inhibition of HDAC activity, failed to induce global histone
3 (H3) acetylation in the HCT116 colorectal cancer cell line and demonstrated
minimal effect on growth. Although previous studies have shown some degree of
tolerance of structural changes at C7 position of largazole, these data show the 
negative effect of conformational change accompanying change of configuration at 
this position. Similarly, analogue 16a with D-1-naphthylmethyl side chain at C2
too had negligible inhibition of HDAC activity, failed to induce global histone 3
(H3) acetylation in the HCT116 colorectal cancer cell line and demonstrated
minimal effect on growth. In contrast, the L-allyl analogue 16b and the
L-1-naphthylmethyl analogue 16c were potent HDAC inhibitors, showing robust
induction of global H3 acetylation and significant effect on cell growth. The
data suggest that even bulky substituents are tolerated at this position,
provided the stereochemistry at C2 is retained. With bulky substituents,
inversion of configuration at C2 results in loss of inhibitory activity. The
activity profiles of 16b and 16c on Class I HDAC1 vs Class II HDAC6 are similar
to those of largazole and, taken together with x-ray crystallography information 
of HDAC8-largazole complex, may suggest that the C2 position of largazole is not 
a suitable target for structural optimization to achieve isoform selectivity. The
results of these studies may guide the synthesis of more potent and selective
HDAC inhibitors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4188730
PMID: 25203782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Genet. 2014 Aug;93(2):539-44.

Pattern of change in histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation and histone deacetylases in
development of zebrafish embryo.

Li Y(1), Wang J, Xie Y, Liu S, Tian Y.

Author information: 
(1)Hebei Key Lab of Laboratory Animal, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang
050017, People's Republic of China. liushf@126.com.

PMID: 25189256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. BMC Urol. 2014 Aug 30;14:71. doi: 10.1186/1471-2490-14-71.

Panobinostat synergizes with bortezomib to induce endoplasmic reticulum stress
and ubiquitinated protein accumulation in renal cancer cells.

Sato A(1), Asano T, Isono M, Ito K, Asano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-8513, Japan. zenpaku@ndmc.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Inducing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is a novel strategy used
to treat malignancies. Inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6 by the HDAC
inhibitor panobinostat hinders the refolding of unfolded proteins by increasing
the acetylation of heat shock protein 90. We investigated whether combining
panobinostat with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib would kill cancer cells
effectively by inhibiting the degradation of these unfolded proteins, thereby
causing ubiquitinated proteins to accumulate and induce ER stress.
METHODS: Caki-1, ACHN, and 769-P cells were treated with panobinostat and/or
bortezomib. Cell viability, clonogenicity, and induction of apoptosis were
evaluated. The in vivo efficacy of the combination was evaluated using a murine
subcutaneous xenograft model. The combination-induced ER stress and ubiquitinated
protein accumulation were assessed.
RESULTS: The combination of panobinostat and bortezomib induced apoptosis and
inhibited renal cancer growth synergistically (combination indexes <1). It also
suppressed colony formation significantly (p <0.05). In a murine subcutaneous
tumor model, a 10-day treatment was well tolerated and inhibited tumor growth
significantly (p <0.05). Enhanced acetylation of the HDAC6 substrate
alpha-tubulin was consistent with the suppression of HDAC6 activity by
panobinostat, and the combination was shown to induce ER stress and ubiquitinated
protein accumulation synergistically.
CONCLUSIONS: Panobinostat inhibits renal cancer growth by synergizing with
bortezomib to induce ER stress and ubiquitinated protein accumulation. The
current study provides a basis for testing the combination in patients with
advanced renal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4153447
PMID: 25176354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;55:79-86. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.08.010.
Epub 2014 Aug 21.

N-terminal truncation mutations of adenomatous polyposis coli are associated with
primary cilia defects.

Song L(1), Jia Y(2), Zhu W(2), Newton IP(3), Li Z(4), Li W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, >Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Molecular 
Engineering of Ministry of Education, Institute of Biotechnology, Taiyuan 030006,
China; MOE Key Lab of Environmental Remediation and Ecosystem Health, College of 
Environmental and Resource Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, >Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Molecular 
Engineering of Ministry of Education, Institute of Biotechnology, Taiyuan 030006,
China. (3)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. (4)Institute of Biotechnology, >Key
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Institute of Biotechnology, Taiyuan 030006, China; College of Life
Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou 310053, China. Electronic 
address: lzy@sxu.edu.cn.

Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is a tumor suppressor gene and its
truncated mutations cause a few cilia-related diseases such as Gardner's
syndrome. However, little is known about the mechanism that links APC mutations
and cilia disorder. APC mutations lead to the expression of N-terminal fragments,
which have dominant effects in tumors owing to loss of the C-terminal region or a
gain of function. The present study investigated the impact of tumor-associated
N-terminal APC fragments on primary cilia assembly and the possible molecular
mechanism involved. We discovered that expression of tumor-associated N-terminal 
APC fragments (APC-N, APC-N1, APC-N2, and APC-N3, which contain amino acids
1-1018, 1-448, 449-781, and 782-1018 respectively), resulted in primary cilia
defects. We found that a ß-catenin/PI3K/AKT/GSK-3ß feedback signal cascade is
responsible for causing N-terminal APC fragment-induced cilia defects. In this
cascade, dysfunctions of both ß-catenin and GSK-3ß were involved in the
up-regulation of HDAC6 and subsequent decreased acetylated tubulin levels, which 
thereby led to cilia defects. These data suggest a mechanism for linking
N-terminal APC fragments and cilia loss, thus accelerating our understanding of
human cilia-related diseases such as Gardner's syndrome and their cause due to
APC mutations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25150829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cancer Lett. 2014 Nov 1;354(1):97-106. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.07.041. Epub
2014 Aug 8.

HDAC6 sustains growth stimulation by prolonging the activation of EGF receptor
through the inhibition of rabaptin-5-mediated early endosome fusion in gastric
cancer.

Park SJ(1), Kim JK(1), Bae HJ(1), Eun JW(1), Shen Q(1), Kim HS(1), Shin WC(1),
Yang HD(1), Lee EK(2), You JS(3), Park WS(1), Lee JY(1), Nam SW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; Functional RNomics Research Center, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of 
Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul
137-701, Republic of Korea; Cancer Evolution Research Center, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of
Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; Functional RNomics Research Center,
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea; Cancer
Evolution Research Center, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: swnam@catholic.ac.kr.

The aberrant regulation of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) contributes to malignant
progression in various types of cancer, but the mechanism underlying gastric
carcinogenesis remains unknown. Aberrant HDAC6 overexpression was observed in a
subset of human gastric cancer cells. HDAC6 knockdown caused the significant
inhibition of gastric cancer cell growth without affecting the transition of cell
cycles or the processing of cell death. We demonstrate that an increase in
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling through decreased EGFR
degradation was mediated by HDAC6 in gastric carcinogenesis. These results
establish a molecular mechanism responsible for oncogenic HDAC6, explaining how
EGFR signaling induced by the growth factor is sustained during the malignant
progression of gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25111897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2014 Jul;79(7):637-42. doi: 10.1134/S0006297914070050.

Selective inhibitor of histone deacetylase 6 (tubastatin A) suppresses
proliferation of hepatitis C virus replicon in culture of human hepatocytes.

Kozlov MV(1), Kleymenova AA, Konduktorov KA, Malikova AZ, Kochetkov SN.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, 119991, Russia. kozlovmv@hotmail.com.

Acetylation of a-tubulin was studied in cultures of human hepatocytes under the
influence of selective inhibitors of histone deacetylases HDAC6 and SIRT-2 -
tubastatin A and 2-(3-phenethoxyphenylamino)benzamide, respectively. It was found
that in hepatocyte cell line HepG2 acetylated a-tubulin is accumulated
preferentially on inhibition of HDAC6 but not of SIRT-2. Under the same
conditions, no acetylation of a-tubulin was observed in hepatocyte cell line
Huh7. However, the inhibition of HDAC6 with tubastatin A led to hyperacetylation 
of a-tubulin and simultaneously to decrease in viral RNA concentration in
hepatocyte cell line Huh7-luc/neo, which supports propagation of the full genome 
replicon of hepatitis C virus. The correlation between these two processes points
to HDAC6 as a promising cellular target for therapy of hepatitis C.

PMID: 25108326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Immunol. 2014 Sep 15;193(6):2850-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302778. Epub 2014
Aug 8.

A novel role for histone deacetylase 6 in the regulation of the tolerogenic
STAT3/IL-10 pathway in APCs.

Cheng F(1), Lienlaf M(1), Wang HW(1), Perez-Villarroel P(1), Lee C(2), Woan K(1),
Rock-Klotz J(1), Sahakian E(1), Woods D(1), Pinilla-Ibarz J(1), Kalin J(3), Tao
J(1), Hancock W(4), Kozikowski A(3), Seto E(5), Villagra A(6), Sotomayor EM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Malignant Hematology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer
Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612; (2)All Children's Research
Institute, All Children's Hospital-Johns Hopkins Medicine, St. Petersburg, FL
33701; Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287; (3)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal
Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612;
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104; and. (5)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt 
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612. (6)Department of
Immunology and Malignant Hematology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612; Alejandro.Villagra@moffitt.org
Eduardo.Sotomayor@moffitt.org.

APCs are critical in T cell activation and in the induction of T cell tolerance. 
Epigenetic modifications of specific genes in the APC play a key role in this
process, and among them histone deacetylases (HDACs) have emerged as key
participants. HDAC6, one of the members of this family of enzymes, has been shown
to be involved in regulation of inflammatory and immune responses. In this study,
to our knowledge we show for the first time that genetic or pharmacologic
disruption of HDAC6 in macrophages and dendritic cells results in diminished
production of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10 and induction of inflammatory 
APCs that effectively activate Ag-specific naive T cells and restore the
responsiveness of anergic CD4(+) T cells. Mechanistically, we have found that
HDAC6 forms a previously unknown molecular complex with STAT3, association that
was detected in both the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments of the APC. By
using HDAC6 recombinant mutants we identified the domain comprising amino acids
503-840 as being required for HDAC6 interaction with STAT3. Furthermore, by
re-chromatin immunoprecipitation we confirmed that HDAC6 and STAT3 are both
recruited to the same DNA sequence within the Il10 gene promoter. Of note,
disruption of this complex by knocking down HDAC6 resulted in decreased STAT3
phosphorylation--but no changes in STAT3 acetylation--as well as diminished
recruitment of STAT3 to the Il10 gene promoter region. The additional
demonstration that a selective HDAC6 inhibitor disrupts this STAT3/IL-10
tolerogenic axis points to HDAC6 as a novel molecular target in APCs to overcome 
immune tolerance and tips the balance toward T cell immunity.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4157123
PMID: 25108026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int J Med Sci. 2014 Jul 17;11(10):994-1000. doi: 10.7150/ijms.8522. eCollection
2014.

Expression of histone deacetylases in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and its
clinical significance.

Lee SH(1), Yoo C(2), Im S(2), Jung JH(2), Choi HJ(2), Yoo J(2).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Hospital Pathology, St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (2)2. Department of Hospital Pathology, St.
Vincent's Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Suwon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase inhibitors are a new class of drugs used in
treatment of malignant tumors. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most 
common type of B-cell lymphoma, and it accounts for more than 40% of all B-cell
lymphomas. In this study, we aimed to determine the expression patterns of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) in DLBCL, to examine whether HDAC expression
patterns differ among cases, and to assess whether these findings have clinical
significance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We selected 91 cases of DLBCL diagnosed at St. Vincent
Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, from 2001-2012. We performed a
pathology slide review and collected clinical data including age, sex, tumor
site, survival time, and mortality. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed
using primary antibodies for HDACs, including HDAC1 and 2 of class I, HDAC4 and 5
of class IIa, and HDAC6 of class IIb. Expression site was determined to be
nuclear, cytoplasmic, or both. Staining intensities were graded as low and high. 
We assessed correlations between HDAC expression levels and clinical data and
survival analysis.
RESULTS: Of the 91 cases examined, 46 (50.5%) were men and 45 (49.5%) were women.
Most of the patients were elderly, and 74 (81.3%) cases were older than 46 y.
Forty-six (50.5%) cases showed lymph node involvement, and 45 (49.5%) cases
showed lymphoma at extranodal sites. In nodal lymphoma, staining was strongly
positive for HDAC2, whereas staining was weak or negative for HDAC4; however,
there was no significant correlation with survival. But nodal lymphoma cases with
high nuclear expression of HDAC2 and nodal lymphoma cases with high nuclear
expression of HDAC2 and low nuclear expression of HDAC4 showed significantly
shorter survival times compared with other cases.
CONCLUSIONS: High nuclear expression of HDAC2 may play an important role in
survival of DLBCL patients, especially in those with nodal lymphoma, which is
associated with a shorter survival time. Our results may have important
implications for treatment of DLBCL by epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC4115238
PMID: 25076845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Cell Biol. 2014 Aug 4;206(3):395-413. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201403039. Epub 2014 Jul
28.

Paxillin inhibits HDAC6 to regulate microtubule acetylation, Golgi structure, and
polarized migration.

Deakin NO(1), Turner CE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, State University of New York
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210. (2)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, State University of New York Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY 13210 turnerce@upstate.edu.

Polarized cell migration is essential for normal organism development and is also
a critical component of cancer cell invasion and disease progression. Directional
cell motility requires the coordination of dynamic cell-extracellular matrix
interactions as well as repositioning of the Golgi apparatus, both of which can
be controlled by the microtubule (MT) cytoskeleton. In this paper, we have
identified a new and conserved role for the focal adhesion scaffold protein
paxillin in regulating the posttranslational modification of the MT cytoskeleton 
through an inhibitory interaction with the a-tubulin deacetylase HDAC6. We also
determined that through HDAC6-dependent regulation of the MT cytoskeleton,
paxillin regulates both Golgi organelle integrity and polarized cell invasion and
migration in both three-dimensional and two-dimensional matrix microenvironments.
Importantly, these data reveal a fundamental role for paxillin in coordinating MT
acetylation-dependent cell polarization and migration in both normal and
transformed cells.

© 2014 Deakin and Turner.

PMCID: PMC4121979
PMID: 25070956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2014;14(9):1249-60.

Ellagic acid inhibits VEGF/VEGFR2, PI3K/Akt and MAPK signaling cascades in the
hamster cheek pouch carcinogenesis model.

Kowshik J, Giri H, Kishore TK, Kesavan R, Vankudavath RN, Reddy GB, Dixit M,
Nagini S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Annamalai
University, Annamalainagar- 608 002, Tamil Nadu, India. s_nagini@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Blocking vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mediated tumor
angiogenesis by phytochemicals has emerged as an attractive strategy for cancer
prevention and therapy.
METHODS: We investigated the anti-angiogenic effects of ellagic acid in a hamster
model of oral oncogenesis by examining the transcript and protein expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1a), VEGF, VEGFR2, and the members of the
PI3K/Akt and MAPK signaling cascades. Molecular docking studies and cell culture 
experiments with the endothelial cell line ECV304 were performed to delineate the
mechanism by which ellagic acid regulates VEGF signaling.
RESULTS: We found that ellagic acid significantly inhibits HIF-1a-induced
VEGF/VEGFR2 signalling in the hamster buccal pouch by abrogating PI3K/Akt and
MAPK signaling via downregulation of PI3K, PDK-1, p-Akt(ser473), mTOR, p-ERK, and
p-JNK. Ellagic acid was also found to reduce the expression of histone
deacetylases that could inhibit neovascularization. Analysis of the mechanism
revealed that ellagic acid inhibits hypoxia-induced angiogenesis via suppression 
of HDAC-6 in ECV304 cells. Furthermore, knockdown of endogenous HDAC6 via small
interfering RNA abrogated hypoxia-induced expression of HIF-1a and VEGF and
blocked Akt activation. Molecular docking studies confirmed interaction of
ellagic acid with upstream kinases that regulate angiogenic signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these findings demonstrate that the anti-angiogenic 
activity of ellagic acid may be mediated by abrogation of hypoxia driven
PI3K/Akt/mTOR, MAPK and VEGF/VEGFR2 signaling pathways involving suppression of
HDAC6 and HIF-1a responses.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Ellagic acid offers promise as a lead compound for
anticancer therapeutics by virtue of its ability to inhibit key oncogenic
signaling cascades and HDACs.

PMID: 25060902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Int J Oncol. 2014 Oct;45(4):1715-23. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2550. Epub 2014 Jul
21.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce attenuation of Wnt signaling and TCF7L2
depletion in colorectal carcinoma cells.

Götze S(1), Coersmeyer M(2), Müller O(3), Sievers S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Dortmund, Germany. (2)Swiss
Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)University 
of Applied Sciences, Kaiserslautern, Germany.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) specifically affect cancer cells by
inducing cell cycle arrest, activate apoptotic pathways and re-activate
epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor genes, but their pleiotropic mode of
action is not fully understood. Despite the clinical effects of HDIs in the
treatment of hematological malignancies, their potency against solid tumors is
still unclear. We investigated the effects and mechanisms of HDI action in
colorectal carcinoma cell lines with an activated Wnt signaling pathway, which is
implicated in different aspects of tumorigenesis, including cell proliferation,
apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. We assessed the effects of HDI treatment 
in colorectal carcinoma cell lines by measuring histone hyperacetylation, cell
viability and expression of Wnt target genes. Upon treatment with HDIs of the
hydroxamate class, we found attenuation of Wnt signaling with concomitant
induction of apoptosis and colorectal cancer cell death. Strikingly, the effects 
of HDIs on Wnt signaling were independent of histone hyperacetylation, thus we
investigated the role of non-histone target proteins of histone deacetylases
(HDACs). The compounds TSA and SAHA induced a rapid proteasome-dependent
depletion of the Wnt transcription factor TCF7L2, which may be mediated by
inhibition of HDAC 6 and 10. Our findings provide a molecular rationale for the
use of HDIs against colorectal carcinomas with activated Wnt signaling.

PMID: 25050608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Amino Acids. 2014 Oct;46(10):2435-44. doi: 10.1007/s00726-014-1800-5. Epub 2014
Jul 22.

Design and synthesis of mono and bicyclic tetrapeptides thioester as potent
inhibitor of histone deacetylases.

Hoque MA(1), Islam MS, Islam MN, Kato T, Nishino N, Ito A, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400,
Serdang, Malaysia, ashraf_bio2003@yahoo.com.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a promising class of anticancer
agents that have an effect on gene regulation. The naturally occurring cyclic
depsipeptide FK228 containing disulfide and Largazole possessing thioester
functionalities act as pro-drugs and share the same HDAC inhibition mechanism in 
cell. Inspired from these facts, we have reported bicyclic tetrapeptide disulfide
HDAC inhibitors resembling FK228 with potent activity and enhanced selectivity.
In the present study, we report the design and synthesis of several mono and
bicyclic tetrapeptide thioester HDAC inhibitors that share the inhibition
mechanism similar to Largazole. Most of the compounds showed HDAC1 and HDAC4
inhibition and p21 promoting activity in nanomolar ranges. Among these the
monocyclic peptides 1, 2 and bicyclic peptide, 4 are notable demanding more
advanced research to be promising anticancer drug candidates.

PMID: 25048030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2014 May 29;6(3):29. doi: 10.1186/alzrt259. eCollection
2014.

Acetylation: a new key to unlock tau's role in neurodegeneration.

Cook C(1), Stankowski JN(1), Carlomagno Y(1), Stetler C(1), Petrucelli L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

The identification of tau protein as a major constituent of neurofibrillary
tangles spurred considerable effort devoted to identifying and validating
pathways through which therapeutics may alleviate tau burden in Alzheimer's
disease and related tauopathies, including chronic traumatic encephalopathy
associated with sport- and military-related injuries. Most tau-based therapeutic 
strategies have previously focused on modulating tau phosphorylation, given that 
tau species present within neurofibrillary tangles are hyperphosphorylated on a
number of different residues. However, the recent discovery that tau is modified 
by acetylation necessitates additional research to provide greater mechanistic
insight into the spectrum of physiological consequences of tau acetylation, which
may hold promise as a novel therapeutic target. In this review, we discuss recent
findings evaluating tau acetylation in the context of previously accepted notions
regarding tau biology and pathophysiology. We also examine the evidence
demonstrating the neuroprotective and beneficial consequences of inhibiting
histone deacetylase (HDAC)6, a tau deacetylase, including its effect on
microtubule stabilization. We also discuss the rationale for pharmacologically
modulating HDAC6 in tau-based pathologies as a novel therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC4075151
PMID: 25031639  [PubMed]


226. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(19):11229-39. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00727-14. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Histone deacetylase 6 inhibits influenza A virus release by downregulating the
trafficking of viral components to the plasma membrane via its substrate,
acetylated microtubules.

Husain M(1), Cheung CY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand matloob.husain@otago.ac.nz. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Mammalian cells produce many proteins, such as IFITM3, ISG15, MxA, and viperin,
that inhibit influenza A virus (IAV) infection. Here, we show that a new class of
host protein, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), inhibits IAV infection. We found
that HDAC6-overexpressing cells release about 3-fold less IAV progeny, whereas
HDAC6-depleted cells release about 6-fold more IAV progeny. The deacetylase
activity of HDAC6 played a role in its anti-IAV function as tubacin, a specific
small-molecule inhibitor of HDAC6, increased the release of IAV progeny in a
dose-dependent manner. Further, as visualized by electron microscopy,
tubacin-treated cells showed an increase in IAV budding at the plasma membrane,
the site of IAV assembly. Tubacin is a domain-specific inhibitor and binds to one
of the two HDAC6 catalytic domains possessing tubulin deacetylase activity. This 
indicated the potential involvement of acetylated microtubules in the trafficking
of viral components to the plasma membrane. Indeed, as quantified by flow
cytometry, there was about a 2.0- to 2.5-fold increase and about a 2.0-fold
decrease in the amount of viral envelope protein hemagglutinin present on the
plasma membrane of tubacin-treated/HDAC6-depleted and HDAC6-overexpressing cells,
respectively. In addition, the viral ribonucleoprotein complex was colocalized
with acetylated microtubule filaments, and viral nucleoprotein
coimmunoprecipitated with acetylated tubulin. Together, our findings indicate
that HDAC6 is an anti-IAV host factor and exerts its anti-IAV function by
negatively regulating the trafficking of viral components to the host cell plasma
membrane via its substrate, acetylated microtubules.IMPORTANCE: Host cells
produce many proteins that have the natural ability to restrict influenza virus
infection. Here, we discovered that another host protein, histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6), inhibits influenza virus infection. We demonstrate that HDAC6 exerts its
anti-influenza virus function by negatively regulating the trafficking of viral
components to the site of influenza virus assembly via its substrate, acetylated 
microtubules. HDAC6 is a multisubstrate enzyme and regulates multiple cellular
pathways, including the ones leading to various cancers, neurodegenerative
diseases, and inflammatory disorders. Therefore, several drugs targeting HDAC6
are under clinical development for the treatment of a wide range of diseases.
Influenza virus continues to be a major global public health problem due to
regular emergence of drug-resistant and novel influenza virus strains in humans. 
As an alternative antiviral strategy, HDAC6 modulators could be employed to
stimulate the anti-influenza virus potential of endogenous HDAC6 to inhibit
influenza virus infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178787
PMID: 25031336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Cell Sci. 2014 Sep 15;127(Pt 18):4052-63. doi: 10.1242/jcs.152363. Epub 2014
Jul 11.

Interaction of SQSTM1 with the motor protein dynein--SQSTM1 is required for
normal dynein function and trafficking.

Calderilla-Barbosa L(1), Seibenhener ML(1), Du Y(1), Diaz-Meco MT(2), Moscat
J(2), Yan J(3), Wooten MW(1), Wooten MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, 331 Funchess Hall, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL 36849, USA. (2)10901 North Torrey Pines Road, Sanford-Burnham Medical 
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Graduate Center for Toxicology,
Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, KY
40536, USA. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, 331 Funchess Hall, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA wootemc@auburn.edu.

The dynein motor protein complex is required for retrograde transport of
vesicular cargo and for transport of aggregated proteins along microtubules for
processing and degradation at perinuclear aggresomes. Disruption of this process 
leads to dysfunctional endosome accumulation and increased protein aggregation in
the cell cytoplasm, both pathological features of neurodegenerative diseases.
However, the exact mechanism of dynein functionality in these pathways is still
being elucidated. Here, we show that the scaffolding protein SQSTM1 directly
interacts with dynein through a previously unidentified dynein-binding site. This
interaction is independent of HDAC6, a known interacting protein of both SQSTM1
and dynein. However, knockdown of HDAC6 increases the interaction of SQSTM1 with 
dynein, indicating a possible competitive interaction. Using different dynein
cargoes, we show that SQSTM1 is required for proper dynein motility and
trafficking along microtubules. Based on our results, we propose a new model of
competitive interaction between SQSTM1 and HDAC6 with dynein. In this model,
SQSTM1 would not only affect the association of polyubiquitylated protein
aggregates and endosomes with dynein, but would also be required for normal
dynein function.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4163647
PMID: 25015291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Virol. 2014 Sep;88(18):10803-12. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00320-14. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat (SAHA) increases the susceptibility 
of uninfected CD4+ T cells to HIV by increasing the kinetics and efficiency of
postentry viral events.

Lucera MB(1), Tilton CA(1), Mao H(2), Dobrowolski C(2), Tabler CO(1), Haqqani
AA(1), Karn J(2), Tilton JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and 
Microbiology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
Ohio, USA. (3)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA john.c.tilton@case.edu.

Latently infected cells remain a primary barrier to eradication of HIV-1. Over
the past decade, a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which
latency is established and maintained has led to the discovery of a number of
compounds that selectively reactivate latent proviruses without inducing
polyclonal T cell activation. Recently, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor 
vorinostat has been demonstrated to induce HIV transcription from latently
infected cells when administered to patients. While vorinostat will be given in
the context of antiretroviral therapy (ART), infection of new cells by induced
virus remains a clinical concern. Here, we demonstrate that vorinostat
significantly increases the susceptibility of CD4(+) T cells to infection by HIV 
in a dose- and time-dependent manner that is independent of receptor and
coreceptor usage. Vorinostat does not enhance viral fusion with cells but rather 
enhances the kinetics and efficiency of postentry viral events, including reverse
transcription, nuclear import, and integration, and enhances viral production in 
a spreading-infection assay. Selective inhibition of the cytoplasmic class IIb
HDAC6 with tubacin recapitulated the effect of vorinostat. These findings reveal 
a previously unknown cytoplasmic effect of HDAC inhibitors promoting productive
infection of CD4(+) T cells that is distinct from their well-characterized
effects on nuclear histone acetylation and long-terminal-repeat (LTR)
transcription. Our results indicate that careful monitoring of patients and ART
intensification are warranted during vorinostat treatment and indicate that HDAC 
inhibitors that selectively target nuclear class I HDACs could reactivate latent 
HIV without increasing the susceptibility of uninfected cells to HIV.IMPORTANCE: 
HDAC inhibitors, particularly vorinostat, are currently being investigated
clinically as part of a "shock-and-kill" strategy to purge latent reservoirs of
HIV. We demonstrate here that vorinostat increases the susceptibility of
uninfected CD4(+) T cells to infection with HIV, raising clinical concerns that
vorinostat may reseed the viral reservoirs it is meant to purge, particularly
under conditions of suboptimal drug exposure. We demonstrate that vorinostat acts
following viral fusion and enhances the kinetics and efficiency of reverse
transcription, nuclear import, and integration. The effect of vorinostat was
recapitulated using the cytoplasmic histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibitor
tubacin, revealing a novel and previously unknown cytoplasmic mechanism of HDAC
inhibitors on HIV replication that is distinct from their well-characterized
effects of long-terminal-repeat (LTR)-driven gene expression. Moreover, our
results suggest that treatment of patients with class I-specific HDAC inhibitors 
could induce latent viruses without increasing the susceptibility of uninfected
cells to HIV.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178860
PMID: 25008921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Bioorg Med Chem. 2014 Aug 1;22(15):3850-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.06.029. Epub
2014 Jun 25.

Design and synthesis of CHAP31, trapoxin B and HC-toxin based bicyclic
tetrapeptides disulfide as potent histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Hoque MA(1), Islam MN(2), Islam MS(2), Kato T(3), Nishino N(3), Ito A(4), Yoshida
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of
Technology, Kitakyushu 808-0196, Japan; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi 6205, Bangladesh.
Electronic address: ashraf_bio2003@yahoo.com. (2)Graduate School of Life Science 
and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu 808-0196,
Japan; Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Rajshahi,
Rajshahi 6205, Bangladesh. (3)Graduate School of Life Science and Systems
Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu 808-0196, Japan.
(4)Chemical Genetics Laboratory/Chemical Genomics Research Group, RIKEN Advanced 
Science Institute, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Retraction in
    Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Aug 1;23(15):5078.

The naturally occurring cyclic depsipeptide, FK228 inhibits histone deacetylase
(HDAC) enzymes after reductive cleavage of intra-molecular disulfide bond. One of
the sulfhydryl groups produced in the reduction interacts with zinc atom that
involved in the catalytic mechanism of type 1 and 2 HDACs such as HDAC1, HDAC4,
and HDAC6. In the present study, we describe the development of CHAP31, trapoxin 
B and HC-toxin based cyclic tetrapeptides with intra-molecular disulfide bond as 
HDAC inhibitors. The bicyclic tetrapeptides disulfide showed potent HDAC1 and
HDAC4 inhibition and p21 promoting activity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24997578  [PubMed]


230. Cell Rep. 2014 Jul 10;8(1):94-102. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.051. Epub 2014
Jun 26.

HDAC6 is a Bruchpilot deacetylase that facilitates neurotransmitter release.

Miskiewicz K(1), Jose LE(1), Yeshaw WM(1), Valadas JS(1), Swerts J(1), Munck
S(2), Feiguin F(3), Dermaut B(4), Verstreken P(5).

Author information: 
(1)VIB Center for the Biology of Disease, Herestraat 49 bus 602, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium; KU Leuven, Center for Human Genetics and Leuven Research Institute for
Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), Herestraat 49 bus 602, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)VIB Center for the Biology of Disease, Herestraat 49 bus 602, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium; KU Leuven, Center for Human Genetics and Leuven Research Institute for
Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), Herestraat 49 bus 602, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; VIB
Bio Imaging Core, Herestraat 49 bus 602, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (3)International
Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano 99, 34149 Trieste,
Italy. (4)INSERM U744, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille Nord de
France, rue du Professeur Calmette 1, 59019 Lille, France; Center for Medical
Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Gent, Belgium. (5)VIB
Center for the Biology of Disease, Herestraat 49 bus 602, 3000 Leuven, Belgium;
KU Leuven, Center for Human Genetics and Leuven Research Institute for
Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), Herestraat 49 bus 602, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
Electronic address: patrik.verstreken@cme.vib-kuleuven.be.

Presynaptic densities are specialized structures involved in synaptic vesicle
tethering and neurotransmission; however, the mechanisms regulating their
function remain understudied. In Drosophila, Bruchpilot is a major constituent of
the presynaptic density that tethers vesicles. Here, we show that HDAC6 is
necessary and sufficient for deacetylation of Bruchpilot. HDAC6 expression is
also controlled by TDP-43, an RNA-binding protein deregulated in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS). Animals expressing TDP-43 harboring pathogenic mutations
show increased HDAC6 expression, decreased Bruchpilot acetylation, larger
vesicle-tethering sites, and increased neurotransmission, defects similar to
those seen upon expression of HDAC6 and opposite to hdac6 null mutants.
Consequently, reduced levels of HDAC6 or increased levels of ELP3, a Bruchpilot
acetyltransferase, rescue the presynaptic density defects in TDP-43-expressing
flies as well as the decreased adult locomotion. Our work identifies HDAC6 as a
Bruchpilot deacetylase and indicates that regulating acetylation of a presynaptic
release-site protein is critical for maintaining normal neurotransmission.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24981865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Oncotarget. 2014 Jul 15;5(13):5165-76.

RPL24: a potential therapeutic target whose depletion or acetylation inhibits
polysome assembly and cancer cell growth.

Wilson-Edell KA(1), Kehasse A(1), Scott GK(1), Yau C(1), Rothschild DE(1),
Schilling B(1), Gabriel BS(2), Yevtushenko MA(2), Hanson IM(1), Held JM(1),
Gibson BW(3), Benz CC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Research on Aging; Novato, CA, USA. (2)Buck Institute for
Research on Aging; Novato, CA, USA. Master of Science in Biology Program;
Dominican University; San Rafael, CA, USA. (3)Buck Institute for Research on
Aging; Novato, CA, USA. Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of
California, San Francisco, CA USA. (4)Buck Institute for Research on Aging;
Novato, CA, USA. Oncology-Hematology Division, Department of Medicine, University
of California, San Francisco, CA USA.

Partial loss of large ribosomal subunit protein 24 (RPL24) function is known to
protect mice against Akt or Myc-driven cancers, in part via translational
inhibition of a subset of cap(eIF4E)-dependently translated mRNAs. The role of
RPL24 in human malignancies is unknown. By analyzing a public dataset of matched 
human breast cancers and normal mammary tissue, we found that breast cancers
express significantly more RPL24 than matched normal breast samples. Depletion of
RPL24 in breast cancer cells by >70% reduced cell viability by 80% and decreased 
protein expression of the eIF4E-dependently translated proteins cyclin D1 (75%), 
survivin (46%) and NBS1 (30%) without altering GAPDH or beta-tubulin levels.
RPL24 knockdown also reduced 80S subunit levels relative to 40S and 60S levels.
These effects on expression of eIF4E-dependent proteins and ribosome assembly
were mimicked by 2-24 h treatment with the pan-HDACi, trichostatin A (TSA), which
induced acetylation of 15 different polysome-associated proteins including RPL24.
Furthermore, HDAC6-selective inhibition or HDAC6 knockdown induced ribosomal
protein acetylation. Via mass spectrometry, we found that 60S-associated, but
not, polysome-associated, RPL24 undergoes HDACi-induced acetylation on K27. Thus,
RPL24 K27 acetylation may play a role in ribosome assembly. These findings point 
toward a novel acetylation-dependent polysome assembly mechanism regulating
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4148130
PMID: 24970821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cell Reprogram. 2014 Aug;16(4):253-65. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0058. Epub 2014 Jun
24.

Effects of histone deacetylase inhibitor oxamflatin on in vitro porcine somatic
cell nuclear transfer embryos.

Hou L(1), Ma F, Yang J, Riaz H, Wang Y, Wu W, Xia X, Ma Z, Zhou Y, Zhang L, Ying 
W, Xu D, Zuo B, Ren Z, Xiong Y.

Author information: 
(1)1 Key Laboratory of Agriculture Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
College of Animal Science, Huazhong Agricultural University , Wuhan, 430070,
China .

Low cloning efficiency is considered to be caused by the incomplete or aberrant
epigenetic reprogramming of differentiated donor cells in somatic cell nuclear
transfer (SCNT) embryos. Oxamflatin, a novel class of histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDACi), has been found to improve the in vitro and full-term
developmental potential of SCNT embryos. In the present study, we studied the
effects of oxamflatin treatment on in vitro porcine SCNT embryos. Our results
indicated that the rate of in vitro blastocyst formation of SCNT embryos treated 
with 1 µM oxamflatin for 15 h postactivation was significantly higher than all
other treatments. Treatment of oxamflatin decreased the relative histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity in cloned embryos and resulted in hyperacetylation
levels of histone H3 at lysine 9 (AcH3K9) and histone H4 at lysine 5 (AcH4K5) at 
pronuclear, two-cell, and four-cell stages partly through downregulating HDAC1.
The suppression of HDAC6 through oxamflatin increased the nonhistone acetylation 
level of a-tubulin during the mitotic cell cycle of early SCNT embryos. In
addition, we demonstrated that oxamflatin downregulated DNA methyltransferase 1
(DNMT1) expression and global DNA methylation level (5-methylcytosine) in
two-cell-stage porcine SCNT embryos. The pluripotency-related gene POU5F1 was
found to be upregulated in the oxamflatin-treated group with a decreased DNA
methylation tendency in its promoter regions. Treatment of oxamflatin did not
change the locus-specific DNA methylation levels of Sus scrofa heterochromatic
satellite DNA sequences at the blastocyst stage. Meanwhile, our findings suggest 
that treatment with HDACi may contribute to maintaining the stable status of
cytoskeleton-associated elements, such as acetylated a-tubulin, which may be the 
crucial determinants of donor nuclear reprogramming in early SCNT embryos. In
summary, oxamflatin treatment improves the developmental potential of porcine
SCNT embryos in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4116115
PMID: 24960409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1839(9):793-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.06.011. 
Epub 2014 Jun 21.

Akt1 mediates the posterior Hoxc gene expression through epigenetic modifications
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Kong KA(1), Lee JY(1), Oh JH(1), Lee Y(1), Kim MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Lab., Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Lab., Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
mhkim1@yuhs.ac.

The evolutionarily conserved Hox genes are organized in clusters and expressed
colinearly to specify body patterning during embryonic development. Previously,
Akt1 has been identified as a putative Hox gene regulator through in silico
analysis. Substantial upregulation of consecutive 5' Hoxc genes has been observed
when Akt1 is absent in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells. In this study, we 
provide evidence that Akt1 regulates the 5' Hoxc gene expression by epigenetic
modifications. Enrichment of histone H3K9 acetylation and a low level of the
H3K27me3 mark were detected at the posterior 5' Hoxc loci when Akt1 is absent. A 
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor de-repressed 5' Hoxc gene expression when
Akt1 is present, and a DNA demethylating reagent synergistically upregulated
HDAC-induced 5' Hoxc gene expression. A knockdown study revealed that Hdac6 is
mediated in the Hoxc12 repression through direct binding to the transcription
start site (TSS) in the presence of Akt1. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that endogenous Akt1 directly interacted with Hdac6. Furthermore,
exogenous Akt1 was enriched at the promoter region of the posterior Hoxc genes
such as Hoxc11 and Hoxc12, not the Akt1-independent Hoxc5 and Hoxd10 loci. The
regulation of the H3K27me3 mark by Ezh2 and Kdm6b at the 5' Hoxc gene promoter
turned out to be Akt1 dependent. Taken together, these results suggest that Akt1 
mediates the posterior 5' Hoxc gene expression through epigenetic modification
such as histone methylation and acetylation, and partly through a direct binding 
to the promoter region of the 5' Hoxc genes and/or Hdac6 in mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24955524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Surgery. 2014 Aug;156(2):235-42. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2014.03.033. Epub 2014 Jun
16.

Selective histone deacetylase-6 inhibition attenuates stress responses and
prevents immune organ atrophy in a lethal septic model.

Zhao T(1), Li Y(2), Bronson RT(3), Liu B(2), Velmahos GC(1), Alam HB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Trauma, Emergency Surgery & Surgical Critical Care, Department of 
Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Hospital, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Hospital, Ann Arbor, MI.
Electronic address: alamh@med.umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: An overproduction of corticosterone during severe sepsis results in
increased apoptosis of immune cells, which may result in relative
immunosuppression and an impaired ability to fight infections. We have previously
demonstrated that administration of tubastatin A, a selective inhibitor of
histone deacetylase-6 (HDAC6), improves survival in a lethal model of cecal
ligation and puncture (CLP) in mice. The purpose of this study was to
characterize the effects of this treatment on sepsis-induced stress responses and
immune function.
METHODS: C57BL/6J mice were subjected to CLP, and 1 hour later given an
intraperitoneal injection of either tubastatin A dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide 
(DMSO), or DMSO only. Blood samples were collected to measure the levels of
circulating corticosterone and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Thymus and
long bones (femur and tibia) were subjected to hematoxylin and eosin staining,
and immunohistochemistry was utilized to detect cleaved-caspase 3 in the splenic 
follicles as a measure of cellular apoptosis.
RESULTS: All vehicle-treated CLP animals died within 3 days, and displayed
increased corticosterone and decreased ACTH levels compared with the
sham-operated group. These animals also developed atrophy of thymic cortex with a
marked depletion of thymocytes. Tubastatin A treatment significantly attenuated
the stress hormone abnormalities. Treated animals also had significantly lower
percentages of thymic atrophy (95.0 ± 5.0 vs 42.5 ± 25.3; P = .0366), bone marrow
depletion and atrophy (58.3 ± 6.5 vs 25.0 ± 14.4%; P = .0449), and cellular
apoptosis in the splenic follicles (41.2 ± 3.7 vs 28.5 ± 4.3 per 40× field; P =
.0354).
CONCLUSION: Selective inhibition of HDAC6 in this lethal septic model was
associated with a significant blunting of the stress responses, with attenuated
thymic and bone marrow atrophy, and decreased splenic apoptosis. Our findings
identify a novel mechanism behind the survival advantage seen with tubastatin A
treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4267495
PMID: 24947640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;33(9):567-80. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2300. Epub 2014 Jun
16.

Interplay between HDAC6 and its interacting partners: essential roles in the
aggresome-autophagy pathway and neurodegenerative diseases.

Yan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University , Auburn, Alabama.

Cytoplasmic localization and possession of two deacetylase domains and a
ubiquitin-binding domain make histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) a unique histone
deacetylase. HDAC6 interacts with a number of proteins in the cytoplasm. Some of 
these proteins can be deacetylated by HDAC6 deacetylase activity. Others can
affect HDAC6 functions by modulating its catalytic activity or ubiquitin-binding 
capability. Over the last decade, HDAC6 has been shown to play important roles in
the aggresome-autophagy pathway, which selectively targets on protein aggregates 
or damaged organelles for their accumulation and clearance in cells.
HDAC6-interacting partners are integral components in this pathway with regard to
their regulatory roles through interaction with HDAC6. The aggresome-autophagy
pathway appears to be an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of
neurodegenerative diseases as accumulation of protein aggregates are hallmarks in
these diseases. In the current review, I discuss the molecular details of how
HDAC6 and its interacting partners regulate each individual step in the
aggresome-autophagy pathway and also provide perspectives of how HDAC6 can be
targeted in treating neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 24932665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Oct;70:12-20. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.05.038. Epub 2014 Jun
9.

Stem cell-derived motor neurons from spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy patients.

Grunseich C(1), Zukosky K(2), Kats IR(3), Ghosh L(4), Harmison GG(5), Bott LC(6),
Rinaldi C(7), Chen KL(8), Chen G(9), Boehm M(10), Fischbeck KH(11).

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
2A-1000 Building 35, 35 Convent Drive, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic
address: christopher.grunseich@nih.gov. (2)Neurogenetics Branch, National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2A-1000 Building 35, 35 Convent
Drive, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: kristen.perkins@nih.gov.
(3)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
2A-1000 Building 35, 35 Convent Drive, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic
address: Ilona.kats@nih.gov. (4)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2A-1000 Building 35, 35 Convent Drive, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: labonighosh@gmail.com.
(5)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
2A-1000 Building 35, 35 Convent Drive, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic
address: george.harmison@nih.gov. (6)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2A-1000 Building 35, 35 Convent Drive, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska
Institute, Solnavagen 1, 17177 Solna, Sweden. Electronic address:
laura.bott@nih.gov. (7)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, 2A-1000 Building 35, 35 Convent Drive, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. Electronic address: carlo.rinaldi@nih.gov. (8)Neurogenetics Branch,
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2A-1000 Building 35, 35 
Convent Drive, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
chenk@ninds.nih.gov. (9)National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bld 10-CRC Rm
5-3132, 10 Center Dr., NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
guibin.chen@nih.gov. (10)National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bld 10-CRC Rm 
5-3132, 10 Center Dr., NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
manfred.boehm@nih.gov. (11)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2A-1000 Building 35, 35 Convent Drive, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: kf@ninds.nih.gov.

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA, Kennedy's disease) is a motor neuron
disease caused by polyglutamine repeat expansion in the androgen receptor.
Although degeneration occurs in the spinal cord and muscle, the exact mechanism
is not clear. Induced pluripotent stem cells from spinal and bulbar muscular
atrophy patients provide a useful model for understanding the disease mechanism
and designing effective therapy. Stem cells were generated from six patients and 
compared to control lines from three healthy individuals. Motor neurons from four
patients were differentiated from stem cells and characterized to understand
disease-relevant phenotypes. Stem cells created from patient fibroblasts express 
less androgen receptor than control cells, but show androgen-dependent
stabilization and nuclear translocation. The expanded repeat in several stem cell
clones was unstable, with either expansion or contraction. Patient stem cell
clones produced a similar number of motor neurons compared to controls, with or
without androgen treatment. The stem cell-derived motor neurons had
immunoreactivity for HB9, Isl1, ChAT, and SMI-32, and those with the largest
repeat expansions were found to have increased acetylated a-tubulin and reduced
HDAC6. Reduced HDAC6 was also found in motor neuron cultures from two other
patients with shorter repeats. Evaluation of stably transfected mouse cells and
SBMA spinal cord showed similar changes in acetylated a-tubulin and HDAC6.
Perinuclear lysosomal enrichment, an HDAC6 dependent process, was disrupted in
motor neurons from two patients with the longest repeats. SBMA stem cells present
new insights into the disease, and the observations of reduced androgen receptor 
levels, repeat instability, and reduced HDAC6 provide avenues for further
investigation of the disease mechanism and development of effective therapy.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4172362
PMID: 24925468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Aug 1;90(3):320-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.06.001. Epub 
2014 Jun 7.

A novel small molecule hybrid of vorinostat and DACA displays anticancer activity
against human hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer through dual
inhibition of histone deacetylase and topoisomerase I.

Yu CC(1), Pan SL(2), Chao SW(3), Liu SP(4), Hsu JL(1), Yang YC(5), Li TK(5),
Huang WJ(6), Guh JH(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sect. 1, Jen-Ai Rd,
Taipei 100, Taiwan. (2)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery,
College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Urology, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Microbiology, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sect. 1, Jen-Ai Rd, Taipei, Taiwan. 
(6)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: wjhuang@tmu.edu.tw. (7)School of 
Pharmacy, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sect. 1, Jen-Ai Rd, Taipei 100,
Taiwan. Electronic address: jhguh@ntu.edu.tw.

Vorinostat, which is an extensively studied inhibitor against histone deacetylase
(HDAC), shows limited clinical activity to solid tumors. WJ35435, a new hybrid of
vorinostat and DACA (a topoisomerase inhibitor) potently inhibited HDAC activity 
(in particular HDAC1 and HDAC6) in kinase assay and cell-based examination. The
anti-HDAC effect was confirmed by the induction of histone H3 acetylation and
phosphorylation, a-tubulin acetylation and <U+03B3>-H2AX formation. WJ35435 showed
better potency than vorinostat and DACA against PC-3 and DU-145, two human
hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer (HRMPC) cell lines, but not benign 
prostate cells. WJ35435 at differential concentrations induced G1- or G2-phase
arrest of the cell cycle in HRMPCs but not in benign prostate cells. WJ35435
induced the formation of topoisomerase I-DNA cleavable complexes but not type-IIa
or -IIß. Topoisomerase activity assay confirmed the selective inhibition of
topoisomerase I. WJ35435 induced profound DNA damage using comet tailing assay.
WJ35435 was less effective than camptothecin and etoposide in inducing the
phosphorylation and activation of Chk1, Chk2 and RPA32 which were crucial
coordinators in DNA repair pathway, indicating a low DNA repair activity to
WJ35435 action. Furthermore, WJ35435 showed an in vivo antitumor activity. A
synergistic apoptosis (combination index=0.55) was obtained in combination
between WJ35435 and MG-132 (a proteasome inhibitor). In summary, WJ35435 is a
dual-targeted anticancer hybrid induces anti-HDAC and anti-topoisomerase I
activities that cause DNA damage associated with a low DNA repair capability, and
induce cell cycle arrest at G1- and G2-phase. Ultimately, WJ35435 inhibits cell
proliferation and induces apoptosis of HRMPCs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24915421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):433-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.134. Epub 2014 Jun 6.

Involvement of transcription factor XBP1s in the resistance of HDAC6 inhibitor
Tubastatin A to superoxidation via acetylation-mediated proteasomal degradation.

Zhang Y(1), Liu CM(1), Cao XC(1), Zang Y(2), Zhou YB(3), Li J(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, 3663 North Zhongshan
Road, Shanghai 200062, China; National Center for Drug Screening, State Key
Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. (2)National Center for Drug
Screening, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. (3)National Center
for Drug Screening, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of 
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. Electronic
address: ybzhou@mail.shcnc.ac.cn. (4)School of Life Sciences, East China Normal
University, 3663 North Zhongshan Road, Shanghai 200062, China; National Center
for Drug Screening, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of 
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. Electronic
address: jli@simm.ac.cn.

HDAC6 is a major cytoplasmic deacetylase. XBP1s is a basic-region leucine zipper 
(bZIP) transcriptional factor. Despite their mutual involvement in the
anti-oxidative process, there are no reports about their inter-protein
interactions so far. Here we identified a direct link between HDAC6 inhibition
and XBP1s transcription activity in anti-oxidative damage. We showed that the
specific HDAC6 inhibitor Tubastatin A could up-regulate XBP1s transcriptional
activity, thereby increasing anti-oxidative genes expression. Moreover, knock
down of XBP1s could significantly abolish the cell growth protection afforded by 
Tubastatin A. We hypothesize that Tubastatin A acts to increase XBP1s protein
levels that are dependent on its HDAC6 deacetylase inhibition via a mechanism
involving acetylation-mediated proteasomal degradation, providing novel
mechanistic insight into the anti-oxidative effects of HDAC6 inhibition.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24909686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Jul;146(1):145-52. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3008-5. 
Epub 2014 Jun 6.

A phase I-II study of the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat plus
sequential weekly paclitaxel and doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide in locally advanced
breast cancer.

Tu Y(1), Hershman DL, Bhalla K, Fiskus W, Pellegrino CM, Andreopoulou E, Makower 
D, Kalinsky K, Fehn K, Fineberg S, Negassa A, Montgomery LL, Wiechmann LS,
Alpaugh RK, Huang M, Sparano JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Montefiore Medical Center-Weiler Division, 2 South,
Room 47-48, 1825 Eastchester Road, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of enzymes that regulate chromatin
remodeling and gene transcription. Vorinostat is a panHDAC inhibitor that
sensitizes breast cancer cells to taxanes and trastuzumab by suppressing HDAC6
and Hsp90 client proteins. Fifty-five patients with clinical stage IIA-IIIC
breast cancer received 12 weekly doses of paclitaxel (80 mg/m(2)) plus vorinostat
(200-300 mg PO BID) on days 1-3 of each paclitaxel dose plus trastuzumab (for
Her2/neu positive disease only), followed by doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide
(60/600 mg/m(2) every 2 weeks plus pegfilgrastim). The primary study endpoint was
pathologic complete response (pCR). pCR occurred in 13 of 24 evaluable patients
with Her2-positive disease (54, 95 % confidence intervals [CI] 35-72 %), which
met the prespecified study endpoint. pCR occurred in 4 of 15 patients with triple
negative disease (27, 95 % CI 11-52 %) and none of 12 patients with ER-positive, 
Her2/neu negative disease (0, 95 % CI 0-24 %), which did not meet the
prespecified endpoint. ER-positive tumors exhibited lower Ki67 and higher Hsp70
expression, and HDAC6, Hsp70, p21, and p27 expression were not predictive of
response. Vorinostat increased acetylation of Hsp90 and alpha tubulin, and
reduced expression of Hsp90 client proteins and HDAC6 in the primary tumor.
Combination of vorinostat with weekly paclitaxel plus trastuzumab followed by
doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide is associated with a high pCR rate in locally
advanced Her2/neu positive breast cancer. Consistent with cell line and xenograft
data, vorinostat increased acetylation of Hsp90 and alpha tubulin, and decreased 
Hsp90 client protein and HDAC6 expression in human breast cancers in vivo.

PMID: 24903226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2014 Mar 3;5(5):582-6. doi: 10.1021/ml500024s. eCollection
2014.

Late-Stage C-H Coupling Enables Rapid Identification of HDAC Inhibitors:
Synthesis and Evaluation of NCH-31 Analogues.

Sekizawa H(1), Amaike K(1), Itoh Y(2), Suzuki T(3), Itami K(4), Yamaguchi J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules (WPI-ITbM) and Graduate School of
Science, Nagoya University , Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan. (2)Graduate School 
of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine , 13 Taishogun
Nishitakatsukasa-Cho, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8334, Japan. (3)Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine , 13 Taishogun
Nishitakatsukasa-Cho, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8334, Japan ; JST, PRESTO , 4-1-8 Honcho
Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan. (4)Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules 
(WPI-ITbM) and Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University , Chikusa, Nagoya
464-8602, Japan ; JST, ERATO, Itami Molecular Nanocarbon Project, Nagoya
University , Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

We previously reported the discovery of NCH-31, a potent histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor. By utilizing our C-H coupling reaction, we rapidly synthesized 
16 analogues (IYS-1 through IYS-15 and IYS-Me) of NCH-31 with different aryl
groups at the C4-position of 2-aminothiazole core of NCH-31. Subsequent
biological testing of these derivatives revealed that 3-fluorophenyl (IYS-10) and
4-fluorophenyl (IYS-15) derivatives act as potent pan-HDAC inhibitor.
Additionally, 4-methylphenyl (IYS-1) and 3-fluoro-4-methylphenyl (IYS-14)
derivatives acted as HDAC6-insensitive inhibitors. The present work clearly shows
the power of the late-stage C-H coupling approach to rapidly identify novel and
highly active/selective biofunctional molecules.

PMCID: PMC4027735
PMID: 24900884  [PubMed]


241. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 May 1;9:68. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-68.

LC3, an autophagosome marker, is expressed on oligodendrocytes in Nasu-Hakola
disease brains.

Satoh J(1), Motohashi N, Kino Y, Ishida T, Yagishita S, Jinnai K, Arai N,
Nakamagoe K, Tamaoka A, Saito Y, Arima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo, Japan. satoj@my-pharm.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Nasu-Hakola disease (NHD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by sclerosing leukoencephalopathy and multifocal bone cysts, caused
by a loss-of-function mutation of either DAP12 or TREM2. TREM2 and DAP12
constitute a receptor/adaptor signaling complex expressed exclusively on
osteoclasts, dendritic cells, macrophages, and microglia. Neuropathologically,
NHD exhibits profound loss of myelin and accumulation of axonal spheroids,
accompanied by intense gliosis accentuated in the white matter of the frontal and
temporal lobes. At present, the molecular mechanism responsible for development
of leukoencephalopathy in NHD brains remains totally unknown.
METHODS: By immunohistochemistry, we studied the expression of
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3), an autophagosome marker, in
5 NHD and 12 control brains.
RESULTS: In all NHD brains, Nogo-A-positive, CNPase-positive oligodendrocytes
surviving in the non-demyelinated white matter intensely expressed LC3. They also
expressed ubiquitin, ubiquilin-1, and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) but did not
express Beclin 1 or sequestosome 1 (p62). Substantial numbers of axonal spheroids
were also labeled with LC3 in NHD brains. In contrast, none of oligodendrocytes
expressed LC3 in control brains. Furthermore, surviving oligodendrocytes located 
at the demyelinated lesion edge of multiple sclerosis (MS) did not express LC3,
whereas infiltrating Iba1-positive macrophages and microglia intensely expressed 
LC3 in MS lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: These results propose a novel hypothesis that aberrant regulation of
autophagy might induce oligodendrogliopathy causative of leukoencephalopathy in
NHD brains.

PMCID: PMC4022378
PMID: 24886140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Anal Biochem. 2014 Sep 1;460:39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2014.05.014. Epub 2014 Jun 
2.

Kinetic method for the large-scale analysis of the binding mechanism of histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Meyners C(1), Baud MG(2), Fuchter MJ(3), Meyer-Almes FJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences Darmstadt, Department of Chemical Engineering
and Biotechnology, Schnittspahnstrasse 12, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany. (2)Imperial 
College London, Department of Chemistry, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ,
UK; University of Cambridge, Department of Chemistry, Lensfield Rd, CB2 1EW, UK. 
(3)Imperial College London, Department of Chemistry, South Kensington Campus,
London SW7 2AZ, UK. (4)University of Applied Sciences Darmstadt, Department of
Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Schnittspahnstrasse 12, 64287 Darmstadt, 
Germany. Electronic address: franz-josef.meyer-almes@h-da.de.

Performing kinetic studies on protein ligand interactions provides important
information on complex formation and dissociation. Beside kinetic parameters such
as association rates and residence times, kinetic experiments also reveal
insights into reaction mechanisms. Exploiting intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence a
parallelized high-throughput Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based
reporter displacement assay with very low protein consumption was developed to
enable the large-scale kinetic characterization of the binding of ligands to
recombinant human histone deacetylases (HDACs) and a bacterial histone
deacetylase-like amidohydrolase (HDAH) from Bordetella/Alcaligenes. For the
binding of trichostatin A (TSA), suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), and two 
other SAHA derivatives to HDAH, two different modes of action, simple one-step
binding and a two-step mechanism comprising initial binding and induced fit, were
verified. In contrast to HDAH, all compounds bound to human HDAC1, HDAC6, and
HDAC8 through a two-step mechanism. A quantitative view on the inhibitor-HDAC
systems revealed two types of interaction, fast binding and slow dissociation. We
provide arguments for the thesis that the relationship between quantitative
kinetic and mechanistic information and chemical structures of compounds will
serve as a valuable tool for drug optimization.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24882269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell. 2014 Jul 3;55(1):31-46. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.04.028. Epub 2014
May 29.

HDAC6 deacetylates and ubiquitinates MSH2 to maintain proper levels of MutSa.

Zhang M(1), Xiang S(1), Joo HY(2), Wang L(1), Williams KA(1), Liu W(1), Hu C(1), 
Tong D(3), Haakenson J(1), Wang C(4), Zhang S(4), Pavlovicz RE(5), Jones A(2),
Schmidt KH(6), Tang J(1), Dong H(1), Shan B(7), Fang B(8), Radhakrishnan R(9),
Glazer PM(10), Matthias P(11), Koomen J(8), Seto E(9), Bepler G(12), Nicosia
SV(13), Chen J(9), Li C(14), Gu L(3), Li GM(3), Bai W(15), Wang H(2), Zhang
X(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, USF Morsani College of Medicine,
12901 Bruce B. Downs Boulevard, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (2)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Kaul
Human Genetics Building 402A, 720 South 20th Street, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(3)Graduate Center for Toxicology, Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. (4)Key Laboratory of Medical Cell 
Biology, Institute for Translational Medicine, China Medical University,
Shengyang 110000, China. (5)Biophysics Program, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (6)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and
Molecular Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA; Cancer
Biology and Evolution Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (7)Medical Sciences,
Washington State University at Spokane, 412E Spokane Falls Boulevard, Spokane, WA
99201, USA. (8)Proteomics, SRB-3, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (9)Cancer Biology and
Evolution Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902
Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (10)Department of Therapeutic Radiology,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (11)Friedrich
Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research Foundation, 4058
Basel, Switzerland. (12)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Karmanos Cancer
Institute, 4100 John R, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (13)Department of Pathology and
Cell Biology, USF Morsani College of Medicine, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Boulevard,
Tampa, FL 33612, USA; Chemical Biology and Molecular Medicine Program, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa,
FL 33612, USA. (14)Biophysics Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA; Division of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of
Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (15)Department of
Pathology and Cell Biology, USF Morsani College of Medicine, 12901 Bruce B. Downs
Boulevard, Tampa, FL 33612, USA; Cancer Biology and Evolution Program, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL
33612, USA. (16)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, USF Morsani College of 
Medicine, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Boulevard, Tampa, FL 33612, USA; Cancer Biology
and Evolution Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902
Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. Electronic address: xzhang1@health.usf.edu.

MutS protein homolog 2 (MSH2) is a key DNA mismatch repair protein. It forms the 
MSH2-MSH6 (MutSa) and MSH2-MSH3 (MutSß) heterodimers, which help to ensure
genomic integrity. MutSa not only recognizes and repairs mismatched nucleotides
but also recognizes DNA adducts induced by DNA-damaging agents, and triggers
cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. Loss or depletion of MutSa from cells leads to
microsatellite instability (MSI) and resistance to DNA damage. Although the level
of MutSa can be reduced by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, the detailed
mechanisms of this regulation remain elusive. Here we report that histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) sequentially deacetylates and ubiquitinates MSH2, leading
to MSH2 degradation. In addition, HDAC6 significantly reduces cellular
sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents and decreases cellular DNA mismatch repair
activities by downregulation of MSH2. Overall, these findings reveal a mechanism 
by which proper levels of MutSa are maintained.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4188514
PMID: 24882211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Oct;35(10):2316-28. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.029. Epub 2014 May 2.

Histone deacetylase 6 regulates cytotoxic a-synuclein accumulation through
induction of the heat shock response.

Du Y(1), Wang F(1), Zou J(1), Le W(2), Dong Q(1), Wang Z(1), Shen F(1), Yu L(1), 
Li Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of Neurology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
lliyans@hotmail.com.

Abnormal aggregation of a-synuclein (a-syn) is central to the pathogenesis of
Parkinson's disease (PD). Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) was previously shown to
control major cell response pathways to the cytotoxic ubiquitinated aggregates in
some protein aggregation diseases. Whether it influences the aggregation process 
of a-syn in PD models and its related mechanisms are not completely known. Here, 
we characterized the expression and function of HDAC6 in the ubiquitin-proteasome
system impairment-induced PD model. Our results showed that HDAC6 inhibition
further exacerbated the nigrostriatal dopamine neurodegeneration and upregulated 
a-syn oligomers levels, whereas HDAC6 overexpression in vitro showed the opposite
effects. More importantly, we provided evidence for the first time that HDAC6
regulating a-syn oligomers levels were related to its ability to trigger the heat
shock response in a heat shock protein 90-dependent manner. HDAC6 mediated the
dissociation of heat shock protein 90-heat shock factor 1-containing complex, and
the activation of heat shock factor 1, which led to the expression of major
molecular chaperones to prevent the deleterious a-syn aggregation. Thus, we
propose that HDAC6 appears as a key modulator of cell protective response to the 
cytotoxic a-syn aggregates and may serve as a potential target for therapy
development in PD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24866403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Bioorg Med Chem. 2014 Jul 15;22(14):3720-31. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.05.001. Epub
2014 May 14.

Design and synthesis of novel and highly-active pan-histone deacetylase
(pan-HDAC) inhibitors.

Tashima T(1), Murata H(2), Kodama H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nippon Pharmaceutical Chemicals Co., Ltd, 2-8-18 Chodo, Higashi-Osaka, Osaka
577-0056, Japan. Electronic address: t-tashima@nichiri.co.jp. (2)Nippon
Pharmaceutical Chemicals Co., Ltd, 2-8-18 Chodo, Higashi-Osaka, Osaka 577-0056,
Japan.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitions are known to elicit anticancer effects. We
designed and synthesized several HDAC inhibitors. Among these compounds, compound
40 exhibited a more than 10-fold stronger inhibitory activity compared with that 
of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) against each human HDAC isozyme in
vitro (IC50 values of 40: HDAC1, 0.0038µM; HDAC2, 0.0082µM; HDAC3, 0.015µM;
HDAC8, 0.0060µM; HDAC4, 0.058µM; HDAC9, 0.0052µM; HDAC6, 0.058µM). The dose of
the administered HDAC inhibitors that contain hydroxamic acid as the zinc-binding
group may be reduced by 40. Because the carbostyril subunit is a time-tested
structural component of drugs and biologically active compounds, 40 most likely
exhibits good absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity
(ADMET). Thus, compound 40 is expected to be a promising therapeutic agent or
chemical tool for the investigation of life process.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24864038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2015 Feb;41(2):245-57. doi: 10.1111/nan.12153.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) in frontotemporal lobar degeneration.

Whitehouse A(1), Doherty K, Yeh HH, Robinson AC, Rollinson S, Pickering-Brown S, 
Snowden J, Thompson JC, Davidson YS, Mann DM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Cognitive Sciences Research Group, Institute of Brain, Behaviour 
and Mental Health, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of
Manchester, Salford Royal Hospital, Salford, UK.

AIMS: Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is clinically and pathologically
heterogeneous. Although associated with variations in MAPT, GRN and C9ORF72, the 
pathogenesis of these, and of other nongenetic, forms of FTLD, remains unknown.
Epigenetic factors such as histone regulation by histone deacetylases (HDAC) may 
play a role in the dysregulation of transcriptional activity, thought to underpin
the neurodegenerative process.
METHODS: The distribution and intensity of HDACs 4, 5 and 6 was assessed
semi-quantitatively in immunostained sections of temporal cortex with
hippocampus, and cerebellum, from 33 pathologically confirmed cases of FTLD and
27 controls.
RESULTS: We found a significantly greater intensity of cytoplasmic immunostaining
for HDAC4 and HDAC6 in granule cells of the dentate gyrus in cases of FTLD
overall compared with controls, and specifically in cases of FTLD tau-Picks
compared with FTLD tau-MAPT and controls. No differences were noted between
FTLD-TDP subtypes, or between the different genetic and nongenetic forms of FTLD.
No changes were seen in HDAC5 in any FTLD or control cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Dysregulation of HDAC4 and/or HDAC6 could play a role in the
pathogenesis of FTLD-tau associated with Pick bodies, although their lack of
immunostaining implies that such changes do not contribute directly to the
formation of Pick bodies.

© 2014 British Neuropathological Society.

PMID: 24861260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2014 Jul 15;307(2):H252-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00149.2014. Epub 2014 May 23.

HDAC6 contributes to pathological responses of heart and skeletal muscle to
chronic angiotensin-II signaling.

Demos-Davies KM(1), Ferguson BS(1), Cavasin MA(1), Mahaffey JH(1), Williams
SM(1), Spiltoir JI(1), Schuetze KB(1), Horn TR(1), Chen B(2), Ferrara C(3),
Scellini B(3), Piroddi N(3), Tesi C(3), Poggesi C(3), Jeong MY(1), McKinsey
TA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, Colorado; (2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; and. (3)Dipartimento di
Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Università degli Studi di Firenze, Firenze,
Italy. (4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado 
Denver, Aurora, Colorado; timothy.mckinsey@ucdenver.edu.

Little is known about the function of the cytoplasmic histone deacetylase HDAC6
in striated muscle. Here, we addressed the role of HDAC6 in cardiac and skeletal 
muscle remodeling induced by the peptide hormone angiotensin II (ANG II), which
plays a central role in blood pressure control, heart failure, and associated
skeletal muscle wasting. Comparable with wild-type (WT) mice, HDAC6 null mice
developed cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in response to ANG II. However,
whereas WT mice developed systolic dysfunction upon treatment with ANG II,
cardiac function was maintained in HDAC6 null mice treated with ANG II for up to 
8 wk. The cardioprotective effect of HDAC6 deletion was mimicked in WT mice
treated with the small molecule HDAC6 inhibitor tubastatin A. HDAC6 null mice
also exhibited improved left ventricular function in the setting of pressure
overload mediated by transverse aortic constriction. HDAC6 inhibition appeared to
preserve systolic function, in part, by enhancing cooperativity of myofibrillar
force generation. Finally, we show that HDAC6 null mice are resistant to skeletal
muscle wasting mediated by chronic ANG-II signaling. These findings define novel 
roles for HDAC6 in striated muscle and suggest potential for HDAC6-selective
inhibitors for the treatment of cardiac dysfunction and muscle wasting in
patients with heart failure.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4101640
PMID: 24858848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;41(4):1193-205. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140066.

Tubastatin A/ACY-1215 improves cognition in Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice.

Zhang L(1), Liu C(1), Wu J(1), Tao JJ(1), Sui XL(1), Yao ZG(1), Xu YF(1), Huang
L(1), Zhu H(1), Sheng SL(1), Qin C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Medical Center, Peking Union Medical College (PUMC) & Institute of
Laboratory Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Science (CAMS), Beijing,
China.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is currently being discussed as a promising
therapeutic target for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Mounting
evidence indicates that increased HDAC6 expression may contribute to
AD-associated neurodegeneration, although beneficial effects have also been
identified. In the present study, we tested the potential of two selective HDAC6 
inhibitors, tubastatin A and ACY-1215, to rescue cognitive deficits in a mouse
model of AD. We found that both tubastatin A and ACY-1215 alleviated behavioral
deficits, altered amyloid-ß (Aß) load, and reduced tau hyperphosphorylation in AD
mice without obvious adverse effects. Our data suggested that tubastatin A and
ACY-1215 not only promoted tubulin acetylation, but also reduced production and
facilitated autophagic clearance of Aß and hyperphosphorylated tau. Further, the 
decreased hyperphosphorylated tau and increased tubulin acetylation may account
for the improved microtubule stability in AD mice after tubastatin A/ACY-1215
treatment. These preclinical results support the detrimental role of HDAC6 in AD,
and offer prospective approaches for using tubastatin A/ACY-1215 as potential
therapeutic strategy for AD.

PMID: 24844691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 4;449(3):268-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.016. Epub 2014 May 14.

The histone deacetylase-6 inhibitor tubacin directly inhibits de novo
sphingolipid biosynthesis as an off-target effect.

Siow D(1), Wattenberg B(2).

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, KY 40202, USA. Electronic address: deanna01.siow@louisville.edu.
(2)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, KY 40202, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY 40202, USA;
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, KY 40202, USA; Department of Medicine, University of
Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. Electronic address:
b0watt01@louisville.edu.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) controls acetylation of a number of cytosolic
proteins, most prominently tubulin. Tubacin is a small molecule inhibitor of
HDAC6 selected for its selective inhibition of HDAC6 relative to other histone
deacetylases. For this reason it has become a useful pharmacological tool to
discern the biological functions of HDAC6 in numerous cellular processes. The
interest of this laboratory is in the function and regulation of sphingolipids, a
family of lipids based on the sphingosine backbone. Sphingolipid biosynthesis is 
initiated by the rate limiting enzyme serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT).
Sphingolipids have critical and diverse functions in cell survival, apoptosis,
intra- and intercellular signaling, and in membrane structure. In the course of
examining the role of HDAC6 in the regulation of sphingolipid biosynthesis we
observed that tubacin strongly inhibited de novo synthesis whereas HDAC6
knockdown very moderately stimulated synthesis. We resolved these seemingly
contradictory results by demonstrating that, surprisingly, tubacin is a direct
inhibitor of SPT activity in permeabilized cells. Furthermore tubacin inhibits de
novo sphingolipid synthesis in intact cells at doses commonly used to test HDAC6 
function and does so in an HDAC6-independent manner. Niltubacin is a chemical
analog of tubacin which lacks tubacin's HDAC6 activity, and so is often used as a
control for off-target effects of tubacin. We find that niltubacin is inactive in
the inhibition of sphingolipid biosynthesis, and so does not serve to distinguish
the inhibitory effects of tubacin on HDAC6 from those on sphingolipid
biosynthesis. These results indicate that caution should be used in the use of
tubacin to study the role of HDAC6.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24835950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. DNA Repair (Amst). 2014 Nov;23:33-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2014.04.011. Epub 2014
May 10.

Regulation of SIRT2-dependent a-tubulin deacetylation by cellular NAD levels.

Skoge RH(1), Dölle C(1), Ziegler M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Postbox 7803, 5020
Bergen, Norway. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Postbox
7803, 5020 Bergen, Norway. Electronic address: mathias.ziegler@mbi.uib.no.

Acetylation of a-tubulin on lysine 40 is one of the major posttranslational
modifications of microtubules. The acetylation reaction is catalyzed by
alpha-tubulin N-acetyltransferase and the modification can be reversed by either 
the NAD-independent class II histone deacetylase HDAC6 or the NAD-dependent
deacetylase SIRT2. In this study, we assessed to what extent cellular NAD levels 
are involved in the regulation of the a-tubulin acetylation state. Cells were
subjected to different treatments known to influence cellular NAD content. In
response to NAD depletion caused by inhibition of NAD synthesis from
nicotinamide, a-tubulin was hyperacetylated. Under these conditions, the normal
tubulin acetylation state could be restored by providing the cells with
alternative NAD precursors. Likewise, decreasing the rate of endogenous NAD
consumption using an inhibitor of poly-ADP-ribosylation also stabilized the
acetylation of a-tubulin. Conversely, the level of acetylated a-tubulin decreased
when NAD synthesis was enhanced by overexpression of an NAD biosynthetic enzyme. 
Combined, these results show that the tubulin acetylation status is reciprocally 
regulated by cellular NAD levels. Furthermore, we provide evidence confirming
that the NAD-dependent regulation of tubulin acetylation is mediated by SIRT2.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24814981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biol Open. 2014 May 2;3(6):418-30. doi: 10.1242/bio.20147021.

Aggresome formation is regulated by RanBPM through an interaction with HDAC6.

Salemi LM(1), Almawi AW(1), Lefebvre KJ(1), Schild-Poulter C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 
5B7, Canada Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada.
(2)Robarts Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 
5B7, Canada Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada
cschild-poulter@robarts.ca.

In conditions of proteasomal impairment, the build-up of damaged or misfolded
proteins activates a cellular response leading to the recruitment of damaged
proteins into perinuclear aggregates called aggresomes. Aggresome formation
involves the retrograde transport of cargo proteins along the microtubule network
and is dependent on the histone deacetylase HDAC6. Here we show that ionizing
radiation (IR) promotes Ran-Binding Protein M (RanBPM) relocalization into
discrete perinuclear foci where it co-localizes with aggresome components
ubiquitin, dynein and HDAC6, suggesting that the RanBPM perinuclear clusters
correspond to aggresomes. RanBPM was also recruited to aggresomes following
treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 and the DNA-damaging agent
etoposide. Strikingly, aggresome formation by HDAC6 was markedly impaired in
RanBPM shRNA cells, but was restored by re-expression of RanBPM. RanBPM was found
to interact with HDAC6 and to inhibit its deacetylase activity. This interaction 
was abrogated by a RanBPM deletion of its LisH/CTLH domain, which also prevented 
aggresome formation, suggesting that RanBPM promotes aggresome formation through 
an association with HDAC6. Our results suggest that RanBPM regulates HDAC6
activity and is a central regulator of aggresome formation.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4058076
PMID: 24795145  [PubMed]


252. Exp Neurol. 2014 Jul;257:170-81. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2014.04.024. Epub 2014 
May 2.

Decreased SIRT2 activity leads to altered microtubule dynamics in
oxidatively-stressed neuronal cells: implications for Parkinson's disease.

Patel VP(1), Chu CT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, 3550 Terrace St.,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; Center for Neuroscience,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. Electronic address:
vpp3@pitt.edu. (2)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, 3550
Terrace St., University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; Center for
Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; The McGowan
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; The Pittsburgh
Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. Electronic
address: ctc4@pitt.edu.

The microtubule (MT) system is important for many aspects of neuronal function,
including motility, differentiation, and cargo trafficking. Parkinson's disease
(PD) is associated with increased oxidative stress and alterations in the
integrity of the axodendritic tree. To study dynamic mechanisms underlying the
neurite shortening phenotype observed in many PD models, we employed the
well-characterized oxidative parkinsonian neurotoxin, 6-hydroxydopamine (6OHDA). 
In both acute and chronic sub-lethal settings, 6OHDA-induced oxidative stress
elicited significant alterations in MT dynamics, including reductions in MT
growth rate, increased frequency of MT pauses/retractions, and increased levels
of tubulin acetylation. Interestingly, 6OHDA decreased the activity of tubulin
deacetylases, specifically sirtuin 2 (SIRT2), through more than one mechanism.
Restoration of tubulin deacetylase function rescued the changes in MT dynamics
and prevented neurite shortening in neuron-differentiated, 6OHDA-treated cells.
These data indicate that impaired tubulin deacetylation contributes to altered MT
dynamics in oxidatively-stressed cells, conferring key insights for potential
therapeutic strategies to correct MT-related deficits contributing to neuronal
aging and disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4141566
PMID: 24792244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Int J Cancer. 2014 Dec 15;135(12):2950-61. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28924. Epub 2014 May 
5.

Combination of proteasome and class I HDAC inhibitors induces apoptosis of NPC
cells through an HDAC6-independent ER stress-induced mechanism.

Hui KF(1), Chiang AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
SAR, China; Center for Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Research, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

The current paradigm stipulates that inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6
is essential for the combinatorial effect of proteasome and HDAC inhibitors for
the treatment of cancers. Our study aims to investigate the effect of combining
different class I HDAC inhibitors (without HDAC6 action) with a proteasome
inhibitor on apoptosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). We found that
combination of a proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, and several class I HDAC
inhibitors, including MS-275, apicidin and romidepsin, potently induced killing
of NPC cells both in vitro and in vivo. Among the drug pairs, combination of
bortezomib and romidepsin (bort/romidepsin) was the most potent and could induce 
apoptosis at low nanomolar concentrations. The apoptosis of NPC cells was
reactive oxygen species (ROS)- and caspase-dependent but was independent of HDAC6
inhibition. Of note, bort/romidepsin might directly suppress the formation of
aggresome through the downregulation of c-myc. In addition, two markers of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced apoptosis, ATF-4 and CHOP/GADD153, were
upregulated, whereas a specific inhibitor of caspase-4 (an initiator of ER
stress-induced apoptosis) could suppress the apoptosis. When ROS level in the NPC
cells was reduced to the untreated level, ER stress-induced caspase activation
was abrogated. Collectively, our data demonstrate a model of synergism between
proteasome and class I HDAC inhibitors in the induction of ROS-dependent ER
stress-induced apoptosis of NPC cells, independent of HDAC6 inhibition, and
provide the rationale to combine the more specific and potent class I HDAC
inhibitors with proteasome inhibitors for the treatment of cancers.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24771510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Med Chem. 2014 May 22;57(10):4009-22. doi: 10.1021/jm401899x. Epub 2014 May 6.

Azaindolylsulfonamides, with a more selective inhibitory effect on histone
deacetylase 6 activity, exhibit antitumor activity in colorectal cancer HCT116
cells.

Lee HY(1), Tsai AC, Chen MC, Shen PJ, Cheng YC, Kuo CC, Pan SL, Liu YM, Liu JF,
Yeh TK, Wang JC, Chang CY, Chang JY, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University , 250
Wuxing Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.

A series of indolylsulfonylcinnamic hydroxamates has been synthesized. Compound
12,
(E)-3-(3-((1H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-1-yl)sulfonyl)phenyl)-N-hydroxyacrylamide,
which has a 7-azaindole core cap, was shown to have antiproliferative activity
against KB, H460, PC3, HSC-3, HONE-1, A549, MCF-7, TSGH, MKN45, HT29, and HCT116 
human cancer cell lines. Pharmacological studies indicated that 12 functions as a
potent HDAC inhibitor with an IC50 value of 0.1 µM. It is highly selective for
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and is 60-fold more active than against HDAC1 and
223-fold more active than against HDAC2. It has a good pharmacokinetic profile
with oral bioavailability of 33%. In in vivo efficacy evaluations in colorectal
HCT116 xenografts, compound 12 suppresses tumor growth more effectively than SAHA
(1, N-hydroxy-N'-phenyloctanediamide) and is therefore seen as a suitable
candidate for further investigation.

PMID: 24766560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Apr 24;5:e1195. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.157.

The bromodomain protein BRD4 regulates the KEAP1/NRF2-dependent oxidative stress 
response.

Hussong M(1), Börno ST(2), Kerick M(2), Wunderlich A(2), Franz A(1), Sültmann
H(3), Timmermann B(4), Lehrach H(2), Hirsch-Kauffmann M(2), Schweiger MR(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany [2] Department of Biology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, Free
University, Berlin, Germany. (2)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. (3)Cancer Genome Research,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Next Generation
Sequencing Group, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(5)1] Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany [2] Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany.

The epigenetic sensor BRD4 (bromodomain protein 4) is a potent target for
anti-cancer therapies. To study the transcriptional impact of BRD4 in cancer, we 
generated an expression signature of BRD4 knockdown cells and found oxidative
stress response genes significantly enriched. We integrated the RNA-Seq results
with DNA-binding sites of BRD4 generated by chromatin immunoprecipitations,
correlated these with gene expressions from human prostate cancers and identified
21 top BRD4 candidate genes among which the oxidative stress pathway genes KEAP1,
SESN3 and HDAC6 are represented. Knock down of BRD4 or treatment with the BRD4
inhibitor JQ1 resulted in decreased reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and 
increased cell viability under H2O2 exposure. Consistently, a deregulation of
BRD4 diminished the KEAP1/NRF2 axis and led to a disturbed regulation of the
inducible heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1). Without exogenous stress induction, we also
found BRD4 directly targeting the HMOX1 promoter over the SP1-binding sites. Our 
findings provide insight into the transcriptional regulatory network of BRD4 and 
highlight BRD4 as signal transducer of the cellular response to oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC4001311
PMID: 24763052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Immunol. 2014 Jul;60(1):44-53. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2014.02.019. Epub 2014
Apr 18.

Divergent roles of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and histone deacetylase 11
(HDAC11) on the transcriptional regulation of IL10 in antigen presenting cells.

Cheng F(1), Lienlaf M(1), Perez-Villarroel P(1), Wang HW(1), Lee C(2), Woan K(1),
Woods D(1), Knox T(1), Bergman J(3), Pinilla-Ibarz J(1), Kozikowski A(4), Seto
E(5), Sotomayor EM(6), Villagra A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute,
Tampa, FL, United States; Department of Malignant Hematology, H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, United States. (2)All Children's
Research Institute, All Children's Hospital-Johns Hopkins Medicine, St.
Petersburg, FL, United States; Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. (3)Drug Discovery
Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of
Illinois, Chicago, IL, United States. (4)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States; Drug
Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, United States. (5)Department of Molecular
Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, United
States. (6)Department of Immunology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research
Institute, Tampa, FL, United States; Department of Malignant Hematology, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, United States. Electronic 
address: Eduardo.Sotomayor@moffitt.org. (7)Department of Immunology, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, United States. Electronic 
address: Alejandro.Villagra@moffitt.org.

The anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 is a key modulator of immune responses. A
better understanding of the regulation of this cytokine offers the possibility of
tipping the balance of the immune response toward either tolerance, or enhanced
immune responses. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been widely described as
negative regulators of transcriptional regulation, and in this context, the
primarily nuclear protein HDAC11 was shown to repress il-10 gene transcriptional 
activity in antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Here we report that another HDAC,
HDAC6, primarily a cytoplasmic protein, associates with HDAC11 and modulates the 
expression of IL-10 as a transcriptional activator. To our knowledge, this is the
first demonstration of two different HDACs being recruited to the same gene
promoter to dictate divergent transcriptional responses. This dynamic interaction
results in dynamic changes in the expression of IL-10 and might help to explain
the intrinsic plasticity of the APC to determine T-cell activation versus T-cell 
tolerance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4020151
PMID: 24747960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 May 22;79:251-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.04.021. Epub
2014 Apr 8.

Influence of the adamantyl moiety on the activity of biphenylacrylohydroxamic
acid-based HDAC inhibitors.

Cincinelli R(1), Musso L(1), Giannini G(2), Zuco V(3), De Cesare M(3), Zunino
F(3), Dallavalle S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food, Environmental and Nutritional Sciences, Division of
Chemistry and Molecular Biology, Università di Milano, Via Celoria 2, 20133
Milano, Italy. (2)R&D Sigma-Tau Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.p.A., Via
Pontina Km 30,400, I-00040 Pomezia, RM, Italy. (3)Molecular Pharmacology Unit,
Dept. Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, Via Amadeo 42, I-20133 Milan, Italy. (4)Department of Food,
Environmental and Nutritional Sciences, Division of Chemistry and Molecular
Biology, Università di Milano, Via Celoria 2, 20133 Milano, Italy. Electronic
address: sabrina.dallavalle@unimi.it.

To investigate the influence of the adamantyl group on the biological properties 
of known HDAC inhibitors with a 4-phenylcinnamic skeleton, a series of compounds 
having the adamantyl moiety in the cap structure were synthesized and compared to
the corresponding hydroxamic acids lacking this group. An unexpected finding was 
the substantial reduction of inhibitory activity toward the tested enzymes, in
particular HDAC6, following the introduction of the adamantyl group. In spite of 
the reduced ability to function as HDAC inhibitors, the compounds containing the 
adamantyl moiety still retained a good efficacy as antiproliferative and
proapoptotic agents. A selected compound (2c; ST3056) of this series exhibited an
appreciable antitumor activity against the colon carcinoma xenograft HCT116.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24742384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 11;9(4):e94213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094213. eCollection
2014.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors sensitize lung cancer cells to hyperthermia:
involvement of Ku70/SirT-1 in thermo-protection.

Hassan MK(1), Watari H(2), Salah-Eldin AE(3), Sultan AS(4), Mohamed Z(2), Fujioka
Y(5), Ohba Y(5), Sakuragi N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hokkaido University, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan; Biotechnology program, Department of Zoology,
Faculty of Science, Port Said University, Port Said, Egypt. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hokkaido University, Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan. (3)Department of Zoology, Aswan Faculty of Science, Aswan
University, Aswan, Egypt. (4)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, United
States of America. (5)Department of Cell Physiology, Hokkaido University,
Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

This study describes the sensitization mechanism to thermal stress by histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) in lung cancer cells and shows that Ku70, based
on its acetylation status, mediates the protection of lung cancer from
hyperthermia (42.5°C, 1-6 hrs). Ku70 regulates apoptosis by sequestering
pro-apoptotic Bax. However, its role in thermal stress is not fully understood.
The findings showed that, pre-treating lung cancer cells with HDACIs,
nicotinamide (NM) or Trichostatin A (TsA) or both significantly enhanced
hyperthermia-induced Bax-dependent apoptosis in PC-10 cells. We found that
hyperthermia induces SirT-1, Sirtuin, upregulation but not HDAC6 or SirT-3,
therefore transfection with dominant negative SirT-1 (Y/H) also eliminated the
protection and resulted in more cell death by hyperthermia, in H1299 cells
through Bax activation. Hyperthermia alone primed lung cancer cells to apoptosis 
without prominent death. After hyperthermia Bax was upregulated, Bcl-2 was
downregulated, the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio was inversed and Bax/Bcl-2 heterodimer was
dissociated. Although hyperthermia did not affect total Ku70 expression level, it
stimulated Ku70 deacetylation, which in turn could bind more Bax in the PC-10
cells. These findings suggest an escape mechanism from hyperthermia-induced Bax
activation. To verify the role of Ku70 in this protection mechanism, Ku70 was
silenced by siRNA. Ku70 silencing significantly sensitized the lung cancer cells 
to hyperthermia. The Ku70 KD cells underwent cytotoxic G1 arrest and
caspase-dependant apoptosis when compared to scrambled transfectants which showed
only G2/M cytostatic arrest in the cell lines investigated, suggesting an
additional cell cycle-dependent, novel, role of Ku70 in protection from
hyperthermia. Taken together, our data show a Ku70-dependent protection mechanism
from hyperthermia. Targeting Ku70 and/or its acetylation during hyperthermia may 
represent a promising therapeutic approach for lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC3984116
PMID: 24728004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Jun;25(11):1715-29. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-12-0730. Epub 2014
Apr 2.

Primary cilia in stem cells and neural progenitors are regulated by neutral
sphingomyelinase 2 and ceramide.

He Q(1), Wang G(1), Wakade S(1), Dasgupta S(1), Dinkins M(1), Kong JN(1),
Spassieva SD(2), Bieberich E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Neurobiology, Department of Neuroscience and
Regenerative Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA 30912. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425 ebieberich@gru.edu
spassisd@musc.edu. (3)Program in Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912 ebieberich@gru.edu spassisd@musc.edu.

We show here that human embryonic stem (ES) and induced pluripotent stem
cell-derived neuroprogenitors (NPs) develop primary cilia. Ciliogenesis depends
on the sphingolipid ceramide and its interaction with atypical PKC (aPKC), both
of which distribute to the primary cilium and the apicolateral cell membrane in
NP rosettes. Neural differentiation of human ES cells to NPs is concurrent with a
threefold elevation of ceramide-in particular, saturated, long-chain C16:0
ceramide (N-palmitoyl sphingosine) and nonsaturated, very long chain C24:1
ceramide (N-nervonoyl sphingosine). Decreasing ceramide levels by inhibiting
ceramide synthase or neutral sphingomyelinase 2 leads to translocation of
membrane-bound aPKC to the cytosol, concurrent with its activation and the
phosphorylation of its substrate Aurora kinase A (AurA). Inhibition of aPKC,
AurA, or a downstream target of AurA, HDAC6, restores ciliogenesis in
ceramide-depleted cells. Of importance, addition of exogenous C24:1 ceramide
reestablishes membrane association of aPKC, restores primary cilia, and
accelerates neural process formation. Taken together, these results suggest that 
ceramide prevents activation of HDAC6 by cytosolic aPKC and AurA, which promotes 
acetylation of tubulin in primary cilia and, potentially, neural processes. This 
is the first report on the critical role of ceramide generated by nSMase2 in stem
cell ciliogenesis and differentiation.

© 2014 He et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4038499
PMID: 24694597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Med Chem. 2014 Apr 24;57(8):3324-41. doi: 10.1021/jm401877m. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Discovery of the first N-hydroxycinnamamide-based histone deacetylase 1/3 dual
inhibitors with potent oral antitumor activity.

Li X(1), Inks ES, Li X, Hou J, Chou CJ, Zhang J, Jiang Y, Zhang Y, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shandong University ,
Ji'nan, Shandong 250012, P. R. China.

In our previous study, we designed and synthesized a novel series of
N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs), among which the
representative compound 14a exhibited promising HDACs inhibition and antitumor
activity. In this current study, we report the development of a more potent class
of N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDACIs, using 14a as lead, among which, compound
11r gave IC50 values of 11.8, 498.1, 3.9, 2000.8, 5700.4, 308.2, and 900.4 nM for
the inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC8, HDAC4, HDAC6, and HDAC11,
exhibiting dual HDAC1/3 selectivity. Compounds 11e, 11r, 11w, and 11y showed
excellent growth inhibition in multiple tumor cell lines. In vivo antitumor assay
in U937 xenograft model identified compound 11r as a potent, orally active HDACI.
To the best of our knowledge, this work constitutes the first report of oral
active N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDACIs with dual HDAC1/3 selectivity.

PMCID: PMC4030833
PMID: 24694055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Front Aging Neurosci. 2014 Mar 20;6:51. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00051.
eCollection 2014.

Epigenetic alterations in hippocampus of SAMP8 senescent mice and modulation by
voluntary physical exercise.

Cosín-Tomás M(1), Alvarez-López MJ(1), Sanchez-Roige S(2), Lalanza JF(2), Bayod
S(3), Sanfeliu C(4), Pallàs M(3), Escorihuela RM(2), Kaliman P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Farmacologia, Facultat de Farmàcia Institut de Biomedicina
Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Nucli Universitari de Pedralbes Barcelona, Spain
; Department of Brain Ischemia and Neurodegeneration, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB)-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
(CSIC) Barcelona, Spain. (2)Departamento de Psiquiatría y Medicina Legal,
Facultad de Medicina, Instituto de Neurociencias, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona Barcelona, Spain. (3)Unitat de Farmacologia, Facultat de Farmàcia
Institut de Biomedicina Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Nucli Universitari de
Pedralbes Barcelona, Spain. (4)Department of Brain Ischemia and
Neurodegeneration, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona
(IIBB)-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC) Barcelona, Spain.

The senescence-accelerated SAMP8 mouse model displays features of cognitive
decline and Alzheimer's disease. With the purpose of identifying potential
epigenetic markers involved in aging and neurodegeneration, here we analyzed the 
expression of 84 mature miRNAs, the expression of histone-acetylation regulatory 
genes and the global histone acetylation in the hippocampus of 8-month-old SAMP8 
mice, using SAMR1 mice as control. We also examined the modulation of these
parameters by 8 weeks of voluntary exercise. Twenty-one miRNAs were
differentially expressed between sedentary SAMP8 and SAMR1 mice and seven miRNAs 
were responsive to exercise in both strains. SAMP8 mice showed alterations in
genes involved in protein acetylation homeostasis such as Sirt1 and Hdac6 and
modulation of Hdac3 and Hdac5 gene expression by exercise. Global histone H3
acetylation levels were reduced in SAMP8 compared with SAMR1 mice and reached
control levels in response to exercise. In sum, data presented here provide new
candidate epigenetic markers for aging and neurodegeneration and suggest that
exercise training may prevent or delay some epigenetic alterations associated
with accelerated aging.

PMCID: PMC3960508
PMID: 24688469  [PubMed]


262. FASEB J. 2014 Jul;28(7):2955-69. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-246470. Epub 2014 Mar 31.

Fam65b is important for formation of the HDAC6-dysferlin protein complex during
myogenic cell differentiation.

Balasubramanian A(1), Kawahara G(1), Gupta VA(1), Rozkalne A(1), Beauvais A(2),
Kunkel LM(3), Gussoni E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics, Division of Genetics and. (2)Regenerative Medicine
Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; and.
(3)Program in Genomics, Division of Genetics and Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Program in Genomics, Division of Genetics 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
gussoni@enders.tch.harvard.edu.

Previously, we identified family with sequence similarity 65, member B (Fam65b), 
as a protein transiently up-regulated during differentiation and fusion of human 
myogenic cells. Silencing of Fam65b expression results in severe reduction of
myogenin expression and consequent lack of myoblast fusion. The molecular
function of Fam65b and whether misregulation of its expression could be causative
of muscle diseases are unknown. Protein pulldowns were used to identify
Fam65b-interacting proteins in differentiating human muscle cells and
regenerating muscle tissue. In vitro, human muscle cells were treated with
histone-deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, and expression of Fam65b and interacting
proteins was studied. Nontreated cells were used as controls. In vivo, expression
of Fam65b was down-regulated in developing zebrafish to determine the effects on 
muscle development. Fam65b binds to HDAC6 and dysferlin, the protein mutated in
limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2B. The tricomplex Fam65b-HDAC6-dysferlin is
transient, and Fam65b expression is necessary for the complex to form. Treatment 
of myogenic cells with pan-HDAC or HDAC6-specific inhibitors alters Fam65b
expression, while dysferlin expression does not change. Inhibition of Fam65b
expression in developing zebrafish results in abnormal muscle, with low
birefringence, tears at the myosepta, and increased embryo lethality. Fam65b is
an essential component of the HDAC6-dysferlin complex. Down-regulation of Fam65b 
in developing muscle causes changes consistent with muscle
disease.-Balasubramanian, A., Kawahara, G., Gupta, V. A., Rozkalne, A., Beauvais,
A., Kunkel, L. M., Gussoni, E. Fam65b is important for formation of the
HDAC6-dysferlin protein complex during myogenic cell differentiation.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4062822
PMID: 24687993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;51:58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.015.
Epub 2014 Mar 28.

Interactions of ataxin-3 with its molecular partners in the protein machinery
that sorts protein aggregates to the aggresome.

Bonanomi M(1), Mazzucchelli S(1), D'Urzo A(1), Nardini M(2), Konarev PV(3),
Invernizzi G(1), Svergun DI(3), Vanoni M(4), Regonesi ME(5), Tortora P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnologies and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca,
P.zza della Scienza 2, 20126 Milan, Italy. (2)Department of Biosciences,
University of Milan, Via Celoria 26, 20133 Milano, Italy. (3)European Molecular
Biology Laboratory, Hamburg Outstation, c/o DESY, Notkestrasse 85, D-22603
Hamburg, Germany. (4)Department of Biotechnologies and Biosciences, University of
Milano-Bicocca, P.zza della Scienza 2, 20126 Milan, Italy; SysBio Centre for
Systems Biology, Milan and Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Biotechnologies and
Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, P.zza della Scienza 2, 20126 Milan,
Italy. Electronic address: mariaelena.regonesi@unimib.it.

Ataxin-3 (AT3) is the protein that triggers the inherited neurodegenerative
disorder spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 when its polyglutamine (polyQ) stretch
close to the C-terminus exceeds a critical length. AT3 consists of the N-terminal
globular Josephin domain (JD) and the C-terminal disordered one. It cleaves
isopeptide bonds between ubiquitin monomers, an event involved in protein quality
control mechanisms. AT3 has been implicated in the pathway that sorts aggregated 
protein to aggresomes via microtubules, in which dynein and histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) also seem to be involved. By taking advantage of small angle X-ray
scattering (SAXS) and surface plasmon resonance (SPR), we have investigated the
interaction of AT3 with tubulin and HDAC6. Based on SAXS results, the AT3
oligomer, consisting of 6-7 subunits, tightly binds to the tubulin hexameric
oligomer in a "parallel" fashion. By SPR analysis we have demonstrated that AT3
binds to tubulin dimer with a 50nM affinity. Binding fits with a Langmuir 1:1
model and involves a single binding interface. Nevertheless, the interaction
surface consists of three distinct, discontinuous tubulin-binding regions (TBR), 
one located in the JD, and the two others in the disordered domain, upstream and 
downstream of the polyQ stretch. In the absence of any of the three TBRs, the
affinity is drastically reduced. By SPR we have also provided the first evidence 
of direct binding of AT3 to HDAC6, with affinity in the range 0.1-1µM. These
results shed light on the interactions among the components of the transport
machinery that sorts aggregate protein to the aggresome, and pave the way to in
vivo studies aimed at further clarifying their roles.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24685680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2014 Apr;27:10-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2013.10.005. Epub 2013 
Nov 16.

Role of G protein-coupled receptor kinases in cell migration.

Penela P(1), Nogués L(1), Mayor F Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular and Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo
Ochoa" (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas - Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain; Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria La Princesa, 28006 Madrid, Spain. (2)Departamento de
Biología Molecular and Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas - Universidad Autónoma de Madrid),
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain; Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria La Princesa, 28006 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
fmayor@cbm.uam.es.

G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are emerging as important integrative
nodes in cell migration processes. Recent evidence links GRKs (particularly the
GRK2 isoform) to the complex modulation of diverse aspects of cell motility. In
addition to its well-established role in the desensitization of G protein-coupled
receptors involved in chemotaxis, GRK2 can play an effector role in the
organization of actin and microtubule networks and in adhesion dynamics, by means
of novel substrates and transient interacting partners, such as the GIT1 scaffold
or the cytoplasmic a-tubulin deacetylase histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). The
overall effect of altering GRK levels or activity on chemotaxis would depend on
how such different roles are integrated in a given cell type and physiological
context, and may have relevant implications in inflammatory diseases or cancer
progression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24680425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nat Commun. 2014 Mar 25;5:3510. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4510.

MYPT1 regulates contractility and microtubule acetylation to modulate integrin
adhesions and matrix assembly.

Joo EE(1), Yamada KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Although much is known about how individual cytoskeletal systems contribute to
physiological processes such as cell migration and branching morphogenesis,
little is known about how these different systems actively coordinate their
functions after polymerization. Here we show that both fibroblasts and developing
glands reciprocally coordinate levels of cellular contractility and microtubule
acetylation. We find that this balance is achieved by interaction of the myosin
phosphatase target subunit of myosin phosphatase with either myosin light chain
or HDAC6, a microtubule deacetylase. This balance of contractility and
microtubule acetylation controls progression of adhesion maturation by regulating
surface density of a5ß1 integrin and fibronectin. Thus, we propose that a
homeostatic balance between contractility and microtubule acetylation is mediated
by myosin phosphatase via controlled activation and deactivation of myosin II and
HDAC6. This regulates the surface density of a5ß1 integrin to modulate
fibronectin matrix assembly and governs rates of cell migration and branching
morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4190669
PMID: 24667306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nat Commun. 2014 Mar 25;5:3500. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4500.

Dido3-dependent HDAC6 targeting controls cilium size.

Sánchez de Diego A(1), Alonso Guerrero A(1), Martínez-A C(1), van Wely KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
(CNB-CSIC), C/Darwin 3, Campus UAM Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Primary cilia are involved in a variety of physiological processes such as
sensing of the environment, cell growth and development. Numerous developmental
disorders and pathologies arise from defects in these organelles. Multiple
proteins that promote formation and disassembly of the primary cilium have been
identified, but little is known about the mechanisms that control steady-state
cilium size. Here, we show that death inducer obliterator (Dido3)-dependent
targeting of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a key determinant of cilium size in
growth-arrested cells. The amount of either protein negatively correlates with
cilium size. Dido3 availability at the centrosome governs ciliary HDAC6 levels,
and redistribution of the two proteins controls tubulin acetylation. In turn,
basal body localization of Dido3 and HDAC6 depends on the actin network,
previously shown to limit cilium size independent of the cell cycle. These
results show that not only kinase-dependent activation of a deacetylase but also 
its subcellular distribution controls substrate selection.

PMCID: PMC3973121
PMID: 24667272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Mar 7;8:68. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00068. eCollection 
2014.

A selective histone deacetylase-6 inhibitor improves BDNF trafficking in
hippocampal neurons from Mecp2 knockout mice: implications for Rett syndrome.

Xu X(1), Kozikowski AP(2), Pozzo-Miller L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Civitan International Research Center, The
University of Alabama at Birmingham Birmingham, AL, USA. (2)Drug Discovery
Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of
Illinois at Chicago Chicago, IL, USA.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by loss-of-function
mutations in the transcriptional modulator methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2). 
One of the most prominent gene targets of MeCP2 is brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (Bdnf), a potent modulator of activity-dependent synaptic development,
function and plasticity. Dysfunctional BDNF signaling has been demonstrated in
several pathophysiological mechanisms of RTT disease progression. To evaluate
whether the dynamics of BDNF trafficking is affected by Mecp2 deletion, we
analyzed movements of BDNF tagged with yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) in
cultured hippocampal neurons by time-lapse fluorescence imaging. We found that
both anterograde and retrograde vesicular trafficking of BDNF-YFP are
significantly impaired in Mecp2 knockout hippocampal neurons. Selective
inhibitors of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) show neuroprotective effects in
neurodegenerative diseases and stimulate microtubule-dependent vesicular
trafficking of BDNF-containing dense core vesicles. Here, we show that the
selective HDAC6 inhibitor Tubastatin-A increased the velocity of BDNF-YFP
vesicles in Mecp2 knockout neurons in both directions by increasing a-tubulin
acetylation. Tubastatin-A also restored activity-dependent BDNF release from
Mecp2 knockout neurons to levels comparable to those shown by wildtype neurons.
These findings demonstrate that a selective HDAC6 inhibitor is a potential
pharmacological strategy to reverse cellular and synaptic impairments in RTT
resulting from impaired BDNF signaling.

PMCID: PMC3945638
PMID: 24639629  [PubMed]


268. Nat Commun. 2014 Mar 17;5:3479. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4479.

Microtubule acetylation amplifies p38 kinase signalling and anti-inflammatory
IL-10 production.

Wang B(1), Rao YH(1), Inoue M(2), Hao R(1), Lai CH(1), Chen D(1), McDonald SL(3),
Choi MC(1), Wang Q(3), Shinohara ML(2), Yao TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, DUMC, Box 3813, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA. (2)Department of Immunology, DUMC, Box 3010, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA. (3)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, 124 Science
Drive, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Reversible acetylation of a-tubulin is an evolutionarily conserved modification
in microtubule networks. Despite its prevalence, the physiological function and
regulation of microtubule acetylation remain poorly understood. Here we report
that macrophages challenged by bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS) undergo
extensive microtubule acetylation. Suppression of LPS-induced microtubule
acetylation by inactivating the tubulin acetyltransferase, MEC17, profoundly
inhibits the induction of anti-inflammatory interleukin-10 (IL-10), a phenotype
effectively reversed by an acetylation-mimicking a-tubulin mutant. Conversely,
elevating microtubule acetylation by inhibiting the tubulin deacetylase, HDAC6,
or stabilizing microtubules via Taxol stimulates IL-10 hyper-induction.
Supporting the anti-inflammatory function of microtubule acetylation, HDAC6
inhibition significantly protects mice from LPS toxicity. In HDAC6-deficient
macrophages challenged by LPS, p38 kinase signalling becomes selectively
amplified, leading to SP1-dependent IL-10 transcription. Remarkably, the
augmented p38 signalling is suppressed by MEC17 inactivation. Our findings
identify reversible microtubule acetylation as a kinase signalling modulator and 
a key component in the inflammatory response.

PMCID: PMC4000527
PMID: 24632940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Jul;72:138-45. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.03.005. Epub
2014 Mar 13.

Selective inhibition of class I but not class IIb histone deacetylases exerts
cardiac protection from ischemia reperfusion.

Aune SE(1), Herr DJ(1), Mani SK(1), Menick DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gazes Cardiac Research Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 114
Doughty St., Charleston, SC 29425, USA. (2)Gazes Cardiac Research Institute,
Medical University of South Carolina, 114 Doughty St., Charleston, SC 29425, USA.
Electronic address: menickd@musc.edu.

While inhibition of class I/IIb histone deacetylases (HDACs) protects the
mammalian heart from ischemia reperfusion (IR) injury, class selective effects
remain unexamined. We hypothesized that selective inhibition of class I HDACs
would preserve left ventricular contractile function following IR in isolated
hearts. Male Sprague Dawley rats (n=6 per group) were injected with vehicle
(dimethylsulfoxide, 0.63mg/kg), the class I/IIb HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A
(1mg/kg), the class I HDAC inhibitor entinostat (MS-275, 10mg/kg), or the HDAC6
(class IIb) inhibitor tubastatin A (10mg/kg). After 24h, hearts were isolated and
perfused in Langendorff mode for 30min (Sham) or subjected to 30min global
ischemia and 120min global reperfusion (IR). A saline filled balloon attached to 
a pressure transducer was placed in the LV to monitor contractile function. After
perfusion, LV tissue was collected for measurements of antioxidant protein levels
and infarct area. At the conclusion of IR, MS-275 pretreatment was associated
with significant preservation of developed pressure, rate of pressure generation,
rate of pressure relaxation and rate pressure product, as compared to vehicle
treated hearts. There was significant reduction of infarct area with MS-275
pretreatment. Contractile function was not significantly restored in hearts
treated with trichostatin A or tubastatin A. Mitochondrial superoxide dismutase
(SOD2) and catalase protein and mRNA in hearts from animals pretreated with
MS-275 were increased following IR, as compared to Sham. This was associated with
a dramatic enrichment of nuclear FOXO3a transcription factor, which mediates the 
expression of SOD2 and catalase. Tubastatin A treatment was associated with
significantly decreased catalase levels after IR. Class I HDAC inhibition elicits
protection of contractile function following IR, which is associated with
increased expression of endogenous antioxidant enzymes. Class I/IIb HDAC
inhibition with trichostatin A or selective inhibition of HDAC6 with tubastatin A
was not protective. This study highlights the need for the development of new
strategies that target specific HDAC isoforms in cardiac ischemia reperfusion.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4046340
PMID: 24632412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Apr;6(2):116-27. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju010. Epub 2014 Mar
11.

Reversible acetylation regulates vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2
activity.

Zecchin A(1), Pattarini L, Gutierrez MI, Mano M, Mai A, Valente S, Myers MP,
Pantano S, Giacca M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy.

The tyrosine kinase receptor vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2
(VEGFR2) is a key regulator of angiogenesis. Here we show that VEGFR2 is
acetylated in endothelial cells both at four lysine residues forming a dense
cluster in the kinase insert domain and at a single lysine located in the
receptor activation loop. These modifications are under dynamic control of the
acetyltransferase p300 and two deacetylases HDAC5 and HDAC6. We demonstrate that 
VEGFR2 acetylation essentially regulates receptor phosphorylation. In particular,
VEGFR2 acetylation significantly alters the kinetics of receptor phosphorylation 
after ligand binding, allowing receptor phosphorylation and intracellular
signaling upon prolonged stimulation with VEGF. Molecular dynamics simulations
indicate that acetylation of the lysine in the activation loop contributes to the
transition to an open active state, in which tyrosine phosphorylation is favored 
by better exposure of the kinase target residues. These findings indicate that
post-translational modification by acetylation is a critical mechanism that
directly affects VEGFR2 function.

PMID: 24620033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Jun 1;15(6):742-57. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28469. Epub 2014 Mar 
11.

Limited efficacy of specific HDAC6 inhibition in urothelial cancer cells.

Rosik L(1), Niegisch G(1), Fischer U(2), Jung M(3), Schulz WA(1), Hoffmann MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology; Heinrich-Heine-University; Medical Faculty;
Duesseldorf, Germany. (2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and
Clinical Immunology; Heinrich-Heine-University; Medical Faculty; Duesseldorf,
Germany. (3)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences; University of Freiburg;
Freiburg, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK); Heidelberg, Germany; German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ); Heidelberg, Germany.

Epigenetic modifiers such as histone deacetylases (HDACs) have come into focus as
novel drug targets for cancer therapy due to their functional role in tumor
progression. Since common pan-HDAC inhibitors have adverse side effects and minor
anti-cancer activity against solid tumors, enzyme-specific inhibitors were
developed. HDAC6 is especially well-suited for specific inhibition due to its
unique domain structure and mode of action and has been suggested to provide an
exceptionally suitable target for cancer therapy. However, expression and
function of HDACs have been insufficiently studied in urothelial cancers (UC), a 
disease urgently requiring new therapeutic approaches. The present study sought
to evaluate HDAC6 as a target for treatment of urothelial cancers with
enzyme-specific inhibitors. We observed moderate HDAC6 overexpression in
urothelial cancer tissues and a broad range of expression in urothelial cancer
cell lines. In the cell lines Tubacin was the most potent inhibitor, compared
with Tubastatin and ST-80, but still active only at high micromolar
concentrations. HDAC6 expression levels correlated poorly with sensitivity to
enzyme inhibition. Combined treatments with heat shock, HSP90 inhibition by
17-AAG, proteasome inhibition by bortezomib, or DNA-damaging agents did not
result in significant synergistic effects. Experiments with siRNA-mediated
knockdown further underlined that urothelial cancer cells do not critically
depend on HDAC6 expression for survival.

PMCID: PMC4049790
PMID: 24618845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e90932. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090932. eCollection
2014.

Microtubule stabilization by Mdp3 is partially attributed to its modulation of
HDAC6 in addition to its association with tubulin and microtubules.

Tala(1), Sun X(1), Chen J(1), Zhang L(1), Liu N(1), Zhou J(1), Li D(1), Liu M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

Microtubule-mediated cellular events such as intracellular transport and the
maintenance of cell polarity are highly dependent upon microtubule stability,
which is controlled by a repertoire of microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) in 
the cell. MAP7 domain-containing protein 3 (Mdp3) has recently been identified as
a critical regulator of microtubule stability. However, it remains elusive how
Mdp3 carries out this function. In this study, by examination of tubulin
partitioning between the polymer and soluble dimer forms, we found that Mdp3
could protect microtubules from cold- or nocodazole-induced depolymerization.
Immunoblotting and immunofluorescence microscopy showed that knockdown of Mdp3
expression significantly reduced the level of tubulin acetylation. In vitro
tubulin polymerization assays revealed that the amino-terminal region of Mdp3 was
necessary for its ability to stabilize microtubules. Immunoprecipitation and
pulldown experiments showed that the amino-terminal region mediated the
interaction of Mdp3 with histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), in addition to its
association with tubulin and microtubules. Immunofluorescence microscopy further 
demonstrated that endogenous Mdp3 and HDAC6 colocalized in the cytoplasm.
Moreover, depletion of Mdp3 dramatically increased the activity of HDAC6 toward
tubulin deacetylation. These findings suggest that Mdp3 controls microtubule
stability through its binding to tubulin and microtubules as well as its
regulation of HDAC6 activity.

PMCID: PMC3948737
PMID: 24614595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Surg Res. 2014 Aug;190(2):647-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2014.01.056. Epub 2014 Feb
4.

Selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 alters the composition of
circulating blood cells in a lethal septic model.

Zhao T(1), Li Y(2), Liu B(2), Halaweish I(2), Mazitschek R(3), Alam HB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Trauma, Emergency Surgery and Surgical Critical Care, Department
of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Hospital, Ann
Arbor, Michigan. (3)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Chemical Biology Program, The
Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts. (4)Department of
Surgery, University of Michigan Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Electronic
address: alamh@med.umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: Phagocytes, especially monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells,
play a pivotal role in the innate and adaptive immune responses during sepsis. We
have shown that inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 improves survival and
increases bacterial clearance in a mouse model of cecal ligation and puncture
(CLP). The aim of this study was to determine whether this effect was associated 
with changes in the number and composition of different blood cell types in the
circulation.
METHODS: C57BL/6J mice were subjected to CLP, and 1 h later given an
intraperitoneal injection of either Tubastatin A dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide,
or dimethyl sulfoxide only. Sham-operated animals were treated in an identical
fashion but not subjected to CLP. Forty-eight hours later, peripheral blood was
obtained via cardiac puncture and analyzed using a HemaTrue veterinary hematology
analyzer.
RESULTS: Tubastatin A administration increased the number of circulating
monocytes in the sham-operated and the CLP animals. In comparison with the sham, 
CLP animals displayed an increase in the granulocyte percentage in white blood
cells and decrease in the lymphocyte number and percentage, with a resultant
increase in the granulocyte-to-lymphocyte ratio. Treatment of CLP animals with
Tubastatin A decreased the granulocyte percentage and restored the lymphocyte
number and percentage, which decreased the granulocyte-to-lymphocyte ratio. In
the sham animals, Tubastatin A increased red blood cell number, hematocrit, and
hemoglobin. This effect was not seen in CLP animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Tubastatin A treatment has significant impact on the composition of 
circulating blood cells. It increases the number of circulating monocytes and the
red blood cell mass in sham-operated animals. In the CLP animals, it increases
the monocyte count, decreases the percentage of granulocytes, restores the
lymphocyte population, and decreases the granulocyte-to-lymphocyte ratio. These
results may explain why Tubastatin A treatment improves survival in the septic
models.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4267528
PMID: 24613069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Pathol. 2014 Jul;233(3):247-57. doi: 10.1002/path.4343. Epub 2014 Apr 29.

Tubers from patients with tuberous sclerosis complex are characterized by changes
in microtubule biology through ROCK2 signalling.

Ferrer I(1), Mohan P, Chen H, Castellsague J, Gómez-Baldó L, Carmona M, García N,
Aguilar H, Jiang J, Skowron M, Nellist M, Ampuero I, Russi A, Lázaro C, Maxwell
CA, Pujana MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Bellvitge, University of
Barcelona, Bellvitge Institute for Biomedical Research (IDIBELL), CIBERNED,
L'Hospitalet del Llobregat, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Most patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) develop cortical tubers that 
cause severe neurological disabilities. It has been suggested that defects in
neuronal differentiation and/or migration underlie the appearance of tubers.
However, the precise molecular alterations remain largely unknown. Here, by
combining cytological and immunohistochemical analyses of tubers from nine TSC
patients (four of them diagnosed with TSC2 germline mutations), we show that
alteration of microtubule biology through ROCK2 signalling contributes to TSC
neuropathology. All tubers showed a larger number of binucleated neurons than
expected relative to control cortex. An excess of normal and altered cytokinetic 
figures was also commonly observed. Analysis of centrosomal markers suggested
increased microtubule nucleation capacity, which was supported by the analysis of
an expression dataset from cortical tubers and control cortex, and subsequently
linked to under-expression of Rho-associated coiled-coil containing kinase 2
(ROCK2). Thus, augmented microtubule nucleation capacity was observed in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts and human fibroblasts deficient in the Tsc2/TSC2 gene
product, tuberin. Consistent with ROCK2 under-expression, microtubule acetylation
was found to be increased with tuberin deficiency; this alteration was abrogated 
by rapamycin treatment and mimicked by HDAC6 inhibition. Together, the results of
this study support the hypothesis that loss of TSC2 expression can alter
microtubule organization and dynamics, which, in turn, deregulate cell division
and potentially impair neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24604753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Jul;115(7):1225-33. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24802.

Class II HDACs and neuronal regeneration.

Tang BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University Health System, Singapore, Singapore; NUS Graduate School for
Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Medical
Drive, Singapore, 117597, Singapore.

The vastly more superior regenerative capacity of the axons of peripheral nerves 
over central nervous system (CNS) neurons has been partly attributed to the
former's intrinsic capacity to initiate and sustain the functionality of a new
growth cone. Growth cone generation involves a myriad of processes that centers
around the organization of microtubule bundles. Histone deacetylases (HDACs)
modulate a wide range of key neuronal processes such as neural progenitor
differentiation, learning and memory, neuronal death, and degeneration. HDAC
inhibitors have been shown to be beneficial in attenuating neuronal death and
promoting neurite outgrowth and axonal regeneration. Recent advances have
provided insights on how manipulating HDAC activities, particularly the type II
HDACs 5 and 6, which deacetylate tubulin, may benefit axonal regeneration. These 
advances are discussed herein.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24604703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cancer Res. 2014 May 1;74(9):2520-32. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2033. Epub
2014 Mar 5.

Auranofin induces lethal oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress and exerts
potent preclinical activity against chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Fiskus W(1), Saba N, Shen M, Ghias M, Liu J, Gupta SD, Chauhan L, Rao R,
Gunewardena S, Schorno K, Austin CP, Maddocks K, Byrd J, Melnick A, Huang P,
Wiestner A, Bhalla KN.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Houston Methodist Research Institute; The University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; Hematology Branch, National
Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI); National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland; The University of Kansas Medical
Center; Institute for Advancing Medical Innovation, Kansas University, Kansas
City, Kansas; Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The
Comprehensive Cancer Center at the Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio; and
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) exhibits high remission rates after initial
chemoimmunotherapy, but with relapses with treatment, refractory disease is the
most common outcome, especially in CLL with the deletion of chromosome 11q or
17p. In addressing the need of treatments for relapsed disease, we report the
identification of an existing U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved
small-molecule drug to repurpose for CLL treatment. Auranofin (Ridaura) is
approved for use in treating rheumatoid arthritis, but it exhibited preclinical
efficacy in CLL cells. By inhibiting thioredoxin reductase activity and
increasing intracellular reactive oxygen species levels, auranofin induced a
lethal endoplasmic reticulum stress response in cultured and primary CLL cells.
In addition, auranofin displayed synergistic lethality with heme oxygenase-1 and 
glutamate-cysteine ligase inhibitors against CLL cells. Auranofin overcame
apoptosis resistance mediated by protective stromal cells, and it also killed
primary CLL cells with deletion of chromosome 11q or 17p. In TCL-1 transgenic
mice, an in vivo model of CLL, auranofin treatment markedly reduced tumor cell
burden and improved mouse survival. Our results provide a rationale to reposition
the approved drug auranofin for clinical evaluation in the therapy of CLL.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4172421
PMID: 24599128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2014 Feb 27;6(1):12. doi: 10.1186/alzrt241. eCollection
2014.

Histone deacetylase 6 inhibition improves memory and reduces total tau levels in 
a mouse model of tau deposition.

Selenica ML(1), Benner L(2), Housley SB(2), Manchec B(2), Lee DC(1), Nash KR(3), 
Kalin J(4), Bergman JA(5), Kozikowski A(5), Gordon MN(3), Morgan D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Byrd Alzheimer's Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33613, USA 
; College of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (2)Byrd Alzheimer's Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL 33613, USA. (3)Byrd Alzheimer's Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL 33613, USA ; College of Medicine, Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Science, The Johns Hopkins
University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (5)Drug Discovery
Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of
Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Tau pathology is associated with a number of age-related
neurodegenerative disorders. Few treatments have been demonstrated to diminish
the impact of tau pathology in mouse models and none are yet effective in humans.
Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is an enzyme that removes acetyl groups from
cytoplasmic proteins, rather than nuclear histones. Its substrates include
tubulin, heat shock protein 90 and cortactin. Tubastatin A is a selective
inhibitor of HDAC6. Modification of tau pathology by specific inhibition of HDAC6
presents a potential therapeutic approach in tauopathy.
METHODS: We treated rTg4510 mouse models of tau deposition and non-transgenic
mice with tubastatin (25 mg/kg) or saline (0.9%) from 5 to 7 months of age.
Cognitive behavior analysis, histology and biochemical analysis were applied to
access the effect of tubastatin on memory, tau pathology and neurodegeneration
(hippocampal volume).
RESULTS: We present data showing that tubastatin restored memory function in
rTg4510 mice and reversed a hyperactivity phenotype. We further found that
tubastatin reduced the levels of total tau, both histologically and by western
analysis. Reduction in total tau levels was positively correlated with memory
improvement in these mice. However, there was no impact on phosphorylated forms
of tau, either by histology or western analysis, nor was there an impact on
silver positive inclusions histologically.
CONCLUSION: Potential mechanisms by which HDAC6 inhibitors might benefit the
rTg4510 mouse include stabilization of microtubules secondary to increased
tubulin acetylation, increased degradation of tau secondary to increased
acetylation of HSP90 or both. These data support the use of HDAC6 inhibitors as
potential therapeutic agents against tau pathology.

PMCID: PMC3978441
PMID: 24576665  [PubMed]


278. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 May;12(5):681-93. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0654. Epub
2014 Feb 26.

NEDD9 regulates actin dynamics through cortactin deacetylation in an
AURKA/HDAC6-dependent manner.

Kozyreva VK(1), McLaughlin SL, Livengood RH, Calkins RA, Kelley LC, Rajulapati A,
Ice RJ, Smolkin MB, Weed SA, Pugacheva EN.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center; Departments of
2Biochemistry, 3Pathology, and 4Neurobiology and Anatomy, West Virginia
University School of Medicine, Morgantown, West Virginia.

The prometastatic protein NEDD9 (neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally
downregulated 9) is highly expressed in many cancers and is required for
mesenchymal individual cell migration and progression to the invasive stage.
Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms of NEDD9-driven migration and the
downstream targets effecting metastasis are not well defined. In the current
study, knockdown of NEDD9 in highly metastatic tumor cells drastically reduces
their migratory capacity due to disruption of actin dynamics at the leading edge.
Specifically, NEDD9 deficiency leads to a decrease in the persistence and
stability of lamellipodial protrusions similar to knockdown of cortactin (CTTN). 
Mechanistically, it was shown that NEDD9 binds to and regulates acetylation of
CTTN in an Aurora A kinase (AURKA)/HDAC6-dependent manner. The knockdown of NEDD9
or AURKA results in an increase in the amount of acetylated CTTN and a decrease
in the binding of CTTN to F-actin. Overexpression of the deacetylation mimicking 
(9KR) mutant of CTTN is sufficient to restore actin dynamics at the leading edge 
and migration proficiency of the tumor cells. Inhibition of AURKA and HDAC6
activity by alisertib and Tubastatin A in xenograft models of breast cancer leads
to a decrease in the number of pulmonary metastases. Collectively, these findings
identify CTTN as the key downstream component of NEDD9-driven migration and
metastatic phenotypes.IMPLICATIONS: This study provides a mechanistic platform
for therapeutic interventions based on AURKA and HDAC6 inhibition for patients
with metastatic breast cancer to prevent and/or eradicate metastases.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4020952
PMID: 24574519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Commun Integr Biol. 2013 Nov 1;6(6):e26316. doi: 10.4161/cib.26316. Epub 2013 Sep
5.

Tubulin polymerization promoting protein 1 (TPPP1): A DNA-damage induced
microtubule regulatory gene.

Schofield A(1), Bernard O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cytoskeleton and Cancer Unit; St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research;
Department of Medicine (St. Vincent's Hospital); University of Melbourne;
Melbourn VIC Australia.

The eukaryotic cell cycle relies heavily on the mechanical forces vested by the
dynamic rearrangement of the microtubule (MT) network. Tubulin Polymerization
promoting Protein 1 (TPPP1) alters MT dynamics by driving MT polymerization as
well as stabilization, via increasing MT acetylation. It increases MT rigidity,
which results in reduced cell proliferation through downregulation of G1/S-phase 
and mitosis to G1-phase cell cycle transitioning. In this communication, we
provide further evidence that TPPP1 may be an important regulator of genomic
homeostasis. Our preliminary data show that long-term TPPP1 overexpression
reduces cell viability via induction of apoptotic cell death pathways. Moreover, 
induction of DNA-damage results in increased TPPP1 expression, which is inhibited
in the absence of expression of the tumor suppressor p53.

PMCID: PMC3925458
PMID: 24567774  [PubMed]


280. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 Apr 9;76:53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.01.056. Epub 2014
Jan 30.

4,5,6,7-Tetrahydro-isoxazolo-[4,5-c]-pyridines as a new class of cytotoxic Hsp90 
inhibitors.

Baruchello R(1), Simoni D(2), Marchetti P(1), Rondanin R(1), Mangiola S(1),
Costantini C(1), Meli M(3), Giannini G(4), Vesci L(5), Carollo V(5), Brunetti
T(5), Battistuzzi G(5), Tolomeo M(6), Cabri W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche e Farmaceutiche, Università degli Studi di
Ferrara, I-44121 Ferrara, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche e
Farmaceutiche, Università degli Studi di Ferrara, I-44121 Ferrara, Italy.
Electronic address: smd@unife.it. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze per la Promozione
della Salute e Materno Infantile, Sezione di Farmacologia, Università di Palermo,
Italy. (4)R&D Sigma-Tau Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.p.A., I-00040 Pomezia, 
Roma, Italy. Electronic address: giuseppe.giannini@sigma-tau.it. (5)R&D Sigma-Tau
Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.p.A., I-00040 Pomezia, Roma, Italy. (6)Centro
Interdipartimentale di Ricerca in Oncologia Clinica e Dipartimento Biomedico di
Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Sezione di Malattie Infettive, Università di
Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Hsp90 is considered an interesting therapeutic target for anticancer drug
development. Here we describe a new class of
4,5,6,7-tetrahydro-isoxazolo-[4,5-c]-pyridine compounds. A small library of
derivatives has been synthesized and investigated. Some reported compounds show
interesting properties combining both notable binding to Hsp90 and potent cell
growth inhibitory activity. N-5 substitution with a 2,4 resorcinol carboxamide
appears crucial for activity. Moreover, a derivative bearing a hydroxamic acid
residue bound to C-3 amide portion was found to inhibit both Hsp90 and HDAC6.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24565573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mar Drugs. 2014 Feb 20;12(2):1102-15. doi: 10.3390/md12021102.

Mode of action of diterpene and characterization of related metabolites from the 
soft coral, Xenia elongata.

Andrianasolo EH(1), Haramaty L(2), White E(3), Lutz R(4), Falkowski P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Biotechnology, Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
andriane@marine.rutgers.edu. (2)Center for Marine Biotechnology, Institute of
Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. haramaty@marine.rutgers.edu. (3)The Cancer Institute of
New Jersey, 195 Little Albany Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.
epwhite@cinj.rutgers.edu. (4)Center for Marine Biotechnology, Institute of Marine
and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick,
NJ 08901, USA. rlutz@imcs.marine.rutgers.edu. (5)Center for Marine Biotechnology,
Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. falko@imcs.marine.rutgers.edu.

Chemical and biological investigation of the cultured marine soft coral Xenia
elongata led to the isolation of two new diterpenes (2, 3). Their structures were
elucidated using a combination of NMR and mass spectrometry. Biological
evaluations and assessments were determined using the specific apoptosis
induction assay based on genetically engineered mammalian cell line D3 deficient 
in Bak and Bax and derived from a mouse epithelial cell. The diterpenes induce
apoptosis in low micromolar concentrations. The results indicate that the
previously isolated compound (1) affects cell in a manner similar to that of
HSP90 and HDAC inhibitors and in a manner opposite of PI3 kinase/mTOR inhibitors.
Compound (3) inhibits selectively HDAC6 in high micromolar concentrations.

PMCID: PMC3944532
PMID: 24562393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Development. 2014 Mar;141(5):1064-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.097774.

Microtubule-severing protein Katanin regulates neuromuscular junction development
and dendritic elaboration in Drosophila.

Mao CX(1), Xiong Y, Xiong Z, Wang Q, Zhang YQ, Jin S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei 430062, China.

Microtubules (MTs) are crucial for diverse biological processes including cell
division, cell growth and motility, intracellular transport and the maintenance
of cell shape. MT abnormalities are associated with neurodevelopmental and
neurodegenerative diseases such as hereditary spastic paraplegia. Among many MT
regulators, katanin was the first identified MT-severing protein, but its
neuronal functions have not yet been examined in a multicellular organism.
Katanin consists of two subunits; the catalytic subunit katanin 60 contains an
AAA (ATPases associated with a variety of cellular activities) domain and breaks 
MT fibers while hydrolyzing ATP, whereas katanin 80 is a targeting and regulatory
subunit. To dissect the in vivo functions of Katanin, we generated mutations in
Drosophila Katanin 60 and manipulated its expression in a tissue-specific manner.
Null mutants of Katanin 60 are pupal lethal, demonstrating that it is essential
for viability. Loss-of-function mutants of Katanin 60 showed excess satellite
boutons, reduced neurotransmission efficacy, and more enlarged cisternae at
neuromuscular junctions. In peripheral sensory neurons, loss of Katanin 60 led to
increased elaboration of dendrites, whereas overexpression of Katanin 60 resulted
in the opposite. Genetic interaction analyses indicated that increased levels of 
MT acetylation increase its susceptibility to Katanin-mediated severing in
neuronal and non-neuronal systems. Taken together, our results demonstrate for
the first time that Katanin 60 is required for the normal development of
neuromuscular synapses and dendrites.

PMID: 24550114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):1515-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300238111. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Oncogenes induce a vimentin filament collapse mediated by HDAC6 that is linked to
cell stiffness.

Rathje LS(1), Nordgren N, Pettersson T, Rönnlund D, Widengren J, Aspenström P,
Gad AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor, and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Oncogenes deregulate fundamental cellular functions, which can lead to
development of tumors, tumor-cell invasion, and metastasis. As the mechanical
properties of cells govern cell motility, we hypothesized that oncogenes promote 
cell invasion by inducing cytoskeletal changes that increase cellular stiffness. 
We show that the oncogenes simian virus 40 large T antigen, c-Myc, and cyclin E
induce spatial reorganization of the vimentin intermediate filament network in
cells. At the cellular level, this reorganization manifests as increased width of
vimentin fibers and the collapse of the vimentin network. At nanoscale
resolution, the organization of vimentin fibers in these oncogene-expressing
cells was more entangled, with increased width of the fibers compared with
control cells. Expression of these oncogenes also resulted in up-regulation of
the tubulin deacetylase histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and altered spatial
distribution of acetylated microtubules. This oncogene expression also induced
increases in cellular stiffness and promoted the invasive capacity of the cells. 
Importantly, HDAC6 was required and sufficient for the structural collapse of the
vimentin filament network, and was required for increased cellular stiffness of
the oncogene-expressing cells. Taken together, these data are consistent with the
possibility that oncogenes can induce cellular stiffness via an HDAC6-induced
reorganization of the vimentin intermediate filament network.

PMCID: PMC3910606
PMID: 24474778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Protein Cell. 2014 Mar;5(3):214-23. doi: 10.1007/s13238-013-0010-3. Epub 2014 Jan
29.

Histone deacetylase 6 and cytoplasmic linker protein 170 function together to
regulate the motility of pancreatic cancer cells.

Li D(1), Sun X, Zhang L, Yan B, Xie S, Liu R, Liu M, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, 300071, China.

Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease with the worst prognosis among all the
major human malignancies. The propensity to rapidly metastasize contributes
significantly to the highly aggressive feature of pancreatic cancer. The
molecular mechanisms underlying this remain elusive, and proteins involved in the
control of pancreatic cancer cell motility are not fully characterized. In this
study, we find that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a member of the class II HDAC 
family, is highly expressed at both protein and mRNA levels in human pancreatic
cancer tissues. HDAC6 does not obviously affect pancreatic cancer cell
proliferation or cell cycle progression. Instead, it significantly promotes the
motility of pancreatic cancer cells. Further studies reveal that HDAC6 interacts 
with cytoplasmic linker protein 170 (CLIP-170) and that these two proteins
function together to stimulate the migration of pancreatic cancer cells. These
findings provide mechanistic insight into the progression of pancreatic cancer
and suggest HDAC6 as a potential target for the management of this malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3967059
PMID: 24474193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Glia. 2014 Apr;62(4):535-47. doi: 10.1002/glia.22624. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

HDAC6 inhibition results in tau acetylation and modulates tau phosphorylation and
degradation in oligodendrocytes.

Noack M(1), Leyk J, Richter-Landsberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Molecular Neurobiology, University of Oldenburg,
D-26111, Oldenburg, Germany.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a unique member of the HDAC family. It is
localized within the cytoplasm and has unique substrate specificities for
nonhistone proteins, such as a-tubulin. Furthermore, it plays a major role in
protein aggregate formation and recently was demonstrated to interact with the
microtubule associated protein tau and tau was identified as a possible substrate
for HDAC6 in neurons. This study was undertaken to investigate whether HDAC6 is
present in oligodendrocytes and whether it is involved in tubulin and tau
acetylation in these cells. We show for the first time that HDAC6 is expressed in
cultured rat brain oligodendrocytes. Its inhibition by the specific HDAC6
inhibitor tubastatin A (TST) leads to morphological alterations, microtubule
bundling, and tubulin acetylation, and changes in tau-isoform expression and
phosphorylation. Furthermore, the microtubule binding activity of tau was
reduced. Using the oligodendroglial cell lines OLN-t40 and OLN-t44, which were
genetically engineered to express either the longest human tau isoform with four 
microtubule binding repeats (4R-tau), or the shortest tau isoform with three
repeats (3R-tau), respectively, we demonstrate that tau is acetylated by HDAC6
within the 4R-binding domain. Tau acetylation reduced its turnover rate and
acetylated tau was degraded slower in these cells. TST and shRNA-mediated
knockdown of HDAC6 in oligodendroglia cells caused an increase in pathological
hyperphosphorylated tau detectable with the 12E8 antibody. Hence HDAC6 and
dysregulation of the deacetylation and acetylation process in oligodendrocytes
may contribute to diseases with oligodendroglial pathology.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24464872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):6404-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.501205. Epub 2014 
Jan 23.

Polycystin-1 negatively regulates Polycystin-2 expression via the
aggresome/autophagosome pathway.

Cebotaru V(1), Cebotaru L, Kim H, Chiaravalli M, Boletta A, Qian F, Guggino WB.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine and.

Mutations of the PKD1 and PKD2 genes, encoding polycystin-1 (PC1) and
polycystin-2 (PC2), respectively, lead to autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease. Interestingly, up-regulation or down-regulation of PKD1 or PKD2 leads to
polycystic kidney disease in animal models, but their interrelations are not
completely understood. We show here that full-length PC1 that interacts with PC2 
via a C-terminal coiled-coil domain regulates PC2 expression in vivo and in vitro
by down-regulating PC2 expression in a dose-dependent manner. Expression of the
pathogenic mutant R4227X, which lacks the C-terminal coiled-coil domain, failed
to down-regulate PC2 expression, suggesting that PC1-PC2 interaction is necessary
for PC2 regulation. The proteasome and autophagy are two pathways that control
protein degradation. Proteins that are not degraded by proteasomes precipitate in
the cytoplasm and are transported via histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) toward the
aggresomes. We found that HDAC6 binds to PC2 and that expression of full-length
PC1 accelerates the transport of the HDAC6-PC2 complex toward aggresomes, whereas
expression of the R4227X mutant fails to do so. Aggresomes are engulfed by
autophagosomes, which then fuse with the lysosome for degradation; this process
is also known as autophagy. We have now shown that PC1 overexpression leads to
increased degradation of PC2 via autophagy. Interestingly, PC1 does not activate 
autophagy generally. Thus, we have now uncovered a new pathway suggesting that
when PC1 is expressed, PC2 that is not bound to PC1 is directed to aggresomes and
subsequently degraded via autophagy, a control mechanism that may play a role in 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3945307
PMID: 24459142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014 Mar;22(3):490-8. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2013.12.016. 
Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Primary cilia disassembly down-regulates mechanosensitive hedgehog signalling: a 
feedback mechanism controlling ADAMTS-5 expression in chondrocytes.

Thompson CL(1), Chapple JP(2), Knight MM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Material Sciences,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK; Centre for Endocrinology, William
Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. Electronic address:
clare.l.thompson@qmul.ac.uk. (2)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research
Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK. Electronic address: j.p.chapple@qmul.ac.uk.
(3)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Material Sciences,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. Electronic address:
m.m.knight@qmul.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Hedgehog signalling is mediated by the primary cilium and promotes
cartilage degeneration in osteoarthritis. Primary cilia are influenced by
pathological stimuli and cilia length and prevalence are increased in
osteoarthritic cartilage. This study aims to investigate the relationship between
mechanical loading, hedgehog signalling and cilia disassembly in articular
chondrocytes.
METHODS: Primary bovine articular chondrocytes were subjected to cyclic tensile
strain (CTS; 0.33 Hz, 10% or 20% strain). Hedgehog pathway activation (Ptch1,
Gli1) and A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase with Thrombospondin Motifs 5
(ADAMTS-5) expression were assessed by real-time PCR. A chondrocyte cell line
generated from the Tg737(ORPK) mouse was used to investigate the role of the
cilium in this response. Cilia length and prevalence were quantified by
immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: Mechanical strain upregulates Indian hedgehog expression and activates
hedgehog signalling. Ptch1, Gli1 and ADAMTS-5 expression were increased following
10% CTS, but not 20% CTS. Pathway activation requires a functioning primary
cilium and is not observed in Tg737(ORPK) cells lacking cilia. Mechanical loading
significantly reduced cilium length such that cilia became progressively shorter 
with increasing strain magnitude. Inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a 
tubulin deacetylase, prevented cilia disassembly and restored mechanosensitive
hedgehog signalling and ADAMTS-5 expression at 20% CTS.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates for the first time that mechanical loading
activates primary cilia-mediated hedgehog signalling and ADAMTS-5 expression in
adult articular chondrocytes, but that this response is lost at high strains due 
to HDAC6-mediated cilia disassembly. The study provides new mechanistic insight
into the role of primary cilia and mechanical loading in articular cartilage.

Copyright © 2014 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3988976
PMID: 24457103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Am J Pathol. 2014 Mar;184(3):600-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.11.027. Epub 2014 
Jan 13.

HDAC6 is overexpressed in cystic cholangiocytes and its inhibition reduces
cystogenesis.

Gradilone SA(1), Habringer S(2), Masyuk TV(2), Howard BN(2), Masyuk AI(2),
Larusso NF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. Electronic
address: gradilone.sergio@mayo.edu. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota. Electronic address: larusso.nicholas@mayo.edu.

Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is a member of the cholangiopathies, a group of
liver diseases in which cholangiocytes, the epithelia lining of the biliary tree,
are the target cells. PLDs are caused by mutations in genes involved in
intracellular signaling pathways, cell cycle regulation, and ciliogenesis, among 
others. We previously showed that cystic cholangiocytes have abnormal cell cycle 
profiles and malfunctioning cilia. Because histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) plays an
important role in both cell cycle regulation and ciliary disassembly, we examined
the role of HDAC6 in hepatic cystogenesis. HDAC6 protein was increased sixfold in
cystic liver tissue and in cultured cholangiocytes isolated from both PCK rats
(an animal model of PLD) and humans with PLD. Furthermore, pharmacological
inhibition of HDAC6 by Tubastatin-A, Tubacin, and ACY-1215 decreased
proliferation of cystic cholangiocytes in a dose- and time-dependent manner, and 
inhibited cyst growth in three-dimensional cultures. Importantly, ACY-1215
administered to PCK rats diminished liver cyst development and fibrosis. In
summary, we show that HDAC6 is overexpressed in cystic cholangiocytes both
in vitro and in vivo, and its pharmacological inhibition reduces cholangiocyte
proliferation and cyst growth. These data suggest that HDAC6 may represent a
potential novel therapeutic target for cases of PLD.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3936326
PMID: 24434010  [PubMed - in process]


289. Drug Discov Ther. 2013 Dec;7(6):233-42.

HDAC6: physiological function and its selective inhibitors for cancer treatment.

Yang PH(1), Zhang L, Zhang YJ, Zhang J, Xu WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong
University, Ji'nan, Shandong, China.

Acetylation and deacetylation of histones are important in regulating gene
expression and play a key role in modification of gene transcription. Specific
HDACs isoforms can be regarded as a target for cancer therapy avoiding
side-effects, HDAC6 with a unique physiological function and structure has become
a hot issue recently. The unique isoform HDAC6 is involved in tumorigenesis,
development and metastasis through tubulin, HSP90, invasin and ubiquitin-protein.
Here we review the structure elements, biological function, and recent selective 
inhibitors of HDAC6, and study the structure-activity and structure-selectivity
relationship.

PMID: 24423654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. ChemMedChem. 2014 Mar;9(3):657-64. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300414. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Design, synthesis, and biological activity of NCC149 derivatives as histone
deacetylase 8-selective inhibitors.

Suzuki T(1), Muto N, Bando M, Itoh Y, Masaki A, Ri M, Ota Y, Nakagawa H, Iida S, 
Shirahige K, Miyata N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 
13 Taishogun, Nishitakatsukasa-cho, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8334 (Japan); PRESTO
(Japan) Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama
332-0012 (Japan). suzukit@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp.

We recently discovered
N-hydroxy-3-[1-(phenylthio)methyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl]benzamide (NCC149) as a
potent and selective histone deacetylase 8 (HDAC8) inhibitor from a 151-member
triazole compound library using a click chemistry approach. In this work, we
present a series of NCC149 derivatives bearing various aromatic linkers that were
designed and synthesized as HDAC8-selective inhibitors. A series of in vitro
assays were used to evaluate the newly synthesized compounds, four of which
showed HDAC8 inhibitory activity similar to that of NCC149, and one of which
displayed HDAC8 selectivity superior to that of NCC149. In addition, these top
four compounds induced the increase of acetylated cohesin (an HDAC8 substrate) in
HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner, indicating inhibition of HDAC8 in the
cells. While none of these compounds enhanced the acetylation of H3K9 (a
substrate of HDAC1 and 2), only one compound refrained from increasing a-tubulin 
acetylation, a substrate of HDAC6, indicating that this compound is more
selective for HDAC8 than the other derivatives. Furthermore, this HDAC8-selective
inhibitor suppressed the growth of T-cell lymphoma cells more potently than did
NCC149. These findings are useful for the further development of HDAC8-selective 
inhibitors.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24403121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Mar;9(3):973-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1889. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

ß-catenin deacetylation is essential for WNT-induced proliferation of breast
cancer cells.

Wang SH(1), Li N(1), Wei Y(1), Li QR(1), Yu ZP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School of 
Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.

Deregulation of the WNT signaling pathway is associated with the development and 
progression of breast cancer. ß-catenin mutations have been found to
constitutively activate ß-catenin-T-cell factor (TCF) signaling in other types of
cancer. ß-catenin acetylation regulates ß-catenin-TCF4 interaction in WNT
signaling, but it remains unknown whether the acetylation of ß-catenin is
involved in WNT-induced proliferation of breast cancer cells. In this study, a
lower level of acetylated ß-catenin (K345) was observed in breast cancer tissues.
WNT3A stimulated the downregulation of ß-catenin acetylation and promoted the
proliferation of MCF7 cells. The K345Q mutation in ß-catenin inhibited
WNT-induced cell growth and axin2/TCF7 upregulation in breast cancer cells. By
contrast, K345R mutants could mimic deacetylated ß-catenin to generate the
WNT-elicited phenotype. Additionally, the acetylation of ß-catenin may prime
ß-catenin for phosphorylation. Further investigation revealed that the
deacetylase HDAC6 was responsible for WNT-induced deacetylation of ß-catenin in
breast cancer cells. In conclusion, the epigenetic modification of ß-catenin may 
be essential for WNT signaling in breast cancer progression, and blocking the
occurrence of ß-catenin acetylation may provide a novel therapeutic approach for 
breast cancer.

PMID: 24401947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Autophagy. 2014 Mar;10(3):532-4. doi: 10.4161/auto.27641. Epub 2014 Jan 7.

"Ciliophagy": The consumption of cilia components by autophagy.

Cloonan SM(1), Lam HC(2), Ryter SW(2), Choi AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine; Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School; Boston, MA USA; Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine;
Weill Cornell Medical College; New York, NY USA. (2)Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine; Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School; 
Boston, MA USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) involves aberrant airway
inflammatory responses to cigarette smoke (CS) associated with respiratory
epithelial cell cilia shortening and impaired mucociliary clearance (MCC). The
underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms for CS-associated cilia shortening
have remained incompletely understood. We have previously demonstrated increased 
autophagy in the lungs of COPD patients; however, whether or not this process is 
selective for specific autophagic targets in the lung was not elucidated. Based
on observations that increased morphological and biochemical indicators of
autophagy correlate with cilia shortening in our models, we posited that
autophagy might regulate cilia length in response to CS in the lung. We
demonstrate that CS-induced cilia shortening occurs through an
autophagy-dependent mechanism mediated by the deacetylase HDAC6 (histone
deacetylase 6). Autophagy-impaired (Becn1(+/-), map1lc3b(-/-), or Hdac6(-/Y))
mice resist CS-induced cilia shortening. Furthermore, cilia components are
identified as autophagic substrates during CS exposure. Assessment of airway
cilia function using a 3D MCC assay demonstrates that Becn1(+/-), map1lc3b(-/-), 
and Hdac6(-/Y) mice or mice injected with the HDAC6 inhibitor tubastatin A are
protected from CS-associated mucociliary dysfunction. We concluded that an
autophagy-dependent pathway regulates cilia length during CS exposure, which
identifies new pathways and targets in COPD.

PMCID: PMC4077895
PMID: 24401596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1839(2):71-87. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.12.006. 
Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Regulatory role of the 90-kDa-heat-shock protein (Hsp90) and associated factors
on gene expression.

Erlejman AG(1), Lagadari M(2), Toneatto J(3), Piwien-Pilipuk G(3), Galigniana
MD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires/IQUIBICEN, Argentina. (2)Laboratorio de Receptores
Nucleares, Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental/CONICET, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (3)Laboratorio de Arquitectura Nuclear, Instituto de Biología y
Medicina Experimental/CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (4)Departamento de
Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de
Buenos Aires/IQUIBICEN, Argentina; Laboratorio de Receptores Nucleares, Instituto
de Biología y Medicina Experimental/CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic 
address: mgali@qb.fcen.uba.ar.

The term molecular chaperone was first used to describe the ability of
nucleoplasmin to prevent the aggregation of histones with DNA during the assembly
of nucleosomes. Subsequently, the name was extended to proteins that mediate the 
post-translational assembly of oligomeric complexes protecting them from
denaturation and/or aggregation. Hsp90 is a 90-kDa molecular chaperone that
represents the major soluble protein of the cell. In contrast to most
conventional chaperones, Hsp90 functions as a refined sensor of protein function 
and its principal role in the cell is to facilitate biological activity to
properly folded client proteins that already have a preserved tertiary structure.
Consequently, Hsp90 is related to basic cell functions such as cytoplasmic
transport of soluble proteins, translocation of client proteins to organelles,
and regulation of the biological activity of key signaling factors such as
protein kinases, ubiquitin ligases, steroid receptors, cell cycle regulators, and
transcription factors. A growing amount of evidence links the protective action
of this molecular chaperone to mechanisms related to posttranslational
modifications of soluble nuclear factors as well as histones. In this article, we
discuss some aspects of the regulatory action of Hsp90 on transcriptional
regulation and how this effect could have impacted genetic assimilation mechanism
in some organisms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24389346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cell Signal. 2014 Feb;26(2):363-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.11.036. Epub 2013 
Dec 2.

HDAC6 mediates the acetylation of TRIM50.

Fusco C(1), Micale L(1), Augello B(1), Mandriani B(1), Pellico MT(1), De Nittis
P(1), Calcagnì A(2), Monti M(3), Cozzolino F(3), Pucci P(3), Merla G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della Sofferenza Hospital, 71013
San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (2)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della 
Sofferenza Hospital, 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; Telethon Institute of
Genetics and Medicine, Via P. Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy. (3)CEINGE
Advanced Biotechnology and Department of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Federico II University, 80131 Napoli, Italy. (4)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo Della Sofferenza Hospital, 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; Scienze
della Riproduzione e dello Sviluppo, University of Trieste, Italy. Electronic
address: g.merla@operapadrepio.it.

The E3 Ubiquitin ligase TRIM50 promotes the formation and clearance of
aggresome-associated polyubiquitinated proteins through HDAC6 interaction, a
tubulin specific deacetylase that regulates microtubule-dependent aggresome
formation. In this report we showed that TRIM50 is a target of HDAC6 with Lys-372
as a critical residue for acetylation. We identified p300 and PCAF as two TRIM50 
acetyltransferases and we further showed that a balance between ubiquitination
and acetylation regulates TRIM50 degradation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24308962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Med Chem. 2013 Dec 27;56(24):9969-81. doi: 10.1021/jm401225q. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationship of 3-hydroxypyridine-2-thione-based
histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Sodji QH(1), Patil V, Kornacki JR, Mrksich M, Oyelere AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Parker H. Petit Institute for
Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta, Georgia
30332-0400, United States.

We previously identified 3-hydroxypyridine-2-thione (3HPT) as a novel zinc
binding group for histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition. Early structure-activity
relationship (SAR) studies led to various small molecules possessing selective
inhibitory activity against HDAC6 or HDAC8 but devoid of HDAC1 inhibition. To
delineate further the depth of the SAR of 3HPT-derived HDAC inhibitors (HDACi),
we have extended the SAR studies to include the linker region and the surface
recognition group to optimize the HDAC inhibition. The current efforts resulted
in the identification of two lead compounds, 10d and 14e, with potent HDAC6 and
HDAC8 activities that are inactive against HDAC1. These new HDACi possess
anticancer activities against various cancer cell lines including Jurkat J.<U+03B3>1 for
which SAHA and the previously disclosed 3HPT-derived HDACi were inactive.

PMCID: PMC4029159
PMID: 24304348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Elife. 2013 Dec 3;2:e01557. doi: 10.7554/eLife.01557.

Hdac6 regulates Tip60-p400 function in stem cells.

Chen PB(1), Hung JH, Hickman TL, Coles AH, Carey JF, Weng Z, Chu F, Fazzio TG.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, United States.

In embryonic stem cells (ESCs), the Tip60 histone acetyltransferase activates
genes required for proliferation and silences genes that promote differentiation.
Here we show that the class II histone deacetylase Hdac6 co-purifies with
Tip60-p400 complex from ESCs. Hdac6 is necessary for regulation of most
Tip60-p400 target genes, particularly those repressed by the complex. Unlike
differentiated cells, where Hdac6 is mainly cytoplasmic, Hdac6 is largely nuclear
in ESCs, neural stem cells (NSCs), and some cancer cell lines, and interacts with
Tip60-p400 in each. Hdac6 localizes to promoters bound by Tip60-p400 in ESCs,
binding downstream of transcription start sites. Surprisingly, Hdac6 does not
appear to deacetylate histones, but rather is required for Tip60-p400 binding to 
many of its target genes. Finally, we find that, like canonical subunits of
Tip60-p400, Hdac6 is necessary for robust ESC differentiation. These data suggest
that Hdac6 plays a major role in the modulation of Tip60-p400 function in stem
cells. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01557.001.

PMCID: PMC3843111
PMID: 24302573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Protein Cell. 2013 Nov 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Histone deacetylase 6 and cytoplasmic linker protein 170 function together to
regulate the motility of pancreatic cancer cells.

Li D(1), Sun X, Zhang L, Yan B, Xie S, Liu R, Liu M, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, 300071, China.

Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease with the worst prognosis among all the
major human malignancies. The propensity to rapidly metastasize contributes
significantly to the highly aggressive feature of pancreatic cancer. The
molecular mechanisms underlying this remain elusive, and proteins involved in the
control of pancreatic cancer cell motility are not fully characterized. In this
study, we find that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a member of the class II HDAC 
family, is highly expressed at both protein and mRNA levels in human pancreatic
cancer tissues. HDAC6 does not obviously affect pancreatic cancer cell
proliferation or cell cycle progression. Instead, it significantly promotes the
motility of pancreatic cancer cells. Further studies reveal that HDAC6 interacts 
with cytoplasmic linker protein 170 (CLIP-170) and that these two proteins
function together to stimulate the migration of pancreatic cancer cells. These
findings provide mechanistic insight into the progression of pancreatic cancer
and suggest HDAC6 as a potential target for the management of this malignancy.

PMID: 24264142  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


298. J Virol. 2014 Jan;88(2):1281-92. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02665-13. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Histone deacetylase classes I and II regulate Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus reactivation.

Shin HJ(1), DeCotiis J, Giron M, Palmeri D, Lukac DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey Medical School
and Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Rutgers Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey, USA.

In primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) cells infected with latent Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), the promoter of the viral lytic switch
gene, Rta, is organized into bivalent chromatin, similar to cellular
developmental switch genes. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACis)
reactivate latent KSHV and dramatically remodel the viral genome topology and
chromatin architecture. However, reactivation is not uniform across a population 
of infected cells. We sought to identify an HDACi cocktail that would uniformly
reactivate KSHV and reveal the regulatory HDACs. Using HDACis with various
specificities, we found that class I HDACis were sufficient to reactivate the
virus but differed in potency. Valproic acid (VPA) was the most effective HDACi, 
inducing lytic cycle gene expression in 75% of cells, while trichostatin A (TSA) 
induced less widespread lytic gene expression and inhibited VPA-stimulated
reactivation. VPA was only slightly superior to TSA in inducing histone
acetylation of Rta's promoter, but only VPA induced significant production of
infectious virus, suggesting that HDAC regulation after Rta expression has a
dramatic effect on reactivation progression. Ectopic HDACs 1, 3, and 6 inhibited 
TPA-stimulated KSHV reactivation. Surprisingly, ectopic HDACs 1 and 6 stimulated 
reactivation independently, suggesting that the stoichiometries of HDAC complexes
are critical for the switch. Tubacin, a specific inhibitor of the
ubiquitin-binding, proautophagic HDAC6, also inhibited VPA-stimulated
reactivation. Immunofluorescence indicated that HDAC6 is expressed diffusely
throughout latently infected cells, but its expression level and nuclear
localization is increased during reactivation. Overall, our data suggest that
inhibition of HDAC classes I and IIa and maintenance of HDAC6 (IIb) activity are 
required for optimal KSHV reactivation.

PMCID: PMC3911646
PMID: 24227836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. ChemMedChem. 2014 Mar;9(3):638-48. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300297. Epub 2013 Nov 12.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors with enhanced enzymatic inhibition effects and
potent in vitro and in vivo antitumor activities.

Zhang L(1), Zhang Y, Chou CJ, Inks ES, Wang X, Li X, Hou J, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, School of Medicine, Qingdao University, 308 Dengzhou
Road, Qingdao, Shandong 266071 (China). lei@qdu.edu.cn.

In the present work, a series of small molecules were designed and synthesized
based on structural optimization. A significant improvement in the enzyme
inhibitory activity of these compounds was discovered. Moreover, the tested
compounds have moderate preference for class I HDACs over HDAC6, as demonstrated 
by enzyme selectivity assays. In vitro antiproliferation assay results show that 
representative compounds can selectively inhibit the growth of non-solid lymphoma
and leukemic cells such as U937, K562, and HL60. In the in vivo antitumor assay, 
(S)-4-(2-(5-(dimethylamino)naphthalene-1-sulfonamido)-2-phenylacetamido)-N-hydrox
ybenzamide (D17) showed better performance than SAHA in blocking U937 tumor
growth. Western blot analysis revealed that representative molecules can block
the function of both class I HDACs and HDAC6. More importantly, our western blot 
results reveal that the levels of some oncogenic proteins (p-Akt in the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signal pathway, c-Raf and p-Erk in the MAPK signal pathway) were
dramatically down-regulated by our compounds in the U937 cell line rather than
MDA-MB-231 cells. This distinction in cellular mechanism might be an important
reason why the U937 cell line was found to more sensitive to our HDAC inhibitors 
than the MDA-MB-231 cell line.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3947464
PMID: 24227760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 29;441(4):970-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 Nov 9.

LC3B-II deacetylation by histone deacetylase 6 is involved in
serum-starvation-induced autophagic degradation.

Liu KP(1), Zhou D, Ouyang DY, Xu LH, Wang Y, Wang LX, Pan H, He XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan
University, Guangzhou 510630, China.

Autophagy is a conserved mechanism for controlling the degradation of misfolded
proteins and damaged organelles in eukaryotes and can be induced by nutrient
withdrawal, including serum starvation. Although differential acetylation of
autophagy-related proteins has been reported to be involved in autophagic flux,
the regulation of acetylated microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3)
is incompletely understood. In this study, we found that the acetylation levels
of phosphotidylethanolamine (PE)-conjugated LC3B (LC3B-II), which is a critical
component of double-membrane autophagosome, were profoundly decreased in HeLa
cells upon autophagy induction by serum starvation. Pretreatment with lysosomal
inhibitor chloroquine did not attenuate such deacetylation. Under normal culture 
medium, we observed increased levels of acetylated LC3B-II in cells treated with 
tubacin, a specific inhibitor of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). However, tubacin 
only partially suppressed serum-starvation-induced LC3B-II deacetylation,
suggesting that HDAC6 is not the only deacetylase acting on LC3B-II during
serum-starvation-induced autophagy. Interestingly, tubacin-induced increase in
LC3B-II acetylation was associated with p62/SQSTM1 accumulation upon serum
starvation. HDAC6 knockdown did not influence autophagosome formation but
resulted in impaired degradation of p62/SQSTM1 during serum starvation.
Collectively, our data indicated that LC3B-II deacetylation, which was partly
mediated by HDAC6, is involved in autophagic degradation during serum starvation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24220335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Clin Invest. 2013 Nov;123(11):4612-26.

A microenvironment-mediated c-Myc/miR-548m/HDAC6 amplification loop in
non-Hodgkin B cell lymphomas.

Lwin T, Zhao X, Cheng F, Zhang X, Huang A, Shah B, Zhang Y, Moscinski LC, Choi
YS, Kozikowski AP, Bradner JE, Dalton WS, Sotomayor E, Tao J.

A dynamic interaction occurs between the lymphoma cell and its microenvironment, 
with each profoundly influencing the behavior of the other. Here, using a
clonogenic coculture growth system and a xenograft mouse model, we demonstrated
that adhesion of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and other non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells 
to lymphoma stromal cells confers drug resistance, clonogenicity, and induction
of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Furthermore, stroma triggered a c-Myc/miR-548m 
feed-forward loop, linking sustained c-Myc activation, miR-548m downregulation,
and subsequent HDAC6 upregulation and stroma-mediated cell survival and lymphoma 
progression in lymphoma cell lines, primary MCL and other B cell lymphoma cell
lines. Treatment with an HDAC6-selective inhibitor alone or in synergy with a
c-Myc inhibitor enhanced cell death, abolished cell adhesionmediated drug
resistance, and suppressed clonogenicity and lymphoma growth ex vivo and in vivo.
Together, these data suggest that the lymphoma-stroma interaction in the lymphoma
microenvironment directly impacts the biology of lymphoma through genetic and
epigenetic regulation, with HDAC6 and c-Myc as potential therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3809771
PMID: 24216476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):5212-30. doi: 10.1172/JCI69636. Epub 2013 Nov 8.

Histone deacetylase 6-mediated selective autophagy regulates COPD-associated
cilia dysfunction.

Lam HC, Cloonan SM, Bhashyam AR, Haspel JA, Singh A, Sathirapongsasuti JF, Cervo 
M, Yao H, Chung AL, Mizumura K, An CH, Shan B, Franks JM, Haley KJ, Owen CA,
Tesfaigzi Y, Washko GR, Quackenbush J, Silverman EK, Rahman I, Kim HP, Mahmood A,
Biswal SS, Ryter SW, Choi AM.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) involves aberrant airway
inflammatory responses to cigarette smoke (CS) that are associated with
epithelial cell dysfunction, cilia shortening, and mucociliary clearance
disruption. Exposure to CS reduced cilia length and induced autophagy in vivo and
in differentiated mouse tracheal epithelial cells (MTECs). Autophagy-impaired
(Becn1+/- or Map1lc3B-/-) mice and MTECs resisted CS-induced cilia shortening.
Furthermore, CS increased the autophagic turnover of ciliary proteins, indicating
that autophagy may regulate cilia homeostasis. We identified cytosolic
deacetylase HDAC6 as a critical regulator of autophagy-mediated cilia shortening 
during CS exposure. Mice bearing an X chromosome deletion of Hdac6 (Hdac6-/Y) and
MTECs from these mice had reduced autophagy and were protected from CS-induced
cilia shortening. Autophagy-impaired Becn1-/-, Map1lc3B-/-, and Hdac6-/Y mice or 
mice injected with an HDAC6 inhibitor were protected from CS-induced mucociliary 
clearance (MCC) disruption. MCC was preserved in mice given the chemical
chaperone 4-phenylbutyric acid, but was disrupted in mice lacking the
transcription factor NRF2, suggesting that oxidative stress and altered
proteostasis contribute to the disruption of MCC. Analysis of human COPD
specimens revealed epigenetic deregulation of HDAC6 by hypomethylation and
increased protein expression in the airways. We conclude that an
autophagy-dependent pathway regulates cilia length during CS exposure and has
potential as a therapeutic target for COPD.

PMCID: PMC3859407
PMID: 24200693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2014 Feb;34(1):26-37. doi:
10.3109/10799893.2013.848891. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Curcumin attenuates amyloid-ß-induced tau hyperphosphorylation in human
neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells involving PTEN/Akt/GSK-3ß signaling pathway.

Huang HC(1), Tang D, Xu K, Jiang ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Functional Foods, Beijing
Union University , Beijing , People's Republic of China .

Accumulated amyloid-ß peptide (Aß) and hyperphosphorylated tau proteins are two
hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Increasing evidence suggests that Aß
induces tau hyperphosphorylation in AD pathology, but the signaling pathway is
not completely understood. Inhibiting Aß-induced cellular signaling is beneficent
to AD treatment. In this study, cellular signaling of tau phosphorylation induced
by Aß and the inhibiting effects of curcumin on this signaling were investigated 
on human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. The results indicated that curcumin
inhibits Aß-induced tau phosphorylation at Thr231 and Ser396, over-expression of 
HDAC6, and decrease in phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) at
Ser9. However, the protective effect of curcumin on dephosphorylation of GSK-3ß
induced by Aß is not directly related to cellular oxidative stress. Curcumin
depresses Aß-induced down-regulation of phosphorylations of Akt at Thr308 and
Ser473 and 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 at Ser241, implying that
second message PIP3 involves curcumin-protective cell signaling. Furthermore,
insulin receptor/phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase pathway, as a regulatory
signaling of second message PIP3, does not participate in Aß-induced deactivation
of Akt (dephosphorylation at Thr308 and Ser473). However, Aß results in
over-expression of Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), a negative regulator of
PIP3. Curcumin depresses Aß-induced up-regulation of PTEN induced by Aß. These
results imply that curcumin inhibits Aß-induced tau hyperphosphorylation
involving PTEN/Akt/GSK-3ß pathway.

PMID: 24188406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 30;33(44):17350-62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4901-12.2013.

Boosting regulatory T cells limits neuroinflammation in permanent cortical
stroke.

Liesz A(1), Zhou W, Na SY, Hämmerling GJ, Garbi N, Karcher S, Mracsko E, Backs J,
Rivest S, Veltkamp R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany, 
Department of Molecular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany, Institutes of Molecular Medicine and Experimental
Immunology, University of Bonn, 53105 Bonn, Germany, Laboratory for Cardiac
Epigenetics, Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, and German
Centre for Cardiovascular Research, Heidelberg University Research Center for
Cardiomyopathies and Arrhythmias-From Genes to Translation, Partner Site
Heidelberg/Mannheim, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany, and Laboratory of Endocrinology
and Genomics, CHUQ Research Center and Department of Molecular Medicine, Laval
University, Québec City, Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Inflammatory mechanisms contribute substantially to secondary tissue injury after
brain ischemia. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are key endogenous modulators of
postischemic neuroinflammation. We investigated the potential of histone
deacetylase inhibition (HDACi) to enhance Treg potency for experimental stroke in
mice. HDACi using trichostatin A increased the number of Tregs and boosted their 
immunosuppressive capacity and interleukin (IL)-10 expression. In vivo treatment 
reduced infarct volumes and behavioral deficits after cortical brain ischemia,
attenuated cerebral proinflammatory cytokine expression, and increased numbers of
brain-invading Tregs. A similar effect was obtained using tubastatin, a specific 
inhibitor of HDAC6 and a key HDAC in Foxp3 regulation. The neuroprotective effect
of HDACi depended on the presence of Foxp3(+) Tregs, and in vivo and in vitro
studies showed that the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 was their main mediator.
In summary, modulation of Treg function by HDACi is a novel and potent target to 
intervene at the center of neuroinflammation. Furthermore, this novel concept of 
modulating endogenous immune mechanisms might be translated to a broad spectrum
of diseases, including primary neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative disorders.

PMID: 24174668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Int J Oncol. 2014 Jan;44(1):211-21. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2150. Epub 2013 Oct 25.

Comprehensive genomic analyses of a metastatic colon cancer to the lung by whole 
exome sequencing and gene expression analysis.

Fang LT(1), Lee S, Choi H, Kim HK, Jew G, Kang HC, Chen L, Jablons D, Kim IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

We performed whole exome sequencing and gene expression analysis on a metastatic 
colon cancer to the lung, along with the adjacent normal tissue of the lung.
Whole exome sequencing uncovered 71 high-confidence non-synonymous mutations. We 
selected 16 mutation candidates, and 13 out of 16 mutations were validated by
targeted deep sequencing using the Ion Torrent PGM customized AmpliSeq panel. By 
integrating mutation, copy number and gene expression microarray data, we
identified a JAZF1 mutation with a gain-of-copy, suggesting its oncogenic
potential for the lung metastasis from colon cancer. Our pathway analyses showed 
that the identified mutations closely reflected characteristics of the metastatic
site (lung) while mRNA gene expression patterns kept genetic information of its
primary tumor (colon). The most significant gene expression network was the
'Colorectal Cancer Metastasis Signaling', containing 6 (ADCY2, ADCY9, APC, GNB5, 
K-ras and LRP6) out of the 71 mutated genes. Some of these mutated genes (ADCY9, 
ADCY2, GNB5, K-ras, HDAC6 and ARHGEF17) also belong to the 'Phospholipase C
Signaling' network, which suggests that this pathway and its mutated genes may
contribute to a lung metastasis from colon cancer.

PMID: 24172857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Nat Prod. 2013 Nov 22;76(11):2026-33. doi: 10.1021/np400198r. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Santacruzamate A, a potent and selective histone deacetylase inhibitor from the
Panamanian marine cyanobacterium cf. Symploca sp.

Pavlik CM(1), Wong CY, Ononye S, Lopez DD, Engene N, McPhail KL, Gerwick WH,
Balunas MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicinal Chemistry, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Connecticut , Storrs, Connecticut 06269, United States.

A dark brown tuft-forming cyanobacterium, morphologically resembling the genus
Symploca, was collected during an expedition to the Coiba National Park, a UNESCO
World Heritage Site on the Pacific coast of Panama. Phylogenetic analysis of its 
16S rRNA gene sequence indicated that it is 4.5% divergent from the type strain
for Symploca and thus is likely a new genus. Fractionation of the crude extract
led to the isolation of a new cytotoxin, designated santacruzamate A (1), which
has several structural features in common with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
[(2), SAHA, trade name Vorinostat], a clinically approved histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor used to treat refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Recognition 
of the structural similarly of 1 and SAHA led to the characterization of
santacruzamate A as a picomolar level selective inhibitor of HDAC2, a Class I
HDAC, with relatively little inhibition of HDAC4 or HDAC6, both Class II HDACs.
As a result, chemical syntheses of santacruzamate A as well as a structurally
intriguing hybrid molecule, which blends aspects of both agents (1 and 2), were
achieved and evaluated for their HDAC activity and specificity.

PMCID: PMC3879121
PMID: 24164245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Cancer. 2013 Oct 24;12(1):128. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-128.

A novel Hsp90 inhibitor AT13387 induces senescence in EBV-positive nasopharyngeal
carcinoma cells and suppresses tumor formation.

Chan KC, Ting CM, Chan PS, Lo MC, Lo KW, Curry JE, Smyth T, Lee AW, Ng WT, Tsao
GS, Wong RN, Lung ML, Mak NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, P,R, China.
nkmak@hkbu.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an epithelial malignancy strongly
associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). AT13387 is a novel heat shock protein
90 (Hsp90) inhibitor, which inhibits the chaperone function of Hsp90 and reduces 
expression of Hsp90-dependent client oncoproteins. This study aimed to evaluate
both the in vitro and in vivo antitumor effects of AT13387 in the EBV-positive
NPC cell line C666-1.
RESULTS: Our results showed that AT13387 inhibited C666-1 cell growth and induced
cellular senescence with the downregulation of multiple Hsp90 client oncoproteins
EGFR, AKT, CDK4, and restored the protein expression of negative cell cycle
regulator p27. We also studied the ability of AT13387 to restore p27 expression
by downregulation of AKT and the p27 ubiquitin mediator, Skp2, using AKT
inhibitor and Skp2 siRNA. In the functional study, AT13387 inhibited cell
migration with downregulation of a cell migration regulator, HDAC6, and increased
the acetylation and stabilization of a-tubulin. We also examined the effect of
AT13387 on putative cancer stem cells (CSC) by 3-D tumor sphere formation assay. 
AT13387 effectively reduced both the number and size of C666-1 tumor spheres with
decreased expression of NPC CSC-like markers CD44 and SOX2. In the in vivo study,
AT13387 significantly suppressed tumor formation in C666-1 NPC xenografts.
CONCLUSION: AT13387 suppressed cell growth, cell migration, tumor sphere
formation and induced cellular senescence on EBV-positive NPC cell line C666-1.
Also, the antitumor effect of AT13387 was demonstrated in an in vivo model. This 
study provided experimental evidence for the preclinical value of using AT13387
as an effective antitumor agent in treatment of NPC.

PMCID: PMC3834878
PMID: 24156782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Circulation. 2014 Jan 21;129(3):346-58. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.005300.
Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Activation of histone deacetylase-6 induces contractile dysfunction through
derailment of a-tubulin proteostasis in experimental and human atrial
fibrillation.

Zhang D(1), Wu CT, Qi X, Meijering RA, Hoogstra-Berends F, Tadevosyan A,
Cubukcuoglu Deniz G, Durdu S, Akar AR, Sibon OC, Nattel S, Henning RH, Brundel
BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Clinical Pharmacology (D.Z., R.A.M.M., F.H.-B., R.H.H.,
B.J.J.M.B.) and Cell Biology (O.C.M.S.), University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands; Research Center and
Department of Medicine, Montreal Heart Institute and Université de Montréal,
Montreal, QB, Canada (C.T.W., X.Y.Q., A.T., S.N.); Chang-Gung Memorial Hospital
and Chang-Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China (C.T.W.); Nyken BV,
Groningen, The Netherlands (F.-H.B.); Ankara University Biotechnology Institute, 
Ankara, Turkey (G.C.D., S.D.); Ankara University Stem Cell Institute, Ankara,
Turkey (G.C.D., S.D., A.R.A.); Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Ankara
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey (S.D., A.R.A.); and Department of
Pharmacology, McGill University, Montreal, QB, Canada (S.N.).

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is characterized by structural remodeling,
contractile dysfunction, and AF progression. Histone deacetylases (HDACs)
influence acetylation of both histones and cytosolic proteins, thereby mediating 
epigenetic regulation and influencing cell proteostasis. Because the exact
function of HDACs in AF is unknown, we investigated their role in experimental
and clinical AF models.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Tachypacing of HL-1 atrial cardiomyocytes and Drosophila
pupae hearts significantly impaired contractile function (amplitude of Ca(2+)
transients and heart wall contractions). This dysfunction was prevented by
inhibition of HDAC6 (tubacin) and sirtuins (nicotinamide). Tachypacing induced
specific activation of HDAC6, resulting in a-tubulin deacetylation,
depolymerization, and degradation by calpain. Tachypacing-induced contractile
dysfunction was completely rescued by dominant-negative HDAC6 mutants with loss
of deacetylase activity in the second catalytic domain, which bears a-tubulin
deacetylase activity. Furthermore, in vivo treatment with the HDAC6 inhibitor
tubastatin A protected atrial tachypaced dogs from electric remodeling (action
potential duration shortening, L-type Ca(2+) current reduction, AF promotion) and
cellular Ca(2+)-handling/contractile dysfunction (loss of Ca(2+) transient
amplitude, sarcomere contractility). Finally, atrial tissue from patients with AF
also showed a significant increase in HDAC6 activity and reduction in the
expression of both acetylated and total a-tubulin.
CONCLUSIONS: AF induces remodeling and loss of contractile function, at least in 
part through HDAC6 activation and subsequent derailment of a-tubulin proteostasis
and disruption of the cardiomyocyte microtubule structure. In vivo inhibition of 
HDAC6 protects against AF-related atrial remodeling, disclosing the potential of 
HDAC6 as a therapeutic target in clinical AF.

PMID: 24146251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2532. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3532.

Septins promote dendrite and axon development by negatively regulating
microtubule stability via HDAC6-mediated deacetylation.

Ageta-Ishihara N(1), Miyata T, Ohshima C, Watanabe M, Sato Y, Hamamura Y,
Higashiyama T, Mazitschek R, Bito H, Kinoshita M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Nagoya University Graduate School of Science,
Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

Neurite growth requires two guanine nucleotide-binding protein polymers of
tubulins and septins. However, whether and how those cytoskeletal systems are
coordinated was unknown. Here we show that the acute knockdown or knockout of the
pivotal septin subunit SEPT7 from cerebrocortical neurons impairs their
interhemispheric and cerebrospinal axon projections and dendritogenesis in
perinatal mice, when the microtubules are severely hyperacetylated. The resulting
hyperstabilization and growth retardation of microtubules are demonstrated in
vitro. The phenotypic similarity between SEPT7 depletion and the pharmacological 
inhibition of a-tubulin deacetylase HDAC6 reveals that HDAC6 requires SEPT7 not
for its enzymatic activity, but to associate with acetylated a-tubulin. These and
other findings indicate that septins provide a physical scaffold for HDAC6 to
achieve efficient microtubule deacetylation, thereby negatively regulating
microtubule stability to an optimal level for neuritogenesis. Our findings shed
light on the mechanisms underlying the HDAC6-mediated coupling of the two
ubiquitous cytoskeletal systems during neural development.

PMCID: PMC3826633
PMID: 24113571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Dec 15;305(12):C1211-3. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00309.2013. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

Tubulin acetylation a valuable accessory of the platelet cytoskeleton. Focus on
"Histone deacetylase 6-mediated deacetylation of a-tubulin coordinates
cytoskeletal and signaling events during platelet activation".

Sadoul K(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U823; Université Joseph Fourier-Grenoble 1; Institut Albert Bonniot,
Grenoble, France.

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Dec 15;305(12):C1230-9.

PMID: 24108865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2013 Dec;21(12):1987-96. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2013.09.008. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors increase microRNA-146a expression and enhance
negative regulation of interleukin-1ß signaling in osteoarthritis fibroblast-like
synoviocytes.

Wang JH(1), Shih KS, Wu YW, Wang AW, Yang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei 
10051, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: MiR-146a exerts negative control on inflammatory responses by
suppressing cytokine-induced expression of interleukin-1 receptor-associated
kinase-1 (IRAK1) and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6)
by impairing NF-<U+03BA>B activity and inhibiting the expression of target genes. Recent
study suggests that histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the regulation
of microRNA (miRNA) expression. Therefore, we determined whether HDAC inhibitors 
can increase miR-146a expression, thereby inhibiting interleukin-1ß
(IL-1ß)-induced signaling in osteoarthritis fibroblast-like synoviocytes
(OA-FLS).
METHOD: MiRNA expression was analyzed using real-time PCR. IL-1ß-induced
downstream signals and cytokine expression were evaluated using Western blotting 
and ELISA. Transcription factors regulating promoter activation were identified
using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: IL-1ß treatment of OA-FLS induced a mild (1.7-fold) increase in miR-146a
expression that was unable to appropriately downregulate IRAK1 and TRAF6
expression. HDAC inhibitors, SAHA (vorinostat), and LBH589 (panobinostat)
significantly (6.1- and 5.4-fold) elevated miR-146a expression by increasing the 
binding of the transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B to the miR-146a promoter, and
negatively regulated IL-1ß-induced IKK/I<U+03BA>B/p65 phosphorylation signaling and IL-6
secretion. The increase in miR-146a expression induced by the HDAC inhibitors was
prevented by transfection of miR-146a inhibitor or HDAC1 (class I HDAC), HDAC4
(class IIa HDAC), and HDAC6 (class IIb HDAC) overexpression, suggesting that they
were due to inhibition of HDAC activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that HDAC inhibitor treatment in OA-FLS
significantly increased miR-146a expression and mediated markedly negative
regulation to inhibit IL-1ß-induced signaling and cytokine secretion. Our results
indicate the potential rationale of anti-inflammatory effects for HDAC
inhibitors.

Copyright © 2013 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24107356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Dec;12(12):2709-21. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0626.
Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Molecular and biologic analysis of histone deacetylase inhibitors with diverse
specificities.

Newbold A(1), Matthews GM, Bots M, Cluse LA, Clarke CJ, Banks KM, Cullinane C,
Bolden JE, Christiansen AJ, Dickins RA, Miccolo C, Chiocca S, Kral AM, Ozerova
ND, Miller TA, Methot JL, Richon VM, Secrist JP, Minucci S, Johnstone RW.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Ricky Johnstone, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia.
ricky.johnstone@petermac.org.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are anticancer agents that induce
hyperacetylation of histones, resulting in chromatin remodeling and
transcriptional changes. In addition, nonhistone proteins, such as the chaperone 
protein Hsp90, are functionally regulated through hyperacetylation mediated by
HDACis. Histone acetylation is thought to be primarily regulated by HDACs 1, 2,
and 3, whereas the acetylation of Hsp90 has been proposed to be specifically
regulated through HDAC6. We compared the molecular and biologic effects induced
by an HDACi with broad HDAC specificity (vorinostat) with agents that
predominantly inhibited selected class I HDACs (MRLB-223 and romidepsin).
MRLB-223, a potent inhibitor of HDACs 1 and 2, killed tumor cells using the same 
apoptotic pathways as the HDAC 1, 2, 3, 6, and 8 inhibitor vorinostat. However,
vorinostat induced histone hyperacetylation and killed tumor cells more rapidly
than MRLB-223 and had greater therapeutic efficacy in vivo. FDCP-1 cells
dependent on the Hsp90 client protein Bcr-Abl for survival, were killed by all
HDACis tested, concomitant with caspase-dependent degradation of Bcr-Abl. These
studies provide evidence that inhibition of HDAC6 and degradation of Bcr-Abl
following hyperacetylation of Hsp90 is likely not a major mechanism of action of 
HDACis as had been previously posited.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 24092806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 15;288(46):33156-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472506. Epub
2013 Oct 2.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylates histone deacetylase 6 
(HDAC6) at serine 1035 to stimulate cell migration.

Williams KA(1), Zhang M, Xiang S, Hu C, Wu JY, Zhang S, Ryan M, Cox AD, Der CJ,
Fang B, Koomen J, Haura E, Bepler G, Nicosia SV, Matthias P, Wang C, Bai W, Zhang
X.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, University of South Florida
Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is well known for its ability to promote cell
migration through deacetylation of its cytoplasmic substrates such as a-tubulin. 
However, how HDAC6 itself is regulated to control cell motility remains elusive. 
Previous studies have shown that one third of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) is associated with the microtubule cytoskeleton in cells. Yet, no
connection between HDAC6 and ERK has been discovered. Here, for the first time,
we reveal that ERK binds to and phosphorylates HDAC6 to promote cell migration
via deacetylation of a-tubulin. We have identified two novel ERK-mediated
phosphorylation sites: threonine 1031 and serine 1035 in HDAC6. Both sites were
phosphorylated by ERK1 in vitro, whereas Ser-1035 was phosphorylated in response 
to the activation of EGFR-Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling pathway in vivo. HDAC6-null
mouse embryonic fibroblasts rescued by the nonphosphorylation mimicking mutant
displayed significantly reduced cell migration compared with those rescued by the
wild type. Consistently, the nonphosphorylation mimicking mutant exerted lower
tubulin deacetylase activity in vivo compared with the wild type. These data
indicate that ERK/HDAC6-mediated cell motility is through deacetylation of
a-tubulin. Overall, our results suggest that HDAC6-mediated cell migration could 
be governed by EGFR-Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling.

PMCID: PMC3829163
PMID: 24089523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e76016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076016. eCollection
2013.

SQSTM1/p62 interacts with HDAC6 and regulates deacetylase activity.

Yan J(1), Seibenhener ML, Calderilla-Barbosa L, Diaz-Meco MT, Moscat J, Jiang J, 
Wooten MW, Wooten MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Cellular and Molecular Biosciences Program,
Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, United States of America.

Protein aggregates can form in the cytoplasm of the cell and are accumulated at
aggresomes localized to the microtubule organizing center (MTOC) where they are
subsequently degraded by autophagy. In this process, aggregates are engulfed into
autophagosomes which subsequently fuse with lysosomes for protein degradation. A 
member of the class II histone deacetylase family, histone deacetylase 6(HDAC6)
has been shown to be involved in both aggresome formation and the fusion of
autophagosomes with lysosomes making it an attractive target to regulate protein 
aggregation. The scaffolding protein sequestosome 1(SQSTM1)/p62 has also been
shown to regulate accumulation and autophagic clearance of protein aggregates.
Recent studies have revealed colocalization of HDAC6 and p62 to ubiquitinated
mitochondria, as well as, ubiquitinated protein aggregates associated with the E3
ubiquitin ligase TRIM50. HDAC6 deacetylase activity is required for aggresome
formation and can be regulated by protein interaction with HDAC6. Due to their
colocalization at ubiquitinated protein aggregates, we sought to examine if p62
specifically interacted with HDAC6 and if so, if this interaction had any effect 
on HDAC6 activity and/or the physiological function of cortactin-F-actin
assembly. We succeeded in identifying and mapping the direct interaction between 
HDAC6 and p62. We further show that this interaction regulates HDAC6 deacetylase 
activity. Data are presented demonstrating that the absence of p62 results in
hyperactivation of HDAC6 and deacetylation of a-tubulin and cortactin. Further,
upon induction of protein misfolding we show that p62 is required for perinuclear
co-localization of cortactin-F-actin assemblies. Thus, our findings indicate that
p62 plays a key role in regulating the recruitment of F-actin network assemblies 
to the MTOC, a critical cellular function that is required for successful
autophagic clearance of protein aggregates.

PMCID: PMC3785417
PMID: 24086678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cell. 2013 Sep 26;51(6):819-28. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.08.016. Epub 2013 
Sep 12.

Proteasomes activate aggresome disassembly and clearance by producing unanchored 
ubiquitin chains.

Hao R(1), Nanduri P, Rao Y, Panichelli RS, Ito A, Yoshida M, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Aberrant protein aggregation is a dominant pathological feature in
neurodegenerative diseases. Protein aggregates cannot be processed by the
proteasome; instead, they are frequently concentrated to the aggresome, a
perinuclear inclusion body, and subsequently removed by autophagy. Paradoxically,
proteasomes are also concentrated at aggresomes and other related inclusion
bodies prevalent in neurodegenerative disease. Here, we show that proteasomes are
crucial components in aggresome clearance. The disassembly and disposal of
aggresomes requires Poh1, a proteasomal deubiquitinating enzyme that cleaves
ubiquitinated proteins and releases ubiquitin chains. In Poh1-deficient cells,
aggresome clearance is blocked. Remarkably, microinjection of free lysine (K)
63-linked ubiquitin chains restores aggresome degradation. We present evidence
that free ubiquitin chains produced by Poh1 bind and activate the deacetylase
HDAC6, which, in turn, stimulates actinomyosin- and autophagy-dependent aggresome
processing. Thus, unanchored ubiquitin chains are key signaling molecules that
connect and coordinate the proteasome and autophagy to eliminate toxic protein
aggregates.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3791850
PMID: 24035499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013 Nov;28(11):2744-53. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gft316. Epub
2013 Sep 11.

The nephronophthisis gene product NPHP2/Inversin interacts with Aurora A and
interferes with HDAC6-mediated cilia disassembly.

Mergen M(1), Engel C, Müller B, Follo M, Schäfer T, Jung M, Walz G.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, University Freiburg Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013 Nov;28(11):2661-3.

BACKGROUND: Nephronophthisis (NPH) is a rare recessive disease caused by several 
different gene mutations. Most gene products localize to the cilium, and thus,
the various NPH manifestations including kidney cysts and situs inversus have
been linked to ciliary defects.
RESULTS: Here, we describe that targeted knockdown of NPHP2 significantly reduced
the number of cilia on polarized MDCK cells. As one of the underlying molecular
mechanisms, we identified a direct interaction between NPHP2 and Aurora A, a cell
cycle kinase that promotes ciliary disassembly after activation by Hef1. NPHP2
inhibited the phosphorylation and activation of Aurora A, and reduced its kinase 
activity in vitro. Aurora A and histone deacetylase inhibitors ameliorated the
ciliogenesis defect in NPHP2-deficient MDCK cells, supporting our hypothesis that
NPHP2 is involved in the control of ciliary disassembly. Furthermore, we observed
that nephrocystin (NPHP1), an interaction partner of NPHP2, also binds Aurora A, 
exerting very similar inhibitory effects on Hef1-mediated Aurora A activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these findings suggest that NPHP gene products can
interfere with ciliary disassembly through interaction with the Hef1/Aurora A
module, thereby modulating cell cycle control and cell proliferation.

PMID: 24026243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Dec 15;305(12):C1230-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00053.2013. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Histone deacetylase 6-mediated deacetylation of a-tubulin coordinates
cytoskeletal and signaling events during platelet activation.

Aslan JE(1), Phillips KG, Healy LD, Itakura A, Pang J, McCarty OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon;

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Dec 15;305(12):C1211-3.

The tubulin cytoskeleton plays a key role in maintaining the characteristic
quiescent discoid shape of resting platelets. Upon activation, platelets undergo 
a dramatic change in shape; however, little is known of how the microtubule
system contributes to regulating platelet shape and function. Here we
investigated the role of the covalent modification of a-tubulin by acetylation in
the regulation of platelet physiology during activation. Superresolution
microscopy analysis of the platelet tubulin cytoskeleton showed that the marginal
band together with an interconnected web of finer tubulin structures collapsed
upon platelet activation with the glycoprotein VI (GPVI)-agonist collagen-related
peptide (CRP). Western blot analysis revealed that a-tubulin was acetylated in
resting platelets and deacetylated during platelet activation. Tubacin, a
specific inhibitor of the tubulin deacetylase HDAC6, prevented tubulin
deacetylation upon platelet activation with CRP. Inhibition of HDAC6 upregulated 
tubulin acetylation and disrupted the organization of the platelet microtubule
marginal band without significantly affecting platelet volume changes in response
to CRP stimulation. HDAC6 inhibitors also inhibited platelet aggregation in
response to CRP and blocked platelet signaling events upstream of platelet Rho
GTPase activation. Together, these findings support a role for acetylation
signaling in controlling the resting structure of the platelet tubulin marginal
band as well as in the coordination of signaling systems that drive platelet
cytoskeletal changes and aggregation.

PMCID: PMC3882361
PMID: 24025866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e73401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073401. eCollection 
2013.

The HDAC inhibitor LBH589 induces ERK-dependent prometaphase arrest in prostate
cancer via HDAC6 inactivation and down-regulation.

Chuang MJ(1), Wu ST, Tang SH, Lai XM, Lai HC, Hsu KH, Sun KH, Sun GH, Chang SY,
Yu DS, Hsiao PW, Huang SM, Cha TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) have potent anti-cancer activity in a
variety of cancer models. Understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in the 
therapeutic responsiveness of HDACI is needed before its clinical application.
This study aimed to determine if a potent HDACI, LBH589 (Panobinostat), had
differential therapeutic responsiveness towards LNCaP and PC-3 prostate cancer
(PCa) cells. The former showed prometaphase arrest with subsequent apoptosis upon
LBH589 treatment, while the latter was less sensitive and had late G2 arrest. The
LBH589 treatment down-regulated HDAC6 and sustained ERK activation, and
contributed to prometaphase arrest. Mechanistically, LBH589 inhibited HDAC6
activity, caused its dissociation from protein phosphatase PP1a, and increased
14-3-3<U+03B6> acetylation. Acetylated 14-3-3<U+03B6> released its mask effect on serine 259 of
c-Raf and serine 216 of Cdc25C subsequent to de-phosphorylation by PP1a, which
contributed to ERK activation. Enhanced ERK activity by LBH589 further
down-regulated HDAC6 protein levels and sustained ERK activation by free-forward 
regulation. The sustained Cdc25C and ERK activation resulted in early M-phase
(prometaphase) arrest and subsequent apoptosis in the most sensitive LNCaP cells 
but not in PC-3 cells. This study provides pre-clinical evidence that HDAC6 may
serve as a sensitive therapeutic target in the treatment of prostate cancer with 
HDACI LBH589 for clinical translation. This study also posits a novel mechanism
of HDAC6 participation in regulating the c-Raf-PP1-ERK signaling pathway and
contributing to M phase cell-cycle transition.

PMCID: PMC3762759
PMID: 24023871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 24;110(39):15704-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1313893110. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

Development of a histone deacetylase 6 inhibitor and its biological effects.

Lee JH(1), Mahendran A, Yao Y, Ngo L, Venta-Perez G, Choy ML, Kim N, Ham WS,
Breslow R, Marks PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065.

Development of isoform-selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors is
important in elucidating the function of individual HDAC enzymes and their
potential as therapeutic agents. Among the eleven zinc-dependent HDACs in humans,
HDAC6 is structurally and functionally unique. Here, we show that a hydroxamic
acid-based small-molecule
N-hydroxy-4-(2-[(2-hydroxyethyl)(phenyl)amino]-2-oxoethyl)benzamide (HPOB)
selectively inhibits HDAC6 catalytic activity in vivo and in vitro. HPOB causes
growth inhibition of normal and transformed cells but does not induce cell death.
HPOB enhances the effectiveness of DNA-damaging anticancer drugs in transformed
cells but not normal cells. HPOB does not block the ubiquitin-binding activity of
HDAC6. The HDAC6-selective inhibitor HPOB has therapeutic potential in
combination therapy to enhance the potency of anticancer drugs.

PMCID: PMC3785767
PMID: 24023063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Med Chem. 2013 Sep 26;56(18):7201-11. doi: 10.1021/jm400385r. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Potent histone deacetylase inhibitors derived from
4-(aminomethyl)-N-hydroxybenzamide with high selectivity for the HDAC6 isoform.

Blackburn C(1), Barrett C, Chin J, Garcia K, Gigstad K, Gould A, Gutierrez J,
Harrison S, Hoar K, Lynch C, Rowland RS, Tsu C, Ringeling J, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery, Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc. , 40 Landsdowne Street, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, United States.

A screen for HDAC6 inhibitors identified acyl derivatives of
4-(aminomethyl)-N-hydroxybenzamide as potent leads with unexpected selectivity
over the other subtypes. We designed and synthesized constrained heterocyclic
analogues such as tetrahydroisoquinolines that show further enhanced HDAC6
selectivity and inhibitory activity in cellular assays. Selectivity may be
attributed to the benzylic spacer more effectively accessing the wider channel of
HDAC6 compared to other HDAC subtypes as well as hydrophobic capping groups
interacting with the protein surface near the rim of the active site.

PMID: 23964961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 1;23(1):104-16. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt402. Epub 2013 Aug
19.

Acetylation of the KXGS motifs in tau is a critical determinant in modulation of 
tau aggregation and clearance.

Cook C(1), Carlomagno Y, Gendron TF, Dunmore J, Scheffel K, Stetler C, Davis M,
Dickson D, Jarpe M, DeTure M, Petrucelli L.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

The accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) is 
a neuropathological hallmark of tauopathies, including Alzheimer's disease (AD)
and chronic traumatic encephalopathy, but effective therapies directly targeting 
the tau protein are currently lacking. Herein, we describe a novel mechanism in
which the acetylation of tau on KXGS motifs inhibits phosphorylation on this same
motif, and also prevents tau aggregation. Using a site-specific antibody to
detect acetylation of KXGS motifs, we demonstrate that these sites are
hypoacetylated in patients with AD, as well as a mouse model of tauopathy,
suggesting that loss of acetylation on KXGS motifs renders tau vulnerable to
pathogenic insults. Furthermore, we identify histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) as the
enzyme responsible for the deacetylation of these residues, and provide proof of 
concept that acute treatment with a selective and blood-brain barrier-permeable
HDAC6 inhibitor enhances acetylation and decreases phosphorylation on tau's KXGS 
motifs in vivo. As such, we have uncovered a novel therapeutic pathway that can
be manipulated to block the formation of pathogenic tau species in disease.

PMCID: PMC3857946
PMID: 23962722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014 Jan;39(2):389-400. doi: 10.1038/npp.2013.207. Epub 
2013 Aug 19.

Antidepressant-like properties of novel HDAC6-selective inhibitors with improved 
brain bioavailability.

Jochems J(1), Boulden J(1), Lee BG(2), Blendy JA(2), Jarpe M(3), Mazitschek R(4),
Van Duzer JH(3), Jones S(3), Berton O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Center for Systems Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

HDAC inhibitors have been reported to produce antidepressant and pro-cognitive
effects in animal models, however, poor brain bioavailability or lack of isoform 
selectivity of current probes has limited our understanding of their mode of
action. We report the characterization of novel pyrimidine hydroxyl amide small
molecule inhibitors of HDAC6, brain bioavailable upon systemic administration. We
show that two compounds in this family, ACY-738 and ACY-775, inhibit HDAC6 with
low nanomolar potency and a selectivity of 60- to 1500-fold over class I HDACs.
In contrast to tubastatin A, a reference HDAC6 inhibitor with similar potency and
peripheral activity, but more limited brain bioavailability, ACY-738 and ACY-775 
induce dramatic increases in a-tubulin acetylation in brain and stimulate mouse
exploratory behaviors in novel, but not familiar environments. Interestingly,
despite a lack of detectable effect on histone acetylation, we show that ACY-738 
and ACY-775 share the antidepressant-like properties of other HDAC inhibitors,
such as SAHA and MS-275, in the tail suspension test and social defeat paradigm. 
These effects of ACY-738 and ACY-775 are directly attributable to the inhibition 
of HDAC6 expressed centrally, as they are fully abrogated in mice with a
neural-specific loss of function of HDAC6. Furthermore, administered in
combination, a behaviorally inactive dose of ACY-738 markedly potentiates the
anti-immobility activity of a subactive dose of the selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor citalopram. Our results validate new isoform-selective probes for in
vivo pharmacological studies of HDAC6 in the CNS and reinforce the viability of
this HDAC isoform as a potential target for antidepressant development.

PMCID: PMC3870780
PMID: 23954848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 6;8(8):e70472. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070472. Print 2013.

Autophagic impairment contributes to systemic inflammation-induced dopaminergic
neuron loss in the midbrain.

Zheng HF(1), Yang YP, Hu LF, Wang MX, Wang F, Cao LD, Li D, Mao CJ, Xiong KP,
Wang JD, Liu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

BACKGROUND: Neuroinflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
Parkinson's disease (PD), inducing and accelerating dopaminergic (DA) neuron
loss. Autophagy, a critical mechanism for clearing misfolded or aggregated
proteins such as a-synuclein (a-SYN), may affect DA neuron survival in the
midbrain. However, whether autophagy contributes to neuroinflammation-induced
toxicity in DA neurons remains unknown.
RESULTS: Intraperitoneal injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 5 mg/kg) into
young (3-month-old) and aged (16-month-old) male C57BL/6J mice was observed to
cause persistent neuroinflammation that was associated with a delayed and
progressive loss of DA neurons and accumulation of a-SYN in the midbrain. The
autophagic substrate-p62 (SQSTM1) persistently increased, whereas LC3-II and
HDAC6 exhibited early increases followed by a decline. In vitro studies further
demonstrated that TNF-a induced cell death in PC12 cells. Moreover, a sublethal
dose of TNF-a (50 ng/ml) increased the expression of LC3-II, p62, and a-SYN,
implying that TNF-a triggered autophagic impairment in cells.
CONCLUSION: Neuroinflammation may cause autophagic impairment, which could in
turn result in DA neuron degeneration in midbrain.

PMCID: PMC3735600
PMID: 23936437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013 Nov;28(11):2661-3. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gft354. Epub
2013 Aug 9.

Primary cilia and renal cysts: does length matter?

Ong AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kidney Genetics Group, Academic Nephrology Unit, The Henry Wellcome
Laboratories for Medical Research, University of Sheffield Medical School,
Sheffield, UK.

Comment on
    Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013 Nov;28(11):2744-53.

PMID: 23935132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Neuropharmacology. 2013 Dec;75:106-15. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.07.015.
Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Differential regulation of Bdnf expression in cortical neurons by class-selective
histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Koppel I(1), Timmusk T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee
15, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia. Electronic address: indrek.koppel@ttu.ee.
(2)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee
15, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia. Electronic address: tonis.timmusk@ttu.ee.

Histone deactylase (HDAC) inhibitors show promise as therapeutics for
neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases. Increased expression of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been associated with memory-enhancing and
neuroprotective properties of these drugs, but the mechanism of BDNF induction is
not well understood. Here, we compared the effects of a class I/IIb selective
HDAC inhibitor SAHA, a class I selective inhibitor MS-275, a class II selective
inhibitor MC1568 and a HDAC6 selective inhibitor tubacin on Bdnf mRNA expression 
in rat primary neurons. We show that inhibition of class II HDACs resulted in
rapid upregulation of Bdnf mRNA levels, whereas class I HDAC inhibition produced 
a markedly delayed Bdnf induction. In contrast to relatively slow upregulation of
Bdnf transcripts, histone acetylation at BDNF promoters I and IV was rapidly
induced by SAHA. Bdnf induction by SAHA and MS-275 at 24 h was sensitive to
protein synthesis inhibition, suggesting that delayed Bdnf induction by HDAC
inhibitors is secondary to changed expression of its regulators. HDAC4 and HDAC5 
repressed Bdnf promoter IV activity, supporting the role of class II HDACs in
regulation of Bdnf expression. In addition, we show a critical role for the
cAMP/Ca2+ response element (CRE) in induction of Bdnf promoter IV by MS-275,
MC1568, SAHA and sodium valproate. In contrast, MEF2-binding CaRE1 element was
not necessary for promoter IV induction by HDAC inhibition. Finally, we show that
similarly to Bdnf, the studied HDAC inhibitors differentially induced expression 
of neuronal activity-regulated genes c-fos and Arc. Together, our findings
implicate class II HDACs in transcriptional regulation of Bdnf and indicate that 
class II selective HDAC inhibitors may have potential as therapeutics for nervous
system disorders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Acta Neuropathol. 2013 Dec;126(6):793-807. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1158-x. Epub
2013 Aug 3.

Inclusion body formation, macroautophagy, and the role of HDAC6 in
neurodegeneration.

Richter-Landsberg C(1), Leyk J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Molecular Neurobiology, University of Oldenburg, POB
2503, 26111, Oldenburg, Germany, Christiane.richter.landsberg@uni-oldenburg.de.

The failure to clear misfolded or aggregated proteins from the cytoplasm of nerve
cells and glia is a common pathogenic event in a variety of neurodegenerative
disorders. This might be causally related to defects in the major proteolytic
systems, i.e., the ubiquitin-proteasomal system and the autophagic pathway. Large
protein aggregates and defective organelles are excluded from the proteasome.
They can be degraded only by macroautophagy, which is a highly selective process.
It requires p62 to act as a bridge connecting ubiquitinated protein aggregates
and autophagosomes, and the tubulin deacetylase histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6).
HDAC6 has recently been identified as a constituent in Lewy bodies of Parkinson
disease and glial cytoplasmic inclusions of multiple system atrophy. It is
considered a sensor of proteasomal inhibition and a cellular stress surveillance 
factor, and plays a central role in autophagy by controlling the fusion process
of autophagosomes with lysosomes. Upon proteasomal inhibition, HDAC6 is relocated
and recruited to polyubiquitin-positive aggresomes. Tubulin acetylation is a
major consequence of HDAC6 inhibition, and HDAC6 inhibition restores microtubule 
(MT)-dependent transport mechanisms in neurons. This suggests the involvement of 
HDAC6 in neurodegenerative diseases. Furthermore, the protein tau seems to be a
substrate for HDAC6. Tau acetylation impairs MT assembly and promotes tau
fibrillization in vitro. It has been suggested that acetylation and
phosphorylation of tau at multiples sites may act synergistically in the
pathogenesis of tau fibrillization. In this review, we will survey the process of
aggresome formation, macroautophagy and the role of autophagosomal proteins and
HDAC6 in inclusion body formation.

PMID: 23912309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Med Chem. 2013 Sep 12;56(17):6775-91. doi: 10.1021/jm400564j. Epub 2013 Aug 16.

Quinazolin-4-one derivatives as selective histone deacetylase-6 inhibitors for
the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Yu CW(1), Chang PT, Hsin LW, Chern JW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine, Department of Life Science, College 
of Life Science, and §Center for Innovative Therapeutics Discovery, National
Taiwan University , 33, LinSen South Road, Taipei 100, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Novel quinazolin-4-one derivatives containing a hydroxamic acid moiety were
designed and synthesized. All compounds were subjected to histone deacetylase
(HDAC) enzymatic assays to identify selective HDAC6 inhibitors with nanomolar
IC50 values.
(E)-3-(2-Ethyl-7-fluoro-4-oxo-3-phenethyl-3,4-dihydroquinazolin-6-yl)-N-hydroxyac
rylamide, 4b, is the most potent HDAC6 inhibitor (IC50, 8 nM). In vitro, these
compounds induced neurite outgrowth accompanied by growth-associated protein 43
expression, and they enhanced the synaptic activities of PC12 and SH-SY5Y
neuronal cells without producing toxic or mitogenic effects. Several of the
compounds dramatically increased nonhistone protein acetylation, specifically of 
a-tubulin. Some of the more potent HDAC6 inhibitors decreased zinc-mediated
ß-amyloid aggregation in vitro.
N-Hydroxy-3-(2-methyl-4-oxo-3-phenethyl-3,4-dihydro-quinazolin-7-yl)-acrylamide, 
3f, the most promising drug candidate, selectively inhibits HDAC6 (IC50, 29 nM), 
practically does not affect human ether-a-go-go-related membrane channel activity
(IC50 >10 µM) or cytochrome P450 activity (IC50 >6.5 µM) in vitro, and
significantly improves learning-based performances of mice with ß-amyloid-induced
hippocampal lesions.

PMID: 23905680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Future Oncol. 2013 Aug;9(8):1215-29. doi: 10.2217/fon.13.73.

Preclinical evaluation of dipotassium bisperoxo (picolinato) oxovanadate V for
the treatment of pediatric low-grade gliomas.

Ajeawung NF(1), Faure R, Jones C, Kamnasaran D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Laval University, 2705 Boulevard Laurier, Local
RC9800, Québec, QC, G1V 4G2, Canada.

AIM: The treatment of pediatric low-grade gliomas with current treatment
modalities still remains ineffective among a subset of patients; hence,
justifying the need to further investigate more effective therapies. Dipotassium 
bisperoxo (picolinato) oxovanadate V (Bpv[pic]), is a derivative of the trace
metal vanadium and a potent inhibitor of protein tyrosine phosphatases, which are
important mediators of oncogenic and tumor suppressive activities in cancers. In 
this study, we undertook a preclinical evaluation of the antineoplastic functions
of Bpv(pic) in the treatment of pediatric low-grade gliomas.
MATERIALS & METHODS: We utilized pediatric low-grade glioma cell lines (Res186,
Res259 and R286) in a wide variety of cancer assays to determine whether Bpv(pic)
can abrogate the neoplastic properties of these cells.
RESULTS: Our preclinical evaluation of the antineoplastic properties of Bpv(pic) 
in pediatric low-grade gliomas reveals a significant dose-dependent decrease in
cell viability as a consequence of decreased proliferation and sustained
induction of growth arrest and apoptosis. Bpv(pic) significantly decreases cell
migration/invasion and anchorage-independent growth in soft agarose. Within
cells, Bpv(pic) functions by attenuating CDC25A activity, and by decreasing the
expression of multiple protein tyrosine phosphatases, DNA repair genes,
microtubule-associated genes, such as PLK1, AURKA and HDAC6, and conversely
augmenting the expression of proapoptotic mediators such as BAK, AIFM and CTSL1.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, our data strongly suggest novel evidence of Bpv(pic)
being a potent antineoplastic drug and a suitable alternative for the treatment
of pediatric low-grade gliomas.

PMID: 23902250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Vis. 2013 Jul 25;19:1639-55. Print 2013.

Ankyrin repeat and suppressor of cytokine signaling box containing protein-10 is 
associated with ubiquitin-mediated degradation pathways in trabecular meshwork
cells.

Keller KE(1), Yang YF, Sun YY, Sykes R, Acott TS, Wirtz MK.

Author information: 
(1)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson
Park Rd, Portland, OR 97239, USA. gregorka@ohsu.edu

PURPOSE: Ankyrin repeat and suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) box
containing protein-10 (ASB10) was recently identified as a gene that causes
primary open-angle glaucoma. Here, we investigated endogenous ASB10 protein
expression in human trabecular meshwork (HTM) cells to provide the first clues to
the biologic function of this protein.
METHODS: Primary HTM cells were cultured and immunostained with anti-ASB10 and
various biomarkers of the ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal and autophagy-lysosomal 
degradation pathways. Cells were imaged with confocal and high-resolution
structured illumination microscopy. Colocalization was quantified using Imaris
Bitplane software, which generated a Pearson's correlation coefficient value.
Coimmunoprecipitation of ASB10-transfected cells was performed.
RESULTS: Immunofluorescence and confocal analysis showed that ASB10 was localized
in intracellular structures in HTM cells. Two populations were observed: small,
spherical vesicles and larger, less abundant structures. In the ASB10-silenced
cells, the number of large structures was significantly decreased. ASB10
partially colocalized with biomarkers of the ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal
pathway including ubiquitin and the a4 subunit of the 20S proteasome. However,
ASB10 itself was not ubiquitinated. ASB10 also colocalized with numerous
biomarkers of specific autophagic structures: aggresomes (histone deacetylase 6
[HDAC6] and heat shock protein 70 [HSP70]), autophagosomes (light chain 3 [LC3]
and p62), amphisomes (Rab7), and lysosomes (lysosomal-associated membrane protein
1 [LAMP1]). Pearson coefficients indicated strong colocalization of large
ASB10-stained structures with the a4 subunit of the 20S proteasome, K48 and
K63-linked ubiquitin antibodies, p62, HSP70, and HDAC6 (Pearson's range,
0.59-0.82). Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed a positive interaction of ASB10
with HSP70 and with the a4 subunit of the 20S proteasome. Super-resolution
structured illumination confocal microscopy suggested that the smaller
ASB10-stained vesicles aggregated into the larger structures, which resembled
aggresome-like induced structures. Treatment of HTM cells with an autophagy
activator (MG132) or inhibitors (wortmannin, bafilomycin A1) significantly
increased and decreased the number of small ASB10-stained vesicles, respectively.
No discernible differences in the colocalization of large ASB10-stained
structures with ubiquitin or HDAC6 were observed between dermal fibroblasts
derived from a normal individual and a patient with primary open-angle glaucoma
carrying a synonymous ASB10 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our evidence suggests that ASB10 may play a role in
ubiquitin-mediated degradation pathways in TM cells.

PMCID: PMC3724959
PMID: 23901248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Orthop Res. 2013 Dec;31(12):1999-2005. doi: 10.1002/jor.22447. Epub 2013 Jul
24.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors as potential therapeutic approaches for chordoma: 
an immunohistochemical and functional analysis.

Scheipl S(1), Lohberger B, Rinner B, Froehlich EV, Beham A, Quehenberger F,
Lazáry A, Pal Varga P, Haybaeck J, Leithner A, Liegl B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical University of
Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 5, 8036, Graz, Austria.

Chordomas are rare malignancies of the axial skeleton. Therapy is mainly
restricted to surgery. This study investigates histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors as potential therapeutics for chordomas. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
was performed using the HDAC 1-6 antibodies on 50 chordoma samples (34 primary
tumors, 16 recurrences) from 44 patients (27 male, 17 female).
Pan-HDAC-inhibitors Vorinostat (SAHA), Panobinostat (LBH-589), and Belinostat
(PXD101) were tested for their efficacy in the chordoma cell line MUG-Chor1 via
Western blot, cell cycle analysis, caspase 3/7 activity (MUG-Chor1, UCh-1),
cleaved caspase-3, and PARP cleavage. p-Values below 0.05 were considered
significant. IHC was negative for HDAC1, positive for HDAC2 in most (n = 36;
72%), and for HDACs 3-6 in all specimens available (n = 43; 86%). HDAC6
expression was strongest. SAHA and LBH-589, but not PXD101 caused a significant
increase of G2/M phase cells and of cleaved caspase-3 (p = 0.0003, and p = 0.0014
after 72 h, respectively), and a peak of caspase 3/7 activity. PARP cleavage
confirmed apoptosis. The presented chordoma series expressed HDACs 2-6 with
strongest expression of HDAC6. SAHA and LBH-589 significantly increased apoptosis
and changed cell cycle distribution in vitro. HDAC-inhibitors should be further
evaluated as therapeutic options for chordoma.

© 2013 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 23893747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Sep 15;305(6):L419-31. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00411.2012. Epub 2013 Jul 19.

Reduced microtubule acetylation in cystic fibrosis epithelial cells.

Rymut SM(1), Harker A, Corey DA, Burgess JD, Sun H, Clancy JP, Kelley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve Univ., 833 BRB, 10900 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, OH 44106-4948. Thomas.kelley@case.edu.

Dysfunctional cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) leads to
many cellular consequences, including perinuclear accumulation of free
cholesterol due to impaired endosomal transport. The hypothesis being tested is
that CF-related perinuclear cholesterol accumulation due to disrupted endocytic
trafficking occurs as a result of reduced microtubule (MT) acetylation. Here, it 
is identified that acetylated-a-tubulin (Ac-tub) content is reduced by ~40%
compared with respective wild-type controls in both cultured CF cell models (IB3)
and primary Cftr-/- mouse nasal epithelial tissue. Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) 
has been shown to regulate MT acetylation, which provides reasonable grounds to
test its impact on reduced Ac-tub content on CF cellular phenotypes. Inhibition
of HDAC6, either through tubastatin treatment or HDAC6 knockdown in CF cells,
increases Ac-tub content and results in redistributed free cholesterol and
reduced stimulation of NF-<U+03BA>B activity. Mechanistically, endoplasmic reticulum
stress, which is widely reported in CF and leads to aggresome formation, is
identified as a regulator of MT acetylation. F508del CFTR correction with C18 in 
primary airway epithelial cells restores MT acetylation and cholesterol
transport. A significant role for phosphatidyl inositol-3 kinase p110a is also
identified as a regulator of MT acetylation.

PMCID: PMC3763039
PMID: 23873844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jan;35(1):61-71. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1007-5. Epub 2013 Jul 
20.

Clinical significance of histone deacetylase (HDAC)-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6
expression in human malignant and benign thyroid lesions.

Giaginis C(1), Alexandrou P, Delladetsima I, Giannopoulou I, Patsouris E,
Theocharis S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Athens, 75 M.
Asias str., Goudi, Athens, GR11527, Greece.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been associated with human malignant tumor
development and progression, and HDAC inhibitors are currently being explored as 
anticancer agents in clinical trials. The present study aimed to evaluate the
clinical significance of HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 proteins' expression 
in human malignant and benign thyroid lesions. HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6
proteins' expression was assessed immunohistochemically on paraffin-embedded
thyroid tissues obtained from 74 patients with benign and malignant thyroid
lesions. Enhanced HDAC-2 and HDAC-6 expression was significantly more frequently 
observed in malignant, compared to benign, thyroid lesions (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0042 and
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0069, respectively). Enhanced HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 expression was
significantly more frequently observed in cases with papillary carcinoma compared
to hyperplastic nodules (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0065, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0394, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0061, respectively).
In malignant thyroid lesions, HDAC-1, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 expression was
significantly associated with tumor size (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0169, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0056, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0234,
respectively); HDAC-2 expression with lymphatic and vascular invasion (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0299
and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0391, respectively); and HDAC-4 expression with capsular invasion
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0464). The cellular pattern of HDAC-1 and HDAC-2 distribution (nuclear vs.
nuclear and cytoplasmic) presented a distinct discrimination between malignant
and benign thyroid lesions (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0030 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0028, respectively) as well as
between papillary carcinoma and hyperplastic nodules (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0036 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0028, 
respectively). HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 may be associated with the
malignant thyroid transformation and could be considered as useful biomarkers and
possible therapeutic targets in this neoplasia.

PMID: 23873102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2013;37(4-5):229-39. doi: 10.1159/000350148. Epub 2013
Jul 8.

HDAC inhibition suppresses cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in DOCA-salt
hypertensive rats via regulation of HDAC6/HDAC8 enzyme activity.

Kee HJ(1), Bae EH, Park S, Lee KE, Suh SH, Kim SW, Jeong MH.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Research Center of Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju
501-757, Republic of Korea.

Background : Inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) was reported to suppress
cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in various hypertrophic animal models. However, 
the HDAC expression profile and HDAC enzyme activity have not yet been
investigated in DOCA-salt hypertensive rats. Methods : Unilaterally
nephrectomized rats were implanted with DOCA strips. DOCA-salt rats then received
a control diet with vehicle or valproate. We measured the expression of cardiac
hypertrophic markers, class I HDACs, class II HDACs, fibrosis, and HDAC enzyme
activity. Results : Here we report that sodium valproate inhibits the cardiac
hypertrophy accompanied by fibrosis in the heart of chronic hypertensive rats. We
show that expression of GATA6 and HDAC6 is upregulated in DOCA-salt hypertension.
In addition, HDAC6 and HDAC8 enzyme activity is attenuated by sodium valproate.
Conclusion : These results suggest that a novel HDAC6- and HDAC8-selective
inhibitor is needed to treat or prevent pathological cardiac hypertrophy. © 2013 
S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23868068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Jun;45(2):134-44. doi: 10.4143/crt.2013.45.2.134. Epub
2013 Jun 30.

RASSF1A Suppresses Cell Migration through Inactivation of HDAC6 and Increase of
Acetylated a-Tubulin.

Jung HY(1), Jung JS, Whang YM, Kim YH.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Biomedical Science, Korea University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ; Genomic Research Center for Lung and Breast/Ovarian
Cancers, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: The RAS association domain family protein 1 (RASSF1) has been implicated
in a tumor-suppressive function through the induction of acetylated a-tubulin and
modulation of cell migration. However, the mechanisms of how RASSF1A is
associated with acetylation of a-tubulin for controlling cell migration have not 
yet been elucidated. In this study, we found that RASSF1A regulated cell
migration through the regulation of histon deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), which functions
as a tubulin deacetylase.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The cell migration was assessed using wound-healing and
transwell assays. The role of RASSF1A on cell migration was examined by
immunofluorescence staining, HDAC activity assay and western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Cell migration was inhibited and cell morphology was changed in
RASSF1A-transfected H1299 cells, compared with controls, whereas HDAC6 protein
expression was not changed by RASSF1A transfection in these cells. However,
RASSF1A inhibited deacetylating activity of HDAC6 protein and induced acetylated 
a-tubulin expression. Furthermore, acetylated a-tubulin and HDAC6 protein were
co-localized in the cytoplasm in RASSF1A-transfected H1299 cells. Conversely,
when the endogenous RASSF1A expression in HeLa cells was blocked with RASSF1A
siRNA treatment, acetylated a-tubulin was co-localized with HDAC6 protein
throughout the whole cells, including the nucleus, compared with scramble
siRNA-treated HeLa cells. The restoration of RASSF1A by 5-Aza-dC treatment also
induced acetylated a-tubulin through inhibition of HDAC6 activity that finally
resulted in suppressing cell migration in H1299 cells. To further confirm the
role of HDAC6 in RASSF1A-mediated cell migration, the HDAC6 expression in H1299
cells was suppressed by using HDAC6 siRNA, and cell motility was found to be
decreased through enhanced acetylated a-tubulin.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that the inactivation of HDAC6 by
RASSF1A regulates cell migration through increased acetylated a-tubulin protein.

PMCID: PMC3710963
PMID: 23864847  [PubMed]


335. Bioorg Med Chem. 2013 Sep 1;21(17):5339-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2013.06.009. Epub 
2013 Jun 15.

Novel N-hydroxyfurylacrylamide-based histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors with
branched CAP group (Part 2).

Feng T(1), Wang H, Su H, Lu H, Yu L, Zhang X, Sun H, You Q.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug Design and Optimization, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing 210009, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are significant enzymes involved in tumor genesis
and development. Herein, we report a series of novel
N-hydroxyfurylacryl-amide-based HDAC inhibitors, which are marked by introducing 
branched hydrophobic groups as the capping group. The inhibitory activity of the 
synthesized compounds against HDACs and several tumor cell lines are firstly
determined. Fifteen compounds with promising activities are selected for further 
evaluation of target selectivity profile against recombinant human HDAC1, HDAC4
and HDAC6. Compounds 10a, 10b, 10d and 16a exhibit outstanding selectivity
against HDAC6. Analysis of HDAC4 X-ray structure and HDAC1, HDAC6 homology model 
indicates that these enzyme differ significantly in the rim near the surface of
the active site. Although TSA has been known as a pan-HDAC inhibitor, it exhibits
outstanding selectivity for HDAC6 over HDAC4. For further physicochemical
properties study, six compounds are chosen for determination of their
physicochemical properties including logD7.4 and aqueous solubility. The results 
suggest that compounds with a smaller framework and with hydrophilicgroups are
likely to have better aqueous solubility.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23820574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 2;288(31):22516-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.489328. Epub 2013
Jun 24.

Inhibition of HDAC6 deacetylase activity increases its binding with microtubules 
and suppresses microtubule dynamic instability in MCF-7 cells.

Asthana J(1), Kapoor S, Mohan R, Panda D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Mumbai 400076, India.

The post-translational modification of tubulin appears to be a highly controlled 
mechanism that regulates microtubule functioning. Acetylation of the e-amino
group of Lys-40 of a-tubulin marks stable microtubules, although the causal
relationship between tubulin acetylation and microtubule stability has remained
poorly understood. HDAC6, the tubulin deacetylase, plays a key role in
maintaining typical distribution of acetylated microtubules in cells. Here, by
using tubastatin A, an HDAC6-specific inhibitor, and siRNA-mediated depletion of 
HDAC6, we have explored whether tubulin acetylation has a role in regulating
microtubule stability. We found that whereas both pharmacological inhibition of
HDAC6 as well as its depletion enhance microtubule acetylation, only
pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 activity leads to an increase in microtubule 
stability against cold and nocodazole-induced depolymerizing conditions.
Tubastatin A treatment suppressed the dynamics of individual microtubules in
MCF-7 cells and delayed the reassembly of depolymerized microtubules.
Interestingly, both the localization of HDAC6 on microtubules and the amount of
HDAC6 associated with polymeric fraction of tubulin were found to increase in the
tubastatin A-treated cells compared with the control cells, suggesting that the
pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 enhances the binding of HDAC6 to
microtubules. The evidence presented in this study indicated that the increased
binding of HDAC6, rather than the acetylation per se, causes microtubule
stability. The results are in support of a hypothesis that in addition to its
deacetylase function, HDAC6 might function as a MAP that regulates microtubule
dynamics under certain conditions.

PMCID: PMC3829339
PMID: 23798680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Eur J Med Chem. 2013 Aug;66:56-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.05.017. Epub 2013
May 31.

Design, synthesis and preliminary evaluation of a series of histone deacetylase
inhibitors carrying a benzodiazepine ring.

Guandalini L(1), Balliu M, Cellai C, Martino MV, Nebbioso A, Mercurio C, Carafa
V, Bartolucci G, Dei S, Manetti D, Teodori E, Scapecchi S, Altucci L, Paoletti F,
Romanelli MN.

Author information: 
(1)NEUROFARBA, Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child
Health, Section of Pharmaceutical and Nutraceutical Sciences, University of
Florence, Via Ugo Schiff 6, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.

A series of new histone deacetylase inhibitors were designed and synthesized
based on hybridization between SAHA or oxamflatin and
5-phenyl-1,4-benzodiazepines. The compounds were tested for their enzyme
inhibitory activity on HeLa nuclear extracts, and on human recombinant HDAC1 and 
HDAC6. Antiproliferative activity was tested on different cancer cells types,
while proapoptotic activity was primarily tested on NB4 cells. The compounds
showed IC50 values similar to those of SAHA. Compound (S)-8 displayed interesting
activity against hematological and solid malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jul 19;437(1):41-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.06.032. Epub 2013 Jun 18.

Combined treatment with SAHA, bortezomib, and clarithromycin for concomitant
targeting of aggresome formation and intracellular proteolytic pathways enhances 
ER stress-mediated cell death in breast cancer cells.

Komatsu S(1), Moriya S, Che XF, Yokoyama T, Kohno N, Miyazawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Oncology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo 160-8402,
Japan.

The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and the autophagy-lysosome pathway are two major
intracellular protein degradation systems. We previously reported that
clarithromycin (CAM) blocks autophagy flux, and that combined treatment with CAM 
and proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BZ) enhances ER-stress-mediated apoptosis in
breast cancer cells, whereas treatment with CAM alone results in almost no
cytotoxicity. Since HDAC6 is involved in aggresome formation, which is recognized
as a cytoprotective response serving to sequester misfolded proteins and
facilitate their clearance by autophagy, we further investigated the combined
effect of vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA)), which has a potent
inhibitory effect for HDAC6, with CAM and BZ in breast cancer cell lines. SAHA
exhibited some cytotoxicity along with an increased acetylation level of
a-tubulin, a substrate of HDAC6. Combined treatment of SAHA, CAM, and BZ potently
enhanced the apoptosis-inducing effect compared with treatment using each reagent
alone or a combination of two of the three. Expression levels of
ER-stress-related genes, including the pro-apoptotic transcription factor CHOP
(GADD153), were maximally induced by the simultaneous combination of three
reagents. Like breast cancer cell lines, a wild-type murine embryonic fibroblast 
(MEF) cell line exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity and maximally up-regulated Chop
after combined treatment with SAHA, CAM, and BZ; however, a Chop knockout MEF
cell line almost completely canceled this enhanced effect. The specific HDAC6
inhibitor tubacin also exhibited a pronounced cytocidal effect with a combination
of CAM plus BZ. These data suggest that simultaneous targeting of intracellular
proteolytic pathways and HDAC6 enhances ER-stress-mediated apoptosis in breast
cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Oncogene. 2014 May 29;33(22):2938-46. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.241. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

Oncogenic Shp2 disturbs microtubule regulation to cause HDAC6-dependent ERK
hyperactivation.

Tien SC(1), Chang ZF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (2)1] Institute of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC [2] Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Deregulation of Shp2, a non-receptor tyrosine phosphatase, causes hyperactivation
of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), leading to growth abnormality.
Here, we show that inhibition of RhoA-Dia is sufficient to upregulate ERK
activation in epithelial cells. Oncogenic Shp2 expression attenuates RhoA-Dia
signaling, by which microtubule (MT) is destabilized with reduced level of
acetylation. Either MT stabilization, silencing of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) 
or enforcing RhoA-Dia signal prevents oncogenic Shp2-induced ERK hyperactivation.
We provide evidence that downregulation of RhoA-Dia-EB1 pathway by oncogenic Shp2
leads to HDAC6-mediated reduction in MT acetylation, in turn affecting ERK
regulation. In response to serum stimulation, cells expressing wild-type Shp2
display transient ERK activation. In contrast, cells expressing oncogenic Shp2
have prolonged ERK activation. HDAC6 inhibition diminishes sustained activation
of ERK and slows down the growth of these cells. Likewise, in human cancer cells,
blocking Shp2 increases MT acetylation and decreases ERK phosphorylation, which
are reversed by inhibition of Dia. As such, HDAC6 inhibition in these cells also 
reduces ERK activity. Our findings link MT regulation by HDAC6 to oncogenic Shp2 
and ERK regulation, implicating the therapeutic potential of HDAC6 inhibitor in
diseases involving Shp2 deregulation.

PMID: 23770849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Epigenetics. 2013 Jun;8(6):612-23. doi: 10.4161/epi.24710. Epub 2013 Apr 26.

HDAC turnover, CtIP acetylation and dysregulated DNA damage signaling in colon
cancer cells treated with sulforaphane and related dietary isothiocyanates.

Rajendran P(1), Kidane AI, Yu TW, Dashwood WM, Bisson WH, Löhr CV, Ho E, Williams
DE, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute; Oregon State University; Corvallis, OR USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) and acetyltransferases have important roles in the
regulation of protein acetylation, chromatin dynamics and the DNA damage
response. Here, we show in human colon cancer cells that dietary isothiocyanates 
(ITCs) inhibit HDAC activity and increase HDAC protein turnover with the potency 
proportional to alkyl chain length, i.e., AITC < sulforaphane (SFN) < 6-SFN <
9-SFN. Molecular docking studies provided insights into the interactions of ITC
metabolites with HDAC3, implicating the allosteric site between HDAC3 and its
co-repressor. ITCs induced DNA double-strand breaks and enhanced the
phosphorylation of histone H2AX, ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein
(ATR) and checkpoint kinase-2 (CHK2). Depending on the ITC and treatment
conditions, phenotypic outcomes included cell growth arrest, autophagy and
apoptosis. Coincident with the loss of HDAC3 and HDAC6, as well as SIRT6, ITCs
enhanced the acetylation and subsequent degradation of critical repair proteins, 
such as CtIP, and this was recapitulated in HDAC knockdown experiments.
Importantly, colon cancer cells were far more susceptible than non-cancer cells
to ITC-induced DNA damage, which persisted in the former case but was scarcely
detectable in non-cancer colonic epithelial cells under the same conditions.
Future studies will address the mechanistic basis for dietary ITCs preferentially
exploiting HDAC turnover mechanisms and faulty DNA repair pathways in colon
cancer cells vs. normal cells.

PMCID: PMC3857341
PMID: 23770684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2013 Aug 15;154(3-4):102-10. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2013.05.004. Epub 2013 May 10.

Epigenetic regulation of the innate immune response to LPS in bovine peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC).

Doherty R(1), O'Farrelly C, Meade KG.

Author information: 
(1)Animal & Bioscience Research Department, Animal & Grassland Research and
Innovation Centre, Teagasc, Grange, Co, Meath, Ireland.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression could help explain variation in
responses to infection and differences in disease susceptibility in cattle. The
aim of this study was to examine epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of
LPS-induced innate immune gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from five healthy calves. Firstly, epigenetic enzyme gene expression
(histone deacetylase (HDAC) and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)) was measured after 
LPS stimulation. Secondly, the effect of the histone deacetylase inhibitor
Trichostatin A (TSA) on histone H3 acetylation and on innate immune gene
expression was also measured. Results showed differential expression of HDAC6,
HDAC7 and DNMT3A genes in response to LPS in cells from all animals, while TSA
significantly inhibited pro-inflammatory cytokine (TNF, IL2 and IFNG) expression 
(P<0.05), presumably by histone acetylation. These results suggest an important
role for the HDAC family of enzymes in the regulation of bovine innate immune
gene expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23764468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 1;191(1):464-71. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203533. Epub 2013 May
31.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase activity suppresses IFN-<U+03B3> induction of
tripartite motif 22 via CHIP-mediated proteasomal degradation of IRF-1.

Gao B(1), Wang Y, Xu W, Li S, Li Q, Xiong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Immunobiology, Shanghai Medical
College of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China.

Tripartite motif (TRIM)22 plays an important role in IFN-mediated antiviral
activity. We previously demonstrated that IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-1 was
crucial for basal and IFN-induced TRIM22 transcription via binding to a novel
cis-element named 5' extended IFN-stimulating response element. In this study, we
investigated the role of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in TRIM22 induction 
by IFN-<U+03B3> and its underlying mechanism. We found that the HDAC activity,
especially that conferred by HDAC6, was required for IFN-<U+03B3>-induced TRIM22
transcription. Importantly, inhibition of HDAC activity by trichostatin A (TSA)
enhanced the hyperacetylation of heat shock protein (HSP)90 and suppressed its
chaperone activity for IRF-1. Further study showed that TSA treatment promoted
the proteasomal degradation of IRF-1 protein via enhancing the association of
IRF-1 with the ubiquitin E3 ligase carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting
protein. Moreover, carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein was found to be
involved in the TSA-mediated inhibitory effect on IFN-<U+03B3> induction of TRIM22 as
well as other IRF-1-dependent IFN-stimulated genes. This study may provide novel 
insight into the role of HDAC activity in the transcriptional control of
IFN-stimulated gene induction.

PMID: 23729439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jul 12;436(4):571-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.05.076. Epub 2013 May 29.

Tubulin polymerization promoting protein 1 (TPPP1) increases ß-catenin expression
through inhibition of HDAC6 activity in U2OS osteosarcoma cells.

Schofield AV(1), Gamell C, Bernard O.

Author information: 
(1)Cytoskeleton and Cancer Unit, St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research,
Australia.

The Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK) family of proteins, including ROCK1 
and ROCK2, are key regulators of actin and intermediate filament morphology. The 
newly discovered ROCK substrate Tubulin polymerization promoting protein 1
(TPPP1) promotes microtubule polymerization and inhibits the activity of Histone 
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). The effect of TPPP1 on HDAC6 activity is inhibited by ROCK
signaling. Moreover, it was recently demonstrated that ROCK activity increases
the cellular expression of the oncogene ß-catenin, which is a HDAC6 substrate. In
this study, we investigated the interplay between ROCK-TPPP1-HDAC6 signaling and 
ß-catenin expression. We demonstrate that ß-catenin expression is increased with 
ROCK signaling activation and is reduced with increased TPPP1 expression in U2OS 
cells. Further investigation revealed that ROCK-mediated TPPP1 phosphorylation,
which prevents its binding to HDAC6, negates TPPP1-mediated reduction in
ß-catenin expression. We also show that increased HDAC6 activity resulting from
ROCK signaling activation reduced ß-catenin acetylation at Lys-49, which was also
accompanied by its decreased phosphorylation by Caesin kinase 1 (CK1) and
Glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK3ß), thus preventing its proteasomal degradation.
Overall, our results suggest that ROCK regulates ß-catenin stability in cells via
preventing TPPP1-mediated inhibition of HDAC6 activity, to reduce its acetylation
and degradation via phosphorylation by CK1 and GSK3ß.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Sep;11(9):1072-7. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0040-T. Epub
2013 May 30.

HDAC6 and SIRT2 regulate the acetylation state and oncogenic activity of mutant
K-RAS.

Yang MH(1), Laurent G, Bause AS, Spang R, German N, Haigis MC, Haigis KM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Unit, Center for Cancer Research, and Center for Systems
Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 149 13 Street, Charlestown, MA 02129.
khaigis@partners.org.

Activating point mutations in K-RAS are extremely common in cancers of the lung, 
colon, and pancreas and are highly predictive of poor therapeutic response. One
potential strategy for overcoming the deleterious effects of mutant K-RAS is to
alter its posttranslational modification. Although therapies targeting
farnesylation have been explored, and have ultimately failed, the therapeutic
potential of targeting other modifications remains to be seen. Recently, it was
shown that acetylation of lysine 104 attenuates K-RAS transforming activity by
interfering with GEF-induced nucleotide exchange. Here, the deacetylases HDAC6
and SIRT2 were shown to regulate the acetylation state of K-RAS in cancer cells. 
By extension, inhibition of either of these enzymes has a dramatic impact on the 
growth properties of cancer cells expressing activation mutants of K-RAS. These
results suggest that therapeutic targeting of HDAC6 and/or SIRT2 may represent a 
new way to treat cancers expressing mutant forms of K-RAS.IMPLICATIONS: This
study suggests that altering K-RAS acetylation is a feasible approach to limiting
tumorigenic potential.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3778089
PMID: 23723075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Oct;20(10):1306-16. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.47. Epub 2013
May 24.

A regulatory circuit that involves HR23B and HDAC6 governs the biological
response to HDAC inhibitors.

New M(1), Olzscha H, Liu G, Khan O, Stimson L, McGouran J, Kerr D, Coutts A,
Kessler B, Middleton M, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford,
Old Road Campus Research Building, Old Road Campus, off Roosevelt Drive,
Headington, Oxford, UK

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) is an emergent anticancer target, and HR23B is a
biomarker for response to HDAC inhibitors. We show here that HR23B has impacts on
two documented effects of HDAC inhibitors; HDAC inhibitors cause apoptosis in
cells expressing high levels of HR23B, whereas in cells with low level
expression, HDAC inhibitor treatment is frequently associated with autophagy. The
mechanism responsible involves the interaction of HDAC6 with HR23B, which
downregulates HR23B and thereby reduces the level of ubiquitinated substrates
targeted to the proteasome, ultimately desensitising cells to apoptosis.
Significantly, the ability of HDAC6 to downregulate HR23B occurs independently of
its deacetylase activity. An analysis of the HDAC6 interactome identified HSP90
as a key effector of HDAC6 on HR23B levels. Our results define a regulatory
mechanism that involves the interplay between HR23B and HDAC6 that influences the
biological outcome of HDAC inhibitor treatment.

PMCID: PMC3770323
PMID: 23703321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 15;73(14):4500-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4127. Epub
2013 May 22.

Microtubule-associated histone deacetylase 6 supports the calcium store sensor
STIM1 in mediating malignant cell behaviors.

Chen YT(1), Chen YF, Chiu WT, Liu KY, Liu YL, Chang JY, Chang HC, Shen MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
Taiwan.

Stromal-interaction molecule 1 (STIM1) is an endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) storage
sensor that promotes cell growth, migration, and angiogenesis in breast and
cervical cancers. Here, we report that the microtubule-associated histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) differentially regulates activation of STIM1-mediated
store-operated Ca(2+) entry (SOCE) between cervical cancer cells and normal
cervical epithelial cells. Confocal microscopy of living cells indicated that
microtubule integrity was necessary for STIM1 trafficking to the plasma membrane 
and interaction with Orai1, an essential pore subunit of SOCE. Cancer cells
overexpressed both STIM1 and Orai1 compared with normal cervical epithelial
cells. HDAC6 upregulation in cancer cells was accompanied by hypoacetylated
a-tubulin. Tubastatin-A, a specific HDAC6 inhibitor, inhibited STIM1
translocation to plasma membrane and blocked SOCE activation in cancer cells but 
not normal epithelial cells. Genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC6 blocked
STIM1 membrane trafficking and downstream Ca(2+) influx, as evidenced by total
internal reflection fluorescent images and intracellular Ca(2+) determination. In
contrast, HDAC6 inhibition did not affect interactions between STIM1 and the
microtubule plus end-binding protein EB1. Analysis of surgical specimens
confirmed that most cervical cancer tissues overexpressed STIM1 and Orai1,
accompanied by hypoacetylated a-tubulin. Together, our results identify HDAC6 as 
a candidate target to disrupt STIM1-mediated SOCE as a general strategy to block 
malignant cell behavior.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23698468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Bioorg Med Chem. 2013 Jul 1;21(13):3795-807. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2013.04.036. Epub
2013 Apr 22.

Structural basis for the design and synthesis of selective HDAC inhibitors.

Di Micco S(1), Chini MG, Terracciano S, Bruno I, Riccio R, Bifulco G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Farmacia, Università degli Studi di Salerno, Via Ponte Don
Melillo, 84084 Fisciano, Salerno, Italy.

Histone Deacetylases are considered promising targets for cancer epigenetic
therapy, and small molecules able to modulate their biological function have
recently gained an increasing interest as potential anticancer agents. In spite
of their potential application in cancer therapy, most HDAC inhibitors
unselectively bind the several HDAC isoforms, giving rise to different
side-effects. In this context, we have traced out the structural elements
responsible of selective binding for the therapeutically relevant different HDAC 
isoforms. The structural analysis has been carried out by molecular modeling,
docking in the binding pockets of HDAC1-4 and HDAC6-8, 36 inhibitors presenting a
well defined selectivity for the different isoforms. As quick proof of evidence, 
we have designed, synthesized and experimentally tested three selective ligands. 
The experimental data suggest that the obtained structural guidelines can be
useful tools for the rational design of new potent inhibitors against selected
HDAC isoforms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23693069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Br J Haematol. 2013 Aug;162(4):559-62. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12388. Epub 2013 May 21.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors as single agents induce multiple myeloma
cell death principally through the inhibition of class I HDAC.

Mithraprabhu S, Khong T, Jones SS, Spencer A.

PMID: 23692150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Med Chem. 2013 Jun 13;56(11):4816-20. doi: 10.1021/jm400390r. Epub 2013 May 29.

Discovery of the first histone deacetylase 6/8 dual inhibitors.

Olson DE(1), Wagner FF, Kaya T, Gale JP, Aidoud N, Davoine EL, Lazzaro F, Weïwer 
M, Zhang YL, Holson EB.

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 7
Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

We disclose the first small molecule histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor (3,
BRD73954) capable of potently and selectively inhibiting both HDAC6 and HDAC8
despite the fact that these isoforms belong to distinct phylogenetic classes
within the HDAC family of enzymes. Our data demonstrate that meta substituents of
phenyl hydroxamic acids are readily accommodated upon binding to HDAC6 and,
furthermore, are necessary for the potent inhibition of HDAC8.

PMID: 23672185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 May 2;14(5):9514-35. doi: 10.3390/ijms14059514.

HDAC6 and ovarian cancer.

Haakenson J(1), Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, University of South Florida Morsani 
College of Medicine, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd., Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
xzhang@health.usf.edu.

The special class IIb histone deacetylase, HDAC6, plays a prominent role in many 
cellular processes related to cancer, including oncogenesis, the cell stress
response, motility, and myriad signaling pathways. Many of the lessons learned
from other cancers can be applied to ovarian cancer as well. HDAC6 interacts with
diverse proteins such as HSP90, cortactin, tubulin, dynein, p300, Bax, and GRK2
in both the nucleus and cytoplasm to carry out these cancerous functions. Not all
pro-cancer interactions of HDAC6 involve deacetylation. The idea of using HDAC6
as a target for cancer treatment continues to expand in recent years, and more
potent and specific HDAC6 inhibitors are required to effectively down-regulate
the tumor-prone cell signaling pathways responsible for ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3676797
PMID: 23644884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 May 1;8:66. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-66.

Adult-onset Alexander disease, associated with a mutation in an alternative GFAP 
transcript, may be phenotypically modulated by a non-neutral HDAC6 variant.

Melchionda L(1), Fang M, Wang H, Fugnanesi V, Morbin M, Liu X, Li W, Ceccherini
I, Farina L, Savoiardo M, D'Adamo P, Zhang J, Costa A, Ravaglia S, Ghezzi D,
Zeviani M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico (IRCCS), Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: We studied a family including two half-siblings, sharing the same
mother, affected by slowly progressive, adult-onset neurological syndromes. In
spite of the diversity of the clinical features, characterized by a mild movement
disorder with cognitive impairment in the elder patient, and severe motor-neuron 
disease (MND) in her half-brother, the brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
features were compatible with adult-onset Alexander's disease (AOAD), suggesting 
different expression of the same, genetically determined, condition.
METHODS: Since mutations in the alpha isoform of glial fibrillary acidic protein,
GFAP-a, the only cause so far known of AOAD, were excluded, we applied exome Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) to identify gene variants, which were then
functionally validated by molecular characterization of recombinant and
patient-derived cells.
RESULTS: Exome-NGS revealed a mutation in a previously neglected GFAP isoform,
GFAP-<U+03F5>, which disrupts the GFAP-associated filamentous cytoskeletal meshwork of
astrocytoma cells. To shed light on the different clinical features in the two
patients, we sought for variants in other genes. The male patient had a mutation,
absent in his half-sister, in X-linked histone deacetylase 6, a candidate MND
susceptibility gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Exome-NGS is an unbiased approach that not only helps identify new
disease genes, but may also contribute to elucidate phenotypic expression.

PMCID: PMC3654953
PMID: 23634874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Jul 15;270(2):87-96. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.04.014. Epub 2013 Apr 28.

Largazole, a class I histone deacetylase inhibitor, enhances TNF-a-induced ICAM-1
and VCAM-1 expression in rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts.

Ahmed S(1), Riegsecker S, Beamer M, Rahman A, Bellini JV, Bhansali P,
Tillekeratne LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences, The
University of Toledo, Health Science Campus, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.
Salah.Ahmed@utoledo.edu

In the present study, we evaluated the effect of largazole (LAR), a
marine-derived class I HDAC inhibitor, on tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a)-induced
expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and vascular cell
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity.
LAR (1-5 µM) had no adverse effect on the viability of RA synovial fibroblasts.
Among the different class I HDACs screened, LAR (0.5-5 µM) inhibited the
constitutive expression of HDAC1 (0-30%). Surprisingly, LAR increased class II
HDAC [HDAC6] by ~220% with a concomitant decrease in HDAC5 [30-58%] expression in
RA synovial fibroblasts. SAHA (5 µM), a pan-HDAC inhibitor, also induced HDAC6
expression in RA synovial fibroblasts. Pretreatment of RA synovial fibroblasts
with LAR further enhanced TNF-a-induced ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression. However,
LAR inhibited TNF-a-induced MMP-2 activity in RA synovial fibroblasts by 35% when
compared to the TNF-a-treated group. Further, the addition of HDAC6 specific
inhibitor Tubastatin A with LAR suppressed TNF-a+LAR-induced ICAM-1 and VCAM-1
expression and completely blocked MMP-2 activity, suggesting a role of HDAC6 in
LAR-induced ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression. LAR also enhanced TNF-a-induced
phospho-p38 and phospho-AKT expression, but inhibited the expression of
phospho-JNK and nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 in RA synovial fibroblasts.
These results suggest that LAR activates p38 and Akt pathways and influences
class II HDACs, in particular HDAC6, to enhance some of the detrimental effects
of TNF-a in RA synovial fibroblasts. Understanding the exact role of different
HDAC isoenzymes in RA pathogenesis is extremely important in order to develop
highly effective HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of RA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3766723
PMID: 23632129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17313-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.401174. Epub
2013 Apr 29.

Tubulin polymerization-promoting protein (TPPP/p25a) promotes unconventional
secretion of a-synuclein through exophagy by impairing autophagosome-lysosome
fusion.

Ejlerskov P(1), Rasmussen I, Nielsen TT, Bergström AL, Tohyama Y, Jensen PH,
Vilhardt F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The Panum Institute, University
of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.

Aggregation of a-synuclein can be promoted by the tubulin
polymerization-promoting protein/p25a, which we have used here as a tool to study
the role of autophagy in the clearance of a-synuclein. In NGF-differentiated PC12
catecholaminergic nerve cells, we show that de novo expressed p25a co-localizes
with a-synuclein and causes its aggregation and distribution into autophagosomes.
However, p25a also lowered the mobility of autophagosomes and hindered the final 
maturation of autophagosomes by preventing their fusion with lysosomes for the
final degradation of a-synuclein. Instead, p25a caused a 4-fold increase in the
basal level of a-synuclein secreted into the medium. Secretion was strictly
dependent on autophagy and could be up-regulated (trehalose and Rab1A) or
down-regulated (3-methyladenine and ATG5 shRNA) by enhancers or inhibitors of
autophagy or by modulating minus-end-directed (HDAC6 shRNA) or plus-end-directed 
(Rab8) trafficking of autophagosomes along microtubules. Finally, we show in the 
absence of tubulin polymerization-promoting protein/p25a that a-synuclein release
was modulated by dominant mutants of Rab27A, known to regulate exocytosis of late
endosomal (and amphisomal) elements, and that both lysosomal fusion block and
secretion of a-synuclein could be replicated by knockdown of the p25a target,
HDAC6, the predominant cytosolic deacetylase in neurons. Our data indicate that
unconventional secretion of a-synuclein can be mediated through exophagy and that
factors, which increase the pool of autophagosomes/amphisomes (e.g. lysosomal
disturbance) or alter the polarity of vesicular transport of autophagosomes on
microtubules, can result in an increased release of a-synuclein monomer and
aggregates to the surroundings.

PMCID: PMC3682534
PMID: 23629650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Med Chem. 2013 Aug 22;56(16):6297-313. doi: 10.1021/jm4001659. Epub 2013 May
15.

Development and therapeutic implications of selective histone deacetylase 6
inhibitors.

Kalin JH(1), Bergman JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States. jkalin1@jhmi.edu

This Perspective provides an in depth look at the numerous disease states in
which histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) has been implicated. The physiological
pathways, protein-protein interactions, and non-histone substrates relating to
different pathological conditions are discussed with regard to HDAC6.
Furthermore, the compounds and methods used to modulate HDAC6 activity are
profiled. The latter half of this Perspective analyzes reported HDAC6 selective
inhibitors in terms of structure, potency, and selectivity over the other HDAC
isoforms with the intent of providing a comprehensive overview of the molecular
tools available. Potential obstacles and future directions of HDAC6 research are 
also presented.

PMID: 23627282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(2):685-9.

Effects of down-regulation of HDAC6 expression on proliferation, cell cycling and
migration of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells and related molecular
mechanisms.

Li N(1), Tie XJ, Liu PJ, Zhang Y, Ren HZ, Gao X, Xu ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)The Cancer Diagnosis-Treatment Center of The First People's Hospital of
Kaifeng, Kaifeng, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of down-regulation of HDAC6 expression on
proliferation, cell cycling and migration of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) cells and related molecular mechanisms.
METHODS: ESCC cell line EC9706 cells were randomly divided into untreated (with
no transfection), control siRNA (transfected with control siRNA) and HDAC6 siRNA 
(transfected with HDAC6 small interfering RNA) groups. Effects of HDAC6 siRNA
interference on expression of HDAC6 mRNA and protein in EC9706 cells were
investigated by semi-quantitative RT-PCR, Western blotting and
immunocytochemistry methods. Effects of down-regulation of HDAC6 expression on
cell proliferation, cell cycle, and cell migration were studied using a CCK-8
kit, flow cytometry and Boyden chambers, respectively. Changes of mRNA and
protein expression levels of cell cycle related factor (p21) and cell migration
related factor (E-cadherin) were investigated by semi- quantitative RT-PCR and
Western blotting methods.
RESULTS: After transfection of HDAC6 siRNA, the expression of HDAC6 mRNA and
protein in EC9706 cells was significantly downregulated. In the HDAC6 siRNA
group, cell proliferation was markedly inhibited, the percentage of cells in
G0/G1 phase evidently increased and the percentage of cells in S phase decreased,
and the number of migrating cells significantly and obviously decreased. The mRNA
and protein expression levels of p21 and E-cadherin in the HDAC6 siRNA group were
significantly higher than those in the untreated group and the control siRNA
group, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC6 siRNA can effectively downregulate the expression of HDAC6
mRNA and protein in EC9706 cells. Down-regulation of HDAC6 expression can
obviously inhibit cell proliferation, arrest cell cycling in the G0/G1 phase and 
reduce cell migration. The latter two functions may be closely related with the
elevation of mRNA and protein expression of p21 and E-cadherin.

PMID: 23621219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Apr 25;4:e610. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.127.

Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) inhibits p53-dependent apoptosis
through the collaboration with HDAC6 in response to DNA damage.

Ozaki T(1), Wu D, Sugimoto H, Nagase H, Nakagawara A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of DNA Damage Signaling, Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chiba, Japan. tozaki@chiba-cc.jp

Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) is the best known as an essential
protein for osteoblast differentiation. In this study, we have found for the
first time that RUNX2 acts as a negative regulator for p53 in response to DNA
damage. On DNA damage mediated by adriamycin (ADR) exposure, p53 as well as RUNX2
was induced at protein and mRNA level in human osteosarcoma-derived U2OS cells in
association with a significant upregulation of various p53-target genes. Indirect
immunostaining and co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that RUNX2
colocalizes with p53 in cell nucleus and forms a complex with p53 following ADR
treatment. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that RUNX2/p53 complex
is efficiently recruited onto p53-target promoters in response to ADR, suggesting
that RUNX2 might be involved in the regulation of transcriptional activation
mediated by p53. Indeed, forced expression of RUNX2 resulted in a remarkable
downregulation of p53-target genes. Consistent with these observations, knockdown
of RUNX2 enhanced ADR-mediated apoptosis and also elevated p53-target gene
expression in response to ADR. On the other hand, depletion of RUNX2 in
p53-deficient human lung carcinoma-derived H1299 cells had an undetectable effect
on p53-target gene expression regardless of ADR treatment, indicating that
RUNX2-mediated downregulation of p53-target genes is dependent on p53.
Furthermore, RUNX2/p53 complex included histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and HDAC6
was also recruited onto p53-target promoters following ADR exposure. Of note,
HDAC6-specific chemical inhibitor tubacin treatment enhanced ADR-mediated
upregulation of p53-target gene expression, indicating that deacetylase activity 
of HDAC6 is required for RUNX2-mediated downregulation of p53-target gene. Taken 
together, our present findings strongly suggest that RUNX2 inhibits DNA
damage-induced transcriptional as well as pro-apoptotic activity of p53 through
the functional collaboration with HDAC6 and therefore might be an attractive
therapeutic target for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3641350
PMID: 23618908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 24;288(21):15035-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.431957. Epub
2013 Apr 11.

HDAC6 regulates mutant SOD1 aggregation through two SMIR motifs and tubulin
acetylation.

Gal J(1), Chen J, Barnett KR, Yang L, Brumley E, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a tubulin deacetylase that regulates protein
aggregation and turnover. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) linked
to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) make the mutant protein prone to 
aggregation. However, the role of HDAC6 in mutant SOD1 aggregation and the ALS
etiology is unclear. Here we report that HDAC6 knockdown increased mutant SOD1
aggregation in cultured cells. Different from its known role in mediating the
degradation of poly-ubiquitinated proteins, HDAC6 selectively interacted with
mutant SOD1 via two motifs similar to the SOD1 mutant interaction region (SMIR)
that we identified previously in p62/sequestosome 1. Expression of the
aggregation-prone mutant SOD1 increased a-tubulin acetylation, and the
acetylation-mimicking K40Q a-tubulin mutant promoted mutant SOD1 aggregation. Our
results suggest that ALS-linked mutant SOD1 can modulate HDAC6 activity and
increase tubulin acetylation, which, in turn, facilitates the microtubule- and
retrograde transport-dependent mutant SOD1 aggregation. HDAC6 impairment might be
a common feature in various subtypes of ALS.

PMCID: PMC3663524
PMID: 23580651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1832(8):1345-59. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.04.005. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Lysine deacetylases and mitochondrial dynamics in neurodegeneration.

Guedes-Dias P(1), Oliveira JM.

Author information: 
(1)REQUIMTE, Department of Drug Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Lysine acetylation is a key post-translational modification known to regulate
gene transcription, signal transduction, cellular transport and metabolism.
Lysine deacetylases (KDACs), including classical KDACs (a.k.a. histone
deacetylases; HDACs) and sirtuins (SIRTs), are emerging therapeutic targets in
neurodegeneration. Given the strong link between abnormal mitochondrial dynamics 
and neurodegenerative disorders (e.g. in Alzheimer, Parkinson and Huntington
diseases), here we examine the evidence for KDAC-mediated regulation of
mitochondrial biogenesis, fission-fusion, movement and mitophagy. Mitochondrial
biogenesis regulation was reported for SIRT1, SIRT3, and class IIa KDACs, mainly 
via PGC-1alpha modulation. SIRT1 or SIRT3 overexpression rescued mitochondrial
density and fission-fusion balance in neurodegeneration models. Mitochondrial
fission decreased with pan-classical-KDAC inhibitors and increased with
nicotinamide (pan-sirtuin-inhibitor/activator depending on concentration and
NAD(+) conversion). Mitochondrial movement increased with HDAC6 inhibition, but
this is not yet reported for the other tubulin deacetylase SIRT2. Inhibition of
HDAC6 or SIRT2 was reported neuroprotective. Mitophagy is assisted by the HDAC6
ubiquitin-binding and autophagosome-lysosome fusion promoting activities, and was
also associated with SIRT1 activation. In summary, KDACs can potentially modulate
multiple components of mitochondrial dynamics, however, several key points
require clarification. The SIRT1-biogenesis connection relies heavily in
controversial caloric restriction (CR) regimes or CR-mimetic drugs, and appears
cell-type dependent, recommending caution before linking SIRT1 activation with
general neuroprotection. Future studies should clarify mitochondrial
fission-fusion regulation by KDACs, and the interplay between HDAC6 and SIRT1 in 
mitophagy. Also, further studies are required to ascertain whether HDAC6
inhibition to enhance mitochondrial trafficking does not compromise autophagy or 
clearance of misfolded proteins in neurodegenerative disorders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23579074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Int Immunopharmacol. 2013 May;16(1):72-8. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.03.016. Epub
2013 Mar 27.

Tubastatin, a selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitor shows anti-inflammatory
and anti-rheumatic effects.

Vishwakarma S(1), Iyer LR, Muley M, Singh PK, Shastry A, Saxena A, Kulathingal J,
Vijaykanth G, Raghul J, Rajesh N, Rathinasamy S, Kachhadia V, Kilambi N, Rajgopal
S, Balasubramanian G, Narayanan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Drug Discovery Research, Orchid Chemicals and
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Sozhanganallur, Chennai, India. santoshv@orchidpharma.com

Epigenetic modifications represent a promising new approach to modulate cell
functions as observed in autoimmune diseases. Emerging evidence suggests the
utility of HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of chronic immune and inflammatory
disorders. However, class and isoform selective inhibition of HDAC is currently
favored as it limits the toxicity that has been observed with pan-HDAC
inhibitors. HDAC6, a member of the HDAC family, whose major substrate is
a-tubulin, is being increasingly implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory
disorders. The present study was carried out to study the potential
anti-inflammatory and anti-rheumatic effects of HDAC6 selective inhibitor
Tubastatin. Tubastatin, a potent human HDAC6 inhibitor with an IC50 of 11 nM
showed significant inhibition of TNF-a and IL-6 in LPS stimulated human THP-1
macrophages with an IC50 of 272 nM and 712 nM respectively. Additionally,
Tubastatin inhibited nitric oxide (NO) secretion in murine Raw 264.7 macrophages 
dose dependently with an IC50 of 4.2 µM and induced a-tubulin hyperacetylation
corresponding to HDAC6 inhibition in THP-1 cells without affecting the cell
viability. Tubastatin showed significant inhibition of paw volume at 30 mg/kg
i.p. in a Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA) induced animal model of inflammation. 
The disease modifying activity of Tubastatin was also evident in collagen induced
arthritis DBA1 mouse model at 30 mg/kg i.p. The significant attenuation of
clinical scores (~70%) by Tubastatin was confirmed histopathologically and was
found comparable to dexamethasone (~90% inhibition of clinical scores).
Tubastatin showed significant inhibition of IL-6 in paw tissues of arthritic
mice. The present work has demonstrated anti-inflammatory and antirheumatic
effects of a selective HDAC6 inhibitor Tubastatin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 May 8;49(36):3775-7. doi: 10.1039/c3cc41422a. Epub 2013 
Mar 28.

Potent and selective HDAC6 inhibitory activity of
N-(4-hydroxycarbamoylbenzyl)-1,2,4,9-tetrahydro-3-thia-9-azafluorenes as novel
sulfur analogues of Tubastatin A.

De Vreese R(1), Verhaeghe T, Desmet T, D'hooghe M.

Author information: 
(1)SynBioC Research Group, Department of Sustainable Organic Chemistry and
Technology, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure Links
653, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.

Eight N-(4-hydroxycarbamoylbenzyl)-1,2,4,9-tetrahydro-3-thia-9-azafluorenes were 
efficiently prepared as sulfur analogues of Tubastatin A and thus evaluated as
new HDAC6 inhibitors. All compounds exhibited potency against HDAC6, and four of 
them were active in the nanomolar range (IC(50) = 1.9-22 nM). Further analysis
revealed that the sulfone derivatives (designated as Tubathians) are superior to 
their non-oxidized sulfide analogues, and the two most active sulfones showed
good to excellent HDAC6 selectivity compared to all other HDAC isoform classes.

PMID: 23538448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. MBio. 2013 Mar 26;4(2). pii: e00636-12. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00636-12.

Inhibition of viral pathogenesis and promotion of the septic shock response to
bacterial infection by IRF-3 are regulated by the acetylation and phosphorylation
of its coactivators.

Chattopadhyay S(1), Fensterl V, Zhang Y, Veleeparambil M, Wetzel JL, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Interferon (IFN) is required for protecting mice from viral pathogenesis;
reciprocally, it mediates the deleterious septic shock response to bacterial
infection. The critical transcription factor for IFN induction, in both cases, is
IRF-3, which is activated by TLR3 or RIG-I signaling in response to virus
infection and TLR4 signaling in response to bacterial infection. Here, we report 
that IRF-3's transcriptional activity required its coactivators, ß-catenin and
CBP, to be modified by HDAC6-mediated deacetylation and protein kinase C isozyme 
ß (PKC-ß)-mediated phosphorylation, respectively, so that activated nuclear IRF-3
could form a stable transcription initiation complex at the target gene
promoters. ß-Catenin bridges IRF-3 and CBP, and the modifications were required
specifically for the interaction between ß-catenin and CBP but not ß-catenin and 
IRF-3. Consequently, like IRF-3(-/-) mice, HDAC6(-/-) mice were resistant to
bacterial lipopolysaccharide-induced septic shock. Conversely, they were highly
susceptible to pathogenesis caused by Sendai virus infection. Thus, HDAC6 is an
essential component of the innate immune response to microbial infection.

PMCID: PMC3622923
PMID: 23532979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. ChemMedChem. 2013 May;8(5):800-11. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300005. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

tert-Butylcarbamate-containing histone deacetylase inhibitors: apoptosis
induction, cytodifferentiation, and antiproliferative activities in cancer cells.

Valente S(1), Trisciuoglio D, Tardugno M, Benedetti R, Labella D, Secci D,
Mercurio C, Boggio R, Tomassi S, Di Maro S, Novellino E, Altucci L, Del Bufalo D,
Mai A, Cosconati S.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Chimica e
Tecnologie del Farmaco, Sapienza Università di Roma, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, 
Italy.

Herein we report novel pyrrole- and benzene-based hydroxamates (8, 10) and
2'-aminoanilides (9, 11) bearing the tert-butylcarbamate group at the CAP moiety 
as histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Compounds 8<U+2009>b and 10<U+2009>c selectively
inhibited HDAC6 at the nanomolar level, whereas the other hydroxamates effected
an increase in acetyl-a-tubulin levels in human acute myeloid leukemia U937
cells. In the same cell line, compounds 8<U+2009>b and 10<U+2009>c elicited 18.4 and 21.4<U+2009>%
apoptosis, respectively (SAHA: 16.9<U+2009>%), and the pyrrole anilide 9<U+2009>c displayed the
highest cytodifferentiating effect (90.9<U+2009>%). In tests against a wide range of
various cancer cell lines to determine its antiproliferative effects, compound
10<U+2009>c exhibited growth inhibition from sub-micromolar (neuroblastoma LAN-5 and
SH-SY5Y cells, chronic myeloid leukemia K562 cells) to low-micromolar (lung H1299
and A549, colon HCT116 and HT29 cancer cells) concentrations. In HT29 cells, 10<U+2009>c
increased histone H3 acetylation, and decreased the colony-forming potential of
the cancer cells by up to 60<U+2009>%.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23526814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 May 21;20(3):321-37. doi: 10.1530/ERC-12-0240. Print
2013 Jun.

PXD101 potentiates hormonal therapy and prevents the onset of
castration-resistant phenotype modulating androgen receptor, HSP90, and CRM1 in
preclinical models of prostate cancer.

Gravina GL(1), Marampon F, Muzi P, Mancini A, Piccolella M, Negri-Cesi P, Motta
M, Lenzi A, Di Cesare E, Tombolini V, Jannini EA, Festuccia C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiobiology, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of
L'Aquila, Via Vetoio, Coppito-2, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy.

Aberrant activation or 'reactivation' of androgen receptor (AR) during androgen
ablation therapy shows a potential cause for the development of
castration-resistant prostate cancer. This study tested the hypothesis that
PXD101, a potent pan histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, may prevent onset of
castration-resistant phenotype and potentiate hormonal therapy. A panel of human 
prostate cancer cells with graded castration-resistant phenotype and in vivo
models were used to verify this hypothesis. In this report, we demonstrated that 
hormonal manipulation favors the onset of castration-resistant phenotype
increasing HDAC expression and activity as well as modulating expression and
activity of AR, EGFR, HER2, and Akt. Consistent with these observations, the
functional knockdown of HDACs by PXD101 prevented the onset of
castration-resistant phenotype with a significant downregulation of AR, EGFR,
HER2, and Akt expression/activity. The dysregulation of functional cooperation
between HDAC6 with hsp90, on the one hand, and between GSK-3ß with CRM1, on the
other hand, may explain the biological effects of PXD101. In this regard, the
HDAC6 silencing or the functional knockdown of hsp90 by 17AAG resulted in the
selective downregulation of AR, EGFR, HER2, and Akt expression/activity, while
the decreased phosphorylation of GSK-3ß mediated by PXD101 increased the nuclear 
expression of CRM1, which in turn modified the AR and survivin recycling with
increased caspase 3 activity. HDAC inhibitors retain the ability to prevent the
onset of castration-resistant phenotype and, therefore, merit clinical
investigation in this setting. However, additional data are needed to develop
clinical treatment strategies for this disease stage.

PMID: 23507703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 19;110(12):4604-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1207586110. Epub 2013 Mar 4.

HDAC6 mutations rescue human tau-induced microtubule defects in Drosophila.

Xiong Y(1), Zhao K, Wu J, Xu Z, Jin S, Zhang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Neurons from the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related tauopathy
patients contain neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated tau
protein. Tau normally stabilizes microtubules (MTs); however, tau
hyperphosphorylation leads to loss of this function with consequent MT
destabilization and neuronal dysfunction. Accordingly, MT-stabilizing drugs such 
as paclitaxel and epothilone D have been shown as possible therapies for AD and
related tauopathies. However, MT-stabilizing drugs have common side effects such 
as neuropathy and neutropenia. To find previously undescribed suppressors of
tau-induced MT defects, we established a Drosophila model ectopically expressing 
human tau in muscle cells, which allow for clear visualization of the MT network.
Overexpressed tau was hyperphosphorylated and resulted in decreased MT density
and greater fragmentation, consistent with previous reports in AD patients and
mouse models. From a genetic screen, we found that a histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) null mutation rescued tau-induced MT defects in both muscles and neurons.
Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of the tubulin-specific deacetylase
activity of HDAC6 indicates that the rescue effect may be mediated by increased
MT acetylation. These findings reveal HDAC6 as a unique potential drug target for
AD and related tauopathies.

PMCID: PMC3606981
PMID: 23487739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Blood. 2013 Apr 25;121(17):3521-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-11-470179. Epub 2013 
Feb 26.

EB1, p150Glued, and Clasp1 control endothelial tubulogenesis through microtubule 
assembly, acetylation, and apical polarization.

Kim DJ(1), Martinez-Lemus LA, Davis GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Missouri
School of Medicine and Dalton Cardiovascular Sciences Center, Columbia, MO 65212,
USA.

Vascular tube morphogenesis requires the establishment of endothelial cell (EC)
apical-basal polarity in three-dimensional (3D) extracellular matrices. To date, 
there is little understanding of how EC polarity is controlled during these
highly dynamic and rapid morphogenic events. We show that the microtubule tip
complex proteins, end binding 1 (EB1), p150(Glued), and Clasp1, control human EC 
tube formation by (1) inducing microtubule assembly and asymmetric cytoskeletal
polarization, whereby acetylated and detyrosinated tubulins distribute in a
subapical membrane location and filamentous actin distributes basally; (2)
increasing tubulin posttranslational modifications, including required
acetylation events; and (3) regulating an EC lumen signaling cascade that
involves membrane type 1 matrix metallopatrinase (MT1-MMP)-dependent proteolysis 
as well as Pak, Raf, and Erk kinases. Another regulator of this process is the
microtubule stabilizing protein, tau, which binds p150(Glued) and similarly
affects EC lumen formation by controlling the levels of acetylated and
detyrosinated tubulins. Increased expression of the tubulin deacetylases, sirtuin
2, and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), blocks EC tube formation and cytoskeletal
polarization, while siRNA suppression of these deacetylases stimulates these
events. Overall, this work reveals a fundamental role for microtubule tip complex
proteins in coordinating microtubule assembly, posttranslational modifications
including acetylation, and apical-basal cytoskeletal polarization to control the 
developing apical membrane surface during blood vessel tubulogenesis in 3D matrix
environments.

PMCID: PMC3637019
PMID: 23444400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2013 Dec;39(7):817-30. doi: 10.1111/nan.12036.

Ubiquilin-1 immunoreactivity is concentrated on Hirano bodies and dystrophic
neurites in Alzheimer's disease brains.

Satoh J(1), Tabunoki H, Ishida T, Saito Y, Arima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo, Japan.

AIMS: Ubiquilin-1 acts as an adaptor protein that mediates the translocation of
polyubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome for degradation. Although previous
studies suggested a key role of ubiquilin-1 in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's
disease (AD), a direct relationship between ubiquilin-1 and Hirano bodies in AD
brains remains unknown.
METHODS: By immunohistochemistry, we studied ubiquilin-1 and ubiquilin-2
expression in the frontal cortex and the hippocampus of six AD and 13 control
cases.
RESULTS: Numerous Hirano bodies, accumulated in the hippocampal CA1 region of AD 
brains, expressed intense immunoreactivity for ubiquilin-1. They were much less
frequently found in control brains. However, Hirano bodies did not express a
panel of markers for proteasome, autophagosome or pathogenic proteins, such as
ubiquilin-2, ubiquitin, p62, LC3, beclin-1, HDAC6, paired helical filament
(PHF)-tau, protein-disulphide isomerase (PDI) and phosphorylated TDP-43, but some
of them expressed C9orf72. Ubiquilin-1-immunoreactive deposits were classified
into four distinct morphologies, such as rod-shaped structures characteristic of 
Hirano bodies, dystrophic neurites contacting senile plaques, fragmented
structures accumulated in the lesions affected with severe neuronal loss, and
thread-shaped structures located mainly in the molecular layer of the
hippocampus.
CONCLUSIONS: Ubiquilin-1 immunoreactivity is concentrated on Hirano bodies and
dystrophic neurites in AD brains, suggesting that aberrant expression of
ubiquilin-1 serves as one of pathological hallmarks of AD.

© 2013 British Neuropathological Society.

PMID: 23421764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055529. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

HDAC6 deacetylase activity is required for hypoxia-induced invadopodia formation 
and cell invasion.

Arsenault D(1), Brochu-Gaudreau K, Charbonneau M, Dubois CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Despite significant progress in the cancer field, tumor cell invasion and
metastasis remain a major clinical challenge. Cell invasion across tissue
boundaries depends largely on extracellular matrix degradation, which can be
initiated by formation of actin-rich cell structures specialized in matrix
degradation called invadopodia. Although the hypoxic microenvironment within
solid tumors has been increasingly recognized as an important driver of local
invasion and metastasis, little is known about how hypoxia influences invadopodia
biogenesis. Here, we show that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a cytoplasmic
member of the histone deacetylase family, is a novel modulator of hypoxia-induced
invadopodia formation. Hypoxia was found to enhance HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase
activity through activation of the EGFR pathway. Activated HDAC6, in turn,
triggered Smad3 phosphorylation resulting in nuclear accumulation. Inhibition of 
HDAC6 activity or knockdown of the protein inhibited both hypoxia-induced Smad3
activation and invadopodia formation. Our data provide evidence that hypoxia
influences invadopodia formation in a biphasic manner, which involves the
activation of HDAC6 deacetylase activity by EGFR, resulting in enhanced Smad
phosphorylation and nuclear accumulation. The identification of HDAC6 as a key
participant of hypoxia-induced cell invasion may have important therapeutic
implications for the treatment of metastasis in cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC3566011
PMID: 23405166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. FEBS Lett. 2013 Apr 2;587(7):880-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.02.001. Epub 2013
Feb 10.

HDAC6 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma progression by inhibiting P53
transcriptional activity.

Ding G(1), Liu HD, Huang Q, Liang HX, Ding ZH, Liao ZJ, Huang G.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common type of liver cancer. HDAC6 is 
a transcriptional regulator of the histone deacetylase family, subfamily 2.
Previous studies have shown that HDAC6 plays critical roles in transcription
regulation, cell cycle progression and developmental events. However, its
biological roles in the development of HCC remain largely unexplored. In the
present study, we found that mRNA and protein levels of HDAC6 were up-regulated
in HCC tissues and cell lines. The proinflammatory cytokines, which were
up-regulated in the human HCC microenvironment, increased HDAC6 expression
through a proximal NF-kappaB binding site on the HDAC6 gene promoter.
Furthermore, overexpression of HDAC6 could promote cell proliferation in HCC cell
lines. In contrast, HDAC6 knockdown using small interfering RNA inhibited cell
proliferation. At the molecular level, we demonstrated that HDAC6 could interact 
with p53 and attenuate its transcriptional activity through promotion of its
degradation. Therefore, our results suggest a previously unknown HDAC6-p53
molecular network controlling HCC development.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23402884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 1;73(7):2259-70. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2938. Epub
2013 Jan 31.

HDAC6 inhibition restores ciliary expression and decreases tumor growth.

Gradilone SA(1), Radtke BN, Bogert PS, Huang BQ, Gajdos GB, LaRusso NF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo
Center for Cell Signalling in Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA. gradilone.sergio@mayo.edu

Primary cilia are multisensory organelles recently found to be absent in some
tumor cells, but the mechanisms of deciliation and the role of cilia in tumor
biology remain unclear. Cholangiocytes, the epithelial cells lining the biliary
tree, normally express primary cilia and their interaction with bile components
regulates multiple processes, including proliferation and transport. Using
cholangiocarcinoma as a model, we found that primary cilia are reduced in
cholangiocarcinoma by a mechanism involving histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). The
experimental deciliation of normal cholangiocyte cells increased the
proliferation rate and induced anchorage-independent growth. Furthermore,
deciliation induced the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase and
Hedgehog signaling, two important pathways involved in cholangiocarcinoma
development. We found that HDAC6 is overexpressed in cholangiocarcinoma and
overexpression of HDAC6 in normal cholangiocytes induced deciliation and
increased both proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. To evaluate the
effect of cilia restoration on tumor cells, we targeted HDAC6 by short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) or by the pharmacologic inhibitor, tubastatin-A. Both approaches
restored the expression of primary cilia in cholangiocarcinoma cell lines and
decreased cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. The effects of
tubastatin-A were abolished when cholangiocarcinoma cells were rendered unable to
regenerate cilia by stable transfection of IFT88-shRNA. Finally, inhibition of
HDAC6 by tubastatin-A also induced a significant decrease in tumor growth in a
cholangiocarcinoma animal model. Our data support a key role for primary cilia in
malignant transformation, provide a plausible mechanism for their involvement,
and suggest that restoration of primary cilia in tumor cells by HDAC6 targeting
may be a potential therapeutic approach for cholangiocarcinoma.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3768151
PMID: 23370327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Med Chem. 2013 Feb 28;56(4):1772-6. doi: 10.1021/jm301355j. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Potent and selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) does not require
a surface-binding motif.

Wagner FF(1), Olson DE, Gale JP, Kaya T, Weïwer M, Aidoud N, Thomas M, Davoine
EL, Lemercier BC, Zhang YL, Holson EB.

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United States.

Hydroxamic acids were designed, synthesized, and evaluated for their ability to
selectively inhibit human histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Several inhibitors,
including compound 14 (BRD9757), exhibited excellent potency and selectivity
despite the absence of a surface-binding motif. The binding of these highly
efficient ligands for HDAC6 is rationalized via structure-activity relationships.
These results demonstrate that high selectivity and potent inhibition of HDAC6
can be achieved through careful choice of linker element only.

PMID: 23368884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 May 1;22(9):1783-90. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt028. Epub 2013 Jan
30.

Hdac6 deletion delays disease progression in the SOD1G93A mouse model of ALS.

Taes I(1), Timmers M, Hersmus N, Bento-Abreu A, Van Den Bosch L, Van Damme P,
Auwerx J, Robberecht W.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, Leuven Research Institute
for Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven,
Belgium.

Defects in axonal transport are thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of
neurodegenerative disease. Because a-tubulin acetylation facilitates axonal
transport, inhibition of the a-tubulin deacetylating enzymes, histone deacetylase
6 (Hdac6) and silent information regulator 2 (Sirt2), is thought to be an
interesting therapeutic strategy for these conditions. Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) is a one such rapidly progressive and fatal neurodegenerative
disorder, in which axonal transport defects have been found in vitro and in vivo.
To establish whether the inhibition of Hdac6 or Sirt2 may be of interest for ALS 
treatment, we investigated whether deleting Hdac6 or Sirt2 from the superoxide
dismutase 1, SOD1(G93A) mouse affects the motor neuron degeneration in this ALS
model. Deletion of Hdac6 significantly extended the survival of SOD1(G93A) mice
without affecting disease onset, and maintained motor axon integrity. This
protective effect was associated with increased a-tubulin acetylation. Deletion
of Sirt2 failed to affect the disease course, but also did not modify a-tubulin
acetylation. These findings show that Hdac6, rather than Sirt2, is a therapeutic 
target for the treatment of ALS. Moreover, Sirt2 appears not to be a major
a-tubulin deacetylase in the nervous system.

PMID: 23364049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Neurodegener. 2013 Jan 29;8:7. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-8-7.

HDAC6 as a target for neurodegenerative diseases: what makes it different from
the other HDACs?

Simões-Pires C(1), Zwick V, Nurisso A, Schenker E, Carrupt PA, Cuendet M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Geneva, University of
Lausanne, Quai Ernest-Ansermet 30, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have been demonstrated to be beneficial in 
animal models of neurodegenerative diseases. Such results were mainly associated 
with the epigenetic modulation caused by HDACs, especially those from class I,
via chromatin deacetylation. However, other mechanisms may contribute to the
neuroprotective effect of HDAC inhibitors, since each HDAC may present distinct
specific functions within the neurodegenerative cascades. Such an example is
HDAC6 for which the role in neurodegeneration has been partially elucidated so
far. The strategy to be adopted in promising therapeutics targeting HDAC6 is
still controversial. Specific inhibitors exert neuroprotection by increasing the 
acetylation levels of a-tubulin with subsequent improvement of the axonal
transport, which is usually impaired in neurodegenerative disorders. On the other
hand, an induction of HDAC6 would theoretically contribute to the degradation of 
protein aggregates which characterize various neurodegenerative disorders,
including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Hutington's diseases. This review
describes the specific role of HDAC6 compared to the other HDACs in the context
of neurodegeneration, by collecting in silico, in vitro and in vivo results
regarding the inhibition and/or knockdown of HDAC6 and other HDACs. Moreover,
structure, function, subcellular localization, as well as the level of HDAC6
expression within brain regions are reviewed and compared to the other HDAC
isoforms. In various neurodegenerative diseases, the mechanisms underlying HDAC6 
interaction with other proteins seem to be a promising approach in understanding 
the modulation of HDAC6 activity.

PMCID: PMC3615964
PMID: 23356410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 15;288(11):7907-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441048. Epub 2013
Jan 25.

Tubulin polymerization promoting protein 1 (Tppp1) phosphorylation by
Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (rock) and cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1)
inhibits microtubule dynamics to increase cell proliferation.

Schofield AV(1), Gamell C, Suryadinata R, Sarcevic B, Bernard O.

Author information: 
(1)Cytoskeleton and Cancer Unit, St Vincents Hospital, University of Melbourne, 
3065 Victoria, Australia.

Tubulin polymerization promoting protein 1 (Tppp1) regulates microtubule (MT)
dynamics via promoting MT polymerization and inhibiting histone deacetylase 6
(Hdac6) activity to increase MT acetylation. Our results reveal that as a
consequence, Tppp1 inhibits cell proliferation by delaying the G1/S-phase and the
mitosis to G1-phase transitions. We show that phosphorylation of Tppp1 by
Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (Rock) prevents its Hdac6 inhibitory activity
to enable cells to enter S-phase. Whereas, our analysis of the role of Tppp1
during mitosis revealed that inhibition of its MT polymerizing and Hdac6
regulatory activities were necessary for cells to re-enter the G1-phase. During
this investigation, we also discovered that Tppp1 is a novel Cyclin B/Cdk1
(cyclin-dependent kinase) substrate and that Cdk phosphorylation of Tppp1
inhibits its MT polymerizing activity. Overall, our results show that dual Rock
and Cdk phosphorylation of Tppp1 inhibits its regulation of the cell cycle to
increase cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3597828
PMID: 23355470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Cell Sci. 2013 Mar 15;126(Pt 6):1355-65. doi: 10.1242/jcs.114918. Epub 2013 Jan
23.

PCM1 recruits Plk1 to the pericentriolar matrix to promote primary cilia
disassembly before mitotic entry.

Wang G(1), Chen Q, Zhang X, Zhang B, Zhuo X, Liu J, Jiang Q, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation and State Key
Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Primary cilia, which emanate from the cell surface, exhibit assembly and
disassembly dynamics along the progression of the cell cycle. However, the
mechanism that links ciliary dynamics and cell cycle regulation remains elusive. 
In the present study, we report that Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), one of the key
cell cycle regulators, which regulate centrosome maturation, bipolar spindle
assembly and cytokinesis, acts as a pivotal player that connects ciliary dynamics
and cell cycle regulation. We found that the kinase activity of centrosome
enriched Plk1 is required for primary cilia disassembly before mitotic entry,
wherein Plk1 interacts with and activates histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) to
promote ciliary deacetylation and resorption. Furthermore, we showed that
pericentriolar material 1 (PCM1) acts upstream of Plk1 and recruits the kinase to
pericentriolar matrix (PCM) in a dynein-dynactin complex-dependent manner. This
process coincides with the primary cilia disassembly dynamics at the onset of
mitosis, as depletion of PCM1 by shRNA dramatically disrupted the pericentriolar 
accumulation of Plk1. Notably, the interaction between PCM1 and Plk1 is
phosphorylation dependent, and CDK1 functions as the priming kinase to facilitate
the interaction. Our data suggest a mechanism whereby the recruitment of Plk1 to 
pericentriolar matrix by PCM1 plays a pivotal role in the regulation of primary
cilia disassembly before mitotic entry. Thus, the regulation of ciliary dynamics 
and cell proliferation share some common regulators.

PMID: 23345402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Proteomics. 2013 Oct 30;92:132-59. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2013.01.004. Epub 2013 
Jan 18.

Protein oxidation in aging and the removal of oxidized proteins.

Höhn A(1), König J, Grune T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Toxicology, Institute of Nutrition, Friedrich
Schiller University Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are generated constantly within cells at low
concentrations even under physiological conditions. During aging the levels of
ROS can increase due to a limited capacity of antioxidant systems and repair
mechanisms. Proteins are among the main targets for oxidants due to their high
rate constants for several reactions with ROS and their abundance in biological
systems. Protein damage has an important influence on cellular viability since
most protein damage is non-repairable, and has deleterious consequences on
protein structure and function. In addition, damaged and modified proteins can
form cross-links and provide a basis for many senescence-associated alterations
and may contribute to a range of human pathologies. Two proteolytic systems are
responsible to ensure the maintenance of cellular functions: the proteasomal
(UPS) and the lysosomal system. Those degrading systems provide a last line of
antioxidative protection, removing irreversible damaged proteins and recycling
amino acids for the continuous protein synthesis. But during aging, both systems 
are affected and their proteolytic activity declines significantly. Here we
highlight the recent advantages in the understanding of protein oxidation and the
fate of these damaged proteins during aging. This article is part of a Special
Issue entitled: Posttranslational Protein modifications in biology and Medicine.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2013;53(1):1-8.

[Identification and significance of a novel degradation system for polyglutamine 
aggregates].

[Article in Japanese]

Iwata A(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokyo Hospital, Department of Neurology.

In neurodegeneration, accumulation of aggregated protein results in the formation
of inclusion bodies, which is a pathological hallmark of the diseases. There are 
various forms of aggregates; from oligomers to filaments and to inclusion bodies,
of which small species such as oligomers are considered to be more toxic compared
to tightly packed inclusion bodies. In vitro experiments show that artificial
inclusion bodies called aggresomes are generated with motor proteins and
microtubules, which represents cellular effort to manage aggregated proteins. We 
showed that the aggresomes are formed in order to concentrate autophagy
components and aggregates in order to give specificity to autophagy against
aggregated proteins, thus facilitating their selective degradation.

PMID: 23328059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Dec 28;18(48):7212-24. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i48.7212.

Comparative genomic study of gastric epithelial cells co-cultured with
Helicobacter pylori.

Wang F(1), Luo LD, Pan JH, Huang LH, Lv HW, Guo Q, Xu CX, Shen SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410013, Hunan Province, China.

AIM: To identify genes potentially involved in Helicobacter pylori (H.
pylori)-induced gastric carcinogenesis.
METHODS: GES-1 cells were co-cultured with H. pylori strains isolated from
patients with gastric carcinoma (GC, n = 10) or chronic gastritis (CG, n = 10)
for in vitro proliferation and apoptosis assays to identify the most and least
virulent strains. These two strains were cagA-genotyped and used for further in
vivo carcinogenic virulence assays by infecting Mongolian gerbils for 52 wk,
respectively; a broth free of H. pylori was lavaged as control. Genomic profiles 
of GES-1 cells co-cultured with the most and least virulent strains were
determined by microarray analysis. The most differentially expressed genes were
further verified using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction in GES-1 
cells infected with the most and least virulent strains, and by
immunohistochemistry in H. pylori positive CG, precancerous diseases, and GC
biopsy specimens in an independent experiment.
RESULTS: GC-derived H. pylori strains induced a potent proliferative effect in
GES-1 cells in co-culture, whereas CG-derived strains did not. The most (from a
GC patient) and least (from a CG patient) virulent strains were cagA-positive and
negative, respectively. At week 52, CG, atrophy, metaplasia, dysplasia, and GC
were observed in 90.0%, 80.0%, 80.0%, 90%, and 60.0%, respectively, of the
animals lavaged with the most virulent strain. However, only mild CG was observed
in 90% of the animals lavaged with the least virulent strain. On microarray
analysis, 800 differentially expressed genes (49 up- and 751 down-regulated),
involving those associated with cell cycle regulation, cell apoptosis,
cytoskeleton, immune response, and substance and energy metabolisms, were
identified in cells co-cultured with the most virulent strain as compared with
those co-cultured with the least virulent strain. The six most differentially
expressed genes (with a betweenness centrality of 0.1-0.2) were identified among 
the significant differential gene profile network, including JUN, KRAS, BRCA1,
SMAD2, TRAF1, and HDAC6. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
analyses verified that HDAC6 and TRFA1 mRNA expressions were significantly more
up-regulated in GES-1 cells co-cultured with the most virulent strain than in
those co-cultured with the least virulent strain. Immunohistochemistry of gastric
mucosal specimens from H. pylori-positive patients with CG, intestinal metaplasia
(IM), dysplasia, and GC showed that moderately positive and strongly positive
HDAC6 expression was detected in 21.7% of CG patients, 30.0% of IM patients,
54.5% of dysplasia patients, and 77.8% of GC patients (P < 0.001). The
up-regulation of TRAF1 expressions was detected in 34.8%, 53.3%, 72.7%, and 88.9%
specimens of CG, IM, dysplasia, and GC, respectively (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The overexpression of HDAC6 and TRAF1 in GES-1 cells co-cultured with
the GC-derived strain and in H. pylori-positive dysplasia and GC suggests that
HDAC6 and TRAF1 may be involved in H. pylori-induced gastric carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3544023
PMID: 23326126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 1;288(9):6227-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.431239. Epub 2013
Jan 15.

Reversible acetylation regulates salt-inducible kinase (SIK2) and its function in
autophagy.

Yang FC(1), Tan BC, Chen WH, Lin YH, Huang JY, Chang HY, Sun HY, Hsu PH, Liou GG,
Shen J, Chang CJ, Han CC, Tsai MD, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100,
Taiwan.

Salt-inducible kinase 2 (SIK2) is a serine/threonine protein kinase belonging to 
the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) family. SIK2 has been shown to function
in the insulin-signaling pathway during adipocyte differentiation and to modulate
CREB-mediated gene expression in response to hormones and nutrients. However,
molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of SIK2 kinase activity remains
largely elusive. Here we report a dynamic, post-translational regulation of its
kinase activity that is coordinated by an acetylation-deacetylation switch,
p300/CBP-mediated Lys-53 acetylation inhibits SIK2 kinase activity, whereas
HDAC6-mediated deacetylation restores the activity. Interestingly, overexpression
of acetylation-mimetic mutant of SIK2 (SIK2-K53Q), but not the nonacetylatable
K53R variant, resulted in accumulation of autophagosomes. Further consistent with
a role in autophagy, knockdown of SIK2 abrogated autophagosome and lysosome
fusion. Consequently, SIK2 and its kinase activity are indispensable for the
removal of TDP-43<U+0394> inclusion bodies. Our findings uncover SIK2 as a critical
determinant in autophagy progression and further suggest a mechanism in which the
interplay among kinase and deacetylase activities contributes to cellular protein
pool homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3585058
PMID: 23322770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Br J Cancer. 2013 Feb 5;108(2):342-50. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.576. Epub 2013 Jan
15.

A novel small molecule hydroxamate preferentially inhibits HDAC6 activity and
tumour growth.

Kaliszczak M(1), Trousil S, Åberg O, Perumal M, Nguyen QD, Aboagye EO.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Imaging Centre, Department of Surgery and Cancer Faculty 
of Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, Room 240, MRC
Cyclotron Building, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

BACKGROUND: This study investigates whether a histone deacetylase subtype 6
(HDAC6) inhibitor could be used in the treatment of solid tumours.
METHODS: We evaluated the effect of a novel inhibitor, C1A, on HDAC6 biochemical 
activity and cell growth. We further examined potential of early noninvasive
imaging of cell proliferation by [(18)F]fluorothymidine positron emission
tomography ([(18)F]FLT-PET) to detect therapy response.
RESULTS: C1A induced sustained acetylation of HDAC6 substrates, a-tubulin and
HSP90, compared with current clinically approved HDAC inhibitor SAHA. C1A induced
apoptosis and inhibited proliferation of a panel of human tumour cell lines from 
different origins in the low micromolar range. Systemic administration of the
drug inhibited the growth of colon tumours in vivo by 78%. The drug showed
restricted activity on gene expression with <0.065% of genes modulated during 24 
h of treatment. C1A treatment reduced tumour [(18)F]FLT uptake by 1.7-fold at 48 
h, suggesting that molecular imaging could provide value in future studies of
this compound.
CONCLUSION: C1A preferentially inhibits HDAC6 and modulates HDAC6 downstream
targets leading to growth inhibition of a diverse set of cancer cell lines. This 
property together with the favourable pharmacokinetics and efficacy in vivo makes
it a candidate for further pre-clinical and clinical development.

PMCID: PMC3566806
PMID: 23322205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Feb 15;23(4):929-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.12.067. 
Epub 2013 Jan 3.

A novel two-step QSAR modeling work flow to predict selectivity and activity of
HDAC inhibitors.

Zhao L(1), Xiang Y, Song J, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China.

A two-step modeling approach was employed to study the selectivity and activity
of histone deacetylase inhibitors. First, according to the activity difference
against HDAC1 and HDAC6, a binary classification model was established to
classify two kinds of inhibitors. Then two continuous models were built for each 
subclass to predict the activity value of HDAC1 and HDAC6 inhibitors. The three
models were all built with the GA-kNN method combined with dragon descriptors.
They were external validated by using external prediction set and Y-randomization
test. The highly predictive models were generated for all three data sets. For
the classification model, the classification accuracies of the models were as
high as 100% for the external test set. For HDAC1 and HDAC6 inhibitor consecutive
models, external R(2) values are 0.947 and 0.911, respectively. The results
proved the reliability of these models. All models were used to screen 1000
compounds included in PubMed dataset. Virtual screening resulted in 8 and 13
structurally unique consensus hits that were considered novel putative HDAC1 and 
HDAC6 inhibitors, respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23321563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. ChemMedChem. 2013 Feb;8(2):272-9. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201200529. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Discovery of pyridone-based histone deacetylase inhibitors: approaches for
metabolic stability.

Cho M(1), Choi E, Yang JS, Lee C, Seo JJ, Kim BS, Oh SJ, Kim HM, Lee K, Park SK, 
Kwon HJ, Han G.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Center for Protein Function Control (TRCP), Department 
of Biotechnology and Department of Biomedical Sciences (WCU Program), Yonsei
University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are important enzymes in epigenetic regulation and
are therapeutic targets for cancer. Most zinc-dependent HDACs induce
proliferation, dedifferentiation, and anti-apoptotic effects in cancer cells. We 
designed and synthesized a new series of pyridone-based HDAC inhibitors that have
a pyridone ring in the core structure and a conjugated system with an olefin
connecting the hydroxamic acid moiety. Consequently, most of the selected
pyridone-based HDAC inhibitors showed similar or higher inhibition profiles in
addition to remarkable metabolic stability against hydrolysis relative to the
corresponding lactam-based HDAC inhibitors. Furthermore, the selectivity of the
novel pyridine-based compounds was evaluated across all of the HDAC isoforms. One
of these compounds,
(E)-N-hydroxy-3-{1-[3-(naphthalen-2-yl)propyl]-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyridin-3-yl}acry
lamide, exhibited the highest level of HDAC inhibition (IC(50) =0.07 µM), highly 
selective inhibition of class I HDAC1 and class II HDAC6 enzymes, metabolic
stability in mouse liver microsomal studies, and effective growth inhibition of
various cancer cell lines. Docking studies indicated that a long alkyl linker and
bulky hydrophobic cap groups affect in vitro activities. Overall, the findings
reported herein regarding pyridone-based HDAC inhibitors can be used to guide
future research efforts to develop new and effective anticancer therapeutics.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23292995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51999. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051999. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

The Guanine nucleotide exchange factor kalirin-7 is a novel synphilin-1
interacting protein and modifies synphilin-1 aggregate transport and formation.

Tsai YC(1), Riess O, Soehn AS, Nguyen HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

Synphilin-1 has been identified as an interaction partner of a-synuclein, a key
protein in the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (PD). To further explore novel
binding partners of synphilin-1, a yeast two hybrid screening was performed and
kalirin-7 was identified as a novel interactor. We then investigated the effect
of kalirin-7 on synphilin-1 aggregate formation. Coexpression of kalirin-7 and
synphilin-1 caused a dramatic relocation of synphilin-1 cytoplasmic small
inclusions to a single prominent, perinuclear inclusion. These perinuclear
inclusions were characterized as being aggresomes according to their
colocalization with microtubule organization center markers, and their formation 
was microtubule-dependent. Furthermore, kalirin-7 increased the susceptibility of
synphilin-1 inclusions to be degraded as demonstrated by live cell imaging and
quantification of aggregates. However, the kalirin-7-mediated synphilin-1
aggresome response was not dependent on the GEF activity of kalirin-7 since
various dominant negative small GTPases could not inhibit the formation of
aggresomes. Interestingly, the aggresome response was blocked by HDAC6 catalytic 
mutants and the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA). Moreover, kalirin-7
decreased the level of acetylated a-tubulin in response to TSA, which suggests an
effect of kalirin-7 on HDAC6-mediated protein transportation and aggresome
formation. In summary, this is the first report demonstrating that kalirin-7
leads to the recruitment of synphilin-1 into aggresomes in a HDAC6-dependent
manner and also links kalirin-7 to microtubule dynamics.

PMCID: PMC3527391
PMID: 23284848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):4103-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.419945. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

Parkin ubiquitinates Tar-DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43) and promotes its
cytosolic accumulation via interaction with histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6).

Hebron ML(1), Lonskaya I, Sharpe K, Weerasinghe PP, Algarzae NK, Shekoyan AR,
Moussa CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
D. C. 20007, USA.

The importance of E3 ubiquitin ligases, involved in the degradation of misfolded 
proteins or promotion of protein-protein interaction, is increasingly recognized 
in neurodegeneration. TDP-43 is a predominantly nuclear protein, which regulates 
the transcription of thousands of genes and binds to mRNA of the E3 ubiquitin
ligase Parkin to regulate its expression. Wild type and mutated TDP-43 are
detected in ubiquitinated forms within the cytosol in several neurodegenerative
diseases. We elucidated the mechanisms of TDP-43 interaction with Parkin using
transgenic A315T mutant TDP-43 (TDP43-Tg) mice, lentiviral wild type TDP-43, and 
Parkin gene transfer rat models. TDP-43 expression increased Parkin mRNA and
protein levels. Lentiviral TDP-43 increased the levels of nuclear and cytosolic
protein, whereas Parkin co-expression mediated Lys-48 and Lys-63-linked ubiquitin
to TDP-43 and led to cytosolic co-localization of Parkin with ubiquitinated
TDP-43. Parkin and TDP-43 formed a multiprotein complex with HDAC6, perhaps to
mediate TDP-43 translocation. In conclusion, Parkin ubiquitinates TDP-43 and
facilitates its cytosolic accumulation through a multiprotein complex with HDAC6.

PMCID: PMC3567661
PMID: 23258539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052095. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Class I and class II histone deacetylases are potential therapeutic targets for
treating pancreatic cancer.

Wang G(1), He J, Zhao J, Yun W, Xie C, Taub JW, Azmi A, Mohammad RM, Dong Y, Kong
W, Guo Y, Ge Y.

Author information: 
(1)The State Engineering Laboratory of AIDS Vaccine, College of Life Science,
Jilin University, Changchun, China.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer is a highly malignant disease with an extremely
poor prognosis. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) have shown promising
antitumor activities against preclinical models of pancreatic cancer, either
alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic agents. In this study, we sought to
identify clinically relevant histone deacetylases (HDACs) to guide the selection 
of HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) tailored to the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
METHODOLOGY: HDAC expression in seven pancreatic cancer cell lines and normal
human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells was determined by Western blotting.
Antitumor interactions between class I- and class II-selective HDACIs were
determined by MTT assays and standard isobologram/CompuSyn software analyses. The
effects of HDACIs on cell death, apoptosis and cell cycle progression, and
histone H4, alpha-tubulin, p21, and <U+03B3>H2AX levels were determined by colony
formation assays, flow cytometry analysis, and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: The majority of classes I and II HDACs were detected in the pancreatic
cancer cell lines, albeit at variable levels. Treatments with MGCD0103 (a class
I-selective HDACI) resulted in dose-dependent growth arrest, cell
death/apoptosis, and cell cycle arrest in G2/M phase, accompanied by induction of
p21 and DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). In contrast, MC1568 (a class
IIa-selective HDACI) or Tubastatin A (a HDAC6-selective inhibitor) showed minimal
effects. When combined simultaneously, MC1568 significantly enhanced
MGCD0103-induced growth arrest, cell death/apoptosis, and G2/M cell cycle arrest,
while Tubastatin A only synergistically enhanced MGCD0103-induced growth arrest. 
Although MC1568 or Tubastatin A alone had no obvious effects on DNA DSBs and p21 
expression, their combination with MGCD0103 resulted in cooperative induction of 
p21 in the cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that classes I and II HDACs are potential
therapeutic targets for treating pancreatic cancer. Accordingly, treating
pancreatic cancer with pan-HDACIs may be more beneficial than class- or
isoform-selective inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3522644
PMID: 23251689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Clin Epigenetics. 2012 Dec 17;4(1):23. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-4-23.

Putative molecular mechanism underlying sperm chromatin remodelling is regulated 
by reproductive hormones.

Gill-Sharma MK(1), Choudhuri J, Ansari MA, D'Souza S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health, J,M, Street, Parel, Mumbai 400012, India.
manjitgill_sharma@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The putative regulatory role of the male reproductive hormones in the
molecular mechanism underlying chromatin condensation remains poorly understood. 
In the past decade, we developed two adult male rat models wherein functional
deficits of testosterone or FSH, produced after treatments with 20<U+2009>mg/Kg/d of
cyproterone acetate (CPA) per os, for a period of 15<U+2009>days or 3<U+2009>mg/Kg/d of
fluphenazine decanoate (FD) subcutaneously, for a period of 60<U+2009>days,
respectively, affected the rate of sperm chromatin decondensation in vitro. These
rat models have been used in the current study in order to delineate the putative
roles of testosterone and FSH in the molecular mechanism underlying remodelling
of sperm chromatin.
RESULTS: We report that deficits of both testosterone and FSH affected the
turnover of polyubiquitylated histones and led to their accumulation in the
testis. Functional deficits of testosterone reduced expression of MIWI, the
5-methyl cap binding RNA-binding protein (PIWIlike murine homologue of the
Drosophila protein PIWI/P-element induced wimpy testis) containing a
PAZ/Piwi-Argonaut-Zwille domain and levels of histone deacetylase1 (HDAC1),
ubiquitin ligating enzyme (URE-B1/E3), 20S proteasome a1 concomitant with reduced
expression of ubiquitin activating enzyme (ube1), conjugating enzyme (ube2d2),
chromodomain Y like protein (cdyl), bromodomain testis specific protein (brdt),
hdac6 (histone deacetylase6), androgen-dependent homeobox placentae embryonic
protein (pem/RhoX5), histones h2b and th3 (testis-specific h3). Functional
deficits of FSH reduced the expression of cdyl and brdt genes in the testis,
affected turnover of ubiquitylated histones, stalled the physiological DNA repair
mechanism and culminated in spermiation of DNA damaged sperm.
CONCLUSIONS: We aver that deficits of both testosterone and FSH differentially
affected the process of sperm chromatin remodelling through subtle changes in the
'chromatin condensation transcriptome and proteome', thereby stalling the
replacement of 'dynamic' histones with 'inert' protamines, and altering the
epigenetic state of condensed sperm chromatin. The inappropriately condensed
chromatin affected the sperm chromatin cytoarchitecture, evident from subtle
ultrastructural changes in the nuclei of immature caput epididymal sperm of CPA- 
or FD-treated rats, incubated in vitro with dithiothreitol.

PMCID: PMC3549752
PMID: 23241214  [PubMed]


386. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Jan;5(1):52-63. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201201923. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Reducing HDAC6 ameliorates cognitive deficits in a mouse model for Alzheimer's
disease.

Govindarajan N(1), Rao P, Burkhardt S, Sananbenesi F, Schlüter OM, Bradke F, Lu
J, Fischer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center,
Georg-August-University Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are currently being discussed as promising
therapeutic targets to treat neurodegenerative diseases. However, the role of
specific HDACs in cognition and neurodegeneration remains poorly understood.
Here, we investigate the function of HDAC6, a class II member of the HDAC
superfamily, in the adult mouse brain. We report that mice lacking HDAC6 are
cognitively normal but reducing endogenous HDAC6 levels restores learning and
memory and a-tubulin acetylation in a mouse model for Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Our data suggest that this therapeutic effect is, at least in part, linked to the
observation that loss of HDAC6 renders neurons resistant to amyloid-ß-mediated
impairment of mitochondrial trafficking. Thus, our study suggests that targeting 
HDAC6 could be a suitable strategy to ameliorate cognitive decline observed in
AD.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3569653
PMID: 23184605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. FEBS J. 2013 Feb;280(3):775-93. doi: 10.1111/febs.12079. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Histone deacetylase 6 plays a role as a distinct regulator of diverse cellular
processes.

Li Y(1), Shin D, Kwon SH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Yonsei Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Yonsei
University, Incheon, Korea.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6 is the best-characterized class IIb deacetylase that
regulates many important biological processes via the formation of complexes with
its partner proteins. HDAC6 is important both for cytoplasmic and nuclear
functions. Unlike other deacetylases, HDAC6 has unique substrate specificity for 
nonhistone proteins. Such diverse functions of HDAC6 suggest that it serves a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of a wide range of diseases. This 
therapeutic interest in HDAC6 stems from the observation that HDAC6 may be
overexpressed or deregulated in various cancers, neurodegenerative diseases and
inflammatory disorders. Despite extensive efforts, however, very few
HDAC6-selective inhibitors have been identified and the precise structural
determinants remain undefined. Future efforts aiming to better define the
structure and function of HDAC6 should provide the basis for the discovery of
novel effective inhibitors. In this review, we focus on recent studies that
highlight the importance of HDAC6-mediated biological processes, disease
mechanisms and HDAC6-selective inhibitors.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

PMID: 23181831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Br J Haematol. 2013 Jan;160(2):188-98. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12108. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Prognostic and therapeutic relevance of c-FLIP in acute myeloid leukaemia.

McLornan D(1), Hay J, McLaughlin K, Holohan C, Burnett AK, Hills RK, Johnston PG,
Mills KI, McMullin MF, Longley DB, Gilkes A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.

Erratum in
    Br J Haematol. 2013 Aug;162(3):428. Gilkes, Amanda [added].

Chemoresistance is a major contributor to the aggressiveness of AML and is often 
due to insufficient apoptosis. The CFLAR gene is expressed as long and short
splice forms encoding the anti-apoptotic proteins c-FLIP(L) and c-FLIP(S)
(CFLAR(L) and CFLAR(S) , respectively) that play important roles in drug
resistance. In univariate analyses of CFLAR mRNA expression in adult AML
patients, those individuals with higher than median mRNA expression of the long
splice form CFLAR(L) (but not the short splice form) had significantly lower 3
year overall survival (P = 0·04) compared to those with low expression. In cell
line studies, simultaneous down-regulation of c-FLIP(L) and c-FLIP(S) proteins
using siRNA induced apoptosis in U937 and NB-4 AML cells, but not K562 or
OCI-AML3 cells. However, dual c-FLIP(L/S) downregulation sensitized all four cell
lines to apoptosis induced by recombinant tumour necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (rTRAIL). Moreover, specific downregulation of
c-FLIP(L) was found to recapitulate the phenotypic effects of dual c-FLIP(L/S)
downregulation. The histone deacetylase (HDAC)1/2/3/6 inhibitor Vorinostat was
found to potently down-regulate c-FLIP(L) expression by transcriptional and
post-transcriptional mechanisms and to sensitize AML cells to rTRAIL. Further
analyses using more selective HDAC inhibitors revealed that HDAC6 inhibition was 
not required for c-FLIP(L) down-regulation. These results suggest that c-FLIP(L) 
may have clinical relevance both as a prognostic biomarker and potential
therapeutic target for HDAC inhibitors in AML although this requires further
study.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23167276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Blood. 2012 Nov 15;120(20):4118-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-09-455899.

The spreading influence of platelet HDACs.

Kile BT(1).

Author information: 
(1)THE WALTER AND ELIZA HALL INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL RESEARCH.

Comment on
    Blood. 2012 Nov 15;120(20):4215-8.

PMID: 23160187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 4;430(1):394-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.034. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

Brain expression level and activity of HDAC6 protein in neurodegenerative
dementia.

Odagiri S(1), Tanji K, Mori F, Miki Y, Kakita A, Takahashi H, Wakabayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Brain Science, Hirosaki University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a multifunctional cytoplasmic protein that plays
an especially critical role in the formation of aggresomes, where aggregates of
excess protein are deposited. Previous immunohistochemical studies have shown
that HDAC6 accumulates in Lewy bodies in Parkinson's disease and dementia with
Lewy bodies (DLB) as well as in glial cytoplasmic inclusions in multiple system
atrophy (MSA). However, it is uncertain whether the level and activity of HDAC6
are altered in the brains of patients with neurodegenerative dementia. In the
present study, we demonstrated that the level of HDAC6 was not altered in the
temporal cortex of patients with Alzheimer's disease and DLB in comparison with
controls. In contrast, the level of HDAC6 was significantly increased in the
temporal cortex of patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43
inclusions (FTLD-TDP) and in the cerebellar white matter of patients with MSA.
However, the level of acetylated a-tubulin, one of the substrates of HDAC6, was
not altered in FTLD-TDP and MSA relative to controls. These findings suggest that
the induced level of HDAC6 in the brain is insufficient for manifestation of its 
activity in FTLD-TDP and MSA.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49418. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049418. Epub 2012 Nov 13.

HDAC6 regulates epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) endocytic trafficking and
degradation in renal epithelial cells.

Liu W(1), Fan LX, Zhou X, Sweeney WE Jr, Avner ED, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
United States of America.

We present for the first time that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) regulates EGFR
degradation and trafficking along microtubules in Pkd1 mutant renal epithelial
cells. HDAC6, the microtubule-associated a-tubulin deacetylase, demonstrates
increased expression and activity in Pkd1 mutant mouse embryonic kidney cells.
Targeting HDAC6 with a general HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin (TSA), or a specific 
HDAC6 inhibitor, tubacin, increased the acetylation of a-tubulin and
downregulated the expression of EGFR in Pkd1 mutant renal epithelial cells. HDAC6
was co-localized with EGF induced endocytic EGFR and endosomes, respectively.
Inhibition of the activity of HDAC6 accelerated the trafficking of EGFR from
early endosomes to late endosomes along the microtubules. Without EGF stimulation
EGFR was randomly distributed while after stimulation with EGF for 30 min, EGFR
was accumulated around a-tubulin labeled microtubule bundles. These data
suggested that the Pkd1 mutation induced upregulation of HDAC6 might act to slow 
the trafficking of EGFR from early endosomes to late endosomes along the
microtubules for degradation through deacetylating a-tubulin. In addition,
inhibition of HDAC activity decreased the phosphorylation of ERK1/2, the
downstream target of EGFR axis, and normalized EGFR localization from apical to
basolateral in Pkd1 knockout mouse kidneys. Thus, targeting HDAC6 to downregulate
EGFR activity may provide a potential therapeutic approach to treat polycystic
kidney disease.

PMCID: PMC3496684
PMID: 23152903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Biochem J. 2013 Feb 1;449(3):643-8. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121439.

A novel method for purification of polymerizable tubulin with a high content of
the acetylated isotype.

Carbajal A(1), Chesta ME, Bisig CG, Arce CA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Química Biológica de Córdoba (CIQUIBIC),
UNC-CONICET, Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas,
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, 5000-Córdoba, Argentina.

Tubulin can be acetylated/deacetylated on Lys40 of the a-subunit. Studies of the 
post-translational acetylation/deacetylation of tubulin using biochemical
techniques require tubulin preparations that are enriched in AcTubulin
(acetylated tubulin) and (for comparison) preparations lacking AcTubulin.
Assembly-disassembly cycling of microtubules gives tubulin preparations that
contain little or no AcTubulin. In the present study we demonstrated that this
result is owing to the presence of high deacetylating activity in the extracts.
This deacetylating activity in rat brain homogenates was inhibited by TSA
(Trichostatin A) and tubacin, but not by nicotinamide, indicating that HDAC6
(histone deacetylase 6) is involved. TSA showed no effect on microtubule
polymerization or depolymerization. We utilized these properties of TSA to
prevent deacetylation during the assembly-disassembly procedure. The effective
inhibitory concentration of TSA was 3 µM in the homogenate and 1 µM in the
subsequent cycling steps. By comparison with immunopurified AcTubulin, we
estimated that ~64% of the tubulin molecules in the three cycled preparations
were acetylated. The protein profiles of these tubulin preparations, as assessed 
by SDS/PAGE and Coomassie Blue staining, were identical to that of a preparation 
completely lacking AcTubulin obtained by assembly-disassembly cycles in the
absence of TSA. The tyrosination state and in vitro assembly-disassembly kinetics
were the same regardless of the degree of acetylation.

PMID: 23140207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2012;76(11):2165-7. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

The role of acetylation in the subcellular localization of an oncogenic isoform
of translation factor eIF5A.

Ishfaq M(1), Maeta K, Maeda S, Natsume T, Ito A, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetics Laboratory, RIKEN Advanced Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, 
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Mammalian cells express two isoforms of eIF5A, eIF5A1 and eIF5A2, but little is
known about the function of eIF5A2. Here we report that eIF5A2 is reversibly
acetylated at lysine-47. HDAC6 and SIRT2 were identified as the enzymes
responsible for deacetylating eIF5A2. Analysis using acetylation-deficient
mutants indicated that acetylation regulates the subcellular localization of
eIF5A2.

PMID: 23132580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Epigenomics. 2012 Oct;4(5):571-89. doi: 10.2217/epi.12.52.

A focus on the preclinical development and clinical status of the histone
deacetylase inhibitor, romidepsin (depsipeptide, Istodax(®)).

Harrison SJ(1), Bishton M, Bates SE, Grant S, Piekarz RL, Johnstone RW, Dai Y,
Lee B, Araujo ME, Prince HM.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Service, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.

Romidepsin (Istodax(®), depsipeptide, FR901228, FK228, NSC 630176) is a cyclic
peptide, broad-spectrum, potent histone deacetylase inhibitor, with activity
mainly against class I histone deacetylase enzymes. In this article, we give an
overview of the putative modes of action, such as effects on gene expression,
cell cycle regulation, apoptosis induction, DNA repair, protein acetylation and
induction of autophagy. Romidepsin has mainly been developed as a therapy for
hematologic malignancies and is approved by the US FDA for the treatment of
cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. This report outlines the laboratory and clinical
development of the compound as a single agent that has more recently been
evaluated in combination with other anticancer therapeutics, such as proteasome
inhibitors.

PMID: 23130838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Biochem J. 2013 Feb 1;449(3):605-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121121.

Regulation of adipogenesis by cytoskeleton remodelling is facilitated by
acetyltransferase MEC-17-dependent acetylation of a-tubulin.

Yang W(1), Guo X, Thein S, Xu F, Sugii S, Baas PW, Radda GK, Han W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Medicine, Singapore Bioimaging Consortium, Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.

Cytoskeleton remodelling is a prerequisite step for the morphological transition 
from preadipocytes to mature adipocytes. Although microtubules play a pivotal
role in organizing cellular structure, regulation of microtubule dynamics during 
adipogenesis remains unclear. In the present paper we show that acetylation of
a-tubulin is up-regulated during adipogenesis, and adipocyte development is
dependent on a-tubulin acetylation, as expression of an acetylation-resistant
a-tubulin mutant significantly inhibits adipogenesis. Moreover, acetylation of
a-tubulin is under the control of the acetyltransferase MEC-17 and deacetylases
SIRT2 (Sirtuin 2) and HDAC6 (histone deacetylase 6). Adipocyte development is
inhibited in MEC-17-knockdown cells, but enhanced in MEC-17-overexpressing cells.
Finally, we show that katanin, a microtubule-severing protein with enhanced
activity on acetylated a-tubulin, is actively involved in adipogenesis. We
propose that co-ordinated up-regulation of a-tubulin acetylation initiates
cytoskeleton remodelling by promoting a-tubulin severing by katanin which, in
turn, allows expansion of lipid droplets and accelerates the morphological
transition toward mature adipocytes.

PMID: 23126280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Epigenetics. 2012 Dec 1;7(12):1403-12. doi: 10.4161/epi.22674. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

HDAC isoenzyme expression is deregulated in chronic lymphocytic leukemia B-cells 
and has a complex prognostic significance.

Van Damme M(1), Crompot E, Meuleman N, Mineur P, Bron D, Lagneaux L,
Stamatopoulos B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Cell Therapy, Faculty of Medicine, Institut Jules
Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a crucial role in chromatin structure and,
consequently, gene expression. Their deregulation has been reported in various
cancers. We performed a complete and comprehensive study of the expression of 18 
HDACs (including Sirtuin; SIRT) by real-time PCR in a cohort of 200 chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients with a median follow-up of 77 mo, and
compared it with the results obtained from normal B cells. We also compared HDAC 
expression at diagnosis and after relapse. We observed significant deregulation
(mostly upregulation) of HDACs in CLL. In terms of clinical significance, only
HDAC6 was significantly correlated with treatment-free survival (TFS), whereas
HDAC3 and SIRT2, 3 and 6 were correlated with overall survival (OS). A
multivariate Cox regression stepwise analysis indicated that HDAC6, 7 and 10 and 
SIRT3 were TFS independent predictors. Interestingly, poor prognosis was
associated with an overexpression of HDAC7 and 10 but an underexpression of HDAC6
and SIRT3. Therefore, these factors were combined in a TFS score: patients with a
score of 0-1-2, 3 and 4 had a median TFS of 107, 57 and 26 mo, respectively (HR =
4.03, p < 0.0001). For OS, SIRT5 and 6 allowed stratification into 3 groups, with
a median OS of > 360, 237 and 94 mo (HR = 6.38, p < 0.0001). However, we could
not find statistical differences in HDAC expression after relapse. These results,
validated by a 5-fold cross-validation, highlight the complex impact of HDAC
expression in CLL clinical course.

PMCID: PMC3528695
PMID: 23108383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 21;287(52):43620-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.394965. Epub 2012
Oct 23.

Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK) protein controls microtubule dynamics in
a novel signaling pathway that regulates cell migration.

Schofield AV(1), Steel R, Bernard O.

Author information: 
(1)St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research Cytoskeleton and Cancer Unit,
University of Melbourne, 3065 Victoria, Australia.

The two members of the Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK1 and 2) family are
established regulators of actin dynamics that are involved in the regulation of
the cell cycle as well as cell motility and invasion. Here, we discovered a novel
signaling pathway whereby ROCK regulates microtubule (MT) acetylation via
phosphorylation of the tubulin polymerization promoting protein 1 (TPPP1/p25). We
show that ROCK phosphorylation of TPPP1 inhibits the interaction between TPPP1
and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), which in turn results in increased HDAC6
activity followed by a decrease in MT acetylation. As a consequence, we show that
TPPP1 phosphorylation by ROCK increases cell migration and invasion via
modulation of cellular acetyl MT levels. We establish here that the
ROCK-TPPP1-HDAC6 signaling pathway is important for the regulation of cell
migration and invasion.

PMCID: PMC3527948
PMID: 23093407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Dec 1;22(23):7084-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.09.093. 
Epub 2012 Oct 2.

The structural requirements of histone deacetylase inhibitors: suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid analogs modified at the C6 position.

Choi SE(1), Pflum MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA, Vorinostat), the first FDA-approved
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor drug, was modified at the C6 position to
study the structural requirements for high potency and selectivity. Substituents 
on the C6 position only modestly influenced inhibitor potency, with poorer
activity observed as substituent size increased. Interestingly, C6 substituents
also modestly influenced selectivity compared to the parent compound, SAHA. This 
systematic study documenting the influence of substituents on the SAHA linker
region will aid development of anti-cancer drugs targeting HDAC proteins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3745031
PMID: 23089527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Adv Cancer Res. 2012;116:131-63. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394387-3.00004-5.

HDAC inhibitor modulation of proteotoxicity as a therapeutic approach in cancer.

McConkey DJ(1), White M, Yan W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, U.T. M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. 
dmcconke@mdanderson.org

The strong clinical activity of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (Velcade) in 
multiple myeloma and other hematological malignancies has focused considerable
attention on its mechanisms of action. Although NF<U+03BA>B inhibition was initially the
mechanism in focus, accumulating evidence indicates that misfolded protein
accumulation leading to proteotoxicity plays an even more important role in cell 
killing. Proteotoxicity that occurs as a consequence of protein aggregate
accumulation has long been associated with the development of neurodegenerative
diseases, and a large and growing body of literature has documented how protein
aggregates are handled and disposed of via evolutionarily conserved mechanisms
involving cross talk between the proteasome and autophagy in normal cells. The
type II histone deacetylase HDAC6 plays important roles in these processes and
HDAC6 inhibition enhances proteotoxicity. These observations served as the basis 
for the development of HDAC6-specific chemical inhibitors that are now being
evaluated in combination with proteasome inhibitors in preclinical models.
Nonetheless, there is also strong evidence that the more classical,
chromatin-associated (type I) HDACs are also involved in the regulation of
proteotoxicity, although the biochemical mechanisms underlying their effects are 
not well defined. Importantly, emerging evidence indicates that subsets of tumor 
cells contain defects in these protein quality control pathways, which may
underlie their vulnerability to proteasome inhibitor-induced death. In addition, 
our clearer understanding of cytoprotective protein quality control responses is 
identifying novel candidate targets for therapeutic intervention. In this
chapter, we present an overview of protein quality control mechanisms in normal
tissues and describe how this information is informing our development of
proteasome inhibitors and other agents that impact upon these pathways for cancer
therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23088870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Cell Rep. 2012 Oct 25;2(4):951-63. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.09.016. Epub 2012
Oct 19.

Regulation of CD133 by HDAC6 promotes ß-catenin signaling to suppress cancer cell
differentiation.

Mak AB(1), Nixon AM, Kittanakom S, Stewart JM, Chen GI, Curak J, Gingras AC,
Mazitschek R, Neel BG, Stagljar I, Moffat J.

Author information: 
(1)Donnelly Centre and Banting and Best Department of Medical Research,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada.

The pentaspan membrane glycoprotein CD133 marks lineage-specific cancer
progenitor cells and is associated with poor prognosis in a number of tumor
types. Despite its utility as a cancer progenitor cell marker, CD133 protein
regulation and molecular function remain poorly understood. We find that
the deacetylase HDAC6 physically associates with CD133 to negatively regulate
CD133 trafficking down the endosomal-lysosomal pathway for degradation. We
further demonstrate that CD133, HDAC6, and the central molecule of the canonical 
Wnt signaling pathway, ß-catenin, can physically associate as a ternary complex. 
This association stabilizes ß-catenin via HDAC6 deacetylase activity, which leads
to activation of ß-catenin signaling targets. Downregulation of either CD133 or
HDAC6 results in increased ß-catenin acetylation and degradation, which
correlates with decreased proliferation in vitro and tumor xenograft growth
in vivo. Given that CD133 marks progenitor cells in a wide range of cancers,
targeting CD133 may be a means to treat multiple cancer types.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3590846
PMID: 23084749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cell Adh Migr. 2012 Nov-Dec;6(6):495-501. doi: 10.4161/cam.21585. Epub 2012 Oct
17.

The interplay between G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) and histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) at the crossroads of epithelial cell motility.

Lafarga V(1), Mayor F Jr, Penela P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular and Centro de Biología Molecular Severo
Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) is emerging as a key integrative node 
in cell migration control. In addition to its canonical role in the
desensitization of G protein-coupled receptors involved in chemotaxis, novel
recently identified GRK2 substrates and interacting partners appear to mediate
the GRK2-dependent modulation of diverse molecular processes involved in
motility, such as gradient sensing, cell polarity or cytoskeletal reorganization.
We have recently identified an interaction between GRK2 and histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6), a major cytoplasmic a-tubulin deacetylase involved in cell motility and 
adhesion. GRK2 dynamically associates with and phosphorylates HDAC6 to stimulate 
its a-tubulin deacetylase activity at specific cellular localizations such as the
leading edge of migrating cells, thus promoting local tubulin deacetylation and
enhanced motility. This GRK2-HDAC6 functional interaction may have important
implications in pathological contexts related to aberrant epithelial cell
migration.

PMCID: PMC3547893
PMID: 23076141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Neoplasia. 2012 Sep;14(9):846-54.

Inhibition of SIRT2 potentiates the anti-motility activity of taxanes:
implications for antineoplastic combination therapies.

Bonezzi K(1), Belotti D, North BJ, Ghilardi C, Borsotti P, Resovi A, Ubezio P,
Riva A, Giavazzi R, Verdin E, Taraboletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Angiogenesis Unit, Department of Oncology, Mario Negri Institute for
Pharmacological Research, Bergamo, Italy.

Taxanes are potent inhibitors of cell motility, a property implicated in their
antiangiogenic and antimetastatic activity and unrelated to their
antiproliferative effect. The molecular mechanism of this anti-motility activity 
is poorly understood. In this study, we found that paclitaxel induced tubulin
acetylation in endothelial and tumor cells, at concentrations that affected cell 
motility but not proliferation (10(-8) to 10(-9) M, for 4 hours). Induction of
tubulin acetylation correlated with inhibition of motility but not proliferation 
based on a comparison of highly and poorly cytotoxic taxanes (paclitaxel and
IDN5390) and tumor cell lines sensitive and resistant to paclitaxel (1A9 and 1A9 
PTX22). Consistent with the hypothesis that tubulin deacetylase activity might
affect cell response to the anti-motility activity of taxanes, we found that
overexpression of the tubulin deacetylase SIRT2 increased cell motility and
reduced cell response to the anti-motility activity of paclitaxel. Conversely,
the SIRT2 inhibitor splitomicin reduced cell motility and potentiated the
anti-motility activity of paclitaxel. The inhibitory effect was further
potentiated by the addition of the HDAC6 inhibitor trichostatin A. Paclitaxel and
splitomicin promoted translocation into the nucleus--and hence activation--of
FOXO3a, a negative regulator of cell motility. This study indicates a role for
SIRT2 in the regulation of cell motility and suggests that therapies combining
sirtuin inhibitors and taxanes could be used to treat cell motility-based
pathologic processes such as tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3459280
PMID: 23019416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Gene Ther. 2013 Jun;20(6):616-24. doi: 10.1038/gt.2012.77. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

Highly acetylated tubulin permits enhanced interactions with and trafficking of
plasmids along microtubules.

Badding MA(1), Dean DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Microtubule-based transport is required for plasmid translocation to the nucleus 
during transfections, and having stable structures could enhance this movement.
In previous studies, in which the cytoskeleton was disrupted, we found that
populations of microtubules remain that are stable and highly acetylated. By
increasing the levels of acetylated tubulin through inhibition of the tubulin
deacetylase HDAC6, we observe more rapid plasmid nuclear localization of
transfected plasmids and greater levels of gene transfer. In this study, we
sought to understand plasmid movement in cells with enhanced tubulin acetylation.
Using variations of a microtubule spin-down assay, we found that plasmids bound
to hyper-acetylated microtubules to a greater degree than they did to unmodified 
microtubules. To determine whether microtubule acetylation also affects
cytoplasmic trafficking, plasmid movement was evaluated in real time by particle 
tracking in cells with varying levels of acetylated microtubules. We found that
plasmids display greater net rates of movement, spend more time in productive
motion and display longer runs of continuous motion in cells with highly
acetylated microtubules compared with those with fewer modifications. These
results all suggest that plasmid movement is enhanced along highly acetylated
microtubules, reducing the time spent in the cytoplasm before nuclear import.
Taken together, these findings provide a foundation for determining how
modulation of microtubule acetylation can be used as a means to increase
intracellular trafficking of plasmids and enhance gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC3587030
PMID: 23013836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Dec 1;53(11):2092-101. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.09.023. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) plays a crucial role in p38MAPK-dependent induction
of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in response to proteasome inhibition.

Kästle M(1), Woschee E, Grune T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Toxicology, Institute of Nutrition,
Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Dornburger-Strasse 24, 07743 Jena, Germany.

The proteasome is responsible for the degradation of polyubiquitinated proteins. 
Inhibition of the proteasome leads to an accumulation of polyubiquitinated
proteins and thus to an impairment of the cellular protein homeostasis. To
prevent cellular damage on proteasome inhibition there is an up-regulation of
several heat shock proteins (Hsps), including Hsp27, Hsp70, and heme oxygenase-1 
(HO-1). It was demonstrated that the induction of classical Hsps, such as Hsp27
and Hsp70, is dependent on a HDAC6-dependent mechanism which releases HSF-1 and
induces the expression of newly synthesized Hsps. In this study we demonstrate
that the up-regulation of HO-1 on proteasome inhibition is mediated by p38MAPK
and Nrf-2. Interestingly we found additional evidence, proving the involvement of
HDAC6 in the up-regulation of HO-1. By using RNAi technologies against HDAC6 we
demonstrate that there is a lack of the expected induction of HO-1, Nrf-2, and
phosphorylated p38 (pp38) after proteasome inhibition. Furthermore, we can show
that p38 is acetylated in unstressed cells and is a good substrate for
HDAC6-mediated deacetylation. Therefore, we propose that on proteasome inhibition
HDAC6 deacetylates p38, allowing the subsequent phosphorylation of p38 and
resultant activation of NRF-2. NRF-2 enters the nucleus and functions as a
transcription factor for HO-1.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23010497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Med Chem. 2012 Nov 26;55(22):9891-9. doi: 10.1021/jm301098e. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors bearing substituted urea linkers
inhibit melanoma cell growth.

Bergman JA(1), Woan K, Perez-Villarroel P, Villagra A, Sotomayor EM, Kozikowski
AP.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

The incidence of malignant melanoma has dramatically increased in recent years
thus requiring the need for improved therapeutic strategies. In our efforts to
design selective histone deactylase inhibitors (HDACI), we discovered that the
aryl urea 1 is a modestly potent yet nonselective inhibitor. Structure-activity
relationship studies revealed that adding substituents to the nitrogen atom of
the urea so as to generate compounds bearing a branched linker group results in
increased potency and selectivity for HDAC6. Compound 5 g shows low nanomolar
inhibitory potency against HDAC6 and a selectivity of ~600-fold relative to the
inhibition of HDAC1. These HDACIs were evaluated for their ability to inhibit the
growth of B16 melanoma cells with the most potent and selective HDAC6I being
found to decrease tumor cell growth. To the best of our knowledge, this work
constitutes the first report of HDAC6-selective inhibitors that possess
antiproliferative effects against melanoma cells.

PMCID: PMC3562128
PMID: 23009203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(7):3367-71.

HDAC6 siRNA inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis of HeLa cells and its
related molecular mechanism.

Qin HX(1), Cui HK, Pan Y, Yang J, Ren YF, Hua CH, Hua FF, Qiao YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) siRNA on
cell proliferation and cell apoptosis of the HeLa cervical carcinoma cell line
and the molecular mechanisms involved.
METHODS: Division was into three groups: A, the untreated group; B, the control
siRNA group; and C, the HDAC6 siRNA group. Lipofectamine 2000 was used for siRNA 
transfection, and Western blot analysis was used to determine the protein levels.
Cell proliferation and apoptosis were characterized using a CCK-8 assay and flow 
cytometry, respectively.
RESULTS: HDAC6 protein expression in the HDAC6 siRNA-transfection group was
significantly lower (P < 0.05) than in the untreated and control siRNA groups.
The CCK-8 kit results demonstrated that the proliferation of HeLa cells was
clearly inhibited in the HDAC6 siRNA transfection group (P < 0.05). In addition, 
flow cytometry revealed that the early apoptotic rate (26.0% ± 0.87%) was
significantly elevated (P < 0.05) as compared with the untreated group (10.6% ±
1.19%) and control siRNA group (8.61% ± 0.98%). Furthermore, Western blot
analysis indicated that bcl-2 protein expression in the HDAC6 siRNA-transfection 
group was down-regulated, whereas the expression of p21 and bax was up-regulated.
CONCLUSION: HDAC6 plays an essential role in the occurrence and development of
cervical carcinoma, and the down-regulation of HDAC6 expression may be useful
molecular therapeutic method.

PMID: 22994762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov-Dec;1819(11-12):1142-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Sep 16.

The bZIP repressor proteins, c-Jun dimerization protein 2 and activating
transcription factor 3, recruit multiple HDAC members to the ATF3 promoter.

Darlyuk-Saadon I(1), Weidenfeld-Baranboim K, Yokoyama KK, Hai T, Aronheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel. ilona.darlyuk@gmail.com

JDP2, is a basic leucine zipper (bZIP) protein displaying a high degree of
homology with the stress inducible transcription factor, ATF3. Both proteins bind
to cAMP and TPA response elements and repress transcription by multiple
mechanisms. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a key role in gene inactivation by 
deacetylating lysine residues on histones. Here we describe the association of
JDP2 and ATF3 with HDACs 1, 2-6 and 10. Association of HDAC3 and HDAC6 with JDP2 
and ATF3 occurs via direct protein-protein interactions. Only part of the
N-terminal bZIP motif of JDP2 and ATF3 basic domain is necessary and sufficient
for the interaction with HDACs in a manner that is independent of coiled-coil
dimerization. Class I HDACs associate with the bZIP repressors via the DAC
conserved domain whereas the Class IIb HDAC6 associates through its C-terminal
unique binder of ubiquitin Zn finger domain. Both JDP2 and ATF3 are known to bind
and repress the ATF3 promoter. MEF cells treated with histone deacetylase
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA) display enhanced ATF3 transcription. ATF3
enhanced transcription is significantly reduced in MEF cells lacking both ATF3
and JDP2. Collectively, we propose that the recruitment of multiple HDAC members 
to JDP2 and ATF3 is part of their transcription repression mechanism.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3551276
PMID: 22989952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 12;32(37):12673-83. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0016-12.2012.

MEC-17 deficiency leads to reduced a-tubulin acetylation and impaired migration
of cortical neurons.

Li L(1), Wei D, Wang Q, Pan J, Liu R, Zhang X, Bao L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Neuronal migration is a fundamental process during the development of the
cerebral cortex and is regulated by cytoskeletal components. Microtubule dynamics
can be modulated by posttranslational modifications to tubulin subunits.
Acetylation of a-tubulin at lysine 40 is important in regulating microtubule
properties, and this process is controlled by acetyltransferase and deacetylase. 
MEC-17 is a newly discovered a-tubulin acetyltransferase that has been found to
play a major role in the acetylation of a-tubulin in different species in vivo.
However, the physiological function of MEC-17 during neural development is
largely unknown. Here, we report that MEC-17 is critical for the migration of
cortical neurons in the rat. MEC-17 was strongly expressed in the cerebral cortex
during development. MEC-17 deficiency caused migratory defects in the cortical
projection neurons and interneurons, and perturbed the transition of projection
neurons from the multipolar stage to the unipolar/bipolar stage in the
intermediate zone of the cortex. Furthermore, knockdown of a-tubulin deacetylase 
HDAC6 or overexpression of tubulin(K40Q) to mimic acetylated a-tubulin could
reduce the migratory and morphological defects caused by MEC-17 deficiency in
cortical projection neurons. Thus, MEC-17, which regulates the acetylation of
a-tubulin, appears to control the migration and morphological transition of
cortical neurons. This finding reveals the importance of MEC-17 and a-tubulin
acetylation in cortical development.

PMID: 22972992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;34(6):430-5. doi: 10.
3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2012.06.007.

[Effects of downregulation of HDAC6 expression on cell cycle, proliferation and
migration of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan LL(1), Wang F, Li SL, Lou WH, Wang LX.

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in laryngeal
squamous cell carcinoma, and to analyze the effects of downregulation of HDAC6
expression on cell cycle, proliferation and migration of laryngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma cell line Hep-2 cells, and to explore their possible molecular
mechanisms.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the expression of HDAC6 protein 
in 55 cases of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and 20 cases of normal laryngeal
mucosa. HDAC6 siRNA and control siRNA were transfected into Hep-2 cells via
lipofectamine 2000, and the interfering effect was analyzed using Western
blotting. The effects of downregulation of HDAC6 expression on cell cycle,
proliferation and migration were determined by cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8), flow 
cytometry and Boyden chamber, respectively. Finally, Western blotting was used to
detect the expressions of cell cycle, proliferation and migration related
proteins.
RESULTS: There was a high level expression of HDAC6 protein in laryngeal squamous
cell carcinoma, and its expression was not related to age and sex of the patients
(P > 0.05), but closely associated with the degree of histological
differentiation, TNM staging and lymph node metastasis (P < 0.05). HDAC6 siRNA
effectively down-regulated the expression of HDAC6 protein in laryngeal squamous 
cell carcinoma cell line Hep-2 cells, and downregulation of its expression
obviously inhibited cell proliferation, arrested cell cycle at G(0)/G(1) phase
and decreased cell migration ability in Hep-2 cells. Additionally, the
downregulation of HDAC6 protein expression markedly decreased the expressions of 
cyclin D1, cyclin E, cdk2 and MMP-9 proteins, but increased the expressions of
p21 and E-cadherin proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC6 may play a pivotal role in the carcinogenesis and development 
of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. The downregulation of HDAC6
expression-mediated cell proliferation inhibition, cell cycle arrest and
decreased cell migration ability may be closely associated with the decrease of
cyclin D1, cyclin E, cdk2 and MMP-9 proteins and increase of p21 and E-cadherin
proteins.

PMID: 22967444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2012 Aug 10;3(9):749-53. doi: 10.1021/ml300162r. eCollection
2012.

Macrocyclic peptoid-Peptide hybrids as inhibitors of class I histone
deacetylases.

Olsen CA(1), Montero A(1), Leman LJ(1), Ghadiri MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute , 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 
92037, United States.

We report the design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of the first
macrocyclic peptoid-containing histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. The
compounds selectively inhibit human class I HDAC isoforms in vitro, with no
inhibition of the tubulin deacetylase activity associated with class IIb HDAC6 in
cultured Jurkat cells. Compared to the natural product apicidin (1), one
inhibitor (compound 10) showed equivalent potency against K-562 cells, but was
more cytoselective across a panel of cancer cell lines.

PMCID: PMC4025818
PMID: 24900543  [PubMed]


411. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044265. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Depletion of HDAC6 enhances cisplatin-induced DNA damage and apoptosis in
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Wang L(1), Xiang S, Williams KA, Dong H, Bai W, Nicosia SV, Khochbin S, Bepler G,
Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, University of South Florida, Morsani
College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are promising therapeutic agents which are
currently used in combination with chemotherapeutic agents in clinical trials for
cancer treatment including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the
mechanisms underlying their anti-tumor activities remain elusive. Previous
studies showed that inhibition of HDAC6 induces DNA damage and sensitizes
transformed cells to anti-tumor agents such as etoposide and doxorubicin. Here,
we showed that depletion of HDAC6 in two NSCLC cell lines, H292 and A549,
sensitized cells to cisplatin, one of the first-line chemotherapeutic agents used
to treat NSCLC. We suggested that depletion of HDAC6 increased cisplatin-induced 
cytotoxicity was due to the enhancement of apoptosis via activating ATR/Chk1
pathway. Furthermore, we showed that HDAC6 protein levels were positively
correlated with cisplatin IC(50) in 15 NSCLC cell lines. Lastly, depletion of
HDAC6 in H292 xenografts rendered decreased tumor weight and volume and exhibited
increased basal apoptosis compared with the controls in a xenograft mouse model. 
In summary, our findings suggest that HDAC6 is positively associated with
cisplatin resistance in NSCLC and reveal HDAC6 as a potential novel therapeutic
target for platinum refractory NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3434198
PMID: 22957056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Blood. 2012 Nov 15;120(20):4215-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-05-428011. Epub 2012
Sep 6.

HDAC6 controls the kinetics of platelet activation.

Sadoul K(1), Wang J, Diagouraga B, Vitte AL, Buchou T, Rossini T, Polack B, Xi X,
Matthias P, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U823, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble 1, Institut Albert Bonniot,
F-38700 Grenoble, France. karin.sadoul@ujf-grenoble.fr

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Nov 15;120(20):4118-9.

HDAC6, a major cytoplasmic deacetylase, is shown here to fine-tune the kinetics
of platelet activation, a process that must be precisely regulated to ensure
hemostasis after blood vessel injury while preventing pathologic thrombus
formation. The discoid shape of resting platelets in the circulation is
maintained by several highly acetylated microtubules organized in a marginal
band. During platelet activation, microtubules undergo major reorganizations,
which contribute to the shape change of activating platelets. We show that,
during these activation-induced shape changes, a dramatic HDAC6-mediated tubulin 
deacetylation takes place, followed by microtubule reacetylation in spread
platelets. In addition, although HDAC6-controlled tubulin deacetylation is not
required for platelet activation, the capacity of HDAC6 to prevent tubulin
hyperacetylation influences the speed of platelet spreading. These results are
particularly important in view of HDAC6 inhibitors being currently used in
clinical trials and represent the first example of cell signaling by lysine
acetylation in platelet biology.

PMID: 22955928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Clin Pathol. 2012 Dec;65(12):1088-96. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-200940. Epub 
2012 Sep 3.

Cortactin is associated with tumour progression and poor prognosis in prostate
cancer and SIRT2 other than HADC6 may work as facilitator in situ.

Hou H(1), Chen W, Zhao L, Zuo Q, Zhang G, Zhang X, Wang H, Gong H, Li X, Wang M, 
Wang Y, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical School of
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

OBJECTIVE: Cortactin acts as a prominent substrate of histone deacetylases
(HDACs) and plays important roles in tumour progression in several human cancers.
However, the clinical significance of its expression in human prostate cancer
(PCa) has not been determined. We aimed to identify the potential role of
cortactin expression in tumour progression and prognosis in PCa and the
association with HDACs.
METHODS: 256 foci with distinctive lesions in 110 prostate specimens were
collected to identify the status of among cortactin, SIRT2, histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) by immunohistochemistry and its relationship with clinicopathological and
follow-up data were analysed.
RESULTS: The results showed that cortactin expression was significantly higher
(79.1%), and SIRT2 expression was lower (37.3%) in PCa foci, when it was compared
with high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia foci and benign foci,
respectively. HDAC6 expression was low and had no statistical significance in
PCa. High intensity of cortactin staining was significantly and independently
associated with a high prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, high Gleason score,
clinical stage progression and shortened survival time in patients with PCa. High
intensity of SIRT2 staining was significantly and independently associated with a
high PSA level, old age, high Gleason score and clinical stage progression.
Multivariable Cox regression analysis showed cortactin expression was a
significant prognostic factor for survival of patients with PCa (ß, 0.736; 95% CI
1.371 to 3.181; p=0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggested that cortactin seems to be a satisfactory
marker to predict tumour progression and survival in cases of PCa. And it may be 
SIRT2 rather than HADAC6 is responsible for tumour occurrence and the progression
of PCa.

PMID: 22944623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42983. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042983. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

HDAC6 inhibitor blocks amyloid beta-induced impairment of mitochondrial transport
in hippocampal neurons.

Kim C(1), Choi H, Jung ES, Lee W, Oh S, Jeon NL, Mook-Jung I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Even though the disruption of axonal transport is an important pathophysiological
factor in neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease (AD), the
relationship between disruption of axonal transport and pathogenesis of AD is
poorly understood. Considering that a-tubulin acetylation is an important factor 
in axonal transport and that Aß impairs mitochondrial axonal transport, we
manipulated the level of a-tubulin acetylation in hippocampal neurons with Aß
cultured in a microfluidic system and examined its effect on mitochondrial axonal
transport. We found that inhibiting histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), which
deacetylates a-tubulin, significantly restored the velocity and motility of the
mitochondria in both anterograde and retrograde axonal transports, which would be
otherwise compromised by Aß. The inhibition of HDAC6 also recovered the length of
the mitochondria that had been shortened by Aß to a normal level. These results
suggest that the inhibition of HDAC6 significantly rescues hippocampal neurons
from Aß-induced impairment of mitochondrial axonal transport as well as
mitochondrial length. The results presented in this paper identify HDAC6 as an
important regulator of mitochondrial transport as well as elongation and, thus, a
potential target whose pharmacological inhibition contributes to improving
mitochondrial dynamics in Aß treated neurons.

PMCID: PMC3425572
PMID: 22937007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;33(2):283-95. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120727.

The role of HDAC6 in Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang L(1), Sheng S, Qin C.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Medical Center, Peking Union Medical College and Institute of
Laboratory Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing, China.

The expression of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)--a versatile enzyme with a known 
role in epigenetics--increases significantly in the hippocampus and other
relevant brain regions in both patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and animal 
models of AD. However, when and how HDAC6 expression increases during the course 
of AD progression remains unclear. Whether HDAC6 overexpression is an underlying 
cause of AD or a condition resulting from AD is controversial. Mounting evidence 
suggests that increased HDAC6 expression contributes to AD-associated
neurodegeneration, although beneficial effects have also been identified. This
review article addresses recent research on HDAC6 structure and function, and
highlights the potential detrimental and protective roles of HDAC6 overexpression
in AD. We hope to shed light on whether HDAC6 overexpression is associated with
AD etiopathogenesis or whether it rescues AD-associated neurodegeneration
compensatorily. Furthermore, we discuss new evidence showing that HDAC6 may be a 
therapeutic target for AD.

PMID: 22936009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;47(6):481-6.

[Effect of HDAC6 down-regulation on the growth of xenografted human laryngeal
carcinoma cell line Hep-2 in nude mice and underlying mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan LL(1), Lou WH, Sang JZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, the First Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of histone deacetylation 6 (HDAC6) siRNA on the
growth of xenografted human laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma cell line Hep-2 in 
nude mice and underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma cell line Hep-2 cells were
subcutaneously injected to the back of nude mice and transplanted tumor model was
established after one week. Nude mice was divided into three groups including
blank control group, empty vector group and HDAC6 siRNA group, and the tumor
growth was observed. Ki-67 proliferation index was detected by
immunohistochemistry. Western blot, in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry were used to detect the mRNA and protein expressions of
HDAC6 in xenograft. The expressions of Bcl-2 and Bax proteins were examined by
Western blotting. Cell apoptosis was detected by TUNEL.
RESULTS: The mean volume of xenograft transfected with HDAC6 siRNA was less than 
that of xenograft transfected with empty vector or that of xenograft with blank
control treatment (P < 0.05). HDAC6 siRNA effectively down-regulated the
expressions of HDAC6 mRNA and the expressions of HDAC6 and Bcl-2 proteins, but
up-regulated the expression of Bcl-2 protein in xenografts, with significant
differences (all P < 0.05). The proliferation index of Ki-67 in HDAC6 siRNA
transfection group was significantly lower than that in blank control group or
empty vector group (P < 0.05). TUNEL assay demonstrated that HDAC6 evidently
evoked cell apoptosis (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: HDAC6 siRNA could effectively inhibited the growth of xenografted
human laryngeal carcinoma cell line Hep-2 in nude mice, down-regulate the
expressions of HDAC6 and bcl-2, and up-regulate the expression of bax.

PMID: 22932141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Mar;18(2):243-9. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0367-x.
Epub 2012 Aug 21.

Downregulation of Hsp27 (HSPB1) in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells induces
upregulation of PTEN.

Cayado-Gutiérrez N(1), Moncalero VL, Rosales EM, Berón W, Salvatierra EE,
Alvarez-Olmedo D, Radrizzani M, Ciocca DR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncology, IMBECU, CCT-CONICET, National Research Council, C.C.
855, Mendoza, Argentina.

Hsp27 (HSPB1) is usually overexpressed in breast cancers affecting the disease
outcome and the sensitivity of tumors to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Hsp27
interacts with other proteins such as ß-catenin, histone deacetylase HDAC6,
transcription factor STAT2 and procaspase-3. Phosphatase and tensin homologue
(PTEN) is a tumor suppressor gene that is deleted in many human tumors. The
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway is negatively regulated by PTEN. Hsp27 is described as
a key component of the Akt signaling cascade: Akt, BAD, Forkhead transcription
factors, Hsp27, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-3 and -6. Here, we have
examined whether the downregulation of Hsp27 by siHsp27 affects the PTEN levels
in the MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line. PTEN was detected with two different 
antibodies using western blots and immunocytochemistry. p-Akt was also evaluated 
by western blot. In addition, Hsp27 and PTEN were immunoprecipitated to know
whether these proteins interact. Intracellular colocalization studies were
carried out by confocal microscopy. A significant reduction in the Hsp27 levels
was noted in the siHsp27 transfected cells. These Hsp27 downregulated cells
showed a significant increased expression of PTEN. The MW 76 and 55 kDa PTEN
forms were upregulated as revealed by two different antibodies. The phosphatase
activity of PTEN seems to be active because p-Akt levels were reduced. Hsp27
immunoprecipitation was bringing PTEN and vice versa, these two proteins seem to 
interact at cytoplasmic level by FRET. Downregulation of Hsp27 stabilized PTEN
protein levels. Chaperone-assisted E3 ligase C terminus of Hsc70-interacting
protein (CHIP) levels were not significantly influenced by Hsp27 downregulation. 
In conclusion, we report a novel function of Hsp27 modulating the PTEN levels in 
human breast cancer cells suggesting an interaction between these two molecules.

PMCID: PMC3581620
PMID: 22907762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Eur J Cell Biol. 2012 Nov-Dec;91(11-12):950-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2012.07.001. 
Epub 2012 Aug 16.

ATAT1/MEC-17 acetyltransferase and HDAC6 deacetylase control a balance of
acetylation of alpha-tubulin and cortactin and regulate MT1-MMP trafficking and
breast tumor cell invasion.

Castro-Castro A(1), Janke C, Montagnac G, Paul-Gilloteaux P, Chavrier P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Research Center, Paris, France.

Invasive tumor cells use proteases to degrade and migrate through the stromal
environment consisting of a 3D network of extracellular matrix macromolecules. In
particular, MT1-MMP, a membrane-anchored metalloproteinase, is critical during
cancer cell invasion. MT1-MMP is stored in endosomal compartments and then
delivered to invadopodia, the specialized plasma membrane domains of invasive
cancer cells endowed with extracellular matrix-degradation capacity. In
macrophages, traffic of MT1-MMP vesicles to invadopodia-related podosomes
requires microtubules. We previously found that in breast tumor MDA-MB-231 cells 
an increase of microtubule and cortactin acetylation upon inhibition of HDAC6
correlates with a decrease of matrix degradation and invasion in
three-dimensional collagen I gel. Here, we investigated the role of the recently 
identified a-tubulin N-acetyltransferase 1 ATAT1 in invasive MDA-MB-231 cells. We
found that the dynamics and distribution of MT1-MMP-positive endosomes require
regulation of acetylation levels. We observed that ATAT1 tubulin
acetyltransferase binds and regulates cortactin acetylation levels. In addition, 
ATAT1 colocalizes with cortactin at the adherent surface of the cells and it is
required for 2D migration and invasive migration of MDA-MB-231 cells in collagen 
matrix. All together, our data indicate that a balance of acetylation and
deaceylation by ATAT1/HDAC6 enzymes with opposite activities regulates the
migratory and invasive capacities of breast tumor cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22902175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Commun Integr Biol. 2012 May 1;5(3):278-80. doi: 10.4161/cib.19473.

CK2 as anti-stress factor.

Watabe M(1), Nakaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology; Teikyo University School of Medicine; Tokyo,
Japan.

Misfolded proteins are prone to form aggregates, which interfere with normal
cellular functions. In general, the ubiquitin-proteasome system degrades such
misfolded proteins to avoid aggregation. If this system becomes impaired or
overloaded, an inclusion-body-like organelle, aggresome will operate. Misfolded
protein aggregates are transported to aggresome with a deacetylase HDAC6 and
dynein motors along the microtubule network, and are then removed by autophagic
degradation. Although it is well known that the aggresome has evolved to cope
with an excess of protein aggregates, the mechanisms underlying its formation
remain unclear. It is now established that the protein kinase CK2 is a crucial
factor in aggresome assembly and clearance. In particular, this kinase
phosphorylates HDAC6 on serine 458 in response to cellular stress which is caused
by misfolded proteins. The resultant increase in HDAC6 deacetylase activity is
crucial for both the recruitment of misfolded proteins to the aggresome and its
clearance. Interestingly, serine 458 is conserved only in higher primates such as
the humans and chimpanzee, but not in the mouse, rat, dog, bovine or rhesus
macaque. This regulatory mechanism by phosphorylation of the serine residue may
have evolutional significance.

PMCID: PMC3419114
PMID: 22896792  [PubMed]


420. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov;1822(11):1741-51. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.07.015. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Crosstalk between the ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy in a human
cellular model of Alzheimer's disease.

Cecarini V(1), Bonfili L, Cuccioloni M, Mozzicafreddo M, Rossi G, Buizza L,
Uberti D, Angeletti M, Eleuteri AM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, University of Camerino, 62032
Camerino, Italy. valentina.cecarini@unicam.it

Alzheimer's disease is the most common progressive neurodegenerative disorder
characterized by the abnormal deposition of amyloid plaques, likely as a
consequence of an incorrect processing of the amyloid-ß precursor protein (AßPP).
Dysfunctions in both the ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy have also been
observed. Recently, an extensive cross-talk between these two degradation
pathways has emerged, but the exact implicated processes are yet to be clarified.
In this work, we gained insight into such interplay by analyzing human SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells stably transfected either with wild-type AßPP gene or 717
valine-to-glycine AßPP-mutated gene. The over-expression of the AßPP mutant
isoform correlates with an increase in oxidative stress and a remodeled pattern
of protein degradation, with both marked inhibition of proteasome activities and 
impairment in the autophagic flux. To compensate for this altered scenario, cells
try to promote the autophagy activation in a HDAC6-dependent manner. The
treatment with amyloid-ß(42) oligomers further compromises proteasome activity
and also contributes to the inhibition of cathepsin-mediated proteolysis, finally
favoring the neuronal degeneration and suggesting the existence of an Aß(42)
threshold level beyond which proteasome-dependent proteolysis becomes definitely 
dysfunctional.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22867901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Sci Signal. 2012 Jul 31;5(235):pe32. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003364.

T cell signaling targets for enhancing regulatory or effector function.

Pan F(1), Fan H, Liu Z, Jiang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

To respond to infection, resting or naïve T cells must undergo activation, clonal
expansion, and differentiation into specialized functional subsets of effector T 
cells. However, to prevent excessive or self-destructive immune responses,
regulatory T cells (T(regs)) are instrumental in suppressing the activation and
function of effector cells, including effector T cells. The transcription factor 
Forkhead box P3 (Foxp3) regulates the expression of genes involved in the
development and function of T(regs). Foxp3 interacts with other transcription
factors and with epigenetic elements such as histone deacetylases (HDACs) and
histone acetyltransferases. T(reg) suppressive function can be increased by
exposure to HDAC inhibitors. The individual contributions of different HDAC
family members to T(reg) function and their respective mechanisms of action,
however, remain unclear. A study showed that HDAC6, HDAC9, and Sirtuin-1 had
distinct effects on Foxp3 expression and function, suggesting that selectively
targeting HDACs individually or in combination may enhance T(reg) stability and
suppressive function. Another study showed that the receptor programmed death 1
(PD-1), a well-known inhibitor of T cell activation, halted cell cycle
progression in effector T cells by inhibiting the transcription of the gene
encoding the substrate-recognition component (Skp2) of the ubiquitin ligase
SCF(Skp2). Together, these findings reveal new signaling targets for enhancing
T(reg) or effector T cell function that may be helpful in designing future
therapies, either to increase T(reg) suppressive function in transplantation and 
autoimmune diseases or to block PD-1 function, thus increasing the magnitude of
antiviral or antitumor immune responses of effector T cells.

PMCID: PMC4659372
PMID: 22855503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Dec;92(6):1147-54. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0312165. Epub 2012 Jul
16.

BET bromodomain inhibition as a novel strategy for reactivation of HIV-1.

Banerjee C(1), Archin N, Michaels D, Belkina AC, Denis GV, Bradner J, Sebastiani 
P, Margolis DM, Montano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Dec;92(6):1127-9.

The persistence of latent HIV-1 remains a major challenge in therapeutic efforts 
to eradicate infection. We report the capacity for HIV reactivation by a
selective small molecule inhibitor of BET family bromodomains, JQ1, a promising
therapeutic agent with antioncogenic properties. JQ1 reactivated HIV
transcription in models of latent T cell infection and latent monocyte infection.
We also tested the effect of exposure to JQ1 to allow recovery of
replication-competent HIV from pools of resting CD4(+) T cells isolated from
HIV-infected, ART-treated patients. In one of three patients, JQ1 allowed
recovery of virus at a frequency above unstimulated conditions. JQ1 potently
suppressed T cell proliferation with minimal cytotoxic effect. Transcriptional
profiling of T cells with JQ1 showed potent down-regulation of T cell activation 
genes, including CD3, CD28, and CXCR4, similar to HDAC inhibitors, but JQ1 also
showed potent up-regulation of chromatin modification genes, including SIRT1,
HDAC6, and multiple lysine demethylases (KDMs). Thus, JQ1 reactivates HIV-1 while
suppressing T cell activation genes and up-regulating histone modification genes 
predicted to favor increased Tat activity. Thus, JQ1 may be useful in studies of 
potentially novel mechanisms for transcriptional control as well as in
translational efforts to identify therapeutic molecules to achieve viral
eradication.

PMCID: PMC3501896
PMID: 22802445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Sep 15;263(3):345-51. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.07.007. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane, but not indole-3-carbinol, inhibits histone deacetylase
activity in prostate cancer cells.

Beaver LM(1), Yu TW, Sokolowski EI, Williams DE, Dashwood RH, Ho E.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, 307 Linus Pauling Science
Center, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. beaverl@onid.orst.edu

Increased consumption of cruciferous vegetables is associated with a reduced risk
of developing prostate cancer. Indole-3-carbinol (I3C) and 3,3'-diindolylmethane 
(DIM) are phytochemicals derived from cruciferous vegetables that have shown
promise in inhibiting prostate cancer in experimental models. Histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibition is an emerging target for cancer prevention and therapy. We
sought to examine the effects of I3C and DIM on HDACs in human prostate cancer
cell lines: androgen insensitive PC-3 cells and androgen sensitive LNCaP cells.
I3C modestly inhibited HDAC activity in LNCaP cells by 25% but no inhibition of
HDAC activity was detected in PC-3 cells. In contrast, DIM significantly
inhibited HDAC activity in both cell lines by as much as 66%. Decreases in HDAC
activity correlated with increased expression of p21, a known target of HDAC
inhibitors. DIM treatment caused a significant decrease in the expression of
HDAC2 protein in both cancer cell lines but no significant change in the protein 
levels of HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC6 or HDAC8 was detected. Taken together, these
results show that inhibition of HDAC activity by DIM may contribute to the
phytochemicals' anti-proliferative effects in the prostate. The ability of DIM to
target aberrant epigenetic patterns, in addition to its effects on detoxification
of carcinogens, may make it an effective chemopreventive agent by targeting
multiple stages of prostate carcinogenesis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3428467
PMID: 22800507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040440. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

The E3-ubiquitin ligase TRIM50 interacts with HDAC6 and p62, and promotes the
sequestration and clearance of ubiquitinated proteins into the aggresome.

Fusco C(1), Micale L, Egorov M, Monti M, D'Addetta EV, Augello B, Cozzolino F,
Calcagnì A, Fontana A, Polishchuk RS, Didelot G, Reymond A, Pucci P, Merla G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della Sofferenza Hospital, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.

In this study we report that, in response to proteasome inhibition, the
E3-Ubiquitin ligase TRIM50 localizes to and promotes the recruitment and
aggregation of polyubiquitinated proteins to the aggresome. Using Hdac6-deficient
mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF) we show that this localization is mediated by the 
histone deacetylase 6, HDAC6. Whereas Trim50-deficient MEFs allow pinpointing
that the TRIM50 ubiquitin-ligase regulates the clearance of polyubiquitinated
proteins localized to the aggresome. Finally we demonstrate that TRIM50
colocalizes, interacts with and increases the level of p62, a multifunctional
adaptor protein implicated in various cellular processes including the autophagy 
clearance of polyubiquitinated protein aggregates. We speculate that when the
proteasome activity is impaired, TRIM50 fails to drive its substrates to the
proteasome-mediated degradation, and promotes their storage in the aggresome for 
successive clearance.

PMCID: PMC3392214
PMID: 22792322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 17;287(34):29168-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.371120. Epub
2012 Jul 9.

Modulation of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) nuclear import and tubulin
deacetylase activity through acetylation.

Liu Y(1), Peng L, Seto E, Huang S, Qiu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The reversible acetylation of histones and non-histone proteins by histone
acetyltransferases and deacetylases (HDACs) plays a critical role in many
cellular processes in eukaryotic cells. HDAC6 is a unique histone deacetylase
with two deacetylase domains and a C-terminal zinc finger domain. HDAC6 resides
mainly in the cytoplasm and regulates many important biological processes,
including cell migration and degradation of misfold proteins. HDAC6 has also been
shown to localize in the nucleus to regulate transcription. However, how HDAC6
shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm is largely unknown. In addition, it is
not clear how HDAC6 enzymatic activity is modulated. Here, we show that HDAC6 can
be acetylated by p300 on five clusters of lysine residues. One cluster (site B)
of acetylated lysine is in the N-terminal nuclear localization signal region.
These lysine residues in site B were converted to glutamine to mimic acetylated
lysines. The mutations significantly reduced HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase activity
and further impaired cell motility, but had no effect on histone deacetylase
activity. More interestingly, these mutations retained HDAC6 in the cytoplasm by 
blocking the interaction with the nuclear import protein importin-a. The
retention of HDAC6 in the cytoplasm by acetylation eventually affects histone
deacetylation. Thus, we conclude that acetylation is an important
post-translational modification that regulates HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase activity
and nuclear import.

PMCID: PMC3436516
PMID: 22778253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. FEBS Lett. 2012 Sep 21;586(19):3236-41. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.06.042. Epub 
2012 Jul 4.

Acetylation regulates subcellular localization of eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 5A (eIF5A).

Ishfaq M(1), Maeta K, Maeda S, Natsume T, Ito A, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetic Laboratory, RIKEN Advanced Science Institute, Wako, Saitama, 
Japan.

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett. 2014 Aug 19;588(16):2754.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A) is a protein subject to
hypusination, which is essential for its function. eIF5A is also acetylated, but 
the role of that modification is unknown. Here, we report that acetylation
regulates the subcellular localization of eIF5A. We identified PCAF as the major 
cellular acetyltransferase of eIF5A, and HDAC6 and SIRT2 as its major
deacetylases. Inhibition of the deacetylases or impaired hypusination increased
acetylation of eIF5A, leading to nuclear accumulation. As eIF5A is constitutively
hypusinated under physiological conditions, we suggest that reversible
acetylation plays a major role in controlling the subcellular localization of
eIF5A.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Neuropharmacology. 2013 Jan;64:81-96. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.06.043. Epub
2012 Jul 4.

Crebinostat: a novel cognitive enhancer that inhibits histone deacetylase
activity and modulates chromatin-mediated neuroplasticity.

Fass DM(1), Reis SA, Ghosh B, Hennig KM, Joseph NF, Zhao WN, Nieland TJ, Guan JS,
Kuhnle CE, Tang W, Barker DD, Mazitschek R, Schreiber SL, Tsai LH, Haggarty SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Department 
of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

Long-term memory formation is known to be critically dependent upon de novo gene 
expression in the brain. As a consequence, pharmacological enhancement of the
transcriptional processes mediating long-term memory formation provides a
potential therapeutic strategy for cognitive disorders involving aberrant
neuroplasticity. Here we focus on the identification and characterization of
small molecule inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) as enhancers of CREB
(cAMP response element-binding protein)-regulated transcription and modulators of
chromatin-mediated neuroplasticity. Using a CREB reporter gene cell line, we
screened a library of small molecules structurally related to known HDAC
inhibitors leading to the identification of a probe we termed crebinostat that
produced robust activation of CREB-mediated transcription. Further
characterization of crebinostat revealed its potent inhibition of the deacetylase
activity of recombinant class I HDACs 1, 2, 3, and class IIb HDAC6, with weaker
inhibition of the class I HDAC8 and no significant inhibition of the class IIa
HDACs 4, 5, 7, and 9. In cultured mouse primary neurons, crebinostat potently
induced acetylation of both histone H3 and histone H4 as well as enhanced the
expression of the CREB target gene Egr1 (early growth response 1). Using a
hippocampus-dependent, contextual fear conditioning paradigm, mice systemically
administered crebinostat for a ten day time period exhibited enhanced memory. To 
gain insight into the molecular mechanisms of memory enhancement by HDAC
inhibitors, whole genome transcriptome profiling of cultured mouse primary
neurons treated with crebinostat, combined with bioinformatic analyses of
CREB-target genes, was performed revealing a highly connected protein-protein
interaction network reflecting modules of genes important to synaptic structure
and plasticity. Consistent with these findings, crebinostat treatment increased
the density of synapsin-1 punctae along dendrites in cultured neurons. Finally,
crebinostat treatment of cultured mouse primary neurons was found to upregulate
Bdnf (brain-derived neurotrophic factor) and Grn (granulin) and downregulate Mapt
(tau) gene expression-genes implicated in aging-related cognitive decline and
cognitive disorders. Taken together, these results demonstrate that crebinostat
provides a novel probe to modulate chromatin-mediated neuroplasticity and further
suggests that pharmacological optimization of selective of HDAC inhibitors may
provide an effective therapeutic approach for human cognitive disorders. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Cognitive Enhancers'.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3447535
PMID: 22771460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Oncol Rep. 2012 Sep;28(3):867-73. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1898. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Overexpression of histone deacetylase 6 contributes to accelerated migration and 
invasion activity of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Kanno K(1), Kanno S, Nitta H, Uesugi N, Sugai T, Masuda T, Wakabayashi G, Maesawa
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute of Biomedical Science, School of
Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Morioka, Japan.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a cytoplasmic enzyme that regulates many
important biological processes, including cell migration, viral infection and
autophagy. The aim of this study was to investigate the significance of HDAC6 in 
the invasion and metastasis activities of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Three
HCC cell lines and two primary cultures of hepatocytes were used for biological
experiments. Immunohistochemistry for HDAC6 protein was also examined in 70
resected primary HCCs. Knockdown of the HDAC6 gene in the HCC cell lines was
carried out by treatment with siRNA, and their migration and invasion activities 
were examined by the scratch assay and Matrigel invasion assay, respectively.
HDAC6 expression was greater in all of the HCC cell lines compared to the primary
cultures of hepatocytes. Knockdown of HDAC6 markedly downregulated the migration 
and invasion activities of all HCC cell lines (P<0.05). Overexpression of HDAC6
protein to a level higher than that in the corresponding normal hepatocytes was
observed in 14 (20%) of the 70 primary HCCs, and was significantly correlated
with high clinical stage, number of tumors, vascular invasion and intrahepatic
metastasis (P<0.05). These results suggest that overexpression of the HDAC6
protein is involved in the migration and invasion activities of HCC cells, and
may be a good biomarker for prediction of intrahepatic metastasis.

PMID: 22766642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Brain. 2012 Sep;135(Pt 9):2629-41. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws145. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Systemic anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapies induce a painful
sensory neuropathy.

Verheyen A(1), Peeraer E, Nuydens R, Dhondt J, Poesen K, Pintelon I, Daniels A,
Timmermans JP, Meert T, Carmeliet P, Lambrechts D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Translational Genetics, Department of Oncology, University of
Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Comment in
    Brain. 2012 Sep;135(Pt 9):2579-80.

Systemic vascular endothelial growth factor inhibition, in combination with
chemotherapy, improves the outcome of patients with metastatic cancer. Peripheral
sensory neuropathies occurring in patients receiving both drugs are attributed to
the chemotherapy. Here, we provide unprecedented evidence that vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor inhibitors trigger a painful neuropathy and
aggravate paclitaxel-induced neuropathies in mice. By using transgenic mice with 
altered neuronal vascular endothelial growth factor receptor expression, systemic
inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors was shown to interfere
with the endogenous neuroprotective activities of vascular endothelial growth
factor on sensory neurons. In vitro, vascular endothelial growth factor prevented
primary dorsal root ganglion cultures from paclitaxel-induced neuronal stress and
cell death by counteracting mitochondrial membrane potential decreases and
normalizing hyperacetylation of a-tubulin. In contrast, vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor inhibitors exerted opposite effects. Intriguingly,
vascular endothelial growth factor or vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
inhibitors exerted their effects through a mechanism whereby Hdac6, through
Hsp90, controls vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2-mediated expression
of the anti-apoptotic Bcl2. Our observations that systemic anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor therapies interfere with the neuroprotective activities
of vascular endothelial growth factor may have important implications for the
application of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapies in cancer
patients.

PMID: 22734125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Feb;9(1):59-64. doi: 10.1007/s12015-012-9392-5.

Transcriptional analysis of histone deacetylase family members reveal
similarities between differentiating and aging spermatogonial stem cells.

Kofman AE(1), Huszar JM, Payne CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

The differentiation of adult stem cells involves extensive chromatin remodeling, 
mediated in part by the gene products of histone deacetylase (HDAC) family
members. While the transcriptional downregulation of HDACs can impede stem cell
self-renewal in certain contexts, it may also promote stem cell maintenance under
other circumstances. In self-renewing, differentiating, and aging spermatogonial 
stem cells (SSCs), the gene expression dynamics of HDACs have not yet been
characterized. To gain further insight with these studies, we analyzed the
transcriptional profiles of six HDAC family members, previously identified to be 
the most highly expressed in self-renewing SSCs, during stem cell differentiation
and aging. Here we discovered that in both differentiating and aging SSCs the
expression of Sirt4 increases, while the expression of Hdac2, Hdac6, and Sirt1
decreases. When SSCs are exposed to the lifespan-enhancing drug rapamycin in
vivo, the resultant HDAC gene expression patterns are opposite of those seen in
the differentiating and aging SSCs, with increased Hdac2, Hdac6, and Sirt1 and
decreased Hdac8, Hdac9, and Sirt4. Our findings suggest that HDACs important for 
stem cell maintenance and oxidative capacity are downregulated as adult stem
cells differentiate or age. These results provide important insights into the
epigenetic regulation of stem cell differentiation and aging in mammals.

PMCID: PMC3605728
PMID: 22729928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Sep 15;84(6):756-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.06.014. Epub
2012 Jun 21.

Development and therapeutic impact of HDAC6-selective inhibitors.

Dallavalle S(1), Pisano C, Zunino F.

Author information: 
(1)DeFENS, Department of Food, Environmental and Nutritional Sciences, Università
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) play a key role in regulating gene expression by
deacetylating histones. Some HDAC isoforms can also modulate the function of
nonhistone proteins implicated in regulatory processes, and therefore HDACs are
recognized as useful targets for therapeutic purposes. HDAC inhibitors have
generated substantial interest as antitumor agents, because they induce various
cellular effects, including apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and inhibition of
angiogenesis. The nature of cellular response likely depends on the biological
context and on the pattern of HDAC isoform inhibition. Various HDAC inhibitors
belonging to different structural classes have been developed. Many inhibitors
are characterized by a pan-HDAC inhibitory profile. The potential advantages of
isoform-selective inhibitors over pan-HDAC inhibitors in terms of efficacy or
toxicity remain to be defined. The emerging interest for HDAC6-selective
inhibitors is related to the modulation of acetylation of nonhistone regulatory
proteins implicated in cancer-relevant processes, including cell migration,
metastasis, angiogenesis and stress-response pathways. This review is focused on 
the recent development of HDAC inhibitors, with particular reference to
HDAC6-selective inhibitors, and the efforts and perspectives in optimization of
their therapeutic applications.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22728920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Diabetes. 2012 Jul;61(7):e10; author reply e11. doi: 10.2337/db12-0323.

Comment on: Winkler et al. Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is an essential modifier
of glucocorticoid-induced hepatic gluconeogenesis. Diabetes 2012;61:513-523.

Mahla RS.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2012 Feb;61(2):513-23.

PMCID: PMC3379673
PMID: 22723278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39182. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039182. Epub 2012 Jun 14.

Alternative splicing regulated by butyrate in bovine epithelial cells.

Wu S(1), Li C, Huang W, Li W, Li RW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Biological Systems, University of California San Diego,
San Diego, California, United States of America.

As a signaling molecule and an inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACs),
butyrate exerts its impact on a broad range of biological processes, such as
apoptosis and cell proliferation, in addition to its critical role in energy
metabolism in ruminants. This study examined the effect of butyrate on
alternative splicing in bovine epithelial cells using RNA-seq technology.
Junction reads account for 11.28 and 12.32% of total mapped reads between the
butyrate-treated (BT) and control (CT) groups. 201,326 potential splicing
junctions detected were supported by = 3 junction reads. Approximately 94% of
these junctions conformed to the consensus sequence (GT/AG) while ~3% were GC/AG 
junctions. No AT/AC junctions were observed. A total of 2,834 exon skipping
events, supported by a minimum of 3 junction reads, were detected. At least 7
genes, their mRNA expression significantly affected by butyrate, also had exon
skipping events differentially regulated by butyrate. Furthermore, COL5A3, which 
was induced 310-fold by butyrate (FDR <0.001) at the gene level, had a
significantly higher number of junction reads mapped to Exon#8 (Donor) and
Exon#11 (Acceptor) in BT. This event had the potential to result in the formation
of a COL5A3 mRNA isoform with 2 of the 69 exons missing. In addition, 216
differentially expressed transcript isoforms regulated by butyrate were detected.
For example, Isoform 1 of ORC1 was strongly repressed by butyrate while Isoform 2
remained unchanged. Butyrate physically binds to and inhibits all zinc-dependent 
HDACs except HDAC6 and HDAC10. Our results provided evidence that butyrate also
regulated deacetylase activities of classical HDACs via its transcriptional
control. Moreover, thirteen gene fusion events differentially affected by
butyrate were identified. Our results provided a snapshot into complex
transcriptome dynamics regulated by butyrate, which will facilitate our
understanding of the biological effects of butyrate and other HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3375255
PMID: 22720068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Cell Sci. 2012 Sep 15;125(Pt 18):4297-305. doi: 10.1242/jcs.100545. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Heat shock induces rapid resorption of primary cilia.

Prodromou NV(1), Thompson CL, Osborn DP, Cogger KF, Ashworth R, Knight MM, Beales
PL, Chapple JP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London 
EC1M 6BQ, UK.

Primary cilia are involved in important developmental and disease pathways, such 
as the regulation of neurogenesis and tumorigenesis. They function as sensory
antennae and are essential in the regulation of key extracellular signalling
systems. We have investigated the effects of cell stress on primary cilia.
Exposure of mammalian cells in vitro, and zebrafish cells in vivo, to elevated
temperature resulted in the rapid loss of cilia by resorption. In mammalian cells
loss of cilia correlated with a reduction in hedgehog signalling.
Heat-shock-dependent loss of cilia was decreased in cells where histone
deacetylases (HDACs) were inhibited, suggesting resorption is mediated by the
axoneme-localised tubulin deacetylase HDAC6. In thermotolerant cells the rate of 
ciliary resorption was reduced. This implies a role for molecular chaperones in
the maintenance of primary cilia. The cytosolic chaperone Hsp90 localises to the 
ciliary axoneme and its inhibition resulted in cilia loss. In the cytoplasm of
unstressed cells, Hsp90 is known to exist in a complex with HDAC6. Moreover,
immediately after heat shock Hsp90 levels were reduced in the remaining cilia. We
hypothesise that ciliary resorption serves to attenuate cilia-mediated signalling
pathways in response to extracellular stress, and that this mechanism is
regulated in part by HDAC6 and Hsp90.

PMCID: PMC3516438
PMID: 22718348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Sci Signal. 2012 Jun 19;5(229):ra45. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002873.

Histone deacetylases 6 and 9 and sirtuin-1 control Foxp3+ regulatory T cell
function through shared and isoform-specific mechanisms.

Beier UH(1), Wang L, Han R, Akimova T, Liu Y, Hancock WW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Therapeutic inhibition of the histone deacetylases HDAC6, HDAC9, or sirtuin-1
(Sirt1) augments the suppressive functions of regulatory T cells (T(regs)) that
contain the transcription factor Foxp3 (Forkhead box P3) and is useful in organ
transplant patients or patients with autoimmune diseases. However, it is unclear 
whether distinct mechanisms are involved for each HDAC or whether combined
inhibition of HDACs would be more effective. We compared the suppressive
functions of T(regs) from wild-type C57BL/6 mice with those from mice with either
complete or cell-specific deletion of various HDACs, as well as with those of
T(regs) treated with isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors. The improvement of T(reg)
suppressive function mediated by inhibition of HDAC6, but not Sirt1, required an 
intact heat shock response. Although HDAC6, HDAC9, and Sirt1 all deacetylated
Foxp3, each protein had different effects on transcription factors that control
expression of the gene encoding Foxp3. For example, loss of HDAC9, but not other 
HDACs, was associated with stabilization of the acetylated form of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) and promoted its
transcriptional activity. Thus, targeting different HDACs increased T(reg)
function through multiple and additive mechanisms, which suggests the therapeutic
potential for using combinations of HDAC inhibitors in the management of
autoimmunity and organ transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3603571
PMID: 22715468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;26(8):1380-93. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1024. Epub 2012 Jun 
14.

PI3K p110a/Akt signaling negatively regulates secretion of the intestinal peptide
neurotensin through interference of granule transport.

Li J(1), Song J, Cassidy MG, Rychahou P, Starr ME, Liu J, Li X, Epperly G, Weiss 
HL, Townsend CM Jr, Gao T, Evers BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.

Neurotensin (NT), an intestinal peptide secreted from N cells in the small bowel,
regulates a variety of physiological functions of the gastrointestinal tract,
including secretion, gut motility, and intestinal growth. The class IA
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) family, which comprised of p110 catalytic
(a, ß and d) and p85 regulatory subunits, has been implicated in the regulation
of hormone secretion from endocrine cells. However, the underlying mechanisms
remain poorly understood. In particular, the role of PI3K in intestinal peptide
secretion is not known. Here, we show that PI3K catalytic subunit, p110a,
negatively regulates NT secretion in vitro and in vivo. We demonstrate that
inhibition of p110a, but not p110ß, induces NT release in BON, a human endocrine 
cell line, which expresses NT mRNA and produces NT peptide in a manner analogous 
to N cells, and QGP-1, a pancreatic endocrine cell line that produces NT peptide.
In contrast, overexpression of p110a decreases NT secretion. Consistently,
p110a-inhibition increases plasma NT levels in mice. To further delineate the
mechanisms contributing to this effect, we demonstrate that inhibition of p110a
increases NT granule trafficking by up-regulating a-tubulin acetylation; NT
secretion is prevented by overexpression of HDAC6, an a-tubulin deacetylase.
Moreover, ras-related protein Rab27A (a small G protein) and kinase D-interacting
substrate of 220 kDa (Kidins220), which are associated with NT granules, play a
negative and positive role, respectively, in p110a-inhibition-induced NT
secretion. Our findings identify the critical role and novel mechanisms for the
PI3K signaling pathway in the control of intestinal hormone granule transport and
release.

PMCID: PMC3404302
PMID: 22700584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biochimie. 2012 Sep;94(9):1974-81. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.05.020. Epub 2012
May 29.

Characterization of a series of 4-aminoquinolines that stimulate caspase-7
mediated cleavage of TDP-43 and inhibit its function.

Cassel JA(1), McDonnell ME, Velvadapu V, Andrianov V, Reitz AB.

Author information: 
(1)ALS Biopharma, LLC, Pennsylvania Biotechnology Center, 3805 Old Easton Rd.,
Doylestown, PA 18902, USA. jcassel@alsbiopharma.com

Dysfunction of the heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein TAR DNA binding protein 43
(TDP-43) is associated with neurodegeneration in diseases such as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Here we
examine the effects of a series of 4-aminoquinolines with affinity for TDP-43
upon caspase-7-induced cleavage of TDP-43 and TDP-43 cellular function. These
compounds were mixed inhibitors of biotinylated TG6 binding to TDP-43, binding to
both free and occupied TDP-43. Incubation of TDP-43 and caspase-7 in the presence
of these compounds stimulated caspase-7 mediated cleavage of TDP-43. This effect 
was antagonized by the oligonucleotide TG12, prevented by denaturing TDP-43, and 
exhibited a similar relation of structure to function as for the displacement of 
bt-TG6 binding to TDP-43. In addition, the compounds did not affect caspase-7
enzyme activity. In human neuroglioma H4 cells, these compounds lowered levels of
TDP-43 and increased TDP-43 C-terminal fragments via a caspase-dependent
mechanism. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that this was due to induction of 
caspases 3 and 7 leading to increased PARP cleavage in H4 cells with similar rank
order of the potency among the compounds tests for displacement of bt-TG6
binding. Exposure to these compounds also reduced HDAC-6, ATG-7, and increased
LC3B, consistent with the effects of TDP-43 siRNA described by other
investigators. These data suggest that such compounds may be useful biochemical
probes to further understand both the normal and pathological functions of
TDP-43, and its cleavage and metabolism promoted by caspases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3402613
PMID: 22659571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2012 Sep;39(9):751-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2012.05729.x.

Expression patterns of histone deacetylases in experimental stroke and potential 
targets for neuroprotection.

Chen YT(1), Zang XF, Pan J, Zhu XL, Chen F, Chen ZB, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University 
Medical School, Nanjing, China.

1. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors exert neuroprotection in both cellular
and animal models of ischaemic stroke. However, which HDAC isoform (or isoforms) 
mediates this beneficial effect has not yet been determined. 2. In the present
study, gene levels of the HDAC isoforms were determined in the mouse cortex using
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), whereas changes in the 
expression of individual zinc-dependent HDAC family members were evaluated by
western blotting, 3, 12, 24 and 48 h after cerebral ischaemia induced by
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in male Kunming mice. 3. The HDAC
isoforms HDAC1-11 were all expressed in the mouse cortex and differentially
affected by cerebral ischaemia. Notably, there was a substantial increase in
HDAC3, HDAC6 and HDAC11 expression during the early phases of experimental
stroke, indicating their contribution to stroke pathogenesis. Furthermore,
induction of HDAC3 and HDAC6 in cortical neurons by ischaemic stroke was
confirmed in vivo and in vitro using double-labelled immunostaining and RT-PCR,
respectively. Therefore, small hairpin (sh) RNAs were used to selectively knock
down HDAC3 or HDAC6. This knockdown appreciably promoted the survival of cortical
neurons subjected to oxygen and glucose deprivation. 4. The findings of the
present study demonstrate the expression patterns of HDAC isoforms during
experimental ischaemic stroke. Furthermore, HDAC3 and HDAC6 were identified as
potential mediators in the neurotoxicity of ischaemic stroke, suggesting that
specific therapeutic approaches may be considered according to HDAC subtype.

© 2012 The Authors Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology © 2012
Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22651689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Jul;23(14):2658-70. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-12-1056. Epub 2012
May 23.

Calmodulin activation of Aurora-A kinase (AURKA) is required during ciliary
disassembly and in mitosis.

Plotnikova OV(1), Nikonova AS, Loskutov YV, Kozyulina PY, Pugacheva EN, Golemis
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 
19111, USA.

The centrosomal Aurora-A kinase (AURKA) regulates mitotic progression, and
overexpression and hyperactivation of AURKA commonly promotes genomic instability
in many tumors. Although most studies of AURKA focus on its role in mitosis, some
recent work identified unexpected nonmitotic activities of AURKA. Among these, a 
role for basal body-localized AURKA in regulating ciliary disassembly in
interphase cells has highlighted a role in regulating cellular responsiveness to 
growth factors and mechanical cues. The mechanism of AURKA activation involves
interactions with multiple partner proteins and is not well understood,
particularly in interphase cells. We show here that AURKA activation at the basal
body in ciliary disassembly requires interactions with Ca(2+) and calmodulin
(CaM) and that Ca(2+)/CaM are important mediators of the ciliary disassembly
process. We also show that Ca(2+)/CaM binding is required for AURKA activation in
mitosis and that inhibition of CaM activity reduces interaction between AURKA and
its activator, NEDD9. Finally, mutated derivatives of AURKA impaired for CaM
binding and/or CaM-dependent activation cause defects in mitotic progression,
cytokinesis, and ciliary resorption. These results define Ca(2+)/CaM as important
regulators of AURKA activation in mitotic and nonmitotic signaling.

PMCID: PMC3395655
PMID: 22621899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;33 Suppl 1:S145-51. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-129008.

Tau triage decisions mediated by the chaperone network.

Cook C(1), Petrucelli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

The pathological accumulation of the microtubule-binding protein tau is linked to
an increasing number of neurodegenerative conditions associated with aging,
though the mechanisms by which tau accumulates in disease are unclear. In this
review, we will summarize our previous research assessing the mechanism of
action, as well as the therapeutic potential of Hsp90 inhibition for the
treatment of tauopathies. Specifically, we describe the development of a
high-throughput screening approach to identify and rank compounds, and
demonstrate the selective elimination of aberrant p-tau species in the brain
following treatment with an Hsp90 inhibitor. Additionally, we identify CHIP as an
essential component of the Hsp90 chaperone complex that mediates tau degradation,
and present evidence to suggest that CHIP functions to identify and sequester
neurotoxic tau species. Finally, we discuss recent data identifying an additional
mechanism by which CHIP modulates protein triage decisions involving Hsp90.
Specifically, CHIP indirectly regulates Hsp90 chaperone activity by modulating
steady-state levels of the Hsp90 deacetylase, HDAC6, thus influencing both the
acetylation state and function of Hsp90. Thus future research directions will
focus on the manipulation of this network to promote degradation of pathogenic
tau species in disease.

PMID: 22596270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Sci Signal. 2012 May 15;5(224):pt3. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003098.

Roles of GRK2 in cell signaling beyond GPCR desensitization: GRK2-HDAC6
interaction modulates cell spreading and motility.

Penela P(1), Lafarga V, Tapia O, Rivas V, Nogués L, Lucas E, Vila-Bedmar R, Murga
C, Mayor F Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular and Centro de Biología Molecular Severo
Ochoa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain. ppenela@cbm.uam.es

G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) is a ubiquitous, essential protein
kinase that is emerging as an integrative node in many signaling networks.
Moreover, changes in GRK2 abundance and activity have been identified in several 
inflammatory, cardiovascular disease, and tumor contexts, suggesting that those
alterations may contribute to the initiation or development of pathologies. GRKs 
were initially identified as key players in the desensitization and
internalization of multiple G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), but GRK2 also
phosphorylates several non-GPCR substrates and dynamically associates with a
variety of proteins related to signal transduction. Ongoing research in our
laboratory is aimed at understanding how specific GRK2 interactomes are
orchestrated in a stimulus-, context-, or cell type-specific manner. We have
recently identified an interaction between GRK2 and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)
that modulates cell spreading and motility. HDAC6 is a major cytoplasmic
a-tubulin deacetylase that is involved in cell motility and adhesion. GRK2
dynamically and directly associates with and phosphorylates HDAC6 to stimulate
its a-tubulin deacetylase activity at specific cellular localizations, such as
the leading edge of migrating cells, thus promoting local tubulin deacetylation
and enhanced motility. GRK2-HDAC6-mediated regulation of tubulin acetylation also
modulates cellular spreading. This GRK2-HDAC6 functional interaction may have
important implications in pathological contexts related to epithelial cell
migration.

PMID: 22589388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;44(8):1299-304. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.04.020. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease: emerging mechanisms and therapies.

d'Ydewalle C(1), Benoy V, Van Den Bosch L.

Author information: 
(1)Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, Belgium.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most common inherited disorder of the
peripheral nervous system. The disease is characterized by a progressive muscle
weakness and atrophy, sensory loss, foot (and hand) deformities and steppage
gait. While many of the genes associated with axonal CMT have been identified, to
date it is unknown which mechanism(s) causes the disease. However, genetic
findings indicate that the underlying mechanisms mainly converge to the axonal
cytoskeleton. In this review, we will summarize the evidence for this pathogenic 
convergence. Furthermore, recent work with new transgenic mouse models has led to
the identification of histone deacetylase 6 as a potential therapeutic target for
inherited peripheral neuropathies. This enzyme deacetylates microtubules and
plays a crucial role in the regulation of axonal transport. These findings offer 
new perspectives for a potential therapy to treat axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease and other neurodegenerative disorders characterized by axonal transport
defects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22575637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Aug;128(2):365-76. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs163. Epub 2012 May 2.

Phthalates stimulate the epithelial to mesenchymal transition through an
HDAC6-dependent mechanism in human breast epithelial stem cells.

Hsieh TH(1), Tsai CF, Hsu CY, Kuo PL, Lee JN, Chai CY, Hou MF, Chang CC, Long CY,
Ko YC, Tsai EM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

Phthalates are environmental hormone-like molecules that are associated with
breast cancer risk and are involved in metastasis, a process that requires the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, few studies have addressed the 
potential effects of phthalates on stem cells. Here we tested the hypothesis that
phthalates such as butyl benzyl phthalate and di-n-butyl phthalate induce EMT in 
R2d cells, a stem cell-derived human breast epithelial cell line that is
responsive to estradiol for tumor development. We observed that phthalates
induced EMT as evidenced by morphological changes concomitant with increased
expression of mesenchymal markers and decreased expression of epithelial markers.
Molecular mechanism studies revealed that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is
required for phthalate-induced cell migration and invasion during EMT in vitro
and metastasis into the lungs of nude mice. We also constructed a series of
mutant HDAC6 promoter fragments and found that the transcription factor AP-2a
plays a novel role in regulating the HDAC6 promoter. Furthermore, phthalates
stimulated estrogen receptors and triggered the downstream EGFR-PKA signaling
cascade, leading to increased expression of AP-2a in the nucleus. We also
observed that phthalates increased expression of the PP1/HDAC6 complex and caused
Akt activation and GSK3ß inactivation, leading to transcriptional activation of
vimentin through the ß-catenin-TCF-4/LEF1 pathway. Understanding the signaling
cascades of phthalates that activate EMT through HDAC6 in breast epithelial stem 
cells provides the identification of novel therapeutic target for human breast
cancer.

PMID: 22552774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Ovarian Res. 2012 Apr 24;5(1):12. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-5-12.

Thailandepsins are new small molecule class I HDAC inhibitors with potent
cytotoxic activity in ovarian cancer cells: a preclinical study of epigenetic
ovarian cancer therapy.

Wilson AJ(1), Cheng YQ, Khabele D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Oncology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 21st Avenue South, B-1100 Medical Center
North, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. dineo.khabele@vanderbilt.edu.

BACKGROUND: New treatment strategies are emerging to target DNA damage response
pathways in ovarian cancer. Our group has previously shown that the class I
biased HDAC inhibitor romidepsin (FK228) induces DNA damage response and has
potent cytotoxic effects in ovarian cancer cells. Here, we investigated newly
discovered HDAC inhibitors, thailandepsin A (TDP-A) and thailandepsin B (TDP-B), 
to determine the effects on cell viability, apoptosis and DNA damage response in 
ovarian cancer cells.
METHODS: FK228, TDP-A and TDP-B were tested in five ovarian cancer cell lines.
Cellular viability was measured by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays.
Immunofluorescence assays were used to assess activated caspase 3. Western blots 
were performed to detect protein expression of PARP cleavage, pH2AX,
P-glycoprotein and tubulin acetylation.
RESULTS: Treatment with TDPs decreased cell viability at nanonomolar
concentrations in four of the five ovarian cancer cell lines studied. Similar to 
FK228, both TDP compounds exerted minimal effects on NCI/ADR-RES ovarian cancer
cells. Across the four cell lines sensitive to the TDPs, TDP-B consistently had a
greater inhibitory effect than TDP-A on cell viability. TDP-B also had relatively
greater effects on promoting cell apoptosis and induction of pH2AX (a mark of DNA
damage response), than TDP-A. These antitumor effects of TDP-B were of similar
magnitude to those induced by an equal concentration of FK228. Similar to FK228, 
the nanomolar concentrations of the TDPs had little effect on tubulin acetylation
(a mark of class II HDAC6 inhibition).
CONCLUSIONS: The new small molecule HDAC inhibitors TDP-A and TDP-B are FK228
analogues that suppress cell viability and induce apoptosis at nanomolar drug
concentrations. TDP-B showed the most similarity to the biological activity of
FK228 with greater cytotoxic effects than TDP-A in vitro. Our results indicate
that FK228-like small molecule class I HDAC-biased HDAC inhibitors have
therapeutic potential for ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3394212
PMID: 22531354  [PubMed]


445. FEBS Lett. 2012 May 7;586(9):1379-83. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.03.060. Epub
2012 Apr 12.

Depression of mitochondrial metabolism by downregulation of cytoplasmic
deacetylase, HDAC6.

Kamemura K(1), Ogawa M, Ohkubo S, Ohtsuka Y, Shitara Y, Komiya T, Maeda S, Ito A,
Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Nagahama Institute of Bio-Science and Technology,
Nagahama, Shiga, Japan. k_kamemura@nagahama-i-bio.ac.jp

Mitochondria perform multiple functions critical to the maintenance of cellular
homeostasis. Here we report that the downregulation of histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) causes a reduction in the net activity of mitochondrial enzymes,
including respiratory complex II and citrate synthase. HDAC6 deacetylase and
ubiquitin-binding activities were both required for recovery of reduced
mitochondrial metabolic activity due to the loss of HDAC6. Hsp90, a substrate of 
HDAC6, localizes to mitochondria and partly mediates the regulation of
mitochondrial metabolic activity by HDAC6. Our finding suggests that HDAC6
regulates mitochondrial metabolism and might serve as a cellular homeostasis
surveillance factor.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22504143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 1;21(13):2936-45. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds125. Epub 2012 Apr 
5.

Loss of HDAC6, a novel CHIP substrate, alleviates abnormal tau accumulation.

Cook C(1), Gendron TF, Scheffel K, Carlomagno Y, Dunmore J, DeTure M, Petrucelli 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

The abnormal accumulation of the microtubule-binding protein tau is associated
with a number of neurodegenerative conditions, and correlates with cognitive
decline in Alzheimer's disease. The ubiquitin ligase carboxy terminus of
Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP) and the molecular chaperone Hsp90 are implicated
in protein triage decisions involving tau, and have consequently been targeted
for therapeutic approaches aimed at decreasing tau burden. Here, we present
evidence that CHIP binds, ubiquitinates and regulates expression of histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). As the deacetylase for Hsp90, HDAC6 modulates Hsp90
function and determines the favorability of refolding versus degradation of Hsp90
client proteins. Moreover, we demonstrate that HDAC6 levels positively correlate 
with tau burden, while a decrease in HDAC6 activity or expression promotes tau
clearance. Consistent with previous research on Hsp90 clients in cancer, we
provide evidence that a loss of HDAC6 activity augments the efficacy of an Hsp90 
inhibitor and drives client degradation, in this case tau. Therefore, our current
findings not only identify HDAC6 as a critical factor for the regulation of tau
levels, but also indicate that a multi-faceted treatment approach could more
effectively arrest tau accumulation in disease.

PMCID: PMC3373241
PMID: 22492994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Chin Med J (Engl). 2012 Feb;125(4):662-6.

Nicotine inhibits histone deacetylase 6 activity and chaperone-dependent
activation of the glucocorticoid receptor in A549 cells.

Sun LC(1), Lin JT, Li W, Zhang L, Zhou TL, Zhang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Medicine of Peking University China-Japan Friendship, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Nicotine, a major component of tobacco, is the main cause of smoking 
addiction. It was found that asthmatic patients who smoke were insensitive to
glucocorticoid treatment. In this paper, we investigated whether nicotine could
inhibit histone deacetylase 6 activity (HDAC6) and chaperone-dependent activation
of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in A549 cells. Furthermore, the expression
level of heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) was determined.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to detect the 
levels of RNA transcription, and Western blotting was applied to analyze the
levels of protein expression of HDAC6, GR, and HSP90 in A549 cells. Moreover, the
effects of dexamethasone and trichostatin A were observed in A549 cells.
RESULTS: A549 cell proliferation was inhibited in the presence of nicotine, and
the level of RNA and protein expression of HDAC6 and GR were down-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Nicotine could inhibit HDAC6 activity and chaperone-dependent
activation of GR. This might be the main reason why asthmatic patients who smoke 
show insensitivity to the glucocorticoid treatment.

PMID: 22490492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jul;41(1):53-60. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1424. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Downregulation of cylindromatosis gene, CYLD, confers a growth advantage on
malignant melanoma cells while negatively regulating their migration activity.

Ishikawa Y(1), Tsunoda K, Shibazaki M, Takahashi K, Akasaka T, Masuda T, Maesawa 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute of Biomedical Science, Iwate Medical
University, Iwate, Japan.

The cylindromatosis gene (CYLD) encodes a deubiquitinase that was initially
identified as a tumor suppressor and has recently been investigated in connection
with a variety of normal physiological processes. In contrast to its
cell-proliferative activity, the effect of CYLD protein on cell migration has
been a matter of debate. We investigated the effect of CYLD-siRNA on the
migration activity of malignant melanoma cells. Expression of CYLD mRNA/protein
was lower in 6 of 8 malignant melanoma cell lines than in 3 sets of
primary-cultured normal human epidermal melanocytes. Knockdown of CYLD
significantly increased the proliferation activities of two melanoma cell lines
(p<0.05), along with BCL3 nuclear translocation followed by CCND1 overexpression.
In contrast to the proliferation-related activity, CYLD knockdown significantly
decreased the cell migration of all the melanoma cell lines (n=7, p<0.05), and we
demonstrated that the mechanism regulating melanoma cell migration was activation
of RAC1 through the action of CYLD. Our findings provide new insight into the
role of CYLD-induced RAC1 activation in melanoma cell migration.

PMID: 22469839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Leuk Res. 2012 Aug;36(8):1055-62. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.02.026. Epub 2012
Mar 29.

HDAC6 as a target for antileukemic drugs in acute myeloid leukemia.

Hackanson B(1), Rimmele L, Benkißer M, Abdelkarim M, Fliegauf M, Jung M, Lübbert 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University of Freiburg Medical Center,
Freiburg, Germany. bjoern.hackanson@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by drugs such as vorinostat or
depsipeptide has become treatment strategy under study in acute myeloid leukemia.
Most preclinically and clinically investigated HDACi target classes I, II and IV,
but only few are selective in inhibiting specific HDACs. Here we analyzed the in 
vitro antileukemic activity of three novel hydroxamate derivatives, the
pan-HDAC-inhibitors ST13, ST34 and the known HDAC6 inhibitor ST80, treating
leukemia cell lines HL60, Kasumi-1, NB-4, THP-1, K562, U937, Jurkat as well as
primary AML blasts. In cell lines all three compounds exerted a strong
growth-inhibitory effect at low micromolar concentrations. ST13 increased
acetylation of H3, H4 and a-tubulin, while ST34 preferentially acetylated
histones H3 and H4. Interestingly, ST80 preferentially induced a-tubulin
acetylation at low micromolar doses, confirming a selective inhibition of HDAC6
by ST80 in leukemic cells. These observations were also confirmed in primary AML 
blasts cultured ex vivo. Growth-inhibition by ST80 was independent of
pre-treatment HDAC6 protein expression and in contrast to ST13 and ST34, ST80 did
not result in induction of p21/WAF. Immunofluorescence imaging confirmed that
ST80 treatment both increased the abundance and resulted in unilateral local
accumulation of acetylated a-tubulin. In conclusion, the three novel HDACi show
potent antileukemic activity in myeloid cell lines and primary AML blasts at low 
micromolar concentrations. Preferential acetylation of a-tubulin implies that
ST80 might exert its antileukemic effect not through histone reacetylation but
rather through inhibition of HDAC6.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Neurosci. 2012 Mar 28;32(13):4400-16. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5634-11.2012.

HDAC6 regulates glucocorticoid receptor signaling in serotonin pathways with
critical impact on stress resilience.

Espallergues J(1), Teegarden SL, Veerakumar A, Boulden J, Challis C, Jochems J,
Chan M, Petersen T, Deneris E, Matthias P, Hahn CG, Lucki I, Beck SG, Berton O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Genetic variations in certain components of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
chaperone complex have been associated with the development of stress-related
affective disorders and individual variability in therapeutic responses to
antidepressants. Mechanisms that link GR chaperoning and stress susceptibility
are not well understood. Here, we show that the effects of glucocorticoid
hormones on socioaffective behaviors are critically regulated via reversible
acetylation of Hsp90, a key component of the GR chaperone complex. We provide
pharmacological and genetic evidence indicating that the cytoplasmic lysine
deacetylase HDAC6 controls Hsp90 acetylation in the brain, and thereby modulates 
Hsp90-GR protein-protein interactions, as well as hormone- and stress-induced GR 
translocation, with a critical impact on GR downstream signaling and behavior.
Pet1-Cre-driven deletion of HDAC6 in serotonin neurons, the densest
HDAC6-expressing cell group in the mouse brain, dramatically reduced acute
anxiogenic effects of the glucocorticoid hormone corticosterone in the
open-field, elevated plus maze, and social interaction tests. Serotonin-selective
depletion of HDAC6 also blocked the expression of social avoidance in mice
exposed to chronic social defeat and concurrently prevented the
electrophysiological and morphological changes induced, in serotonin neurons, by 
this murine model of traumatic stress. Together, these results identify HDAC6
inhibition as a potential new strategy for proresilience and antidepressant
interventions through regulation of the Hsp90-GR heterocomplex and focal
prevention of GR signaling in serotonin pathways. Our data thus uncover an
alternate mechanism by which pan-HDAC inhibitors may regulate stress-related
behaviors independently of their action on histones.

PMCID: PMC3355377
PMID: 22457490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Integr Biol (Camb). 2012 May;4(5):540-9. doi: 10.1039/c2ib00168c. Epub 2012 Mar
26.

Actin filaments play a primary role for structural integrity and viscoelastic
response in cells.

Ketene AN(1), Roberts PC, Shea AA, Schmelz EM, Agah M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, 100 Randolph Hall, Blacksburg, VA, USA. 
anketene@vt.edu

This atomic force microscopy (AFM) study is devoted to the analysis of the mouse 
ovarian cancer cell's cytoskeleton components and the impact of both actin and
microtubulin filaments on a cell's deformation behavior. Early stage,
non-tumorigenic cancer cells show abundant well-organized cytoskeletal structures
consisting of both actin and microtubule filaments. In sharp contrast, cells
representing late and more aggressive stages of cancer display highly
disorganized actin and microtubule structures. With the use of actin
microfilament targeting drugs, together with the suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid 
(SAHA) and tubastatin A anti-cancer drugs, we modified the cell architectural
framework and performed nano-indentation tests to evaluate cell elasticity and
viscosity as a function of each biopolymer's weighted presence. Results
demonstrate that both mechanical properties are heavily influenced by the levels 
and organization state of actin microfilaments; decreasing the actin organization
of cells results in 85% and 79% decrease in cell elasticity and viscosity,
respectively. In contrast, microtubule organization was shown to exert only
marginal effects on either property. Furthermore, the anti-cancer drug, SAHA, was
shown to exert little impact on the viscoelastic response of cancer cells.
Finally, we report for the first time that tubastatin A, a specific HDAC6
inhibitor, increased cell elasticity as revealed by AFM tests without exerting
drastic changes to the actin microfilament or microtubule networks. Our findings 
raise interest in a potential HDAC6 target that affects cellular mechanics just
as effectively as the conventionally known cytoskeleton components.

PMID: 22446682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Hepatology. 2012 Aug;56(2):644-57. doi: 10.1002/hep.25699. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Histone deacetylase 6 functions as a tumor suppressor by activating c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinase-mediated beclin 1-dependent autophagic cell death in liver
cancer.

Jung KH(1), Noh JH, Kim JK, Eun JW, Bae HJ, Chang YG, Kim MG, Park WS, Lee JY,
Lee SY, Chu IS, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Functional RNomics Research
Center, Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

Ubiquitin-binding histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is uniquely endowed with tubulin 
deacetylase activity and plays an important role in the clearance of misfolded
protein by autophagy. In cancer, HDAC6 has become a target for drug development
due to its major contribution to oncogenic cell transformation. In the present
study we show that HDAC6 expression was down-regulated in a large cohort of human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients, and that low expression of HDAC6 was
significantly associated with poor prognosis of HCC patients in 5-year overall,
disease-free, and recurrence-free survival. Notably, we observed that ectopic
overexpression of HDAC6 suppressed tumor cell growth and proliferation in various
liver cancer cells, and elicited increased LC3B-II conversion and autophagic
vacuole formation without causing apoptotic cell death or cell cycle inhibition. 
In addition, the sustained overexpression of HDAC6 reduced the in vivo tumor
growth rate in a mouse xenograft model. It was also found that HDAC6 mediated
autophagic cell death by way of Beclin 1 and activation of the LC3-II pathway in 
liver cancer cells, and that HDAC6 overexpression activated c-Jun NH2-terminal
kinase (JNK) and increased the phosphorylation of c-Jun. In contrast, the
induction of Beclin 1 expression was blocked by SP600125 (a specific inhibitor of
JNK) or by small interfering RNA directed against HDAC6.CONCLUSION: Our findings 
suggest that loss of HDAC6 expression in human HCCs and tumor suppression by
HDAC6 occur by way of activation of caspase-independent autophagic cell death
through the JNK/Beclin 1 pathway in liver cancer and, thus, that a novel tumor
suppressor function mechanism involving HDAC6 may be amenable to nonepigenetic
regulation.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22392728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32215. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032215. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Arsenic trioxide exerts antimyeloma effects by inhibiting activity in the
cytoplasmic substrates of histone deacetylase 6.

Qu X(1), Du J, Zhang C, Fu W, Xi H, Zou J, Hou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Myeloma and Lymphoma Center, Changzheng
Hospital, The Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Arsenic trioxide (As(2)O(3)) has shown remarkable efficacy for the treatment of
multiple myeloma (MM). Histone deacetylases (HDAC) play an important role in the 
control of gene expression, and their dysregulation has been linked to myeloma.
Especially, HDAC6, a unique cytoplasmic member of class II, which mainly
functions as a-tubulin deacetylase and Hsp90 deacetylase, has become a target for
drug development to treat cancer due to its major contribution in oncogenic cell 
transformation. However, the mechanisms of action for As(2)O(3) have not yet been
defined. In this study, we investigated the effect of As(2)O(3) on proliferation 
and apoptosis in human myeloma cell line and primary myeloma cells, and then we
studied that As(2)O(3) exerts antimyeloma effects by inhibiting activity in the
a-tubulin and Hsp90 through western blot analysis and immunoprecipitation. We
found that As(2)O(3) acts directly on MM cells at relatively low concentrations
of 0.5~2.5 µM, which effects survival and apoptosis of MM cells. However,
As(2)O(3) inhibited HDAC activity at the relatively high concentration and
dose-dependent manner (great than 4 µM). Subsequently, we found that As(2)O(3)
treatment in a dose- and time-dependent fashion markedly increased the level of
acetylated a-tubulin and acetylated Hsp90, and inhibited the chaperone
association with IKKa activities and increased degradation of IKKa. Importantly, 
the loss of IKKa-associated Hsp90 occurred prior to any detectable loss in the
levels of IKKa, indicating a novel pathway by which As(2)O(3) down-regulates
HDAC6 to destabilize IKKa protein via Hsp90 chaperone function. Furthermore, we
observed the effect of As(2)O(3) on TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway was to 
significantly reduced phosphorylation of Ser-536 on NF-<U+03BA>B p65. Therefore, our
studies provide an important insight into the molecular mechanism of anti-myeloma
activity of As(2)O(3) in HDAC6-Hsp90-IKKa-NF<U+03BA>B signaling axis and the rationale
for As(2)O(3) can be extended readily using all the HDAC associated diseases.

PMCID: PMC3284565
PMID: 22384180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Sep 1;21(13):2531-40. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0014. Epub 2012 
Apr 2.

Upregulation of miR-22 promotes osteogenic differentiation and inhibits
adipogenic differentiation of human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells
by repressing HDAC6 protein expression.

Huang S(1), Wang S, Bian C, Yang Z, Zhou H, Zeng Y, Li H, Han Q, Zhao RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Tissue Engineering, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences
and School of Basic Medicine, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Mesenchmal stem cells (MSCs) can be differentiated into either adipocytes or
osteoblasts, and a reciprocal relationship exists between adipogenesis and
osteogenesis. Multiple transcription factors and signaling pathways have been
reported to regulate adipogenic or osteogenic differentiation, respectively, yet 
the molecular mechanism underlying the cell fate alteration between adipogenesis 
and osteogenesis still remains to be illustrated. MicroRNAs are important
regulators in diverse biological processes by repressing protein expression of
their targets. Here, miR-22 was found to regulate adipogenic and osteogenic
differentiation of human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hADMSCs) 
in opposite directions. Our data showed that miR-22 decreased during the process 
of adipogenic differentiation but increased during osteogenic differentiation. On
one hand, overexpression of miR-22 in hADMSCs could inhibit lipid droplets
accumulation and repress the expression of adipogenic transcription factors and
adipogenic-specific genes. On the other hand, enhanced alkaline phosphatase
activity and matrix mineralization, as well as increased expression of
osteo-specific genes, indicated a positive role of miR-22 in regulating
osteogenic differentiation. Target databases prediction and validation by Dual
Luciferase Reporter Assay, western blot, and real-time polymerase chain reaction 
identified histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) as a direct downstream target of miR-22 
in hADMSCs. Inhibition of endogenous HDAC6 by small-interfering RNAs suppressed
adipogenesis and stimulated osteogenesis, consistent with the effect of miR-22
overexpression in hADMSCs. Together, our results suggested that miR-22 acted as a
critical regulator of balance between adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation
of hADMSCs by repressing its target HDAC6.

PMCID: PMC3424982
PMID: 22375943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Traffic. 2012 Jun;13(6):771-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01347.x. Epub 2012
Mar 26.

HDAC6 at the Intersection of Neuroprotection and Neurodegeneration.

d'Ydewalle C(1), Bogaert E, Van Den Bosch L.

Author information: 
(1)Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Campus Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) catalyzes multiple reactions. We summarize the
current knowledge on HDAC6, its targets and functions. Among others, HDAC6
recognizes damaged proteins and assures that these proteins are destroyed by
autophagy. On the other hand, HDAC6 also modifies the tracks used by the
clearance mechanism so that axonal transport becomes less efficient. We
hypothesize that a disturbance in the equilibrium between the different functions
of HDAC6 could play an important role in neurodegeneration.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22372633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Toxicol Sci. 2012 May;127(1):246-55. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs070. Epub 2012 Feb
23.

Histone deacetylase 6 associates with ribosomes and regulates de novo protein
translation during arsenite stress.

Kappeler KV(1), Zhang J, Dinh TN, Strom JG, Chen QM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona,
Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is known as a cytoplasmic enzyme that regulates
cell migration, cell adhesion, and degradation of misfolded proteins by
deacetylating substrates such as a-tubulin and Hsp90. When HaCaT keratinocytes
were exposed to 1-200µM sodium arsenite, we observed perinuclear localization of 
HDAC6 within 30 min. Although the overall level of HDAC6 protein did not change, 
sodium arsenite caused an increase of HDAC6 in ribosomal fractions. Separation of
ribosomal subunits versus intact ribosomes or polysomes indicated that HDAC6 was 
mainly detected in 40/43S fractions containing the small ribosomal subunit in
untreated cells but was associated with 40/43S and 60/80S ribosomal fractions in 
arsenite-treated cells. Immunocytochemistry studies revealed that arsenite caused
colocalization of HDAC6 with the ribosomal large and small subunit protein L36a
and S6. Both L36a and S6 were detected in the immunocomplex of HDAC6 isolated
from arsenite-treated cells. The observed physical interaction of HDAC6 with
ribosomes pointed to a role of HDAC6 in stress-induced protein translation. Among
arsenite stress-induced proteins, de novo Nrf2 protein translation was inhibited 
by Tubastatin A. These data demonstrate that HDAC6 was recruited to ribosomes,
physically interacted with ribosomal proteins, and regulated de novo protein
translation in keratinocytes responding to arsenite stress.

PMCID: PMC3327865
PMID: 22367689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 30;287(14):10885-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.308791. Epub
2012 Feb 9.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) deacetylates survivin for its nuclear export in
breast cancer.

Riolo MT(1), Cooper ZA, Holloway MP, Cheng Y, Bianchi C, Yakirevich E, Ma L, Chin
YE, Altura RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University
and Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA.

Survivin is an oncogenic protein that is highly expressed in breast cancer and
has a dual function that is dependent on its subcellular localization. In the
cytosol, survivin blocks programmed cell death by inactivating caspase proteins; 
however, in the nucleus it facilitates cell division by regulating chromosomal
movement and cytokinesis. In prior work, we showed that survivin is acetylated by
CREB-binding protein (CBP), which restricts its localization to the nuclear
compartment and thereby inhibits its anti-apoptotic function. Here, we identify
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) as responsible for abrogating CBP-mediated survivin
acetylation in the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer cell line,
MCF-7. HDAC6 directly binds survivin, an interaction that is enhanced by CBP. In 
quiescent breast cancer cells in culture and in malignant tissue sections from
ER+ breast tumors, HDAC6 localizes to a perinuclear region of the cell,
undergoing transport to the nucleus following CBP activation where it then
deacetylates survivin. Genetically modified mouse embryonic fibroblasts that lack
mhdac6 localize survivin predominantly to the nuclear compartment, whereas
wild-type mouse embryonic fibroblasts localize survivin to distinct cytoplasmic
structures. Together, these data imply that HDAC6 deacetylates survivin to
regulate its nuclear export, a feature that may provide a novel target for
patients with ER+ breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3322878
PMID: 22334690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Physiol. 2012 Apr 1;590(7):1535-46. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.224907. Epub
2012 Feb 13.

Histone deacetylase 6 gates the synaptic action of acute stress in prefrontal
cortex.

Lee JB(1), Wei J, Liu W, Cheng J, Feng J, Yan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

The prefrontal cortex (PFC), a region responsible for high-order cognitive
functions, such as decision-making, attention and working memory, is highly
influenced by stress and corticosteroid stress hormones. Recently it has been
shown that acute stress affects PFC functions by potentiating glutamatergic
transmission via a mechanism dependent on glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and its
downstream target, serum and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase (SGK). To identify
the key regulators of stress responses, we examined the role of histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a unique member of the HDAC family that could regulate the
GR chaperone protein heat shock protein 90 (HSP90), in the synaptic action of
acute stress in PFC. We found that HDAC6 inhibition or knockdown blocked the
enhancement of glutamatergic transmission and glutamate receptor trafficking by
acute stress in vivo or corticosterone treatment in vitro. In addition, HDAC6
inhibition blocked the up-regulation of SGK in animals exposed to acute stress.
HSP90 inhibition or knockdown produced a similar blockade of the acute
stress-induced enhancement of glutamatergic signalling. These findings have
identified HDAC6 as a key molecule gating the effects of acute stress on synaptic
functions in the PFC.

PMCID: PMC3413488
PMID: 22331421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030924. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

Loss of deacetylation activity of Hdac6 affects emotional behavior in mice.

Fukada M(1), Hanai A, Nakayama A, Suzuki T, Miyata N, Rodriguiz RM, Wetsel WC,
Yao TP, Kawaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human
Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan.

Acetylation is mediated by acetyltransferases and deacetylases, and occurs not
only on histones but also on diverse proteins. Although histone acetylation in
chromatin structure and transcription has been well studied, the biological roles
of non-histone acetylation remain elusive. Histone deacetylase 6 (Hdac6), a
member of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) family, is a unique deacetylase that
localizes to cytoplasm and functions in many cellular events by deacetylating
non-histone proteins including a-tubulin, Hsp90, and cortactin. Since robust
expression of Hdac6 is observed in brain, it would be expected that
Hdac6-mediated reversible acetylation plays essential roles in CNS. Here we
demonstrate the crucial roles of Hdac6 deacetylase activity in the expression of 
emotional behavior in mice. We found that Hdac6-deficient mice exhibit
hyperactivity, less anxiety, and antidepressant-like behavior in behavioral
tests. Moreover, administration of Hdac6-specific inhibitor replicated
antidepressant-like behavior in mice. In good agreement with behavioral
phenotypes of Hdac6-deficient mice, Hdac6 dominantly localizes to the dorsal and 
median raphe nuclei, which are involved in emotional behaviors. These findings
suggest that HDAC6-mediated reversible acetylation might contribute to maintain
proper neuronal activity in serotonergic neurons, and also provide a new
therapeutic target for depression.

PMCID: PMC3273475
PMID: 22328923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Aug;19(8):1317-27. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2012.8. Epub 2012 Feb
10.

Identification of an acetylation-dependant Ku70/FLIP complex that regulates FLIP 
expression and HDAC inhibitor-induced apoptosis.

Kerr E(1), Holohan C, McLaughlin KM, Majkut J, Dolan S, Redmond K, Riley J,
McLaughlin K, Stasik I, Crudden M, Van Schaeybroeck S, Fenning C, O'Connor R,
Kiely P, Sgobba M, Haigh D, Johnston PG, Longley DB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Biomedical Science, Queen's University Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.

FLIP is a potential anti-cancer therapeutic target that inhibits apoptosis by
blocking caspase 8 activation by death receptors. We report a novel interaction
between FLIP and the DNA repair protein Ku70 that regulates FLIP protein
stability by inhibiting its polyubiquitination. Furthermore, we found that the
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor Vorinostat (SAHA) enhances the acetylation
of Ku70, thereby disrupting the FLIP/Ku70 complex and triggering FLIP
polyubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. Using in vitro and in vivo 
colorectal cancer models, we further demonstrated that SAHA-induced apoptosis is 
dependant on FLIP downregulation and caspase 8 activation. In addition, an
HDAC6-specific inhibitor Tubacin recapitulated the effects of SAHA, suggesting
that HDAC6 is a key regulator of Ku70 acetylation and FLIP protein stability.
Thus, HDAC inhibitors with anti-HDAC6 activity act as efficient
post-transcriptional suppressors of FLIP expression and may, therefore,
effectively act as 'FLIP inhibitors'.

PMCID: PMC3392639
PMID: 22322857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Med Chem. 2012 Feb 23;55(4):1731-50. doi: 10.1021/jm2016182. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Defining the mechanism of action and enzymatic selectivity of psammaplin A
against its epigenetic targets.

Baud MG(1), Leiser T, Haus P, Samlal S, Wong AC, Wood RJ, Petrucci V, Gunaratnam 
M, Hughes SM, Buluwela L, Turlais F, Neidle S, Meyer-Almes FJ, White AJ, Fuchter 
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom.

Psammaplin A (11c) is a marine metabolite previously reported to be a potent
inhibitor of two classes of epigenetic enzymes: histone deacetylases and DNA
methyltransferases. The design and synthesis of a focused library based on the
psammaplin A core has been carried out to probe the molecular features of this
molecule responsible for its activity. By direct in vitro assay of the free thiol
generated upon reduction of the dimeric psammaplin scaffold, we have
unambiguously demonstrated that 11c functions as a natural prodrug, with the
reduced form being highly potent against HDAC1 in vitro (IC(50) 0.9 nM).
Furthermore, we have shown it to have high isoform selectivity, being 360-fold
selective for HDAC1 over HDAC6 and more than 1000-fold less potent against HDAC7 
and HDAC8. SAR around our focused library revealed a number of features, most
notably the oxime functionality to be important to this selectivity. Many of the 
compounds show significant cytotoxicity in A549, MCF7, and W138 cells, with the
SAR of cytotoxicity correlating to HDAC inhibition. Furthermore, compound
treatment causes upregulation of histone acetylation but little effect on tubulin
acetylation. Finally, we have found no evidence for 11c functioning as a DNMT
inhibitor.

PMID: 22280363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Exp Med. 2012 Feb 13;209(2):275-89. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111117. Epub 2012 Jan
23.

Inhibiting the HSP90 chaperone destabilizes macrophage migration inhibitory
factor and thereby inhibits breast tumor progression.

Schulz R(1), Marchenko ND, Holembowski L, Fingerle-Rowson G, Pesic M, Zender L,
Dobbelstein M, Moll UM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center of Molecular Biosciences,
University of Göttingen, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2012 Mar 12;209(3):640.

Intracellular macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) often becomes
stabilized in human cancer cells. MIF can promote tumor cell survival, and
elevated MIF protein correlates with tumor aggressiveness and poor prognosis.
However, the molecular mechanism facilitating MIF stabilization in tumors is not 
understood. We show that the tumor-activated HSP90 chaperone complex protects MIF
from degradation. Pharmacological inhibition of HSP90 activity, or siRNA-mediated
knockdown of HSP90 or HDAC6, destabilizes MIF in a variety of human cancer cells.
The HSP90-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP mediates the ensuing
proteasome-dependent MIF degradation. Cancer cells contain constitutive
endogenous MIF-HSP90 complexes. siRNA-mediated MIF knockdown inhibits
proliferation and triggers apoptosis of cultured human cancer cells, whereas
HSP90 inhibitor-induced apoptosis is overridden by ectopic MIF expression. In the
ErbB2 transgenic model of human HER2-positive breast cancer, genetic ablation of 
MIF delays tumor progression and prolongs overall survival of mice. Systemic
treatment with the HSP90 inhibitor 17AAG reduces MIF expression and blocks growth
of MIF-expressing, but not MIF-deficient, tumors. Together, these findings
identify MIF as a novel HSP90 client and suggest that HSP90 inhibitors inhibit
ErbB2-driven breast tumor growth at least in part by destabilizing MIF.

PMCID: PMC3280870
PMID: 22271573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Blood. 2012 Mar 15;119(11):2579-89. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-387365. Epub 2012 
Jan 19.

Preclinical activity, pharmacodynamic, and pharmacokinetic properties of a
selective HDAC6 inhibitor, ACY-1215, in combination with bortezomib in multiple
myeloma.

Santo L(1), Hideshima T, Kung AL, Tseng JC, Tamang D, Yang M, Jarpe M, van Duzer 
JH, Mazitschek R, Ogier WC, Cirstea D, Rodig S, Eda H, Scullen T, Canavese M,
Bradner J, Anderson KC, Jones SS, Raje N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymatic activity has been linked to the
transcription of DNA in cancers including multiple myeloma (MM). Therefore, HDAC 
inhibitors used alone and in combination are being actively studied as novel
therapies in MM. In the present study, we investigated the preclinical activity
of ACY-1215, an HDAC6-selective inhibitor, alone and in combination with
bortezomib in MM. Low doses of ACY-1215 combined with bortezomib triggered
synergistic anti-MM activity, resulting in protracted endoplasmic reticulum
stress and apoptosis via activation of caspase-3, caspase-8, and caspase-9 and
poly (ADP) ribosome polymerase. In vivo, the anti-MM activity of ACY-1215 in
combination with bortezomib was confirmed using 2 different xenograft SCID mouse 
models: human MM injected subcutaneously (the plasmacytoma model) and
luciferase-expressing human MM injected intravenously (the disseminated MM
model). Tumor growth was significantly delayed and overall survival was
significantly prolonged in animals treated with the combination therapy.
Pharmacokinetic data showed peak plasma levels of ACY-1215 at 4 hours after
treatment coincident with an increase in acetylated a-tubulin, a marker of HDAC6 
inhibition, by immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. These studies
provide preclinical rationale for acetylated a-tubulin use as a pharmacodynamic
biomarker in future clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC3337713
PMID: 22262760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29719. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029719. Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Knock down of heat shock protein 27 (HspB1) induces degradation of several
putative client proteins.

Gibert B(1), Eckel B, Fasquelle L, Moulin M, Bouhallier F, Gonin V, Mellier G,
Simon S, Kretz-Remy C, Arrigo AP, Diaz-Latoud C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR5534, Université Lyon
1, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France. benjamin.gibert@lyon.unicancer.fr

Hsp27 belongs to the heat shock protein family and displays chaperone properties 
in stress conditions by holding unfolded polypeptides, hence avoiding their
inclination to aggregate. Hsp27 is often referenced as an anti-cancer therapeutic
target, but apart from its well-described ability to interfere with different
stresses and apoptotic processes, its role in non-stressed conditions is still
not well defined. In the present study we report that three polypeptides (histone
deacetylase HDAC6, transcription factor STAT2 and procaspase-3) were degraded in 
human cancerous cells displaying genetically decreased levels of Hsp27. In
addition, these proteins interacted with Hsp27 complexes of different native
size. Altogether, these findings suggest that HDAC6, STAT2 and procaspase-3 are
client proteins of Hsp27. Hence, in non stressed cancerous cells, the structural 
organization of Hsp27 appears to be a key parameter in the regulation by this
chaperone of the level of specific polypeptides through client-chaperone type of 
interactions.

PMCID: PMC3251601
PMID: 22238643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. ChemMedChem. 2012 Mar 5;7(3):425-39. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201100522. Epub 2012 Jan
10.

Chiral mercaptoacetamides display enantioselective inhibition of histone
deacetylase 6 and exhibit neuroprotection in cortical neuron models of oxidative 
stress.

Kalin JH(1), Zhang H, Gaudrel-Grosay S, Vistoli G, Kozikowski AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 833 S. Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612-7211, USA.

Mercaptoacetamide-based ligands have been designed as a new class of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors for possible use in the treatment of
neurodegenerative diseases. The thiol group of these compounds provides a key
binding element for interaction with the catalytic zinc ion, and thus differs
from the more typically employed hydroxamic acid based zinc binding groups.
Herein we disclose the chemistry and biology of some substituted
mercaptoacetamides with the intention of increasing HDAC6 isoform selectivity
while maintaining potency similar to their hydroxamic acid analogues. The
introduction of a stereocenter a to the thiol group was found to have a
considerable impact on HDAC inhibitor potency. These new compounds were also
profiled for their therapeutic potential in an in vitro model of stress-induced
neuronal injury and were found to act as nontoxic neuroprotective agents.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22234885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Diabetes. 2012 Feb;61(2):513-23. doi: 10.2337/db11-0313. Epub 2011 Dec 30.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is an essential modifier of glucocorticoid-induced 
hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Winkler R(1), Benz V, Clemenz M, Bloch M, Foryst-Ludwig A, Wardat S, Witte N,
Trappiel M, Namsolleck P, Mai K, Spranger J, Matthias G, Roloff T, Truee O,
Kappert K, Schupp M, Matthias P, Kintscher U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Nutrition, Charité Medical University, the Center for Cardiovascular Research,
Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2012 Jul;61(7):e10; author reply e11.

In the current study, we investigated the importance of histone deacetylase
(HDAC)6 for glucocorticoid receptor-mediated effects on glucose metabolism and
its potential as a therapeutic target for the prevention of
glucocorticoid-induced diabetes. Dexamethasone-induced hepatic glucose output and
glucocorticoid receptor translocation were analyzed in wild-type (wt) and
HDAC6-deficient (HDAC6KO) mice. The effect of the specific HDAC6 inhibitor
tubacin was analyzed in vitro. wt and HDAC6KO mice were subjected to 3 weeks'
dexamethasone treatment before analysis of glucose and insulin tolerance. HDAC6KO
mice showed impaired dexamethasone-induced hepatic glucocorticoid receptor
translocation. Accordingly, dexamethasone-induced expression of a large number of
hepatic genes was significantly attenuated in mice lacking HDAC6 and by tubacin
in vitro. Glucose output of primary hepatocytes from HDAC6KO mice was diminished.
A significant improvement of dexamethasone-induced whole-body glucose intolerance
as well as insulin resistance in HDAC6KO mice compared with wt littermates was
observed. This study demonstrates that HDAC6 is an essential regulator of hepatic
glucocorticoid-stimulated gluconeogenesis and impairment of whole-body glucose
metabolism through modification of glucocorticoid receptor nuclear translocation.
Selective pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 may provide a future therapeutic
option against the prodiabetogenic actions of glucocorticoids.

PMCID: PMC3266407
PMID: 22210316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Cell Sci. 2011 Dec 15;124(Pt 24):4286-98. doi: 10.1242/jcs.092239. Epub 2011
Dec 22.

Son maintains accurate splicing for a subset of human pre-mRNAs.

Sharma A(1), Markey M, Torres-Muñoz K, Varia S, Kadakia M, Bubulya A, Bubulya PA.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Ph.D. Program, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, 
USA.

Serine-arginine-rich (SR) proteins play a key role in alternative pre-mRNA
splicing in eukaryotes. We recently showed that a large SR protein called Son has
unique repeat motifs that are essential for maintaining the subnuclear
organization of pre-mRNA processing factors in nuclear speckles. Motif analysis
of Son highlights putative RNA interaction domains that suggest a direct role for
Son in pre-mRNA splicing. Here, we used in situ approaches to show that Son
localizes to a reporter minigene transcription site, and that RNAi-mediated Son
depletion causes exon skipping on reporter transcripts at this transcription
site. A genome-wide exon microarray analysis was performed to identify human
transcription and splicing targets of Son. Our data show that Son-regulated
splicing encompasses all known types of alternative splicing, the most common
being alternative splicing of cassette exons. We confirmed that knockdown of Son 
leads to exon skipping in pre-mRNAs for chromatin-modifying enzymes, including
ADA, HDAC6 and SetD8. This study reports a comprehensive view of human
transcription and splicing targets for Son in fundamental cellular pathways such 
as integrin-mediated cell adhesion, cell cycle regulation, cholesterol
biosynthesis, apoptosis and epigenetic regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3258111
PMID: 22193954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. EMBO J. 2012 Feb 15;31(4):856-69. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.466. Epub 2011 Dec 23.

A novel GRK2/HDAC6 interaction modulates cell spreading and motility.

Lafarga V(1), Aymerich I, Tapia O, Mayor F Jr, Penela P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, and Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo
Ochoa' (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Cell motility and adhesion involves dynamic microtubule (MT)
acetylation/deacetylation, a process regulated by enzymes as HDAC6, a major
cytoplasmic a-tubulin deacetylase. We identify G protein-coupled receptor kinase 
2 (GRK2) as a key novel stimulator of HDAC6. GRK2, which levels inversely
correlate with the extent of a-tubulin acetylation in epithelial cells and
fibroblasts, directly associates with and phosphorylates HDAC6 to stimulate
a-tubulin deacetylase activity. Remarkably, phosphorylation of GRK2 itself at
S670 specifically potentiates its ability to regulate HDAC6. GRK2 and HDAC6
colocalize in the lamellipodia of migrating cells, leading to local tubulin
deacetylation and enhanced motility. Consistently, cells expressing GRK2-K220R or
GRK2-S670A mutants, unable to phosphorylate HDAC6, exhibit highly acetylated
cortical MTs and display impaired migration and protrusive activity. Finally, we 
find that a balanced, GRK2/HDAC6-mediated regulation of tubulin acetylation
differentially modulates the early and late stages of cellular spreading. This
novel GRK2/HDAC6 functional interaction may have important implications in
pathological contexts.

PMCID: PMC3280560
PMID: 22193721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28563. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028563. Epub 2011 Dec 8.

Dysferlin interacts with histone deacetylase 6 and increases alpha-tubulin
acetylation.

Di Fulvio S(1), Azakir BA, Therrien C, Sinnreich M.

Author information: 
(1)Neuromuscular Research Group, Departments of Neurology and Biomedicine,
University, Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

Dysferlin is a multi-C2 domain transmembrane protein involved in a plethora of
cellular functions, most notably in skeletal muscle membrane repair, but also in 
myogenesis, cellular adhesion and intercellular calcium signaling. We previously 
showed that dysferlin interacts with alpha-tubulin and microtubules in muscle
cells. Microtubules are heavily reorganized during myogenesis to sustain growth
and elongation of the nascent muscle fiber. Microtubule function is regulated by 
post-translational modifications, such as acetylation of its alpha-tubulin
subunit, which is modulated by the histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) enzyme. In this 
study, we identified HDAC6 as a novel dysferlin-binding partner. Dysferlin
prevents HDAC6 from deacetylating alpha-tubulin by physically binding to both the
enzyme, via its C2D domain, and to the substrate, alpha-tubulin, via its C2A and 
C2B domains. We further show that dysferlin expression promotes alpha-tubulin
acetylation, as well as increased microtubule resistance to, and recovery from,
Nocodazole- and cold-induced depolymerization. By selectively inhibiting HDAC6
using Tubastatin A, we demonstrate that myotube formation was impaired when
alpha-tubulin was hyperacetylated early in the myogenic process; however, myotube
elongation occurred when alpha-tubulin was hyperacetylated in myotubes. This
study suggests a novel role for dysferlin in myogenesis and identifies HDAC6 as a
novel dysferlin-interacting protein.

PMCID: PMC3234273
PMID: 22174839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Med Chem. 2012 Jan 26;55(2):639-51. doi: 10.1021/jm200773h. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Second-generation histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors enhance the immunosuppressive 
effects of Foxp3+ T-regulatory cells.

Kalin JH(1), Butler KV, Akimova T, Hancock WW, Kozikowski AP.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States.

Second-generation Tubastatin A analogues were synthesized and evaluated for their
ability to inhibit selectively histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Substitutions to
the carboline cap group were well-tolerated with substitution at the 2-position
of both ß- and <U+03B3>-carbolines being optimal for HDAC6 activity and selectivity.
Some compounds in this series were determined to have subnanomolar activity at
HDAC6 with more than 7000 fold selectivity for HDAC6 versus HDAC1. Selected
compounds were then evaluated for their ability to augment the immunosuppressive 
effect of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells. All compounds tested were found to enhance
the ability of regulatory T cells to inhibit the mitotic division of effector T
cells both in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that further investigation into the
use of these compounds for the treatment of autoimmune disorders is warranted.

PMID: 22165909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27746. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027746. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

SAHA decreases HDAC 2 and 4 levels in vivo and improves molecular phenotypes in
the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease.

Mielcarek M(1), Benn CL, Franklin SA, Smith DL, Woodman B, Marks PA, Bates GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, London,
United Kingdom.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive neurological disorder for which there 
are no disease-modifying treatments. Transcriptional dysregulation is a major
molecular feature of HD, which significantly contributes to disease progression. 
Therefore, the development of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors as
therapeutics for HD has been energetically pursued. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid (SAHA) - a class I HDAC as well an HDAC6 inhibitor, improved motor
impairment in the R6/2 mouse model of HD. Recently it has been found that SAHA
can also promote the degradation of HDAC4 and possibly other class IIa HDACs at
the protein level in various cancer cell lines. To elucidate whether SAHA is a
potent modifier of HDAC protein levels in vivo, we performed two independent
mouse trials. Both WT and R6/2 mice were chronically treated with SAHA and
vehicle. We found that prolonged SAHA treatment causes the degradation of HDAC4
in cortex and brain stem, but not hippocampus, without affecting its transcript
levels in vivo. Similarly, SAHA also decreased HDAC2 levels without modifying the
expression of its mRNA. Consistent with our previous data, SAHA treatment
diminishes Hdac7 transcript levels in both wild type and R6/2 brains and
unexpectedly was found to decrease Hdac11 in R6/2 but not wild type. We
investigated the effects of SAHA administration on well-characterised molecular
readouts of disease progression. We found that SAHA reduces SDS-insoluble
aggregate load in the cortex and brain stem but not in the hippocampus of the
R6/2 brains, and that this was accompanied by restoration of Bdnf cortical
transcript levels.

PMCID: PMC3225376
PMID: 22140466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;90(1):78-84. doi: 10.1038/icb.2011.103. Epub 2011 Nov
29.

Interplay between histone deacetylases and autophagy--from cancer therapy to
neurodegeneration.

Trüe O(1), Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute For Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are chromatin modifiers that alter gene expression
but also exert a broad range of functions outside the nucleus by deacetylating
non-histone target proteins. They gained growing attention for their implications
in disease treatment, mainly through research using HDAC-inhibiting compounds.
Understanding the effects of HDAC function and deregulation has therefore become 
an important focus for both basic and applied research. One of the described
effects of HDAC inhibition is induction of autophagy. Autophagy is a ubiquitous
process of recycling cellular components in response to starvation or stress and 
therefore crucial for cell homeostasis. Because of its role in managing anomalous
protein overloads, autophagy is of great interest for neurodegenerative disease
research. However, autophagy can also promote cell death, which puts it in the
focus of cancer research. This review provides an overview of what we know of the
impact of HDACs on the autophagy pathway and describes the fields where promising
progress has been achieved, although one has to state that the work to illuminate
the connections has just begun. Therefore, one focus is the effect of HDAC
inhibition on autophagy in several types and models of cancer, which aims to find
combinations of treatments that circumvent the ability of cancer cells to escape 
from cell death. Another recently emerged aspect is the direct involvement of the
cytosolic deacetylase HDAC6 in autophagy progression, which is of great potential
for revealing disease mechanisms in neurodegeneration.

PMID: 22124372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Apr 15;83(8):987-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.11.010. Epub
2011 Nov 22.

Sensitization of tumor cells by targeting histone deacetylases.

Perego P(1), Zuco V, Gatti L, Zunino F.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.
paola.perego@istitutotumori.mi.it

Epigenetic mechanisms may contribute to drug resistance by interfering with tumor
growth regulatory pathways and pro-apoptotic programs. Since gene expression is
regulated by acetylation status of histones, a large variety of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have been studied as antitumor agents. On the basis
of their pro-apoptotic activity, HDAC inhibitors have been combined with
conventional antitumor agents or novel target-specific agents to increase
susceptibility to apoptosis and drug sensitivity of cancer cells. Several
combination strategies including HDAC inhibitors have been explored in
preclinical studies. Promising therapeutic effects have been reported in
combination with DNA damaging agents, taxanes, targeted agents, death receptor
agonists and hormonal therapies. Some histone deacetylases, such as HDAC6, can
also modulate the function of non-histone proteins involved in critical
regulatory processes which may be relevant as therapeutic targets. Given the
pleiotropic effects of most of the available inhibitors, the mechanisms of the
sensitization are not completely elucidated. A better understanding of the
involved mechanisms will provide a rational basis to improve the therapeutic
outcome of the available antitumor agents.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22120677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Neuropathology. 2012 Jun;32(3):261-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2011.01267.x. Epub
2011 Nov 28.

Immunohistochemical analysis of Marinesco bodies, using antibodies against
proteins implicated in the ubiquitin-proteasome system, autophagy and aggresome
formation.

Odagiri S(1), Tanji K, Mori F, Kakita A, Takahashi H, Kamitani T, Wakabayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Brain Science, Hirosaki University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan.
h001008@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

Marinesco bodies (MBs) are spherical eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions in
pigmented neurons in the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus. Previous
immunohistochemical studies have shown that MBs are positive for ubiquitin, p62
and SUMO-1, suggesting the involvement of ubiquitination and related proteins in 
the formation or disaggregation of MBs. However, the involvement is not
thoroughly understood. Therefore, we immunohistochemically examined the midbrain 
from five control subjects ranged from 53 to 84 years old. MBs were positive for 
various proteins implicated in the ubiquitin-proteasome system (ubiquitin, p62,
EDD1, NEDD8, NUB1, SUMO-1 and SUMO-2), aggresome formation (HDAC6) and autophagy 
(ubiquitin, p62, LC3, GABARAP and GATE-16). These findings suggest that proteins 
related to ubiquitination, proteasomal degradation and autophagy are involved in 
the formation or disaggregation of MBs.

© 2011 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 22118216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Blood. 2012 Jan 19;119(3):894-903. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-350025. Epub 2011
Nov 23.

The transcription factor Erg regulates expression of histone deacetylase 6 and
multiple pathways involved in endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis.

Birdsey GM(1), Dryden NH, Shah AV, Hannah R, Hall MD, Haskard DO, Parsons M,
Mason JC, Zvelebil M, Gottgens B, Ridley AJ, Randi AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart and Lung Institute, Faculty of
Medicine, Imperial College London, United Kingdom.

The endothelial ETS transcription factor Erg plays an important role in
homeostasis and angiogenesis by regulating many endothelial functions including
survival and junction stability. Here we show that Erg regulates endothelial cell
(EC) migration. Transcriptome profiling of Erg-deficient ECs identified ~ 80
genes involved in cell migration as candidate Erg targets, including many
regulators of Rho- GTPases. Inhibition of Erg expression in HUVECs resulted in
decreased migration in vitro, while Erg overexpression using adenovirus caused
increased migration. Live-cell imaging of Erg-deficient HUVECs showed a reduction
in lamellipodia, in line with decreased motility. Both actin and tubulin
cytoskeletons were disrupted in Erg-deficient ECs, with a dramatic increase in
tubulin acetylation. Among the most significant microarray hits was the cytosolic
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a regulator of cell migration. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and transactivation studies demonstrated that Erg
regulates HDAC6 expression. Rescue experiments confirmed that HDAC6 mediates the 
Erg-dependent regulation of tubulin acetylation and actin localization. In vivo, 
inhibition of Erg expression in angiogenic ECs resulted in decreased HDAC6
expression with increased tubulin acetylation. Thus, we have identified a novel
function for the transcription factor Erg in regulating HDAC6 and multiple
pathways essential for EC migration and angiogenesis.

PMID: 22117042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 15;18(2):360-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3022.
Epub 2011 Nov 17.

A noncanonical Flt3ITD/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway represses DAPK1 in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Shanmugam R(1), Gade P, Wilson-Weekes A, Sayar H, Suvannasankha A, Goswami C, Li 
L, Gupta S, Cardoso AA, Al Baghdadi T, Sargent KJ, Cripe LD, Kalvakolanu DV,
Boswell HS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology Division) and Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Indiana, USA.

PURPOSE: Death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1), a tumor suppressor, is a
rate-limiting effector in an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-dependent
apoptotic pathway. Its expression is epigenetically suppressed in several tumors.
A mechanistic basis for epigenetic/transcriptional repression of DAPK1 was
investigated in certain forms of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with poor
prognosis, which lacked ER stress-induced apoptosis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Heterogeneous primary AMLs were screened to identify a
subgroup with Flt3ITD in which repression of DAPK1, among NF-<U+03BA>B-and
c-Jun-responsive genes, was studied. RNA interference knockdown studies were
carried out in an Flt3ITD(+) cell line, MV-4-11, to establish genetic epistasis
in the pathway Flt3ITD-TAK1-DAPK1 repression, and chromatin immunoprecipitations 
were carried out to identify proximate effector proteins, including
TAK1-activated p52NF-<U+03BA>B, at the DAPK1 locus.
RESULTS: AMLs characterized by normal karyotype with Flt3ITD were found to have
10- to 100-fold lower DAPK1 transcripts normalized to the expression of c-Jun, a 
transcriptional activator of DAPK1, as compared with a heterogeneous cytogenetic 
category. In addition, Meis1, a c-Jun-responsive adverse AML prognostic gene
signature was measured as control. These Flt3ITD(+) AMLs overexpress relB, a
transcriptional repressor, which forms active heterodimers with p52NF-<U+03BA>B.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays identified p52NF-<U+03BA>B binding to the DAPK1
promoter together with histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and HDAC6 in the Flt3ITD(+) 
human AML cell line MV-4-11. Knockdown of p52NF-<U+03BA>B or its upstream regulator,
NF-<U+03BA>B-inducing kinase (NIK), de-repressed DAPK1. DAPK1-repressed primary
Flt3ITD(+) AMLs had selective nuclear activation of p52NF-<U+03BA>B.
CONCLUSIONS: Flt3ITD promotes a noncanonical pathway via TAK1 and p52NF-<U+03BA>B to
suppress DAPK1 in association with HDACs, which explains DAPK1 repression in
Flt3ITD(+) AML.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3918433
PMID: 22096027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Oncol Rep. 2012 Mar;27(3):819-24. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1553. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

HDAC6 and SIRT2 promote bladder cancer cell migration and invasion by targeting
cortactin.

Zuo Q(1), Wu W, Li X, Zhao L, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, PR China.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) promotes cell motility and contributes to the
metastasis of cancers. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of
HDAC6 in human bladder cancer for the first time. The results showed that HDAC6
promotes the migration and invasion of bladder cancer cells by targeting the
cytoskeletal protein cortactin. Furthermore, a colony formation assay as well as 
in vitro migration and invasion assays demonstrated that this migration and
invasion was suppressed by the HDAC6-specific inhibitor tubacin. In addition,
cortactin is the substrate of SIRT2, which also belongs to the family of histone 
deacetylases. We demonstrated that by using SIRT2-specific siRNA combined with
tubacin treatment, the cell migratory and invasive abilities were dramatically
suppressed. Taken together, we conclude that HDAC6 and SIRT2 work synergistically
to promote cell migration and invasion in bladder cancer, and the HDAC6-specific 
inhibitor tubacin may be regarded as a novel therapeutic agent for bladder
cancer.

PMID: 22089141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Vascul Pharmacol. 2012 Jan-Feb;56(1-2):56-63. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2011.10.002.
Epub 2011 Oct 30.

Taxol alleviates 2-methoxyestradiol-induced endothelial permeability.

Gorshkov BA(1), Zemskova MA, Verin AD, Bogatcheva NV.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Center, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA
30912, USA.

We have previously shown that the anti-cancer agent 2-methoxyestradiol (2ME)
induces hyperpermeability across endothelial monolayers. Here, we show that both 
microtubule disruptor, 2ME, and microtubule stabilizer, paclitaxel (taxol),
increase vascular lung permeability in vitro and in vivo. Simultaneous
application of 2ME and taxol alleviates 2ME-induced endothelial barrier
dysfunction, which is evident by the decreased Evans Blue Dye accumulation in
lung tissue and increased transendothelial resistance across monolayers. 2ME
significantly increases the level of p38 and MLC phosphorylation in both
endothelial monolayers and murine lungs; this increase is suppressed in the
presence of taxol. Taxol treatment leads to an immediate and sustained increase
in tubulin acetylation in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (HPAEC).
Surprisingly, 2ME treatment also increases tubulin acetylation; however, the
onset of this process is delayed and coincides with the stage of a partial
barrier restoration in HPAEC monolayer. Inhibition of histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) with tubacin increases tubulin acetylation level, suppresses 2ME-induced 
HSP27 and MLC phosphorylation, and decreases 2ME-induced barrier dysfunction,
suggesting barrier-protective and/or barrier-restorative role for tubulin
acetylation in vascular endothelium.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3268947
PMID: 22074808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 20;287(4):2317-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.273730. Epub 2011 
Nov 8.

Protein aggregates are recruited to aggresome by histone deacetylase 6 via
unanchored ubiquitin C termini.

Ouyang H(1), Ali YO, Ravichandran M, Dong A, Qiu W, MacKenzie F, Dhe-Paganon S,
Arrowsmith CH, Zhai RG.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G
1L7, Canada. hui.ouyang@utoronto.ca

The aggresome pathway is activated when proteasomal clearance of misfolded
proteins is hindered. Misfolded polyubiquitinated protein aggregates are
recruited and transported to the aggresome via the microtubule network by a
protein complex consisting of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and the dynein motor 
complex. The current model suggests that HDAC6 recognizes protein aggregates by
binding directly to polyubiquitinated proteins. Here, we show that there are
substantial amounts of unanchored ubiquitin in protein aggregates with
solvent-accessible C termini. The ubiquitin-binding domain (ZnF-UBP) of HDAC6
binds exclusively to the unanchored C-terminal diglycine motif of ubiquitin
instead of conjugated polyubiquitin. The unanchored ubiquitin C termini in the
aggregates are generated in situ by aggregate-associated deubiquitinase ataxin-3.
These results provide structural and mechanistic bases for the role of HDAC6 in
aggresome formation and further suggest a novel ubiquitin-mediated signaling
pathway, where the exposure of ubiquitin C termini within protein aggregates
enables HDAC6 recognition and transport to the aggresome.

PMCID: PMC3268394
PMID: 22069321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. FASEB J. 2012 Feb;26(2):778-87. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-191742. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

Phthalates induce proliferation and invasiveness of estrogen receptor-negative
breast cancer through the AhR/HDAC6/c-Myc signaling pathway.

Hsieh TH(1), Tsai CF, Hsu CY, Kuo PL, Lee JN, Chai CY, Wang SC, Tsai EM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

The environmentally present group of chemical phthalates, or phthalate esters,
has been recognized as a rising threat to public health, including cancer. While 
most studies have addressed the estrogenic effects of phthalates in malignancies 
of the breast and the prostate, little is known about their role in the etiology 
of hormone-independent cancer. Here we show that treatments with the phthalates
n-butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP) and dibutyl phthalate (DBP) at 1 µM induced
proliferation (BBP, 3.2-fold; DBP, 3.2-fold), migration (BBP, 2.6-fold; DBP,
2.6-fold), invasion (BBP, 2.7-fold; DBP, 3.1-fold), and tumor formation (EC(50): 
BBP, 0.12 µM; DBP, 0.22 µM) in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer
cells (MDA-MB-231). We further demonstrate that phthalates stimulated the cell
surface aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and triggered the downstream cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-PKA-CREB1 signaling cascade. The pathway led to increased expression of
HDAC6, which facilitated nuclear assembly of the ß-catenin-LEF1/TCF4
transcriptional complex and transactivation of the c-Myc oncogene. This
nongenomic pathway emanated from the phthalate-induced AhR promoted tumorigenesis
of ER-negative breast cancer. Collectively, our findings revealed a novel
oncogenic mechanism of phthalates in breast cancer independent from their
estrogenic activities.

PMID: 22049059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. ACS Chem Biol. 2012 Feb 17;7(2):331-9. doi: 10.1021/cb200134p. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

A novel class of small molecule inhibitors of HDAC6.

Inks ES(1), Josey BJ, Jesinkey SR, Chou CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, South Carolina College
of Pharmacy, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina
29425, United States.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of enzymes that play significant roles 
in numerous biological processes and diseases. HDACs are best known for their
repressive influence on gene transcription through histone deacetylation. Mapping
of nonhistone acetylated proteins and acetylation-modifying enzymes involved in
various cellular pathways has shown protein acetylation/deacetylation also plays 
key roles in a variety of cellular processes including RNA splicing, nuclear
transport, and cytoskeletal remodeling. Studies of HDACs have accelerated due to 
the availability of small molecule HDAC inhibitors, most of which contain a
canonical hydroxamic acid or benzamide that chelates the metal catalytic site. To
increase the pool of unique and novel HDAC inhibitor pharmacophores, a
pharmacological active compound screen was performed. Several unique HDAC
inhibitor pharmacophores were identified in vitro. One class of novel HDAC
inhibitors, with a central naphthoquinone structure, displayed a selective
inhibition profile against HDAC6. Here we present the results of a unique class
of HDAC6 inhibitors identified using this compound library screen. In addition,
we demonstrated that treatment of human acute myeloid leukemia cell line MV4-11
with the selective HDAC6 inhibitors decreases levels of mutant FLT-3 and
constitutively active STAT5 and attenuates Erk phosphorylation, all of which are 
associated with the inhibitor's selective toxicity against leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3288198
PMID: 22047054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Eur J Neurol. 2012 Mar;19(3):501-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2011.03575.x. Epub
2011 Oct 31.

Characterization of the Asian myopathy patients with VCP mutations.

Shi Z(1), Hayashi YK, Mitsuhashi S, Goto K, Kaneda D, Choi YC, Toyoda C, Hieda S,
Kamiyama T, Sato H, Wada M, Noguchi S, Nonaka I, Nishino I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP), Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Mutations in the valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene
are known to cause inclusion body myopathy with Paget's disease of bone and
frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS). Despite an increasing number of clinical reports, only one Asian family
with IBMPFD has been described.
METHODS: To characterize patients with VCP mutations, we screened a total of 152 
unrelated Asian families who were suspected to have rimmed vacuolar myopathy.
RESULTS: We identified VCP mutations in seven patients from six unrelated Asian
families. Five different missense mutations were found, including a novel
p.Ala439Pro substitution. All patients had adult-onset progressive muscle wasting
with variable involvement of axial, proximal, and distal muscles. Two of seven
patients were suggested to have mild brain involvement including cerebellar
ataxia, and only one showed radiological findings indicating a change in bone.
Findings from skeletal muscle indicated mixed neurogenic and myogenic changes,
fibers with rimmed vacuoles, and the presence of cytoplasmic and nuclear
inclusions. These inclusions were immunopositive for VCP, ubiquitin,
transactivation response DNA-binding protein 43, and also histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6), of which function is regulated by VCP. Evidence of early nuclear and
mitochondrial damage was also characteristic.
CONCLUSIONS:   Valosin-containing protein mutations are not rare in Asian
patients, and gene analysis should be considered for patients with adult-onset
rimmed vacuolar myopathy with neurogenic changes. A wide variety of central and
peripheral nervous system symptoms coupled with rare bone abnormalities may
complicate diagnosis.

© 2011 The Author(s). European Journal of Neurology © 2011 EFNS.

PMID: 22040362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biomol Screen. 2011 Dec;16(10):1206-16. doi: 10.1177/1087057111424605. Epub
2011 Oct 25.

Identification of selective class II histone deacetylase inhibitors using a novel
dual-parameter binding assay based on fluorescence anisotropy and lifetime.

Haus P(1), Korbus M, Schröder M, Meyer-Almes FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Applied
Sciences Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are important epigenetic factors regulating a
variety of vital cellular functions such as cell cycle progression,
differentiation, cell migration, and apoptosis. Consequently, HDACs have emerged 
as promising targets for cancer therapy. The drugability of HDACs has been shown 
by the discovery of several structural classes of inhibitors (HDACis),
particularly by the recent approval of two HDACis, vorinostat (ZOLINZA) and
romidepsin (Istodax), for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma by the US
Food and Drug Administration. The outstanding potential of HDACis, with a defined
isoform selectivity profile as drugs against a plurality of diseases, vindicates 
increased effort in developing high-throughput capable assays for screening
campaigns. In this study, a dual-competition assay exploiting changes in
fluorescence anisotropy and lifetime was used to screen the LOPAC (Sigma-Aldrich,
St Louis, MO) library against the bacterial histone deacetylase homologue HDAH
from Bordetella, which shares 35% identity with the second deacetylase domain of 
HDAC6. The binding assay proved to be highly suitable for high-throughput
screening campaigns. Several LOPAC compounds have been identified to inhibit HDAH
in the lower micromolar range. Most interestingly, some of the hit compounds
turned out to be weak but selective inhibitors of human class IIa and IIb HDACs.

PMID: 22027638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025804. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

HDAC6 regulates LPS-tolerance in astrocytes.

Beurel E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami, Miami, 
Florida, United States of America. eleonore_beurel@hotmail.fr

Inflammatory tolerance is a crucial mechanism that limits inflammatory responses 
in order to avoid prolonged inflammation that may damage the host. Evidence that 
chronic inflammation contributes to the neuropathology of prevalent
neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases suggests that inflammatory tolerance
mechanisms are often inadequate to control detrimental inflammation in the
central nervous system. Thus, identifying mechanisms that regulate
neuroinflammatory tolerance may reveal opportunities for bolstering tolerance to 
reduce chronic inflammation in these diseases. Examination of tolerance after
repeated lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment of mouse primary astrocytes
demonstrated that histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity promoted tolerance,
opposite to the action of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3), which counteracts
tolerance. HDAC6 in particular was found to be critical for tolerance induction, 
as its deacetylation of acetyl-tubulin was increased during LPS tolerance, this
was enhanced by inhibition of GSK3, and the HDAC6 inhibitor tubacin completely
blocked tolerance and the promotion of tolerance by inhibition of GSK3. These
results reveal opposing interactions between HDAC6 and GSK3 in regulating
tolerance, and indicate that shifting the balance between these two opposing
forces on inflammatory tolerance can obliterate or enhance tolerance to LPS in
astrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3192131
PMID: 22022450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2012 Oct;38(6):559-71. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2011.01229.x.

Immunohistochemical localization of aggresomal proteins in glial cytoplasmic
inclusions in multiple system atrophy.

Chiba Y(1), Takei S, Kawamura N, Kawaguchi Y, Sasaki K, Hasegawa-Ishii S,
Furukawa A, Hosokawa M, Shimada A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human
Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan.

AIMS: Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is pathologically characterized by the
formation of a-synuclein-containing glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) in
oligodendrocytes. However, the mechanisms of GCI formation are not fully
understood. Cellular machinery for the formation of aggresomes has been linked to
the biogenesis of the Lewy body, a characteristic a-synuclein-containing
inclusion of Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Here, we examined
whether GCIs contain the components of aggresomes by immunohistochemistry.
METHODS: Sections from five patients with MSA were stained immunohistochemically 
with antibodies against aggresome-related proteins and analysed in comparison
with sections from five patients with no neurological disease. We evaluated the
presence or absence of aggresome-related proteins in GCIs by double
immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy.
RESULTS: GCIs were clearly immunolabelled with antibodies against
aggresome-related proteins, such as <U+03B3>-tubulin, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and 
20S proteasome subunits. Neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs) were also
immunopositive for these aggresome-related proteins. Double immunofluorescence
staining and quantitative analysis demonstrated that the majority of GCIs
contained these proteins, as well as other aggresome-related proteins, such as
Hsp70, Hsp90 and 62-kDa protein/sequestosome 1 (p62/SQSTM1). Immunoelectron
microscopy demonstrated immunoreactivities for <U+03B3>-tubulin and HDAC6 along the
fibrils comprising GCIs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that GCIs, and probably NCIs, share at least
some characteristics with aggresomes in terms of their protein components.
Therefore, GCIs and NCIs may be another manifestation of aggresome-related
inclusion bodies observed in neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2011 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2011 British
Neuropathological Society.

PMID: 22013984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Aging Cell. 2012 Feb;11(1):51-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00756.x. Epub
2011 Nov 15.

Adaptive responses to alloxan-induced mild oxidative stress ameliorate certain
tauopathy phenotypes.

Yoshiike Y(1), Yamashita S, Mizoroki T, Maeda S, Murayama M, Kimura T, Sahara N, 
Soeda Y, Takashima A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Alzheimer's Disease, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Hirosawa,
Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan. yyoshiik@ncgg.go.jp

Oxidative stress is considered to promote aging and age-related disorders such as
tauopathy. Although recent reports suggest that oxidative stress under certain
conditions possesses anti-aging properties, no such conditions have been reported
to ameliorate protein-misfolding diseases. Here, we used neuronal and murine
models that overexpress human tau to demonstrate that mild oxidative stress
generated by alloxan suppresses several phenotypes of tauopathy. Alloxan
treatment reduced HSP90 levels and promoted proteasomal degradation of tau, c-Jun
N-amino terminal kinase, and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6. Moreover, reduced
soluble tau (phosphorylated tau) levels suppressed the formation of insoluble tau
in tau transgenic mice, while reduced HDAC6 levels contributed to microtubule
stability by increasing tubulin acetylation. Age-dependent decreases in HDAC2 and
phospho-tau levels correlated with spatial memory enhancement in alloxan-injected
tau mice. These results suggest that mild oxidative stress, through adaptive
stress responses, operates counteractively against some of the tauopathy
phenotypes.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 21981382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 27;30(23):4838-49. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.351.

PKC alpha regulates Sendai virus-mediated interferon induction through HDAC6 and 
ß-catenin.

Zhu J(1), Coyne CB, Sarkar SN.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Virology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Recognition of viral RNA by cytoplasmic retinoic acid inducible gene I
(RIG-I)-like receptors initiates signals leading to the induction of type I
interferon (IFN) transcription via transcription factors such as interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B). Here, we describe a new
signalling pathway that involves protein kinase C alpha (PKCa), histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and beta-catenin (ß-catenin), which is essential for IFN
gene induction following virus infection. Knockdown of PKCa in various human
cells, including primary cells, inhibited Sendai virus (SeV)-mediated IFN
induction and enhanced virus replication. In the absence of this pathway IRF3
becomes activated, but does not bind to its promoter and is thus unable to
support transcription. Mechanistically, SeV infection induced the activation of
PKCa, which promoted its interaction with HDAC6 and enhanced its deacetylation
activity in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Further downstream, HDAC6 caused 
deacetylation of ß-catenin and enhanced its nuclear translocation and promoter
binding. In the nucleus, ß-catenin acted as a co-activator for IRF3-mediated
transcription. Our findings suggest an important role of a novel signalling
pathway mediated by PKCa-HDAC6-ß-catenin in controlling IRF3-mediated
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3243614
PMID: 21952047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Med Chem. 2011 Nov 10;54(21):7453-63. doi: 10.1021/jm200432a. Epub 2011 Oct 10.

Largazole and analogues with modified metal-binding motifs targeting histone
deacetylases: synthesis and biological evaluation.

Bhansali P(1), Hanigan CL, Casero RA, Tillekeratne LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal and Biological Chemistry, The University of Toledo, OH
43606, USA.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor largazole 1 was synthesized by a convergent
approach that involved several efficient and high yielding single pot multistep
protocols. Initial attempts using tert-butyl as thiol protecting group proved
problematic, and synthesis was accomplished by switching to the trityl protecting
group. This synthetic protocol provides a convenient approach to many new
largazole analogues. Three side chain analogues with multiple heteroatoms for
chelation with Zn(2+) were synthesized, and their biological activities were
evaluated. They were less potent than largazole 1 in growth inhibition of HCT116 
colon carcinoma cell line and in inducing increases in global H3 acetylation.
Largazole 1 and the three side chain analogues had no effect on HDAC6, as
indicated by the lack of increased acetylation of a-tubulin.

PMCID: PMC3208063
PMID: 21936551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jun;133(2):427-36. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1758-x. 
Epub 2011 Sep 11.

Estrogen receptor-a directly regulates sensitivity to paclitaxel in neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for breast cancer.

Tokuda E(1), Seino Y, Arakawa A, Saito M, Kasumi F, Hayashi S, Yamaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.

Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) has become the standard treatment for advanced
breast cancer. Several prognostic markers, including estrogen receptor-a (ERa),
are used to predict the response to NAC. However, the molecular significance of
ERa expression in the efficacy of chemotherapy is not yet fully understood. To
examine this issue, we first evaluated ERa transcriptional activity in breast
cancer cells derived from pre-NAC specimens using estrogen response element-green
fluorescent protein (ERE-GFP) as a reporter gene, and found that, in the cases
for which ERa activities determined by GFP expression were not detected or low,
pCR (pathological complete response) could be achieved even though ERa protein
was expressed. Next, we examined the effects of alterations in ERa expression
levels on sensitivity to paclitaxel, a key drug in NAC, by stable expression of
ERa in ER-negative SKBR3 cells and by siRNA-mediated down-regulation of ERa in
ER-positive MCF-7 cells, and showed that ERa expression and sensitivity to
paclitaxel showed an inverse correlation. We also established
paclitaxel-resistant MCF-7 cell clones and found that they have higher
estrogen-induced ER activity than parent cells. Paclitaxel is a
microtubule-stabilizing agent, while HDAC6 (histone deacetylase 6), which we
previously identified as an estrogen-regulated gene, enhances cell motility by
destabilizing microtubules via deacetylation of a-tubulin. Finally, we
demonstrate herein that ERa knockdown in MCF-7 cells prevents deacetylation of
a-tubulin, thereby increasing sensitivity to paclitaxel. Taken together, these
results suggest that ERa expression directly regulates sensitivity to paclitaxel 
in NAC for breast cancer via the effect on microtubule stability.

PMID: 21909982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Oct 15;21(20):6139-42. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.08.027. Epub 2011 Aug 12.

The structural requirements of histone deacetylase inhibitors: Suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid analogs modified at the C3 position display isoform selectivity.

Choi SE(1), Weerasinghe SV, Pflum MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

The FDA-approved drug suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA, Vorinostat) was
modified to improve its selectivity for a single histone deaetylase (HDAC)
isoform. We show that attaching an ethyl group at the C3 position transforms SAHA
from nonselective to an HDAC6-selective inhibitor. Theses results indicate that
small structural changes in SAHA can significantly influence selectivity, which
will lead future anti-cancer design efforts targeting HDAC proteins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3842171
PMID: 21889343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Neurodegener. 2011 Aug 30;6:64. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-64.

TDP-43 knockdown impairs neurite outgrowth dependent on its target histone
deacetylase 6.

Fiesel FC(1), Schurr C, Weber SS, Kahle PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Functional Neurogenetics, Department of Neurodegeneration,
Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Otfried-Mueller-Str, 27, Tuebingen,
72076, Germany. fabienne.fiesel@klinikum.uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Trans-activation response element (TAR) DNA binding protein of 43kDa 
(TDP-43) is causally related to the neurodegenerative diseases frontotemporal
dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis being the hallmark protein in the
disease-characteristic neuropathological lesions and via genetic linkage. Histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is an established target of the RNA-binding protein TDP-43.
HDAC6 is an unusual cytosolic deacetylase enzyme, central for a variety of
pivotal cellular functions including aggregating protein turnover, microtubular
dynamics and filopodia formation. All these functions are important in the
context of neurodegenerative proteinopathies involving TDP-43. We have previously
shown in a human embryonic kidney cell line that TDP-43 knockdown significantly
impairs the removal of a toxic, aggregating polyQ ataxin-3 fusion protein in an
HDAC6-dependent manner. Here we investigated the influence of TDP-43 and its
target HDAC6 on neurite outgrowth.
RESULTS: Human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells with stably silenced TDP-43 showed a
significant reduction of neurite outgrowth induced by retinoic acid and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Re-transfection with TDP-43 as well as HDAC6
rescued retinoic acid-induced neurite outgrowth. In addition, we show that
silencing of HDAC6 alone is sufficient to reduce neurite outgrowth of in vitro
differentiated SH-SY5Y cells.
CONCLUSIONS: TDP-43 deficiency leads to impairment of neurite growth in an
HDAC6-dependent manner, thereby contributing to neurodegenerative events in
TDP-43 diseases.

PMCID: PMC3170629
PMID: 21878116  [PubMed]


492. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2011 Mar-Apr;48(2):71-86. doi:
10.3109/10408363.2011.591365.

Molecules modulating gene transcription during muscle wasting in cancer, sepsis, 
and other critical illness.

Aversa Z(1), Alamdari N, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Muscle wasting in patients with sepsis, severe injury, and cancer is associated
with increased transcription of several genes regulating different proteolytic
pathways. The involvement of gene activation in muscle wasting suggests that
transcription factors and nuclear cofactors play important roles in the
regulation of muscle mass. Among transcription factors, NF-<U+03BA>B, C/EBPß, and FOXO
transcription factors are activated in atrophying muscle and stimulate the
transcription of genes in the ubiquitin-proteasome proteolytic pathway, as well
as genes regulating authophagy/lysosomal proteolysis. Changes in the expression
and activity of several nuclear cofactors, including the histone
acetyltransferase p300, histone deacetylases (HDACs), such as HDAC3, HDAC6, and
SIRT1, as well as the nuclear cofactors PGC-1a and ß, contribute to loss of
muscle mass in various catabolic conditions. The activity of transcription
factors and nuclear cofactors involved in the regulation of muscle mass is
influenced not only by their abundance, but also by posttranslational
modifications as well, including ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and
acetylation. Transcription factors and nuclear cofactors involved in muscle
wasting interact with each other at multiple levels, supporting the concept that 
the molecular regulation of muscle mass in various catabolic conditions is
complex. An increased understanding of molecules that modulate gene transcription
in catabolic muscle may make it possible to develop treatments targeting
transcription factors and nuclear cofactors in the prevention and treatment of
muscle wasting.

PMID: 21871000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cell Signal. 2011 Dec;23(12):2076-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.08.002. Epub
2011 Aug 9.

A novel small molecule deubiquitinase inhibitor blocks Jak2 signaling through
Jak2 ubiquitination.

Kapuria V(1), Levitzki A, Bornmann WG, Maxwell D, Priebe W, Sorenson RJ,
Showalter HD, Talpaz M, Donato NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, University
of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
vaibhav.kapuria@unil.ch

AG490 is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor with activity against Jak2 and apoptotic
activity in specific leukemias. Due to its weak kinase inhibitory activity and
poor pharmacology, we conducted a cell-based screen for derivatives with improved
Jak2 inhibition and activity in animals. Two hits emerged from an initial small
chemical library screen, and more detailed structure-activity relationship
studies led to the development of WP1130 with 50-fold greater activity in
suppressing Jak2-dependent cytokine signaling than AG490. However, WP1130 did not
directly suppress Jak2 kinase activity, but mediated Jak2 ubiquitination
resulting in its trafficking through HDAC6 to perinuclear aggresomes without
cytokine stimulation or SOCS-1 induction. Jak2 primarily contained K63-linked
ubiquitin polymers, and mutation of this lysine blocked Jak2 ubiquitination and
mobilization in WP1130-treated cells. Further analysis demonstrated that WP1130, 
but not AG490, acts as a deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) inhibitor, possibly
through a Michael addition reaction. We conclude that chemical modification of
AG490 resulted in development of a DUB inhibitor with activity against a DUB
capable of modulating Jak2 ubiquitination, trafficking and signal transduction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21855629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Neoplasia. 2011 Aug;13(8):726-34.

HDAC6 deacetylates Ku70 and regulates Ku70-Bax binding in neuroblastoma.

Subramanian C(1), Jarzembowski JA, Opipari AW Jr, Castle VP, Kwok RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0617,
USA.

Ku70 was first characterized as a nuclear factor that binds DNA double-strand
breaks in nonhomolog end-joining DNA repair. However, recent studies have shown
that Ku70 is also found in the cytoplasm and binds Bax, preventing Bax-induced
cell death. We have shown that, in neuroblastoma cells, the binding between Ku70 
and Bax depends on the acetylation status of Ku70, such that, when Ku70 is
acetylated, Bax is released from Ku70, triggering cell death. Thus, to survive,
in neuroblastoma cells, cytoplasmic Ku70 acetylation status is carefully
regulated such that Ku70 is maintained in a deacetylated state, keeping Bax
complexed with Ku70. We have shown that overexpression of CREB-binding protein
(CBP), a known acetyltransferase that acetylates Ku70, releases Bax from Ku70,
triggering apoptosis. Although we have shown that blocking deacetylase activity
using non-type-specific inhibitors also triggers Ku70 acetylation and
Bax-dependent cell death, the targets of these deacetylase inhibitors in
neuroblastoma cells remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that, in neuroblastoma
cells, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) binds Ku70 and Bax in the cytoplasm and that
knocking down HDAC6 or using an HDAC6-specific inhibitor triggers Bax-dependent
cell death. Our results show that HDAC6 regulates the interaction between Ku70
and Bax in neuroblastoma cells and may be a therapeutic target in this pediatric 
solid tumor.

PMCID: PMC3156663
PMID: 21847364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. EMBO J. 2011 Aug 16;30(20):4142-56. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.298.

Class IIb HDAC6 regulates endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis by
deacetylation of cortactin.

Kaluza D(1), Kroll J, Gesierich S, Yao TP, Boon RA, Hergenreider E, Tjwa M,
Rössig L, Seto E, Augustin HG, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S, Urbich C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre of Molecular Medicine,
University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) deacetylate histones and non-histone proteins,
thereby affecting protein activity and gene expression. The regulation and
function of the cytoplasmic class IIb HDAC6 in endothelial cells (ECs) is largely
unexplored. Here, we demonstrate that HDAC6 is upregulated by hypoxia and is
essential for angiogenesis. Silencing of HDAC6 in ECs decreases sprouting and
migration in vitro and formation of functional vascular networks in matrigel
plugs in vivo. HDAC6 regulates zebrafish vessel formation, and HDAC6-deficient
mice showed a reduced formation of perfused vessels in matrigel plugs.
Consistently, overexpression of wild-type HDAC6 increases sprouting from
spheroids. HDAC6 function requires the catalytic activity but is independent of
ubiquitin binding and deacetylation of a-tubulin. Instead, we found that HDAC6
interacts with and deacetylates the actin-remodelling protein cortactin in ECs,
which is essential for zebrafish vessel formation and which mediates the
angiogenic effect of HDAC6. In summary, we show that HDAC6 is necessary for
angiogenesis in vivo and in vitro, involving the interaction and deacetylation of
cortactin that regulates EC migration and sprouting.

PMCID: PMC3199386
PMID: 21847094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Leuk Lymphoma. 2012 Jan;53(1):123-9. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.597905. Epub 2011
Aug 1.

Increased gene expression of histone deacetylases in patients with
Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Skov V(1), Larsen TS, Thomassen M, Riley CH, Jensen MK, Bjerrum OW, Kruse TA,
Hasselbalch HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Denmark.

Myeloproliferation, myeloaccumulation (decreased apoptosis), inflammation, bone
marrow fibrosis and angiogenesis are cardinal features of the
Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms: essential
thrombocythemia (ET), polycythemia vera (PV) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF).
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have a critical role in modulating gene expression
and, accordingly, in the control of cell pathobiology and cancer development.
HDAC inhibition has been shown to inhibit tumor growth (impaired
myeloproliferation), to modulate the balance between pro- and antiapoptotic
proteins in favor of apoptosis (enhanced apoptosis) and also to inhibit
angiogenesis. Recently, enhanced HDAC enzyme activity has been found in
CD34+cells from patients with PMF, enzyme activity levels highly exceeding those 
recorded in other chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms (CMPNs). The raised levels
correlated to the degree of splenomegaly, suggesting that HDAC might be recruited
as ET or PV progresses into myelofibrosis or PMF progresses into a more advanced 
stage. Accordingly, HDAC inhibition is an obvious novel therapeutic approach in
these neoplasms. Using global gene expression profiling of whole blood from
patients with CMPNs, we have found a pronounced deregulation of HDAC genes,
involving significant up-regulation of the HDAC genes 9 and 11, with the highest 
expression levels being found in patients with ET (HDAC9 and 11), PMF (HDAC9) and
CMPNs (both HDAC9 and HDAC11). Furthermore, we have identified that the HDAC6
gene is progressively expressed in patients with ET, PV and PMF, reflecting a
steady accumulation of abnormally expressed HDAC6 during disease evolution. Our
results lend further support to HDACs as important epigenetic targets in the
future treatment of patients with CMPNs. Since the highest expression levels of
HDAC genes were recorded in ET, in PMF and in the entire CMPN group, their
down-regulation by HDAC inhibitors might be associated with decreased disease
activity, including reduction of splenomegaly.

PMID: 21806350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Curr Opin Immunol. 2011 Oct;23(5):670-8. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2011.07.002. Epub
2011 Jul 26.

Histone/protein deacetylases control Foxp3 expression and the heat shock response
of T-regulatory cells.

Beier UH(1), Akimova T, Liu Y, Wang L, Hancock WW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, USA.

Lysine <U+025B>-acetylation is a post-translational modification that alters the
biochemical properties of many proteins. The reaction is catalyzed by
histone/protein acetyltransferases (HATs), and is reversed by histone/protein
deacetylases (HDACs). As a result, HATs and HDACs constitute an important, though
little recognized, set of proteins that control the functions of T-regulatory
(Treg) cells. Targeting certain HDACs, especially HDAC6, HDAC9, and Sirtuin-1
(Sirt1), can augment Treg suppressive potency by several distinct and potentially
additive mechanisms. These involve promoting Forkhead box p3 (Foxp3) gene
expression and preserving Foxp3 lysine <U+025B>-acetylation, which infers resistance to 
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, and increases DNA binding. Moreover, 
depleting certain HDAC can enhance the heat shock response, which increases the
tenacity of Treg to survive under stress, and helps preserve a suppressive
phenotype. As a result, HDAC inhibitor therapy can be used to enhance Treg
functions in vivo and have beneficial effects on allograft survival and
autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3190028
PMID: 21798734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Nat Prod. 2011 Oct 28;74(10):2031-8. doi: 10.1021/np200324x. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Thailandepsins: bacterial products with potent histone deacetylase inhibitory
activities and broad-spectrum antiproliferative activities.

Wang C(1), Henkes LM, Doughty LB, He M, Wang D, Meyer-Almes FJ, Cheng YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, P.O. Box
413, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53201, United States.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have emerged as a new class of anticancer
drugs, with one synthetic compound, SAHA (vorinostat, Zolinza; 1), and one
natural product, FK228 (depsipeptide, romidepsin, Istodax; 2), approved by FDA
for clinical use. Our studies of FK228 biosynthesis in Chromobacterium violaceum 
no. 968 led to the identification of a cryptic biosynthetic gene cluster in the
genome of Burkholderia thailandensis E264. Genome mining and genetic manipulation
of this gene cluster further led to the discovery of two new products,
thailandepsin A (6) and thailandepsin B (7). HDAC inhibition assays showed that
thailandepsins have selective inhibition profiles different from that of FK228,
with comparable inhibitory activities to those of FK228 toward human HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC6, HDAC7, and HDAC9 but weaker inhibitory activities than FK228
toward HDAC4 and HDAC8, the latter of which could be beneficial. NCI-60
anticancer screening assays showed that thailandepsins possess broad-spectrum
antiproliferative activities with GI50 for over 90% of the tested cell lines at
low nanomolar concentrations and potent cytotoxic activities toward certain types
of cell lines, particularly for those derived from colon, melanoma, ovarian, and 
renal cancers. Thailandepsins thus represent new naturally produced HDAC
inhibitors that are promising for anticancer drug development.

PMCID: PMC3204160
PMID: 21793558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Nat Med. 2011 Jul 24;17(8):968-74. doi: 10.1038/nm.2396.

HDAC6 inhibitors reverse axonal loss in a mouse model of mutant HSPB1-induced
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

d'Ydewalle C(1), Krishnan J, Chiheb DM, Van Damme P, Irobi J, Kozikowski AP,
Vanden Berghe P, Timmerman V, Robberecht W, Van Den Bosch L.

Author information: 
(1)Vesalius Research Center, VIB and K.U. Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Leuven,
Belgium.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2011 Sep;7(9):476.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited disorder of the
peripheral nervous system. Mutations in the 27-kDa small heat-shock protein gene 
(HSPB1) cause axonal CMT or distal hereditary motor neuropathy (distal HMN). We
developed and characterized transgenic mice expressing two different HSPB1
mutations (S135F and P182L) in neurons only. These mice showed all features of
CMT or distal HMN dependent on the mutation. Expression of mutant HSPB1 decreased
acetylated a-tubulin abundance and induced severe axonal transport deficits. An
increase of a-tubulin acetylation induced by pharmacological inhibition of
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) corrected the axonal transport defects caused by
HSPB1 mutations and rescued the CMT phenotype of symptomatic mutant HSPB1 mice.
Our findings demonstrate the pathogenic role of a-tubulin deacetylation in mutant
HSPB1-induced neuropathies and offer perspectives for using HDAC6 inhibitors as a
therapeutic strategy for hereditary axonopathies.

PMID: 21785432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Cell Sci. 2011 Aug 15;124(Pt 16):2692-701. doi: 10.1242/jcs.081232. Epub 2011
Jul 19.

p62/SQSTM1 in autophagic clearance of a non-ubiquitylated substrate.

Watanabe Y(1), Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Geriatrics, Research Institute for Neurological Diseases
and Geriatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji,
Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Proteolytic systems and the aggresome pathway contribute to preventing
accumulation of cytotoxic aggregation-prone proteins. Although polyubiquitylation
is usually required for degradation or aggresome formation, several substrates
are processed independently of ubiquitin through a poorly understood mechanism.
Here, we found that p62/SQSTM1, a multifunctional adaptor protein, was involved
in the selective autophagic clearance of a non-ubiquitylated substrate, namely an
aggregation-prone isoform of STAT5A (STAT5A_<U+0394>E18). By using a cell line that
stably expressed STAT5A_<U+0394>E18, we investigated the properties of its aggregation
and degradation. We found that STAT5A_<U+0394>E18 formed non-ubiquitylated aggresomes
and/or aggregates by impairment of proteasome functioning or autophagy. Transport
of these aggregates to the perinuclear region was inhibited by trichostatin A or 
tubacin, inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC), indicating that the
non-ubiquitylated aggregates of STAT5A_<U+0394>E18 were sequestered into aggresomes in
an HDAC6-dependent manner. Moreover, p62 was bound to STAT5A_<U+0394>E18 through its PB1
domain, and the oligomerization of p62 was required for this interaction. In
p62-knockdown experiments, we found that p62 was required for autophagic
clearance of STAT5A_<U+0394>E18 but not for its aggregate formation, suggesting that the
binding of p62 to non-ubiquitylated substrates might trigger their autophagic
clearance.

© 2011. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd

PMID: 21771882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Apr;18(2):227-37. doi: 10.1007/s12253-011-9432-5. Epub
2011 Jul 13.

Down-regulated expression of HSP70 in correlation with clinicopathology of
cholangiocarcinoma.

Boonjaraspinyo S(1), Boonmars T, Kaewkes S, Laummaunwai P, Pinlaor S, Loilome W, 
Yongvanit P, Wu Z, Puapairoj A, Bhudhisawasdi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, 40002, Thailand.

Cholangiocarcinoma is a crucial health problem in northeast Thailand. Although
rare, it is a highly fatal disease and the prognosis of CCA patients is very
poor. To determine if expression of specific genes is useful for diagnosis and
prognosis for CCA. We examined the expression of HSP70, HSP90, RB1, cyclin D1,
and HDAC6 in 50 resections of human CCA tissues by quantitative real-time PCR.
The expression of HSP70, RB1, and HDAC6 was "dominant down-regulation," while the
expression of cyclin D1 and HSP90 was "dominant up-regulation." There were no
correlations between RB1, cyclin D1, HSP90, and clinicopathological parameters
such as status, histology type, histological grading, stage of CCA, and
metastasis. A significant association was found between HDAC6 and CCA staging
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000), CCA gross type and HSP70 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046) as well as RB1 expression
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046). Patients with down-regulation of HSP70 had significantly poorer
prognosis than those in the up-regulation group (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). Expression of HSP70 
may be useful as a new prognostic marker for CCA.

PMID: 21750953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Aug;52(8):1544-55. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.570821. Epub
2011 Jun 23.

Tubacin suppresses proliferation and induces apoptosis of acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cells.

Aldana-Masangkay GI(1), Rodriguez-Gonzalez A, Lin T, Ikeda AK, Hsieh YT, Kim YM, 
Lomenick B, Okemoto K, Landaw EM, Wang D, Mazitschek R, Bradner JE, Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Aug;52(8):1421-2.

Over the past decade, histone deacetylase inhibitors have increasingly been used 
to treat various malignancies. Tubacin (tubulin acetylation inducer) is a small
molecule that inhibits histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and induces acetylation of
a-tubulin. We observed a higher antiproliferative effect of tubacin in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells than in normal hematopoietic cells. Treatment 
with tubacin led to the induction of apoptotic pathways in both pre-B and T cell 
ALL cells at a 50% inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) of low micromolar
concentrations. Acetylation of a-tubulin increases within the first 30<U+2009>min
following treatment of ALL cells with tubacin. We also observed an accumulation
of polyubiquitinated proteins and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage.
Furthermore, the signaling pathways activated by tubacin appear to be distinct
from those observed in multiple myeloma. In this article, we demonstrate that
tubacin enhances the effects of chemotherapy to treat primary ALL cells in vitro 
and in vivo. These results suggest that targeting HDAC6 alone or in combination
with chemotherapy could provide a novel approach to treat ALL.

PMCID: PMC4113006
PMID: 21699378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020696. Epub 2011 Jun 3.

Hdac6 knock-out increases tubulin acetylation but does not modify disease
progression in the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease.

Bobrowska A(1), Paganetti P, Matthias P, Bates GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, London,
United Kingdom.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder for which
there is no effective disease modifying treatment. Following-on from studies in
HD animal models, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition has emerged as an
attractive therapeutic option. In parallel, several reports have demonstrated a
role for histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in the modulation of the toxicity caused
by the accumulation of misfolded proteins, including that of expanded
polyglutamine in an N-terminal huntingtin fragment. An important role for HDAC6
in kinesin-1 dependent transport of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) from
the cortex to the striatum has also been demonstrated. To elucidate the role that
HDAC6 plays in HD progression, we evaluated the effects of the genetic depletion 
of HDAC6 in the R6/2 mouse model of HD. Loss of HDAC6 resulted in a marked
increase in tubulin acetylation throughout the brain. Despite this, there was no 
effect on the onset and progression of a wide range of behavioural,
physiological, molecular and pathological HD-related phenotypes. We observed no
change in the aggregate load or in the levels of soluble mutant exon 1
transprotein. HDAC6 genetic depletion did not affect the efficiency of BDNF
transport from the cortex to the striatum. Therefore, we conclude that HDAC6
inhibition does not modify disease progression in R6/2 mice and HDAC6 should not 
be prioritized as a therapeutic target for HD.

PMCID: PMC3108987
PMID: 21677773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Commun Integr Biol. 2011 Mar;4(2):139-42. doi: 10.4161/cib.4.2.14272.

To prevent neurodegeneration: HDAC6 uses different strategies for different
challenges.

Du G(1), Jiao R.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Science; Institute of Biophysics; 
Chinese Academy of Sciences; Beijing, China.

Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by progressive dysfunction and death
of neurons in specific areas of the nervous system. Loss of neurons is often
associated with multiple stresses such as abnormal aggregation of misfolded
proteins, deficiency of protein degradation system, mitochondrial dysfunction and
excessive oxidative products. HDAC6 has recently been suggested to be an integral
factor that copes with these stresses. In this mini-review, we summarize our
current understanding of how HDAC6 promotes inclusion formation, facilitates
autophagic degradation of protein aggregates and dysfunctional mitochondria.
Finally, the possibility for HDAC6 to be a potential preventional and
therapeutical target of some neurodegenerative diseases is put forward.

PMCID: PMC3104564
PMID: 21655425  [PubMed]


5. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Dec;18(12):1904-13. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.71. Epub 2011
Jun 3.

SAHA shows preferential cytotoxicity in mutant p53 cancer cells by destabilizing 
mutant p53 through inhibition of the HDAC6-Hsp90 chaperone axis.

Li D(1), Marchenko ND, Moll UM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Mutant p53 (mutp53) cancers are surprisingly dependent on their hyperstable
mutp53 protein for survival, identifying mutp53 as a potentially significant
clinical target. However, exploration of effective small molecule therapies
targeting mutp53 has barely begun. Mutp53 hyperstabilization, a hallmark of p53
mutation, is cancer cell-specific and due to massive upregulation of the HSP90
chaperone machinery during malignant transformation. We recently showed that
stable complex formation between HSP90 and its mutp53 client inhibits E3 ligases 
MDM2 and CHIP, causing mutp53 stabilization. Histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors (HDACi) are a new class of promising anti-cancer drugs,
hyperacetylating histone and non-histone targets. Currently, suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA) is the only FDA-approved HDACi. We show that SAHA exhibits
preferential cytotoxicity for mutant, rather than wild-type and null p53 human
cancer cells. Loss/gain-of-function experiments revealed that although able to
exert multiple cellular effects, SAHA's cytotoxicity is caused to a significant
degree by its ability to strongly destabilize mutp53 at the level of protein
degradation. The underlying mechanism is SAHA's inhibition of HDAC6, an essential
positive regulator of HSP90. This releases mutp53 and enables its MDM2- and
CHIP-mediated degradation. SAHA also strongly chemosensitizes mutp53 cancer cells
for chemotherapy due to its ability to degrade mutp53. This identifies a novel
action of SAHA with the prospect of SAHA becoming a centerpiece in
mutp53-specific anticancer strategies.

PMCID: PMC3170683
PMID: 21637290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2011 May 12;2(5):358-362. Epub 2011 Mar 18.

Synthesis and Biological Evaluation of JAHAs: Ferrocene-Based Histone Deacetylase
Inhibitors.

Spencer J, Amin J, Wang M, Packham G, Alwi SS, Tizzard GJ, Coles SJ, Paranal RM, 
Bradner JE, Heightman TD.

N(1)-Hydroxy-N(8)-ferrocenyloctanediamide, JAHA (7), an organometallic analogue
of SAHA containing a ferrocenyl group as a phenyl bioisostere, displays nanomolar
inhibition of class I HDACs, excellent selectivity over class IIa HDACs, and
anticancer action in intact cells (IC(50) = 2.4 µM, MCF7 cell line). Molecular
docking studies of 7 in HDAC8 (a,b) suggested that the ferrocenyl moiety in 7 can
overlap with the aryl cap of SAHA and should display similar HDAC inhibition,
which was borne out in an in vitro assay (IC(50) values against HDAC8 (µM, SD in 
parentheses): SAHA, 1.41 (0.15); 7, 1.36 (0.16). Thereafter, a small library of
related JAHA analogues has been synthesized, and preliminary SAR studies are
presented. IC(50) values as low as 90 pM toward HDAC6 (class IIb) have been
determined, highlighting the excellent potential of JAHAs as bioinorganic probes.

PMCID: PMC3093745
PMID: 21572592  [PubMed]


7. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Aug;131(8):1710-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.110. Epub 2011
May 12.

Nucleus accumbens-associated 1 contributes to cortactin deacetylation and
augments the migration of melanoma cells.

Tsunoda K(1), Oikawa H, Tada H, Tatemichi Y, Muraoka S, Miura S, Shibazaki M,
Maeda F, Takahashi K, Akasaka T, Masuda T, Maesawa C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioscience, Department of Tumor Biology, Center for Advanced
Medical Science, Morioka, Japan.

We investigated the prognostic significance and post-transcriptional
acetylation-modification of cortactin (CTTN) via the nucleus accumbens-associated
1 (NACC1)-histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) deacetylation system in primary melanomas
and melanoma cell lines. Overexpression of CTTN protein was observed in 56 (73%) 
of 77 stage I-IV melanomas, and was significantly correlated with tumor
thickness, lymph node metastasis, distant metastasis, and disease outcome. The
patients whose tumors exhibited CTTN overexpression had a poorer outcome than
patients without this feature (P=0.028, log-rank test). NACC1 and CTTN proteins, 
but not HDAC6, were overexpressed in four melanoma cell lines in comparison with 
a primary culture of normal human epidermal melanocytes. Knockdown of both NACC1 
and HDAC6 markedly downregulated the migration activity of all melanoma cell
lines (P<0.05), and induced a gain of CTTN protein acetylation status. Confocal
microscopy showed that hyperacetylation of CTTN modulated by depletion of both
NACC1 and HDAC6 induced disappearance of CTTN protein at the leading edge of
migrating cells, resulting in stabilization of the focal adhesion structure and
development of actin stress fibers. These data suggest that the acetylation
status of CTTN modulated by the NACC1-HDAC6 deacetylation system induces
acceleration of melanoma cell migration activity via an actin-dependent cellular 
process, possibly contributing to aggressive behavior (invasion/metastasis) of
the melanoma cells.

PMID: 21562571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Eur J Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;90(8):631-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2011.03.002. Epub
2011 May 11.

p21(Cip1) regulates cell-substrate adhesion and interphase microtubule dynamics
in untransformed human mammary epithelial cells.

Bouchet BP(1), Fauvet F, Grelier G, Galmarini CM, Puisieux A.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, F-69000 Lyon, France. bouchetben@gmail.com

Despite its frequent inactivation in human breast cancers, the role of p21(Cip1) 
(p21) in morphological plasticity of normal mammary epithelial cells is still
poorly understood. To address this question, we have investigated the
consequences of p21 silencing in two-dimensional (2D) morphogenesis of
untransformed human mammary epithelial cells. Here we show that p21 inactivation 
causes a reduction of 2D cell spreading and suppresses focal adhesion. In order
to investigate the cytoskeletal modifications associated with this altered
morphology, we have analyzed the microtubule dynamics in interphase p21-depleted 
cells. Our results demonstrate that interphase microtubule dynamic instability is
strongly increased by p21 silencing. This alteration correlates with severe
microtubule hypoacetylation. Next, we show that these microtubule defects in
p21-depleted cells can be reversed by the use of the small molecule tubacin, a
specific inhibitor of the a-tubulin deacetylase HDAC6. Tubacin-induced
microtubule dynamics decrease also correlates with a partial recovery of cell
spreading and focal adhesion in those cells. Collectively, these data indicate
that p21 regulates the morphological plasticity of normal mammary epithelial
cells by modulating dynamics of key cytoskeletal components.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21561680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 15;10(12):1968-77. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

SRSF2 is required for sodium butyrate-mediated p21(WAF1) induction and premature 
senescence in human lung carcinoma cell lines.

Edmond V(1), Brambilla C, Brambilla E, Gazzeri S, Eymin B.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe 2 Bases Moléculaires de la Progression des Cancers du Poumon, Grenoble,
France.

Sodium butyrate (NaBu) is a histone deacetylase inhibitor that exhibits numerous 
antiproliferative activities in various cancer cell lines, notably through the
accumulation of the well-known cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1) .
SRSF2 belongs to the family of SR proteins that are crucial regulators of
constitutive and alternative pre-mRNA splicing. Previous studies demonstrated
that NaBu alters pre-mRNA splicing patterns through upregulation of SR proteins
expression in non-tumor cells. In this study, we show that NaBu also induces the 
accumulation of SRSF2 in human lung carcinoma cell lines. We recently identified 
a signaling network involving the acetyltransferase TIP60, the deacetylase HDAC6 
and the SRPK kinases that regulates SRSF2 protein turnover through
phosphorylation/acetylation modifications in response to cisplatin. Here, we show
that the same signaling pathway controls SRSF2 protein expression upon NaBu
treatment. Importantly, we further demonstrate that SRSF2 is required for the
accumulation of p21(WAF1) at both mRNA and protein levels in response to NaBu.
Finally, we provide evidence that a long-term NaBu-treatment triggers senescence 
in our cellular models, a phenomenon that is prevented by the knockdown of SRSF2.
Altogether, these results unravel a new function of SRSF2 in the process of
cellular senescence and identify the cyclin-Cdk inhibitor p21(WAF1) as a key
target of SRSF2 in this setting.

PMID: 21555914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Clin Invest. 2011 Jun;121(6):2480-92. doi: 10.1172/JCI44932. Epub 2011 May 9.

Variable HIV peptide stability in human cytosol is critical to epitope
presentation and immune escape.

Lazaro E(1), Kadie C, Stamegna P, Zhang SC, Gourdain P, Lai NY, Zhang M, Martinez
SA, Heckerman D, Le Gall S.

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Induction of virus-specific CD8<U+207A> T cell responses is critical for the success of 
vaccines against chronic viral infections. Despite the large number of potential 
MHC-I-restricted epitopes located in viral proteins, MHC-I-restricted epitope
generation is inefficient, and factors defining the production and presentation
of MHC-I-restricted viral epitopes are poorly understood. Here, we have
demonstrated that the half-lives of HIV-derived peptides in cytosol from primary 
human cells were highly variable and sequence dependent, and significantly
affected the efficiency of cell recognition by CD8<U+207A> T cells. Furthermore,
multiple clinical isolates of HLA-associated HIV epitope variants displayed
reduced half-lives relative to consensus sequence. This decreased cytosolic
peptide stability diminished epitope presentation and CTL recognition,
illustrating a mechanism of immune escape. Chaperone complexes including Hsp90
and histone deacetylase HDAC6 enhanced peptide stability by transient protection 
from peptidase degradation. Based on empirical results with 166 peptides, we
developed a computational approach utilizing a sequence-based algorithm to
estimate the cytosolic stability of antigenic peptides. Our results identify
sequence motifs able to alter the amount of peptide available for loading onto
MHC-I, suggesting potential new strategies to modulate epitope production from
vaccine immunogens.

PMCID: PMC3104749
PMID: 21555856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Jul;51(1):41-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.04.005. Epub 
2011 Apr 23.

Cardiac HDAC6 catalytic activity is induced in response to chronic hypertension.

Lemon DD(1), Horn TR, Cavasin MA, Jeong MY, Haubold KW, Long CS, Irwin DC, McCune
SA, Chung E, Leinwand LA, McKinsey TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, CO, USA.

Small molecule histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors block adverse cardiac
remodeling in animal models of heart failure. The efficacious compounds target
class I, class IIb and, to a lesser extent, class IIa HDACs. It is hypothesized
that a selective inhibitor of a specific HDAC class (or an isoform within that
class) will provide a favorable therapeutic window for the treatment of heart
failure, although the optimal selectivity profile for such a compound remains
unknown. Genetic studies have suggested that class I HDACs promote pathological
cardiac remodeling, while class IIa HDACs are protective. In contrast, nothing is
known about the function or regulation of class IIb HDACs in the heart. We
developed assays to quantify catalytic activity of distinct HDAC classes in left 
and right ventricular cardiac tissue from animal models of hypertensive heart
disease. Class I and IIa HDAC activity was elevated in some but not all diseased 
tissues. In contrast, catalytic activity of the class IIb HDAC, HDAC6, was
consistently increased in stressed myocardium, but not in a model of physiologic 
hypertrophy. HDAC6 catalytic activity was also induced by diverse extracellular
stimuli in cultured cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts. These findings suggest an
unforeseen role for HDAC6 in the heart, and highlight the need for pre-clinical
evaluation of HDAC6-selective inhibitors to determine whether this HDAC isoform
is pathological or protective in the setting of cardiovascular disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3113526
PMID: 21539845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Oncogene. 2011 Sep 22;30(38):4050-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.120. Epub 2011 May 2.

The HTLV-1 Tax protein inhibits formation of stress granules by interacting with 
histone deacetylase 6.

Legros S(1), Boxus M, Gatot JS, Van Lint C, Kruys V, Kettmann R, Twizere JC,
Dequiedt F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, University 
of Liège (ULg), Gembloux, Belgium.

Human T cell leukemia virus type-1 (HTLV-1) is the causative agent of a fatal
adult T-cell leukemia. Through deregulation of multiple cellular signaling
pathways the viral Tax protein has a pivotal role in T-cell transformation. In
response to stressful stimuli, cells mount a cellular stress response to limit
the damage that environmental forces inflict on DNA or proteins. During stress
response, cells postpone the translation of most cellular mRNAs, which are
gathered into cytoplasmic mRNA-silencing foci called stress granules (SGs) and
allocate their available resources towards the production of dedicated
stress-management proteins. Here we demonstrate that Tax controls the formation
of SGs and interferes with the cellular stress response pathway. In agreement
with previous reports, we observed that Tax relocates from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm in response to environmental stress. We found that the presence of Tax 
in the cytoplasm of stressed cells prevents the formation of SGs and counteracts 
the shutoff of specific host proteins. Unexpectedly, nuclear localization of Tax 
promotes spontaneous aggregation of SGs, even in the absence of stress. Mutant
analysis revealed that the SG inhibitory capacity of Tax is independent of its
transcriptional abilities but relies on its interaction with histone deacetylase 
6, a critical component of SGs. Importantly, the stress-protective effect of Tax 
was also observed in the context of HTLV-1 infected cells, which were shown to be
less prone to form SGs and undergo apoptosis under arsenite exposure. These
observations identify Tax as the first virally encoded inhibitory component of
SGs and unravel a new strategy developed by HTLV-1 to deregulate normal cell
processes. We postulate that inhibition of the stress response pathway by Tax
would favor cell survival under stressful conditions and may have an important
role in HTLV-1-induced cellular transformation.

PMID: 21532619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 May 20;408(4):630-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.075. Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 attenuates endothelial barrier dysfunction
induced by thrombin.

Saito S(1), Lasky JA, Guo W, Nguyen H, Mai A, Danchuk S, Sullivan DE, Shan B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tulane Medical School, New Orleans, LA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Endothelial barrier dysfunction (EBD) involves microtubule
disassembly and enhanced cell contractility. Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)
deacetylates a-tubulin, and thereby destabilizes microtubules. This study
investigates a role for HDAC6 in EBD.
METHODS: EBD was induced with thrombin±HDAC6 inhibitors (tubacin and MC1575), and
assessed by transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER). Markers for
microtubule disassembly (a-tubulin and acetylated a-tubulin) and contraction
(phosphorylated myosin light chain 2, P-MLC2) were measured using immunoblots and
immunofluorescence.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Thrombin induced a ~50% decrease in TEER that was
abrogated by the HDAC6 inhibitors. Moreover, inhibition of HDAC6 diminished edema
in the lung injured by lipopolysaccharide. Lastly, inhibition of HDAC6 attenuated
thrombin-induced microtubule disassembly and P-MLC2. Our results suggest that
HDAC6 can be targeted to limit EBD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3100403
PMID: 21531207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Anticancer Res. 2011 Apr;31(4):1337-43.

Abnormal methylation of histone deacetylase genes: implications on etiology and
epigenetic therapy of astrocytomas.

Gomes MV(1), Borges KS, Moreno DA, Queiroz RG, Machado HR, Carlotti CG Jr,
Scrideli CA, Tone LG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Biological and Health Sciences, University of Northern Paraná, PR,
Brazil. mvmgomes@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: A growing body of evidence has revealed the involvement of epigenetic
alterations in the etiology of astrocytomas. In the present study, we aimed to
evaluate the association of DNA methylation of histone deacetylase genes (HDAC)
with the etiology of astrocytoma, and the implications for epigenetic therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation of the HDAC4, HDAC5 and HDAC6 genes was
assessed in 29 tumor samples (astrocytomas grades I, III, and IV) and in the
glioblastoma cell lines U87, U251, U343, SF188, and T98G by methylation-specific 
quantitative PCR (MSED-qPCR).
RESULTS: Significantly increased methylation of the HDAC5 gene was observed in
astrocytomas when compared to non-neoplastic brain samples (p=0.0007) and to
glioblastomas cell lines (p=0.001). A heterogenic methylation pattern was
evidenced when compared to the glioblastoma cell lines. Distinct effects on
methylation and gene expression were observed after in vitro treatment of the
different cell lines with decitabine.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that abnormal methylation of HDAC genes is
involved in the etiology of astrocytomas and indicate that loci-specific
epigenetic interindividualities might be associated to the differential responses
to treatment with decitabine.

PMID: 21508384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Cell Sci. 2011 May 1;124(Pt 9):1519-32. doi: 10.1242/jcs.081778. Epub 2011 Apr 
12.

Protein kinase CK2 regulates the formation and clearance of aggresomes in
response to stress.

Watabe M(1), Nakaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo
173-8605, Japan.

Misfolded protein aggregates elicit a stress response, and their clearance is
crucial for cell survival. These aggregates are transported by cytoplasmic
deacetylase HDAC6 and dynein motors to the aggresome via the microtubule network,
and are removed by autophagic degradation. HDAC6 activity is necessary for both
the transport and clearance of protein aggregates. However, the cellular factors 
that regulate HDAC6 activity remain unknown. Here we show that protein kinase CK2
is a crucial modulator of HDAC6 activity because CK2 directly phosphorylates
HDAC6 and increases cytoplasmic deacetylase activity. Indeed, cells that
expressed HDAC6 mutated at Ser458, a CK2-mediated phosphorylation site, failed to
both form and clear aggresomes, and increased cytotoxicity. Interestingly, Ser458
is conserved only in higher primates, such as human and chimpanzee, but not in
the rhesus macaque. These findings identify CK2 as a crucial protein involved in 
the formation and clearance of aggresomes, and hence in cell viability in
response to misfolded protein stress.

PMID: 21486957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oncol Rep. 2011 Jun;25(6):1677-81. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1236. Epub 2011 Mar 28.

Histone deacetylases 1, 6 and 8 are critical for invasion in breast cancer.

Park SY(1), Jun JA, Jeong KJ, Heo HJ, Sohn JS, Lee HY, Park CG, Kang J.

Author information: 
(1)Myunggok Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine, Konyang University, 
Daejeon 302-718, Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are associated with the development and progression 
of cancer, but it is not known which of the HDAC isoforms play important roles in
breast cancer metastasis. This study identified the specific HDAC isoforms that
are necessary for invasion and/or migration in human breast cancer cell lines.
MDA-MB-231 cells were significantly more invasive and expressed higher levels of 
matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) compared to MCF-7 cells. We compared the
expression of HDAC isoforms between MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells and found greater 
expression of HDAC4, 6 and 8 in MDA-MB-231 cells by RT-PCR and Western blot
analyses. In addition, apicidin, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, was shown to
attenuate the invasion, migration and MMP-9 expression in MDA-MB-231 cells. Using
specific siRNAs directed against HDAC1, 4, 6 and 8, we show that inhibition of
HDAC1, 6 and 8, but not HDAC4, are responsible for invasion and MMP-9 expression 
in MDA-MB-231 cells. We analyzed the invasiveness of MCF-7 cells overexpressing
HDAC1, 4, 6 or 8 and found that overexpression of HDAC1, 6 or 8 increased
invasion and MMP-9 expression. By developing HDAC isoforms as potential
biomarkers for breast cancer metastasis, the present study can be extended to
developing therapies for breast cancer invasion.

PMID: 21455583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 May;31(10):2066-78. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05155-11. Epub 2011 Mar 
28.

Histone deacetylase 6 and heat shock protein 90 control the functions of Foxp3(+)
T-regulatory cells.

de Zoeten EF(1), Wang L, Butler K, Beier UH, Akimova T, Sai H, Bradner JE,
Mazitschek R, Kozikowski AP, Matthias P, Hancock WW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-4318, USA.

Foxp3(+) T-regulatory cells (Tregs) are key to immune homeostasis such that their
diminished numbers or function can cause autoimmunity and allograft rejection.
Foxp3(+) Tregs express multiple histone/protein deacetylases (HDACs) that
regulate chromatin remodeling, gene expression, and protein function. Pan-HDAC
inhibitors developed for oncologic applications enhance Treg production and Treg 
suppression function but have limited nononcologic utility given their broad
actions and various side effects. We show, using HDAC6-deficient mice and
wild-type (WT) mice treated with HDAC6-specific inhibitors, that HDAC6 inhibition
promotes Treg suppressive activity in models of inflammation and autoimmunity,
including multiple forms of experimental colitis and fully major
histocompatibility complex (MHC)-incompatible cardiac allograft rejection. Many
of the beneficial effects of HDAC6 targeting are also achieved by inhibition of
the HDAC6-regulated protein heat shock protein 90 (HSP90). Hence, selective
targeting of a single HDAC isoform, HDAC6, or its downstream target, HSP90, can
promote Treg-dependent suppression of autoimmunity and transplant rejection.

PMCID: PMC3133361
PMID: 21444725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Reprod Sci. 2011 Aug;18(8):755-62. doi: 10.1177/1933719111398147. Epub 2011 Mar
18.

Histone deacetylase 6 regulates estrogen receptor alpha in uterine leiomyoma.

Wei LH(1), Torng PL, Hsiao SM, Jeng YM, Chen MW, Chen CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC) 6 is a regulatory factor in the endocrine traffic
network that controls growth factor receptor stability. Histone deacetylase 6
expression and its pathogenic role in the uterine leiomyoma have not been
studied. Here, we demonstrated that there was a consistent pattern of increasing 
HDAC6 and estrogen receptor (ER) a expression in leiomyoma samples. For all
individual cases, expression of HDAC6 in the normal myometrium or leiomyoma
positively correlated with ERa expression. The spearman's rho (<U+03C1>) was .53 (P =
.008) between HDAC6 and ERa in normal myometrium and, more significantly, the
spearman rho was .80 (P < .001) between HDAC6 and ERa in leiomyoma. In ELT-3
leiomyoma cells, silencing HDAC6 expression substantially reduced ERa expression,
lowered estrogen response, and inhibited ELT-3 cell growth. Our results, taken
together, are the first to provide experimental evidence suggesting that HDAC6
may be an essential molecular therapeutic target in controlling leiomyoma growth.

PMID: 21421902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2010 Apr;41(2):112-6.

[Histone deacetylase 6: the key regulator of misfolded proteins].

[Article in Chinese]

Su M(1), Sun X, Liu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215004, China.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a cytoplasmic enzyme that regulates many
important biological processes. It deacetylates alpha-tubulin, Hsp90 and
cortactin, and forms complexes with other partner proteins. When the misfolded
proteins are too more to be degradated by the chaperone refolding system and the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system in cultured cells, misfolded proteins are
specifically transported to a cytoplasmic juxtanuclear structure called aggresome
by HDAC6, facilitating their clearance by autophagy. The diverse functions of
HDAC6 in misfolded proteins degradation pathway suggest that it is a potential
therapeutic target for the treatment of "conformational diseases".

PMID: 21416996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Jul;112(7):1749-60. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23094.

EGFR signaling suppresses osteoblast differentiation and inhibits expression of
master osteoblastic transcription factors Runx2 and Osterix.

Zhu J(1), Shimizu E, Zhang X, Partridge NC, Qin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Biochem. 2012 Apr;113(4):1448.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and its ligands regulate key
processes of cell biology, such as proliferation, survival, differentiation,
migration, and tumorigenesis. We previously showed that, EGFR signaling pathway
is an important bone regulator and it primarily plays an anabolic role in bone
metabolism. In this study, we demonstrated that EGF-like ligands strongly
inhibited osteoblast differentiation and mineralization in several lines of
osteoblastic cells. Real-time RT-PCR and promoter reporter assays revealed that
EGF-like ligands suppressed the expression of both early and late bone marker
genes at the transcriptional level in the differentiating osteoblasts via an
EGFR-dependent manner. This inhibitory effect of EGFR signaling was not dependent
on its mitogenic activity. Furthermore, we demonstrated that EGFR signaling
reduced the expression of two major osteoblastic transcription factors Runx2
(type II) and Osterix in osteoblast differentiating cells. EGFR-induced decrease 
in Runx2 transcriptional activity was confirmed by Runx2 reporter and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. EGFR signaling increased the protein amounts of
transcription co-repressors HDAC4 and 6 and over-expression of HDAC4 decreased
Runx2 amount in differentiating osteoblasts, implying that HDACs contribute to
the down-regulation of Runx2 by EGFR. Moreover, activation of EGFR in
undifferentiated osteoprogenitors attenuated the expression of early bone markers
and Osterix and decreased Runx2 protein amounts. Together with our previous data,
that EGFR stimulates osteoprogenitor proliferation and that blocking EGFR
activity in osteoblast lineage cells results in fewer osteoprogenitors and an
osteopenic phenotype, we conclude that EGFR signaling is important for
maintaining osteoprogenitor population at an undifferentiated stage.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3111753
PMID: 21381079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Neurol Sci. 2011 May 15;304(1-2):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.02.017. Epub 2011
Mar 5.

HDAC6 a-tubulin deacetylase: a potential therapeutic target in neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Li G(1), Jiang H, Chang M, Xie H, Hu L.

Author information: 
(1)Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Neurology, the First Hospital, Jilin
University, Changchun 130021, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs), or lysine deacetylases (KDAC), are epigenetic
regulators that catalyze the removal of acetyl moieties from the tails of lysine 
residues of histones and other proteins. To date, eighteen HDAC family members
(HDAC1-11 and SIRT1-7) have been identified and grouped into four classes
according to their homology to yeast histone deacetylases. HDACs play an
important role in regulating gene transcription as well as a variety of cellular 
functions. Recent studies have found that HDAC6 (a-tubulin deacetylase) has the
novel ability to capture a-tubulin as a substrate and regulate the physiological 
level of its acetylated form. In addition, a growing body of evidence suggests
that a-tubulin deacetylase plays a critical role in the cellular response to the 
accumulation of misfolded and aggregated proteins, which are a prominent
pathological feature common to many age-related neurodegenerative disorders such 
as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases. Therefore, the role of
a-tubulin deacetylase and its potential as a therapeutic target for
neurodegenerative diseases are areas of rapidly expanding investigation. Here we 
review the research of the role played by HDAC6 in the regulation of tubulin
modification and aggresome formation. We also summarize the specific inhibitors
of HDAC6 and address reports that implicate HDAC6 in various neurodegenerative
disorders.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21377170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Br J Haematol. 2011 Apr;153(2):222-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08591.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 6.

Bortezomib interacts synergistically with belinostat in human acute myeloid
leukaemia and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cells in association with
perturbations in NF-<U+03BA>B and Bim.

Dai Y(1), Chen S, Wang L, Pei XY, Kramer LB, Dent P, Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University and the Massey Cancer Center, VCU Health Sciences Center, 401 College 
Street, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Interactions between the histone deacetylase inhibitor belinostat and the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib were investigated in acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) cells. Co-administration of
sub-micromolar concentrations of belinostat with low nanomolar concentrations of 
bortezomib sharply increased apoptosis in both AML and ALL cell lines and primary
blasts. Synergistic interactions were associated with interruption of both
canonical and non-canonical nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B signalling pathways, e.g.
accumulation of the phosphorylated (S32/S36) form of I<U+03BA>Ba, diminished
belinostat-mediated RelA/p65 hyperacetylation (K310), and reduced processing of
p100 into p52. These events were accompanied by down-regulation of
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent pro-survival proteins (e.g. XIAP, Bcl-xL). Moreover,
belinostat/bortezomib co-exposure induced up-regulation of the BH3-only pro-death
protein Bim. Significantly, shRNA knock-down of Bim substantially reduced the
lethality of belinostat/bortezomib regimens. Administration of belinostat ±
bortezomib also induced hyperacetylation (K40) of a-tubulin, indicating histone
deacetylase inhibitor 6 inhibition. Finally, in contrast to the pronounced
lethality of belinostat/bortezomib toward primary leukaemia blasts, equivalent
treatment was relatively non-toxic to normal CD34(+) cells. Together, these
findings indicate that belinostat and bortezomib interact synergistically in both
cultured and primary AML and ALL cells, and raise the possibilities that
up-regulation of Bim and interference with NF-<U+03BA>B pathways contribute to this
phenomenon. They also suggest that combined belinostat/bortezomib regimens
warrant further attention in acute leukaemias.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3358826
PMID: 21375523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2011 Jul;55(7):999-1009. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201000547. Epub
2011 Mar 4.

Differential effects of sulforaphane on histone deacetylases, cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis in normal prostate cells versus hyperplastic and cancerous prostate
cells.

Clarke JD(1), Hsu A, Yu Z, Dashwood RH, Ho E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR
97331, USA.

SCOPE: Sulforaphane (SFN) is an isothiocyanate derived from cruciferous
vegetables such as broccoli. The ability of SFN to inhibit histone deacetylase
(HDAC) enzymes may be one mechanism by which it acts as a chemoprevention agent. 
The ability of a chemopreventive agent to specifically cause cytotoxicity in
cancer and not normal cells is an important factor in determining its safety and 
clinical relevance.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We characterized the effects of SFN in normal (PrEC), benign
hyperplasia (BPH1) and cancerous (LnCap and PC3) prostate epithelial cells. We
observed that 15<U+2009>µM SFN selectively induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
BPH1, LnCap and PC3 cells but not PrEC cells. SFN treatment also selectively
decreased HDAC activity, and Class I and II HDAC proteins, increased acetylated
histone H3 at the promoter for P21, induced p21 expression and increased tubulin 
acetylation in prostate cancer cells. HDAC6 over-expression was able to reverse
SFN-induced cyotoxicity. In PrEC cells, SFN caused only a transient reduction in 
HDAC activity with no change in any other endpoints tested. The differences in
sensitivity to SFN in PrEC and PC3 are likely not due to differences in SFN
metabolism or differences in phase 2 enzyme induction.
CONCLUSION: SFN exerts differential effects on cell proliferation, HDAC activity 
and downstream targets in normal and cancer cells.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3129466
PMID: 21374800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cell Death Dis. 2011 Jan 27;2:e117. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2010.96.

C6-ceramide synergistically potentiates the anti-tumor effects of histone
deacetylase inhibitors via AKT dephosphorylation and a-tubulin hyperacetylation
both in vitro and in vivo.

Zhu QY(1), Wang Z, Ji C, Cheng L, Yang YL, Ren J, Jin YH, Wang QJ, Gu XJ, Bi ZG, 
Hu G, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, PR China.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) have shown promising anti-tumor effects
for a variety of malignancies, however, many tumors are reportedly resistant to
them. In this study, we made a novel discovery that co-administration of HDACIs
(Trichostatin A (TSA) and others) and exogenous cell-permeable short-chain
ceramide (C6) results in striking increase in cancer cell death and apoptosis in 
multiple cancer cells. These events are associated with perturbations in diverse 
cell signaling pathways, including inactivation of Akt/mTOR and increase in
a-tubulin acetylation (both in vivo and in vitro). TSA interacts in a highly
synergistic manner with C6-ceramide to disrupt HDAC6/protein phosphatase 1
(PP1)/tubulin complex, to induce a-tubulin hyperacetylation, and to release and
activate PP1, which then leads to AKT dephosphorylation and eventually causes
cancer cell death. Interestingly, TSA itself results in short-term ceramide
accumulation, which as a result of metabolic (glycosylation) removal, does not
result in evident increase of cancer cell death. However, adding C6-ceramide led 
to a very pronounced increase in ceramide level and marked increase in cell
death. Importantly, the effective synergistic anti-tumor activity of TSA plus
C6-ceramide is also seen in in vivo mice xenograft pancreatic and ovarian cancer 
models, indicating that this regimen (HDACI plus C6-ceramide) may represent a
more effective form of therapy against pancreatic and ovarian carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3077291
PMID: 21368888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Protein Cell. 2011 Feb;2(2):150-60. doi: 10.1007/s13238-011-1015-4. Epub 2011 Feb
25.

Microtubule-associated deacetylase HDAC6 promotes angiogenesis by regulating cell
migration in an EB1-dependent manner.

Li D(1), Xie S, Ren Y, Huo L, Gao J, Cui D, Liu M, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Protein
Science, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Angiogenesis, a process by which the preexisting blood vasculature gives rise to 
new capillary vessels, is associated with a variety of physiologic and pathologic
conditions. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this important process
remains poorly understood. Here we show that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a
microtubule-associated enzyme critical for cell motility, contributes to
angiogenesis by regulating the polarization and migration of vascular endothelial
cells. Inhibition of HDAC6 activity impairs the formation of new blood vessels in
chick embryos and in angioreactors implanted in mice. The requirement for HDAC6
in angiogenesis is corroborated in vitro by analysis of endothelial tube
formation and capillary sprouting. Our data further show that HDAC6 stimulates
membrane ruffling at the leading edge to promote cell polarization. In addition, 
microtubule end binding protein 1 (EB1) is important for HDAC6 to exert its
activity towards the migration of endothelial cells and generation of
capillary-like structures. These results thus identify HDAC6 as a novel player in
the angiogenic process and offer novel insights into the molecular mechanism
governing endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis.

PMID: 21359602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 16;6(2):e17138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017138.

Inhibition of histone deacetylases 1 and 6 enhances cytarabine-induced apoptosis 
in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Xu X(1), Xie C, Edwards H, Zhou H, Buck SA, Ge Y.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains a challenging disease 
to treat even with intensified cytarabine-based chemotherapy. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) have been reported to be promising therapeutic targets for
treating AML. However, HDAC family members that are involved in chemotherapy
sensitivities remain unknown. In this study, we sought to identify members of the
HDAC family that are involved in cytarabine sensitivities, and to select the
optimal HDACI that is most efficacious when combined with cytarabine for treating
children with AML.
METHODOLOGY: Expression profiles of classes I, II, and IV HDACs in 4 pediatric
AML cell lines were determined by Western blotting. Inhibition of class I HDACs
by different HDACIs was measured post immnunoprecipitation. Individual
down-regulation of HDACs in pediatric AML cells was performed with lentiviral
shRNA. The effects of cytarabine and HDACIs on apoptosis were determined by flow 
cytometry analysis.
RESULTS: Treatments with structurally diverse HDACIs and HDAC shRNA knockdown
experiments revealed that down-regulation of both HDACs 1 and 6 is critical in
enhancing cytarabine-induced apoptosis in pediatric AML, at least partly mediated
by Bim. However, down-regulation of HDAC2 may negatively impact cytarabine
sensitivities in the disease. At clinically achievable concentrations, HDACIs
that simultaneously inhibited both HDACs 1 and 6 showed the best anti-leukemic
activities and significantly enhanced cytarabine-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Our results further confirm that HDACs are bona fide therapeutic
targets for treating pediatric AML and suggest that pan-HDACIs may be more
beneficial than isoform-specific drugs.

PMCID: PMC3040224
PMID: 21359182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Mol Neurosci. 2011 Sep;45(1):32-41. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9502-x. Epub 2011
Feb 22.

Proteasome inhibition drives HDAC6-dependent recruitment of tau to aggresomes.

Guthrie CR(1), Kraemer BC.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatrics Research Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA 98108, USA.

Lesions containing aggregated and hyperphosphorylated tau protein are
characteristic of neurodegenerative tauopathies. We have developed a cellular
model of pathological tau deposition and clearance by overexpressing wild type
human tau in HEK293 cells. When proteasome activity is inhibited, HEK293/tau
cells accumulate tau protein in structures that bear many of the hallmarks of
aggresomes. These include recruitment of tau into large spherical inclusions,
accumulation of the retrograde motor protein dynein at the centrosome, formation 
of an intermediate filament cage around inclusions, and clustering of
mitochondria at the aggresome. Tau aggresomes form rapidly and can be cleared
upon relief of proteasome inhibition. We observe recruitment of pathological
misfolded phospho-tau species to aggresomes. Immunoblotting reveals accumulation 
of detergent insoluble aggregated tau species. Knockdown of histone deacetylase
6, a protein known to interact with tau, reveals a requirement for HDAC6 activity
in tau aggresome formation. Direct observation of the accumulation and clearance 
of abnormal tau species will allow us to dissect the cellular and molecular
mechanisms at work in clearing aggresomal tau and its similarity to disease
relevant pathological tau clearance mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3145040
PMID: 21340680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Jul;32(7):964-72. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr029. Epub 2011 Feb 
11.

Activation of autophagy in mesenchymal stem cells provides tumor stromal support.

Sanchez CG(1), Penfornis P, Oskowitz AZ, Boonjindasup AG, Cai DZ, Dhule SS, Rowan
BG, Kelekar A, Krause DS, Pochampally RR.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Center, Tulane University Health Science Center, 1430 Tulane
avenue, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Recent studies have implicated multipotential mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as an
aid to breast cancer cell proliferation and metastasis, partly as a result of the
MSCs secretome. As the tumor gets beyond 2 mm in diameter, the stromal cells
could undergo starvation due to the lack of sufficient nutrients in solid tumor
microenvironment. In this study, we investigated the survival mechanisms used by 
stressed stromal cells in breast cancers. We used serum-deprived mesenchymal stem
cells (SD-MSCs) and MCF-7 breast cancer cells as model system with a hypothesis
that stromal cells in the nutrient-deprived core utilize survival mechanisms for 
supporting surrounding cells. We tested this hypothesis using in vivo tumor
xenografts in immunodeficient mice, which indicated that SD-MSCs supported MCF-7 
tumor growth by protection from apoptosis. Histochemical assays showed that
SD-MSCs-injected tumors exhibited higher cellularity, decreased apoptosis and
decreased differentiation. Beclin-1 staining indicated autophagic areas
surrounded by actively proliferating cells. Furthermore, in vitro studies
demonstrate that SD-MSCs survive using autophagy and secrete paracrine factors
that support tumor cells following nutrient/serum deprivation. Western blot and
immunocytochemistry analysis of SD-MSCs demonstrated upregulation and perinuclear
relocation of autophagy key regulators such as beclin-1, ATG10, ATG12, MAP-LC3
and lysosomes. Electron microscopic analysis detected a time-dependent increase
in autophagosome formation and HDAC6 activity assays indicated the upregulation
of autophagy. Taken together, these data suggest that under nutrient-deprived
conditions that can occur in solid tumors, stromal cells utilize autophagy for
survival and also secrete anti-apoptotic factors that can facilitate solid tumor 
survival and growth.

PMCID: PMC3128555
PMID: 21317300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neuropathology. 2011 Dec;31(6):561-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2011.01200.x. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Accumulation of histone deacetylase 6, an aggresome-related protein, is specific 
to Lewy bodies and glial cytoplasmic inclusions.

Miki Y(1), Mori F, Tanji K, Kakita A, Takahashi H, Wakabayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Brain Science, Hirosaki University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan. yasuomiki@hotmail.com

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) plays a crucial role in aggresome formation,
resulting in the clearance of misfolded proteins. Previous studies have shown
that HDAC6 is concentrated in Lewy bodies (LBs) in Parkinson's disease (PD) and
dementia with LBs (DLB) (Cell 115: 727-738, 2003). We performed
immunohistochemical and ultrastructural investigations on the brains of patients 
with various neurodegenerative disorders. Anti-HDAC6 antibody faintly
immunostained the cytoplasm of neuronal and glial cells in control subjects. In
PD and DLB, almost all of the cortical, brainstem-type and peripheral LBs were
intensely immunolabeled with anti-HDAC6. In multiple system atrophy (MSA), the
vast majority of glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) were also positive for
HDAC6. Immunoelectron microscopy revealed that the reaction product was localized
to the filamentous structures in LBs and GCIs. Various neuronal and glial
inclusions in neurodegenerative disorders other than LB disease and MSA were
HDAC6-negative. These findings suggest that accumulation of HDAC6 is specific to 
a-synucleinopathy and that both LBs and GCIs may represent cytoprotective
responses to sequester toxic proteins.

© 2011 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 21284752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Immunol. 2011 Mar 1;186(5):2710-3. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003322. Epub 2011 Jan
28.

Cutting edge: tubulin a functions as an adaptor in NFAT-importin ß interaction.

Ishiguro K(1), Ando T, Maeda O, Watanabe O, Goto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pathogenesis of Gastroenterology, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Upon T cell stimulation, NFAT is dephosphorylated by calcineurin, leading to
nuclear translocation via NFAT-importin ß interaction. Whereas the process of
NFAT dephosphorylation has been well researched, the molecular mechanism of
NFAT-importin ß interaction remains unknown. In contrast to NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT, no
importin a family members have been reported as adaptor proteins for NFAT. Our
study shows that tubulin a, but not tubulin ß, binds to the N-terminal region of 
NFAT containing the regulatory and Rel homology domains. Importin ß interacts
with the NFAT-tubulin a complex rather than NFAT or tubulin a alone, resulting in
cotranslocation of NFAT and tubulin a into the nucleus. Furthermore, the
interaction is suppressed by acetate-induced tubulin a acetylation at lysine 40. 
In conclusion, tubulin a functions as an adaptor in NFAT-importin ß interaction, 
and this function is regulated by acetate-induced acetylation.

PMID: 21278340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Sci Signal. 2011 Jan 25;4(157):ra4. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2001225.

Genome-wide RNAi screen reveals disease-associated genes that are common to
Hedgehog and Wnt signaling.

Jacob LS(1), Wu X, Dodge ME, Fan CW, Kulak O, Chen B, Tang W, Wang B, Amatruda
JF, Lum L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) and Wnt signal transduction pathways are master regulators of
embryogenesis and tissue renewal and represent anticancer therapeutic targets.
Using genome-wide RNA interference screening in murine cultured cells, we
established previously unknown associations between these signaling pathways and 
genes linked to developmental malformations, diseases of premature tissue
degeneration, and cancer. We identified functions in both pathways for the
multitasking kinase Stk11 (also known as Lkb1), a tumor suppressor implicated in 
lung and cervical cancers. We found that Stk11 loss resulted in disassembly of
the primary cilium, a cellular organizing center for Hh pathway components, thus 
dampening Hh signaling. Loss of Stk11 also induced aberrant signaling through the
Wnt pathway. Chemicals that targeted the Wnt acyltransferase Porcupine or that
restored primary cilia length by inhibiting the tubulin deacetylase HDAC6
(histone deacetylase 6) countered deviant pathway activities driven by Stk11
loss. Our study demonstrates that Stk11 is a critical mediator in both the Hh and
the Wnt pathways, and our approach provides a platform to support the development
of targeted therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3790583
PMID: 21266715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Biotechnol. 2011 Mar;29(3):255-65. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1759. Epub 2011 Jan 23.

Chemoproteomics profiling of HDAC inhibitors reveals selective targeting of HDAC 
complexes.

Bantscheff M(1), Hopf C, Savitski MM, Dittmann A, Grandi P, Michon AM, Schlegl J,
Abraham Y, Becher I, Bergamini G, Boesche M, Delling M, Dümpelfeld B, Eberhard D,
Huthmacher C, Mathieson T, Poeckel D, Reader V, Strunk K, Sweetman G, Kruse U,
Neubauer G, Ramsden NG, Drewes G.

Author information: 
(1)Cellzome AG, Heidelberg, Germany. marcus.bantscheff@cellzome.com

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2011 Mar;29(3):235-6.

The development of selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors with
anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory properties remains challenging in large part
owing to the difficulty of probing the interaction of small molecules with
megadalton protein complexes. A combination of affinity capture and quantitative 
mass spectrometry revealed the selectivity with which 16 HDAC inhibitors target
multiple HDAC complexes scaffolded by ELM-SANT domain subunits, including a novel
mitotic deacetylase complex (MiDAC). Inhibitors clustered according to their
target profiles with stronger binding of aminobenzamides to the HDAC NCoR complex
than to the HDAC Sin3 complex. We identified several non-HDAC targets for
hydroxamate inhibitors. HDAC inhibitors with distinct profiles have
correspondingly different effects on downstream targets. We also identified the
anti-inflammatory drug bufexamac as a class IIb (HDAC6, HDAC10) HDAC inhibitor.
Our approach enables the discovery of novel targets and inhibitors and suggests
that the selectivity of HDAC inhibitors should be evaluated in the context of
HDAC complexes and not purified catalytic subunits.

PMID: 21258344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Neurochem. 2011 Apr;117(1):112-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07180.x. Epub 
2011 Feb 9.

HDAC6 regulates aggresome-autophagy degradation pathway of a-synuclein in
response to MPP+-induced stress.

Su M(1), Shi JJ, Yang YP, Li J, Zhang YL, Chen J, Hu LF, Liu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, China.

Increasing evidence suggests that the ubiquitin-binding histone deacetylase-6
(HDAC6) plays an important role in the clearance of misfolded proteins by
autophagy. In this study, we treated PC-12 cells over-expressing human mutant
(A53T) a-synuclein (a-syn) and SH-SY5Y cells with MPP(+). It was found that HDAC6
expression significantly increased and mainly colocalized with a-syn in the
perinuclear region to form aggresome-like bodies. HDAC6 deficiency blocked the
formation of aggresome-like bodies and interfered with the autophagy in response 
to MPP(+)-induced stress. Moreover, misfolded a-syn accumulated into the nuclei, 
resulting in its reduced clearance, and finally, the number of apoptotic cells
significantly increased. Taken together, HDAC6 participated in the degradation of
MPP(+)-induced misfolded a-syn aggregates by regulating the aggresome-autophagy
pathway. Understanding the mechanism may disclose potential therapeutic targets
for synucleinopathies such as Parkinson's disease.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21235576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 18;286(11):9748-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.198325. Epub 2011
Jan 13.

Efficient induction of nuclear aggresomes by specific single missense mutations
in the DNA-binding domain of a viral AP-1 homolog.

Park R(1), Wang'ondu R, Heston L, Shedd D, Miller G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Nuclear aggresomes induced by proteins containing an expanded polyglutamine
(polyQ) tract are pathologic hallmarks of certain neurodegenerative diseases.
Some GFP fusion proteins lacking a polyQ tract may also induce nuclear aggresomes
in cultured cells. Here we identify single missense mutations within the basic
DNA recognition region of Bam HI Z E B virus replication activator (ZEBRA), an
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded basic zipper protein without a polyQ tract, that
efficiently induced the formation of nuclear aggresomes. Wild-type (WT) ZEBRA was
diffusely distributed within the nucleus. Four non-DNA-binding mutants, Z(R179E),
Z(R183E), Z(R190E), and Z(K178D) localized to the periphery of large intranuclear
spheres, to discrete nuclear aggregates, and to the cytoplasm. Other
non-DNA-binding mutants, Z(N182K), Z(N182E), and Z(S186E), did not exhibit this
phenotype. The interior of the spheres contained promyelocytic leukemia and HSP70
proteins. ZEBRA mutants directly induced the nuclear aggresome pathway in cells
with and without EBV. Specific cellular proteins (SC35 and HDAC6) and viral
proteins (WT ZEBRA, Rta, and BMLF1) but not other cellular or viral proteins were
recruited to nuclear aggresomes. Co-transfection of WT ZEBRA with
aggresome-inducing mutants Z(R183E) and Z(R179E) inhibited late lytic viral
protein expression and lytic viral DNA amplification. This is the first reported 
instance in which nuclear aggresomes are induced by single missense mutations in 
a viral or cellular protein. We discuss conformational changes in the mutant
viral AP-1 proteins that may lead to formation of nuclear aggresomes.

PMCID: PMC3059024
PMID: 21233201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 18;286(11):9280-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.208884. Epub 2011 
Jan 10.

Regulation of Tat acetylation and transactivation activity by the
microtubule-associated deacetylase HDAC6.

Huo L(1), Li D, Sun X, Shi X, Karna P, Yang W, Liu M, Qiao W, Aneja R, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Molecular
Microbiology and Biotechnology of the Ministry of Education, College of Life
Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Reversible acetylation of Tat is critical for its transactivation activity toward
HIV-1 transcription. However, the enzymes involved in the
acetylation/deacetylation cycles have not been fully characterized. In this
study, by yeast two-hybrid assay, we have discovered the histone deacetylase
HDAC6 to be a binding partner of Tat. Our data show that HDAC6 interacts with Tat
in the cytoplasm in a microtubule-dependent manner. In addition, HDAC6
deacetylates Tat at Lys-28 and thereby suppresses Tat-mediated transactivation of
the HIV-1 promoter. Inactivation of HDAC6 promotes the interaction of Tat with
cyclin T1 and leads to an increase in Tat transactivation activity. These
findings establish HDAC6 as a Tat deacetylase and support a model in which Lys-28
deacetylation decreases Tat transactivation activity through affecting the
ability of Tat to form a ribonucleoprotein complex with cyclin T1 and the
transactivation-responsive RNA.

PMCID: PMC3059013
PMID: 21220424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2011 Feb;12(1):68-73.

MIIP, a cytoskeleton regulator that blocks cell migration and invasion, delays
mitosis, and suppresses tumorogenesis.

Wang Y(1), Wen J, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The migration and invasion inhibitory protein (MIIP) was initially discovered in 
a yeast two-hybrid screen for proteins that interact and inhibit the migration
and invasion-promoting protein insulin-like growth factor binding protein 2
(IGFBP2). Recent studies have shown that MIIP not only modulates IGFBP2 but also 
regulates microtubule by binding to and inhibiting HDAC6, a class 2 histone
deacetylase that deacetylates a-tubulin, heat-shock protein 90 (HSP90), and
cortactin. In addition, MIIP also regulates the mitosis checkpoint, another
microtubule-associated process. The location of the MIIP gene in chromosomal
region 1p36, a commonly deleted region in a broad spectrum of human cancers, and 
the observation that MIIP attenuates tumorigenesis in a mouse model suggest that 
it functions as a tumor-suppressor gene. This review summarizes the recent
progress in characterizing this novel protein, which regulates cell migration and
mitosis, two processes that rely on the highly coordinated dynamics of the
microtubule and cytoskeleton systems.

PMID: 21190522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Nov;130(2):365-75. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1310-4. 
Epub 2010 Dec 24.

CG0006, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, induces breast cancer cell death
via histone-acetylation and chaperone-disrupting pathways independent of ER
status.

Kim HM(1), Kim CS, Lee JH, Jang SJ, Hwang JJ, Ro S, Hyun YL, Choi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 388-1
Pungnap-2 dong, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

We previously reported that CG0006, a novel hydroxamate-based pan-histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACI), suppresses the growth of human cancer cells. Here,
we tested the ability of CG0006 to inhibit breast cancer cell proliferation in
relation to estrogen receptor (ER) status, and examined changes in the expression
of cell-cycle regulatory proteins. CG0006 effects on the proliferation of
multiple human cancer cell lines were tested using MTT and MTS assays. Changes in
estrogen-signaling proteins and cell-cycle regulatory proteins were examined by
western blotting and quantitative RT-PCR, and cell-cycle effects were tested
using flow cytometry. CG0006 increased histone H3 and H4 acetylation,
up-regulated p21 protein, and promoted cell-cycle arrest, inducing G(2)/M-phase
accumulation in ER-positive MCF7 cells, and G(1)- and G(2)/M-phase accumulation
in ER-negative MDA-MB-231 cells. In both cell types, CG0006 treatment (1 µM)
reduced the levels of the estrogen-signaling proteins ERa and cyclin D1, and
promoted massive degradation of cell-cycle regulatory proteins. CG0006
down-regulated the histone deacetylase HDAC6 at the protein level in association 
with a subsequent increase in Hsp90 and a-tubulin acetylation. HDAC6 depletion
using small interfering RNA produced a protein-degradation phenotype similar to
that of CG0006 treatment. These findings suggest that CG0006 inhibits breast
cancer cell growth by two different pathways: a histone acetylation-dependent
pathway, and a non-epigenetic pathway that disrupts chaperone function.

PMID: 21184271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS Genet. 2010 Dec 9;6(12):e1001240. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001240.

Histone deacetylases suppress CGG repeat-induced neurodegeneration via
transcriptional silencing in models of fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome.

Todd PK(1), Oh SY, Krans A, Pandey UB, Di Prospero NA, Min KT, Taylor JP, Paulson
HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United
States of America. petertod@umich.edu

Fragile X Tremor Ataxia Syndrome (FXTAS) is a common inherited neurodegenerative 
disorder caused by expansion of a CGG trinucleotide repeat in the 5'UTR of the
fragile X syndrome (FXS) gene, FMR1. The expanded CGG repeat is thought to induce
toxicity as RNA, and in FXTAS patients mRNA levels for FMR1 are markedly
increased. Despite the critical role of FMR1 mRNA in disease pathogenesis, the
basis for the increase in FMR1 mRNA expression is unknown. Here we show that
overexpressing any of three histone deacetylases (HDACs 3, 6, or 11) suppresses
CGG repeat-induced neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model of FXTAS. This
suppression results from selective transcriptional repression of the CGG
repeat-containing transgene. These findings led us to evaluate the acetylation
state of histones at the human FMR1 locus. In patient-derived lymphoblasts and
fibroblasts, we determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation that there is
increased acetylation of histones at the FMR1 locus in pre-mutation carriers
compared to control or FXS derived cell lines. These epigenetic changes correlate
with elevated FMR1 mRNA expression in pre-mutation cell lines. Consistent with
this finding, histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitors repress FMR1 mRNA
expression to control levels in pre-mutation carrier cell lines and extend
lifespan in CGG repeat-expressing Drosophila. These findings support a disease
model whereby the CGG repeat expansion in FXTAS promotes chromatin remodeling in 
cis, which in turn increases expression of the toxic FMR1 mRNA. Moreover, these
results provide proof of principle that HAT inhibitors or HDAC activators might
be used to selectively repress transcription at the FMR1 locus.

PMCID: PMC3000359
PMID: 21170301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 2;30(3):510-23. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.333. Epub 2010 Dec 14.

Acetylation and phosphorylation of SRSF2 control cell fate decision in response
to cisplatin.

Edmond V(1), Moysan E, Khochbin S, Matthias P, Brambilla C, Brambilla E, Gazzeri 
S, Eymin B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U823, Equipe 2 Bases Moléculaires de la Progression des Cancers du
Poumon, Institut Albert Bonniot, Grenoble, France.

SRSF2 is a serine/arginine-rich protein belonging to the family of SR proteins
that are crucial regulators of constitutive and alternative pre-mRNA splicing.
Although it is well known that phosphorylation inside RS domain controls activity
of SR proteins, other post-translational modifications regulating SRSF2 functions
have not been described to date. In this study, we provide the first evidence
that the acetyltransferase Tip60 acetylates SRSF2 on its lysine 52 residue inside
the RNA recognition motif, and promotes its proteasomal degradation. We also
demonstrate that the deacetylase HDAC6 counters this acetylation and acts as a
positive regulator of SRSF2 protein level. In addition, we show that Tip60
downregulates SRSF2 phosphorylation by inhibiting the nuclear translocation of
both SRPK1 and SRPK2 kinases. Finally, we demonstrate that this
acetylation/phosphorylation signalling network controls SRSF2 accumulation as
well as caspase-8 pre-mRNA splicing in response to cisplatin and determines
whether cells undergo apoptosis or G(2)/M cell cycle arrest. Taken together,
these results unravel lysine acetylation as a crucial post-translational
modification regulating SRSF2 protein level and activity in response to genotoxic
stress.

PMCID: PMC3034009
PMID: 21157427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Feb 15;20(4):763-78. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq521. Epub 2010 Nov
30.

Strategies for diminishing katanin-based loss of microtubules in tauopathic
neurodegenerative diseases.

Sudo H(1), Baas PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of Medicine,
2900 W. Queen Lane, Philadelphia, PA 19129, USA.

It is commonly stated that microtubules gradually disintegrate as tau becomes
dissociated from them in tauopathies such as Alzheimer's disease. However, there 
has been no compelling evidence to date that such disintegration is due to
depolymerization of microtubules from their ends. In recent studies, we have
shown that neurons contain sufficient levels of the microtubule-severing protein 
termed katanin to completely break down the axonal microtubule array if not
somehow attenuated. The presence of tau on axonal microtubules renders them
notably less sensitive to katanin, prompting us to posit that microtubule
disintegration in tauopathies may result from elevated severing of the
microtubules as they lose tau. In support of this hypothesis, we demonstrate here
that pathogenic tau mutants that bind less strongly to microtubules than
wild-type tau provide correspondingly less protection against katanin-based
severing. Using cultured rat hippocampal neurons, we pursued two potential
therapies for fortifying axonal microtubules against excess severing by katanin, 
under conditions of tau depletion. We found that either deacetylating the
microtubules via overexpression of HDAC6 or treating the neurons with NAP, a
microtubule-interacting neuroprotective peptide, resulted in notable protection
of the microtubules against katanin-based loss. In both cases, we found that
these treatments also diminished the characteristic increase in axonal branching 
that normally accompanies tau depletion, an effect that is also known to be
directly related to the severing of microtubules. These observations may be
useful in developing therapeutic regimes for preserving microtubules against loss
in the axons of patients suffering from tauopathies.

PMCID: PMC3024046
PMID: 21118899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Dec;38(6):1608-14. doi: 10.1042/BST0381608.

Analysis of post-transcriptional regulation using the FunREG method.

Laloo B(1), Maurel M, Jalvy-Delvaille S, Sagliocco F, Grosset CF.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U889, Groupe de Recherche pour l'Etude du Foie (GREF), Université
Victor Sagalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux cedex, F-33076 France.

An increasing number of arguments, including altered microRNA expression, support
the idea that post-transcriptional deregulation participates in gene disturbances
found in diseased tissues. To evaluate this hypothesis, we developed a method
which facilitates post-transcriptional investigations in a wide range of human
cells and experimental conditions. This method, called FunREG (functional,
integrated and quantitative method to measure post-transcriptional regulation),
connects lentiviral transduction with a fluorescent reporter system and
quantitative PCR. Using FunREG, we efficiently measured post-transcriptional
regulation mediated either by selected RNA sequences or regulatory factors
(microRNAs), and then evaluated the contribution of mRNA decay and translation
efficiency in the observed regulation. We demonstrated the existence of
gene-specific post-transcriptional deregulation in liver tumour cells, and also
reported a molecular link between a transcript variant abrogating HDAC6 (histone 
deacetylase 6) regulation by miR-433 and a rare familial genetic disease. Because
FunREG is sensitive, quantitative and easy to use, many applications can be
envisioned in fundamental and pathophysiological research.

PMID: 21118135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Genes Cancer. 2010 Jul 1;1(7):779-786.

The role of ubiquitin in autophagy-dependent protein aggregate processing.

Yao TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

The efficient management of misfolded protein aggregates is essential for cell
viability and requires three interconnected pathways: the molecular chaperone
machinery that assists protein folding, the proteasome pathway that degrades
misfolded proteins, and the aggresomal pathway that sequesters and delivers toxic
proteins aggregates to autophagy for clearance. Although autophagy is generally
considered as non-selective degradative machinery, growing evidence supports the 
existence of a selective autophagy that specifically targets protein aggregates
for clearance. This so-called "quality control autophagy" is established by
specific ubiquitin E3 ligases, autophagic substrate ubiquitination, and specific 
ubiquitin binding proteins p62 and HDAC6. In this context, quality control
autophagy is similar to the proteasome system and utilizes ubiquitin tags for
substrate recognition and processing. Here I will discuss the recent progress
towards understanding the molecular basis of this unique form of
ubiquitin-dependent autophagy in protein aggregate clearance and its relevance to
disease.

PMCID: PMC2991150
PMID: 21113398  [PubMed]


43. Int J Oncol. 2011 Jan;38(1):105-12.

Hsp90 inhibition increases p53 expression and destabilizes MYCN and MYC in
neuroblastoma.

Regan PL(1), Jacobs J, Wang G, Torres J, Edo R, Friedmann J, Tang XX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Neuroblastoma is a childhood cancer that exhibits either a favorable or an
unfavorable phenotype. MYCN and MYC are oncoproteins that play crucial roles in
determining the malignancy of unfavorable neuroblastoma. The Hsp90 superchaperone
complex assists in the folding and function of a variety of oncogenic client
proteins. Inhibition of Hsp90 by small molecule inhibitors leads to the
destabilization of these oncogenic proteins and consequently suppresses tumor
malignancy. Nonetheless, little is known about the effect of Hsp90 inhibition on 
the stability of MYCN and MYC proteins. In this study, we investigated the effect
of Hsp90 inhibition on the phenotype of unfavorable neuroblastoma cells including
its effect on MYCN and MYC expression. Two MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cell
lines (IMR5 and CHP134) and two non-MYCN-amplified cell lines (SY5Y and SKNAS)
were used to address the effect of Hsp90 inhibition on the malignant phenotype of
neuroblastoma. It was found that Hsp90 inhibition in neuroblastoma cell lines
resulted in significant growth suppression, a decrease in MYCN and MYC
expression, and an increase in the expression of p53. In the TP53-mutated SKNAS
cell line, Hsp90 inhibition enhanced the expression of the favorable
neuroblastoma genes EFNB2, MIZ-1 and NTRK1 (TrkA). In addition, Hsp90 inhibition 
reduced HDAC6 expression and enhanced tubulin acetylation. Together our data
suggest that Hsp90 inhibition suppresses the growth of neuroblastoma through
multiple cellular pathways and that MYC/MYCN destabilization is among the
important consequences of Hsp90 inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3212671
PMID: 21109931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. FEBS Lett. 2011 Jan 3;585(1):128-32. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.11.023. Epub
2010 Nov 19.

Enhanced acetylation of alpha-tubulin in influenza A virus infected epithelial
cells.

Husain M(1), Harrod KS.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute,
Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA. mhusain@lrri.org

Acetylated microtubules (AcMTs), a post-translationally modified form of
microtubules, promote polarized protein transport. Here we report that influenza 
A virus (IAV) induces the acetylation of microtubules in epithelial cells. By
employing specific inhibitors and siRNA we demonstrate Rho GTPase-mediated
downregulation of tubulin deacetylase activity in IAV-infected cells, resulting
in increased tubulin acetylation. Further, we demonstrate that
depolymerization/deacetylation or enhanced acetylation of microtubules decreased 
or increased, respectively, the release of virions from infected cells. IAV
assembly requires the polarized delivery of viral components to apical plasma
membrane. Our findings suggest the potential involvement of AcMTs in polarized
trafficking of IAV components.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21094644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Biochemistry. 2010 Dec 21;49(50):10737-46. doi: 10.1021/bi101014s. Epub 2010 Nov 
29.

HDAC6 and Ubp-M BUZ domains recognize specific C-terminal sequences of proteins.

Hard RL(1), Liu J, Shen J, Zhou P, Pei D.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program and Department of Chemistry, The Ohio State
University, 100 West 18th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210, United States.

The BUZ/Znf-UBP domain is a protein module found in the cytoplasmic deacetylase
HDAC6, E3 ubiquitin ligase BRAP2/IMP, and a subfamily of ubiquitin-specific
proteases. Although several BUZ domains have been shown to bind ubiquitin with
high affinity by recognizing its C-terminal sequence (RLRGG-COOH), it is
currently unknown whether the interaction is sequence-specific or whether the BUZ
domains are capable of binding to proteins other than ubiquitin. In this work,
the BUZ domains of HDAC6 and Ubp-M were subjected to screening against a
one-bead-one-compound (OBOC) peptide library that exhibited random peptide
sequences with free C-termini. Sequence analysis of the selected binding peptides
as well as alanine scanning studies revealed that the BUZ domains require a
C-terminal Gly-Gly motif for binding. At the more N-terminal positions, the two
BUZ domains have distinct sequence specificities, allowing them to bind to
different peptides and/or proteins. A database search of the human proteome on
the basis of the BUZ domain specificities identified 11 and 24 potential partner 
proteins for Ubp-M and HDAC6 BUZ domains, respectively. Peptides corresponding to
the C-terminal sequences of four of the predicted binding partners (FBXO11,
histone H4, PTOV1, and FAT10) were synthesized and tested for binding to the BUZ 
domains by fluorescence polarization. All four peptides bound to the HDAC6 BUZ
domain with low micromolar K(D) values and less tightly to the Ubp-M BUZ domain. 
Finally, in vitro pull-down assays showed that the Ubp-M BUZ domain was capable
of binding to the histone H3-histone H4 tetramer protein complex. Our results
suggest that BUZ domains are sequence-specific protein-binding modules, with each
BUZ domain potentially binding to a different subset of proteins.

PMCID: PMC3005221
PMID: 21090589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Feb;348(1-2):165-71. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0651-y. Epub 
2010 Nov 17.

Carbamazepine promotes Her-2 protein degradation in breast cancer cells by
modulating HDAC6 activity and acetylation of Hsp90.

Meng Q(1), Chen X, Sun L, Zhao C, Sui G, Cai L.

Author information: 
(1)The Breast Department of the Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, People's Republic of China.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibition, recently, has been shown to promote the
acetylation of heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and disrupt its chaperone function. 
Her-2 oncoprotein is identified as a client protein of Hsp90. Therefore, in this 
study we examined the effect of carbamazepine, which could inhibit HDAC on Hsp90 
acetylation and Her-2 stability. The results of this study demonstrate that while
carbamazepine had no effect on the Her-2 mRNA level, it induced Her-2 protein
degradation via the proteasome pathway by disrupting the chaperone function of
Hsp90 in SK-BR-3 cells. Mechanistically, carbamazepine could enhance the
acetylation of a-tubulin, indicating its inhibitory effect on HDAC6.
Functionally, carbamazepine could synergize with trastuzumab or geldanamycin to
promote Her-2 degradation and inhibit breast cancer cell proliferation. Thus,
this study has potential clinical implications by providing a promising strategy 
to overcome the development of resistance against trastuzumab therapy for breast 
cancer.

PMID: 21082217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:875824. doi: 10.1155/2011/875824. Epub 2010 Nov 7.

The role of HDAC6 in cancer.

Aldana-Masangkay GI(1), Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a member of the HDAC family whose major substrate 
is a-tubulin, has become a target for drug development to treat cancer due to its
major contribution in oncogenic cell transformation. Overexpression of HDAC6
correlates with tumorigenesis and improved survival; therefore, HDAC6 may be used
as a marker for prognosis. Previous work demonstrated that in multiple myeloma
cells, inhibition of HDAC6 results in apoptosis. Furthermore, HDAC6 is required
for the activation of heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), an activator of heat-shock
protein encoding genes (HSPs) and CYLD, a cylindromatosis tumor suppressor gene. 
HDAC6 contributes to cancer metastasis since its upregulation increases cell
motility in breast cancer MCF-7 cells and its interaction with cortactin
regulates motility. HDAC6 also affects transcription and translation by
regulating the heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and stress granules (SGs),
respectively. This review will discuss the role of HDAC6 in the pathogenesis and 
treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC2975074
PMID: 21076528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Jan 30;332(1-2):196-212. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2010.10.012. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

Recruitment of the oncoprotein v-ErbA to aggresomes.

Bondzi C(1), Brunner AM, Munyikwa MR, Connor CD, Simmons AN, Stephens SL, Belt
PA, Roggero VR, Mavinakere MS, Hinton SD, Allison LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Hampton University, Hampton, VA 23668,
United States.

Aggresome formation, a cellular response to misfolded protein aggregates, is
linked to cancer and neurodegenerative disorders. Previously we showed that
Gag-v-ErbA (v-ErbA), a retroviral variant of the thyroid hormone receptor (TRa1),
accumulates in and sequesters TRa1 into cytoplasmic foci. Here, we show that foci
represent v-ErbA targeting to aggresomes. v-ErbA colocalizes with aggresomal
markers, proteasomes, hsp70, HDAC6, and mitochondria. Foci have hallmark
characteristics of aggresomes: formation is microtubule-dependent, accelerated by
proteasome inhibitors, and they disrupt intermediate filaments.
Proteasome-mediated degradation is critical for clearance of v-ErbA and
T(3)-dependent TRa1 clearance. Our studies highlight v-ErbA's complex mode of
action: the oncoprotein is highly mobile and trafficks between the nucleus,
cytoplasm, and aggresome, carrying out distinct activities within each
compartment. Dynamic trafficking to aggresomes contributes to the dominant
negative activity of v-ErbA and may be enhanced by the viral Gag sequence. These 
studies provide insight into novel modes of oncogenesis across multiple cellular 
compartments.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4634111
PMID: 21075170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Med Chem. 2010 Dec 9;53(23):8387-99. doi: 10.1021/jm101092u. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

Non-natural macrocyclic inhibitors of histone deacetylases: design, synthesis,
and activity.

Auzzas L(1), Larsson A, Matera R, Baraldi A, Deschênes-Simard B, Giannini G,
Cabri W, Battistuzzi G, Gallo G, Ciacci A, Vesci L, Pisano C, Hanessian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, P.O. Box 6128, Station
Centre-ville, Montréal, QC, H3C 3J7 Canada.

Nonpeptidic chiral macrocycles were designed on the basis of an analogue of
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (2) (SAHA, vorinostat) and evaluated against 11
histone deacetylase (HDAC) isoforms. The identification of critical amino acid
residues highly conserved in the cap region of HDACs guided the design of the
suberoyl-based macrocycles, which were expected to bear a maximum common
substructure required to target the whole HDAC panel. A nanomolar HDAC inhibitory
profile was observed for several compounds, which was comparable, if not
superior, to that of 2. A promising cytotoxic activity was found for selected
macrocycles against lung and colon cancer cell lines. Further elaboration of
selected candidates led to compounds with an improved selectivity against HDAC6
over the other isozymes. Pair-fitting analysis was used to compare one of the
best candidates with the natural tetrapeptide apicidin, in an effort to define a 
general pharmacophore that might be useful in the design of surrogates of
peptidic macrocycles as potent and isoform-selective inhibitors.

PMID: 21073160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cancer. 2010 Nov 2;9:288. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-288.

Increasing CD44+/CD24(-) tumor stem cells, and upregulation of COX-2 and HDAC6,
as major functions of HER2 in breast tumorigenesis.

Wang KH(1), Kao AP, Chang CC, Lee JN, Hou MF, Long CY, Chen HS, Tsai EM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cells are believed to arise primarily from stem cells.
CD44+/CD24(-) have been identified as markers for human breast cancer stem cells.
Although, HER2 is a well known breast cancer oncogene, the mechanisms of action
of this gene are not completely understood. Previously, we have derived immortal 
(M13SV1), weakly tumorigenic (M13SV1R2) and highly tumorigenic (M13SV1R2N1) cell 
lines from a breast epithelial cell type with stem cell phenotypes after
successive SV40 large T-antigen transfection, X-ray irradiation and ectopic
expression of HER2/C-erbB2/neu. Recently, we found that M13SV1R2 cells became
non-tumorigenic after growing in a growth factor/hormone-deprived medium (R2d
cells).
RESULTS: In this study, we developed M13SV1R2N1 under the same growth
factor/hormone-deprived condition (R2N1d cells). This provides an opportunity to 
analyze HER2 effect on gene expression associated with tumorigenesis by
comparative study of R2d and R2N1d cells with homogeneous genetic background
except HER2 expression. The results reveal distinct characters of R2N1d cells
that can be ascribed to HER2: 1) development of fast-growing tumors; 2) high
frequency of CD44+/CD24(-) cells (~50% for R2N1d vs. ~10% for R2d); 3) enhanced
expression of COX-2, HDAC6 mediated, respectively, by MAPK and PI3K/Akt pathways,
and many genes associated with inflammation, metastasis, and angiogenesis.
Furthermore, HER2 expression can be down regulated in non-adhering R2N1d cells.
These cells showed longer latent period and lower rate of tumor development
compared with adhering cells.
CONCLUSIONS: HER2 may induce breast cancer by increasing the frequency of tumor
stem cells and upregulating the expression of COX-2 and HDAC6 that play pivotal
roles in tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC2989327
PMID: 21044318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 16;107(46):20003-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1013754107. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) induces DNA damage and
sensitizes transformed cells to anticancer agents.

Namdar M(1), Perez G, Ngo L, Marks PA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is structurally and functionally unique among the
11 human zinc-dependent histone deacetylases. Here we show that chemical
inhibition with the HDAC6-selective inhibitor tubacin significantly enhances cell
death induced by the topoisomerase II inhibitors etoposide and doxorubicin and
the pan-HDAC inhibitor SAHA (vorinostat) in transformed cells (LNCaP, MCF-7), an 
effect not observed in normal cells (human foreskin fibroblast cells). The
inactive analogue of tubacin, nil-tubacin, does not sensitize transformed cells
to these anticancer agents. Further, we show that down-regulation of HDAC6
expression by shRNA in LNCaP cells enhances cell death induced by etoposide,
doxorubicin, and SAHA. Tubacin in combination with SAHA or etoposide is more
potent than either drug alone in activating the intrinsic apoptotic pathway in
transformed cells, as evidenced by an increase in PARP cleavage and partial
inhibition of this effect by the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk. HDAC6
inhibition with tubacin induces the accumulation of <U+03B3>H2AX, an early marker of DNA
double-strand breaks. Tubacin enhances DNA damage induced by etoposide or SAHA as
indicated by increased accumulation of <U+03B3>H2AX and activation of the checkpoint
kinase Chk2. Tubacin induces the expression of DDIT3 (CHOP/GADD153), a
transcription factor up-regulated in response to cellular stress. DDIT3 induction
is further increased when tubacin is combined with SAHA. These findings point to 
mechanisms by which HDAC6-selective inhibition can enhance the efficacy of
certain anti-cancer agents in transformed cells.

PMCID: PMC2993347
PMID: 21037108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Eur J Cell Biol. 2011 Feb-Mar;90(2-3):128-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.09.004.
Epub 2010 Oct 23.

HDAC6 is required for invadopodia activity and invasion by breast tumor cells.

Rey M(1), Irondelle M, Waharte F, Lizarraga F, Chavrier P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Research Center, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Invasion across tissue boundaries by metastatic tumor cells depends on the
proteolytic degradation of the extracellular matrix, initiated by the formation
of invadopodia, actin-driven membrane protrusions with matrix-degradative
activity. Yet, mechanisms underlying invadopodia formation remain largely
unknown. In this report, we examined the role of the histone deacetylase HDAC6 in
invadopodia formation and invasion by breast cancer cells. Using small
interfering RNA silencing of protein expression in highly invasive MDA-MB-231
breast adenocarcinoma cells, we show that HDAC6 is required for two-dimensional
matrix proteolysis. In addition, we demonstrate that HDAC6 acts as a tubulin and 
cortactin deacetylase. We also report that the inhibition of HDAC6 by siRNA or
treatment with HDAC inhibitor TSA results in a decreased invasion capacity of a
three-dimensional type I collagen matrix by MDA-MB-231 cells. These data identify
HDAC6 as a critical component of the invasive apparatus of tumor cells, in both
two- and three-dimensional matrices.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20970878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Oct;1812(10):1213-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.10.008. Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Epigenetics and autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.

Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Physiology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, WI53226, USA. xxli@mcw.edu

The roles of epigenetic modulation of gene expression and protein functions in
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) have recently become the
focus of scientific investigation. Evidence generated to date indicates that one 
of the epigenetic modifiers, histone deacetylases (HDACs), are important
regulators of ADPKD. HDACs are involved in regulating the expression of the Pkd1 
gene and are the target of fluid flow-induced calcium signal in kidney epithelial
cells. Pharmacological inhibition of HDAC activity has been found to reduce the
progression of cyst formation and slow the decline of kidney function in Pkd1
conditional knockout mice and Pkd2 knockout mice, respectively, implicating the
potential clinical application of HDAC inhibitors on ADPKD. Since the expression 
of HDAC6 is upregulated in cystic epithelial cells, the potential roles of HDAC6 
in regulating cilia resorption and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
trafficking through deacetylating a-tubulin and regulating Wnt signaling through 
deacetylating ß-catenin are also discussed. This article is part of a Special
Issue entitled: Polycystic Kidney Disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3413450
PMID: 20970496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19314-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1010253107. Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Acetylation modulates prolactin receptor dimerization.

Ma L(1), Gao JS, Guan Y, Shi X, Zhang H, Ayrapetov MK, Zhang Z, Xu L, Hyun YM,
Kim M, Zhuang S, Chin YE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery and Medicine, Brown University School of Medicine-Rhode
Island Hospital, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Cytokine-activated receptors undergo extracellular domain dimerization, which is 
necessary to activate intracellular signaling pathways. Here, we report that in
prolactin (PRL)-treated cells, PRL receptor (PRLR) undergoes cytoplasmic loop
dimerization that is acetylation-dependent. PRLR-recruited CREB-binding protein
(CBP) acetylates multiple lysine sites randomly distributed along the cytoplasmic
loop of PRLR. Two PRLR monomers appear to interact with each other at multiple
parts from the membrane-proximal region to the membrane-distal region, relying on
the coordination among multiple lysine sites neutralized via acetylation.
Cytoplasmic loop-dimerized PRLR activates STAT5, which is also acetylated by CBP 
and undergoes acetylation-dependent dimerization. PRLR dimerization and
subsequent signaling are enhanced by treating the cells with deacetylase sirtuin 
(SIRT) inhibitor nicotinamide or histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
trichostatin A but inhibited by expressing exogenous deacetylase SIRT2 or HDAC6. 
Our results suggest that acetylation and deacetylation provide the rheostat-like 
regulation for the cytokine receptor PRLR in its cytoplasmic loop dimerization
and subsequent STAT5 activation.

PMCID: PMC2984224
PMID: 20962278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Jan;79(1):197-206. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.067702. Epub 2010 Oct
19.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors stimulate histone H3 lysine 4 methylation in part 
via transcriptional repression of histone H3 lysine 4 demethylases.

Huang PH(1), Chen CH, Chou CC, Sargeant AM, Kulp SK, Teng CM, Byrd JC, Chen CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

This study investigates the mechanism by which histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors up-regulate histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methylation. Exposure of LNCaP 
prostate cancer cells and the prostate tissue of transgenic adenocarcinoma of the
mouse prostate mice to the pan- and class I HDAC inhibitors
(S)-(+)-N-hydroxy-4-(3-methyl-2-phenyl-butyrylamino)-benzamide (AR42),
N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[N-(pyridine-3-yl-methoxycarbonyl)-aminomethyl]-benzamide
(MS-275), and vorinostat led to differential increases in H3K4 methylation.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation shows that this accumulation of methylated H3K4
occurred in conjunction with decreases in the amount of the H3K4 demethylase RBP2
at the promoter of genes associated with tumor suppression and differentiation,
including KLF4 and E-cadherin. This finding, together with the HDAC
inhibitor-induced up-regulation of KLF4 and E-cadherin, suggests that HDAC
inhibitors could activate the expression of these genes through changes in
histone methylation status. Evidence indicates that this up-regulation of H3K4
methylation was attributable to the suppressive effect of these HDAC inhibitors
on the expression of RBP2 and other JARID1 family histone demethylases, including
PLU-1, SMCX, and LSD1, via the down-regulation of Sp1 expression. Moreover,
shRNA-mediated silencing of the class I HDAC isozymes 1, 2, 3, and 8, but not
that of the class II isozyme HDAC6, mimicked the drug effects on H3K4 methylation
and H3K4 demethylases, which could be reversed by ectopic Sp1 expression. These
data suggest a cross-talk mechanism between HDACs and H3K4 demethylases via
Sp1-mediated transcriptional regulation, which underlies the complexity of the
functional role of HDACs in the regulation of histone modifications.

PMCID: PMC3014276
PMID: 20959362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Dec 1;20(23):7067-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.09.100.
Epub 2010 Oct 12.

Inhibitors selective for HDAC6 in enzymes and cells.

Gupta PK(1), Reid RC, Liu L, Lucke AJ, Broomfield SA, Andrews MR, Sweet MJ,
Fairlie DP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors with anticancer or anti-inflammatory activity bind
to Class I or Class I and II HDAC enzymes. Here we compare selectivity of
inhibitors of a Class II HDAC enzyme (HDAC6) and find one that retains high
selectivity in macrophages.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20947351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Genes Cancer. 2010 May;1(5):465-479.

An Integrated Genetic-Genomic Approach for the Identification of Novel Cancer
Loci in Mice Sensitized to c-Myc-Induced Apoptosis.

Mendrysa SM(1), Akagi K, Roayaei J, Lien WH, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Eisenman
RN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA, USA.

Deregulated c-Myc is associated with a wide range of human cancers. In many cell 
types, overexpression of c-Myc potently promotes cell growth and proliferation
concomitant with the induction of apoptosis. Secondary genetic events that shift 
this balance either by increasing growth and proliferation or limiting apoptosis 
are likely to cooperate with c-Myc in tumorigenesis. Here, the authors have
performed large-scale insertional mutagenesis in Eµ-c-myc mice that, through mdm2
loss of function mutations, are sensitized to apoptosis. The authors chose to use
this genetic background based on the hypothesis that the high level of apoptosis 
induced by c-Myc overexpression in MDM2-deficient mice would act as a
rate-limiting barrier for lymphoma development. As a result, it was predicted
that the spectrum of retroviral insertions would be shifted toward loci that
harbor antiapoptotic genes. Nine novel common insertion sites (CISs) specific to 
mice with this sensitized genetic background were identified, suggesting the
presence of novel antiapoptotic cancer genes. Moreover, cross-comparing the data 
to the Retroviral Tagged Cancer Gene Database, the authors identified an
additional 23 novel CISs. Here, evidence is presented that 2 genes, ppp1r16b and 
hdac6, identified at CISs, are bona fide cellular oncogenes. This study
highlights the power of combining unique sensitized genetic backgrounds with
large-scale mutagenesis as an approach for identifying novel cancer genes.

PMCID: PMC2949282
PMID: 20927200  [PubMed]


58. Hum Reprod. 2010 Dec;25(12):3012-24. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deq266. Epub 2010 Oct 1.

Effect of ICSI on gene expression and development of mouse preimplantation
embryos.

Giritharan G(1), Li MW, Di Sebastiano F, Esteban FJ, Horcajadas JA, Lloyd KC,
Donjacour A, Maltepe E, Rinaudo PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetric, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    Hum Reprod. 2013 Jan;28(1):285. De Sebastiano, F [corrected to Di Sebastiano, F].

BACKGROUND: In vitro culture (IVC) and IVF of preimplantation mouse embryos are
associated with changes in gene expression. It is however not known whether ICSI 
has additional effects on the transcriptome of mouse blastocysts.
METHODS: We compared gene expression and development of mouse blastocysts
produced by ICSI and cultured in Whitten's medium (ICSI(WM)) or KSOM medium with 
amino acids (ICSI(KSOMaa)) with control blastocysts flushed out of the uterus on 
post coital Day 3.5 (in vivo). In addition, we compared gene expression in
embryos generated by IVF or ICSI using WM. Global pattern of gene expression was 
assessed using the Affymetrix 430 2.0 chip.
RESULTS: Blastocysts from ICSI fertilization have a reduction in the number of
trophoblastic and inner cell mass cells compared with embryos generated in vivo. 
Approximately 1000 genes are differentially expressed between ICSI blastocyst and
in vivo blastocysts; proliferation, apoptosis and morphogenetic pathways are the 
most common pathways altered after IVC. Unexpectedly, expression of only 41 genes
was significantly different between embryo cultured in suboptimal conditions (WM)
or optimal conditions (KSOM(aa)).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that fertilization by ICSI may play a more
important role in shaping the transcriptome of the developing mouse embryo than
the culture media used.

PMCID: PMC2989873
PMID: 20889529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 23;5(9):e12908. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012908.

Impaired function of HDAC6 slows down axonal growth and interferes with axon
initial segment development.

Tapia M(1), Wandosell F, Garrido JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology, Instituto
Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain.

The development of morphological neuronal polarity starts by the formation and
elongation of an axon. At the same time the axon initial segment (AIS) is
generated and creates a diffusion barrier which differentiate axon and
somatodendritic compartment. Different structural and functional proteins that
contribute to the generation of neuronal action potential are concentrated at the
axon initial segment. While axonal elongation is controlled by signalling
pathways that regulate cytoskeleton through microtubule associated proteins and
tubulin modifications, the microtubule cytoskeleton under the AIS is mostly
unknown. Thus, understanding which proteins modify tubulin, where in the neuron
and at which developmental stage is crucial to understanding how morphological
and functional neuronal polarity is achieved. In this study performed in mice and
using a well established model of murine cultured hippocampal neurons, we report 
that the tubulin deacetylase HDAC6 is localized at the distal region of the axon,
and its inhibition with TSA or tubacin slows down axonal growth. Suppression of
HDAC6 expression with HDAC6 shRNAs or expression of a non-active mutant of HDAC6 
also reduces axonal length. Furthermore, HDAC6 inhibition or suppression avoids
the concentration of ankyrinG and sodium channels at the axon initial segment
(AIS). Moreover, treatment of mouse cultured hippocampal neurons with detergents 
to eliminate the soluble pool of microtubules identified a pool of detergent
resistant acetylated microtubules at the AIS, not present at the rest of the
axon. Inhibition or suppression of HDAC6 increases acetylation all along the axon
and disrupts the specificity of AIS cytoskeleton, modifying the axonal distal
gradient localization of KIF5C to a somatodendritic and axonal localization. In
conclusion, our results reveal a new role of HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase as a
regulator of microtubule characteristics in the axon distal region where axonal
elongation takes place, and allowing the development of acetylated microtubules
microdomains where HDAC6 is not concentrated, such as the axon initial segment.

PMCID: PMC2944822
PMID: 20886111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Br J Haematol. 2010 Nov;151(4):387-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08342.x.
Epub 2010 Sep 29.

The class-I HDAC inhibitor MGCD0103 induces apoptosis in Hodgkin lymphoma cell
lines and synergizes with proteasome inhibitors by an HDAC6-independent
mechanism.

Buglio D(1), Mamidipudi V, Khaskhely NM, Brady H, Heise C, Besterman J, Martell
RE, MacBeth K, Younes A.

Author information: 
(1)M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Lymphoma/Myeloma, Houston,
University of Texas, TX, USA.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)-dependent aggresome function by pan
HDAC inhibitors was recently reported to be a key mechanism underlying the
synergistic activity between proteasome inhibitors and HDAC inhibitors in a
variety of tumour types. Because these combinations induce significant
thrombocytopenia in vivo, we examined whether less toxic, isotype-selective HDAC 
inhibitors may still synergize with proteasome inhibitors, and if so, by what
mechanisms. Here, we showed that the class I HDAC inhibitor, MGCD0103, has a
potent antiproliferative activity in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cell lines.
Furthermore, MGCD0103 induced tumour necrosis factor a (TNF-a) expression and
secretion, which was associated with nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B activation. Selective
inhibition of TNF-a expression by short interfering mRNA, or inhibition of
MGCD0103-induced NF-kB activation by proteasome inhibitors enhanced
MGCD0103-induced cell death. Thus, our results demonstrate that MGCD0103 may
synergize with proteasome inhibitors by HDAC6-independent mechanisms, providing
mechanistic rationale for exploring this potentially less toxic combination for
the treatment of lymphoma.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3189488
PMID: 20880107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Diabetologia. 2010 Dec;53(12):2569-78. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1892-8. Epub 2010 
Sep 28.

Lysine deacetylases are produced in pancreatic beta cells and are differentially 
regulated by proinflammatory cytokines.

Lundh M(1), Christensen DP, Rasmussen DN, Mascagni P, Dinarello CA, Billestrup N,
Grunnet LG, Mandrup-Poulsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Research Methodology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Cytokine-induced beta cell toxicity is abrogated by
non-selective inhibitors of lysine deacetylases (KDACs). The KDAC family consists
of 11 members, namely histone deacetylases HDAC1 to HDAC11, but it is not known
which KDAC members play a role in cytokine-mediated beta cell death. The aim of
the present study was to examine the KDAC gene expression profile of the beta
cell and to investigate whether KDAC expression is regulated by cytokines. In
addition, the protective effect of the non-selective KDAC inhibitor ITF2357 and
interdependent regulation of four selected KDACs were investigated.
METHODS: The beta cell line INS-1 and intact rat and human islets were exposed to
cytokines with or without ITF2357. Expression of mRNA was assessed by real-time
PCR and selected targets validated at the protein level by immunoblotting.
Effects on cytokine-induced toxicity were investigated by in vitro assays.
RESULTS: Hdac1 to Hdac11 were expressed and differentially regulated by cytokines
in INS-1 cells and rat islets. HDAC1, -2, -6 and -11 were found to be expressed
and regulated by cytokines in human islets. ITF2357 protected against
cytokine-induced beta cell apoptosis and counteracted cytokine-induced
attenuation of basal insulin secretion. In addition, cytokine-induced regulation 
of Hdac2 and Hdac6, but not Hdac1 and Hdac11, was reduced by KDAC inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: All classical KDAC genes are expressed by beta cells 
and differentially regulated by cytokines. Based on the relative expression
levels and degree of regulation by cytokines, we propose that HDAC1, -2, -6 and
-11 are of particular importance for beta cell function. These observations may
help in the design of specific KDAC inhibitors to prevent beta cell destruction
in situ and in islet grafts.

PMID: 20878317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS Curr. 2010 Sep 2;2. pii: RRN1172. doi: 10.1371/currents.RRN1172.

Evaluation of histone deacetylases as drug targets in Huntington's disease
models. Study of HDACs in brain tissues from R6/2 and CAG140 knock-in HD mouse
models and human patients and in a neuronal HD cell model.

Quinti L(1), Chopra V, Rotili D, Valente S, Amore A, Franci G, Meade S, Valenza
M, Altucci L, Maxwell MM, Cattaneo E, Hersch S, Mai A, Kazantsev A.

Author information: 
(1)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Massachusetts General
Hospital, & Harvard Medical School, Bldg. 114-3300, 16th Street, Charlestown, MA 
02129, USA.

The family of histone deacetylases (HDACs) has recently emerged as important drug
targets for treatment of slow progressive neurodegenerative disorders, including 
Huntington's disease (HD). Broad pharmaceutical inhibition of HDACs has shown
neuroprotective effects in various HD models. Here we examined the susceptibility
of HDAC targets for drug treatment in affected brain areas during HD progression.
We observed increased HDAC1 and decreased HDAC4, 5 and 6 levels, correlating with
disease progression, in cortices and striata of HD R6/2 mice. However, there were
no significant changes in HDAC protein levels, assessed in an age-dependent
manner, in HD knock-in CAG140 mice and we did not observe significant changes in 
HDAC1 levels in human HD brains. We further assessed acetylation levels of
a-tubulin, as a biomarker of HDAC6 activity, and found it unchanged in cortices
from R6/2, knock-in, and human subjects at all disease stages. Inhibition of
deacetylase activities was identical in cortical extracts from R6/2 and wild-type
mice treated with a class II-selective HDAC inhibitor. Lastly, treatment with
class I- and II-selective HDAC inhibitors showed similar responses in HD and
wild-type rat striatal cells. In conclusion, our results show that class I and
class II HDAC targets are present and accessible for chronic drug treatment
during HD progression and provide impetus for therapeutic development of
brain-permeable class- or isoform-selective inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2943247
PMID: 20877454  [PubMed]


63. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(2):502-12. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq820. Epub 2010 Sep 
19.

Cyclical regulation of the insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 gene in
response to 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3.

Malinen M(1), Ryynänen J, Heinäniemi M, Väisänen S, Carlberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

The nuclear receptor vitamin D receptor (VDR) is known to associate with two
vitamin D response element (VDRE) containing chromatin regions of the
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3) gene. In non-malignant
MCF-10A human mammary cells, we show that the natural VDR ligand
1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (1a,25(OH)(2)D(3)) causes cyclical IGFBP3 mRNA
accumulation with a periodicity of 60<U+2009>min, while in the presence of the potent
VDR agonist Gemini the mRNA is continuously accumulated. Accordingly, VDR also
showed cyclical ligand-dependent association with the chromatin regions of both
VDREs. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play an important role both in VDR signalling
and in transcriptional cycling. From the 11 HDAC gene family members, only HDAC4 
and HDAC6 are up-regulated in a cyclical fashion in response to 1a,25(OH)(2)D(3),
while even these two genes do not respond to Gemini. Interestingly, HDAC4 and
HDAC6 proteins show cyclical VDR ligand-induced association with both VDRE
regions of the IGFBP3 gene, which coincides with histone H4 deacetylation on
these regions. Moreover, combined silencing of HDAC4 and HDAC6 abolishes the
cycling of the IGFBP3 gene. We assume that due to more efficient VDR interaction,
Gemini induces longer lasting chromatin activation and therefore no
transcriptional cycling but monotonically increasing IGFBP3 mRNA. In conclusion, 
1a,25(OH)(2)D(3) regulates IGFBP3 transcription through short-term cyclical
association of VDR, HDAC4 and HDAC6 to both VDRE-containing chromatin regions.

PMCID: PMC3025564
PMID: 20855290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Virol J. 2010 Sep 16;7:237. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-237.

A role for the histone deacetylase HDAC4 in the life-cycle of HIV-1-based
vectors.

Smith JA(1), Yeung J, Kao GD, Daniel R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases-Center for Human Virology, Department of
Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

HIV-1 integration is mediated by the HIV-1 integrase protein, which joins 3'-ends
of viral DNA to host cell DNA. To complete the integration process, HIV-1 DNA has
to be joined to host cell DNA also at the 5'-ends. This process is called
post-integration repair (PIR). Integration and PIR involve a number of cellular
co-factors. These proteins exhibit different degrees of involvement in
integration and/or PIR. Some are required for efficient integration or PIR. On
the other hand, some reduce the efficiency of integration. Finally, some are
involved in integration site selection. We have studied the role of the histone
deacetylase HDAC4 in these processes. HDAC4 was demonstrated to play a role in
both cellular double-strand DNA break repair and transcriptional regulation. We
observed that HDAC4 associates with viral DNA in an integrase-dependent manner.
Moreover, infection with HIV-1-based vectors induces foci of the HDAC4 protein.
The related histone deacetylases, HDAC2 and HDAC6, failed to associate with viral
DNA after infection. These data suggest that HDAC4 accumulates at integration
sites. Finally, overexpression studies with HDAC4 mutants suggest that HDAC4 may 
be required for efficient transduction by HIV-1-based vectors in cells that are
deficient in other DNA repair proteins. We conclude that HDAC4 is likely involved
in PIR.

PMCID: PMC2949839
PMID: 20846395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Acta Oncol. 2011 Feb;50(2):317-8. doi: 10.3109/0284186X.2010.504229. Epub 2010
Sep 15.

Mutational analysis of mononucleotide repeats in HDAC4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 11 genes
in gastric and colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability.

Park SW, Kim HS, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

PMID: 20843176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 12;285(46):35759-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.126904. Epub
2010 Sep 13.

Regulation of MyD88 aggregation and the MyD88-dependent signaling pathway by
sequestosome 1 and histone deacetylase 6.

Into T(1), Inomata M, Niida S, Murakami Y, Shibata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology, Asahi University School of Dentistry, 1851-1 
Hozumi, Mizuho, Gifu 501-0296, Japan. into@dent.asahi-u.ac.jp

MyD88 is an essential adaptor molecule for Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and
interleukin (IL)-1 receptor. MyD88 is thought to be present as condensed forms or
aggregated structures in the cytoplasm, although the reason has not yet been
clear. Here, we show that endogenous MyD88 is present as small speckle-like
condensed structures, formation of which depends on MyD88 dimerization. In
addition, formation of large aggregated structures is related to cytoplasmic
accumulation of sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1; also known as p62) and histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), which are involved in accumulation of polyubiquitinated
proteins. A gene knockdown study revealed that SQSTM1 and HDAC6 were required for
MyD88 aggregation and exhibited a suppressive effect on TLR ligand-induced
expression of IL-6 and NOS2 in RAW264.7 cells. SQSTM1 and HDAC6 were partially
involved in suppression of several TLR4-mediated signaling events, including
activation of p38 and JNK, but they hardly affected degradation of I<U+03BA>Ba
(inhibitor of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B). Biochemical induction of MyD88 oligomerization 
induced recruitment of SQSTM1 and HDAC6 to the MyD88-TRAF6 signaling complex.
Repression of SQSTM1 and HDAC6 enhanced formation of the MyD88-TRAF6 complex and 
conversely decreased interaction of the ubiquitin-specific negative regulator
CYLD with the complex. Furthermore, ubiquitin-binding regions on SQSTM1 and HDAC6
were essential for MyD88 aggregation but were not required for interaction with
the MyD88 complex. Thus, our study reveals not only that SQSTM1 and HDAC6 are
important determinants of aggregated localization of MyD88 but also that MyD88
activates a machinery of polyubiquitinated protein accumulation that has a
modulatory effect on MyD88-dependent signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC2975200
PMID: 20837465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Gynecol Oncol. 2010 Dec;119(3):557-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.07.036. Epub
2010 Sep 9.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid partly reverses resistance to paclitaxel in human
ovarian cancer cell lines.

Angelucci A(1), Mari M, Millimaggi D, Giusti I, Carta G, Bologna M, Dolo V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, Via
Vetoio-Coppito 2, I-67100, L'Aquila, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to determine whether the addition of
the histone deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) to
paclitaxel (PTX) can sensitize PTX-resistant human ovarian cancer cell lines
(CABA-PTX and IGROV-PTX) in vitro.
METHODS: SAHA was studied in combination with paclitaxel in PTX-sensitive and
PTX-resistant human ovarian cancer cell lines. Using cell proliferation analysis,
immunofluorescence, and flow cytometric assays, we can determine whether the
resistance was partly removed when the cells were treated with a combination of
SAHA and PTX. Cells were also assayed for cytochrome c release. The levels of
acetylated tubulin, ß-tubulin, and HDAC6 were quantified by Western blots.
RESULTS: SAHA in combination with PTX led to a more pronounced inhibition of cell
growth compared with PTX alone. In addition, the combined exposure to PTX and
SAHA resulted in a marked arrest in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle and in a
significant increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells. The expression of
acetylated tubulin was dramatically increased by exposure to the combination of
PTX and SAHA. These data paralleled the findings of an increased expression of
HDAC6 in the presence of PTX in PTX-resistant cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest the existence of a novel
resistance mechanism based upon the upregulation of HDAC6 and that the histone
deacetylase inhibitor SAHA holds promise to overcome PTX resistance in ovarian
cancer cell lines.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20825984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 29;285(44):34097-105. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.154831. Epub
2010 Aug 18.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated proteins TDP-43 and FUS/TLS function in 
a common biochemical complex to co-regulate HDAC6 mRNA.

Kim SH(1), Shanware NP, Bowler MJ, Tibbetts RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an incurable neurodegenerative disease
that preferentially targets motor neurons. It was recently found that dominant
mutations in two related RNA-binding proteins, TDP-43 (43-kDa TAR DNA-binding
domain protein) and FUS/TLS (fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma) cause a 
subset of ALS. The convergent ALS phenotypes associated with TDP-43 and FUS/TLS
mutations are suggestive of a functional relationship; however, whether or not
TDP-43 and FUS/TLS operate in common biochemical pathways is not known. Here we
show that TDP-43 and FUS/TLS directly interact to form a complex at endogenous
expression levels in mammalian cells. Binding was mediated by an unstructured
TDP-43 C-terminal domain and occurred within the context of a 300-400-kDa complex
that also contained C-terminal cleavage products of TDP-43 linked to
neuropathology. TDP-43 C-terminal fragments were excluded from large molecular
mass TDP-43 ribonucleoprotein complexes but retained FUS/TLS binding activity.
The functional significance of TDP-43-FUS/TLS complexes was established by
showing that RNAi silencing of either TDP-43 or FUS/TLS reduced the expression of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6 mRNA. TDP-43 and FUS/TLS associated with HDAC6 mRNA 
in intact cells and in vitro, and competition experiments suggested that the
proteins occupy overlapping binding sites. The combined findings demonstrate that
TDP-43 and FUS/TLS form a functional complex in intact cells and suggest that
convergent ALS phenotypes associated with TDP-43 and FUS/TLS mutations may
reflect their participation in common biochemical processes.

PMCID: PMC2962508
PMID: 20720006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):32888-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.162743. Epub
2010 Aug 9.

Clostridium difficile toxin A decreases acetylation of tubulin, leading to
microtubule depolymerization through activation of histone deacetylase 6, and
this mediates acute inflammation.

Nam HJ(1), Kang JK, Kim SK, Ahn KJ, Seok H, Park SJ, Chang JS, Pothoulakis C,
Lamont JT, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin University,
Pocheon, Gyeonggido 487-711, Korea.

Clostridium difficile toxin A is known to cause actin disaggregation through the 
enzymatic inactivation of intracellular Rho proteins. Based on the rapid and
severe cell rounding of toxin A-exposed cells, we speculated that toxin A may be 
involved in post-translational modification of tubulin, leading to microtubule
instability. In the current study, we observed that toxin A strongly reduced
a-tubulin acetylation in human colonocytes and mouse intestine. Fractionation
analysis demonstrated that toxin A-induced a-tubulin deacetylation yielded
monomeric tubulin, indicating the presence of microtubule depolymerization.
Inhibition of the glucosyltransferase activity against Rho proteins of toxin A by
UDP-2',3'-dialdehyde significantly abrogated toxin A-induced a-tubulin
deacetylation. In colonocytes treated with trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of 
the HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase, toxin A-induced a-tubulin deacetylation and loss
of tight junction were completely blocked. Administration of TSA also attenuated 
proinflammatory cytokine production, mucosal damage, and epithelial cell
apoptosis in mouse intestine exposed to toxin A. These results suggest that toxin
A causes microtubule depolymerization by activation of HDAC6-mediated tubulin
deacetylation. Indeed, blockage of HDAC6 by TSA markedly attenuates a-tubulin
deacetylation, proinflammatory cytokine production, and mucosal damage in a toxin
A-induced mouse enteritis model. Tubulin deacetylation is an important component 
of the intestinal inflammatory cascade following toxin A-mediated Rho
inactivation in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2963380
PMID: 20696758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cells. 2010 Aug;30(2):107-12. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0094-z. Epub 2010 Jul
23.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 10 induces thioredoxin-interacting protein and 
causes accumulation of reactive oxygen species in SNU-620 human gastric cancer
cells.

Lee JH(1), Jeong EG, Choi MC, Kim SH, Park JH, Song SH, Park J, Bang YJ, Kim TY.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, College of Medicine, Seoul National University,
Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC)10, a novel class IIb histone deacetylase, is the most 
similar to HDAC6, since both contain a unique second catalytic domain. Unlike
HDAC6, which is located in the cytoplasm, HDAC10 resides in both the nucleus and 
cytoplasm. The transcriptional targets of HDAC10 that are associated with HDAC10 
gene regulation have not been identified. In the present study, we found that
knockdown of HDAC10 significantly increased the mRNA expression levels of
thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) in SNU-620 human gastric cancer cells;
whereas inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC6 did not affect TXNIP expression.
TXNIP is the endogenous inhibitor of thioredoxin (TRX), which acts as a cellular 
antioxidant. Real-time PCR and immunoblot analysis confirmed that inhibition of
HDAC10 induced TXNIP expression. Compared to class I only HDAC inhibitors,
inhibitors targeting both class I and II upregulated TXNIP, indicating that TXNIP
is regulated by class II HDACs such as HDAC10. We further verified that
inhibition of HDAC10 induced release of cytochrome c and activated apoptotic
signaling molecules through accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Taken 
together, our results demonstrate that HDAC10 is involved in transcriptional
downregulation of TXNIP, leading to altered ROS signaling in human gastric cancer
cells. How TXNIP is preferentially regulated by HDAC10 needs further
investigation.

PMID: 20680488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Br J Haematol. 2010 Sep;150(6):665-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08301.x.

Differential expression of HDAC3, HDAC7 and HDAC9 is associated with prognosis
and survival in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Moreno DA(1), Scrideli CA, Cortez MA, de Paula Queiroz R, Valera ET, da Silva
Silveira V, Yunes JA, Brandalise SR, Tone LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Altered expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) is a common feature in several
human malignancies and may represent an interesting target for cancer treatment, 
including haematological malignancies. We evaluated the mRNA gene expression
profile of 12 HDAC genes by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction in
94 consecutive childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) samples and its
association with clinical/biological features and survival. ALL samples showed
higher expression levels of HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC8, HDAC6 and HDAC7 when compared to
normal bone marrow samples. HDAC1 and HDAC4 showed high expression in T-ALL and
HDAC5 was highly expressed in B-lineage ALL. Higher than median expression levels
of HDAC3 were associated with a significantly lower 5-year event-free survival
(EFS) in the overall group of patients (P = 0·03) and in T-ALL patients (P =
0.01). HDAC7 and HADC9 expression levels higher than median were associated with 
a lower 5-year EFS in the overall group (P = 0.04 and P = 0.003, respectively)
and in B-lineage CD10-positive patients (P = 0.009 and P = 0·005, respectively). 
Our data suggest that higher expression of HDAC7 and HDAC9 is associated with
poor prognosis in childhood ALL and could be promising therapeutic targets for
the treatment of refractory childhood ALL.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20636436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Aug 11;132(31):10842-6. doi: 10.1021/ja102758v.

Rational design and simple chemistry yield a superior, neuroprotective HDAC6
inhibitor, tubastatin A.

Butler KV(1), Kalin J, Brochier C, Vistoli G, Langley B, Kozikowski AP.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 South Wood, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Structure-based drug design combined with homology modeling techniques were used 
to develop potent inhibitors of HDAC6 that display superior selectivity for the
HDAC6 isozyme compared to other inhibitors. These inhibitors can be assembled in 
a few synthetic steps, and thus are readily scaled up for in vivo studies. An
optimized compound from this series, designated Tubastatin A, was tested in
primary cortical neuron cultures in which it was found to induce elevated levels 
of acetylated alpha-tubulin, but not histone, consistent with its HDAC6
selectivity. Tubastatin A also conferred dose-dependent protection in primary
cortical neuron cultures against glutathione depletion-induced oxidative stress. 
Importantly, when given alone at all concentrations tested, this
hydroxamate-containing HDAC6-selective compound displayed no neuronal toxicity,
thus, forecasting the potential application of this agent and its analogues to
neurodegenerative conditions.

PMCID: PMC2916045
PMID: 20614936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Aug;299(2):R509-20. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00858.2009. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Sepsis and glucocorticoids upregulate p300 and downregulate HDAC6 expression and 
activity in skeletal muscle.

Alamdari N(1), Smith IJ, Aversa Z, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Muscle wasting during sepsis is in part regulated by glucocorticoids. In recent
studies, treatment of cultured muscle cells in vitro with dexamethasone
upregulated expression and activity of p300, a histone acetyl transferase (HAT), 
and reduced expression and activity of the histone deacetylases-3 (HDAC3) and -6,
changes that favor hyperacetylation. Here, we tested the hypothesis that sepsis
and glucocorticoids regulate p300 and HDAC3 and -6 in skeletal muscle in vivo.
Because sepsis-induced metabolic changes are particularly pronounced in white,
fast-twitch skeletal muscle, most experiments were performed in extensor
digitorum longus muscles. Sepsis in rats upregulated p300 mRNA and protein
levels, stimulated HAT activity, and reduced HDAC6 expression and HDAC activity. 
The sepsis-induced changes in p300 and HDAC expression were prevented by the
glucocorticoid receptor antagonist RU38486. Treatment of rats with dexamethasone 
increased expression of p300 and HAT activity, reduced expression of HDAC3 and
-6, and inhibited HDAC activity. Finally, treatment with the HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A resulted in increased muscle proteolysis and expression of the
ubiquitin ligase atrogin-1. Taken together, our results suggest for the first
time that sepsis-induced muscle wasting may be regulated by
glucocorticoid-dependent hyperacetylation caused by increased p300 and reduced
HDAC expression and activity. The recent development of pharmacological HDAC
activators may provide a novel avenue to prevent and treat muscle wasting in
sepsis and other catabolic conditions.

PMCID: PMC2928620
PMID: 20538901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Cell Biol. 2010 Jun 14;189(6):1039-51. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200912001. Epub 2010
Jun 7.

The small GTPases ARL-13 and ARL-3 coordinate intraflagellar transport and
ciliogenesis.

Li Y(1), Wei Q, Zhang Y, Ling K, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, and 
2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street
SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) machinery mediates the bidirectional movement of
cargos that are required for the assembly and maintenance of cilia. However,
little is known about how IFT is regulated in vivo. In this study, we show that
the small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) adenosine diphosphate ribosylation
factor-like protein 13 (ARL-13) encoded by the Caenorhabditis elegans homologue
of the human Joubert syndrome causal gene ARL13B, localizes exclusively to the
doublet segment of the cilium. arl-13 mutants have shortened cilia with various
ultrastructural deformities and a disrupted association between IFT subcomplexes 
A and B. Intriguingly, depletion of ARL-3, another ciliary small GTPase,
partially suppresses ciliogenesis defects in arl-13 mutants by indirectly
restoring binding between IFT subcomplexes A and B. Rescue of arl-13 mutants by
ARL-3 depletion is mediated by an HDAC6 deacetylase-dependent pathway. Thus, we
propose that two conserved small GTPases, ARL-13 and ARL-3, coordinate to
regulate IFT and that perturbing this balance results in cilia deformation.

PMCID: PMC2886347
PMID: 20530210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2010 May 26;5(5):e10848. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010848.

HDAC6 regulates mitochondrial transport in hippocampal neurons.

Chen S(1), Owens GC, Makarenkova H, Edelman DB.

Author information: 
(1)The Neurosciences Institute, San Diego, California, USA. schen@nsi.edu

BACKGROUND: Tubulin is a major substrate of the cytoplasmic class II histone
deacetylase HDAC6. Inhibition of HDAC6 results in higher levels of acetylated
tubulin and enhanced binding of the motor protein kinesin-1 to tubulin, which
promotes transport of cargoes along microtubules. Microtubule-dependent
intracellular trafficking may therefore be regulated by modulating the activity
of HDAC6. We have shown previously that the neuromodulator serotonin increases
mitochondrial movement in hippocampal neurons via the Akt-GSK3beta signaling
pathway. Here, we demonstrate a role for HDAC6 in this signaling pathway.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found that the presence of tubacin, a specific
HDAC6 inhibitor, dramatically enhanced mitochondrial movement in hippocampal
neurons, whereas niltubacin, an inactive tubacin analog, had no effect. Compared 
to control cultures, higher levels of acetylated tubulin were found in neurons
treated with tubacin, and more kinesin-1 was associated with mitochondria
isolated from these neurons. Inhibition of GSK3beta decreased cytoplasmic
deacetylase activity and increased tubulin acetylation, whereas blockade of Akt, 
which phosphorylates and down-regulates GSK3beta, increased cytoplasmic
deacetylase activity and decreased tubulin acetylation. Concordantly, the
administration of 5-HT, 8-OH-DPAT (a specific 5-HT1A receptor agonist), or
fluoxetine (a 5-HT reuptake inhibitor) increased tubulin acetylation. GSK3beta
was found to co-localize with HDAC6 in hippocampal neurons, and inhibition of
GSK3beta resulted in decreased binding of antibody to phosphoserine-22, a
potential GSK3beta phosphorylation site in HDAC6. GSK3beta may therefore regulate
HDAC6 activity by phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study demonstrates that HDAC6 plays an important
role in the modulation of mitochondrial transport. The link between HDAC6 and
GSK3beta, established here, has important implications for our understanding of
neurodegenerative disorders. In particular, abnormal mitochondrial transport,
which has been observed in such disorders as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's 
disease, could result from the misregulation of HDAC6 by GSK3beta. HDAC6 may
therefore constitute an attractive target in the treatment of these disorders.

PMCID: PMC2877100
PMID: 20520769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Neurosci. 2010 May 26;30(21):7215-26. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0048-10.2010.

Acetylation of microtubules influences their sensitivity to severing by katanin
in neurons and fibroblasts.

Sudo H(1), Baas PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19129, USA.

Here we investigated whether the sensitivity of microtubules to severing by
katanin is regulated by acetylation of the microtubules. During interphase,
fibroblasts display long microtubules with discrete regions rich in acetylated
tubulin. Overexpression of katanin for short periods of time produced breaks
preferentially in these regions. In fibroblasts with experimentally enhanced or
diminished microtubule acetylation, the sensitivity of the microtubules to
severing by katanin was increased or decreased, respectively. In neurons,
microtubules are notably more acetylated in axons than in dendrites. Experimental
manipulation of microtubule acetylation in neurons yielded similar results on
dendrites as observed on fibroblasts. However, under these experimental
conditions, axonal microtubules were not appreciably altered with regard to their
sensitivity to katanin. We hypothesized that this may be attributable to the
effects of tau on the axonal microtubules, and this was validated by studies in
which overexpression of tau caused microtubules in dendrites and fibroblasts to
be more resistant to severing by katanin in a manner that was not dependent on
the acetylation state of the microtubules. Interestingly, none of these various
findings apply to spastin, because the severing of microtubules by spastin does
not appear to be strongly influenced by either the acetylation state of the
microtubules or tau. We conclude that sensitivity to microtubule severing by
katanin is regulated by a balance of factors, including the acetylation state of 
the microtubules and the binding of tau to the microtubules. In the neuron, this 
contributes to regional differences in the microtubule arrays of axons and
dendrites.

PMCID: PMC2891103
PMID: 20505088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jul 16;400(3):284-94. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.05.031. Epub 2010 
May 21.

The down-regulation of the human MYC gene by the nuclear hormone
1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 is associated with cycling of corepressors and
histone deacetylases.

Toropainen S(1), Väisänen S, Heikkinen S, Carlberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Eastern Finland, FIN-70211 Kuopio,
Finland.

MYC is a pleiotropic transcription factor that coordinates the expression of
diverse programs that are together necessary for the growth and expansion of
somatic cells. The nuclear hormone 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) down-regulates
MYC expression, but the exact mechanism is still elusive. We found in RWPE-1
normal human prostate cells that 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) down-regulates
MYC mRNA with a periodicity of 30-90 min. In silico screening of the MYC gene
locus identified six putative binding sites [vitamin D response elements (VDREs)]
for the vitamin D receptor (VDR). Two of these VDREs efficiently bound
VDR-retinoid X receptor heterodimers in vitro, and their genomic regions
associated with VDR in RWPE-1 cells. Gene-specific small inhibitory RNA silencing
indicated that basal MYC mRNA expression, as well as its down-regulation,
depended on the exchange factor TBL1X (transducer beta-like 1, X-linked), the
corepressor silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor, and
histone deacetylases (HDACs) 2, 6, and 11. Assaying the association of these five
proteins with the VDRE-containing genomic regions of the MYC gene locus showed
characteristic ligand-dependent profiles of TBL1X, silencing mediator for
retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor, HDAC6, and HDAC11, in particular on an
evolutionarily conserved VDRE. In conclusion, our data suggest that dynamically
composed protein complexes that dock via VDR to the two VDREs may explain the
repression of the MYC gene.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20493879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Drug Resist Updat. 2010 Jun;13(3):87-92. doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2010.04.003. Epub
2010 May 11.

Macroautophagy modulates cellular response to proteasome inhibitors in cancer
therapy.

Wu WK(1), Sakamoto KM, Milani M, Aldana-Masankgay G, Fan D, Wu K, Lee CW, Cho CH,
Yu J, Sung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Diseases, LKS Institute of Health and Department of
Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
wukakei@cuhk.edu.hk

Macroautophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system are two complementary pathways
for protein degradation. The former degrades long-lived proteins and damaged
organelles while the later degrades short-lived proteins. Recent findings
indicate that suppression of the ubiquitin-proteasome system by proteasome
inhibitors induces macroautophagy through multiple pathways, including (1)
accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and activation of HDAC6; (2) activation of
the IRE1-JNK pathway; (3) proteasomal stabilization of ATF4; (4) inhibition of
mTOR complex 1 signaling; (5) reduced proteasomal degradation of LC3. Induction
of macroautophagy attenuates the antitumor effect of proteasome inhibitors in
various types of cancer. These findings suggest that inhibition of macroautophagy
may represent a novel strategy to enhance cellular sensitivity to proteasome
inhibition.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20462785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17;189(4):671-9. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201001039. Epub 2010 May 
10.

Disease-causing mutations in parkin impair mitochondrial ubiquitination,
aggregation, and HDAC6-dependent mitophagy.

Lee JY(1), Nagano Y, Taylor JP, Lim KL, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Mutations in parkin, a ubiquitin ligase, cause early-onset familial Parkinson's
disease (AR-JP). How parkin suppresses parkinsonism remains unknown. Parkin was
recently shown to promote the clearance of impaired mitochondria by autophagy,
termed mitophagy. Here, we show that parkin promotes mitophagy by catalyzing
mitochondrial ubiquitination, which in turn recruits ubiquitin-binding autophagic
components, HDAC6 and p62, leading to mitochondrial clearance. During the
process, juxtanuclear mitochondrial aggregates resembling a protein
aggregate-induced aggresome are formed. The formation of these "mito-aggresome"
structures requires microtubule motor-dependent transport and is essential for
efficient mitophagy. Importantly, we show that AR-JP-causing parkin mutations are
defective in supporting mitophagy due to distinct defects at recognition,
transportation, or ubiquitination of impaired mitochondria, thereby implicating
mitophagy defects in the development of parkinsonism. Our results show that
impaired mitochondria and protein aggregates are processed by common
ubiquitin-selective autophagy machinery connected to the aggresomal pathway, thus
identifying a mechanistic basis for the prevalence of these toxic entities in
Parkinson's disease.

PMCID: PMC2872903
PMID: 20457763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biomaterials. 2010 Aug;31(22):5894-902. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.04.007. 
Epub 2010 May 8.

The influence of mediators of intracellular trafficking on transgene expression
efficacy of polymer-plasmid DNA complexes.

Barua S(1), Rege K.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering, Arizona State University, ECG 301, Tempe, AZ 85287-6106,
USA.

Polymer-mediated gene delivery is an attractive alternative to viral vectors, but
is limited by low efficacies of transgene expression. We report that polymers
possess differential efficacies for transfecting closely related human prostate
cancer cells, which correlates with dramatically different intracellular fate of 
nanoscale cargo in these cells. Sequestration of nanoscale cargo (27 nm quantum
dots and 150-250 nm polyplexes) at a single location near the microtubule
organizing compartment (MTOC) in PC3-PSMA human prostate cancer cells correlated 
with lower polymer-mediated transgene expression compared to PC3 cells, which
showed distributed localization throughout the cytoplasm. We show, for the first 
time, that treatment with the histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibitor tubacin,
which acetylates tubulin of microtubules in the cytoplasm, abolished quantum dot 
and polyplex sequestration at the perinuclear recycling compartment/microtubule
organizing center (PNRC/MTOC) and increased polymer-mediated transgene expression
by up to forty-fold compared to cells not treated with the HDAC6 inhibitor drug. 
Treatment with the class I and II HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA)
demonstrated similar levels of transgene expression enhancement. These results
indicate that mediators of intracellular trafficking can be employed to modulate 
nanoparticle fate and enhance the efficacy of nanoscale therapeutics in cells.
Simultaneous use of high-efficacy polymers along with mediators of intracellular 
trafficking is an attractive synergistic strategy for enhancing polymer-mediated 
transgene expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20452664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Jun 1;20(11):3314-21. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.04.041.
Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Acylurea connected straight chain hydroxamates as novel histone deacetylase
inhibitors: Synthesis, SAR, and in vivo antitumor activity.

Wang H(1), Lim ZY, Zhou Y, Ng M, Lu T, Lee K, Sangthongpitag K, Goh KC, Wang X,
Wu X, Khng HH, Goh SK, Ong WC, Bonday Z, Sun ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry Discovery, S *BIO Pte Ltd, 1 Science Park Road, #05-09
The Capricorn, Singapore Science Park II, Singapore 117528, Singapore.
haishan_wang@sbio.com

Thirty-six novel acylurea connected straight chain hydroxamates were designed and
synthesized. Structure-activity relationships (SAR) were established for the
length of linear chain linker and substitutions on the benzoylurea group.
Compounds 5g, 5i, 5n, and 19 showed 10-20-fold enhanced HDAC1 potency compared to
SAHA. In general, the cellular potency pIC(50) (COLO205) correlates with
enzymatic potency pIC(50) (HDAC1). Compound 5b (SB207), a structurally simple and
close analogue to SAHA, is more potent against HDAC1 and HDAC6 compared to the
latter. As a representative example of this series, good in vitro enzymatic and
cellular potency plus an excellent pharmacokinetic profile has translated into
better efficacy than SAHA in both prostate cancer (PC3) and colon cancer (HCT116)
xenograft models.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20451378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Jul 1;21(13):2128-37. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-03-0200. Epub 2010
May 5.

Drosophila histone deacetylase 6 protects dopaminergic neurons against
{alpha}-synuclein toxicity by promoting inclusion formation.

Du G(1), Liu X, Chen X, Song M, Yan Y, Jiao R, Wang CC.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Macromolecules and State Key Laboratory of Brain and
Cognitive Science, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is associated with progressive degeneration of
dopaminergic (DA) neurons. We report for the first time that the Drosophila
histone deacetylase 6 (dHDAC6) plays a critical role in the protection of DA
neurons and the formation of alpha-synuclein inclusions by using a Drosophila PD 
model constructed by ectopic expression of human alpha-synuclein. Depletion of
dHDAC6 significantly enhances the effects caused by ectopic expression of
alpha-synuclein, namely, loss of DA neurons, retinal degeneration, and locomotor 
dysfunction. Expression of alpha-synuclein in the DA neurons leads to fewer
inclusions in the brains of dHDAC6 mutant flies than in wild-type flies.
Conversely, overexpression of dHDAC6 is able to suppress the
alpha-synuclein-induced DA neuron loss and retinal degeneration and promote
inclusion formation. Furthermore, mutation of dHDAC6 reinforces the accumulation 
of oligomers that are suggested to be a toxic form of alpha-synuclein. We propose
that alpha-synuclein inclusion formation in the presence of dHDAC6 protects DA
neurons from being damaged by oligomers, which may uncover a common mechanism for
synucleinopathies.

PMCID: PMC2893978
PMID: 20444973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gene Ther. 2010 Sep;17(9):1098-104. doi: 10.1038/gt.2010.57. Epub 2010 Apr 29.

Electroporation- and mechanical ventilation-mediated gene transfer to the lung.

Kaufman CD(1), Geiger RC, Dean DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Our laboratory has previously demonstrated that cytoplasmic trafficking and
subsequent nuclear entry of nonviral plasmid DNA can be significantly enhanced
through the application of cyclic stretch after transfection in vitro. In this
study, we show that cyclic stretching of the murine lung using ventilation
immediately after endotracheal administration and transthoracic electroporation
of plasmid DNA increases exogenous gene expression up to fourfold in mice that
were not ventilated after plasmid administration and transfection by
electroporation in vivo. This increase is both time and sequence specific (that
is, the ventilation must occur immediately after the transfection event). The
ventilation-enhanced gene transfer is also amplitude dependent, confirming
similar studies completed in vitro, and is mediated, at least in part, through
the cytoplasmic tubulin deacetylase, HDAC6. Using immunohistochemistry, we show
that this increase in expression is due to an increase in the number of cells
expressing the exogenous protein rather than an increase in the amount of protein
produced per cell. These studies show the potential mechanical stimulation has in
vivo in significantly increasing nonviral DNA gene expression, and may ultimately
pave the way for more successful clinical trials using this type of therapy in
the future.

PMCID: PMC3483646
PMID: 20428212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FEBS Lett. 2010 Jun 18;584(12):2635-45. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.04.041. Epub 
2010 Apr 20.

Fighting disease by selective autophagy of aggregate-prone proteins.

Knaevelsrud H(1), Simonsen A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Ubiquitinated protein aggregates are hallmarks of a range of human diseases,
including neurodegenerative, liver and muscle disorders. These protein aggregates
are typically positive for the autophagy receptor p62. Whereas the
ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) degrades shortlived and misfolded ubiquitinated
proteins that are small enough to enter the narrow pore of the barrel-shaped
proteasome, the lysosomal pathway of autophagy can degrade larger structures
including entire organelles or protein aggregates. This degradation requires
autophagy receptors that link the cargo with the molecular machinery of autophagy
and is enhanced by certain posttranslational modifications of the cargo. In this 
review we focus on how autophagy clears aggregate-prone proteins and the
relevance of this process to protein aggregate associated diseases.

Copyright 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20412801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Autophagy. 2010 May;6(4):555-7. doi: 10.4161/auto.6.4.11812. Epub 2010 May 16.

Quality control autophagy: a joint effort of ubiquitin, protein deacetylase and
actin cytoskeleton.

Lee JY(1), Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA.

Autophagy has been predominantly studied as a nonselective self-digestion process
that recycles macromolecules and produces energy in response to starvation.
However, autophagy independent of nutrient status has long been known to exist.
Recent evidence suggests that this form of autophagy enforces intracellular
quality control by selectively disposing of aberrant protein aggregates and
damaged organelles--common denominators in various forms of neurodegenerative
diseases. By definition, this form of autophagy, termed quality-control (QC)
autophagy, must be different from nutrient-regulated autophagy in substrate
selectivity, regulation and function. We have recently identified the
ubiquitin-binding deacetylase, HDAC6, as a key component that establishes QC.
HDAC6 is not required for autophagy activation per se; rather, it is recruited to
ubiquitinated autophagic substrates where it stimulates autophagosome-lysosome
fusion by promoting F-actin remodeling in a cortactin-dependent manner.
Remarkably, HDAC6 and cortactin are dispensable for starvation-induced autophagy.
These findings reveal that autophagosomes associated with QC are molecularly and 
biochemically distinct from those associated with starvation autophagy, thereby
providing a new molecular framework to understand the emerging complexity of
autophagy and therapeutic potential of this unique machinery.

PMCID: PMC3752377
PMID: 20404488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Apr;9(4):942-52. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0988. Epub
2010 Apr 6.

Treatment with panobinostat induces glucose-regulated protein 78 acetylation and 
endoplasmic reticulum stress in breast cancer cells.

Rao R(1), Nalluri S, Kolhe R, Yang Y, Fiskus W, Chen J, Ha K, Buckley KM, Balusu 
R, Coothankandaswamy V, Joshi A, Atadja P, Bhalla KN.

Author information: 
(1)MCG Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, 1120 15th Street, CN-2133,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Increased levels of misfolded polypeptides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
triggers the dissociation of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) from the three 
transmembrane ER-stress mediators, i.e., protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase
(PERK), activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6), and inositol-requiring enzyme
1alpha, which results in the adaptive unfolded protein response (UPR). In the
present studies, we determined that histone deacetylase-6 (HDAC6) binds and
deacetylates GRP78. Following treatment with the pan-histone deacetylase
inhibitor panobinostat (Novartis Pharmaceuticals), or knockdown of HDAC6 by short
hairpin RNA, GRP78 is acetylated in 11 lysine residues, which dissociates GRP78
from PERK. This is associated with the activation of a lethal UPR in human breast
cancer cells. Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that binding of HDAC6 to GRP78
requires the second catalytic and COOH-terminal BUZ domains of HDAC6. Treatment
with panobinostat increased the levels of phosphorylated-eukaryotic translation
initiation factor (p-eIF2alpha), ATF4, and CAAT/enhancer binding protein
homologous protein (CHOP). Panobinostat treatment also increased the proapoptotic
BIK, BIM, BAX, and BAK levels, as well as increased the activity of caspase-7.
Knockdown of GRP78 sensitized MCF-7 cells to bortezomib and panobinostat-induced 
UPR and cell death. These findings indicate that enforced acetylation and
decreased binding of GRP78 to PERK is mechanistically linked to
panobinostat-induced UPR and cell death of breast cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther; 
9(4); 942-52. (c)2010 AACR.

PMID: 20371724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 4;285(23):17896-906. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.096578. Epub
2010 Mar 22.

TPPP/p25 promotes tubulin acetylation by inhibiting histone deacetylase 6.

Tokési N(1), Lehotzky A, Horváth I, Szabó B, Oláh J, Lau P, Ovádi J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Enzymology, Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Karolina u 29, H-1113, Budapest, Hungary.

TPPP/p25 (tubulin polymerization-promoting protein/p25) is an unstructured
protein that induces microtubule polymerization in vitro and is aligned along the
microtubule network in transfected mammalian cells. In normal human brain,
TPPP/p25 is expressed predominantly in oligodendrocytes, where its expression is 
proved to be crucial for their differentiation process. Here we demonstrated that
the expression of TPPP/p25 in HeLa cells, in doxycycline-inducible CHO10 cells,
and in the oligodendrocyte CG-4 cells promoted the acetylation of alpha-tubulin
at residue Lys-40, whereas its down-regulation by specific small interfering RNA 
in CG-4 cells or by the withdrawal of doxycycline from CHO10 cells decreased the 
acetylation level of alpha-tubulin. Our results indicate that TPPP/p25 binds to
HDAC6 (histone deacetylase 6), an enzyme responsible for tubulin deacetylation.
Moreover, we demonstrated that the direct interaction of these two proteins
resulted in the inhibition of the deacetylase activity of HDAC6. The measurement 
of HDAC6 activity showed that TPPP/p25 is able to induce almost complete (90%)
inhibition at 3 microM concentration. In addition, treatment of the cells with
nocodazole, vinblastine, or cold exposure revealed that microtubule acetylation
induced by trichostatin A, a well known HDAC6 inhibitor, does not cause
microtubule stabilization. In contrast, the microtubule bundling activity of
TPPP/p25 was able to protect the microtubules from depolymerization. Finally, we 
demonstrated that, similarly to other HDAC6 inhibitors, TPPP/p25 influences the
microtubule dynamics by decreasing the growth velocity of the microtubule plus
ends and also affects cell motility as demonstrated by time lapse video
experiments. Thus, we suggest that TPPP/p25 is a multiple effector of the
microtubule organization.

PMCID: PMC2878552
PMID: 20308065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Panminerva Med. 2010 Mar;52(1):9-25.

Autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system in cardiac dysfunction.

Zheng Q(1), Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Biomedical Sciences, Sanford School of Medicine of the
University of South Dakota, 414 E. Clark Street, Vermillion, SD 57069, USA.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and autophagy are two major intracellular
protein degradation pathways. The UPS mediates the removal of soluble abnormal
proteins as well as the targeted degradation of most normal proteins that are no 
longer needed. Autophagy is generally responsible for bulky removal of defective 
organelles and for sequestering portions of cytoplasm for lysosomal degradation
during starvation. Impaired or inadequate protein degradation in the heart is
associated with and may be a major pathogenic factor for a wide variety of
cardiac dysfunctions, while enhanced protein degradation is also implicated in
the development of cardiac pathology. It was generally assumed that the UPS and
autophagy serve distinct functions. Therefore, the functional roles of the UPS
and autophagy in the hearts have been largely investigated separately. However,
recent advances in understanding the shared mechanisms contributing to UPS
alteration and the induction of autophagy have helped reveal the link and
interplay between the two proteolytic systems in the heart. These links are
exemplified by scenarios in which inadequate UPS proteolytic function leads to
activation of autophagy, helping alleviate proteotoxic stress. It is becoming
increasingly clear that a coordinated and complementary relationship between the 
two systems is critical to protect cells against stress. Several proteins
including p62, NBR1, HDAC6, and co-chaperones appear to play an important role in
harmonizing and mobilizing the consortium formed by the UPS and autophagy.

PMCID: PMC2840262
PMID: 20228723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. ChemMedChem. 2010 Apr 6;5(4):598-607. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200900494.

Synthesis of N-hydroxycinnamides capped with a naturally occurring moiety as
inhibitors of histone deacetylase.

Huang WJ(1), Chen CC, Chao SW, Lee SS, Hsu FL, Lu YL, Hung MF, Chang CI.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Xing
Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are regarded as promising therapeutics for 
the treatment of cancer. All reported HDAC inhibitors contain three
pharmacophoric features: a zinc-chelating group, a hydrophobic linker, and a
hydrophobic cap for surface recognition. In this study we investigated the
effectiveness of osthole, a hydrophobic Chinese herbal compound, as the surface
recognition cap in hydroxamate-based compounds as inhibitors of HDAC. Nine novel 
osthole-based N-hydroxycinnamides were synthesized and screened for enzyme
inhibition activity. Compounds 9 d, 9 e, 9 g exhibited inhibitory activities
(IC(50)=24.5, 20.0, 19.6 nM) against nuclear HDACs in HeLa cells comparable to
that of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; IC(50)=24.5 nM), a potent
inhibitor clinically used for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). 
While compounds 9 d and 9 e showed SAHA-like activity towards HDAC1 and HDAC6,
compound 9 g was more selective for HDAC1. Compound 9 d exhibited the best
cellular effect, which was comparable to that of SAHA, of enhancing acetylation
of either alpha-tubulin or histone H3. Molecular docking analysis showed that the
osthole moiety of compound 9 d may interact with the same hydrophobic surface
pocket exploited by SAHA and it may be modified to provide class-specific
selectivity. These results suggest that osthole is an effective hydrophobic cap
when incorporated into N-hydroxycinnamide-derived HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 20209563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Jun;87(6):1103-14. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0509363. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Differential effects of selective HDAC inhibitors on macrophage inflammatory
responses to the Toll-like receptor 4 agonist LPS.

Halili MA(1), Andrews MR, Labzin LI, Schroder K, Matthias G, Cao C, Lovelace E,
Reid RC, Le GT, Hume DA, Irvine KM, Matthias P, Fairlie DP, Sweet MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, S. Lucia,
Brisbane, Queensland, 4072, Australia.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Dec;88(6):1063-4; author reply 1065-6.

Broad-spectrum inhibitors of HDACs are therapeutic in many inflammatory disease
models but exacerbated disease in a mouse model of atherosclerosis. HDAC
inhibitors have anti- and proinflammatory effects on macrophages in vitro. We
report here that several broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitors, including TSA and SAHA, 
suppressed the LPS-induced mRNA expression of the proinflammatory mediators
Edn-1, Ccl-7/MCP-3, and Il-12p40 but amplified the expression of the
proatherogenic factors Cox-2 and Pai-1/serpine1 in primary mouse BMM. Similar
effects were also apparent in LPS-stimulated TEPM and HMDM. The pro- and
anti-inflammatory effects of TSA were separable over a concentration range,
implying that individual HDACs have differential effects on macrophage
inflammatory responses. The HDAC1-selective inhibitor, MS-275, retained
proinflammatory effects (amplification of LPS-induced expression of Cox-2 and
Pai-1 in BMM) but suppressed only some inflammatory responses. In contrast, 17a
(a reportedly HDAC6-selective inhibitor) retained anti-inflammatory but not
proinflammatory properties. Despite this, HDAC6(-/-) macrophages showed normal
LPS-induced expression of HDAC-dependent inflammatory genes, arguing that the
anti-inflammatory effects of 17a are not a result of inhibition of HDAC6 alone.
Thus, 17a provides a tool to identify individual HDACs with proinflammatory
properties.

PMID: 20200406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 1;9(3):482-5.

An old dog learns new tricks: a novel function for Cdc20-APC in dendrite
morphogenesis in neurons.

Puram SV(1), Kim AH, Bonni A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA USA.

The E3 ubiquitin ligases Cdc20-anaphase-promoting complex (Cdc20-APC) and
Cdh1-APC play key roles in cell cycle transitions in proliferating cells.
Remarkably, these ubiquitin ligases are also expressed in postmitotic neurons,
raising interest in non-mitotic functions of the APC. Cdh1-APC has been
implicated in diverse functions in the nervous system, from the control of axon
growth and patterning to synapse development to neuron survival. However, until
recently the question of whether Cdc20-APC harbors functions in neurons remained 
unanswered. New evidence from Kim et al. (2009) has uncovered a novel role for
Cdc20-APCin dendrite growth and elaboration in post-mitotic neurons.
Interestingly, the histone deacetylase HDAC6 augments Cdc20-APC activity at the
centrosome by promoting Cdc20 polyubiquitination. In turn, Cdc20-APC triggers the
degradation of the centrosomally localized protein Id1 and thereby promotes
dendrite growth and elaboration. These findings have advanced our understanding
of APC biology in neuronal connectivity in the brain.

PMCID: PMC2853878
PMID: 20195072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 May 15;19(10):2015-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq083. Epub 2010 Feb
24.

A mutation in the 3'-UTR of the HDAC6 gene abolishing the post-transcriptional
regulation mediated by hsa-miR-433 is linked to a new form of dominant X-linked
chondrodysplasia.

Simon D(1), Laloo B, Barillot M, Barnetche T, Blanchard C, Rooryck C, Marche M,
Burgelin I, Coupry I, Chassaing N, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Lacombe D, Grosset C,
Arveiler B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine, EA 4137, Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 
2, Bordeaux 33076, France.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Sep 1;19(17):3489-90.

A family with dominant X-linked chondrodysplasia was previously described. The
disease locus was ascribed to a 24 Mb interval in Xp11.3-q13.1. We have
identified a variant (c.*281A>T) in the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of the HDAC6
gene that totally segregates with the disease. The variant is located in the seed
sequence of hsa-miR-433. Our data showed that, in MG63 osteosarcoma cells,
hsa-miR-433 (miR433) down-regulated both the expression of endogenous HDAC6 and
that of an enhanced green fluorescent protein-reporter mRNA bearing the wild-type
3'-UTR of HDAC6. This effect was totally abrogated when the reporter mRNA bore
the mutated HDAC6 3'-UTR. The HDAC6 protein was found to be over-expressed in
thymus from an affected male fetus. Concomitantly, the level of total
alpha-tubulin, a target of HDAC6, was found to be increased in the affected fetal
thymus, whereas the level of acetylated alpha-tubulin was found to be profoundly 
decreased. Skin biopsies were obtained from a female patient who presented a
striking body asymmetry with hypotrophy of the left limbs. The mutated HDAC6
allele was expressed in 31% of left arm-derived fibroblasts, whereas it was not
expressed in the right arm. Overexpression of HDAC6 was observed in left
arm-derived fibroblasts. Altogether these results strongly suggest that this
HDAC6 3'-UTR variant suppressed hsa-miR-433-mediated post-transcriptional
regulation causing the overexpression of HDAC6. This variant is likely to
constitute the molecular cause of this new form of X-linked chondrodysplasia.
This represents to our knowledge the first example of a skeletal disease caused
by the loss of a miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional regulation on its target
mRNA.

PMID: 20181727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Epigenetics. 2010 Feb 16;5(2):100-4. Epub 2010 Feb 27.

Epigenetic regulation of androgen receptor signaling in prostate cancer.

Gao L(1), Alumkal J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Knight Cancer Institute, Both at Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the United States, and it is 
the second leading cause of cancer-related death in American men. The Androgen
receptor (AR), a nuclear hormone and transcription factor, is the most
therapeutically relevant target in this disease. While most efforts in the clinic
are still directed at lowering levels of androgens that activate AR, resistance
to androgen deprivation eventually develops, and most prostate cancer deaths are 
attributable to this castration-resistant form of this disease. Recent work has
shed light on the importance of epigenetic events including facilitation of AR
signaling by histone-modifying enzymes and also on the role that enzymes such as 
HDAC6 play in stabilizing AR in prostate cancer cells. Herein, we summarize
recent findings on the role of epigenetic enzymes in AR signaling and highlight
examples on how interdiction of critical epigenetic enzymes may attenuate AR
action in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3150559
PMID: 20160483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell. 2010 Feb 12;37(3):355-69. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.01.001.

A DNAJB chaperone subfamily with HDAC-dependent activities suppresses toxic
protein aggregation.

Hageman J(1), Rujano MA, van Waarde MA, Kakkar V, Dirks RP, Govorukhina N,
Oosterveld-Hut HM, Lubsen NH, Kampinga HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Section of Radiation and Stress Cell Biology,
University Medical Center Groningen and University of Groningen, 9700 RB
Groningen, The Netherlands.

Misfolding and aggregation are associated with cytotoxicity in several protein
folding diseases. A large network of molecular chaperones ensures protein quality
control. Here, we show that within the Hsp70, Hsp110, and Hsp40 (DNAJ) chaperone 
families, members of a subclass of the DNAJB family (particularly DNAJB6b and
DNAJB8) are superior suppressors of aggregation and toxicity of
disease-associated polyglutamine proteins. The antiaggregation activity is
largely independent of the N-terminal Hsp70-interacting J-domain. Rather, a
C-terminal serine-rich (SSF-SST) region and the C-terminal tail are essential.
The SSF-SST region is involved in substrate binding, formation of polydisperse
oligomeric complexes, and interaction with histone deacetylases (HDAC4, HDAC6,
SIRT2). Inhibiting HDAC4 reduced DNAJB8 function. DNAJB8 is (de)acetylated at two
conserved C-terminal lysines that are not involved in substrate binding, but do
play a role in suppressing protein aggregation. Combined, our data provide a
functional link between HDACs and DNAJs in suppressing cytotoxic protein
aggregation.

PMID: 20159555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11219-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.042754. Epub 2010
Feb 4.

The microtubule-associated histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) regulates epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) endocytic trafficking and degradation.

Gao YS(1), Hubbert CC, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a microtubule-associated deacetylase with
tubulin deacetylase activity, and it binds dynein motors. Recent studies revealed
that microtubule acetylation affects the affinity and processivity of microtubule
motors. These unique properties implicate a role for HDAC6 in intracellular
organelle transport. Here, we show that HDAC6 associates with the endosomal
compartments and controls epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) trafficking and
degradation. We found that loss of HDAC6 promoted EGFR degradation.
Mechanistically, HDAC6 deficiency did not cause aberrant EGFR internalization and
recycling. Rather, it resulted in accelerated segregation of EGFR from early
endosomes and premature delivery of EGFR to the late endosomal and lysosomal
compartments. The deregulated EGFR endocytic trafficking was accompanied by an
increase in microtubule-dependent movement of EGFR-bearing vesicles, revealing a 
novel regulation of EGFR vesicular trafficking and degradation by the microtubule
deacetylase HDAC6.

PMCID: PMC2856999
PMID: 20133936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 19;392(4):608-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.091. Epub 2010 Jan 25.

Requirement of a novel splicing variant of human histone deacetylase 6 for
TGF-beta1-mediated gene activation.

Zhuang Y(1), Nguyen HT, Lasky JA, Cao S, Li C, Hu J, Guo X, Burow ME, Shan B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tulane School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) belongs to the family of class IIb HDACs and
predominantly deacetylates non-histone proteins in the cytoplasm via the
C-terminal deacetylase domain of its two tandem deacetylase domains. HDAC6
modulates fundamental cellular processes via deacetylation of alpha-tubulin,
cortactin, molecular chaperones, and other peptides. Our previous study indicates
that HDAC6 mediates TGF-beta1-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in 
A549 cells. In the current study, we identify a novel splicing variant of human
HDAC6, hHDAC6p114. The hHDAC6p114 mRNA arises from incomplete splicing and
encodes a truncated isoform of the hHDAC6p114 protein of 114kDa when compared to 
the major isoform hHDAC6p131. The hHDAC6p114 protein lacks the first 152 amino
acids from N-terminus in the hHDAC6p131 protein, which harbors a nuclear export
signal peptide and 76 amino acids of the N-terminal deacetylase domain.
hHDAC6p114 is intact in its deacetylase activity against alpha-tubulin. The
expression hHDAC6p114 is elevated in a MCF-7 derivative that exhibits an EMT-like
phenotype. Moreover, hHDAC6p114 is required for TGF-beta1-activated gene
expression associated with EMT in A549 cells. Taken together, our results
implicate that expression and function of hHDAC6p114 is differentially regulated 
when compared to hHDAC6p131.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2859088
PMID: 20102703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jun;51(6):2943-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4639. Epub
2010 Jan 20.

Effect of EGF-induced HDAC6 activation on corneal epithelial wound healing.

Wang J(1), Lin A, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Torrance, California 90502, USA.

PURPOSE: Epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulates migration in corneal epithelial
wound healing. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of
EGF-induced alpha-tubulin deacetylation through activating HDAC6 on migration in 
corneal epithelial wound healing.
METHODS: Human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 medium
containing 10% FBS in a 37 degrees C incubator supplied with 5% CO(2). Western
blot analysis was used to determine protein expression. Activity of HDAC6 was
suppressed by trichostatin A (TSA) and by siRNA specific to HDAC6. Corneal
epithelial cell migration was measured by using scratch-induced directional
migration assay in cultured cells and by corneal epithelial debridement using a
mouse whole-eye organ culture model.
RESULTS: The authors found EGF stimulated corneal epithelial cell migration in
wound healing by enhancing HDAC6 activity, resulting in the deacetylation of
alpha-tubulin. EGF stimulated HDAC6 enzymatic activity and protein translocation 
toward the leading edge of the cell. Inhibition of HDAC6 activity by TSA
significantly suppressed EGF-induced cell migration and delayed EGF-induced wound
healing in epithelially debrided mouse corneas. In the meantime, knockdown of
HDAC6 mRNA with specific siRNA effectively abolished EGF-induced deacetylation of
alpha-tubulin, resulting in the inhibition of cell migration.
CONCLUSIONS: These results reveal an important mechanism that involves
EGF-induced HDAC6 activation and alpha-tubulin deacetylation, subsequently
affecting corneal epithelial migration in the wound-healing process.

PMCID: PMC2891458
PMID: 20089874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. EMBO J. 2010 Mar 3;29(5):969-80. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.405. Epub 2010 Jan 14.

HDAC6 controls autophagosome maturation essential for ubiquitin-selective
quality-control autophagy.

Lee JY(1), Koga H, Kawaguchi Y, Tang W, Wong E, Gao YS, Pandey UB, Kaushik S,
Tresse E, Lu J, Taylor JP, Cuervo AM, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Autophagy is primarily considered a non-selective degradation process induced by 
starvation. Nutrient-independent basal autophagy, in contrast, imposes
intracellular QC by selective disposal of aberrant protein aggregates and damaged
organelles, a process critical for suppressing neurodegenerative diseases. The
molecular mechanism that distinguishes these two fundamental autophagic
responses, however, remains mysterious. Here, we identify the ubiquitin-binding
deacetylase, histone deacetylase-6 (HDAC6), as a central component of basal
autophagy that targets protein aggregates and damaged mitochondria. Surprisingly,
HDAC6 is not required for autophagy activation; rather, it controls the fusion of
autophagosomes to lysosomes. HDAC6 promotes autophagy by recruiting a
cortactin-dependent, actin-remodelling machinery, which in turn assembles an
F-actin network that stimulates autophagosome-lysosome fusion and substrate
degradation. Indeed, HDAC6 deficiency leads to autophagosome maturation failure, 
protein aggregate build-up, and neurodegeneration. Remarkably, HDAC6 and F-actin 
assembly are completely dispensable for starvation-induced autophagy, uncovering 
the fundamental difference of these autophagic modes. Our study identifies HDAC6 
and the actin cytoskeleton as critical components that define QC autophagy and
uncovers a novel regulation of autophagy at the level of autophagosome-lysosome
fusion.

PMCID: PMC2837169
PMID: 20075865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Ann Biomed Eng. 2010 Mar;38(3):729-37. doi: 10.1007/s10439-009-9896-6.

Normal shear stress and vascular smooth muscle cells modulate migration of
endothelial cells through histone deacetylase 6 activation and tubulin
acetylation.

Wang YH(1), Yan ZQ, Qi YX, Cheng BB, Wang XD, Zhao D, Shen BR, Jiang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mechanobiology & Medical Engineering, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Endothelial cells (ECs) line the innermost of the blood vessel wall and are
constantly subjected to shear stress imposed by blood flow. ECs were also
influenced by the neighboring vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). The
bidirectional communication between ECs and VSMCs modulates vascular homeostasis.
In this study, the involvement of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in modulating
migration of ECs co-cultured with VSMCs by the normal level of laminar shear
stress (NSS) was investigated. ECs was either cultured alone or co-cultured with 
VSMCs under static conditions or subjected to NSS of 15 dyne/cm2 by using a
parallel-plate co-culture flow chamber system. It was demonstrated that both NSS 
and VSMCs could increase EC migration. The migration level of ECs co-cultured
with VSMCs under NSS was not higher than that under the static condition. The
process of EC migration regulated by VSMCs and NSS was associated with the
increased expression of HDAC6 and low level of acetylated tubulin. The increase
in HDAC6 expression was accompanied by a time-dependent decrease in the
acetylation of tubulin in ECs co-cultured with VSMCs. Inhibition of the HDAC6 by 
siRNA or tributyrin, an inhibitor of HDACs, induced a parallel alteration in the 
migration and the acetylated tubulin of ECs co-cultured with VSMCs. It was
observed by immunofluorescence staining that the acetylated tubulin was
distributed mostly around the cell nucleus in ECs co-cultured with VSMCs. The
results suggest that the NSS may display a protective function on the vascular
homeostasis by modulating EC migration to a normal level in a VSMC-dependent
manner. This modulation process involves the down-regulation of acetylated
tubulin which results from increased HDAC6 activity in ECs.

PMID: 20069369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):813-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0448. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

JNK1 mediates degradation HIF-1alpha by a VHL-independent mechanism that involves
the chaperones Hsp90/Hsp70.

Zhang D(1), Li J, Costa M, Gao J, Huang C.

Author information: 
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, Tuxedo, New York 10987, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is a master transcription factor
that is critical for the regulation of a variety of cellular functions.
HIF-1alpha is rapidly degraded under normoxic conditions by ubiquitin-mediated
proteasome pathway controlled by the tumor suppressor von Hippel Lindau (VHL).
Several recent studies reveal that heat-shock proteins (Hsp) can regulate
HIF-1alpha protein degradation by a VHL-independent pathway. Here, we demonstrate
that the stress kinase c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1) is required for
Hsp-dependent regulation of HIF-1alpha. Stabilization of HIF-1alpha was impaired 
in JNK1-/- cells but could be rescued by JNK1 reconstitution under hypoxic
conditions. These effects could be phenocopied in other cell settings by JNK1
silencing. Accordingly, HIF-1 transcriptional activity and target gene expression
were dramatically reduced in JNK1-/- cells. Further, decreased levels of
endogenous Hsp90/Hsp70 proteins in JNK1-/- cells affected the protective roles of
these chaperones in stabilizing newly synthesized HIF-1alpha, whereas enforced
expression of Hsp90/Hsp70 in JNK1-/- cells increased HIF-1alpha stability
relative to parental control cells. Furthering this connection, we also found
that defective expression of the Hsp90 acetyltransferase HDAC6 in JNK1-/- cells
was associated with reduced Hsp90 chaperone activity. Taken together, our studies
define a novel function for JNK1 in regulating HIF-1alpha turnover by a
VHL-independent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2939838
PMID: 20068160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Jan;9(1):246-56. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0495. Epub
2010 Jan 6.

Selective inhibition of histone deacetylases sensitizes malignant cells to death 
receptor ligands.

Wood TE(1), Dalili S, Simpson CD, Sukhai MA, Hurren R, Anyiwe K, Mao X, Suarez
Saiz F, Gronda M, Eberhard Y, MacLean N, Ketela T, Reed JC, Moffat J, Minden MD, 
Batey RA, Schimmer AD.

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Hospital, Ontario Cancer Institute, Ontario, Canada.

Evasion of death receptor ligand-induced apoptosis represents an important
contributor to cancer development and progression. Therefore, molecules that
restore sensitivity to death receptor stimuli would be important tools to better 
understand this biological pathway and potential leads for therapeutic adjuncts. 
Previously, the small-molecule 4-(4-chloro-2-methylphenoxy)-N-hydroxybutanamide
(that we propose be named droxinostat) was identified as a chemical sensitizer to
death receptor stimuli, decreasing the expression of the caspase-8 inhibitor
FLIP. However, the direct targets of droxinostat were unknown. To better
understand the mechanism of action of droxinostat and highlight new strategies to
restore sensitivity to death receptor ligands, we analyzed changes in gene
expression using the Connectivity Map after treating cells with droxinostat.
Changes in gene expression after droxinostat treatment resembled changes observed
after treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Therefore, we
examined the effects of droxinostat on HDAC activity and showed that it
selectively inhibited HDAC3, HDAC6, and HDAC8 and that inhibition of these HDACs 
was functionally important for its ability to sensitize cells to death ligands.
Thus, we have identified a selective HDAC inhibitor and showed that selective
HDAC inhibition sensitizes cells to death ligands, thereby highlighting a new
mechanism to overcome resistance to death receptor ligands.

PMID: 20053768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Mar;67(6):995-1004. doi: 10.1007/s00018-009-0233-x. Epub 
2009 Dec 29.

The enhancement of antiproliferative and proapoptotic activity of HDAC inhibitors
by curcumin is mediated by Hsp90 inhibition.

Giommarelli C(1), Zuco V, Favini E, Pisano C, Dal Piaz F, De Tommasi N, Zunino F.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

Curcumin, a natural polyphenol, has been described to exhibit effects on
signaling pathways, leading to induction of apoptosis. In this study, we observed
that curcumin inhibited Hsp90 activity causing depletion of client proteins
implicated in survival pathways. Based on this observation, this study was
designed to investigate the cellular effects of curcumin combination with the
pan-HDAC inhibitors, vorinostat and panobinostat, which induce hyperacetylation
of Hsp90, resulting in inhibition of its chaperone function. The results showed
that, at subtoxic concentrations, curcumin markedly sensitized tumor cells to
vorinostat- and panobinostat-induced growth inhibition and apoptosis. The
sensitization was associated with persistent depletion of Hsp90 client proteins
(EGFR, Raf-1, Akt, and survivin). In conclusion, our findings document a novel
mechanism of action of curcumin and support the therapeutic potential of
curcumin/HDAC inhibitors combination, because the synergistic interaction was
observed at pharmacologically achievable concentrations, which were ineffective
when each drug was used alone.

PMID: 20039095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Sci Signal. 2009 Dec 22;2(102):ra84. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2000576.

Regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor trafficking by lysine deacetylase 
HDAC6.

Deribe YL(1), Wild P, Chandrashaker A, Curak J, Schmidt MH, Kalaidzidis Y,
Milutinovic N, Kratchmarova I, Buerkle L, Fetchko MJ, Schmidt P, Kittanakom S,
Brown KR, Jurisica I, Blagoev B, Zerial M, Stagljar I, Dikic I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry II and Cluster of Excellence Macromolecular
Complexes, Goethe University School of Medicine, Frankfurt (Main), Germany.

Binding of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to its receptor leads to receptor
dimerization, assembly of protein complexes, and activation of signaling networks
that control key cellular responses. Despite their fundamental role in cell
biology, little is known about protein complexes associated with the EGF receptor
(EGFR) before growth factor stimulation. We used a modified membrane yeast
two-hybrid system together with bioinformatics to identify 87 candidate proteins 
interacting with the ligand-unoccupied EGFR. Among them was histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6), a cytoplasmic lysine deacetylase, which we found negatively regulated
EGFR endocytosis and degradation by controlling the acetylation status of
alpha-tubulin and, subsequently, receptor trafficking along microtubules. A
negative feedback loop consisting of EGFR-mediated phosphorylation of HDAC6
Tyr(570) resulted in reduced deacetylase activity and increased acetylation of
alpha-tubulin. This study illustrates the complexity of the EGFR-associated
interactome and identifies protein acetylation as a previously unknown regulator 
of receptor endocytosis and degradation.

PMID: 20029029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 12;285(7):4489-510. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.072728. Epub 2009
Dec 15.

Recruitment of cAMP-response element-binding protein and histone deacetylase has 
opposite effects on glucocorticoid receptor gene transcription.

Govindan MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Hôtel-Dieu de
Québec, Québec G1R 2J6, Canada. mgovindanv@gmail.com

Glucocorticoids control the synthesis of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in
various tissues through a negative feedback regulation of the mRNA. In this
study, we have identified feedback regulatory domains in the human GR gene
promoter and examined the roles of GR, the cAMP-response element-binding protein 
(CREB), and HDAC-6 in association with promoter elements of the human GR gene.
Using breast cancer T47D and HeLa-GR cells, we identify specific negative
glucocorticoid-response elements in the GR gene. The feedback regulatory domains 
were also involved in interactions with CREB. GR-bound negative
glucocorticoid-response elements recruited HDAC-6, and this was dependent on
treatment with dexamethasone. Both CREB and HDAC-6 formed complexes with
GR-dexamethasone. The HDAC-6 LXXLL motif between amino acids 313 and 418 made
direct contact with the GR AF-1 domain. Interestingly enough, although the level 
of GR decreased in CREB knockdown cells, it was elevated in HDAC-6 knockdown
cells. Our results suggest that CREB-P is dephosphorylated and that HDAC-6 is
recruited by the GR, and they play opposite roles in the negative feedback
regulation of the GR gene.

PMCID: PMC2836055
PMID: 20018896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Mar;35(4):870-80. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.197. Epub
2009 Dec 9.

Inhibitors of class 1 histone deacetylases reverse contextual memory deficits in 
a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Kilgore M(1), Miller CA, Fass DM, Hennig KM, Haggarty SJ, Sweatt JD, Rumbaugh G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Evelyn F McKnight Brain Institute, University of
Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Comment in
    Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Mar;35(4):853-4.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized clinically
by cognitive impairments that progress to dementia and death. The earliest
symptoms of AD present as a relatively pure deficit in memory retrieval.
Therefore, drug treatments that intervene in the early stages of AD by rescuing
memory deficits could be promising therapies to slow, or even reverse progression
of the disease. In this study, we tested the potential of systemic histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) treatment to rescue cognitive deficits in a mouse
model of AD. APPswe/PS1dE9 mice showed pronounced contextual memory impairments
beginning at 6 months of age. Chronic HDACi injections (2-3 weeks) did not alter 
contextual memory formation in normal mice, but had profound effects in
transgenic animals. Injections of sodium valproate, sodium butyrate, or
vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid; Zolinza) completely restored
contextual memory in these mutant mice. Further behavioral testing of the
HDACi-treated transgenic mice showed that the newly consolidated memories were
stably maintained over a 2-week period. Measurement of the HDAC isoform
selectivity profile of sodium valproate, sodium butyrate, and vorinostat revealed
the common inhibition of class I HDACs (HDAC1, 2, 3, 8) with little effect on the
class IIa HDAC family members (HDAC4, 5, 7, 9) and inhibition of HDAC6 only by
vorinostat. These preclinical results indicate that targeted inhibition of class 
I HDAC isoforms is a promising avenue for treating the cognitive deficits
associated with early stage AD.

PMCID: PMC3055373
PMID: 20010553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Thorac Oncol. 2009 Dec;4(12):1455-65. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181bc9419.

Induction of E-cadherin in lung cancer and interaction with growth suppression by
histone deacetylase inhibition.

Kakihana M(1), Ohira T, Chan D, Webster RB, Kato H, Drabkin HA, Gemmill RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado at Denver and Health
Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Loss of E-cadherin confers a poor prognosis in lung cancer patients
and is associated with in vitro resistance to endothelial growth factor receptor 
inhibitors. Zinc finger E box-binding homeobox (ZEB)-1, the predominant
transcriptional suppressor of E-cadherin in lung tumor lines, recruits histone
deacetylases (HDACs) as co-repressors.
METHODS: NSCLC cell lines were treated with HDAC inhibitors and analyzed for
E-cadherin induction, growth inhibition and apoptosis. National Cancer
Institute-H157 cells expressing ectopic E-cadherin were tested for tumorigenicity
in murine xenografts.
RESULTS: We found that treatment with MS-275, compared to vorinostat (SAHA),
valproic acid or trichostatin A, was most effective in E-cadherin up-regulation
and persistence in non-small cell lung cancers. As with other tumor types and
HDAC inhibitors, MS-275 inhibited growth and induced apoptosis. Importantly,
blocking E-cadherin induction by short hairpin RNA resulted in less inhibition by
MS-275, implicating the epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype process as a
contributing factor. In contrast to H460 and H661, H157 cells were resistant to
E-cadherin up-regulation by HDAC inhibitors. However, E-cadherin was restored, in
a synergistic manner, by combined knockdown of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2. In addition, H157
cells stably transfected with E-cadherin were markedly attenuated in their tumor 
forming ability. Lastly, combining MS-275 with the microtubule stabilizing agent,
paclitaxel, or 17-(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin, a heat shock protein 90 
inhibitor, resulted in synergistic growth inhibition. Since MS-275 has no
reported activity against HDAC6, which regulates both microtubule and heat shock 
protein 90 functions, other mechanisms of synergy are anticipated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the role of ZEB proteins and HDAC inhibitors
in the pathogenesis and treatment of lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC2796578
PMID: 20009910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):3554-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.063354. Epub 2009
Dec 12.

IIp45 inhibits cell migration through inhibition of HDAC6.

Wu Y(1), Song SW, Sun J, Bruner JM, Fuller GN, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

IIp45 (aka MIIP) is a newly discovered gene whose protein product inhibits cell
migration. HDAC6 is a class IIb deacetylase that specifically deacetylates
alpha-tubulin, modulates microtubule dynamics, and promotes cell migration. A
yeast two-hybrid assay using IIp45 as bait identified HDAC6 protein as a binding 
partner of IIp45. This physical interaction of the two functionally antagonistic 
proteins was confirmed by glutathione S-transferase pulldown assay and
co-immunoprecipitation assay in human cells. Serial deletion constructs of HDAC6 
were used to characterize the interaction of HDAC6 and IIp45, and this analysis
found that the two catalytic domains of HDAC6 protein are required for IIp45
binding. We examined the protein expression patterns of IIp45 and HDAC6 in glioma
tissues. Elevated protein levels of HDAC6 were found in high grade glioma
samples, in contrast to the decreased protein expression of IIp45. The potential 
negative regulation of HDAC6 expression by IIp45 was confirmed in cell lines with
altered IIp45 expression by constitutive overexpression or small interfering RNA 
knockdown. Protein turnover study revealed that overexpression of IIp45
significantly reduces the intracellular protein stability of endogenous HDAC6,
indicating a possible mechanism for the negative regulation of HDAC6 by IIp45.
Results from the HDAC activity assay demonstrated that overexpressed IIp45
effectively decreases HDAC6 activity, increases acetylated alpha-tubulin, and
reduces cell migration. The increased cell migration resulting from siIIp45
knockdown was significantly reversed by co-transfection of siHDAC6. Thus, we
report here for the first time a novel mechanism by which IIp45 inhibits cell
motility through inhibition of HDAC6.

PMCID: PMC2823495
PMID: 20008322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Protein Pept Lett. 2010 May;17(5):555-8.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is an independent deacetylase for alpha-tubulin.

Zhao Z(1), Xu H, Gong W.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing 100101, China.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a cytosolic enzyme that catalyzes deacetylation 
of several proteins. Acetylated tubulin has been recently identified as a
physiological substrate of HDAC6. However in previous reports, all in vitro
binding and enzymatic assays were accomplished with only partially purified
protein samples. Therefore, it still remained unclear whether HDAC6 alone could
interact with tubulin and catalyze deacetylation. In this study, both binding and
enzymatic assays were conducted using recombinant-derived HDAC6 and purified
alpha/beta tubulin to eliminate possible contamination. The results clearly
demonstrated that interaction between HDAC6 and tubulin is independent of other
proteins. In addition, HDAC6 can independently catalyze deacetylation of both
tubulin dimer and microtubule polymer.

PMID: 19961433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 6;29(1):209-21. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.324. Epub 2009 Nov 12.

Knockdown of transactive response DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) downregulates
histone deacetylase 6.

Fiesel FC(1), Voigt A, Weber SS, Van den Haute C, Waldenmaier A, Görner K, Walter
M, Anderson ML, Kern JV, Rasse TM, Schmidt T, Springer W, Kirchner R, Bonin M,
Neumann M, Baekelandt V, Alunni-Fabbroni M, Schulz JB, Kahle PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Functional Neurogenetics, Department of Neurodegeneration,
Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany.
fabienne.fiesel@klinikum.uni-tuebingen.de

TDP-43 is an RNA/DNA-binding protein implicated in transcriptional repression and
mRNA processing. Inclusions of TDP-43 are hallmarks of frontotemporal dementia
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Besides aggregation of TDP-43, loss of nuclear
localization is observed in disease. To identify relevant targets of TDP-43, we
performed expression profiling. Thereby, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)
downregulation was discovered on TDP-43 silencing and confirmed at the mRNA and
protein level in human embryonic kidney HEK293E and neuronal SH-SY5Y cells. This 
was accompanied by accumulation of the major HDAC6 substrate, acetyl-tubulin.
HDAC6 levels were restored by re-expression of TDP-43, dependent on RNA binding
and the C-terminal protein interaction domains. Moreover, TDP-43 bound
specifically to HDAC6 mRNA arguing for a direct functional interaction.
Importantly, in vivo validation in TDP-43 knockout Drosophila melanogaster
confirmed the specific downregulation of HDAC6. HDAC6 is necessary for protein
aggregate formation and degradation. Indeed, HDAC6-dependent reduction of
cellular aggregate formation and increased cytotoxicity of polyQ-expanded
ataxin-3 were found in TDP-43 silenced cells. In conclusion, loss of functional
TDP-43 causes HDAC6 downregulation and might thereby contribute to pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2808372
PMID: 19910924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 6;29(1):131-44. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.317. Epub 2009 Nov 5.

CYLD negatively regulates cell-cycle progression by inactivating HDAC6 and
increasing the levels of acetylated tubulin.

Wickström SA(1), Masoumi KC, Khochbin S, Fässler R, Massoumi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,
Martinsried, Germany.

CYLD is a tumour-suppressor gene that is mutated in a benign skin tumour syndrome
called cylindromatosis. The CYLD gene product is a deubiquitinating enzyme that
was shown to regulate cell proliferation, cell survival and inflammatory
responses, mainly through inhibiting NF-kappaB signalling. Here we show that CYLD
controls cell growth and division at the G(1)/S-phase as well as cytokinesis by
associating with alpha-tubulin and microtubules through its CAP-Gly domains.
Translocation of activated CYLD to the perinuclear region of the cell is achieved
by an inhibitory interaction of CYLD with histone deacetylase-6 (HDAC6) leading
to an increase in the levels of acetylated alpha-tubulin around the nucleus. This
facilitates the interaction of CYLD with Bcl-3, leading to a significant delay in
the G(1)-to-S-phase transition. Finally, CYLD also interacts with HDAC6 in the
midbody where it regulates the rate of cytokinesis in a
deubiquitinase-independent manner. Altogether these results identify a mechanism 
by which CYLD regulates cell proliferation at distinct cell-cycle phases.

PMCID: PMC2775896
PMID: 19893491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Med Chem. 2009 Nov 12;52(21):6782-9. doi: 10.1021/jm900555u.

Identification of novel, selective, and stable inhibitors of class II histone
deacetylases. Validation studies of the inhibition of the enzymatic activity of
HDAC4 by small molecules as a novel approach for cancer therapy.

Ontoria JM(1), Altamura S, Di Marco A, Ferrigno F, Laufer R, Muraglia E, Palumbi 
MC, Rowley M, Scarpelli R, Schultz-Fademrecht C, Serafini S, Steinkühler C, Jones
P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Di Ricerche Di Biologia Molecolare, P. Angeletti SpA (IRBM-MRL,
Rome), Via Pontina Km 30,600, I-00040 Pomezia, Italy. jmontoria@gmail.com

5-Aryl-2-(trifluoroacetyl)thiophenes were identified as a new series of class II 
HDAC inhibitors (HDACi). Further development of this new series led to compounds 
such as 6h, a potent inhibitor of HDAC4 and HDAC6 (HDAC4 WT IC(50) = 310 nM,
HDAC6 IC(50) = 70 nM) that displays 40-fold selectivity over HDAC1 and improved
stability in HCT116 cancer cells (t(1/2) = 11 h). Compounds 6h and 2 show
inhibition of alpha-tubulin deacetylation in HCT116 cells at 1 microM
concentration and antiproliferation effects only at concentrations where
inhibition of histone H3 deacetylation is observed.

PMID: 19888759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 17;106(46):19599-604. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0907935106. Epub 2009 Nov 2.

HDAC6 is a target for protection and regeneration following injury in the nervous
system.

Rivieccio MA(1), Brochier C, Willis DE, Walker BA, D'Annibale MA, McLaughlin K,
Siddiq A, Kozikowski AP, Jaffrey SR, Twiss JL, Ratan RR, Langley B.

Author information: 
(1)Burke Medical Research Institute, 785 Mamaroneck Avenue, White Plains, NY
10605, USA.

Central nervous system (CNS) trauma can result in tissue disruption, neuronal and
axonal degeneration, and neurological dysfunction. The limited spontaneous CNS
repair in adulthood and aging is often insufficient to overcome disability.
Several investigations have demonstrated that targeting HDAC activity can protect
neurons and glia and improve outcomes in CNS injury and disease models. However, 
the enthusiasm for pan-HDAC inhibition in treating neurological conditions is
tempered by their toxicity toward a host of CNS cell types -a biological
extension of their anticancer properties. Identification of the HDAC isoform, or 
isoforms, that specifically mediate the beneficial effects of pan-HDAC inhibition
could overcome this concern. Here, we show that pan-HDAC inhibition not only
promotes neuronal protection against oxidative stress, a common mediator of
injury in many neurological conditions, but also promotes neurite growth on
myelin-associated glycoprotein and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan substrates.
Real-time PCR revealed a robust and selective increase in HDAC6 expression due to
injury in neurons. Accordingly, we have used pharmacological and genetic
approaches to demonstrate that inhibition of HDAC6 can promote survival and
regeneration of neurons. Consistent with a cytoplasmic localization, the
biological effects of HDAC6 inhibition appear transcription-independent. Notably,
we find that selective inhibition of HDAC6 avoids cell death associated with
pan-HDAC inhibition. Together, these findings define HDAC6 as a potential
nontoxic therapeutic target for ameliorating CNS injury characterized by
oxidative stress-induced neurodegeneration and insufficient axonal regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2780768
PMID: 19884510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Dec;23(12):1963-72. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0188. Epub 2009 Oct
23.

HDAC6 regulates androgen receptor hypersensitivity and nuclear localization via
modulating Hsp90 acetylation in castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Ai J(1), Wang Y, Dar JA, Liu J, Liu L, Nelson JB, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pennsylvania 15232, USA.

The development of castration-resistant prostate cancer (PCa) requires that under
castration conditions, the androgen receptor (AR) remains active and thus
nuclear. Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) plays a key role in androgen-induced and
-independent nuclear localization and activation of AR. Histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) is implicated, but has not been proven, in regulating AR activity via
modulating Hsp90 acetylation. Here, we report that knockdown of HDAC6 in C4-2
cells using short hairpin RNA impaired ligand-independent nuclear localization of
endogenous AR and inhibited PSA expression and cell growth in the absence or
presence of dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The dose-response curve of DHT-stimulated 
C4-2 colony formation was shifted by shHDAC6 such that approximately 10-fold
higher concentration of DHT is required, indicating a requirement for HDAC6 in AR
hypersensitivity. HDAC6 knockdown also inhibited C4-2 xenograft tumor
establishment in castrated, but not in testes-intact, nude mice. Studies using
HDAC6-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts cells showed that inhibition of AR
nuclear localization by HDAC6 knockdown can be largely alleviated by expressing a
deacetylation mimic Hsp90 mutant. Taken together, our studies suggest that HDAC6 
regulates AR hypersensitivity and nuclear localization, mainly via modulating
HSP90 acetylation. Targeting HDAC6 alone or in combination with other therapeutic
approaches is a promising new strategy for prevention and/or treatment of
castration-resistant PCa.

PMCID: PMC2796151
PMID: 19855091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. ChemMedChem. 2009 Dec;4(12):1991-2001. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200900309.

Azetidinones as zinc-binding groups to design selective HDAC8 inhibitors.

Galletti P(1), Quintavalla A, Ventrici C, Giannini G, Cabri W, Penco S, Gallo G, 
Vincenti S, Giacomini D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica G. Ciamician, Università of Bologna, Via Selmi 2,
40126 Bologna, Italy.

2-Azetidinones, commonly known as beta-lactams, are well-known heterocyclic
compounds. Herein we described the synthesis and biological evaluation of a
series of novel beta-lactams. In vitro inhibition assays against HDAC isoforms
showed an interesting isoform-selectivity of these compounds towards HDAC6 and
HDAC8. The isoform selectivity changed in response to modification of the
azetidinone-ring nitrogen atom substituent. The presence of an N-thiomethyl group
is a prerequisite for the activity of these compounds in the micromolar range
towards HDAC8.

PMID: 19821480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 29;106(39):16663-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0908908106. Epub 2009 Sep 15.

Sulforaphane destabilizes the androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells by
inactivating histone deacetylase 6.

Gibbs A(1), Schwartzman J, Deng V, Alumkal J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Oregon Health and Science University,
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

High consumption of cruciferous vegetables is associated with a reduced risk of
prostate cancer in epidemiological studies. There is preliminary evidence that
sulforaphane, derived from glucoraphanin found in a number of crucifers, may
prevent and induce regression of prostate cancer and other malignancies in
preclinical models, but the mechanisms that may explain these effects are not
fully defined. Recent reports show that sulforaphane may impair prostate cancer
growth through inhibition of histone deacetylases, which are up-regulated in
cancer. Indeed, one of these enzymes, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), influences
the acetylation state of a key androgen receptor (AR) chaperone, HSP90. AR is the
central signaling pathway in prostate cancer, and its inhibition is used for both
prevention and treatment of this disease. However, it is not known whether the
effects of sulforaphane involve suppression of AR. We hypothesized that
sulforaphane treatment would lead to hyperacetylation of HSP90 and that this
would destabilize AR and attenuate AR signaling. We confirmed this by
demonstrating that sulforaphane enhances HSP90 acetylation, thereby inhibiting
its association with AR. Moreover, AR is subsequently degraded in the proteasome,
which leads to reduced AR target gene expression and reduced AR occupancy at its 
target genes. Finally, sulforaphane inhibits HDAC6 deacetylase activity, and the 
effects of sulforaphane on AR protein are abrogated by overexpression of HDAC6
and mimicked by HDAC6 siRNA. The inactivation by sulforaphane of HDAC6-mediated
HSP90 deacetylation and consequent attenuation of AR signaling represents a newly
defined mechanism that may help explain this agent's effects in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2757849
PMID: 19805354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Br J Haematol. 2009 Nov;147(4):515-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07887.x.
Epub 2009 Sep 22.

Expression of histone deacetylases in lymphoma: implication for the development
of selective inhibitors.

Gloghini A(1), Buglio D, Khaskhely NM, Georgakis G, Orlowski RZ, Neelapu SS,
Carbone A, Younes A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy.

Unselective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are a promising novel therapy
for lymphoid malignancies. However, these treatments remain empiric as the
pattern of HDAC enzymes in different types of cancer, including lymphoid
malignancies, remains unknown. We examined the expression of class I and class II
HDACs in a panel of cell lines and tissue sections from primary lymphoid tumours.
Class I enzymes were highly expressed in all cell lines and primary tumours
studied, including the non-malignant reactive cells in the Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) 
microenvironment. The most frequently altered HDAC expression was HDAC6, as it
was either weakly expressed or undetected in 9/14 (64%) of lymphoid cell lines
and in 83/89 (93%) of primary lymphoma tissue specimens, including 50/52 (96%)
cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, and 18/22 (82%) cases of classical HL.
Cell lines that had low expression level of HDAC6 demonstrated aberrant
expression of hyper-acetylated tubulin, and were found to be more sensitive to
the growth inhibitory effects of the class I HDAC inhibitor MGCD0103.
Collectively, our data demonstrate that HDAC6 is rarely expressed in primary
lymphoma cases, suggesting that it may not be an important therapeutic target in 
these lymphoid malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3181219
PMID: 19775297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Psychiatr Res. 2010 Apr;44(5):263-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.08.015.
Epub 2009 Sep 19.

Altered gene expression of histone deacetylases in mood disorder patients.

Hobara T(1), Uchida S, Otsuki K, Matsubara T, Funato H, Matsuo K, Suetsugi M,
Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, Yamaguchi University,
Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami-kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505,
Japan.

Chromatin remodeling such as changes in histone acetylation has been suggested to
play an important role in the pathophysiology and treatment of mood disorders. In
the present study, we investigated whether the expression of histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) genes are altered in mood disorder patients. We used quantitative
real-time PCR to measure the mRNA levels of 11 HDACs (HDAC1-11) in peripheral
white blood cells of major depressive disorder (MDD) and bipolar disorder (BPD)
patients during depressive and remissive episodes and in the first-degree
relatives of BPD patients. In addition, we investigated the effect of
antidepressants and mood stabilizers on the mRNA levels of HDACs using mice. In
MDD, the expression of HDAC2 and -5 mRNA was increased in a depressive state, but
not in a remissive state, compared to controls. In BPD, the expression of HDAC4
mRNA was increased only in a depressive state, and the expression of HDAC6 and -8
was decreased in both depressive and remissive states compared to controls,
whereas the first-degree relatives did not show any significant alteration in
expression levels. Animal study showed that the expression of HDAC2 and -5 or
HDAC4, -6 and -8 mRNAs in the mouse leukocytes were not affected by chronic
treatment with antidepressants or mood stabilizers. Our data suggest that
aberrant transcriptional regulation caused by the altered expression of HDACs is 
associated with the pathophysiology of mood disorders.

PMID: 19767015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Chemistry. 2009 Oct 26;15(42):11174-86. doi: 10.1002/chem.200901552.

Total synthesis of the bicyclic depsipeptide HDAC inhibitors spiruchostatins A
and B, 5''-epi-spiruchostatin B, FK228 (FR901228) and preliminary evaluation of
their biological activity.

Narita K(1), Kikuchi T, Watanabe K, Takizawa T, Oguchi T, Kudo K, Matsuhara K,
Abe H, Yamori T, Yoshida M, Katoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Synthetic Medicinal Chemistry, Department of Chemical
Pharmaceutical Science, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University, 4-4-1 Komatsushima,
Aoba-ku, Sendai, 981-8558, Japan.

The bicyclic depsipeptide histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors spiruchostatins A
and B, 5''-epi-spiruchostatin B and FK228 were efficiently synthesized in a
convergent and unified manner. The synthetic method involved the following
crucial steps: i) a Julia-Kocienski olefination of a 1,3-propanediol-derived
sulfone and a L- or D-malic acid-derived aldehyde to access the most
synthetically challenging unit, (3S or 3R,4E)-3-hydroxy-7-mercaptohept-4-enoic
acid, present in a D-alanine- or D-valine-containing segment; ii) a condensation 
of a D-valine-D-cysteine- or D-allo-isoleucine-D-cysteine-containing segment with
a D-alanine- or D-valine-containing segment to directly assemble the
corresponding seco-acids; and iii) a macrocyclization of a seco-acid using the
Shiina method or the Mitsunobu method to construct the requisite 15- or
16-membered macrolactone. The present synthesis has established the C5''
stereochemistry of spiruchostatin B. In addition, HDAC inhibitory assay and the
cell-growth inhibition analysis of the synthesized depsipeptides determined the
order of their potency and revealed some novel aspects of structure-activity
relationships. It was also found that unnatural 5''-epi-spiruchostatin B shows
extremely high selectivity (ca. 1600-fold) for class I HDAC1 (IC(50)=2.4 nM) over
class II HDAC6 (IC(50)=3900 nM) with potent cell-growth-inhibitory activity at
nanomolar levels of IC(50) values.

PMID: 19760730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30264-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.045526. Epub
2009 Sep 10.

Function of histone deacetylase 6 as a cofactor of nuclear receptor coregulator
LCoR.

Palijan A(1), Fernandes I, Bastien Y, Tang L, Verway M, Kourelis M,
Tavera-Mendoza LE, Li Z, Bourdeau V, Mader S, Yang XJ, White JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Ligand-dependent corepressor LCoR was identified as a protein that interacts with
the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) ligand binding domain in a
hormone-dependent manner. LCoR also interacts directly with histone deacetylase 3
(HDAC3) and HDAC6. Notably, HDAC6 has emerged as a marker of breast cancer
prognosis. However, although HDAC3 is nuclear, HDAC6 is cytoplasmic in many
cells. We found that HDAC6 is partially nuclear in estrogen-responsive MCF7
cells, colocalizes with LCoR, represses transactivation of estrogen-inducible
reporter genes, and augments corepression by LCoR. In contrast, no repression was
observed upon HDAC6 expression in COS7 cells, where it is exclusively
cytoplasmic. LCoR binds to HDAC6 in vitro via a central domain, and repression by
LCoR mutants lacking this domain was attenuated. Kinetic chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed hormone-dependent recruitment of LCoR to
promoters of ERalpha-induced target genes in synchrony with ERalpha. HDAC6 was
also recruited to these promoters, and repeat chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments confirmed the corecruitment of LCoR with ERalpha and with HDAC6.
Remarkably, however, although we find evidence for corecruitment of LCoR and
ERalpha on genes repressed by the receptor, LCoR and HDAC6 failed to
coimmunoprecipitate, suggesting that they are part of distinct complexes on these
genes. Although small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of LCoR or HDAC6
augmented expression of an estrogen-sensitive reporter gene in MCF7 cells,
unexpectedly their ablation led to reduced expression of some endogenous estrogen
target genes. Taken together, these data establish that HDAC6 can function as a
cofactor of LCoR but suggest that they may act in enhance expressing some target 
genes.

PMCID: PMC2781582
PMID: 19744931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Cell Sci. 2009 Oct 1;122(Pt 19):3531-41. doi: 10.1242/jcs.046813. Epub 2009 Sep
8.

Regulation of microtubule dynamics by inhibition of the tubulin deacetylase
HDAC6.

Zilberman Y(1), Ballestrem C, Carramusa L, Mazitschek R, Khochbin S, Bershadsky
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

We studied the role of a class II histone deacetylase, HDAC6, known to function
as a potent alpha-tubulin deacetylase, in the regulation of microtubule dynamics.
Treatment of cells with the class I and II histone deacetylase inhibitor TSA, as 
well as the selective HDAC6 inhibitor tubacin, increased microtubule acetylation 
and significantly reduced velocities of microtubule growth and shrinkage.
siRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC6 also increased microtubule acetylation but,
surprisingly, had no effect on microtubule growth velocity. At the same time,
HDAC6 knockdown abolished the effect of tubacin on microtubule growth,
demonstrating that tubacin influences microtubule dynamics via specific
inhibition of HDAC6. Thus, the physical presence of HDAC6 with impaired catalytic
activity, rather than tubulin acetylation per se, is the factor responsible for
the alteration of microtubule growth velocity in HDAC6 inhibitor-treated cells.
In support of this notion, HDAC6 mutants bearing inactivating point mutations in 
either of the two catalytic domains mimicked the effect of HDAC6 inhibitors on
microtubule growth velocity. In addition, HDAC6 was found to be physically
associated with the microtubule end-tracking protein EB1 and a dynactin core
component, Arp1, both of which accumulate at the tips of growing microtubules. We
hypothesize that inhibition of HDAC6 catalytic activity may affect microtubule
dynamics by promoting the interaction of HDAC6 with tubulin and/or with other
microtubule regulatory proteins.

PMID: 19737819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2009 Sep;57(9):897-906.

Explorative study on isoform-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Suzuki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8603, Japan.
suzuki@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the deacetylation of the acetylated lysine 
residues of histones and non-histone proteins, and are involved in various
fundamental life phenomena, such as gene expression and cell cycle progression.
Thus far, eighteen HDAC family members (HDAC1-11 and SIRT1-7) have been
identified, but the functions of the HDAC isoforms are not yet fully understood. 
In addition, some of the HDAC isoforms have been suggested to be associated with 
various disease states, including cancer and neurodegenerative disorders.
Therefore, isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors are of great interest, not only as
tools for probing the biological functions of the isoforms, but also as candidate
therapeutic agents with few side effects. It was against this background that we 
initiated research programs to identify isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors. We
designed HDAC inhibitors based on the three-dimensional structure of the enzyme
and on the proposed catalytic mechanism of HDACs, and found several
isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors. Furthermore, we elucidated the functions of
HDAC6 by chemical genetic approaches using these inhibitors. The results of this 
research also suggested the feasibility of using isoform-selective HDAC
inhibitors as therapeutic agents.

PMID: 19721249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Med Chem. 2009 Dec 10;52(23):7836-46. doi: 10.1021/jm900850t.

Discovery of potent and selective histone deacetylase inhibitors via focused
combinatorial libraries of cyclic alpha3beta-tetrapeptides.

Olsen CA(1), Ghadiri MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are powerful tools in understanding
epigenetic regulation and have proven especially promising for the treatment of
various cancers, but the discovery of potent, isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors
has been a major challenge. We recently developed a cyclic
alpha(3)beta-tetrapeptide scaffold for the preparation of HDAC inhibitors with
novel selectivity profiles ( J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009 , 131 , 3033 ). In this
study, we elaborate this scaffold with respect to side chain diversity by
synthesizing one-bead-one-compound combinatorial libraries of cyclic tetrapeptide
analogues and applying two generations of these focused libraries to the
discovery of potent HDAC ligands using a convenient screening platform. Our
studies led to the first HDAC6-selective cyclic tetrapeptide analogue, which
extends the use of cyclic tetrapeptides to the class II HDAC isoforms. These
findings highlight the persistent potential of cyclic tetrapeptides as epigenetic
modulators and possible anticancer drug lead compounds.

PMCID: PMC2788660
PMID: 19705846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Sep;20(18):4021-30. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-03-0248. Epub 2009
Jul 29.

c-Cbl and Cbl-b act redundantly to protect osteoclasts from apoptosis and to
displace HDAC6 from beta-tubulin, stabilizing microtubules and podosomes.

Purev E(1), Neff L, Horne WC, Baron R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine, Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental
Medicine, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

c-Cbl and Cbl-b are highly conserved adaptor proteins that participate in
integrin signaling, regulating cytoskeletal organization, motility, and bone
resorption. Deletion of both c-Cbl and Cbl-b in mice leads to embryonic
lethality, indicating that the two proteins perform essential redundant
functions. To examine the redundant actions of c-Cbl and Cbl-b in osteoclasts, we
depleted c-Cbl in Cbl-b(-/-) osteoclasts by using a short hairpin RNA. Depleting 
both Cbl proteins disrupted both the podosome belt and the microtubule network
and decreased bone-resorbing activity. Stabilizing the microtubules with
paclitaxel or inhibiting histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), which destabilizes
microtubules by deacetylating beta-tubulin, protected both the microtubule
network and the podosome belt. Examination of the mechanism involved demonstrated
that the conserved four-helix bundle of c-Cbl's tyrosine kinase binding domain
bound to beta-tubulin, and both c-Cbl and Cbl-b displaced HDAC6. In addition to
the effects on microtubules and the podosome belt, depleting both Cbls
significantly increased the levels of the proapoptotic protein Bim and apoptosis 
relative to the levels induced by eliminating either protein alone. Thus, both
c-Cbl and Cbl-b promote bone resorption via the stabilization of microtubules,
allowing the formation of the podosome belt in osteoclasts, and by promoting
osteoclast survival.

PMCID: PMC2743621
PMID: 19641021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. FEBS Lett. 2009 Aug 6;583(15):2517-20. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.07.005. Epub
2009 Jul 15.

Influenza A virus-induced caspase-3 cleaves the histone deacetylase 6 in infected
epithelial cells.

Husain M(1), Harrod KS.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA.
mhusain@lrri.org

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a multi-substrate cytoplasmic enzyme that
regulates many important biological processes. Recently, some reports have
implicated HDAC6 in viral infection. However, nothing is known about its
regulation in virus-infected cells. The data presented here for the first time
demonstrate the caspase-3-mediated cleavage of HDAC6 in influenza A virus
(IAV)-infected cells. HDAC6 polypeptide contains the caspase-3 cleavage motif
DMAD-S at the C-terminus, and is a caspase-3 substrate. The cleavage removes most
of the C-terminal ubiquitin-binding zinc finger domain from HDAC6, which could be
significant for HDAC6's role in IAV-induced apoptosis in infected cells.

PMID: 19596000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Cell Mol Med. 2010 Oct;14(10):2448-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00832.x.

Autophagy inhibition enhances vorinostat-induced apoptosis via ubiquitinated
protein accumulation.

Carew JS(1), Medina EC, Esquivel JA 2nd, Mahalingam D, Swords R, Kelly K, Zhang
H, Huang P, Mita AC, Mita MM, Giles FJ, Nawrocki ST.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Drug Development, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX 78245, USA.

Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved cell survival pathway that enables cells
to recoup ATP and other critical biosynthetic molecules during nutrient
deprivation or exposure to hypoxia, which are hallmarks of the tumour
microenvironment. Autophagy has been implicated as a potential mechanism of
resistance to anticancer agents as it can promote cell survival in the face of
stress induced by chemotherapeutic agents by breaking down cellular components to
generate alternative sources of energy. Disruption of autophagy with chloroquine 
(CQ) induces the accumulation of ubiquitin-conjugated proteins in a manner
similar to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BZ). However, CQ-induced protein 
accumulation occurs at a slower rate and is localized to lysosomes in contrast to
BZ, which stimulates rapid buildup of ubiquitinated proteins and aggresome
formation in the cytosol. The histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor vorinostat
(VOR) blocked BZ-induced aggresome formation, but promoted CQ-mediated
ubiquitinated protein accumulation. Disruption of autophagy with CQ strongly
enhanced VOR-mediated apoptosis in colon cancer cells. Accordingly, knockdown of 
the essential autophagy gene Atg7 also sensitized cells to VOR-induced apoptosis.
Knockdown of HDAC6 greatly enhanced BZ-induced apoptosis, but only marginally
sensitized cells to CQ. Subsequent studies determined that the CQ/VOR combination
promoted a large increase in superoxide generation that was required for
ubiquitinated protein accumulation and cell death. Finally, treatment with the
CQ/VOR combination significantly reduced tumour burden and induced apoptosis in a
colon cancer xenograft model. Collectively, our results establish that inhibition
of autophagy with CQ induces ubiquitinated protein accumulation and VOR
potentiates CQ-mediated aggregate formation, superoxide generation and apoptosis.

© 2009 The Authors Journal compilation © 2010 Foundation for Cellular and
Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2891399
PMID: 19583815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Cell Sci. 2009 Jul 1;122(Pt 13):2274-82. doi: 10.1242/jcs.048975. Epub 2009 Jun
9.

The NIMA-family kinase Nek3 regulates microtubule acetylation in neurons.

Chang J(1), Baloh RH, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

NIMA-related kinases (Neks) belong to a large family of Ser/Thr kinases that have
critical roles in coordinating microtubule dynamics during ciliogenesis and
mitotic progression. The Nek kinases are also expressed in neurons, whose axonal 
projections are, similarly to cilia, microtubule-abundant structures that extend 
from the cell body. We therefore investigated whether Nek kinases have
additional, non-mitotic roles in neurons. We found that Nek3 influences neuronal 
morphogenesis and polarity through effects on microtubules. Nek3 is expressed in 
the cytoplasm and axons of neurons and is phosphorylated at Thr475 located in the
C-terminal PEST domain, which regulates its catalytic activity. Although
exogenous expression of wild-type or phosphomimic (T475D) Nek3 in cultured
neurons has no discernible impact, expression of a phospho-defective mutant
(T475A) or PEST-truncated Nek3 leads to distorted neuronal morphology with
disturbed polarity and deacetylation of microtubules via HDAC6 in its
kinase-dependent manner. Thus, the phosphorylation at Thr475 serves as a
regulatory switch that alters Nek3 function. The deacetylation of microtubules in
neurons by unphosphorylated Nek3 raises the possibility that it could have a role
in disorders where axonal degeneration is an important component.

PMCID: PMC2723145
PMID: 19509051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Neurochem. 2009 Jun;109(6):1756-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06102.x. Epub
2009 May 7.

Tau--an inhibitor of deacetylase HDAC6 function.

Perez M(1), Santa-Maria I, Gomez de Barreda E, Zhu X, Cuadros R, Cabrero JR,
Sanchez-Madrid F, Dawson HN, Vitek MP, Perry G, Smith MA, Avila J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autonoma de 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Analysis of brain microtubule protein from patients with Alzheimer's disease
showed decreased alpha tubulin levels along with increased acetylation of the
alpha tubulin subunit, mainly in those microtubules from neurons containing
neurofibrillary tau pathology. To determine the relationship of tau protein and
increased tubulin acetylation, we studied the effect of tau on the
acetylation-deacetylation of tubulin. Our results indicate that tau binds to the 
tubulin-deacetylase, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), decreasing its activity with 
a consequent increase in tubulin acetylation. As expected, increased acetylation 
was also found in tubulin from wild-type mice compared with tubulin from mice
lacking tau because of the tau-mediated inhibition of the deacetylase. In
addition, we found that an excess of tau protein, as a HDAC6 inhibitor, prevents 
induction of autophagy by inhibiting proteasome function.

PMID: 19457097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell. 2009 May 15;34(3):259-69. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.04.026.

A role for ubiquitin in selective autophagy.

Kirkin V(1), McEwan DG, Novak I, Dikic I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry II and Cluster of Excellence Macromolecular
Complexes, Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Frankfurt, Germany.
vladimir.chirchin@merck.de

Ubiquitination is the hallmark of protein degradation by the 26S proteasome.
However, the proteasome is limited in its capacity to degrade oligomeric and
aggregated proteins. Removal of harmful protein aggregates is mediated by
autophagy, a mechanism by which the cell sequesters cytosolic cargo and delivers 
it for degradation by the lysosome. Identification of autophagy receptors, such
as p62/SQSTM1 and NBR1, which simultaneously bind both ubiquitin and
autophagy-specific ubiquitin-like modifiers, LC3/GABARAP, has provided a
molecular link between ubiquitination and autophagy. This review explores the
hypothesis that ubiquitin represents a selective degradation signal suitable for 
targeting various types of cargo, ranging from protein aggregates to
membrane-bound organelles and microbes.

PMID: 19450525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Histopathology. 2009 May;54(6):688-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03290.x.

Histone deacetylase 1, 2, 6 and acetylated histone H4 in B- and T-cell lymphomas.

Marquard L(1), Poulsen CB, Gjerdrum LM, de Nully Brown P, Christensen IJ, Jensen 
PB, Sehested M, Johansen P, Ralfkiaer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen N,
Denmark. l.m.ipsen@mail.tele.dk

AIMS: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are novel therapeutics in the
treatment of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified (PTCL) and diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), where, for unknown reasons, T-cell malignancies appear
to be more sensitive than B-cell malignancies. The aim was to determine HDAC
expression in DLBCL and PTCL which has not previously been investigated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6 and acetylated histone
H4 was examined immunohistochemically in 31 DLBCL and 45 PTCL. All four markers
showed high expression in both DLBCL and PTCL compared with normal lymphoid
tissue. HDAC1 was more abundantly expressed in PTCL than in DLBCL (P = 0.0046),
whereas acetylated H4 was more frequent in DLBCL (P < 0.0001), the latter
suggesting a mechanism for T-cell lymphoma sensitivity to HDAC inhibitors.
Moderate to strong HDAC6 expression was significantly correlated with favourable 
outcome (P = 0.016) in DLBCL patients, whereas the opposite effect was observed
in PTCL patients (P < 0.0001). The other markers did not correlate with survival 
(P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6 and acetylated H4 are overexpressed in DLBCL and
PTCL relative to normal lymphoid tissue. Furthermore, HDAC6 may be an important
prognostic marker associated with favourable outcome in DLBCL and a more
aggressive course in PTCL.

PMID: 19438744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4415-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2839. Epub 
2009 May 5.

The role of ATF4 stabilization and autophagy in resistance of breast cancer cells
treated with Bortezomib.

Milani M(1), Rzymski T, Mellor HR, Pike L, Bottini A, Generali D, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Factor Group, Cancer Research UK, Molecular Oncology Laboratories,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Headington, Oxford, UK.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system plays a key regulatory role in cellular
homeostasis. The inhibition of the 26S proteasome by Bortezomib leads to the
accumulation of misfolded proteins, resulting in endoplasmic reticulum stress
followed by a coordinated cellular response called unfolded protein response
(UPR). Endoplasmic reticulum stress is also a potent inducer of macroautophagy.
Bortezomib is a selective and potent inhibitor of the 26S proteasome and is
approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Clinical trials with Bortezomib
have shown promising results for some types of cancers, but not for some others, 
including those of the breast. In this study, we show that Bortezomib induces the
UPR and autophagy in MCF7 breast cancer cells. Surprisingly, Bortezomib did not
induce phosphorylation of PERK, a key initial step of the UPR. We show that
induction of autophagy by Bortezomib is dependent on the proteasomal
stabilisation of ATF4 and up-regulation of LC3B by ATF4. We show that ATF4 and
LC3B play a critical role in activating autophagy and protecting cells from
Bortezomib-induced cell death. Our experiments also reveal that HDAC6 knockdown
results in decreased LC3B protein and reduced autophagy. Our work shows that the 
induction of autophagy through ATF4 may be an important resistance mechanism to
Bortezomib treatment in breast cancer, and targeting autophagy may represent a
novel approach to sensitize breast cancers to Bortezomib.

PMID: 19417138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 19;284(25):17102-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809090200. Epub 2009 
Apr 22.

Tubacin kills Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-Burkitt lymphoma cells by inducing
reactive oxygen species and EBV lymphoblastoid cells by inducing apoptosis.

Kawada J(1), Zou P, Mazitschek R, Bradner JE, Cohen JI.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Virology Section, Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, NIAID,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1888, USA.

Tubacin is a small molecule inhibitor of histone deacetylase 6 and blocks
aggresome activity. We found that Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive Burkitt
lymphoma (BL) cells were generally killed by lower doses of tubacin than
EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cells (LCLs) or EBV-negative BL cells. Tubacin
induced apoptosis of LCLs, which was inhibited by pretreatment with a pancaspase 
inhibitor but not by butylated hydroxyanisole, which inhibits reactive oxygen
species. In contrast, tubacin killed EBV-positive BL cells in a
caspase-3-independent pathway that involved reactive oxygen species and was
blocked by butylated hydroxyanisole. Previously, we showed that bortezomib, a
proteasome inhibitor, induces apoptosis of EBV LCLs and that LCLs are killed by
lower doses of bortezomib than EBV-positive BL cells. Here we found that the
combination of bortezomib and tubacin acted in synergy to kill EBV-positive BL
cells and LCLs. Tubacin or the combination of bortezomib and tubacin did not
induce EBV lytic replication. These findings suggest that the combination of a
proteasome inhibitor and an HDAC6 inhibitor may represent a useful strategy for
the treatment of certain EBV-associated B cell lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC2719348
PMID: 19386607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 May 1;15(9):3163-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2319.
Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Protein acetylation and histone deacetylase expression associated with malignant 
breast cancer progression.

Suzuki J(1), Chen YY, Scott GK, Devries S, Chin K, Benz CC, Waldman FM, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA.

PURPOSE: Excess histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity can induce hypoacetylation of
histone and nonhistone protein substrates, altering gene expression patterns and 
cell behavior potentially associated with malignant transformation. However, HDAC
expression and protein acetylation have not been studied in the context of breast
cancer progression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We assessed expression levels of acetylated histone H4
(ac-H4), ac-H4K12, ac-tubulin, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC6 in 22 reduction
mammoplasties and in 58 specimens with synchronous normal epithelium, ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) components.
Differences among groups were tested for significance using nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: From normal epithelium to DCIS, there was a marked reduction in histone 
acetylation (P < 0.0001). Most cases showed similar levels of acetylation in DCIS
and IDC, although some showed further reduction of ac-H4 and ac-H4K12 from DCIS
to IDC. Expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC6 was also significantly reduced but 
by a smaller magnitude. Greater reductions of H4 acetylation and HDAC1 levels
were observed from normal to DCIS in estrogen receptor-negative compared with
estrogen receptor-positive, and in high-grade compared with non-high-grade
tumors.
CONCLUSION: Overall, there was a global pattern of hypoacetylation associated
with progression from normal to DCIS to IDC. These findings suggest that the
reversal of this hypoacetylation in DCIS and IDC could be an early measure of
HDAC inhibitor activity.

PMCID: PMC3746548
PMID: 19383825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Apr;8(4):794-801. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0985.

HDAC2 regulates chromatin plasticity and enhances DNA vulnerability.

Marchion DC(1), Bicaku E, Turner JG, Schmitt ML, Morelli DR, Munster PN.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Program, Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology,
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) may have a prominent role in the development of
cancer and the response to anticancer therapy. However, the therapeutic relevance
and tissue specificity of individual HDAC enzymes remain largely unknown. HDAC
inhibitors may function as sensitizing agents to chemotherapies that target DNA
through their effects on chromatin structure and plasticity. Here, we report a
new role for HDAC2 as a regulator of chromatin compaction status and the mediator
of HDAC inhibitor-induced sensitization to chemotherapy. The selective depletion 
of HDAC2 by small interfering RNA led to reduced expression of heterochromatin
maintenance proteins and morphologic changes indicative of chromatin
decondensation. Furthermore, depletion of HDAC2 but not HDAC1 or HDAC6 was
sufficient to sensitize breast cancer cells to topoisomerase inhibitor-induced
apoptosis. The levels of HDAC2 expression appear to correlate with the degree of 
HDAC inhibitor-induced histone acetylation in a surrogate tissue in patients.
These data suggest that HDAC2 may be a relevant pharmacologic and biological
target for combination therapy involving drugs that target DNA.

PMID: 19372552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. ChemMedChem. 2009 May;4(5):842-52. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200800461.

Studies of benzamide- and thiol-based histone deacetylase inhibitors in models of
oxidative-stress-induced neuronal death: identification of some HDAC3-selective
inhibitors.

Chen Y(1), He R, Chen Y, D'Annibale MA, Langley B, Kozikowski AP.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 833 S. Wood St., Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

We compare three structurally different classes of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors that contain benzamide, hydroxamate, or thiol groups as the zinc
binding group (ZBG) for their ability to protect cortical neurons in culture from
cell death induced by oxidative stress. This study reveals that none of the
benzamide-based HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) provides any neuroprotection whatsoever,
in distinct contrast to HDACIs that contain other ZBGs. Some of the
sulfur-containing HDACIs, namely the thiols, thioesters, and disulfides present
modest neuroprotective activity but show toxicity at higher concentrations. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that the HDAC6-selective mercaptoacetamides that
were reported previously provide the best protection in the homocysteic acid
model of oxidative stress, thus further supporting their study in animal models
of neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 19350613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Biol Evol. 2009 Jul;26(7):1549-56. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msp065. Epub 2009 Apr 
6.

Recent strong positive selection on Drosophila melanogaster HDAC6, a gene
encoding a stress surveillance factor, as revealed by population genomic
analysis.

Svetec N(1), Pavlidis P, Stephan W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Section of Evolutionary Biology, LMU BioCenter,
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany. svetec@bio.lmu.de

Based on nearly complete genome sequences from a variety of organisms, data on
naturally occurring genetic variation on the scale of hundreds of loci to entire 
genomes have been collected in recent years. In parallel, new statistical
approaches (such as the composite likelihood ratio and "SweepFinder" tests) have 
been developed to infer evidence of recent positive selection from these data and
to localize the target of selection. Here, we apply these methods to the X
chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster in an effort to map genes involved in
ecological adaptation. Using slight modifications of these tests that increase
their robustness against past demographic changes, we detected evidence that
recent strongly positive selection has been acting on a 2.7-kb region in an
ancestral African population. This region overlaps with the 3' end of HDAC6, a
gene that encodes a newly characterized stress surveillance factor. HDAC6 is an
unusual histone deacetylase being localized in the cytoplasm. Its
ubiquitin-binding and tubulin-deacetylase activities suggest that HDAC6 is very
different from other histone deacetylases. Indeed, recent discoveries have shown 
that HDAC6 is a key regulator of cytotoxic stress resistance.

PMID: 19349642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 May 22;383(1):88-92. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.147. Epub 2009 Apr 1.

Acetylation of histone deacetylase 6 by p300 attenuates its deacetylase activity.

Han Y(1), Jeong HM, Jin YH, Kim YJ, Jeong HG, Yeo CY, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Yongbong-dong, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Protein acetyltransferases and deacetylases affect the activities of each other. 
This is well documented by the acetylation and inhibition of HDAC1 by p300, a
transcriptional co-activator with protein acetyltransferase activity. However,
the relationship between HDAC6 and p300 is poorly understood. HDAC6 is a class II
histone deacetylase and differs from other members of HDAC family in that it
contains two HDAC domains and an ubiquitin-binding motif. HDAC6 is a
microtubule-associated deacetylase. It predominantly deacetylates non-histone
proteins, including alpha-tubulin, and regulates cell motility. Here, we report
that p300 interacts with and acetylates HDAC6 resulting down-regulation of HDAC6 
deacetylase activity. Furthermore, we provide evidences that acetylation of HDAC6
by p300 inhibits tubulin deacetylation and suppression of Sp1 transcriptional
activity by HDAC6. Our results demonstrate that p300 can inactivate HDAC6 by
acetylation, and that p300 may regulate the activity of Sp1 indirectly through
HDAC6 in addition to its direct modification of Sp1.

PMID: 19344692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Radiother Oncol. 2009 Jul;92(1):125-32. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2009.03.008. Epub
2009 Mar 28.

Epigenetic modulation of radiation response in human cancer cells with activated 
EGFR or HER-2 signaling: potential role of histone deacetylase 6.

Kim IA(1), No M, Lee JM, Shin JH, Oh JS, Choi EJ, Kim IH, Atadja P, Bernhard EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University School of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. inah228@snu.ac.kr

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) are prototypes of
agents targeting epigenetic modifications and have received considerable
attention for their promise as targeted anticancer drugs. We examined the effects
and potential mechanism(s) of combining LBH589 and irradiation in human cancer
cells having activated EGFR or HER-2 signaling, focusing on the role of HDAC6.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: We evaluated whether the HDI, LBH589, would radiosensitize
a panel of human tumor cell lines having activated EGFR or HER-2 signaling. A
mechanistic role for the HDAC6 isotype was investigated using RNA interference
and ectopic overexpression HDAC6.
RESULTS: The HDI, LBH589, enhanced the radiosensitivity of the human carcinoma
cell lines we tested. Radiosensitization was accompanied by abrogation of
radiation-induced G2/M arrest and was associated with aberrant mitotic features
and prolonged gammaH2AX foci. Radiation-induced apoptosis was also increased.
LBH589 radiosensitized cells with activated EGFR or HER-2 signaling to a greater 
degree than the HDIs SK7041 or TSA. However radiosensitization by the three HDI
was equivalent in cells without activation of this signaling. LBH589 led
acetylation of histone H3 and HSP90. This was associated with down-regulation of 
the client oncoproteins EGFR, HER-2, and decreased phosphorylation of Akt and
ERK. Specific inhibition of HDAC6 by RNAi increased radiosensitivity as well as
increasing acetylation of HSP90 and reducing the association of HSP90 with its
client proteins. Conversely, ectopic overexpression of HDAC6 isotype increased
the levels of p-EGFR and p-AKT expression, and reduced LBH589-mediated
radiosensitization.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings define a unique mechanism for counteracting
pro-survival signaling from EGFR or HER-2 that is present in many tumor cells.

PMID: 19329208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;69(7):2935-40. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3458. Epub
2009 Mar 24.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha and histone deacetylase 6 causes rapid
deacetylation of tubulin in breast cancer cells.

Azuma K(1), Urano T, Horie-Inoue K, Hayashi S, Sakai R, Ouchi Y, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) is a nuclear receptor that functions as a
ligand-activated transcription factor. Besides its genomic action in nuclei,
ERalpha could exert nongenomic actions at the plasma membrane. To investigate the
mechanism underlying the nongenomic action of ERalpha in breast cancer cells, we 
generated a construct of membrane-targeted ERalpha (memER), an expression vector 
of ERalpha without the nuclear localizing signal and including instead the
membrane-targeting sequence of Src kinase. MemER was stably expressed in human
breast cancer MCF-7 cells. Cell migration test and tumorigenic assay in nude mice
revealed that the in vitro motility and the in vivo proliferation activity of
MCF-7 cells expressing memER were significantly enhanced compared with those of
vector-transfected cells. Interestingly, the acetylation level of tubulin in
memER-overexpressing cells was lower than that in control cells. We found that
histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6 translocated to the plasma membrane shortly after
estrogen stimulation, and rapid tubulin deacetylation subsequently occurred. We
also showed that memER associated with HDAC6 in a ligand-dependent manner.
Although tamoxifen is known for its antagonistic role in the ERalpha genomic
action in MCF-7 cells, the agent showed an agonistic function in the memER-HDAC6 
association and tubulin deacetylation. These findings suggest that ERalpha ligand
dependently forms a complex with HDAC6 and tubulin at the plasma membrane.
Estrogen-dependent tubulin deacetylation could provide new evidence for the
nongenomic action of estrogen, which potentially contributes to the
aggressiveness of ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells.

PMID: 19318565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;15(7):2488-96. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1930.
Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Clinical and biological effects of valproic acid as a histone deacetylase
inhibitor on tumor and surrogate tissues: phase I/II trial of valproic acid and
epirubicin/FEC.

Munster P(1), Marchion D, Bicaku E, Lacevic M, Kim J, Centeno B, Daud A, Neuger
A, Minton S, Sullivan D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology Oncology, University of California, San Francisco,
Divisadero, San Francisco, California 94143-1711, USA. pmunster@medicine.ucsf.edu

PURPOSE: The aim was to study the biological and molecular effects of the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, valproic acid, in patients with solid tumor
malignancies.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A phase I dose escalation of valproic acid given on days 1
to 3 followed by epirubicin (day 3) was followed by a dose expansion of valproic 
acid combined with 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FEC100).
Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic studies entailed valproic acid and epirubicin
plasma levels and their interaction, the effects of valproic acid on histone
acetylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and tumor cells at
baseline and day 3, and baseline expression of HDAC2 and HDAC6 as therapeutic
targets.
RESULTS: Forty-four patients were enrolled in the phase I part, with a
disease-specific cohort expansion of 15 breast cancer patients (median age, 55
years; range, 28-66 years) receiving 120 mg/kg/day valproic acid followed by
FEC100. Partial responses were seen in 9 of 41 (22%) patients during the phase I 
part. Objective responses were seen in 9 of 14 (64%) evaluable patients at the
dose expansion with a median number of 6 administered cycles. Predominant
toxicities were valproic acid-associated somnolence and epirubicin-induced
myelosuppression. Valproic acid plasma levels were associated with short-term,
reversible depletion of WBC and neutrophils within 48 hours. Histone acetylation 
in tumor samples and in PBMCs correlated with valproic acid levels and was
further linked to baseline HDAC2 but not to HDAC6 expression.
CONCLUSION: Valproic acid is a clinically relevant HDAC inhibitor, and PBMCs may 
serve as a surrogate for tumor histone acetylation in solid tumor malignancies.
HDAC2 should be further considered as a relevant therapeutic target.

PMID: 19318486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Med Chem. 2009 Apr 23;52(8):2265-79. doi: 10.1021/jm800988r.

Design of chimeric histone deacetylase- and tyrosine kinase-inhibitors: a series 
of imatinib hybrides as potent inhibitors of wild-type and mutant BCR-ABL,
PDGF-Rbeta, and histone deacetylases.

Mahboobi S(1), Dove S, Sellmer A, Winkler M, Eichhorn E, Pongratz H, Ciossek T,
Baer T, Maier T, Beckers T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacy, University of Regensburg, D-93040 Regensburg, Germany. 
siavosh.mahboobi@chemie.uni-regensburg.de

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases are a new class of cancer therapeutics with
possibly broad applicability. Combinations of HDAC inhibitors with the kinase
inhibitor 1 (Imatinib) in recent studies showed additive and synergistic effects.
Here we present a new concept by combining inhibition of protein kinases and
HDACs, two independent pharmacological activities, in one synthetic small
molecule. In general, the HDAC inhibition profile, the potencies, and the
probable binding modes to HDAC1 and HDAC6 were similar as for 6 (SAHA).
Inhibition of Abl kinase in biochemical assays was maintained for most compounds,
but in general the kinase selectivity profile differed from that of 1 with nearly
equipotent inhibition of the wild-type and the Imatinib resistant Abl T(315)I
mutant. A potent cellular inhibition of PDGFR and cytotoxicity toward EOL-1
cells, a model for idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES), are restored or
enhanced for selected analogues (12b, 14b, and 18b). Cytotoxicity was evaluated
by using a broad panel of tumor cell lines, with selected analogues displaying
mean IC(50) values between 3.6 and 7.1 muM.

PMID: 19301902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Apr 15;19(8):2346-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.02.029. 
Epub 2009 Feb 12.

N-Hydroxy-(4-oxime)-cinnamide: a versatile scaffold for the synthesis of novel
histone deacetylase [correction of deacetilase] (HDAC) inhibitors.

Giannini G(1), Marzi M, Pezzi R, Brunetti T, Battistuzzi G, Marzo MD, Cabri W,
Vesci L, Pisano C.

Author information: 
(1)R&D Sigma-Tau SpA, Pomezia, Italy. giuseppe.giannini@sigma-tau.it

Erratum in
    Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Jul 1;19(13):3694.

With the aim to discover novel HDAC inhibitors with high potency and good safety 
profiles, we have designed a small library based on a
N-hydroxy-(4-oxime)-cinnamide scaffold. We describe the synthesis of these novel 
compounds and some preliminary in vitro cytotoxic activity on three tumor cell
lines, NB4, H460 and HCT116, as well as their inhibitory activity against class
I, II and IV HDAC. Several 4-oxime derivatives demonstrated a promising
inhibitory activity on HDAC6 and HDAC8 coupled to a good selectivity profile.

PMID: 19285395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Apr 1;19(7):1866-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.02.075. 
Epub 2009 Feb 23.

Synthesis and evaluation of lysine derived sulfamides as histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Manku S(1), Allan M, Nguyen N, Ajamian A, Rodrigue J, Therrien E, Wang J, Guo T, 
Rahil J, Petschner AJ, Nicolescu A, Lefebvre S, Li Z, Fournel M, Besterman JM,
Déziel R, Wahhab A.

Author information: 
(1)MethylGene Inc., Departments of Medicinal Chemistry, 7220 rue
Frederick-Banting, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H4S 2A1.

We have recently reported on a novel class of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors bearing a sulfamide group as the zinc-binding unit. Herein, we report 
on the synthesis of sulfamide based inhibitors designed around a lysine scaffold 
and their structure-activity relationships against HDAC1 and HDAC6 isotypes as
well as 293T cells. Our efforts led us to an improvement of the originally
disclosed lysine-based sulfamide, 2a to compound 12h which has equal potency in
enzyme and cell-based assays as well as enhanced metabolic stability and PK
profile.

PMID: 19272776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cancer Lett. 2009 Aug 8;280(2):222-32. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.01.040. Epub
2009 Mar 5.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors that target tubulin.

Schemies J(1), Sippl W, Jung M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.

Epigenetics is defined as heritable changes in gene expression that occur without
changes in DNA sequence. Major mechanisms of epigenetics are post-translational
histone modifications such as reversible acetylation. Histone deacetylases
(HDACs) maintain the acetylation level of histones but also act on non-histone
substrates that are involved in signal transduction or cellular transport
processes. One important non-histone substrate is tubulin. The isotypes
responsible for tubulin deacetylation are HDAC6 and the NAD(+)-dependent histone 
deacetylase (sirtuin) Sirt2. Here we review the action of those enzymes on
tubulin and present an overview over existing inhibitors with a focus on their
structural interaction with the targets.

PMID: 19268440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. BMC Cell Biol. 2009 Mar 2;10:17. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-10-17.

Cep70 and Cep131 contribute to ciliogenesis in zebrafish embryos.

Wilkinson CJ(1), Carl M, Harris WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3DY, UK.
Christopher.Wilkinson@rhul.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The centrosome is the cell's microtubule organising centre, an
organelle with important roles in cell division, migration and polarity. However,
cells can divide and flies can, for a large part of development, develop without 
them. Many centrosome proteins have been identified but the roles of most are
still poorly understood. The centrioles of the centrosome are similar to the
basal bodies of cilia, hair-like extensions of many cells that have important
roles in cell signalling and development. In a number of human diseases, such
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, centrosome/cilium proteins are mutated, leading to
polycystic kidney disease, situs inversus, and neurological problems, amongst
other symptoms.
RESULTS: We describe zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos depleted for two
uncharacterised, centrosome proteins, Cep70 and Cep131. The phenotype of these
embryos resembles that of zebrafish mutants for intraflagellar transport proteins
(IFTs), with kidney and ear development affected and left-right asymmetry
randomised. These organs and processes are those affected in Bardet-Biedl
syndrome and other similar diseases. Like these diseases, the root cause of the
phenotype lies, in fact, in dysfunctional cilia, which are shortened but not
eliminated in several tissues in the morphants. Centrosomes and basal bodies, on 
the other hand, are present. Both Cep70 and Cep131 possess a putative HDAC
(histone deacetylase) interacting domain. However, we could not detect in yeast
two-hybrid assays any interaction with the deacetylase that controls cilium
length, HDAC6, or any of the IFTs that we tested.
CONCLUSION: Cep70 and Cep131 contribute to ciliogenesis in many tissues in the
zebrafish embryo: cilia are made in cep70 and cep131 morphant zebrafish embryos
but are shortened. We propose that the role of these centrosomal/basal body
proteins is in making the cilium and that they are involved in determination of
the length of the axoneme.

PMCID: PMC2662791
PMID: 19254375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 10;284(15):9648-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808708200. Epub 2009 
Feb 18.

The protein farnesyltransferase regulates HDAC6 activity in a
microtubule-dependent manner.

Zhou J(1), Vos CC, Gjyrezi A, Yoshida M, Khuri FR, Tamanoi F, Giannakakou P.

Author information: 
(1)Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

The cytoplasmic deacetylase HDAC6 is an important regulator of cellular pathways 
that include response to stress, protein folding, microtubule stability, and cell
migration, thus representing an attractive target for cancer chemotherapy.
However, little is known about its upstream regulation. Our previous work has
implicated HDAC6 as a new protein target for the farnesyltransferase inhibitors
(FTIs), although HDAC6 lacks a farnesylation motif. Here we show that the protein
farnesyltransferase (FTase) and HDAC6 are present in a protein complex together
with microtubules in vivo and in vitro. FTase binds microtubules directly via its
alpha subunit, and this association requires the C terminus of tubulin. Treatment
with an FTI removed FTase, but not HDAC6, from the protein complex, suggesting
that the active form of FTase is bound to microtubules. Importantly, the removal 
of FTase from microtubules abrogated HDAC6 activity, as did a stable knockdown of
the alpha subunit of FTase (FTalphaKD). Interestingly, the FTalphaKD cells showed
increased sensitivity to the antiproliferative effects of Taxol and the FTI
lonafarnib when used either as single agents or in combination as compared with
parental cells. Altogether, these data suggest that FTase, via its
tubulin-association, is a critical upstream regulator of HDAC6 activity and that 
FTase expression could help stratify cancer patients that would most benefit from
this treatment.

PMCID: PMC2665085
PMID: 19228685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 1;15(3):840-50. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1918.

Dual degradation of aurora A and B kinases by the histone deacetylase inhibitor
LBH589 induces G2-M arrest and apoptosis of renal cancer cells.

Cha TL(1), Chuang MJ, Wu ST, Sun GH, Chang SY, Yu DS, Huang SM, Huan SK, Cheng
TC, Chen TT, Fan PL, Hsiao PW.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, Tri-Service General Hospital, Taiwan,
People's Republic of China. tlcha@ndmctsgh.edu.tw

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;15(5):1843.

PURPOSE: This study is aimed at investigating antineoplastic efficacy of histone 
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACI) LBH589 on renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and
elucidating the novel molecular mechanisms involved in growth arrest and
apoptosis by targeting the important nonhistone molecules.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed the growth-inhibitory effect of LBH589 on RCC by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay in vitro and
antitumor efficacy by xenograft experiments in vivo. To verify the associated
molecular mechanisms involved in LBH589-mediated cell death and cell cycle
progression by Western blotting and fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis.
RESULTS: HDACI LBH589 induced degradation of both Aurora A and B kinases through 
a proteasome-mediated pathway by targeting HDAC3 and HDAC6. The dual degradation 
of Aurora A and B kinases mediated by LBH589 resulted in inducing G2-M arrest and
apoptosis of renal cancer cell lines and our results also showed that LBH589
potently inhibited renal cancer cell growth in vitro and suppressed tumor
formation in vivo. The Aurora A and B kinases and HDAC3 are overexpressed in the 
human RCC tumor tissues examined, which make them perfect targets for HDACI
LBH589 treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our in vitro and in vivo data showed that LBH589 has potent
anticancer effect of renal cancer cells. LBH589 and other HDACI treatment
resulted in inducing G2-M arrest and apoptosis of renal cancer cells through
degradation of Aurora A and B kinases by inhibition of HDAC3 and HDAC6. The
clinical efficacy of LBH589 in the treatment of patients with metastatic RCC,
especially those with high Aurora kinase and HDAC expression, is worthy of
further investigation.

PMID: 19188154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell. 2009 Feb 6;136(3):551-64. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.11.043. Epub 2009 Jan
29.

Elongator controls the migration and differentiation of cortical neurons through 
acetylation of alpha-tubulin.

Creppe C(1), Malinouskaya L, Volvert ML, Gillard M, Close P, Malaise O, Laguesse 
S, Cornez I, Rahmouni S, Ormenese S, Belachew S, Malgrange B, Chapelle JP,
Siebenlist U, Moonen G, Chariot A, Nguyen L.

Author information: 
(1)GIGA-Signal Transduction, University of Liege, C.H.U. Sart Tilman, 4000 Liège,
Belgium.

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 Feb 6;136(3):393-4.

The generation of cortical projection neurons relies on the coordination of
radial migration with branching. Here, we report that the multisubunit histone
acetyltransferase Elongator complex, which contributes to transcript elongation, 
also regulates the maturation of projection neurons. Indeed, silencing of its
scaffold (Elp1) or catalytic subunit (Elp3) cell-autonomously delays the
migration and impairs the branching of projection neurons. Strikingly, neurons
defective in Elongator show reduced levels of acetylated alpha-tubulin. Reduction
of alpha-tubulin acetylation via expression of a nonacetylatable alpha-tubulin
mutant leads to comparable defects in cortical neurons and suggests that
alpha-tubulin is a target of Elp3. This is further supported by the demonstration
that Elp3 promotes acetylation and counteracts HDAC6-mediated deacetylation of
this substrate in vitro. Our results uncover alpha-tubulin as a target of the
Elongator complex and suggest that a tight regulation of its acetylation
underlies the maturation of cortical projection neurons.

PMID: 19185337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Chem Inf Model. 2009 Feb;49(2):461-76. doi: 10.1021/ci800366f.

Novel inhibitors of human histone deacetylase (HDAC) identified by QSAR modeling 
of known inhibitors, virtual screening, and experimental validation.

Tang H(1), Wang XS, Huang XP, Roth BL, Butler KV, Kozikowski AP, Jung M, Tropsha 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. for Molecular Modeling, and Carolina Exploratory Center for
Cheminformatics Res., Div. of Medicinal Chemistry and Natural Products, School of
Pharmacy, UNC, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7360, USA.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACIs) have emerged as a new class of drugs 
for the treatment of human cancers and other diseases because of their effects on
cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. In this study we have developed
several quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) models for 59
chemically diverse histone deacetylase class 1 (HDAC1) inhibitors. The variable
selection k nearest neighbor (kNN) and support vector machines (SVM) QSAR
modeling approaches using both MolconnZ and MOE chemical descriptors generated
from two-dimensional rendering of compounds as chemical graphs have been
employed. We have relied on a rigorous model development workflow including the
division of the data set into training, test, and external sets and extensive
internal and external validation. Highly predictive QSAR models were generated
with leave-one-out cross-validated (LOO-CV) q2 and external R2 values as high as 
0.80 and 0.87, respectively, using the kNN/MolconnZ approach and 0.93 and 0.87,
respectively, using the SVM/MolconnZ approach. All validated QSAR models were
employed concurrently for virtual screening (VS) of an in-house compound
collection including 9.5 million molecules compiled from the ZINC7.0 database,
the World Drug Index (WDI) database, the ASINEX Synergy libraries, and other
commercial databases. VS resulted in 45 structurally unique consensus hits that
were considered novel putative HDAC1 inhibitors. These computational hits had
several novel structural features that were not present in the original data set.
Four computational hits with novel scaffolds were tested experimentally, and
three of them were confirmed active against HDAC1, with IC50 values for the most 
active compound of 1.00 microM. The fourth compound was later identified to be a 
selective inhibitor of HDAC6, a Class II HDAC. Moreover, two of the confirmed
hits are marketed drugs, which could potentially facilitate their further
development as anticancer agents. This study illustrates the power of the
combined QSAR-VS method as a general approach for the effective identification of
structurally novel bioactive compounds.

PMID: 19182860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cell. 2009 Jan 23;136(2):322-36. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.11.050.

A centrosomal Cdc20-APC pathway controls dendrite morphogenesis in postmitotic
neurons.

Kim AH(1), Puram SV, Bilimoria PM, Ikeuchi Y, Keough S, Wong M, Rowitch D, Bonni 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The ubiquitin ligase anaphase-promoting complex (APC) recruits the coactivator
Cdc20 to drive mitosis in cycling cells. However, the nonmitotic functions of
Cdc20-APC have remained unexplored. We report that Cdc20-APC plays an essential
role in dendrite morphogenesis in postmitotic neurons. Knockdown of Cdc20 in
cerebellar slices and in postnatal rats in vivo profoundly impairs the formation 
of granule neuron dendrite arbors in the cerebellar cortex. Remarkably, Cdc20 is 
enriched at the centrosome in neurons, and the centrosomal localization is
critical for Cdc20-dependent dendrite development. We also find that the
centrosome-associated protein histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) promotes the
polyubiquitination of Cdc20, stimulates the activity of centrosomal Cdc20-APC,
and drives the differentiation of dendrites. These findings define a postmitotic 
function for Cdc20-APC in the morphogenesis of dendrites in the mammalian brain. 
The identification of a centrosomal Cdc20-APC ubiquitin signaling pathway holds
important implications for diverse biological processes, including neuronal
connectivity and plasticity.

PMCID: PMC2707082
PMID: 19167333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7436-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808999200. Epub 2009 
Jan 21.

HDAC6 modulates Hsp90 chaperone activity and regulates activation of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor signaling.

Kekatpure VD(1), Dannenberg AJ, Subbaramaiah K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and the Weill Cornell Cancer Center, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated member of the basic
helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors, binds with high affinity to
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and the environmental toxin
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (dioxin). Most of the biochemical,
biological, and toxicological responses caused by exposure to PAHs and
polychlorinated dioxins are mediated, at least in part, by the AhR. The AhR is a 
client protein of Hsp90, a molecular chaperone that can be reversibly acetylated 
with functional consequences. The main objective of this study was to determine
whether modulating Hsp90 acetylation would affect ligand-mediated activation of
AhR signaling. Trichostatin A and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, two broad
spectrum HDAC inhibitors, blocked PAH and dioxin-mediated induction of CYP1A1 and
CYP1B1 in cell lines derived from the human aerodigestive tract. Silencing HDAC6 
or treatment with tubacin, a pharmacological inhibitor of HDAC6, also suppressed 
the induction of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1. Inhibiting HDAC6 led to hyperacetylation of
Hsp90 and loss of complex formation with AhR, cochaperone p23, and XAP-2.
Inactivation or silencing of HDAC6 also led to reduced binding of ligand to the
AhR and decreased translocation of the AhR from cytosol to nucleus in response to
ligand. Ligand-induced recruitment of the AhR to the CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 promoters 
was inhibited when HDAC6 was inactivated. Mutation analysis of Hsp90 Lys(294)
shows that its acetylation status is a strong determinant of interactions with
AhR and p23 in addition to ligand-mediated activation of AhR signaling.
Collectively, these results show that HDAC6 activity regulates the acetylation of
Hsp90, the ability of Hsp90 to chaperone the AhR, and the expression of
AhR-dependent genes. Given the established link between activation of AhR
signaling and xenobiotic metabolism, inhibitors of HDAC6 may alter drug or
carcinogen metabolism.

PMCID: PMC2658039
PMID: 19158084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Methods Cell Biol. 2009;94:333-46. doi: 10.1016/S0091-679X(08)94017-6. Epub 2009 
Dec 23.

Regulation of cilia assembly, disassembly, and length by protein phosphorylation.

Cao M(1), Li G, Pan J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

The exact mechanism by which cells are able to assemble, regulate, and
disassemble cilia or flagella is not yet completely understood. Recent studies in
several model systems, including Chlamydomonas, Tetrahymena, Leishmania,
Caenorhabditis elegans, and mammals, provide increasing biochemical and genetic
evidence that phosphorylation of multiple protein kinases plays a key role in
cilia assembly, disassembly, and length regulation. Members of several protein
kinase families--including aurora kinases, never in mitosis A (NIMA)-related
protein kinases, mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, and a novel
cyclin-dependent protein kinase--are involved in the ciliary regulation process. 
Among the newly identified protein kinase substrates are Chlamydomonas kinesin-13
(CrKinesin13), a microtubule depolymerizer, and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a 
microtubule deacetylase. Chlamydomonas aurora/Ipl1p-like protein kinase (CALK)
and CrKinesin13 are two proteins that undergo phosphorylation changes correlated 
with flagellar assembly or disassembly. CALK becomes phosphorylated when flagella
are lost, whereas CrKinesin13 is phosphorylated when new flagella are assembled. 
Conversely, suppressing CrKinesin13 expression results in cells with shorter
flagella.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20362099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Feb 1;19(3):688-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.12.045.
Epub 2008 Dec 14.

Novel HDAC6 isoform selective chiral small molecule histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Smil DV(1), Manku S, Chantigny YA, Leit S, Wahhab A, Yan TP, Fournel M, Maroun C,
Li Z, Lemieux AM, Nicolescu A, Rahil J, Lefebvre S, Panetta A, Besterman JM,
Déziel R.

Author information: 
(1)MethylGene Inc, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 7220 Frederick-Banting,
Montréal, Que., Canada H4S 2A1. smild@methylgene.com

In an effort to identify HDAC isoform selective inhibitors, we designed and
synthesized novel, chiral 3,4-dihydroquinoxalin-2(1H)-one and
piperazine-2,5-dione aryl hydroxamates showing selectivity (up to 40-fold) for
human HDAC6 over other class I/IIa HDACs. The observed selectivity and potency
(IC(50) values 10-200 nM against HDAC6) is markedly dependent on the absolute
configuration of the chiral moiety, and suggests new possibilities for use of
chiral compounds in selective HDAC isoform inhibition.

PMID: 19111466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Feb;20(4):1120-31. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-07-0759. Epub 2008
Dec 24.

A histone deacetylase 4/myogenin positive feedback loop coordinates
denervation-dependent gene induction and suppression.

Tang H(1), Macpherson P, Marvin M, Meadows E, Klein WH, Yang XJ, Goldman D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute and Department of Biological
Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Muscle activity contributes to formation of the neuromuscular junction and
affects muscle metabolism and contractile properties through regulated gene
expression. However, the mechanisms coordinating these diverse activity-regulated
processes remain poorly characterized. Recently, it was reported that histone
deacetylase 4 (HDAC4) can mediate denervation-induced myogenin and nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor gene expression. Here, we report that HDAC4 is not only
necessary for denervation-dependent induction of genes involved in synaptogenesis
(nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and muscle-specific receptor tyrosine kinase)
but also for denervation-dependent suppression of genes involved in glycolysis
(muscle-specific enolase and phosphofructokinase). In addition, HDAC4
differentially regulates genes involved in muscle fiber type specification by
inducing myosin heavy chain IIA and suppressing myosin heavy chain IIB.
Consistent with these regulated gene profiles, HDAC4 is enriched in fast
oxidative fibers of innervated tibialis anterior muscle and HDAC4 knockdown
enhances glycolysis in cultured myotubes. HDAC4 mediates gene induction
indirectly by suppressing the expression of Dach2 and MITR that function as
myogenin gene corepressors. In contrast, HDAC4 is directly recruited to myocyte
enhancer factor 2 sites within target promoters to mediate gene suppression.
Finally, we discovered an HDAC4/myogenin positive feedback loop that coordinates 
gene induction and repression underlying muscle phenotypic changes after muscle
denervation.

PMCID: PMC2642751
PMID: 19109424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. ChemMedChem. 2009 Feb;4(2):283-90. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200800196.

Pyridylalanine-containing hydroxamic acids as selective HDAC6 inhibitors.

Schäfer S(1), Saunders L, Schlimme S, Valkov V, Wagner JM, Kratz F, Sippl W,
Verdin E, Jung M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg,
Germany.

We synthesized hydroxamic acids with a pyridylalanine substructure and identified
them as selective inhibitors of human recombinant HDAC6. The in vitro selectivity
was up to 25-fold for HDAC6 over HDAC1 and was confirmed by Western blotting to
assess tubulin versus histone acetylation in cancer cells. Docking studies with
an HDAC6 homology model suggested that the hydrophobic cap group of the
inhibitors interacts with aromatic residues that form a sub-pocket near the
entrance of the substrate binding channel. The HDAC6-selective compounds have
less cytotoxicity toward cancer cells than do pan-HDAC inhibitors. The
synergistic antiproliferative activity we showed with the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib suggests the potential for combination anticancer therapy with less
general toxicity.

PMID: 19090524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Jan 15;19(2):336-40. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.11.081. 
Epub 2008 Nov 27.

Sulfamides as novel histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Wahhab A(1), Smil D, Ajamian A, Allan M, Chantigny Y, Therrien E, Nguyen N, Manku
S, Leit S, Rahil J, Petschner AJ, Lu AH, Nicolescu A, Lefebvre S, Montcalm S,
Fournel M, Yan TP, Li Z, Besterman JM, Déziel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, MethylGene Inc., 7220 rue
Frederick-Banting, Montreal, Que., Canada H4S 2A1. wahhaba@methylgene.com

The sulfamide moiety has been utilized to design novel HDAC inhibitors. The
potency and selectivity of these inhibitors were influenced both by the nature of
the scaffold, and the capping group. Linear long-chain-based analogs were
primarily HDAC6-selective, while analogs based on the lysine scaffold resulted in
potent HDAC1 and HDAC6 inhibitors.

PMID: 19084395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Dev Cell. 2008 Dec;15(6):854-65. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.11.001.

A BBSome subunit links ciliogenesis, microtubule stability, and acetylation.

Loktev AV(1), Zhang Q, Beck JS, Searby CC, Scheetz TE, Bazan JF, Slusarski DC,
Sheffield VC, Jackson PK, Nachury MV.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2008 Dec;15(6):799-800.

Primary cilium dysfunction affects the development and homeostasis of many organs
in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). We recently showed that seven highly conserved
BBS proteins form a stable complex, the BBSome, that functions in membrane
trafficking to and inside the primary cilium. We have now discovered a BBSome
subunit that we named BBIP10. Similar to other BBSome subunits, BBIP10 localizes 
to the primary cilium, BBIP10 is present exclusively in ciliated organisms, and
depletion of BBIP10 yields characteristic BBS phenotypes in zebrafish.
Unexpectedly, BBIP10 is required for cytoplasmic microtubule polymerization and
acetylation, two functions not shared with any other BBSome subunits. Strikingly,
inhibition of the tubulin deacetylase HDAC6 restores microtubule acetylation in
BBIP10-depleted cells, and BBIP10 physically interacts with HDAC6. BBSome-bound
BBIP10 may therefore function to couple acetylation of axonemal microtubules and 
ciliary membrane growth.

PMID: 19081074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Dec;6(12):1908-19. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0299.

Specific activity of class II histone deacetylases in human breast cancer cells.

Duong V(1), Bret C, Altucci L, Mai A, Duraffourd C, Loubersac J, Harmand PO,
Bonnet S, Valente S, Maudelonde T, Cavailles V, Boulle N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier, INSERM U896, Parc
Euromédecine, Montpellier, France.

Although numerous studies have underlined the role of histone deacetylases (HDAC)
in breast physiology and tumorigenesis, little is known on the particular
contribution of the various classes of HDACs in these processes. Using estrogen
receptor-alpha (ERalpha)-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells, the effects of
MC1575 and MC1568, two novel class II-specific HDAC inhibitors, were analyzed on 
cell proliferation, apoptosis, and estrogen signaling. The specificity of these
HDAC inhibitors was validated by measuring histone and alpha-tubulin acetylation 
and by the specific in vitro inhibition of recombinant HDAC4 using histone and
nonhistone substrates, contrasting with the lack of inhibition of class I HDACs. 
In addition, MC1575 did not inhibit class I HDAC gene expression, thus confirming
the specific targeting of class II enzymes. Similar to trichostatin A (TSA),
MC1575 displayed a dose-dependent antiproliferative effect and induced cell cycle
arrest although this blockade occurred at a different level than TSA. Moreover,
and in contrast to TSA, MC1575 had no effect on MCF-7 cells apoptosis.
Interestingly, MC1575 was able to increase p21(waf1/CIP1) mRNA levels but did not
regulate the expression of other genes such as cyclin D1, p27, p14(ARF), Bcl2,
Baxalpha, Trail-R1, and Trail-R2. Finally, MC1575 strongly induced ERbeta gene
expression but did not decrease ERalpha expression, nor did it switch
hydroxytamoxifen to an agonist activity. Altogether, these data suggest that the 
class II HDAC subfamily may exert specific roles in breast cancer progression and
estrogen dependence.

PMCID: PMC2810315
PMID: 19074835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Dec;49(12):2321-7. doi: 10.1080/10428190802527699.

Enhanced histone deacetylase enzyme activity in primary myelofibrosis.

Wang JC(1), Chen C, Dumlao T, Naik S, Chang T, Xiao YY, Sominsky I, Burton J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center,
Brooklyn, New York 112112, USA. jcwang5@aol.com

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Dec;49(12):2231-2.

We measured histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in 17 patients with primary
myelofibrosis (PMF); 19 with other myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) and 16
normal volunteers. Significantly elevated HDAC levels were shown in patients with
PMF compared with other MPN patients and normal volunteers (p<0.05). Sixteen
patients with PMF were also studied for correlation between JAK2 mutation status 
and HDAC levels; no significant correlation was found. We further correlated HDAC
levels with clinical features in PMF: there was no correlation with WBC, platelet
counts, Hb levels or degree of bone marrow fibrosis, but HDAC levels were
correlated to the degree of splenomegaly. This suggests that HDAC may be
recruited as essential thrombocythemia or polycythemia vera progresses into
myelofibrosis or PMF progresses into more advanced stage. We then used the
qRT-PCR cycle threshold (CT) method to study which HDACs were elevated in PMF.
The results showed that, in general, Class 1 HDACs were elevated (HDAC1,2,8)
except HDAC3, Class II HDACs were depressed (HDAC4,5) except HDAC6 and 10, and
Class III HDACs were generally elevated. The current study may form the basis for
using HDAC inhibitor in the treatment of patients with PMF and may implicate a
possible role of HDAC in the association of pathogenesis of PMF.

PMID: 19052980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 26;28(48):12993-3002. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2860-08.2008.

Direct binding with histone deacetylase 6 mediates the reversible recruitment of 
parkin to the centrosome.

Jiang Q(1), Ren Y, Feng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14214, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a microtubule-associated tubulin deacetylase,
plays a significant role in the formation of protein aggregates in many
neurodegenerative disorders. Parkin, a protein-ubiquitin E3 ligase linked to
Parkinson's disease, accumulates at the centrosome in a microtubule-dependent
manner in response to proteasome inhibition. Here, we show that the centrosome
recruitment of parkin was mediated by its direct binding to HDAC6 through
multiple interaction domains. The tubulin deacetylase activity of HDAC6 was
required for the accumulation of parkin as well as its dispersion upon the
reversal of proteasome inhibition. The bidirectional movements of parkin required
intact microtubule network and were dependent on dynein and kinesin 1,
respectively. Tubulin deacetylation increases microtubule dynamicity and may thus
facilitate microtubule-based trafficking of the parkin-HDAC6 complex. The results
suggest that HDAC6 acts as a sensor of proteasome inhibition and directs the
trafficking of parkin by using different motor proteins.

PMCID: PMC2680492
PMID: 19036992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Cell Sci. 2008 Dec 15;121(Pt 24):4079-88. doi: 10.1242/jcs.035006. Epub 2008
Nov 25.

The ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10 interacts with HDAC6 and localizes to
aggresomes under proteasome inhibition.

Kalveram B(1), Schmidtke G, Groettrup M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Immunology, University of Constance,
Universitätsstrasse 10, 78457 Konstanz, Germany.

During misfolded-protein stress, the cytoplasmic protein histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) functions as a linker between the dynein motor and polyubiquitin to
mediate the transport of polyubiquitylated cargo to the aggresome. Here, we
identify a new binding partner of HDAC6, the ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10 (also 
known as UBD), which is cytokine-inducible and - similar to ubiquitin - serves as
a signal for proteasomal degradation. In vivo, the two proteins only interacted
under conditions of proteasome impairment. The binding of HDAC6 to FAT10 was
mediated by two separate domains: the C-terminal ubiquitin-binding zinc-finger
(BUZ domain) of HDAC6 and its first catalytic domain, even though catalytic
activity of HDAC6 was not required for this interaction. Both endogenous and
ectopically expressed FAT10 as well as the model conjugate FAT10-GFP localized to
the aggresome in a microtubule-dependent manner. Furthermore, FAT10-containing as
well as ubiquitin-containing aggresomes were reduced in both size and number in
HDAC6-deficient fibroblasts. We conclude that, if FAT10 fails to subject its
target proteins to proteasomal degradation, an alternative route is taken to
ensure their sequestration and possibly also their subsequent removal by
transporting them to the aggresome via the association with HDAC6.

PMID: 19033385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 15;14(22):7340-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0642.

Ubiquitin proteasome system stress underlies synergistic killing of ovarian
cancer cells by bortezomib and a novel HDAC6 inhibitor.

Bazzaro M(1), Lin Z, Santillan A, Lee MK, Wang MC, Chan KC, Bristow RE,
Mazitschek R, Bradner J, Roden RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
21231, USA.

PURPOSE: Elevated metabolic activity of ovarian cancer cells causes increased
ubiquitin-proteasome-system (UPS) stress, resulting in their greater sensitivity 
to the toxic effects of proteasomal inhibition. The proteasomes and a potentially
compensatory histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)-dependent lysosomal pathway mediate
eukaryotic protein turnover. We hypothesized that up-regulation of the
HDAC6-dependent lysosomal pathway occurs in response to UPS stress and
proteasomal inhibition, and thus, ovarian cancer cell death can be triggered most
effectively by coinhibition of both the proteasome- and HDAC6-dependent protein
degradation pathways.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To address this hypothesis, we examined HDAC6 expression
patterns in normal and cancerous ovarian tissues and used a novel HDAC6-specific 
inhibitor, NK84, to address HDAC6 function in ovarian cancer.
RESULTS: Abnormally high levels of HDAC6 are expressed by ovarian cancer cells in
situ and in culture relative to benign epithelium and immortalized ovarian
surface epithelium, respectively. Specific HDAC6 inhibition acts in synergy with 
the proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (PS-341) to cause selective apoptotic cell
death of ovarian cancer cells at doses that do not cause significant toxicity
when used individually. Levels of UPS stress regulate the sensitivity of ovarian 
cancer cells to proteasome/HDAC6 inhibition. Pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC6
also reduces ovarian cancer cell spreading and migration consistent with its
known function in regulating microtubule polymerization via deacetylation of
alpha-tubulin.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest the elevation of both the proteasomal and
alternate HDAC6-dependent proteolytic pathways in ovarian cancer and the
potential of combined inhibition of proteasome and HDAC6 as a therapy for ovarian
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2744414
PMID: 19010849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. FEBS Lett. 2008 Dec 10;582(29):4059-65. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.10.048. Epub 
2008 Nov 11.

HDAC inhibition upregulates the expression of angiostatic ADAMTS1.

Chou CW(1), Chen CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
No. 1, Jen-Ai Road, 1st Section Taipei 10018, Taiwan. chingchowchen@ntu.edu.tw

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett. 2009 Feb 4;583(3):596.

HDAC inhibitors are promising anticancer agents that induce cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. However, the role of HDACs in cancer progression, such as angiogenesis
and metastasis, remains largely unexplored. Among various HDAC inhibitors, we
demonstrate that TSA and SAHA upregulated the expression of angiostatic ADAMTS1
in A549 cells. HDAC6 inhibitor tubacin, and knockdown of HDAC6, also lead to
ADAMTS1 upregulation. By reporter, DAPA, and ChIP assays, the proximal GC boxes
were demonstrated to be essential for ADAMTS1 induction. Decreased binding of SP1
and HDAC6 to the ADAMTS1 promoter after TSA treatment was also seen. These data
suggest the involvement of HDAC6 and SP1 in the HDACi-induced expression of
angiostatic ADAMTS1.

PMID: 19007777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 2;284(1):446-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805010200. Epub 2008 Nov
6.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli invades host cells via an HDAC6-modulated
microtubule-dependent pathway.

Dhakal BK(1), Mulvey MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology and Immunology, Pathology Department, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-0565, USA.

Strains of uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) encode filamentous adhesive
organelles called type 1 pili that promote bacterial colonization and invasion of
the bladder epithelium. Type 1 pilus-mediated interactions with host receptors,
including alpha3beta1 integrin, trigger localized actin rearrangements that lead 
to internalization of adherent bacteria via a zipper-like mechanism. Here we
report that type 1 pilus-mediated bacterial invasion of bladder cells also
requires input from host microtubules and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a
cytosolic enzyme that, by deacetylating alpha-tubulin, can alter the stability of
microtubules along with the recruitment and directional trafficking of the
kinesin-1 motor complex. We found that disruption of microtubules by nocodazole
or vinblastine treatment, as well as microtubule stabilization by taxol,
inhibited host cell invasion by UPEC, as did silencing of HDAC6 expression or
pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 activity. Invasion did not require two
alternate HDAC6 substrates, Hsp90 and cortactin, but was dependent upon the
kinesin-1 light chain KLC2 and an upstream activator of HDAC6, aurora A kinase.
These results indicate that HDAC6 and microtubules act as vital regulatory
elements during the invasion process, possibly via indirect effects on kinesin-1 
and associated cargos.

PMCID: PMC2610520
PMID: 18996840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;29(1):116-28. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00829-08. Epub 2008 Oct
27.

A critical role for CHIP in the aggresome pathway.

Sha Y(1), Pandit L, Zeng S, Eissa NT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Recent evidence suggests that aggresome formation is a physiologic stress
response not limited to misfolded proteins. That stress response, termed
"physiologic aggresome," is exemplified by aggresome formation of inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), an important host defense protein. CHIP (carboxy
terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein) is a highly conserved protein that has
been shown to mediate substrate ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome.
In this study, we show that CHIP has a previously unexpected critical role in the
aggresome pathway. CHIP interacts with iNOS and promotes its ubiquitination and
degradation by the proteasome as well as its sequestration to the aggresome.
CHIP-mediated iNOS targeting to the proteasome sequentially precedes
CHIP-mediated iNOS sequestration to the aggresome. CHIP is required for iNOS
preaggresome structures to form a mature aggresome. Furthermore, CHIP is required
for targeting the mutant form of cystic fibrosis transconductance regulator
(CFTRDeltaF508) to the aggresome. Importantly, the ubiquitin ligase function of
CHIP is required in targeting preaggresomal structures to the aggresome by
promoting an iNOS interaction with histone deacetylase 6, which serves as an
adaptor between ubiquitinated proteins and the dynein motor. This study reveals a
critical role for CHIP in the aggresome pathway.

PMCID: PMC2612489
PMID: 18955503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jan 15;124(2):509. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23975.

Inhibition of HDAC6-dependent carcinogenesis: emerging, new therapeutic options
besides belinostat.

Kapoor S.

Comment on
    Int J Cancer. 2008 Mar 15;122(6):1400-10.

PMID: 18942705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Oct;7(10):3195-202. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0617.

Genistein down-regulates androgen receptor by modulating HDAC6-Hsp90 chaperone
function.

Basak S(1), Pookot D, Noonan EJ, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor belonging to
the steroid hormone receptor family and is very important for the development and
progression of prostate cancer. The soy isoflavone genistein has been shown
previously to down-regulate AR in androgen-dependent prostate cancer cell lines
such as LNCaP. However, the mechanism(s) by which AR is down-regulated by
genistein is still not known fully. We show a new mechanism by which genistein
inhibits AR protein levels. We show that genistein-treated LNCaP cells exhibit
increased ubiquitination of AR, suggesting that AR protein is down-regulated via 
a proteasome-mediated pathway. AR is normally stabilized by the chaperone
activity of the heat shock protein Hsp90. The increased ubiquitination of AR
after genistein treatment is attributed to decreased Hsp90 chaperone activity as 
assessed by its increased functionally inactive acetylated form. Consistent with 
this result, we find that HDAC6, which is a Hsp90 deacetylase, is inhibited by
the antiestrogenic activity of genistein. Hence, in this study, we elucidate a
novel mechanism of AR down-regulation by genistein through inhibition of
HDAC6-Hsp90 cochaperone function required to stabilize AR protein. Our results
suggest that genistein could be used as a potential chemopreventive agent for
prostate cancers along with known inhibitors of HDAC6 and Hsp90.

PMID: 18852123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;68(18):7561-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0188.

The cytoplasmic deacetylase HDAC6 is required for efficient oncogenic
tumorigenesis.

Lee YS(1), Lim KH, Guo X, Kawaguchi Y, Gao Y, Barrientos T, Ordentlich P, Wang
XF, Counter CM, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACI) are promising antitumor agents. Although
transcriptional deregulation is thought to be the main mechanism underlying their
therapeutic effects, the exact mechanism and targets by which HDACIs achieve
their antitumor effects remain poorly understood. It is not known whether any of 
the HDAC members support robust tumor growth. In this report, we show that HDAC6,
a cytoplasmic-localized and cytoskeleton-associated deacetylase, is required for 
efficient oncogenic transformation and tumor formation. We found that HDAC6
expression is induced upon oncogenic Ras transformation. Fibroblasts deficient in
HDAC6 are more resistant to both oncogenic Ras and ErbB2-dependent
transformation, indicating a critical role for HDAC6 in oncogene-induced
transformation. Supporting this hypothesis, inactivation of HDAC6 in several
cancer cell lines reduces anchorage-independent growth and the ability to form
tumors in mice. The loss of anchorage-independent growth is associated with
increased anoikis and defects in AKT and extracellular signal-regulated kinase
activation upon loss of adhesion. Lastly, HDAC6-null mice are more resistant to
chemical carcinogen-induced skin tumors. Our results provide the first
experimental evidence that a specific HDAC member is required for efficient
oncogenic transformation and indicate that HDAC6 is an important component
underlying the antitumor effects of HDACIs.

PMCID: PMC2978070
PMID: 18794144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Ther. 2008 Nov;16(11):1841-7. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.190. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

Microtubule acetylation through HDAC6 inhibition results in increased
transfection efficiency.

Vaughan EE(1), Geiger RC, Miller AM, Loh-Marley PL, Suzuki T, Miyata N, Dean DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The success of viral and nonviral gene delivery relies on the ability of
DNA-based vectors to traverse the cytoplasm and reach the nucleus. We, as well as
other researchers, have shown that plasmids utilize the microtubule network and
its associated motor proteins to traffic toward the nucleus. While disruption of 
microtubules with nocodazole was shown to greatly inhibit cytoplasmic plasmid
trafficking, it did not abolish it. It has been demonstrated that a pool of
stabilized post-translationally acetylated microtubules exists in cells, and that
this acetylation may play a role in protein trafficking. In order to determine
whether this modification could account for the residual DNA trafficking in
nocodazole-treated cells, we inhibited or knocked down the levels of the tubulin 
deacetylase, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), thereby generating higher levels of
acetylated microtubules. Electroporation of plasmids into cells with inhibited or
silenced HDAC6 resulted in increased gene transfer. This increased transfection
efficiency was not because of increased transcriptional activity, but rather,
because of increased cytoplasmic trafficking. When plasmids were cytoplasmically 
microinjected into HDAC6-deficient cells, they entered the nucleus within 5
minutes of injection, almost 10 times faster than in wild-type cells. Taken
together, these results suggest that modulation of HDAC6 and the microtubule
network can increase the efficiency of gene transfer.

PMID: 18781140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 31;283(44):30289-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805517200. Epub 2008
Aug 20.

Impaired protein aggregate handling and clearance underlie the pathogenesis of
p97/VCP-associated disease.

Ju JS(1), Miller SE, Hanson PI, Weihl CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Mutations in p97/VCP cause the multisystem disease inclusion body myopathy, Paget
disease of the bone and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD). p97/VCP is a member of 
the AAA+ (ATPase associated with a variety of activities) protein family and has 
been implicated in multiple cellular processes. One pathologic feature in IBMPFD 
is ubiquitinated inclusions, suggesting that mutations in p97/VCP may affect
protein degradation. The present study shows that IBMPFD mutant expression
increases ubiquitinated proteins and susceptibility to proteasome inhibition.
Co-expression of an aggregate prone protein such as expanded polyglutamine in
IBMPFD mutant cells results in an increase in aggregated protein that localizes
to small inclusions instead of a single perinuclear aggresome. These small
inclusions fail to co-localize with autophagic machinery. IBMPFD mutants avidly
bind to these small inclusions and may not allow them to traffic to an aggresome.
This is rescued by HDAC6, a p97/VCP-binding protein that facilitates the
autophagic degradation of protein aggregates. Expression of HDAC6 improves
aggresome formation and protects IBMPFD mutant cells from polyglutamine-induced
cell death. Our study emphasizes the importance of protein aggregate trafficking 
to inclusion bodies in degenerative diseases and the therapeutic benefit of
inclusion body formation.

PMCID: PMC2573070
PMID: 18715868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Hepatology. 2008 Nov;48(5):1671-9. doi: 10.1002/hep.22481.

Alcohol-induced alterations in hepatic microtubule dynamics can be explained by
impaired histone deacetylase 6 function.

Shepard BD(1), Joseph RA, Kannarkat GT, Rutledge TM, Tuma DJ, Tuma PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC
20064, USA.

We have been using polarized, hepatic WIF-B cells to examine ethanol-induced
liver injury. These cells polarize in culture and maintain numerous
liver-specific activities including the ability to metabolize alcohol.
Previously, we found that microtubules were more highly acetylated and more
stable in ethanol-treated WIF-B cells and that increased microtubule acetylation 
required ethanol metabolism and was likely mediated by acetaldehyde. This study
was aimed at identifying the mechanism responsible for increased microtubule
acetylation. We examined the expression of two known microtubule deacetylases,
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and Sirtuin T2 (SirT2), in WIF-B cells.
Immunoblotting, immunofluorescence microscopy, and assays using the SirT2
inhibitor nicotinamide revealed that WIF-B cells do not express SirT2. In
contrast, HDAC6 was highly expressed in WIF-B cells. Addition of trichostatin A
(TSA), an HDAC6 inhibitor, induced microtubule acetylation to the same extent as 
in ethanol-treated cells (approximately threefold). Although immunofluorescence
labeling revealed that HDAC6 distribution did not change in ethanol-treated
cells, immunoblotting showed HDAC6 protein levels slightly decreased. HDAC6
solubility was increased in nocodazole-treated cells, suggesting impaired
microtubule binding. Direct microtubule binding assays confirmed this hypothesis.
The decreased microtubule binding was partially prevented by 4-methyl pyrazole,
indicating the effect was in part mediated by acetaldehyde. Interestingly, HDAC6 
from ethanol-treated cells was able to bind and deacetylate exogenous tubulin to 
the same extent as control, suggesting that ethanol-induced tubulin modifications
prevented HDAC6 binding to endogenous microtubules.CONCLUSION: We propose that
lower HDAC6 levels combined with decreased microtubule binding lead to increased 
tubulin acetylation in ethanol-treated cells.

PMCID: PMC2965519
PMID: 18697214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Histopathology. 2008 Sep;53(3):267-77. doi: 10.1111/j.0309-0167.2008.03109.x.

Prognostic significance of the therapeutic targets histone deacetylase 1, 2, 6
and acetylated histone H4 in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Marquard L(1), Gjerdrum LM, Christensen IJ, Jensen PB, Sehested M, Ralfkiaer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Experimental Pathology Unit, Copenhagen Biocentre,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen. lmi@topotarget.com

AIMS: Aberrant histone acetylation has been associated with malignancy and
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are currently being investigated in
numerous clinical trials. So far, the malignancy most sensitive to HDAC
inhibitors has been cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). The reason for this
sensitivity is unclear and studies on HDAC expression and histone acetylation in 
CTCL are lacking. The aim of this study was to address this issue.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The immunohistochemical expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6,
and acetylated H4 was examined in 73 CTCLs and the results related to
histological subtypes and overall survival. HDAC1 was most abundantly expressed
(P < 0.0001), followed by HDAC2; HDAC6 and H4 acetylation were equally expressed.
HDAC2 (P = 0.001) and H4 acetylation (P = 0.03) were significantly more common in
aggressive than indolent CTCL subtypes. In contrast, no differences were observed
for HDAC1 and HDAC6. In a Cox analysis, elevated HDAC6 was the only parameter
showing significant influence on survival (P = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: High expression of HDAC2 and acetylated H4 is more common in
aggressive than indolent CTCL. HDAC6 expression is associated with a favorable
outcome independent of the subtype.

PMCID: PMC2675007
PMID: 18671804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Blood. 2008 Oct 1;112(7):2896-905. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-116319. Epub 2008
Jul 25.

Molecular and biologic characterization and drug sensitivity of pan-histone
deacetylase inhibitor-resistant acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Fiskus W(1), Rao R, Fernandez P, Herger B, Yang Y, Chen J, Kolhe R, Mandawat A,
Wang Y, Joshi R, Eaton K, Lee P, Atadja P, Peiper S, Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)MCG Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, USA.

Hydroxamic acid analog pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HA-HDIs) have
shown preclinical and clinical activity against human acute leukemia. Here we
describe HA-HDI-resistant human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) HL-60 (HL-60/LR)
cells that are resistant to LAQ824, vorinostat, LBH589, and sodium butyrate.
HL-60/LR cells show increased expression of HDACs 1, 2, and 4 but lack HDAC6
expression, with concomitant hyperacetylation of heat shock protein 90 (hsp90).
Treatment with HA-HDI failed to further augment hsp90 acetylation, or increase
the levels of p21 or reactive oxygen species (ROSs), in HL-60/LR versus HL-60
cells. Although cross-resistant to antileukemia agents (eg, cytarabine,
etoposide, and TRAIL), HL-60/LR cells are collaterally sensitive to the hsp90
inhibitor 17-AAG. Treatment with 17-AAG did not induce hsp70 or deplete the hsp90
client proteins AKT and c-Raf. HL-60/LR versus HL-60 cells display a higher
growth fraction and shorter doubling time, along with a shorter interval to
generation of leukemia and survival in nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mice. Thus, resistance of AML cells to HA-HDIs is
associated with loss of HDAC6, hyperacetylation of hsp90, aggressive leukemia
phenotype, and collateral sensitivity to 17-AAG. These findings suggest that an
hsp90 inhibitor-based antileukemia therapy may override de novo or acquired
resistance of AML cells to HA-HDIs.

PMID: 18660379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Jul;6(7):1250-8. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-2110.

Destabilization of ERBB2 transcripts by targeting 3' untranslated region
messenger RNA associated HuR and histone deacetylase-6.

Scott GK(1), Marx C, Berger CE, Saunders LR, Verdin E, Schäfer S, Jung M, Benz
CC.

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Age Research, Novato, CA 94945, USA.
gscott@buckinstitute.org

In addition to repressing ERBB2 promoter function, histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors induce the accelerated decay of mature ERBB2 transcripts; the
mechanism mediating this transcript destabilization is unknown but depends on the
3' untranslated region (UTR) of ERBB2 mRNA. Using ERBB2-overexpressing human
breast cancer cells (SKBR3), the mRNA stability factor HuR was shown to support
ERBB2 transcript integrity, bind and endogenously associate with a conserved
U-rich element within the ERBB2 transcript 3' UTR, coimmunoprecipitate with
RNA-associated HDAC activity, and colocalize with HDAC6. HDAC6 also
coimmunoprecipitates with HuR in an RNA-dependent manner and within 6 hours of
exposure to a pan-HDAC inhibitor dose, that does not significantly alter
cytosolic HuR levels or HuR binding to ERBB2 mRNA. Cellular ERBB2 transcript
levels decline while remaining physically associated with HDAC6. Knockdown of
HDAC6 protein by small interfering RNA partially suppressed the ERBB2 transcript 
decay induced by either pan-HDAC or HDAC6-selective enzymatic inhibitors. Three
novel hydroxamates, ST71, ST17, and ST80 were synthesized and shown to inhibit
HDAC6 with 14-fold to 31-fold greater selectivity over their binding and
inhibition of HDAC1. Unlike more potent pan-HDAC inhibitors, these
HDAC6-selective inhibitors produced dose-dependent growth arrest of
ERBB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells by accelerating the decay of mature
ERBB2 mRNA without repressing ERBB2 promoter function. In sum, these findings
point to the therapeutic potential of HuR and HDAC6-selective inhibitors,
contrasting ERBB2 stability effects induced by HDAC6 enzymatic inhibition and
HDAC6 protein knockdown, and show that ERBB2 transcript stability mechanisms
include exploitable targets for the development of novel anticancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC2583372
PMID: 18644987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Med Chem. 2008 Aug 14;51(15):4370-3. doi: 10.1021/jm8002894. Epub 2008 Jul 22.

Use of the nitrile oxide cycloaddition (NOC) reaction for molecular probe
generation: a new class of enzyme selective histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACIs) showing picomolar activity at HDAC6.

Kozikowski AP(1), Tapadar S, Luchini DN, Kim KH, Billadeau DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry & Pharmacognosy, Drug Discovery Program,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 South Wood Street, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA. Kozikowa@uic.edu

A series of hydroxamate based HDAC inhibitors containing a phenylisoxazole as the
CAP group has been synthesized using nitrile oxide cycloaddition chemistry. An
HDAC6 selective inhibitor having a potency of approximately 2 picomolar was
identified. Some of the compounds were examined for their ability to block
pancreatic cancer cell growth and found to be about 10-fold more potent than
SAHA. This research provides valuable, new molecular probes for use in exploring 
HDAC biology.

PMCID: PMC3913184
PMID: 18642892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Blood. 2008 Oct 1;112(7):2917-26. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-12-130823. Epub 2008
Jul 18.

Myc regulates aggresome formation, the induction of Noxa, and apoptosis in
response to the combination of bortezomib and SAHA.

Nawrocki ST(1), Carew JS, Maclean KH, Courage JF, Huang P, Houghton JA, Cleveland
JL, Giles FJ, McConkey DJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute for Drug Development, Cancer Therapy and Research Center at The 
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, USA.
nawrocki@uthscsa.edu

The histone deacetylase inhibitor SAHA enhances cell death stimulated by the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BZ) by disrupting BZ-induced aggresome
formation. Here we report that Myc regulates the sensitivity of multiple myeloma 
(MM) cells to BZ + SAHA-induced cell death. In MM cells, Myc expression directly 
correlated with intracellular ER content, protein synthesis rates, the percentage
of aggresome-positive cells, and the sensitivity to BZ + SAHA-induced cell death.
Accordingly, Myc knockdown markedly reduced the sensitivity of MM cells to BZ +
SAHA-mediated apoptosis. Furthermore, activation of Myc was sufficient to provoke
aggresome formation and thus sensitivity to BZ + SAHA, and these responses
required de novo protein synthesis. BZ + SAHA-mediated stimulation of apoptosis
includes the induction of the proapoptotic BH3-only protein Noxa as well as
endoplasmic reticular stress, a disruption of calcium homeostasis, and activation
of capase-4. Finally, knockdown studies demonstrated that both caspase-4 and Noxa
play significant roles in Myc-driven sensitivity to BZ + SAHA-induced apoptosis. 
Collectively, our results establish a mechanistic link between Myc activity,
regulation of protein synthesis, increases in HDAC6 expression and aggresome
formation, induction of Noxa, and sensitivity to BZ + SAHA-induced apoptosis.
These data suggest that MM patients with elevated Myc activity may be
particularly sensitive to the BZ + SAHA combination.

PMCID: PMC2556625
PMID: 18641367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Neurochem. 2008 Sep;106(5):2119-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05564.x. Epub
2008 Jul 12.

Histone deacetylase 6 interacts with the microtubule-associated protein tau.

Ding H(1), Dolan PJ, Johnson GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a unique cytoplasmic deacetylase, likely plays a
role in neurodegeneration by coordinating cell responses to abnormal protein
aggregation. Here, we provide in vitro and in vivo evidence that HDAC6 interacts 
with tau, a microtubule-associated protein that forms neurofibrillary tangles in 
Alzheimer's disease. This interaction is mediated by the microtubule-binding
domain on tau and the Ser/Glu tetradecapeptide domain on HDAC6. Treatment with
tubacin, a selective inhibitor of tubulin deacetylation activity of HDAC6, did
not disrupt HDAC6-tau interaction. Nonetheless tubacin treatment attenuated
site-specific tau phosphorylation, as did shRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC6.
Proteasome inhibition potentiated HDAC6-tau interactions and facilitated the
concentration and co-localization of HDAC6 and tau in a perinuclear
aggresome-like compartment, independent of HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase activity.
Furthermore, we observed that in Alzheimer's disease brains the protein level of 
HDAC6 was significantly increased. These findings establish HDAC6 as a
tau-interacting protein and as a potential modulator of tau phosphorylation and
accumulation.

PMCID: PMC2574575
PMID: 18636984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Jan;40(1):76-82. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2007-0307OC.
Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Tubulin acetylation and histone deacetylase 6 activity in the lung under cyclic
load.

Geiger RC(1), Kaufman CD, Lam AP, Budinger GR, Dean DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Northwestern University
Medical School, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Previous studies from our lab have demonstrated that upon exposure to physiologic
levels of cyclic stretch, alveolar epithelial cells demonstrate a significant
decrease in the amount of polymerized tubulin (Geiger et al., Gene Therapy
2006;13:725-731). However, not all microtubules are disassembled, although the
mechanisms or implications of this were unknown. Using immunofluorescence
microscopy, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry approaches, we have
compared the levels of acetylated tubulin in stretched and unstretched A549 cells
and in murine lungs. In cultured cells exposed to cyclic stretch (10% change in
basement membrane surface area at 0.25 Hz), nearly all of the remaining
microtubules were acetylated, as demonstrated using immunofluorescence
microscopy. In murine lungs ventilated for 20 minutes at 12 to 20 ml/kg followed 
by 48 hours of spontaneous breathing or for 3 hours at 16 to 40 ml/kg, levels of 
acetylated tubulin were increased in the peripheral lung. In both our in vitro
and in vivo studies, we have found that mild to moderate levels of cyclic stretch
significantly increases tubulin acetylation in a magnitude- and
duration-dependent manner. This appears to be due to a decrease in histone
deacetylase 6 activity (HDAC6), the major tubulin deacetylase. Since it has been 
previously shown that acetylated microtubules are positively correlated to a more
stable population of microtubules, this result suggests that microtubule
stability may be increased by cyclic stretch, and that tubulin acetylation is one
way in which cells respond to changes in exogenous mechanical forces.

PMCID: PMC2606948
PMID: 18635817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 15;105(28):9633-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0803749105. Epub 2008 Jul 7.

HDAC6 is a specific deacetylase of peroxiredoxins and is involved in redox
regulation.

Parmigiani RB(1), Xu WS, Venta-Perez G, Erdjument-Bromage H, Yaneva M, Tempst P, 
Marks PA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Molecular Biology Programs, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Eighteen histone deacetylases (HDACs) are present in humans, categorized into two
groups: zinc-dependent enzymes (HDAC1-11) and NAD(+)-dependent enzymes (sirtuins 
1-7). Among zinc-dependent HDACs, HDAC6 is unique. It has a cytoplasmic
localization, two catalytic sites, a ubiquitin-binding site, and it selectively
deacetylases alpha-tubulin and Hsp90. Here, we report the discovery that the
redox regulatory proteins, peroxiredoxin (Prx) I and Prx II are specific targets 
of HDAC6. Prx are antioxidants enzymes whose main function is H(2)O(2) reduction.
Prx are elevated in many cancers and neurodegenerative diseases. The acetylated
form of Prx accumulates in the absence of an active HDAC6. Acetylation of Prx
increases its reducing activity, its resistance to superoxidation, and its
resistance to transition to high-molecular-mass complexes. Thus, HDAC6 and Prx
are targets for modulating intracellular redox status in therapeutic strategies
for disorders as disparate as cancers and neurodegenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC2443817
PMID: 18606987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Sep 12;374(1):84-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.06.092. Epub 2008 Jul 3.

Effects of downregulated HDAC6 expression on the proliferation of lung cancer
cells.

Kamemura K(1), Ito A, Shimazu T, Matsuyama A, Maeda S, Yao TP, Horinouchi S,
Khochbin S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetics Laboratory, RIKEN Advanced Science Institute, Wako, Saitama 
351-0198, Japan.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a multifunctional, cytosolic protein deacetylase
that primarily acts on alpha-tubulin. Here we report that stable knockdown of
HDAC6 expression causes a decrease in the steady-state level of receptor tyrosine
kinases, such as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and platelet-derived
growth factor receptor alpha, in A549 lung cancer cells. The decreased levels of 
in EGFR in HDAC6-knockdown cells, which correlated with increased acetylation of 
microtubules, were due to increased turnover of EGFR protein. Despite the
decrease in EGFR levels, A549 cells lacking functional HDAC6 appeared to grow
normally, probably due to increased expression of extracellular signal-regulated 
kinases 1 and 2. Indeed, HDAC6-knockdown cells were more sensitive than control
cells to the MEK inhibitor U0126. These results suggest that HDAC6 inhibitors
combined with inhibitors of growth factor signaling may be useful as cancer
therapy.

PMID: 18602369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):1886-93. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-143644. Epub 2008
Jun 30.

HDAC6 inhibition enhances 17-AAG--mediated abrogation of hsp90 chaperone function
in human leukemia cells.

Rao R(1), Fiskus W, Yang Y, Lee P, Joshi R, Fernandez P, Mandawat A, Atadja P,
Bradner JE, Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia (MCG) Cancer Center, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a heat shock protein 90 (hsp90) deacetylase.
Treatment with pan-HDAC inhibitors or depletion of HDAC6 by siRNA induces
hyperacetylation and inhibits ATP binding and chaperone function of hsp90.
Treatment with 17-allylamino-demothoxy geldanamycin (17-AAG) also inhibits ATP
binding and chaperone function of hsp90, resulting in polyubiquitylation and
proteasomal degradation of hsp90 client proteins. In this study, we determined
the effect of hsp90 hyperacetylation on the anti-hsp90 and antileukemia activity 
of 17-AAG. Hyperacetylation of hsp90 increased its binding to 17-AAG, as well as 
enhanced 17-AAG-mediated attenuation of ATP and the cochaperone p23 binding to
hsp90. Notably, treatment with 17-AAG alone also reduced HDAC6 binding to hsp90
and induced hyperacetylation of hsp90. This promoted the proteasomal degradation 
of HDAC6. Cotreatment with 17-AAG and siRNA to HDAC6 induced more inhibition of
hsp90 chaperone function and depletion of BCR-ABL and c-Raf than treatment with
either agent alone. In addition, cotreatment with 17-AAG and tubacin augmented
the loss of survival of K562 cells and viability of primary acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) samples. These findings
demonstrate that HDAC6 is an hsp90 client protein and hyperacetylation of hsp90
augments the anti-hsp90 and antileukemia effects of 17-AAG.

PMID: 18591380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;68(12):4833-42. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0644.

Role of acetylation and extracellular location of heat shock protein 90alpha in
tumor cell invasion.

Yang Y(1), Rao R, Shen J, Tang Y, Fiskus W, Nechtman J, Atadja P, Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia Cancer Center, Augusta, Georgia, USA.

Heat shock protein (hsp) 90 is an ATP-dependent molecular chaperone that
maintains the active conformation of client oncoproteins in cancer cells. An
isoform, hsp90alpha, promotes extracellular maturation of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, involved in tumor invasion and metastasis. Knockdown
of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6, which deacetylates lysine residues in hsp90,
induces reversible hyperacetylation and attenuates ATP binding and chaperone
function of hsp90. Here, using mass spectrometry, we identified seven lysine
residues in hsp90alpha that are hyperacetylated after treatment of eukaryotic
cells with a pan-HDAC inhibitor that also inhibits HDAC6. Depending on the
specific lysine residue in the middle domain involved, although acetylation
affects ATP, cochaperone, and client protein binding to hsp90alpha, acetylation
of all seven lysines increased the binding of hsp90alpha to
17-allyl-amino-demethoxy geldanamycin. Notably, after treatment with the pan-HDAC
inhibitor panobinostat (LBH589), the extracellular hsp90alpha was hyperacetylated
and it bound to MMP-2, which was associated with increased in vitro tumor cell
invasiveness. Treatment with antiacetylated hsp90alpha antibody inhibited in
vitro invasion by tumor cells. Thus, reversible hyperacetylation modulates the
intracellular and extracellular chaperone function of hsp90, and targeting
extracellular hyperacetylated hsp90alpha may undermine tumor invasion and
metastasis.

PMCID: PMC2665713
PMID: 18559531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Med Chem. 2008 Jul 10;51(13):3985-4001. doi: 10.1021/jm800093c. Epub 2008 Jun
18.

Trithiocarbonates as a novel class of HDAC inhibitors: SAR studies, isoenzyme
selectivity, and pharmacological profiles.

Dehmel F(1), Weinbrenner S, Julius H, Ciossek T, Maier T, Stengel T, Fettis K,
Burkhardt C, Wieland H, Beckers T.

Author information: 
(1)Nycomed GmbH, Therapeutic Area Oncology, Byk-Gulden-Strasse 2, D-78467
Konstanz, Germany.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDAC) are currently developed for the
treatment of cancer. These include compounds with a sulfur containing head group 
like depsipeptide, alkylthiols, thiocarboxylates, and trithiocarbonates with a
carbonyl group in the alpha-position. In the present investigation, we report on 
the synthesis and comprehensive SAR analysis of HDAC inhibitors bearing a tri- or
dithiocarbonate motif. Such trithiocarbonates are readily accessible from either 
preformed or in situ prepared alpha-halogenated methylaryl ketones. A HDAC
isotype selectivity and a substrate competitive mode-of-action is shown for
defined analogues. Exploration of the head group showed the necessity of the
dithio-alpha-carbonyl motif for potent HDAC inhibition. Highly potent, substrate 
competitive HDAC6 selective inhibitors were identified (12ac:IC 50 = 65 nM and K 
i = 110 nM). Trithiocarbonate analogues with an aminoquinoline-substituted
pyridinyl-thienoacetyl cap demonstrate a cytotoxicity profile and potency
comparable to that of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) as an approved
cancer drug.

PMID: 18558669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 8;283(32):21926-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709156200. Epub 2008 
May 28.

Cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator missing the first four transmembrane
segments increases wild type and DeltaF508 processing.

Cebotaru L(1), Vij N, Ciobanu I, Wright J, Flotte T, Guggino WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

We previously generated an adenoassociated viral gene therapy vector,
rAAV-Delta264 cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), missing
the first four transmembrane domains of CFTR. When infected into monkey lungs,
Delta264 CFTR increased the levels of endogenous wild type CFTR protein. To
understand this process, we transfected Delta264 CFTR plasmid cDNA into COS7
cells, and we noted that protein expression from the truncation mutant is barely 
detectable when compared with wild type or DeltaF508 CFTR. Delta264 CFTR protein 
expression increases dramatically when cells are treated with proteasome
inhibitors. Cycloheximide experiments show that Delta264 CFTR is degraded faster 
than DeltaF508 CFTR. VCP and HDAC6, two proteins involved in retrograde
translocation from endoplasmic reticulum to cytosol for proteasomal and
aggresomal degradation, coimmunoprecipitate with Delta264 CFTR. In cotransfection
studies in COS7 cells and in transfection of Delta264 CFTR into cells stably
expressing wild type and DeltaF508 CFTR, Delta264 CFTR increases wild type CFTR
protein and increases levels of maturation of immature band B to mature band C of
DeltaF508 CFTR. Thus the adenoassociated viral vector, rAAV-Delta264 CFTR, is a
highly promising cystic fibrosis gene therapy vector because it increases the
amount of mature band C protein both from wild type and DeltaF508 CFTR and
associates with key elements in quality control mechanism of CFTR.

PMCID: PMC2494918
PMID: 18508776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 25;283(30):21065-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802786200. Epub 2008
May 21.

Requirement of HDAC6 for transforming growth factor-beta1-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Shan B(1), Yao TP, Nguyen HT, Zhuo Y, Levy DR, Klingsberg RC, Tao H, Palmer ML,
Holder KN, Lasky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. bshan@tulane.edu

The aberrant expression of transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 in the tumor
microenvironment and fibrotic lesions plays a critical role in tumor progression 
and tissue fibrosis by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT
promotes tumor cell motility and invasiveness. How EMT affects motility and
invasion is not well understood. Here we report that HDAC6 is a novel modulator
of TGF-beta1-induced EMT. HDAC6 is a microtubule-associated deacetylase that
predominantly deacetylates nonhistone proteins, including alpha-tubulin, and
regulates cell motility. We showed that TGF-beta1-induced EMT is accompanied by
HDAC6-dependent deacetylation of alpha-tubulin. Importantly, inhibition of HDAC6 
by small interfering RNA or the small molecule inhibitor tubacin attenuated the
TGF-beta1-induced EMT markers, such as the aberrant expression of epithelial and 
mesenchymal peptides, as well as the formation of stress fibers. Reduced
expression of HDAC6 also impaired the activation of SMAD3 in response to
TGF-beta1. Conversely, inhibition of SMAD3 activation substantially impaired
HDAC6-dependent deacetylation of alpha-tubulin as well as the expression of EMT
markers. These findings reveal a novel function of HDAC6 in EMT by intercepting
the TGF-beta-SMAD3 signaling cascade. Our results identify HDAC6 as a critical
regulator of EMT and a potential therapeutic target against pathological EMT, a
key event for tumor progression and fibrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2475688
PMID: 18499657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Med Chem. 2008 Jun 26;51(12):3437-48. doi: 10.1021/jm701606b.

A series of potent and selective, triazolylphenyl-based histone deacetylases
inhibitors with activity against pancreatic cancer cells and Plasmodium
falciparum.

Chen Y(1), Lopez-Sanchez M, Savoy DN, Billadeau DD, Dow GS, Kozikowski AP.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 South Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The discovery of the rules governing the inhibition of the various HDAC isoforms 
is likely to be key to identifying improved therapeutics that act as epigenetic
modulators of gene transcription. Herein we present results on the modification
of the CAP region of a set of triazolylphenyl-based HDACIs, and show that the
nature of substitution on the phenyl ring plays a role in their selectivity for
HDAC1 versus HDAC6, with low to moderate selectivity (2-51-fold) being achieved. 
In light of the valuable selectivity and potency that were identified for the
triazolylphenyl ligand 6b in the inhibition of HDAC6 (IC50 = 1.9 nM), this
compound represents a valuable research tool and a candidate for further chemical
modifications. Lastly, these new HDACIs were studied for both their anticancer
and antimalarial activity, which serve to validate the superior activity of the
HDACI 10c.

PMID: 18494463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Immunol. 2008 Jun 1;180(11):7697-705.

Tissue transglutaminase activation modulates inflammation in cystic fibrosis via 
PPARgamma down-regulation.

Maiuri L(1), Luciani A, Giardino I, Raia V, Villella VR, D'Apolito M,
Pettoello-Mantovani M, Guido S, Ciacci C, Cimmino M, Cexus ON, Londei M,
Quaratino S.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute for Cystic Fibrosis Research, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Milan, Italy

Cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common life-threatening inherited disease in
Caucasians, is due to mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator
(CFTR) gene and is characterized by airways chronic inflammation and pulmonary
infections. The inflammatory response is not secondary to the pulmonary
infections. Indeed, several studies have shown an increased proinflammatory
activity in the CF tissues, regardless of bacterial infections, because
inflammation is similarly observed in CFTR-defective cell lines kept in sterile
conditions. Despite recent studies that have indicated that CF airway epithelial 
cells can spontaneously initiate the inflammatory cascade, we still do not have a
clear insight of the molecular mechanisms involved in this increased inflammatory
response. In this study, to understand these mechanisms, we investigated ex vivo 
cultures of nasal polyp mucosal explants of CF patients and controls,
CFTR-defective IB3-1 bronchial epithelial cells, C38 isogenic CFTR corrected, and
16HBE normal bronchial epithelial cell lines. We have shown that a defective CFTR
induces a remarkable up-regulation of tissue transglutaminase (TG2) in both
tissues and cell lines. The increased TG2 activity leads to functional
sequestration of the anti-inflammatory peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma and increase of the classic parameters of inflammation, such as TNF-alpha, 
tyrosine phosphorylation, and MAPKs. Specific inhibition of TG2 was able to
reinstate normal levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma and
dampen down inflammation both in CF tissues and CFTR-defective cells. Our results
highlight an unpredicted central role of TG2 in the mechanistic pathway of CF
inflammation, also opening a possible new wave of therapies for sufferers of
chronic inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 18490773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Jul;94(3):283-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.03.012. Epub
2008 May 9.

The aggresome pathway as a target for therapy in hematologic malignancies.

Simms-Waldrip T(1), Rodriguez-Gonzalez A, Lin T, Ikeda AK, Fu C, Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories,
Mattel Children's Hospital UCLA, A2-412 MDCC CHS, David Geffen School of Medicine
at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1752, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Genet Metab.2009 Jun;97(2):164.

Misfolded or unfolded proteins are often refolded with the help of chaperones or 
degraded by the 26S proteasome. An alternative fate of these proteins is the
aggresome pathway. The microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) transports unfolded
proteins to lysosomes and are degraded through autophagy. Histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) deacetylates alpha-tubulin, which is thought to be a component of the
MTOC. Recently, two small molecule inhibitors of the aggresome pathway and HDAC6 
have been described. One inhibitor, tubacin, prevents deacetylation of
alpha-tubulin and produces accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins and
apoptosis. Tubacin acts synergistically with the proteasome inhibitor,
bortezomib, to induce cytotoxicity in one type of hematologic malignancy,
multiple myeloma. The other, LBH589, is a pan HDAC inhibitor and hydroxamic acid 
derivative that induces apoptosis of multiple myeloma cells resistant to
conventional therapies. In this review, we summarize recent reports on targeting 
the aggresome pathway and HDAC6 in hematologic malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2587432
PMID: 18472289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Trends Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;18(6):291-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2008.04.003. Epub 2008
May 9.

HDAC6: a key regulator of cytoskeleton, cell migration and cell-cell
interactions.

Valenzuela-Fernández A(1), Cabrero JR, Serrador JM, Sánchez-Madrid F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Física y Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina and
Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas (ITB), Universidad de La Laguna, Tenerife,
Spain.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a cytoplasmic enzyme that regulates many
important biological processes, including cell migration, immune synapse
formation, viral infection, and the degradation of misfolded proteins. HDAC6
deacetylates tubulin, Hsp90 and cortactin, and forms complexes with other partner
proteins. Although HDAC6 enzymatic activity seems to be required for the
regulation of cell morphology, the role of HDAC6 in lymphocyte chemotaxis is
independent of its tubulin deacetylase activity. The diverse functions of HDAC6
suggest that it is a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of a range of
diseases. This review examines the biological actions of HDAC6, focusing on its
deacetylase activity and its potential scaffold functions in the regulation of
cell migration and other key biological processes in which the cytoskeleton plays
an important role.

PMID: 18472263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Apr;109(3-5):201-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2008.03.013. Epub 2008 Mar 12.

Estrogen signaling in cancer microenvironment and prediction of response to
hormonal therapy.

Hayashi S(1), Yamaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, Course of Health Sciences, School of
Medicine, Tohoku University, Seiryou-machi, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
shayashi@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Estrogen plays an essential role in growth and progression of human breast
cancer. Particularly, local estrogen biosynthesis must be important for etiology 
of this disease. Since estrogen signaling is also activated by the growth
factor-mediating phosphorylation signal, breast cancer strongly depends upon
local cancer microenvironment. Then, to analyze the estrogen-related cancer
microenvironment of individual breast cancer tissues, we established new reporter
cell system, which was stably transfected GFP reporter DNA inserted estrogen
response element in MCF-7 cells. It enables to analyze ERalpha-activation
activity of stromal cells in individual cancer patients. We found that
ERalpha-activation activity and effect of aromatase inhibitors varied among the
individual cases but correlated with histological grade, indicating that the
ability of stromal cells in adjacent to cancer cells must be unique and
important. Furthermore, these ERalpha-activation signals in the microenvironment 
stimulate following intracellular estrogen-signal transduction in cancer cells.
Our estrogen-responsive microarray analysis, real-time RT-PCR, and
immunohistochemical technique revealed several new target genes which correlate
with prognosis of breast cancer and play an important role in cancer development.
For example, we found that transcription factor EGR3 was the bona fide target
gene for ERalpha and might involve with invasive property in breast cancer.
Furthermore, the expression of another downstream gene HDAC6 significantly
correlated with survival of breast cancer patients. In vitro study revealed that 
the HDAC6 caused the deacetylation of alpha-tubulin in cytosol and induced cell
motility in ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells. We hope that these approaches
could provide not only new clues for elucidation of the mechanisms of
estrogen-dependent growth and development of breast cancer, but also clinical
benefits to patients by assessment of individual response to hormonal therapy.

PMID: 18424035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 15;68(8):2557-60. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5989.

Role of the aggresome pathway in cancer: targeting histone deacetylase
6-dependent protein degradation.

Rodriguez-Gonzalez A(1), Lin T, Ikeda AK, Simms-Waldrip T, Fu C, Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Mattel Children's Hospital, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90095-1752, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2009 May 1;69(9):4092.

Misfolded or aggregated proteins have two fates: they are either refolded with
the help of chaperones or degraded by the proteasome. Cells also have an
alternative pathway that involves intracellular "storage bins" for misfolded
intracellular proteins known as aggresomes. Aggresomes recruit motor proteins
that transport misfolded or aggregated proteins to chaperones and proteasomes for
subsequent destruction. There is emerging evidence that inhibiting the aggresome 
pathway leads to accumulation of misfolded proteins and apoptosis in tumor cells 
through autophagy. We discuss the role of aggresomes in cancer and the potential 
to target this pathway for therapy.

PMID: 18413721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Med Chem. 2008 May 22;51(10):2898-906. doi: 10.1021/jm7015254. Epub 2008 Apr
16.

Structural origin of selectivity in class II-selective histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Estiu G(1), Greenberg E, Harrison CB, Kwiatkowski NP, Mazitschek R, Bradner JE,
Wiest O.

Author information: 
(1)Walther Cancer Research Center, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556-5670, USA.

The development of class- and isoform-selective histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors is highly desirable for the study of the complex interactions of these
proteins central to transcription regulation as well as for the development of
selective HDAC inhibitors as drugs in epigenetics. To provide a structural basis 
for the rational design of such inhibitors, a combined computational and
experimental study of inhibition of three different histone deacetylase isoforms,
HDAC1, -6, and -8, with three different hydroxamate inhibitors is reported. While
SAHA was found to be unselective for the inhibition of class I and class II
HDACs, the other inhibitors were found to be selective toward class II HDACs.
Molecular dynamics simulations indicate that this selectivity is caused by both
the overall shape of the protein surface leading to the active site and specific 
interactions of an aspartate residue in a polar loop and two phenylalanines and a
methionine in a nonpolar loop. Monitoring the specific interactions as a function
of the simulation time identifies a key sulfur-pi interaction. The implications
of the structural motifs for the design of class II-selective HDAC inhibitors are
discussed.

PMID: 18412327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Virology. 2008 Jun 20;376(1):69-78. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.02.034. Epub 2008
Apr 8.

Susceptibility to virus-cell fusion at the plasma membrane is reduced through
expression of HIV gp41 cytoplasmic domains.

Malinowsky K(1), Luksza J, Dittmar MT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Disease, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts 
and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 4 Newark Street, London E1 2AT, 
UK.

The cytoplasmic tail of the HIV transmembrane protein plays an important role in 
viral infection. In this study we analyzed the role of retroviral cytoplasmic
tails in modulating the cytoskeleton and interfering with virus-cell fusion.
HeLaP4 cells expressing different HIV cytoplasmic tail constructs showed reduced 
acetylated tubulin levels whereas the cytoplasmic tail of MLV did not alter
microtubule stability indicating a unique function for the lentiviral cytoplasmic
tail. The effect on tubulin is mediated through the membrane proximal region of
the HIV cytoplasmic tail and was independent of membrane localization.
Site-directed mutagenesis identified three motifs in the HIV-2 cytoplasmic tail
required to effect the reduction in acetylated tubulin. Both the YxxPhi domain
and amino acids 21 to 45 of the HIV-2 cytoplasmic tail need to be present to
change the level of acetylated tubulin in transfected cells. T-cells stably
expressing one HIV-2 cytoplasmic tail derived construct showed also a reduction
in acetylated tubulin thus confirming the importance of this effect not only for 
HeLaP4 and 293T cells. Challenge experiments using transiently transfected HeLaP4
cells and T cells stably expressing an HIV cytoplasmic tail construct revealed
both reduced virus-cell fusion and replication of HIV-1(NL4.3) compared to
control cells. In the virus-cell fusion assay only virions pseudotyped with
either HIV or MLV envelopes showed reduced fusion efficiency, whereas VSV-G
pseudotyped virions where not affected by the expression of HIV derived
cytoplasmic tail constructs, indicating that fusion at the plasma but not
endosomal membrane is affected. Overexpression of human histone-deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) and constitutively active RhoA resulted in a reduction of acetylated
tubulin and reduced virus-cell fusion as significant as that observed following
expression of HIV cytoplasmic tail constructs. Inhibition of HDAC6 showed a
strong increase in acetylated tubulin and increase of virus-cell fusion
confirming the correlation between post-translational modification of tubulin and
virus-cell fusion. These results thus identify tubulin and its post-translational
modification as a new cellular target for interference with HIV-cell fusion.

PMID: 18400243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 9;283(19):12686-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C700185200. Epub 2008 
Mar 20.

HDAC6 is required for epidermal growth factor-induced beta-catenin nuclear
localization.

Li Y(1), Zhang X, Polakiewicz RD, Yao TP, Comb MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923, USA.

Nuclear translocation of beta-catenin is a hallmark of Wnt signaling and is
associated with various cancers. In addition to the canonical Wnt pathway
activated by Wnt ligands, growth factors such as epidermal growth factor (EGF)
also induce beta-catenin dissociation from the adherens junction complex,
translocation into the nucleus, and activation of target genes such as c-myc.
Here we report that EGF-induced beta-catenin nuclear localization and activation 
of c-myc are dependent on the deacetylase HDAC6. We show that EGF induces HDAC6
translocation to the caveolae membrane and association with beta-catenin. HDAC6
deacetylates beta-catenin at lysine 49, a site frequently mutated in anaplastic
thyroid cancer, and inhibits beta-catenin phosphorylation at serine 45. HDAC6
inactivation blocks EGF-induced beta-catenin nuclear localization and decreases
c-Myc expression, leading to inhibition of tumor cell proliferation. These
results suggest that EGF-induced nuclear localization of beta-catenin is
regulated by HDAC6-dependent deacetylation and provide a new mechanism by which
HDAC inhibitors prevent tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC3762558
PMID: 18356165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1179-83. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.019. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase1 induces autophagy.

Oh M(1), Choi IK, Kwon HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genomics Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Yonsei Biomedical
Science and Technology Initiative, College of Life Science & Biotechnology,
Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Republic of
Korea.

Autophagy is a process where cytoplasmic materials are degraded by lysosomal
machinery. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors induce autophagy, and HDAC6, one
of class II HDAC isotypes, is directly involved in autophagic degradation in the 
cell. However, it is unclear if class I HDAC isotype such as HDCA1 is involved in
this process. To investigate if class I HDAC isotype is involved in autophagy, a 
specific class I HDAC inhibitor and an siRNA of HDAC1 were used to treat HeLa
cells. Autophagic markers were then investigated. Both inhibition and genetic
knock-down of HDAC1 in the cells significantly induced autophagic vacuole
formation and lysosome function. Moreover, disruption of HDAC1 leads to the
conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II. Together, these results demonstrate that HDAC1
could play a role in autophagy and specific inhibition of HDAC1 can induce
autophagy.

PMID: 18342621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;68(5):1513-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2822.

Selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 silences progesterone
receptor-mediated signaling.

Biçaku E(1), Marchion DC, Schmitt ML, Münster PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, Experimental Therapeutics Program,
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Several histone deacetylases (HDAC) are involved in estrogen receptor
(ER)-mediated gene transactivation, and HDAC inhibitors have been reported to
restore sensitivity to antihormonal therapy. The modulation of ER is the most
promising approach to ER-expressing breast cancers. Recent studies further
suggest a critical role of the progesterone receptor (PR) on ER signaling.
Although HDAC inhibitors modulate ER, little is known about their effects on PR. 
We evaluated the roles of specific HDAC isoenzymes and their inhibition on both
ER and PR signaling and their importance in response to endocrine therapy. The
roles of individual HDAC isoenzymes on ER and PR expression and their functions
were evaluated by depletion of select HDAC enzymes using siRNA or pharmacologic
inhibition. Cotreatment of breast cancer cell lines with HDAC inhibitors and the 
antiestrogen, tamoxifen, resulted in synergistic antitumor activity with
simultaneous depletion of both ER and PR. Selective inhibition of HDAC2, but not 
HDAC1 or HDAC6, was sufficient to potentiate tamoxifen-induced apoptosis in
ER/PR-positive cells. Depletion of HDAC1 and HDAC6 was associated with
down-regulation of ER but not PR. Only the selective depletion of HDAC2 siRNA
down-regulated both ER and PR expression, and was sufficient to potentiate
tamoxifen. Selective depletion of HDAC2 resulted in simultaneous depletion of ER 
and PR, and potentiated the effects of antihormonal therapy in ER-positive cells.
A more effective pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC2 and evaluation of HDAC2 and PR
as therapeutic targets or as predictive markers in hormonal therapy may be
considered when combining HDAC inhibitors and hormonal therapy.

PMID: 18316616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 May 1;228(3):351-63. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2007.12.026. Epub 2008 Jan 8.

The heavy metal cadmium induces valosin-containing protein (VCP)-mediated
aggresome formation.

Song C(1), Xiao Z, Nagashima K, Li CC, Lockett SJ, Dai RM, Cho EH, Conrads TP,
Veenstra TD, Colburn NH, Wang Q, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc.,
National Cancer Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. songc@ncifcrf.gov 
<songc@ncifcrf.gov>

Cadmium (Cd2+) is a heavy metal ion known to have a long biological half-life in 
humans. Accumulating evidence shows that exposure to Cd2+ is associated with
neurodegenerative diseases characterized by the retention of ubiquitinated and
misfolded proteins in the lesions. Here, we report that Cd2+ directly induces the
formation of protein inclusion bodies in cells. The protein inclusion body is an 
aggresome, a major organelle for collecting ubiquitinated or misfolded proteins. 
Our results show that aggresomes are enriched in the detergent-insoluble fraction
of Cd2+-treated cell lysates. Proteomic analysis identified 145 proteins in the
aggresome-enriched fractions. One of the proteins is the highly conserved
valosin-containing protein (VCP), which has been shown to colocalize with
aggresomes and bind ubiquitinated proteins through its N domain (#1-200). Our
subsequent examination of VCP's role in the formation of aggresomes induced by
Cd2+ indicates that the C-terminal tail (#780-806) of VCP interacts with histone 
deacetylase HDAC6, a mediator for aggresome formation, suggesting that VCP
participates in transporting ubiquitinated proteins to aggresomes. This function 
of VCP is impaired by inhibition of the deacetylase activity of HDAC6 or by
over-expression of VCP mutants that do not bind ubiquitinated proteins or HDAC6. 
Our results indicate that Cd2+ induces the formation of protein inclusion bodies 
by promoting the accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins in aggresomes through VCP
and HDAC6. Our delineation of the role of VCP in regulating cell responses to
ubiquitinated proteins has important implications for understanding Cd2+ toxicity
and associated diseases.

PMCID: PMC2692476
PMID: 18261755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Apr 4;368(2):318-22. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.01.056. Epub 2008 Jan 22.

Class II histone deacetylases play pivotal roles in heat shock protein
90-mediated proteasomal degradation of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptors.

Park JH(1), Kim SH, Choi MC, Lee J, Oh DY, Im SA, Bang YJ, Kim TY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Epigenetics and Experimental Therapeutics, Cancer
Research Institute, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs) perform pivotal roles in
both tumor growth and angiogenesis. In this study, we report that histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) induce a reduction in VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 protein
expression via the inhibition of class II histone deacetylases (HDACs) in human
cancer cell lines. After HDI treatment, VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 were shown to be
downregulated in a proteasome-dependent manner. HDI treatment induced a reduction
in the binding of heat shock protein (Hsp) 90 to VEGFR1 or VEGFR2, followed by an
increase of the binding of Hsp70 to VEGFR1 or VEGFR2. However, we noted no
remarkable changes in the binding of Hsp90/Hsp70 to VEGFR3. HDI treatment
effectively inhibited the activities of HDAC6 and HDAC10. Furthermore, the
knock-down of HDAC6 or HDAC10, which was accomplished via the siRNA transfection,
induced depletion of VEGFR1 or VEGFR2 proteins. Overall, these results indicate
that HDAC6 and HDAC10 play important roles in Hsp-mediated VEGFR regulation.

PMID: 18211808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Jan;24(1):15-7. doi: 10.1051/medsci/200824115.

[HDAC6 orchestrates cell defense responses against cytotoxic protein aggregates].

[Article in French]

Boyault C(1), Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U823, Equipe épigénétique et signalisation cellulaire, Institut Albert 
Bonniot, Rond-point de la Chantourne, La Tronche Cedex Grenoble, France.
danielle.salas@ujf-grenoble.fr

PMID: 18198099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cell Cycle. 2008 Jan 1;7(1):7-10. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

HDAC6 a new cellular stress surveillance factor.

Matthias P(1), Yoshida M, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, Basel, Switzerland.

Less than a decade has passed since HDAC6 was first identified and regarded as an
unusual histone deacetylase harbouring two catalytic domains. Early demonstration
of its cytoplasmic localisation, its ubiquitin-binding and its
tubulin-deacetylase activities took HDAC6 far away from everything known to
involve other histone-deacetylases. Recent discoveries confirmed the very unique 
functions of HDAC6 among deacetylases and pointed to this protein as a master
regulator of cell response to cytotoxic assaults. HDAC6 appears both as a sensor 
of stressful stimuli and as an effector, which, thanks to its wide range of
activities, mediates and coordinates appropriate cell responses.

PMID: 18196966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. ChemMedChem. 2008 Mar;3(3):487-501. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200700314.

Chemistry, biology, and QSAR studies of substituted biaryl hydroxamates and
mercaptoacetamides as HDAC inhibitors-nanomolar-potency inhibitors of pancreatic 
cancer cell growth.

Kozikowski AP(1), Chen Y, Gaysin AM, Savoy DN, Billadeau DD, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 833 S. Wood St., Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. kozikowa@uic.edu

The histone deacetylases (HDACs) are able to regulate gene expression, and
inhibitors of the HDACs (HDACIs) hold promise in the treatment of cancer as well 
as a variety of neurodegenerative diseases. To investigate the potential for
isoform selectivity in the inhibition of HDACs, we prepared a small series of
2,4'-diaminobiphenyl ligands functionalized at the para-amino group with an
appendage containing either a hydroxamate or a mercaptoacetamide group and
coupled to an amino acid residue at the ortho-amino group. A smaller series of
substituted phenylthiazoles was also explored. Some of these newly synthesized
ligands show low-nanomolar potency in HDAC inhibition assays and display
micromolar to low-nanomolar IC(50) values in tests against five pancreatic cancer
cell lines. The isoform selectivity of these ligands for class I HDACs (HDAC1-3
and 8) and class IIb HDACs (HDAC6 and 10) together with QSAR studies of their
correlation with lipophilicity are presented. Of particular interest is the
selectivity of the mercaptoacetamides for HDAC6.

PMCID: PMC2692692
PMID: 18181121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1688-701. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01154-06. Epub 2008 Jan 
7.

Mice lacking histone deacetylase 6 have hyperacetylated tubulin but are viable
and develop normally.

Zhang Y(1), Kwon S, Yamaguchi T, Cubizolles F, Rousseaux S, Kneissel M, Cao C, Li
N, Cheng HL, Chua K, Lombard D, Mizeracki A, Matthias G, Alt FW, Khochbin S,
Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, P.O. Box 2543, Maulbeerstrasse 66, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Posttranslational modifications play important roles in regulating protein
structure and function. Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a mostly cytoplasmic
class II HDAC, which has a unique structure with two catalytic domains and a
domain binding ubiquitin with high affinity. This enzyme was recently identified 
as a multisubstrate protein deacetylase that can act on acetylated histone tails,
alpha-tubulin and Hsp90. To investigate the in vivo functions of HDAC6 and the
relevance of tubulin acetylation/deacetylation, we targeted the HDAC6 gene by
homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells and generated knockout mice.
HDAC6-deficient mice are viable and fertile and show hyperacetylated tubulin in
most tissues. The highest level of expression of HDAC6 is seen in the testis, yet
development and function of this organ are normal in the absence of HDAC6.
Likewise, lymphoid development is normal, but the immune response is moderately
affected. Furthermore, the lack of HDAC6 results in a small increase in
cancellous bone mineral density, indicating that this deacetylase plays a minor
role in bone biology. HDAC6-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts show apparently
normal microtubule organization and stability and also show increased Hsp90
acetylation correlating with impaired Hsp90 function. Collectively, these data
demonstrate that mice survive well without HDAC6 and that tubulin
hyperacetylation is not detrimental to normal mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC2258784
PMID: 18180281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Genes Dev. 2007 Dec 15;21(24):3381-94.

The deacetylase HDAC6 is a novel critical component of stress granules involved
in the stress response.

Kwon S(1), Zhang Y, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.

An essential part of the cellular response to environmental stress is a
reversible translational suppression, taking place in dynamic cytoplasmic
structures called stress granules (SGs). We discovered that HDAC6, a cytoplasmic 
deacetylase that acts on tubulin and HSP90 and also binds ubiquitinated proteins 
with high affinity, is a novel critical SG component. We found that HDAC6
interacts with another SG protein, G3BP (Ras-GTPase-activating protein SH3
domain-binding protein 1), and localizes to SGs under all stress conditions
tested. We show that pharmacological inhibition or genetic ablation of HDAC6
abolishes SG formation. Intriguingly, we found that the ubiquitin-binding domain 
of HDAC6 is essential and that SGs are strongly positive for ubiquitin. Moreover,
disruption of microtubule arrays or impairment of motor proteins also prevents
formation of SGs. These findings identify HDAC6 as a central component of the
stress response, and suggest that it coordinates the formation of SGs by
mediating the motor-protein-driven movement of individual SG components along
microtubules.

PMCID: PMC2113037
PMID: 18079183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Bioorg Med Chem. 2008 Feb 15;16(4):2011-33. Epub 2007 Nov 4.

Phenylalanine-containing hydroxamic acids as selective inhibitors of class IIb
histone deacetylases (HDACs).

Schäfer S(1), Saunders L, Eliseeva E, Velena A, Jung M, Schwienhorst A, Strasser 
A, Dickmanns A, Ficner R, Schlimme S, Sippl W, Verdin E, Jung M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Freiburg, Albertstr. 25,
79104 Freiburg, Germany.

We synthesized biarylalanine-containing hydroxamic acids and tested them on
immunoprecipitated HDAC1 and HDAC6 and show a subtype selectivity for HDAC6 that 
was confirmed in cells by Western blot (tubulin vs histones). We obtained an
X-ray structure with a HDAC6-selective inhibitor with the bacterial deacetylase
HDAH. Docking studies were carried out using HDAC1 and HDAC6 protein models.
Antiproliferative activity was shown on cancer cells for selected compounds.

PMID: 18054239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Genome Res. 2008 Jan;18(1):123-36. Epub 2007 Nov 27.

Identification of novel modulators of mitochondrial function by a genome-wide
RNAi screen in Drosophila melanogaster.

Chen J(1), Shi X, Padmanabhan R, Wang Q, Wu Z, Stevenson SC, Hild M, Garza D, Li 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Molecular Pathways, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with many human diseases. There has not
been a systematic genetic approach for identifying regulators of basal
mitochondrial biogenesis and function in higher eukaryotes. We performed a
genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen in Drosophila cells using
mitochondrial Citrate synthase (CS) activity as the primary readout. We screened 
13,071 dsRNAs and identified 152 genes that modulate CS activity. These
modulators are involved in a wide range of biological processes and pathways
including mitochondrial-related functions, transcriptional and translational
regulation, and signaling pathways. Selected hits among the 152 genes were
further analyzed for their effect on mitochondrial CS activity in transgenic
flies or fly mutants. We confirmed a number of gene hits including HDAC6,
Rpd3(HDAC1), CG3249, vimar, Src42A, klumpfuss, barren, and smt3 which exert
effects on mitochondrial CS activities in vivo, demonstrating the value of
Drosophila genome-wide RNAi screens for identifying genes and pathways that
modulate mitochondrial function.

PMCID: PMC2134776
PMID: 18042644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Br J Cancer. 2007 Nov 19;97(10):1344-53. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

R306465 is a novel potent inhibitor of class I histone deacetylases with
broad-spectrum antitumoral activity against solid and haematological
malignancies.

Arts J(1), Angibaud P, Mariën A, Floren W, Janssens B, King P, van Dun J, Janssen
L, Geerts T, Tuman RW, Johnson DL, Andries L, Jung M, Janicot M, van Emelen K.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research, Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development,
Turnhoutseweg 30, 2340 Beerse, Belgium. jarts@prdbe.jnj.com

R306465 is a novel hydroxamate-based histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor with
broad-spectrum antitumour activity against solid and haematological malignancies 
in preclinical models. R306465 was found to be a potent inhibitor of HDAC1 and -8
(class I) in vitro. It rapidly induced histone 3 (H3) acetylation and strongly
upregulated expression of p21waf1,cip1, a downstream component of HDAC1
signalling, in A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells. R306465 showed class I HDAC isotype
selectivity as evidenced by poor inhibition of HDAC6 (class IIb) confirmed by the
absence of downregulation of Hsp90 chaperone c-raf protein expression and tubulin
acetylation. This distinguished it from other HDAC inhibitors currently in
clinical development that were either more potent towards HDAC6 (e.g. vorinostat)
or had a broader HDAC inhibition spectrum (e.g. panobinostat). R306465 potently
inhibited cell proliferation of all main solid tumour indications, including
ovarian, lung, colon, breast and prostate cancer cell lines, with IC50 values
ranging from 30 to 300 nM. Haematological cell lines, including acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia, acute myeloid leukaemia, chronic lymphoblastic
leukaemia, chronic myeloid leukaemia, lymphoma and myeloma, were potently
inhibited at a similar concentration range. R306465 induced apoptosis and
inhibited angiogenesis in cell-based assays and had potent oral in vivo
antitumoral activity in xenograft models. Once-daily oral administration of
R306465 at well-tolerated doses inhibited the growth of A2780 ovarian, H460 lung 
and HCT116 colon carcinomas in immunodeficient mice. The high activity of R306465
in cell-based assays and in vivo after oral administration makes R306465 a
promising novel antitumoral agent with potential applicability in a broad
spectrum of human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2360244
PMID: 18000499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Autophagy. 2008 Feb;4(2):141-50. Epub 2007 Oct 19.

Sorting, recognition and activation of the misfolded protein degradation pathways
through macroautophagy and the proteasome.

Ding WX(1), Yin XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15231, USA.

Based on a functional categorization, proteins may be grouped into three types
and sorted to either the proteasome or the macroautophagy pathway for
degradation. The two pathways are mechanistically connected but their capacity
seems different. Macroautophagy can degrade all forms of misfolded proteins
whereas proteasomal degradation is likely limited to soluble ones. Unlike the
bulk protein degradation that occurs during starvation, autophagic degradation of
misfolded proteins can have a degree of specificity, determined by ubiquitin
modification and the interactions of p62/SQSTM1 and HDAC6. Macroautophagy is
initiated in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress caused by misfolded
proteins, via the ER-activated autophagy (ERAA) pathway, which activates a
partial unfolded protein response involving PERK and/or IRE1, and a
calcium-mediated signaling cascade. ERAA serves the function of mitigating ER
stress and suppressing cell death, which may be explored for controlling protein 
conformational diseases. Conversely, inhibition of ERAA may be explored for
sensitizing resistant tumor cells to cytotoxic agents.

PMID: 17986870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Med Chem. 2007 Nov 15;50(23):5720-6. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

The first biologically active synthetic analogues of FK228, the depsipeptide
histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Yurek-George A(1), Cecil AR, Mo AH, Wen S, Rogers H, Habens F, Maeda S, Yoshida
M, Packham G, Ganesan A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United
Kingdom.

The FK228 and spiruchostatin bicyclic depsipeptide natural products are among the
most potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors known. Although FK228 is in
advanced clinical trials, the complexity of the natural products has precluded
mechanistic studies and the discovery of structure-activity relationships. By
total synthesis, we have prepared the first depsipeptide analogues. Our results
prove that the dehydrobutyrine residue in FK228 is not essential, and other
residues can be substituted without loss of HDAC inhibitory activity.
Conformational restriction by the macrocyclic scaffold is important, as a linear 
peptide was inactive. The intramolecular disulfide formed with a cysteine side
chain can be removed provided the zinc-binding thiol is protected to ensure good 
cellular availability. Like the natural products, the analogues are selective
against class I isoforms, with nanomolar inhibition of class I HDAC1 and
significantly less potency against class II HDAC6.

PMID: 17958342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8637-47. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

Histone deacetylase 6 regulates growth factor-induced actin remodeling and
endocytosis.

Gao YS(1), Hubbert CC, Lu J, Lee YS, Lee JY, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University, Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a cytoplasmic deacetylase that uniquely
catalyzes alpha-tubulin deacetylation and promotes cell motility. However, the
mechanism underlying HDAC6-dependent cell migration and the role for microtubule 
acetylation in motility are not known. Here we show that HDAC6-induced global
microtubule deacetylation was not sufficient to stimulate cell migration.
Unexpectedly, in response to growth factor stimulation, HDAC6 underwent rapid
translocation to actin-enriched membrane ruffles and subsequently became
associated with macropinosomes, the vesicles for fluid-phase endocytosis.
Supporting the importance of these associations, membrane ruffle formation,
macropinocytosis, and cell migration were all impaired in HDAC6-deficient cells. 
Conversely, elevated HDAC6 levels promoted membrane ruffle formation with a
concomitant increase in macropinocytosis and motility. In search for an HDAC6
target, we found that heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), another prominent substrate 
of HDAC6, was also recruited to membrane ruffles and macropinosomes.
Significantly, inhibition of Hsp90 activity suppressed membrane ruffling and cell
migration, while expression of an acetylation-resistant Hsp90 mutant promoted
ruffle formation. Our results uncover a surprising role for HDAC6 in actin
remodeling-dependent processes and identify the actin cytoskeleton as an
important target of HDAC6-regulated protein deacetylation.

PMCID: PMC2169396
PMID: 17938201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Med Chem. 2007 Nov 1;50(22):5425-38. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Design, synthesis, structure--selectivity relationship, and effect on human
cancer cells of a novel series of histone deacetylase 6-selective inhibitors.

Itoh Y(1), Suzuki T, Kouketsu A, Suzuki N, Maeda S, Yoshida M, Nakagawa H, Miyata
N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8603, Japan.

To uncover novel histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)-selective inhibitors and to
elucidate the structural requirements for their inhibitory activity, we designed 
and prepared a series of thiolate analogues based on the structure of an
HDAC6-selective substrate and evaluated their properties by Western blotting and 
enzyme assays. Several thiolate analogues were found to be potent and selective
HDAC6 inhibitors. Study of the structure-selectivity relationship revealed that
the presence of a bulky alkyl group and tert-butylcarbamate group in these
compounds is important for HDAC6-selective inhibition. Compounds 16b and 20b, the
most selective and active compounds in this series, exerted a synergistic
inhibition of cancer cell growth in combination with paclitaxel. They also
blocked the growth of estrogen receptor alpha-positive breast cancer MCF-7 cells 
that had been treated with estrogen. These findings suggested that
HDAC6-selective inhibitors have potential as anticancer agents.

PMID: 17929798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2007 Sep;14(3):839-45.

Valproic acid enhances tubulin acetylation and apoptotic activity of paclitaxel
on anaplastic thyroid cancer cell lines.

Catalano MG(1), Poli R, Pugliese M, Fortunati N, Boccuzzi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathophysiology, University of Turin, Via Genova, 3,
10126 Turin, Italy.

The introduction of paclitaxel into multimodal therapy for anaplastic thyroid
carcinoma has failed to improve overall survival. Toxicity rules out the high
doses required, especially in older patients. The search for strategies to
enhance paclitaxel antineoplastic activity and reduce its side effects is thus
advisable. The study aimed to determine whether the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor valproic acid (VPA) improves the anticancer action of paclitaxel and
elucidate the mechanisms underlying the effects of combined treatment. We
examined the effect of VPA on the sensitivity to paclitaxel of two anaplastic
thyroid carcinoma cell lines (CAL-62 and ARO), and the ability of the drug to
determine tubulin acetylation and enhance paclitaxel-induced acetylation. The
addition of as little as 0.7 mM VPA to paclitaxel enhances both cytostatic and
cytotoxic effects of paclitaxel alone. Increased apoptosis explains the
enhancement of the cytotoxic effect. The mechanism underlying this effect is
through inhibition of HDAC6 activity, which leads to tubulin hyperacetylation.
The results suggest a mechanistic link between HDAC6 inhibition, tubulin
acetylation, and the VPA-induced enhancement of paclitaxel effects, and provide
the rationale for designing future combination therapies.

PMID: 17914112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Autophagy. 2007 Nov-Dec;3(6):643-5. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

HDAC6 at the intersection of autophagy, the ubiquitin-proteasome system and
neurodegeneration.

Pandey UB(1), Batlevi Y, Baehrecke EH, Taylor JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The two major intracellular catabolic pathways, the ubiquitin-proteasome system
(UPS) and macroautophagy (autophagy), have each been implicated as playing roles 
in neurodegenerative proteinopathies. We have investigated the relationship
between the UPS and autophagy using Drosophila models of neurodegenerative
diseases. We identified histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) as a genetic modifier of
polyglutamine-induced neurodegeneration and determined that its mechanism of
action is autophagy-dependent. The ability of HDAC6 to suppress degeneration has 
been extended to additional neurodegenerative disease models, including a fly
model expressing pathological Abeta fragments, presented here, but is not a
universal modifier of degenerative phenotypes. Importantly, HDAC6 was also found 
to suppress degeneration associated with proteasome mutations in an
autophagy-dependent manner, revealing a compensatory relationship between these
two degradation pathways. Our findings indicate that HDAC6 facilitates
degradation of potentially noxious protein substrates, contributing vitally to
the neuroprotective role of autophagy.

PMID: 17912024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Bioorg Med Chem. 2008 Jan 1;16(1):437-45. Epub 2007 Sep 15.

Interaction of aliphatic cap group in inhibition of histone deacetylases by
cyclic tetrapeptides.

Nishino N(1), Shivashimpi GM, Soni PB, Bhuiyan MP, Kato T, Maeda S, Nishino TG,
Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of
Technology, Kitakyushu 808-0196, Japan. nishino@life.kyutech.ac.jp

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a promising class of anticancer
agents that effect gene regulation. To know the interaction of aliphatic cap
groups with HDACs, cyclic tetrapeptide and bicyclic peptide disulfide hybrids
were synthesized without aromatic ring in their macrocyclic framework. Benzene
ring of l-Phe in chlamydocin was replaced with several aliphatic amino acids and 
also a fused bicyclic tetrapeptide was synthesized by ring closing metathesis
using Grubb's first generation catalyst. The inhibitory activities of the cyclic 
peptides against histone deacetylase enzymes were evaluated, which demonstrated
most of them are interesting candidates as anticancer agents.

PMID: 17900911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem J. 2008 Jan 15;409(2):581-9.

Determination of the class and isoform selectivity of small-molecule histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Khan N(1), Jeffers M, Kumar S, Hackett C, Boldog F, Khramtsov N, Qian X, Mills E,
Berghs SC, Carey N, Finn PW, Collins LS, Tumber A, Ritchie JW, Jensen PB,
Lichenstein HS, Sehested M.

Author information: 
(1)Topotarget UK Ltd, 87a Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RY, UK.
nagmabkhan@yahoo.co.uk

The human HDAC (histone deacetylase) family, a well-validated anticancer target, 
plays a key role in the control of gene expression through regulation of
transcription. While HDACs can be subdivided into three main classes, the class
I, class II and class III HDACs (sirtuins), it is presently unclear whether
inhibiting multiple HDACs using pan-HDAC inhibitors, or targeting specific
isoforms that show aberrant levels in tumours, will prove more effective as an
anticancer strategy in the clinic. To address the above issues, we have tested a 
number of clinically relevant HDACis (HDAC inhibitors) against a panel of rhHDAC 
(recombinant human HDAC) isoforms. Eight rhHDACs were expressed using a
baculoviral system, and a Fluor de Lystrade mark (Biomol International) HDAC
assay was optimized for each purified isoform. The potency and selectivity of ten
HDACs on class I isoforms (rhHDAC1, rhHDAC2, rhHDAC3 and rhHDAC8) and class II
HDAC isoforms (rhHDAC4, rhHDAC6, rhHDAC7 and rhHDAC9) was determined. MS-275 was 
HDAC1-selective, MGCD0103 was HDAC1- and HDAC2-selective, apicidin was HDAC2- and
HDAC3-selective and valproic acid was a specific inhibitor of class I HDACs. The 
hydroxamic acid-derived compounds (trichostatin A, NVP-LAQ824, panobinostat,
ITF2357, vorinostat and belinostat) were potent pan-HDAC inhibitors. The
growth-inhibitory effect of the HDACis on HeLa cells showed that both pan-HDAC
and class-I-specific inhibitors inhibited cell growth. The results also showed
that both pan-HDAC and class-I-specific inhibitor treatment resulted in increased
acetylation of histones, but only pan-HDAC inhibitor treatment resulted in
increased tubulin acetylation, which is in agreement with their activity towards 
the HDAC6 isoform.

PMID: 17868033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 Jan;86(1):117-28. Epub 2007 Sep 13.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases induce tumor-selective cytotoxicity through
modulating Aurora-A kinase.

Park JH(1), Jong HS, Kim SG, Jung Y, Lee KW, Lee JH, Kim DK, Bang YJ, Kim TY.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Cancer Epigenetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

The molecular basis of the antitumor selectivity of histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDIs) remains unclear. Centrosomal Aurora-A kinase regulates
chromosomal segregation during mitosis. The overexpression or amplification of
Aurora-A leads to genetic instability, and its inhibition has shown significant
antitumor effects. In this paper, we report that structurally related hydroxamate
LAQ824 and SK-7068 induce tumor-selective mitotic defects by depleting Aurora-A. 
We found that HDI-treated cancer cells, unlike nontransformed cells, exhibit
defective mitotic spindles. After HDI, Aurora-A was selectively downregulated in 
cancer cells, whereas Aurora-B remained unchanged in both cancer and
nontransformed cells. LAQ824 or SK-7068 treatment inhibited histone deacetylase
(HDAC) 6 present in Aurora-A/heat shock protein (Hsp) 90 complex. Inhibition of
HDAC6 acetylated Hsp90 and resulted in dissociation of acetylated Hsp90 from
Aurora-A. As a result, Hsp70 binding to Aurora-A was enhanced in cancer cells,
leading to proteasomal degradation of Aurora-A. Overall, these provide a novel
molecular basis of tumor selectivity of HDI. LAQ824 and SK-7068 might be more
effective HDIs in cancer cells with Aurora-A overexpression.

PMID: 17851643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Cell Biol. 2007 Sep 10;178(6):1025-38.

Parkin-mediated K63-linked polyubiquitination targets misfolded DJ-1 to
aggresomes via binding to HDAC6.

Olzmann JA(1), Li L, Chudaev MV, Chen J, Perez FA, Palmiter RD, Chin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Sequestration of misfolded proteins into pericentriolar inclusions called
aggresomes is a means that cells use to minimize misfolded protein-induced
cytotoxicity. However, the molecular mechanism by which misfolded proteins are
recruited to aggresomes remains unclear. Mutations in the E3 ligase parkin cause 
autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease that is devoid of Lewy bodies, which are 
similar to aggresomes. Here, we report that parkin cooperates with heterodimeric 
E2 enzyme UbcH13/Uev1a to mediate K63-linked polyubiquitination of misfolded
DJ-1. K63-linked polyubiquitination of misfolded DJ-1 serves as a signal for
interaction with histone deacetylase 6, an adaptor protein that binds the
dynein-dynactin complex. Through this interaction, misfolded DJ-1 is linked to
the dynein motor and transported to aggresomes. Furthermore, fibroblasts lacking 
parkin display deficits in targeting misfolded DJ-1 to aggresomes. Our findings
reveal a signaling role for K63-linked polyubiquitination in dynein-mediated
transport, identify parkin as a key regulator in the recruitment of misfolded
DJ-1 to aggresomes, and have important implications regarding the biogenesis of
Lewy bodies.

PMCID: PMC2064625
PMID: 17846173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Genes Dev. 2007 Sep 1;21(17):2172-81.

HDAC6 controls major cell response pathways to cytotoxic accumulation of protein 
aggregates.

Boyault C(1), Zhang Y, Fritah S, Caron C, Gilquin B, Kwon SH, Garrido C, Yao TP, 
Vourc'h C, Matthias P, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U823,
Institut Albert Bonniot, Grenoble F-38706, France.

A cellular defense mechanism counteracts the deleterious effects of misfolded
protein accumulation by eliciting a stress response. The cytoplasmic deacetylase 
HDAC6 (histone deacetylase 6) was previously shown to be a key element in this
response by coordinating the clearance of protein aggregates through aggresome
formation and their autophagic degradation. Here, for the first time, we
demonstrate that HDAC6 is involved in another crucial cell response to the
accumulation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates, and unravel its molecular
basis. Indeed, our data show that HDAC6 senses ubiquitinated cellular aggregates 
and consequently induces the expression of major cellular chaperones by
triggering the dissociation of a repressive HDAC6/HSF1 (heat-shock factor
1)/HSP90 (heat-shock protein 90) complex and a subsequent HSF1 activation. HDAC6 
therefore appears as a master regulator of the cell protective response to
cytotoxic protein aggregate formation.

PMCID: PMC1950856
PMID: 17785525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 15;13(16):4882-90.

Hydroxamic acid analogue histone deacetylase inhibitors attenuate estrogen
receptor-alpha levels and transcriptional activity: a result of hyperacetylation 
and inhibition of chaperone function of heat shock protein 90.

Fiskus W(1), Ren Y, Mohapatra A, Bali P, Mandawat A, Rao R, Herger B, Yang Y,
Atadja P, Wu J, Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia Cancer Center, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

PURPOSE: The molecular chaperone heat shock protein (hsp)-90 maintains estrogen
receptor (ER)-alpha in an active conformation, allowing it to bind
17beta-estradiol (E2) and transactivate genes, including progesterone receptor
(PR)-beta and the class IIB histone deacetylase HDAC6. By inhibiting HDAC6, the
hydroxamic acid analogue pan-HDAC inhibitors (HA-HDI; e.g., LAQ824, LBH589, and
vorinostat) induce hyperacetylation of the HDAC6 substrates alpha-tubulin and
hsp90. Hyperacetylation of hsp90 inhibits its chaperone function, thereby
depleting hsp90 client proteins. Here, we determined the effect of HA-HDIs on the
levels and activity of ERalpha, as well as on the survival of ERalpha-expressing,
estrogen-responsive human breast cancer MCF-7 and BT-474 cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Following exposure to HA-HDIs, hsp90 binding,
polyubiquitylation levels, and transcriptional activity of ERalpha, as well as
apoptosis and loss of survival, were determined in MCF-7 and BT-474 cells.
RESULTS: Treatment with HA-HDI induced hsp90 hyperacetylation, decreased its
binding to ERalpha, and increased polyubiquitylation and depletion of ERalpha
levels. HA-HDI treatment abrogated E2-induced estrogen response
element-luciferase expression and attenuated PRbeta and HDAC6 levels. Exposure to
HA-HDI also depleted p-Akt, Akt, c-Raf, and phospho-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase-1/2 levels, inhibited growth, and sensitized
ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells to tamoxifen.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show that treatment with HA-HDI abrogates ERalpha
levels and activity and could sensitize ERalpha-positive breast cancers to E2
depletion or ERalpha antagonists.

PMID: 17699868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 13;26(37):5468-76.

HDAC6, at the crossroads between cytoskeleton and cell signaling by acetylation
and ubiquitination.

Boyault C(1), Sadoul K, Pabion M, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U823, Equipe Epigénétique et Signalisation Cellulaire, Institut Albert
Bonniot, Université Joseph Fourier, Domaine de la Merci, Grenoble, La Tronche
Cedex, France.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a unique enzyme with specific structural and
functional features. It is actively or stably maintained in the cytoplasm and is 
the only member, within the histone deacetylase family, that harbors a full
duplication of its deacetylase homology region followed by a specific
ubiquitin-binding domain at the C-terminus end. Accordingly, this deacetylase
functions at the heart of a cellular regulatory mechanism capable of coordinating
various cellular functions largely relying on the microtubule network. Moreover, 
HDAC6 action as a regulator of the HSP90 chaperone activity adds to the
multifunctionality of the protein, and allows us to propose a critical role for
HDAC6 in mediating and coordinating various cellular events in response to
different stressful stimuli.

PMID: 17694087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochimie. 2008 Feb;90(2):306-12. Epub 2007 Jul 1.

Regulation of protein turnover by acetyltransferases and deacetylases.

Sadoul K(1), Boyault C, Pabion M, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U823, Equipe Epigénétique et Signalisation Cellulaire, F-38706
Grenoble, France.

Lysine acetylation was first discovered as a post-translational modification of
histones and has long been considered as a direct regulator of chromatin
structure and function. Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) are the enzymes involved in this modification and they were 
thought to act as critical gene silencers or activators. Further investigations
indicated that lysine acetylation can also occur in non-histone proteins and
pointed to HATs and HDACs as multifunctional factors, acting not only on
transcription but also on a variety of other cellular processes. One of these
processes is the regulation of protein stability. Indeed, at least four
independent HATs, namely CBP, p300, PCAF and TAF1, and one HDAC, HDAC6, possess
intrinsic ubiquitin-linked functions in addition to their regular HAT/HDAC
activities. Furthermore HATs and HDACs can be found in multi-subunit complexes
with enzymes of the ubiquitination machinery. Moreover, lysine acetylation itself
was found to directly or indirectly affect protein stability. These observations 
reveal therefore a tight link between protein lysine acetylation and
ubiquitination and designate the acetylation machinery as a determinant element
in the control of cellular proteolytic activities.

PMID: 17681659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Dev Cell. 2007 Aug;13(2):161-2.

HDAC6-pack: cortactin acetylation joins the brew.

Luxton GW(1), Gundersen GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The reversible acetylation of lysine residues is an important posttranslational
modification for the regulation of histones, transcription factors, chaperones,
and microtubules. In a recent article in Molecular Cell, Zhang et al. (2007)
describe a new target of reversible acetylation, the actin binding protein
cortactin.

PMID: 17681125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Cell. 2007 Jul 20;27(2):197-213.

HDAC6 modulates cell motility by altering the acetylation level of cortactin.

Zhang X(1), Yuan Z, Zhang Y, Yong S, Salas-Burgos A, Koomen J, Olashaw N, Parsons
JT, Yang XJ, Dent SR, Yao TP, Lane WS, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Adh Migr. 2010 Apr-Jun;4(2):163-5.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a tubulin-specific deacetylase that regulates
microtubule-dependent cell movement. In this study, we identify the
F-actin-binding protein cortactin as a HDAC6 substrate. We demonstrate that HDAC6
binds cortactin and that overexpression of HDAC6 leads to hypoacetylation of
cortactin, whereas inhibition of HDAC6 activity leads to cortactin
hyperacetylation. HDAC6 alters the ability of cortactin to bind F-actin by
modulating a "charge patch" in its repeat region. Introduction of
charge-preserving or charge-neutralizing mutations in this cortactin repeat
region correlates with the gain or loss of F-actin binding ability, respectively.
Cells expressing a charge-neutralizing cortactin mutant were less motile than
control cells or cells expressing a charge-preserving mutant. These findings
suggest that, in addition to its role in microtubule-dependent cell motility,
HDAC6 influences actin-dependent cell motility by altering the acetylation status
of cortactin, which, in turn, changes the F-actin binding activity of cortactin.

PMCID: PMC2684874
PMID: 17643370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Oct;1773(10):1572-82. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Histone deacetylase 4 is required for TGFbeta1-induced myofibroblastic
differentiation.

Glenisson W(1), Castronovo V, Waltregny D.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liège, Belgium.

Transforming Growth Factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) is a crucial cytokine triggering
myofibroblastic (MF) differentiation, a process involved in tissue healing as
well as in pathologic conditions such as fibrosis and cancer. Together with cell 
shape modifications, TGFbeta1-mediated differentiation of fibroblasts into
myofibroblasts is characteristically associated with the neo-expression of smooth
muscle alpha-actin (alpha-SMA), a cytoskeletal protein that enhances their
contractile activity. Several cellular differentiation programs have been linked 
to epigenetic regulation of gene expression, including gene methylation and
histone acetylation. Herein, we sought to investigate the role of histone
deacetylases (HDAC) in TGFbeta1-induced MF differentiation. We found that TSA, a 
global inhibitor of class I and class II HDACs, prevented alpha-SMA transcript
and protein expression and morphological changes mediated by TGFbeta1 in cultured
human skin fibroblasts. In order to identify the HDAC(s) participating in MF
differentiation, the impact of specific HDAC silencing (HDAC1 through HDAC8)
using RNA interference was investigated in fibroblasts exposed to TGFbeta1. Among
the eight HDACs tested, silencing of HDAC4, HDAC6, and HDAC8 expression impaired 
TGFbeta1-induced alpha-SMA expression. HDAC4 silencing most efficiently abrogated
alpha-SMA expression and also prevented TGFss1-mediated morphological changes.
Forced down-regulation of HDAC4 stimulated the expression of 5'-TG-3'-Interacting
Factor (TGIF) and TGIF2 homeoproteins, two known endogenous repressors of the
TGFbeta signaling pathway, but not of the inhibitory Smad7. Collectively, these
data suggest that HDAC4 is an essential epigenetic regulator of MF
differentiation and unveil HDAC4 as a potential target for treating MF-related
disorders.

PMID: 17610967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cell. 2007 Jun 29;129(7):1351-63.

HEF1-dependent Aurora A activation induces disassembly of the primary cilium.

Pugacheva EN(1), Jablonski SA, Hartman TR, Henske EP, Golemis EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Science, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Jun 29;129(7):1255-7.

The mammalian cilium protrudes from the apical/lumenal surface of polarized cells
and acts as a sensor of environmental cues. Numerous developmental disorders and 
pathological conditions have been shown to arise from defects in cilia-associated
signaling proteins. Despite mounting evidence that cilia are essential sites for 
coordination of cell signaling, little is known about the cellular mechanisms
controlling their formation and disassembly. Here, we show that interactions
between the prometastatic scaffolding protein HEF1/Cas-L/NEDD9 and the oncogenic 
Aurora A (AurA) kinase at the basal body of cilia causes phosphorylation and
activation of HDAC6, a tubulin deacetylase, promoting ciliary disassembly. We
show that this pathway is both necessary and sufficient for ciliary resorption
and that it constitutes an unexpected nonmitotic activity of AurA in vertebrates.
Moreover, we demonstrate that small molecule inhibitors of AurA and HDAC6
selectively stabilize cilia from regulated resorption cues, suggesting a novel
mode of action for these clinical agents.

PMCID: PMC2504417
PMID: 17604723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Neuron. 2007 Jun 21;54(6):854-6.

Autophagy induction rescues toxicity mediated by proteasome inhibition.

Rubinsztein DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. dcr1000@cam.ac.uk

The ubiquitin-proteasome and macroautophagy-lysosome pathways are major routes
for intracytosolic protein degradation. In many systems, proteasome inhibition is
toxic. A Nature article by Pandey et al. shows that this toxicity can be
modulated by altering autophagic activity. Their tantalizing results suggest that
overexpression of HDAC6 may increase flux through the autophagy pathway, thereby 
attenuating the toxicity resulting from proteasome inhibition.

PMID: 17582326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Sep;322(3):1084-92. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Bcr-Abl-independent imatinib-resistant K562 cells show aberrant protein
acetylation and increased sensitivity to histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Lee SM(1), Bae JH, Kim MJ, Lee HS, Lee MK, Chung BS, Kim DW, Kang CD, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Research Center for Ischemic Tissue Regeneration, 
College of Medicine, Pusan National University, Pusan 602-739, South Korea.

Bcr-Abl-independent signaling pathways are known to be involved in imatinib
resistance in some patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). In this
study, to find new targets for imatinib-resistant CML displaying loss of Bcr-Abl 
kinase target dependence, we isolated imatinib-resistant variants, K562/R1,
K562/R2, and K562/R3, which showed profound declines of Bcr-Abl levels and its
tyrosine kinase activity, from K562 cells. Importantly, the imatinib resistance
mechanism in these variants also included aberrant acetylation of nonhistone
proteins such as p53, Ku70, and Hsp90 that was due to upregulation of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) and down-regulation of histone acetyltransferase (HAT). In
comparison with K562 cells, the imatinib-resistant variants showed up-regulation 
of HDAC1, -2, and -3 (class I HDACs) and class III SIRT1 and down-regulation of
CBP/p300 and PCAF with HAT activity, and thereby p53 and cytoplasmic Ku70 were
aberrantly acetylated. In addition, these were associated with down-regulation of
Bax and up-regulation of Bcl-2. In contrast, the class II HDAC6 level was
significantly decreased, and this was accompanied by an increase of Hsp90
acetylation in the imatinib-resistant variants, which was closely associated with
loss of Bcr-Abl. These results indicate that alteration of the normal balance of 
HATs and HDACs leads to deregulated acetylation of Hsp90, p53, and Ku70 and
thereby leads to imatinib resistance, suggesting the importance of the
acetylation status of apoptosis-related nonhistone proteins in
Bcr-Abl-independent imatinib resistance. We also revealed that imatinib-resistant
K562 cells were more sensitive to suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, an HDAC
inhibitor, than K562 cells. These findings may have implications for HDAC as a
molecular target in imatinib-resistant leukemia cells.

PMID: 17569822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nature. 2007 Jun 14;447(7146):859-63.

HDAC6 rescues neurodegeneration and provides an essential link between autophagy 
and the UPS.

Pandey UB(1), Nie Z, Batlevi Y, McCray BA, Ritson GP, Nedelsky NB, Schwartz SL,
DiProspero NA, Knight MA, Schuldiner O, Padmanabhan R, Hild M, Berry DL, Garza D,
Hubbert CC, Yao TP, Baehrecke EH, Taylor JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

A prominent feature of late-onset neurodegenerative diseases is accumulation of
misfolded protein in vulnerable neurons. When levels of misfolded protein
overwhelm degradative pathways, the result is cellular toxicity and
neurodegeneration. Cellular mechanisms for degrading misfolded protein include
the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), the main non-lysosomal degradative pathway
for ubiquitinated proteins, and autophagy, a lysosome-mediated degradative
pathway. The UPS and autophagy have long been viewed as complementary degradation
systems with no point of intersection. This view has been challenged by two
observations suggesting an apparent interaction: impairment of the UPS induces
autophagy in vitro, and conditional knockout of autophagy in the mouse brain
leads to neurodegeneration with ubiquitin-positive pathology. It is not known
whether autophagy is strictly a parallel degradation system, or whether it is a
compensatory degradation system when the UPS is impaired; furthermore, if there
is a compensatory interaction between these systems, the molecular link is not
known. Here we show that autophagy acts as a compensatory degradation system when
the UPS is impaired in Drosophila melanogaster, and that histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6), a microtubule-associated deacetylase that interacts with
polyubiquitinated proteins, is an essential mechanistic link in this compensatory
interaction. We found that compensatory autophagy was induced in response to
mutations affecting the proteasome and in response to UPS impairment in a fly
model of the neurodegenerative disease spinobulbar muscular atrophy. Autophagy
compensated for impaired UPS function in an HDAC6-dependent manner. Furthermore, 
expression of HDAC6 was sufficient to rescue degeneration associated with UPS
dysfunction in vivo in an autophagy-dependent manner. This study suggests that
impairment of autophagy (for example, associated with ageing or genetic
variation) might predispose to neurodegeneration. Morover, these findings suggest
that it may be possible to intervene in neurodegeneration by augmenting HDAC6 to 
enhance autophagy.

PMID: 17568747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Biochem. 2007 Sep;303(1-2):221-30. Epub 2007 May 22.

Mutations in SIRT2 deacetylase which regulate enzymatic activity but not its
interaction with HDAC6 and tubulin.

Nahhas F(1), Dryden SC, Abrams J, Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Human SIRT2 is a cytoplasmic NAD-dependent deacetylase implicated in the mitotic 
regulation of microtubule dynamics by its association with the class II histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). We have previously reported that SIRT2 is multiply
phosphorylated in a cell cycle dependent pattern. Here, we demonstrate that HDAC6
binds to both phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms of SIRT2 and that tubulin
binds only to the SIRT2-HDAC6 complex. Tubulin does not bind to either HDAC6 or
SIRT2 individually. In addition, we show that replacement of specific serines
with alanines in either isoform of SIRT2 regulates its enzymatic activity. We
also found that overexpression of isoform2 was deleterious to cell survival.
SIRT2 was found to be phosphorylated at serines 368 and 372, outside the
conserved core domain of the Sir2 protein family. Double replacement of S368A and
S372A reduced SIRT2 deacetylase activity by 44% compared to wildtype activity.
Replacements of other serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, which did not
alter the phosphorylation pattern, had varying effects on SIRT2 deacetylase
activity but no effect on tubulin/HDAC6 binding.

PMID: 17516032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Mol Biol. 2007 Jul 6;370(2):290-302. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Solution structure of the Ubp-M BUZ domain, a highly specific protein module that
recognizes the C-terminal tail of free ubiquitin.

Pai MT(1), Tzeng SR, Kovacs JJ, Keaton MA, Li SS, Yao TP, Zhou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

The BUZ/Znf-UBP domain is a distinct ubiquitin-binding module found in the
cytoplasmic deacetylase HDAC6, the E3 ubiquitin ligase BRAP2/IMP, and a subfamily
of deubiquitinating enzymes. Here, we report the solution structure of the BUZ
domain of Ubp-M, a ubiquitin-specific protease, and its interaction with
ubiquitin. Unlike the BUZ domain from isopeptidase T (isoT) that contains a
single zinc finger, the Ubp-M BUZ domain features three zinc-binding sites
consisting of 12 residues. These zinc ligands form a pair of cross-braced ring
fingers encapsulated within a third zinc finger in the primary structure. In
contrast to isoT, which can form an N-terminal loop swapped dimer in the crystal 
state, the formation of additional zinc fingers in the Ubp-M BUZ domain restricts
its N-terminal loop to intra-domain interactions. The ubiquitin-binding site of
the Ubp-M BUZ domain is mapped to the highly conserved, concave surface formed by
the alpha 3 helix and the central beta-sheet. We further show that this site
binds to the C-terminal tail of free ubiquitin, and corresponding peptides
display essentially the same binding affinities as full-length ubiquitin does for
the Ubp-M BUZ domain. However, modification of the G76(Ub) carboxylate group
either by a peptide or isopeptide bond abolishes BUZ-domain interaction. The
unique ubiquitin-recognition mode of the BUZ domain family suggests that they may
function as "sensors" of free ubiquitin in cells to achieve regulatory roles in
many aspects of ubiquitin-dependent processes.

PMCID: PMC2870993
PMID: 17512543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 1;357(2):439-45. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Factors affecting the substrate specificity of histone deacetylases.

Riester D(1), Hildmann C, Grünewald S, Beckers T, Schwienhorst A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Preparative Molecular Biology, Institute 
for Microbiology and Genetics, University of Goettingen, Grisebachstr. 8, 37077
Goettingen, Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the deacetylation of epsilon-acetyl-lysine 
residues within the N-terminal tail of core histones and thereby mediate changes 
in the chromatin structure and regulate gene expression in eukaryotic cells. So
far, surprisingly little is known about the substrate specificities of different 
HDACs. Here, we prepared a library of fluorogenic tripeptidic substrates of the
general format Ac-P(-2)-P(-1)-Lys(Ac)-MCA (P(-1), P(-2)=all amino acids except
cysteine) and measured their HDAC-dependent conversion in a standard fluorogenic 
HDAC assay. Different HDAC subtypes can be ranked according to their substrate
selectivity: HDAH > HDAC8 > HDAC1 > HDAC3 > HDAC6. HDAC1, HDAC3, and HDAC6
exhibit a similar specificity profile, whereas both HDAC8 and HDAH have rather
distinct profiles. Furthermore, it was shown that second-site modification (e.g.,
phosphorylation) of substrate sequences as well as corepressor binding can
modulate the selectivity of enzymatic substrate conversion.

PMID: 17428445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 18;356(4):998-1003. Epub 2007 Mar 22.

FK228 inhibits Hsp90 chaperone function in K562 cells via hyperacetylation of
Hsp70.

Wang Y(1), Wang SY, Zhang XH, Zhao M, Hou CM, Xu YJ, Du ZY, Yu XD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 27
Taiping Road, Beijing 100850, China.

Some pan-histone-deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have recently been reported to
exert their anti-leukemia effect by inhibiting the activity of class IIB HDAC6,
which is the deacetylase of Hsp90 and alpha-tubulin, thereby leading to
hyperacetylation of Hsp90, disruption of its chaperone function and apoptosis. In
this study, we compared the effect of a class I HDAC inhibitor FK228 with the
pan-HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) on the Hsp90 chaperone 
function of K562 cells. We demonstrated that, although having a weaker inhibitory
effect on HDAC6, FK228 mediated a similar disruption of Hsp90 chaperone function 
compared to SAHA. Unlike SAHA, FK228 did not mediate hyperacetylation of Hsp90,
instead the acetylation of Hsp70 was increased and Bcr-Abl was increasingly
associated with Hsp70 rather than Hsp90, forming an unstable complex that
promotes Bcr-Abl degradation. These results indicated that FK228 may disrupt the 
function of Hsp90 indirectly through acetylation of Hsp70 and inhibition of its
function.

PMID: 17397803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Neurosci. 2007 Mar 28;27(13):3571-83.

Histone deacetylase 6 inhibition compensates for the transport deficit in
Huntington's disease by increasing tubulin acetylation.

Dompierre JP(1), Godin JD, Charrin BC, Cordelières FP, King SJ, Humbert S, Saudou
F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de
Recherche 146, Orsay, France.

A defect in microtubule (MT)-based transport contributes to the neuronal toxicity
observed in Huntington's disease (HD). Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors show
neuroprotective effects in this devastating neurodegenerative disorder. We report
here that HDAC inhibitors, including trichostatin A (TSA), increase vesicular
transport of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) by inhibiting HDAC6,
thereby increasing acetylation at lysine 40 of alpha-tubulin. MT acetylation in
vitro and in cells causes the recruitment of the molecular motors dynein and
kinesin-1 to MTs. In neurons, acetylation at lysine 40 of alpha-tubulin increases
the flux of vesicles and the subsequent release of BDNF. We show that tubulin
acetylation is reduced in HD brains and that TSA compensates for the transport-
and release-defect phenotypes that are observed in disease. Our findings reveal
that HDAC6 inhibition and acetylation at lysine 40 of alpha-tubulin may be
therapeutic targets of interest in disorders such as HD in which intracellular
transport is altered.

PMID: 17392473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Cell Sci. 2007 Apr 15;120(Pt 8):1469-79. Epub 2007 Mar 27.

HDAC6 deacetylation of tubulin modulates dynamics of cellular adhesions.

Tran AD(1), Marmo TP, Salam AA, Che S, Finkelstein E, Kabarriti R, Xenias HS,
Mazitschek R, Hubbert C, Kawaguchi Y, Sheetz MP, Yao TP, Bulinski JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027,
USA.

Genetic or pharmacological alteration of the activity of the histone deacetylase 
6 (HDAC6) induces a parallel alteration in cell migration. Using tubacin to block
deacetylation of alpha-tubulin, and not other HDAC6 substrates, yielded a
motility reduction equivalent to agents that block all NAD-independent HDACs.
Accordingly, we investigated how the failure to deacetylate tubulin contributes
to decreased motility in HDAC6-inhibited cells. Testing the hypothesis that
motility is reduced because cellular adhesion is altered, we found that
inhibiting HDAC6 activity towards tubulin rapidly increased total adhesion area. 
Next, we investigated the mechanism of the adhesion area increase. Formation of
adhesions proceeded normally and cell spreading was more rapid in the absence of 
active HDAC6; however, photobleaching assays and adhesion breakdown showed that
adhesion turnover was slower. To test the role of hyperacetylated tubulin in
altering adhesion turnover, we measured microtubule dynamics in HDAC6-inhibited
cells because dynamic microtubules are required to target adhesions for turnover.
HDAC6 inhibition yielded a decrease in microtubule dynamics that was sufficient
to decrease focal adhesion turnover. Thus, our results suggest a scenario in
which the decreased dynamics of hyperacetylated microtubules in HDAC6-inhibited
cells compromises their capacity to mediate the focal adhesion dynamics required 
for rapid cell migration.

PMID: 17389687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Differentiation. 2007 Feb;75(2):147-57.

Differentially expressed genes and morphological changes during lengthened
immobilization in rat soleus muscle.

Kim JW(1), Kwon OY, Kim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, College of Health Science, Baekseok
University, Cheonan, South Korea.

To examine the effect of lengthened immobilization on the expression of genes and
concomitant morphological changes in soleus muscle, rat hindlimbs were
immobilized at the ankle in full dorsiflexion by plaster cast. After removing the
muscle (after 1 hr, 1, 4, and 7 days of immobilization), morphology and
differential gene expression were analyzed through electron microscopy and
differential display reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (DDRT-PCR), 
respectively. At the myotendinous junction (MTJ), a large cytoplasmic space
appeared after 1 hr of immobilization and became enlarged over time, together
with damaged Z lines. Interfibrillar space was detected after 1 day of
immobilization, but diminished after 7 days. At the muscle belly, Z-line
streaming and widening were observed following 1 hr of immobilization.
Disorganization of myofilaments (misalignment of adjacent sarcomeres, distortion,
or absence of Z lines) was detected after 4 days. Furthermore, mitochondrial
swelling and cristae disruption were observed after 1 day of stretching. A set of
15 differentially expressed candidate genes was identified through DDRT-PCR. Of
11 known genes, seven (Atp5g3, TOM22, INrf2, Slc25a4, Hdac6, Tpm1, and Sv2b) were
up and three (Podxl, Myh1, and Surf1) were down-regulated following
immobilization. In the case of Acyp2, 1-day stretching-specific expression was
observed. Atp5g3, Slc25a4, TOM22, and Surf1 are mitochondrial proteins related to
energy metabolism, except TOM22, which has a chaperone-like activity located in
the mitochondrial outer membrane. Together with these, INrf2, Hdac6, Podxl, and
Acyp2 are related more or less to stress-induced apoptosis, indicating the
responses to apoptotic changes in mitochondria caused by stretching. The
expression of both Tpm1 and Myh1, fast twitch isoforms, suggests adaption to the 
immobilization. These results altogether indicate that lengthened immobilization 
regulates the expression of several stress/apoptosis-related and muscle-specific 
genes responsible for the slow-to-fast transition in soleus muscle despite
profound muscle atrophy.

PMID: 17316384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Cell. 2007 Jan 12;25(1):151-9.

An acetylation site in the middle domain of Hsp90 regulates chaperone function.

Scroggins BT(1), Robzyk K, Wang D, Marcu MG, Tsutsumi S, Beebe K, Cotter RJ,
Felts S, Toft D, Karnitz L, Rosen N, Neckers L.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) chaperones a key subset of signaling proteins and
is necessary for malignant transformation. Hsp90 is subject to an array of
posttranslational modifications that affect its function, including acetylation. 
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and knockdown of HDAC6 induce Hsp90
acetylation and inhibit its activity. However, direct determination of the
functional consequences of Hsp90 acetylation has awaited mapping of specific
sites. We now demonstrate that Hsp90 K294 is acetylated. Mutational analysis of
K294 shows that its acetylation status is a strong determinant of client protein 
and cochaperone binding. In yeast, Hsp90 mutants that cannot be acetylated at
K294 have reduced viability and chaperone function compared to WT or to mutants
that mimic constitutive acetylation. These data suggest that
acetylation/deacetylation of K294 plays an important role in regulating the Hsp90
chaperone cycle.

PMCID: PMC1839984
PMID: 17218278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Int J Cancer. 2006 Dec 15;119(12):2958-69.

Ursodeoxycholic acid modulates histone acetylation and induces differentiation
and senescence.

Akare S(1), Jean-Louis S, Chen W, Wood DJ, Powell AA, Martinez JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Arizona Cancer Center, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Agents that can modulate colonic environment and control dysregulated signaling
are being evaluated for their chemopreventive potential in colon cancer.
Ursodeoxycholate (UDCA) has shown chemopreventive potential in preclinical and
animal models of colon cancer, but the mechanism behind it remains unknown. Here 
biological effects of UDCA were examined to understand mechanism behind its
chemoprevention in colon cancer. Our data suggests that UDCA can suppress growth 
in a wide variety of cancer cell lines and can induce low level of apoptosis in
colon cancer cells. We also found that UDCA treatment induces alteration in
morphology, increased cell size, upregulation of cytokeratin 8, 18 and 19 and
E-cadherin, cytokeratin remodeling and accumulation of lipid droplets, suggesting
that UDCA induces differentiation in colon carcinoma cells. Our results also
suggest significant differences in UDCA and sodium butyrate induced functional
differentiation. We also report for the first time that UDCA can induce
senescence in colon cancer cells as assessed by flattened, spread out and
vacuolated morphology as well as by senescence marker beta-galactosidase
staining. We also found that UDCA inhibits the telomerase activity. Surprisingly,
we found that UDCA is not a histone deacytylase inhibitor but instead induces
hypoacetylation of histones unlike hyperacetylation induced by sodium butyrate.
Our results also suggest that, although UDCA induced senescence is p53, p21 and
Rb independent, HDAC6 appears to be important in UDCA induced senescence. In
summary, our data shows that UDCA modulates chromatin by inducing histone
hypoacetylation and induces differentiation and senescence in colon cancer cells.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17019713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 1;66(17):8838-46.

Farnesyltransferase inhibitors reverse taxane resistance.

Marcus AI(1), O'Brate AM, Buey RM, Zhou J, Thomas S, Khuri FR, Andreu JM, Díaz F,
Giannakakou P.

Author information: 
(1)Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

The combination of farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) and taxanes has been
shown to result in potent antiproliferative and antimitotic synergy. Recent phase
I and II clinical trials have shown that this combination shows clinical activity
in taxane-refractory or taxane-resistant cancer patients. To understand the
mechanism behind these clinical observations, we used a cancer cell model of
paclitaxel resistance and showed that the FTI/taxane combination retains potent
antiproliferative, antimitotic, and proapoptotic activity against the
paclitaxel-resistant cells, at doses where each drug alone has little or no
activity. To probe the mechanistic basis of these observations, paclitaxel
activity was monitored in living cells using the fluorescently conjugated
paclitaxel, Flutax-2. We observed that all FTIs tested increase the amount of
microtubule-bound Flutax-2 and the number of microtubules labeled with Flutax-2
in both paclitaxel-resistant and paclitaxel-sensitive cells. Importantly, we
observed a consequential increase in microtubule stability and tubulin
acetylation with the combination of the two drugs, even in paclitaxel-resistant
cells, confirming that the enhanced taxane binding in the presence of FTI affects
microtubule function. Furthermore, this mechanism is dependent on the function of
the tubulin deacetylase, HDAC6, because in cells overexpressing a catalytically
inactive HDAC6, FTIs are incapable of enhancing Flutax-2-microtubule binding.
Similar results were obtained by using an FTI devoid of farnesyltransferase
inhibitory activity, indicating that functional inhibition of farnesyltransferase
is also required. Overall, these studies provide a new insight into the
functional relationship between HDAC6, farnesyltransferase, and microtubules, and
support clinical data showing that the FTI/taxane combination is effective in
taxane-refractory patients.

PMCID: PMC1861825
PMID: 16951201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 1;66(17):8814-21.

Class II histone deacetylases are associated with VHL-independent regulation of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha.

Qian DZ(1), Kachhap SK, Collis SJ, Verheul HM, Carducci MA, Atadja P, Pili R.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Johns Hopkins 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) plays a critical role in
transcriptional gene activation involved in tumor angiogenesis. A novel class of 
agents, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, has been shown to inhibit
tumor angiogenesis and HIF-1 alpha protein expression. However, the molecular
mechanism responsible for this inhibition remains to be elucidated. In the
current study, we investigated the molecular link between HIF-1 alpha inhibition 
and HDAC inhibition. Treatment of the VHL-deficient human renal cell carcinoma
cell line UMRC2 with the hydroxamic HDAC inhibitor LAQ824 resulted in a
dose-dependent inhibition of HIF-1 alpha protein via a VHL-independent mechanism 
and reduction of HIF-1 alpha transcriptional activity. HIF-1 alpha inhibition by 
LAQ824 was associated with HIF-1 alpha acetylation and polyubiquitination. HIF-1 
alpha immunoprecipitates contained HDAC activity. Then, we tested different
classes of HDAC inhibitors with diverse inhibitory activity of class I versus
class II HDACs and assessed their capability of targeting HIF-1 alpha. Hydroxamic
acid derivatives with known activity against both class I and class II HDACs were
effective in inhibiting HIF-1 alpha at low nanomolar concentrations. In contrast,
valproic acid and trapoxin were able to inhibit HIF-1 alpha only at
concentrations that are effective against class II HDACs. Coimmunoprecipitation
studies showed that class II HDAC4 and HDAC6 were associated with HIF-1 alpha
protein. Inhibition by small interfering RNA of HDAC4 and HDAC6 reduced HIF-1
alpha protein expression and transcriptional activity. Taken together, these
results suggest that class II HDACs are associated with HIF-1 alpha stability and
provide a rationale for targeting HIF-1 alpha with HDAC inhibitors against class 
II isozymes.

PMID: 16951198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Neurochem Res. 2007 Feb;32(2):187-95. Epub 2006 Aug 25.

Microtubule deacetylases, SirT2 and HDAC6, in the nervous system.

Southwood CM(1), Peppi M, Dryden S, Tainsky MA, Gow A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, 3216 Scott Hall, 540 E Canfield Ave., Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Examination of the cytoskeleton has demonstrated the pivotal role of regulatory
proteins governing cytoskeletal dynamics. Most work has focused on cell cycle and
cell migration regarding cancer. However, these studies have yielded tremendous
insight for development, particularly in the nervous system where all major cell 
types remodel their shape, generate unsurpassed quantities of membranes and
extend cellular processes to communicate, and regulate the activities of other
cells. Herein, we analyze two microtubule regulatory alpha-tubulin deacetylases, 
histone deacetylase-6 (HDAC6) and SirT2. HDAC6 is expressed by most neurons but
is abundant in cerebellar Purkinje cells. In contrast, SirT2 is targeted to
myelin sheaths. Expression of these proteins by post-mitotic cells indicates
novel functions, such as process outgrowth and membrane remodeling. In
oligodendrocytes, targeting of SirT2 to paranodes coincides with the presence of 
the microtubule-destabilizing protein stathmin-1 during early myelinogenesis and 
suggests the existence of a microtubule regulatory network that modulates
cytoskeletal dynamics.

PMID: 16933150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Oct 6;348(4):1429-35. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) is stabilized by the Hsp90
chaperone.

Hurst DR(1), Mehta A, Moore BP, Phadke PA, Meehan WJ, Accavitti MA, Shevde LA,
Hopper JE, Xie Y, Welch DR, Samant RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) is a member of the mSin3-HDAC
transcription co-repressor complex. However, the proteins associated with BRMS1
have not been fully identified. Yeast two-hybrid screen, immuno-affinity
chromatography, and co-immunoprecipitation experiments were performed to identify
BRMS1 interacting proteins (BIPs). In addition to known core mSin3
transcriptional complex components RBBP1 and mSDS3, BRMS1 interacted with other
proteins including three chaperones: DNAJB6 (MRJ), Hsp90, and Hsp70. Hsp90 is a
known target of HDAC6 and reversible acetylation is one of the mechanisms that is
implicated in regulation of Hsp90 chaperone complex activity. BRMS1 interacted
with class II HDACs, HDAC 4, 5, and 6. We further found that BRMS1 is stabilized 
by Hsp90, and its turnover is proteasome dependent. The stability of BRMS1
protein may be important in maintaining the functional role of BRMS1 in
metastasis suppression.

PMCID: PMC1557677
PMID: 16919237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Blood. 2006 Dec 1;108(12):3801-7. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors increase virus gene expression but decrease CD8+
cell antiviral function in HTLV-1 infection.

Mosley AJ(1), Meekings KN, McCarthy C, Shepherd D, Cerundolo V, Mazitschek R,
Tanaka Y, Taylor GP, Bangham CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Wright Fleming Institute, Imperial College London,
Norfolk Place, London, United Kingdom.

The dynamics of human T-lymphotropic virus type-1 (HTLV-1) provirus expression in
vivo are unknown. There is much evidence to suggest that HTLV-1 gene expression
is restricted: this restricted gene expression may contribute to HTLV-1
persistence by limiting the ability of the HTLV-1-specific CD8(+) cell immune
response to clear infected cells. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that
derepression of HTLV-1 gene expression would allow an increase in CD8(+)
cell-mediated lysis of HTLV-1-infected cells. Using histone deacetylase enzyme
inhibitors (HDIs) to hyperacetylate histones and increase HTLV-1 gene expression,
we found that HDIs doubled Tax expression in naturally infected lymphocytes after
overnight culture. However, the rate of CD8(+) cell-mediated lysis of
Tax-expressing cells ex vivo was halved. HDIs appeared to inhibit the CD8(+)
cell-mediated lytic process itself, indicating a role for the
microtubule-associated HDAC6 enzyme. These observations indicate that HDIs may
reduce the efficiency of cytotoxic T-cell (CTL) surveillance of HTLV-1 in vivo.
The impact of HDIs on HTLV-1 proviral load in vivo cannot be accurately predicted
because of the widespread effects of these drugs on cellular processes; we
therefore recommend caution in the use of HDIs in nonmalignant cases of HTLV-1
infection.

PMID: 16912225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Hum Genet. 2006;51(9):815-21. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Pure de-novo 5 Mb duplication at Xp11.22-p11.23 in a male: phenotypic and
molecular characterization.

Bonnet C(1), Grégoire MJ, Brochet K, Raffo E, Leheup B, Jonveaux P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique médicale, CHU Nancy-Brabois, rue du Morvan, 54511,
Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France.

Males with duplications within the short arm of the X chromosome are rare and
most cases are inherited from a maternal heterozygote. Here we describe the first
detailed characterization of a de-novo Xp duplication delineated to
Xp11.22-->Xp11.23 in a 15-year-old male with moderate mental impairment,
autistic-like behaviour, short stature, and mild dysmorphic features. Chromosome 
analysis (550 band resolution) was normal and comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH) analysis on metaphase spreads detected duplication on Xp11. Further
characterization of the duplication by array CGH, FISH experiments with specific 
BAC probes, and genotyping with microsatellite markers helped to determine
proximal and distal breakpoints giving a size of the duplication of approximately
5 Mb. As far as we are aware this is the first described male with isolated
microduplication on Xp11.22-Xp11.23. Among the genes included within the
duplicated region, and particularly those which are outside copy number
polymorphisms, we discuss the relationship of FTSJ1, PQBP1 and HDAC6 with the
clinical symptoms of our patient.

PMID: 16900295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):1693-701.

CRA-026440: a potent, broad-spectrum, hydroxamic histone deacetylase inhibitor
with antiproliferative and antiangiogenic activity in vitro and in vivo.

Cao ZA(1), Bass KE, Balasubramanian S, Liu L, Schultz B, Verner E, Dai Y, Molina 
RA, Davis JR, Misialek S, Sendzik M, Orr CJ, Leung L, Callan O, Young P,
Dalrymple SA, Buggy JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Celera Genomics, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
alex_cao001@hotmail.com

CRA-026440 is a novel, broad-spectrum, hydroxamic acid-based inhibitor of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) that shows antitumor and antiangiogenic activities in vitro
and in vivo preclinically. CRA-026440 inhibited pure recombinant isozymes HDAC1, 
HDAC2, HDAC3/SMRT, HDAC6, HDAC8, and HDAC10 in the nanomolar range. Treatment of 
cultured tumor cell lines grown in vitro with CRA-026440 resulted in the
accumulation of acetylated histone and acetylated tubulin, leading to an
inhibition of tumor cell growth and the induction of apoptosis. CRA-026440
inhibited ex vivo angiogenesis in a dose-dependent manner. CRA-026440
parenterally given to mice harboring HCT116 or U937 human tumor xenografts
resulted in a statistically significant reduction in tumor growth. CRA-026440,
when used in combination with Avastin, achieved greater preclinical efficacy in
HCT 116 colorectal tumor model. Inhibition of tumor growth was accompanied by an 
increase in the acetylation of alpha-tubulin in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells and an alteration in the expression of many genes in the tumors, including 
several involved in angiogenesis, apoptosis, and cell growth. These results
reveal CRA-026440 to be a novel HDAC inhibitor with potent antitumor activity.

PMID: 16891455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Med Chem. 2006 Aug 10;49(16):4809-12.

Highly potent and selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors designed based on a 
small-molecular substrate.

Suzuki T(1), Kouketsu A, Itoh Y, Hisakawa S, Maeda S, Yoshida M, Nakagawa H,
Miyata N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8603, Japan. suzuki@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

To find novel histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)-selective inhibitors and clarify the 
structural requirements for HDAC6-selective inhibition, we prepared thiolate
analogues designed based on the structure of an HDAC6-selective substrate and
evaluated the histone/alpha-tubulin acetylation selectivity by Western blot
analysis. Aliphatic compounds 17b-20b selectively caused alpha-tubulin
acetylation over histone H4 acetylation. In enzyme assays using HDAC1, HDAC4, and
HDAC6, compounds 17a-19a exhibited HDAC6-selective inhibition over HDAC1 and
HDAC4.

PMID: 16884291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 1;66(13):6785-92.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase class I but not class II is critical for the
sensitization of leukemic cells to tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis.

Inoue S(1), Mai A, Dyer MJ, Cohen GM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Lancaster
Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, United Kingdom.

From work done largely on derived cell lines, it has been suggested that tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) might be a therapeutic 
target for many forms of malignancy. However, use of primary tumor cells,
including chronic lymphocytic leukemic (CLL) cells, has shown inherent resistance
to TRAIL. Although the molecular basis for this resistance remains unknown,
treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) often sensitizes resistant 
cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. We used structurally diverse HDACi to ascertain
which HDAC needs to be inhibited for the sensitization. Inhibition of HDAC class 
I but not class II is required for sensitization to TRAIL-induced apoptosis of
CLL cells and various cell lines. Using different HDACi together with small
interfering RNA for HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6, we report that inhibition of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2 but not HDAC3, HDAC6, and HDAC8 are primarily responsible for
sensitization to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Based on these data and our previous
studies, we propose that a clinical trial in CLL is warranted using a combination
of a selective HDACi that inhibits HDAC1 and/or HDAC2 together with a form of
TRAIL that signals through TRAIL receptor 1.

PMID: 16818655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. EMBO J. 2006 Jul 26;25(14):3357-66. Epub 2006 Jun 29.

HDAC6-p97/VCP controlled polyubiquitin chain turnover.

Boyault C(1), Gilquin B, Zhang Y, Rybin V, Garman E, Meyer-Klaucke W, Matthias P,
Müller CW, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U309, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de la
Différenciation, Equipe chromatine et expression des gènes, Institut Albert
Bonniot, Faculté de Médecine, Domaine de la Merci, La Tronche, France.

HDAC6 is a unique cytoplasmic deacetylase capable of interacting with ubiquitin. 
Using a combination of biophysical, biochemical and biological approaches, we
have characterized the ubiquitin-binding domain of HDAC6, named ZnF-UBP, and
investigated its biological functions. These studies show that the three Zn
ion-containing HDAC6 ZnF-UBP domain presents the highest known affinity for
ubiquitin monomers and mediates the ability of HDAC6 to negatively control the
cellular polyubiquitin chain turnover. We further show that HDAC6-interacting
chaperone, p97/VCP, dissociates the HDAC6-ubiquitin complexes and counteracts the
ability of HDAC6 to promote the accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins. We
propose that a finely tuned balance of HDAC6 and p97/VCP concentrations
determines the fate of ubiquitinated misfolded proteins: p97/VCP would promote
protein degradation and ubiquitin turnover, whereas HDAC6 would favour the
accumulation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates and inclusion body formation.

PMCID: PMC1523186
PMID: 16810319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Int J Oncol. 2006 Jul;29(1):117-24.

Aberrant expression of histone deacetylase 6 in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Sakuma T(1), Uzawa K, Onda T, Shiiba M, Yokoe H, Shibahara T, Tanzawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Tokyo Dental College, Chiba
261-8502, Japan.

The structure and function of chromatin can be altered by modifications to
histone. Histone acetylation is a reversible process governed by histone
acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases (HDACs). HDAC6 is a subtype of the
HDAC family that deacetylates alpha-tubulin and increases cell motility. We
investigated the expression levels of HDAC6 mRNA and protein expression in oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)-derived cell lines and human primary OSCCs to
elucidate the potential involvement of HDAC6 in OSCC. Using quantitative
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and Western blots on
nine OSCC-derived cell lines and normal oral keratinocytes (NOKs), HDAC6 mRNA and
protein expression were commonly up-regulated in all cell lines compared with the
NOKs. Immunofluorescence analysis detected HDAC6 protein in the cytoplasm of OSCC
cell lines. Similar to OSCC cell lines, high frequencies of HDAC6 up-regulation
were evident in both mRNA (74%) and protein (51%) levels of primary tumors. Among
the clinical variables analyzed, the clinical tumor stage was found to be
associated with the HDAC6 expression states. The analysis indicated a significant
difference in the HDAC6 expression level between the early stage (stage I and II)
and advanced-stage (stage III and IV) tumors (P=0.014). These results suggest
that HDAC6 expression may be correlated with tumor aggressiveness and offer clues
to the planning of new treatments.

PMID: 16773191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Breast Cancer. 2006;13(2):123-8.

Basic research for hormone-sensitivity of breast cancer.

Hayashi S(1), Yamaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, Course of Health Sciences, School of
Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. shayashi@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Hormonal therapy is a rapidly progressing molecular-targeted therapy for breast
cancer, using drugs such as LH-RH agonists, SERMs and aromatase inhibitors. Basic
research for estrogen signaling and hormone sensitivity in breast cancer cells
strongly contributes to the progression of clinical treatment of breast cancer.
However, further problems remain unresolved, for example the accurate prediction 
of individual response to each hormonal therapy. Moreover, novel combinations
with other molecular-targeted therapies might be advance the effectiveness of
hormonal therapies. To address these issues, we are developing several new tools 
such as focused microarray and a GFP-reporter cell system. We first identified
estrogen-responsive genes by comprehensive expression profiling of estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer cells, and produced a custom-made
estrogen-responsive microarray of a narrowed-down subset. Using this microarray, 
we studied several basic issues regarding estrogen signaling and expression
analysis of estrogen-responsive genes in breast cancer tissues. Furthermore,
expression of several candidate genes selected from the contents of the
customarray was also analyzed by real-time RT-PCR and by immunohistochemical
techniques, to find new predictive factors for responsiveness to hormone therapy 
for primary breast cancer patients. We found that the expression of several genes
such as HDAC6 significantly correlated with disease-free and overall survival of 
ER-positive patients. Furthermore, we are developing a new tool for analyzing the
estrogen-related microenvironment on individual breast cancer patients using
ERE-GFP-indicator cells. This system enables visualization of tumor-stroma
interactions and the effects of aromatase inhibitors in an individual breast
cancer sample. We believe that these approaches could provide not only new clues 
to elucidate the estrogen-dependent mechanisms of cancer, but also clinical
benefits to patients by predicting individual response to hormonal therapy.

PMID: 16755105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Aug;17(8):3435-45. Epub 2006 May 31.

Lymphocyte chemotaxis is regulated by histone deacetylase 6, independently of its
deacetylase activity.

Cabrero JR(1), Serrador JM, Barreiro O, Mittelbrunn M, Naranjo-Suárez S,
Martín-Cófreces N, Vicente-Manzanares M, Mazitschek R, Bradner JE, Avila J,
Valenzuela-Fernández A, Sánchez-Madrid F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital de la Princesa, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, 28006 Madrid, Spain.

In this work, the role of HDAC6, a type II histone deacetylase with tubulin
deacetylase activity, in lymphocyte polarity, motility, and transmigration was
explored. HDAC6 was localized at dynamic subcellular structures as leading
lamellipodia and the uropod in migrating T-cells. However, HDAC6 activity did not
appear to be involved in the polarity of migrating lymphocytes. Overexpression of
HDAC6 in freshly isolated lymphocytes and T-cell lines increased the lymphocyte
migration mediated by chemokines and their transendothelial migration under shear
flow. Accordingly, the knockdown of HDAC6 expression in T-cells diminished their 
chemotactic capability. Additional experiments with HDAC6 inhibitors
(trichostatin, tubacin), other structural related molecules (niltubacin,
MAZ-1391), and HDAC6 dead mutants showed that the deacetylase activity of HDAC6
was not involved in the modulatory effect of this molecule on cell migration. Our
results indicate that HDAC6 has an important role in the chemotaxis of
T-lymphocytes, which is independent of its tubulin deacetylase activity.

PMCID: PMC1525231
PMID: 16738306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 May;5(5):1309-17.

CRA-024781: a novel synthetic inhibitor of histone deacetylase enzymes with
antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo.

Buggy JJ(1), Cao ZA, Bass KE, Verner E, Balasubramanian S, Liu L, Schultz BE,
Young PR, Dalrymple SA.

Author information: 
(1)Celera Genomics, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
drjbuggy@yahoo.com

CRA-024781 is a novel, broad spectrum hydroxamic acid-based inhibitor of histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) that shows antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo
preclinically and is under evaluation in phase I clinical trials for cancer.
CRA-024781 inhibited pure recombinant HDAC1 with a K(i) of 0.007 mumol/L, and
also inhibited the other HDAC isozymes HDAC2, HDAC3/SMRT, HDAC6, HDAC8, and
HDAC10 in the nanomolar range. Treatment of cultured tumor cell lines grown in
vitro with CRA-024781 resulted in the accumulation of acetylated histone and
acetylated tubulin, resulting in an inhibition of tumor cell growth and the
induction of apoptosis. CRA-024781 parenterally administered to mice harboring
HCT116 or DLD-1 colon tumor xenografts resulted in a statistically significant
reduction in tumor growth at doses that were well tolerated as measured by body
weight. Inhibition of tumor growth was accompanied by an increase in the
acetylation of alpha-tubulin in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and an
alteration in the expression of many genes in the tumors, including several
involved in apoptosis and cell growth. These results reveal CRA-024781 to be a
novel HDAC inhibitor with potent antitumor activity.

PMID: 16731764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biochem J. 2006 Sep 15;398(3):461-7.

Involvement of the SMRT/NCoR-HDAC3 complex in transcriptional repression by the
CNOT2 subunit of the human Ccr4-Not complex.

Jayne S(1), Zwartjes CG, van Schaik FM, Timmers HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Stratenum STR 3.211, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.

In eukaryotic cells, the Ccr4-Not complex can regulate mRNA metabolism at various
levels. Previously, we showed that promoter targeting of the CNOT2 subunit
resulted in strong repression of RNA polymerase II transcription, which was
sensitive to the HDAC (histone deacetylase) inhibitor, trichostatin A [Zwartjes, 
Jayne, van den Berg and Timmers (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 10848-10854]. In the
present study, the cofactor requirement for CNOT2-mediated repression was
investigated. We found that coexpression of SMRT (silencing mediator for retinoic
acid receptor and thyroid-hormone receptor) or NCoR (nuclear hormone receptor
co-repressor) in combination with HDAC3 (or HDAC5 and HDAC6) augmented the
repression by CNOT2. This repressive effect is mediated by the conserved Not-Box,
which resides at the C-terminus of CNOT2 proteins. We observed physical
interactions of CNOT2 with several subunits of the SMRT/NCoR-HDAC3 complex. Our
results show that the SMRT/NCoR-HDAC3 complex is a cofactor of CNOT2-mediated
repression and suggest that transcriptional regulation by the Ccr4-Not complex
involves regulation of chromatin modification.

PMCID: PMC1559471
PMID: 16712523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Nucl Recept Signal. 2005;3:e004. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Chaperoning steroid hormone signaling via reversible acetylation.

Kovacs JJ(1), Cohen TJ, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and related steroid hormone receptors are
ligand-dependent transcription factors whose regulation is critical for both
homeostasis and diseases. The structural maturation of the GR has been shown to
require the Hsp90 molecular chaperone complex. Evidence indicates that
Hsp90-dependent maturation is critical for GR ligand binding capacity and
activity. While the role for Hsp90 in GR function is well established, the
regulation of this process is not well understood. Here we discuss a recent
finding that identifies reversible protein acetylation controlled by the
deacetylase HDAC6 as a novel mechanism that regulates Hsp90-dependent GR
maturation. We will also speculate on the implications of this finding in steroid
hormone signaling, oncogenic transformation and its potential therapeutic
utility.

PMCID: PMC1402214
PMID: 16604172  [PubMed]


252. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):3106-13.

Positive and negative regulation of the innate antiviral response and beta
interferon gene expression by deacetylation.

Nusinzon I(1), Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Pancoe-ENH Research Pavilion, Northwestern University, 2200 Campus Drive,
Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene expression in response to virus infection relies 
on the dynamic assembly of a multiprotein enhanceosome complex that is initiated 
by the activation of two inducible transcription factors, interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-kappaB. Virus or double-stranded RNA-induced activation of
IFN-beta gene expression is prevented by the addition of protein deacetylase
inhibitors. The isolated IRF-responsive positive regulatory domain was found to
require deacetylation for its activity, but IRF3 protein activation leading to
its nuclear translocation and DNA binding was not impaired by deacetylase
inhibition. In contrast, NF-kappaB activity was not affected by deacetylase
inhibitors. RNA interference indicated that several deacetylase enzymes,
including histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), HDAC8, and HDAC6, influence IFN-beta
gene expression with opposing effects. While HDAC1 and HDAC8 repress IFN-beta
expression, HDAC6 acts as a coactivator essential for enhancer activity. Virus
replication is enhanced in HDAC6-depleted cells, demonstrating HDAC6 is an
essential component of innate antiviral immunity.

PMCID: PMC1446935
PMID: 16581785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biotechnol. 2006 Jun 25;124(1):258-70. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Substrate and inhibitor specificity of class 1 and class 2 histone deacetylases.

Hildmann C(1), Wegener D, Riester D, Hempel R, Schober A, Merana J, Giurato L,
Guccione S, Nielsen TK, Ficner R, Schwienhorst A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Preparative Molecular Biology Institute
for Microbiology und Genetics, Goettingen, Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are key enzymes in the transcriptional regulation of
gene expression in eukaryotic cells. In recent years HDACs have attracted
considerable attention as promising new targets in anticancer therapy. Currently,
different histone deacetylase subtypes are divided into four groups denoted as
classes 1-4. Here, we compare in more detail representatives of class 1 HDACs and
FB188 HDAH as a close bacterial homologue of class 2 HDAC6, in regard of
substrate and inhibitor specificity. Structure comparison is used to identify
candidate regions responsible for observed specificity differences. Knowledge of 
these structural elements expedite studies on the biochemical role of different
HDAC subtypes as well as the development of highly selective HDAC inhibitors as
antitumor agents.

PMID: 16567013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Eur J Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;85(3-4):195-202. Epub 2005 Oct 24.

Podosome and sealing zone: specificity of the osteoclast model.

Jurdic P(1), Saltel F, Chabadel A, Destaing O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire UMR 5161 CNRS/ENS, IFR 128
Biosciences, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46 allée d'Italie, F-69007 Lyon,
France. pjurdic@ens-lyon.fr

The bone resorption function of osteoclasts is dependent on the integrity of the 
actin cytoskeleton. Depending on the substratum upon which the osteoclasts are
spread, there are two different structures of actin known as podosomes and the
sealing zone. To understand the specific properties and relationship of podosomes
and the sealing zone, we used live-cell imaging of cultured osteoclasts. When
cultured on extracellular matrix components, podosomes in these cells are
organized in higher-ordered structures. These are clustered podosomes that will
arrange later into dynamic short-lived rings which finally expand to the cell
periphery to form a stable long-lived podosome belt in fully differentiated
cells. In osteoclasts, this specific podosome patterning is under the control of 
microtubules (MTs). Indeed, nocodazole treatment does not affect podosome
formation but only the transition between clusters/rings and belts. During this
transition, MTs accumulate a specific post-translational modification of tubulin 
by acetylation. This process is repressed by an inhibitory pathway involving the 
GTPase Rho, its effector mDIA2 and the recently discovered tubulin deacetylase
HDAC6. The specific function of this acetylation is still unknown but is also
observed in active osteoclasts forming a sealing zone which is also MT dependent.
Thus, it appears that the podosome belt is reminiscent of the sealing zone.
Indeed, podosome belts and sealing zones are characterized by their overall
stability. Despite their similar behavior, a sealing zone is not formed by fusion
of podosomes. The formation of a podosome belt or a sealing zone is controlled by
the external environment. Indeed, only the bone mineral fraction, known as
apatite crystal, is able to induce sealing zone formation in mature osteoclasts. 
Contact of osteoclasts with apatite stimulates the non-receptor tyrosine kinase
c-Src and the GTPase Rho in order to form the sealing zone. As we will discuss in
this review, it appears that podosomes and the sealing zone are strikingly
linked.

PMID: 16546562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Mar;64(3):555-60.

[Predictive factors of hormonal therapy in breast cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Iwase H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Faculty of Medical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University Graduate School of Medicine.

Breast cancer is a hormone-dependent cancer, and the presence of estrogen
receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PgR) in tumors is used clinically to
predict the likelihood of response to hormonal therapies. This review describes
the roles of (1) hormone related factors (ER, PgR, phosphorylated ER, ERbeta,
aromatase), (2) growth related factors (HER2, Ki67, p53), (3) ER cofactors (AIB1,
NcoR1), (4) estrogen dependent genes derived from gene expression profiling
(HDAC6, IGFBP4/5), and (5) gene profiling using cDNA microarray. There are,
however, considerable methodological difficulties in identifying useful
predictive factors but on the basis of current evidence other biomarkers add
little additional information. The prospective and multi-centered analyses will
be warranted to develop the predictive factors for directing use of these
therapies.

PMID: 16529049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(6):2019-28.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce VHL and ubiquitin-independent proteasomal
degradation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha.

Kong X(1), Lin Z, Liang D, Fath D, Sang N, Caro J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardeza Foundation Hematologic Research and Department of Medicine, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Adaptation to hypoxic microenvironment is critical for tumor survival and
metastatic spread. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) plays a key role 
in this adaptation by stimulating the production of proangiogenic factors and
inducing enzymes necessary for anaerobic metabolism. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACIs) produce a marked inhibition of HIF-1alpha expression and are 
currently in clinical trials partly based on their potent antiangiogenic effects.
Although it has been postulated that HDACIs affect HIF-1alpha expression by
enhancing its interactions with VHL (von Hippel Lindau), thus promoting its
ubiquitination and degradation, the actual mechanisms by which HDACIs decrease
HIF-1alpha levels are not clear. Here, we present data indicating that HDACIs
induce the proteasomal degradation of HIF-1alpha by a mechanism that is
independent of VHL and p53 and does not require the ubiquitin system. This
degradation pathway involves the enhanced interaction of HIF-1alpha with HSP70
and is secondary to a disruption of the HSP70/HSP90 axis function that appears
mediated by the activity of HDAC-6.

PMCID: PMC1430285
PMID: 16507982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Mar 3;341(1):45-50. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

Characterization of the two catalytic domains in histone deacetylase 6.

Zou H(1), Wu Y, Navre M, Sang BC.

Author information: 
(1)Takeda San Diego Inc., CA 92121, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is the only known HDAC with two potentially
functional catalytic domains, yet the role towards substrate played by these two 
domains remains ambiguous. Most studies report HDAC6 activities measured using
either immune complexes or in vitro translated products. Here, we characterize
the activity of highly purified recombinant HDAC6, mutants with active site
histidine mutations in each domain (H216A and H611A), and individual catalytic
domains. The deacetylase activities of these proteins, as well as their kinetic
parameters, were measured using histone, alpha-tubulin, and fluorogenic
acetylated lysine as substrates. Mutant H216A only slightly lowers the catalytic 
rate. However, mutant H611A decreases the catalytic rate more than 5000-fold. The
first domain expressed alone is not catalytically active. In contrast, the second
domain shows only a modest decrease in substrate binding and product formation
rate. Our results indicate that the in vitro deacetylase activity of HDAC6
resides in the C-terminal second catalytic domain.

PMID: 16412385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Eur J Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;85(3-4):165-73. Epub 2005 Dec 19.

Assembly and mechanosensory function of focal adhesions: experiments and models.

Bershadsky AD(1), Ballestrem C, Carramusa L, Zilberman Y, Gilquin B, Khochbin S, 
Alexandrova AY, Verkhovsky AB, Shemesh T, Kozlov MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, P.O. 
Box 26, Rehovot 76100, Israel. alexander.bershadsky@weizmann.ac.il

Initial integrin-mediated cell-matrix adhesions (focal complexes) appear
underneath the lamellipodia, in the regions of the "fast" centripetal flow driven
by actin polymerization. Once formed, these adhesions convert the flow behind
them into a "slow", myosin II-driven mode. Some focal complexes then turn into
elongated focal adhesions (FAs) associated with contractile actomyosin bundles
(stress fibers). Myosin II inhibition does not suppress formation of focal
complexes but blocks their conversion into mature FAs and further FA growth.
Application of external pulling force promotes FA growth even under conditions
when myosin II activity is blocked. Thus, individual FAs behave as mechanosensors
responding to the application of force by directional assembly. We proposed a
thermodynamic model for the mechanosensitivity of FAs, taking into account that
an elastic molecular aggregate subject to pulling forces tends to grow in the
direction of force application by incorporating additional subunits. This simple 
model can explain a variety of processes typical of FA behavior. Assembly of FAs 
is triggered by the small G-protein Rho via activation of two major targets,
Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) and the formin homology protein, Dia1. ROCK controls
creation of myosin II-driven forces, while Dia1 is involved in the response of
FAs to these forces. Expression of the active form of Dia1, allows the external
force-induced assembly of mature FAs, even in conditions when Rho is inhibited.
Conversely, downregulation of Dia1 by siRNA prevents FA maturation even if Rho is
activated. Dia1 and other formins cap barbed (fast growing) ends of actin
filaments, allowing insertion of the new actin monomers. We suggested a novel
mechanism of such "leaky" capping based on an assumption of elasticity of the
formin/barbed end complex. Our model predicts that formin-mediated actin
polymerization should be greatly enhanced by application of external pulling
force. Thus, the formin-actin complex might represent an elementary
mechanosensing device responding to force by enhancement of actin assembly. In
addition to its role in actin polymerization, Dia1 seems to be involved in
formation of links between actin filaments and microtubules affecting microtubule
dynamics. Alpha-tubulin deacetylase HDAC6 cooperates with Dia1 in formation of
such links. Since microtubules are known to promote FA disassembly, the
Dia1-mediated effect on microtubule dynamics may possibly play a role in the
negative feedback loop controlling size and turnover of FAs.

PMID: 16360240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2005 Nov;56 Suppl 1:27-31.

Estrogen signaling and prediction of endocrine therapy.

Hayashi S(1), Yamaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, School of Medicine, Course of Health
Sciences, Tohoku University, 2-1 Seiryou-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan.
shayashi@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Estrogen plays an important role in the growth and progression of human breast
cancer. Understanding the whole picture of estrogen signaling is a very important
goal towards clarifying the biology of this disease. On the other hand, hormonal 
therapy for breast cancer has been progressing rapidly with the advent of drugs
such as selective estrogen receptor (ER) modulators and aromatase inhibitors.
Prediction of individual response to these hormonal therapies is becoming
important for the management of breast cancer patients. To help address these
basic and clinical issues, we are developing several new tools such as the
focused microarray and the green fluorescent protein-reporter cell system. We
first carried out expression profiling of approximately 10,000 genes in
ER-positive breast cancer cells. Based on the results, estrogen-responsive genes 
(ERG) were selected and a custom-made cDNA microarray consisting of 200 genes
from a narrowed-down subset was produced. Using this microarray, we investigated 
various aspects of estrogen signaling such as the effect of estrogen-antagonists 
on ERG expression profile and functional analysis of ERbeta and novel estrogen
responsive gene EGR3. Furthermore, expression levels of several candidate genes
selected from the custom-array contents were analyzed by real-time RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry using breast cancer tissues to determine novel predictive
factors for responsiveness to hormone therapy in primary breast cancer patients. 
Expression of several genes, such as HDAC6, significantly correlated with
disease-free and overall survival of patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen
therapy. We are currently developing a new tool for analyzing the effects of
novel aromatase inhibitors in individual breast cancer patients using
estrogen-responsive element-green fluorescent protein-indicator cells. We hope
that these approaches may provide not only new clues for elucidation of
estrogen-dependent growth mechanisms of cancer, but also clinical benefits to
patients by assessment of individual responses to endocrine therapy.

PMID: 16273356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 3;281(5):2401-4. Epub 2005 Nov 6.

Two catalytic domains are required for protein deacetylation.

Zhang Y(1), Gilquin B, Khochbin S, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, P. O. Box 2543, Maulbeerstrasse 66, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC)-6 was recently identified as a dual substrate,
possibly multisubstrate, deacetylase that can act both on acetylated histone
tails and on alpha-tubulin acetylated on Lys40. HDAC-6 is unique among
deacetylases in having two hdac domains, and we have used this enzyme as a useful
model to dissect the structural requirements for the deacetylation reaction. In
this report, we show that both hdac domains are required for the intact
deacetylase activity of HDAC-6 in vitro and in vivo. The spatial arrangement of
these two domains in HDAC-6 is essential and alteration of the linker region
between the two domains severely affects the catalytic activity. Artificial
chimeric HDACs, made by replacing the hdac domains in HDAC-6 with corresponding
domains from other class II HDACs, show de novo deacetylase activity. Taken
together, our results demonstrate for the first time that the spatial arrangement
of hdac domains is critical for in vivo deacetylation reaction and may provide a 
useful model for the development of novel HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 16272578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Trends Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;15(11):565-7. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

Modulating molecular chaperone Hsp90 functions through reversible acetylation.

Aoyagi S(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Section, Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, 111 Alexander Drive, P.O. Box 12233, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA.

The molecular chaperone protein Hsp90 is a key regulator of approximately 100
'client' proteins crucial for numerous cell signaling processes. Consequently,
understanding the molecular underpinnings that regulate Hsp90 activity is an
important biological endeavor. Exciting new results now suggest that, at least
for nuclear receptor activity, Hsp90 function is directly regulated by histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). These observations have consequences for various
biological processes and potentially important implications for the development
of cancer therapeutics.

PMID: 16199163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 2;280(48):40282-92. Epub 2005 Sep 28.

HDAC6 and microtubules are required for autophagic degradation of aggregated
huntingtin.

Iwata A(1), Riley BE, Johnston JA, Kopito RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, BIO-X Program, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 94305-5430, USA.

CNS neurons are endowed with the ability to recover from cytotoxic insults
associated with the accumulation of proteinaceous polyglutamine aggregates via a 
process that appears to involve capture and degradation of aggregates by
autophagy. The ubiquitin-proteasome system protects cells against proteotoxicity 
by degrading soluble monomeric misfolded aggregation-prone proteins but is
ineffective against, and impaired by, non-native protein oligomers. Here we show 
that autophagy is induced in response to impaired ubiquitin proteasome system
activity. We show that ATG proteins, molecular determinants of autophagic vacuole
formation, and lysosomes are recruited to pericentriolar cytoplasmic inclusion
bodies by a process requiring an intact microtubule cytoskeleton and the
cytoplasmic deacetylase HDAC6. These data suggest that HDAC6-dependent retrograde
transport on microtubules is used by cells to increase the efficiency and
selectivity of autophagic degradation.

PMID: 16192271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 18;280(46):38879-87. Epub 2005 Sep 26.

Histone acetylation-independent effect of histone deacetylase inhibitors on Akt
through the reshuffling of protein phosphatase 1 complexes.

Chen CS(1), Weng SC, Tseng PH, Lin HP, Chen CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Despite advances in understanding the role of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in
tumorigenesis, the mechanism by which HDAC inhibitors mediate antineoplastic
effects remains elusive. Modifications of the histone code alone are not
sufficient to account for the antitumor effect of HDAC inhibitors. The present
study demonstrates a novel histone acetylation-independent mechanism by which
HDAC inhibitors cause Akt dephosphorylation in U87MG glioblastoma and PC-3
prostate cancer cells by disrupting HDAC-protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) complexes.
Of four HDAC inhibitors examined, trichostatin A (TSA) and HDAC42 exhibit the
highest activity in down-regulating phospho-Akt, followed by suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid, whereas MS-275 shows only a marginal effect at 5 microm. This
differential potency parallels the respective activities in inducing tubulin
acetylation, a non-histone substrate for HDAC6. Evidence indicates that this Akt 
dephosphorylation is not mediated through deactivation of upstream kinases or
activation of downstream phosphatases. However, the effect of TSA on phospho-Akt 
can be rescued by PP1 inhibition but not that of protein phosphatase 2A.
Immunochemical analyses reveal that TSA blocks specific interactions of PP1 with 
HDACs 1 and 6, resulting in increased PP1-Akt association. Moreover, we used
isozyme-specific small interfering RNAs to confirm the role of HDACs 1 and 6 as
key mediators in facilitating Akt dephosphorylation. The selective action of HDAC
inhibitors on HDAC-PP1 complexes represents the first example of modulating
specific PP1 interactions by small molecule agents. From a clinical perspective, 
identification of this PP1-facilitated dephosphorylation mechanism underscores
the potential use of HDAC inhibitors in lowering the apoptosis threshold for
other therapeutic agents through Akt down-regulation.

PMID: 16186112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Nov;16(11):5445-54. Epub 2005 Sep 7.

Histone deacetylase 6 regulates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection.

Valenzuela-Fernández A(1), Alvarez S, Gordon-Alonso M, Barrero M, Ursa A, Cabrero
JR, Fernández G, Naranjo-Suárez S, Yáñez-Mo M, Serrador JM, Muñoz-Fernández MA,
Sánchez-Madrid F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, 28006 Madrid, 
Spain.

Efficient human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection depends on multiple
interactions between the viral gp41/gp120 envelope (Env) proteins and cell
surface receptors. However, cytoskeleton-associated proteins that modify membrane
dynamics may also regulate the formation of the HIV-mediated fusion pore and
hence viral infection. Because the effects of HDAC6-tubulin deacetylase on
cortical alpha-tubulin regulate cell migration and immune synapse organization,
we explored the possible role of HDAC6 in HIV-1-envelope-mediated cell fusion and
infection. The binding of the gp120 protein to CD4+-permissive cells increased
the level of acetylated alpha-tubulin in a CD4-dependent manner. Furthermore,
overexpression of active HDAC6 inhibited the acetylation of alpha-tubulin, and
remarkably, prevented HIV-1 envelope-dependent cell fusion and infection without 
affecting the expression and codistribution of HIV-1 receptors. In contrast,
knockdown of HDAC6 expression or inhibition of its tubulin deacetylase activity
strongly enhanced HIV-1 infection and syncytia formation. These results
demonstrate that HDAC6 plays a significant role in regulating HIV-1 infection and
Env-mediated syncytia formation.

PMCID: PMC1266439
PMID: 16148047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Genomics. 2005 Nov;86(5):606-17. Epub 2005 Aug 31.

Individual histone deacetylases in Drosophila modulate transcription of distinct 
genes.

Cho Y(1), Griswold A, Campbell C, Min KT.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Branch, MSC 3705, Building 35, Room 2A1002, National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Lysine residues on the N-terminal tails of histones in chromatin are the primary 
targets of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) in 
eukaryotes. Regulation of histone acetylation by these two classes of enzymes
plays significant roles in controlling transcriptional activity in cells.
Eukaryotic organisms have several different HDACs, but the biological roles of
each HDAC are still not clear. To understand the physiological functions of
HDACs, we characterized six different Drosophila HDACs, including Rpd3, HDAC3,
HDAC4, HDAC6-S, HDAC6-L, and Sir2, by developmental expression pattern,
transcriptional profiles of target genes, and sensitivity to HDAC inhibitors. We 
found that each HDAC has a distinct temporal expression pattern and regulates
transcription of a unique set of genes. Furthermore, we demonstrated differential
sensitivity of HDACs to inhibitors. These results show that each individual HDAC 
plays different roles in regulating genes involved in various biological
processes.

PMID: 16137856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Leukemia. 2005 Oct;19(10):1751-9.

Histone deacetylases in acute myeloid leukaemia show a distinctive pattern of
expression that changes selectively in response to deacetylase inhibitors.

Bradbury CA(1), Khanim FL, Hayden R, Bunce CM, White DA, Drayson MT, Craddock C, 
Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham Medical School,
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) are a new class of drugs with significant
antileukemic activity. To explore mechanisms of disease-specific HDI activity in 
acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), we have characterised expression of all 18 members
of the histone deacetylase family in primary AML blasts and in four control cell 
types, namely CD34+ progenitors from umbilical cord, either quiescent or cycling 
(post-culture), cycling CD34+ progenitors from GCSF-stimulated adult donors and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Only SIRT1 was consistently overexpressed (>2
fold) in AML samples compared with all controls, while HDAC6 was overexpressed
relative to adult, but not neo-natal cells. HDAC5 and SIRT4 were consistently
underexpressed. AML blasts and cell lines, exposed to HDIs in culture, showed
both histone hyperacetylation and, unexpectedly, specific hypermethylation of H3 
lysine 4. Such treatment also modulated the pattern of HDAC expression, with
strong induction of HDAC11 in all myeloid cells tested and with all inhibitors
(valproate, butyrate, TSA, SAHA), and lesser, more selective, induction of HDAC9 
and SIRT4. The distinct pattern of HDAC expression in AML and its response to
HDIs is of relevance to the development of HDI-based therapeutic strategies and
may contribute to observed patterns of clinical response and development of drug 
resistance.

PMID: 16121216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 7;280(40):33792-9. Epub 2005 Aug 8.

Regulation of the dynamics of hsp90 action on the glucocorticoid receptor by
acetylation/deacetylation of the chaperone.

Murphy PJ(1), Morishima Y, Kovacs JJ, Yao TP, Pratt WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

It is known that inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) leads to acetylation 
of the abundant protein chaperone hsp90. In a recent study, we have shown that
knockdown of HDAC6 by a specific small interfering RNA leads to hyperacetylation 
of hsp90 and that the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), an established hsp90 "client"
protein, is defective in ligand binding, nuclear translocation, and gene
activation in HDAC6-deficient cells (Kovacs, J. J., Murphy, P. J. M., Gaillard,
S., Zhao, X., Wu, J-T., Nicchitta, C. V., Yoshida, M., Toft, D. O., Pratt, W. B.,
and Yao, T-P. (2005) Mol. Cell 18, 601-607). Using human embryonic kidney
wild-type and HDAC6 (small interfering RNA) knockdown cells transiently
expressing the mouse GR, we show here that the intrinsic properties of the
receptor protein itself are not affected by HDAC6 knockdown, but the knockdown
cytosol has a markedly decreased ability to assemble stable GR.hsp90
heterocomplexes and generate stable steroid binding activity under cell-free
conditions. HDAC6 knockdown cytosol has the same ability to carry out dynamic
GR.hsp90 heterocomplex assembly as wild-type cytosol. Addition of purified hsp90 
to HDAC6 knockdown cytosol restores stable GR.hsp90 heterocomplex assembly to the
level of wild-type cytosol. hsp90 from HDAC6 knockdown cytosol has decreased
ATP-binding affinity, and it does not assemble stable GR.hsp90 heterocomplexes
when it is a component of a purified five-protein assembly system. Incubation of 
knockdown cell hsp90 with purified HDAC6 converts the hsp90 to wild-type
behavior. Thus, acetylation of hsp90 results in dynamic GR.hsp90 heterocomplex
assembly/disassembly, and this is manifest in the cell as a approximately
100-fold shift to the right in the steroid dose response for gene activation.

PMID: 16087666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Cell Sci. 2005 Jul 1;118(Pt 13):2901-11.

A novel Rho-mDia2-HDAC6 pathway controls podosome patterning through microtubule 
acetylation in osteoclasts.

Destaing O(1), Saltel F, Gilquin B, Chabadel A, Khochbin S, Ory S, Jurdic P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 5665 CNRS/ENS, INRA
913, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46, allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon Cedex 7,
France.

Osteoclast maturation is accompanied by changes in podosome patterning, resulting
in the formation of a peripheral belt, which requires an intact microtubule
network. Here, we report that by inhibiting Rho, the podosome belt is maintained 
at the cell periphery despite depolymerisation of microtubules by nocodazole. Rho
inhibition was correlated to the increase in microtubule stabilisation and
microtubule acetylation. By microinjecting activated Rho or its activated
effector mDia2 in osteoclasts, we found that the podosome belt was disrupted and 
the level of microtubule acetylation dramatically decreased. We further
characterised the molecular mechanism responsible for microtubule deacetylation
by co-immunoprecipitation experiments. We found that not only was mDia2
coprecipitating with the recently identified microtubule deacetylase HDAC6 but
that it also activated the microtubule deacetylase activity of HDAC6 in an in
vitro deacetylase assay. Finally, we found that during osteoclastogenesis, there 
is a correlation between the increase in microtubule acetylation and the podosome
belt stabilisation and that if Rho is inhibited in the early stages of osteoclast
differentiation, it accelerates both microtubule acetylation and podosome belt
stabilisation. Altogether, our data reveal a pathway in which Rho interferes with
the osteoclast maturation process by controlling the level of microtubule
acetylation and actin organisation through mDIA2 and HDAC6.

PMID: 15976449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jun 28;102(26):9394-9. Epub 2005 Jun 20.

Human thiopurine S-methyltransferase pharmacogenetics: variant allozyme
misfolding and aggresome formation.

Wang L(1), Nguyen TV, McLaughlin RW, Sikkink LA, Ramirez-Alvarado M, Weinshilboum
RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) catalyzes the S-methylation of thiopurine
drugs. TPMT genetic polymorphisms represent a striking example of the potential
clinical value of pharmacogenetics. Subjects homozygous for TPMT*3A, the most
common variant allele for low activity, an allele that encodes a protein with two
changes in amino acid sequence, are at greatly increased risk for
life-threatening toxicity when treated with standard doses of thiopurines. These 
subjects have virtually undetectable levels of TPMT protein. In this study, we
tested the hypothesis that TPMT*3A might result in protein misfolding and
aggregation. We observed that TPMT*3A forms aggresomes in cultured cells and that
it aggregates in vitro, functional mechanisms not previously described in
pharmacogenetics. Furthermore, there was a correlation among TPMT half-life
values in rabbit reticulocyte lysate, aggresome formation in COS-1 cells, and
protein aggregation in vitro for the three variant allozymes encoded by alleles
that include the two TPMT*3A single-nucleotide polymorphisms. These observations 
were compatible with a common structural explanation for all of these effects, a 
conclusion supported by size-exclusion chromatography and CD spectroscopy. The
results of these experiments provide insight into a unique pharmacogenetic
mechanism by which common polymorphisms affect TPMT protein function and, as a
result, therapeutic response to thiopurine drugs.

PMCID: PMC1153717
PMID: 15967990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 22;280(29):26729-34. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 acetylates and disrupts the chaperone
function of heat shock protein 90: a novel basis for antileukemia activity of
histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Bali P(1), Pranpat M, Bradner J, Balasis M, Fiskus W, Guo F, Rocha K, Kumaraswamy
S, Boyapalle S, Atadja P, Seto E, Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa,
Florida 33612, USA.

The hydroxamic acid (HAA) analogue pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
(HDIs) LAQ824 and LBH589 have been shown to induce acetylation and inhibit the
ATP binding and chaperone function of heat shock protein (HSP) 90. This promotes 
the polyubiquitylation and degradation of the pro-growth and pro-survival client 
proteins Bcr-Abl, mutant FLT-3, c-Raf, and AKT in human leukemia cells. HDAC6 is 
a member of the class IIB HDACs. It is predominantly cytosolic,
microtubule-associated alpha-tubulin deacetylase that is also known to promote
aggresome inclusion of the misfolded polyubiquitylated proteins. Here we
demonstrate that in the Bcr-abl oncogene expressing human leukemia K562 cells,
HDAC6 can be co-immunoprecipitated with HSP90, and the knock-down of HDAC6 by its
siRNA induced the acetylation of HSP90 and alpha-tubulin. Depletion of HDAC6
levels also inhibited the binding of HSP90 to ATP, reduced the chaperone
association of HSP90 with its client proteins, e.g. Bcr-Abl, and induced
polyubiquitylation and partial depletion of Bcr-Abl. Conversely, the ectopic
overexpression of HDAC6 inhibited LAQ824-induced acetylation of HSP90 and
alpha-tubulin and reduced LAQ824-mediated depletion of Bcr-Abl, AKT, and c-Raf.
Collectively, these findings indicate that HDAC6 is also an HSP90 deacetylase.
Targeted inhibition of HDAC6 leads to acetylation of HSP90 and disruption of its 
chaperone function, resulting in polyubiquitylation and depletion of pro-growth
and pro-survival HSP90 client proteins including Bcr-Abl. Depletion of HDAC6
sensitized human leukemia cells to HAA-HDIs and proteasome inhibitors.

PMID: 15937340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jun 14;102(24):8567-72. Epub 2005 Jun 3.

Small-molecule inhibition of proteasome and aggresome function induces
synergistic antitumor activity in multiple myeloma.

Hideshima T(1), Bradner JE, Wong J, Chauhan D, Richardson P, Schreiber SL,
Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

We have shown that the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (formerly known as PS-341)
triggers significant antitumor activity in multiple myeloma (MM) in both
preclinical models and patients with relapsed refractory disease. Recent studies 
have shown that unfolded and misfolded ubiquitinated proteins are degraded not
only by proteasomes, but also by aggresomes, dependent on histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6) activity. We therefore hypothesized that inhibition of both mechanisms of
protein catabolism could induce accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins followed
by significant cell stress and cytotoxicity in MM cells. To prove this
hypothesis, we used bortezomib and tubacin to inhibit the proteasome and HDAC6,
respectively. Tubacin specifically triggers acetylation of alpha-tubulin as a
result of HDAC6 inhibition in a dose- and time-dependent fashion. It induces
cytotoxicity in MM cells at 72 h with an IC50 of 5-20 microM, which is mediated
by caspase-dependent apoptosis; no toxicity is observed in normal peripheral
blood mononuclear cells. Tubacin inhibits the interaction of HDAC6 with dynein
and induces marked accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins. It synergistically
augments bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity by c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase/caspase
activation. Importantly, this combination also induces significant cytotoxicity
in plasma cells isolated from MM patient bone marrow. Finally, adherence of MM
cells to bone marrow stromal cells confers growth and resistance to conventional 
treatments; in contrast, the combination of tubacin and bortezomib triggers
toxicity even in adherent MM cells. Our studies therefore demonstrate that
tubacin combined with bortezomib mediates significant anti-MM activity, providing
the framework for clinical evaluation of combined therapy to improve patient
outcome in MM.

PMCID: PMC1150844
PMID: 15937109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Cell. 2005 May 27;18(5):601-7.

HDAC6 regulates Hsp90 acetylation and chaperone-dependent activation of
glucocorticoid receptor.

Kovacs JJ(1), Murphy PJ, Gaillard S, Zhao X, Wu JT, Nicchitta CV, Yoshida M, Toft
DO, Pratt WB, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

The molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and its accessory
cochaperones function by facilitating the structural maturation and complex
assembly of client proteins, including steroid hormone receptors and selected
kinases. By promoting the activity and stability of these signaling proteins,
Hsp90 has emerged as a critical modulator in cell signaling. Here, we present
evidence that Hsp90 chaperone activity is regulated by reversible acetylation and
controlled by the deacetylase HDAC6. We show that HDAC6 functions as an Hsp90
deacetylase. Inactivation of HDAC6 leads to Hsp90 hyperacetylation, its
dissociation from an essential cochaperone, p23, and a loss of chaperone
activity. In HDAC6-deficient cells, Hsp90-dependent maturation of the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is compromised, resulting in GR defective in ligand 
binding, nuclear translocation, and transcriptional activation. Our results
identify Hsp90 as a target of HDAC6 and suggest reversible acetylation as a
unique mechanism that regulates Hsp90 chaperone complex activity.

PMID: 15916966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cancer Res. 2005 May 1;65(9):3883-93.

The synergistic combination of the farnesyl transferase inhibitor lonafarnib and 
paclitaxel enhances tubulin acetylation and requires a functional tubulin
deacetylase.

Marcus AI(1), Zhou J, O'Brate A, Hamel E, Wong J, Nivens M, El-Naggar A, Yao TP, 
Khuri FR, Giannakakou P.

Author information: 
(1)Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

Farnesyl transferase (FT) inhibitors (FTI) are anticancer agents developed to
target oncogenic Ras proteins by inhibiting Ras farnesylation. FTIs potently
synergize with paclitaxel and other microtubule-stabilizing drugs; however, the
mechanistic basis underlying this synergistic interaction remains elusive. Here
we show that the FTI lonafarnib affects the microtubule cytoskeleton resulting in
microtubule bundle formation, increased microtubule stabilization and
acetylation, and suppression of microtubule dynamics. Notably, treatment with the
combination of low doses of lonafarnib with paclitaxel markedly enhanced tubulin 
acetylation (a marker of microtubule stability) as compared with either drug
alone. This synergistic effect correlated with FT inhibition and was accompanied 
by a synergistic increase in mitotic arrest and cell death. Mechanistically, we
show that the combination of lonafarnib and paclitaxel inhibits the in vitro
deacetylating activity of the only known tubulin deacetylase, histone deacetylase
6 (HDAC6). In addition, the lonafarnib/taxane combination is synergistic only in 
cells lines expressing the wild-type HDAC6, but not a catalytic-mutant HDAC6,
revealing that functional HDAC6 is required for the synergy of lonafarnib with
taxanes. Furthermore, tubacin, a specific HDAC6 inhibitor, synergistically
enhanced tubulin acetylation in combination with paclitaxel, similar to the
combination of lonafarnib and paclitaxel. Taken together, these data suggest a
relationship between FT inhibition, HDAC6 function, and cell death, providing
insight into the putative molecular basis of the lonafarnib/taxane synergistic
antiproliferative combination.

PMCID: PMC1861827
PMID: 15867388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 30;24(28):4531-9.

Significance of HDAC6 regulation via estrogen signaling for cell motility and
prognosis in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Saji S(1), Kawakami M, Hayashi S, Yoshida N, Hirose M, Horiguchi S, Itoh A,
Funata N, Schreiber SL, Yoshida M, Toi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Trials and Research, Breast Surgery, Tokyo Metropolitan
Komagome Hospital, Honkomagome, Tokyo, Japan. ss-saji@wa2.so-net.ne.jp

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) 6 is a subtype of the HDAC family; it deacetylates
alpha-tubulin and increases cell motility. Here, we investigate the impact of an 
alteration of HDAC6 expression in estrogen receptor alpha (ER)-positive breast
cancer MCF-7 cells, as we identified that HDAC6 is a novel estrogen-regulated
gene. MCF-7 treated with estradiol showed increased expression of HDAC6 mRNA and 
protein and a four-fold increase in cell motility in a migration assay. Cell
motility was increased to the same degree by stably transfecting the HDAC6
expression vector into MCF-7 cells. In both cases, the cells changed in
appearance from their original round shape to an axon-extended shape, like a
neuronal cell. This HDAC6 accumulation caused the deacetylation of alpha-tubulin.
Either the selective estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen (TAM) or the pure
antiestrogen ICI 182,780 prevented estradiol-induced HDAC6 accumulation and
deacetylation of alpha-tubulin, leading to reduced cell motility. Tubacin, an
inhibitory molecule that binds to the tubulin deacetylation domain of HDAC6, also
prevented estradiol-stimulated cell migration. Finally, we evaluated HDAC6
protein expression in 139 consecutively archived human breast cancer tissues by
immunohistochemical staining. The prognostic analyses for these patients revealed
no significant differences based on HDAC6 expression. However, subset analysis of
ER-positive patients who received adjuvant treatment with TAM (n = 67) showed a
statistically significant difference in relapse-free survival and overall
survival in favor of the HDAC6-positive group (P < 0.02 and P < 0.05,
respectively). HDAC6 expression was an independent prognostic indicator by
multivariate analysis (odds ratio = 2.82, P = 0.047). These results indicate the 
biological significance of HDAC6 regulation via estrogen signaling.

PMID: 15806142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Oncogene. 2005 May 19;24(22):3619-31.

Differential roles for the coactivators CBP and p300 on TCF/beta-catenin-mediated
survivin gene expression.

Ma H(1), Nguyen C, Lee KS, Kahn M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Chemical Genomics, 600
Broadway, Suite 580, Seattle, WA 98122, USA.

The inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) protein survivin is highly expressed in cancers,
but not in normal differentiated tissues. TCF/beta-catenin signaling has been
reported to participate in the regulation of survivin transcription in colon
cancer. We have recently characterized ICG-001, a small molecule specific
inhibitor of the beta-catenin/Creb-binding protein (CBP) interaction. Inhibition 
of the beta-catenin/CBP interaction represses a subset of
TCF/beta-catenin-mediated transcription. ICG-001 potently inhibits survivin gene 
transcription and expression. ICG-001-mediated downregulation of survivin
expression enhanced caspase-3 activity and apoptosis, which was rescued by
overexpression of wild type but not mutant (C84A) survivin. Small interfering RNA
and genetic reduction of CBP also decreased survivin expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that CBP is the crucial coactivator for
TCF/beta-catenin-mediated survivin transcription. Furthermore, ICG-001-induced
recruitment of p300 to the survivin promoter led to concomitant recruitment of
SUMO-1, HDAC6 and PML proteins, which have been associated with transcriptional
repression. These findings demonstrate that CBP and p300 play very distinct roles
in survivin gene transcription.

PMID: 15782138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. FASEB J. 2005 Jun;19(8):966-8. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

Histone deacetylase HDAC8 associates with smooth muscle alpha-actin and is
essential for smooth muscle cell contractility.

Waltregny D(1), Glénisson W, Tran SL, North BJ, Verdin E, Colige A, Castronovo V.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
david.waltregny@ulg.ac.be

Although originally characterized as nuclear enzymes controlling the stability of
nucleosomes, histone deacetylases (HDACs) may also exert their activity within
the cytosol. Recently, we have demonstrated that HDAC8, a class I HDAC, is a
novel, prominently cytosolic marker of smooth muscle differentiation. As HDAC8
displays a striking stress fiber-like pattern of distribution and is coexpressed 
in vivo with smooth muscle alpha-actin (alpha-SMA) and smooth muscle myosin heavy
chain, we have explored the possible participation of this HDAC in smooth muscle 
cytoskeleton regulation. Cell fractionation assays performed with primary human
smooth muscle cells (HSMCs) showed that HDAC8, in contrast to HDAC1 and HDAC3,
was enriched in cytoskeleton-bound protein fractions and insoluble cell pellets, 
suggesting an association of HDAC8 with the cystoskeleton. Coimmunoprecipitation 
experiments using HSMCs, NIH-3T3 cells, and human prostate tissue lysates further
demonstrated that HDAC8 associates with alpha-SMA but not with beta-actin. HDAC8 
silencing through RNA interference strongly reduced the capacity of HSMCs to
contract collagen lattices. Mock transfections had no effect on HSMC contractily,
and transfections with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) specific for HDAC6, a
cytosolic HDAC that functions as an alpha-tubulin deacetylase, resulted in a weak
contraction inhibition. Although mock- and HDAC6 siRNA-transfected HSMCs showed
no noticeable morphological changes, HDAC8 siRNA-transfected HSMCs displayed a
size reduction with diminished cell spreading after replating. Altogether, our
findings indicate that HDAC8 associates with the smooth muscle actin cytoskeleton
and may regulate the contractile capacity of smooth muscle cells.

PMID: 15772115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Med Chem. 2004 Dec 2;47(25):6292-8.

An in silico approach to discovering novel inhibitors of human sirtuin type 2.

Tervo AJ(1), Kyrylenko S, Niskanen P, Salminen A, Leppänen J, Nyrönen TH,
Järvinen T, Poso A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kuopio, P.O. Box 1627,
70211 Kuopio, Finland. anu.tervo@csc.fi

Type 2 human sirtuin (SIRT2) is a NAD(+)-dependent cytoplasmic protein that is
colocalized with HDAC6 on microtubules. SIRT2 has been shown to deacetylate
alpha-tubulin and to control mitotic exit in the cell cycle. To date, some small 
molecular inhibitors of SIRT2 have been identified; however, more inhibitors are 
still needed to improve the understanding of SIRT2 biological function and to
discover its possible therapeutic indications. In this paper, an in silico
identification procedure is described for discovering novel SIRT2 inhibitors.
Molecular modeling and virtual screening were utilized to find potential
compounds, which were then subjected to experimental tests for their SIRT2
inhibitory activity. Five of the 15 compounds tested in vitro showed inhibitory
activity toward SIRT2, yielding a hit ratio of 33% in a micromolar level and thus
demonstrating the usefulness of this procedure in finding new bioactive
compounds. Two of the five compounds yielded in vitro IC(50) values of 56.7 and
74.3 microM, and these can be considered as novel inhibitors of SIRT2. On the
basis of our results, a phenol moiety on the active compound is suggested to be
important for SIRT2 inhibitory activity. This phenol group, together with a
hydrophobic moiety and hydrogen-bonding features, is suggested to form an active 
SIRT2 pharmacophore.

PMID: 15566299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 15;10(20):6962-8.

HDAC6 expression is correlated with better survival in breast cancer.

Zhang Z(1), Yamashita H, Toyama T, Sugiura H, Omoto Y, Ando Y, Mita K, Hamaguchi 
M, Hayashi S, Iwase H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Nagoya City University Hospital,
Nagoya, Japan.

PURPOSE: The structure and function of chromatin can be altered by modifications 
to histone. Histone acetylation in vivo is a dynamic reversible process governed 
by histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs). HDAC6 is a
unique isoform among the HDACs, and a gene expression pattern study, with cDNA
microarray in MCF-7 cells, showed the HDAC6 gene to be late responsive, estrogen 
induced, and up-regulated. This led us to hypothesize that there was a link
between levels of HDAC6 expression and the metastatic potential of breast cancer 
and also, therefore, the prognosis of these patients.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In the present study, the level of HDAC6 mRNA expression was
analyzed with quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR, in 135 female
patients with invasive breast cancer. HDAC6 protein expression was also
determined by immunohistochemistry. An association was sought between HDAC6
expression and various clinicopathologic factors.
RESULTS: HDAC6 mRNA was expressed at significantly higher levels in breast cancer
patients with small tumors measuring less than 2 cm, with low histologic grade,
and in estrogen receptor alpha- and progesterone receptor-positive tumors. By
contrast, no relationship was found between HDAC6 mRNA expression and any of the 
other clinicopathologic factors, namely, age, menopausal status, and axillary
lymph node involvement. Patients expressing high levels of HDAC6 mRNA and protein
had a better prognosis than those expressing low levels, in terms of disease-free
survival. However, multivariate analysis failed to show that HDAC6 mRNA and
protein are an independent prognostic factors for disease-free survival and
overall survival. Furthermore, the patients with high levels of HDAC6 mRNA tended
to be more responsive to endocrine treatment than those with low levels. Specific
HDAC6 staining was found in the nucleus of some normal epithelial cells and in
the cytoplasm of the majority of cancer cells. Although postmenopausal patients
showed higher HDAC6 protein expression, there were no relationship between
protein expression and any other clinicopathologic factors.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the levels of HDAC6 mRNA expression may have
potential both as a marker of endocrine responsiveness and also as a prognostic
indicator in breast cancer. Additional investigations are warranted concerning
the relationship between HDAC6 expression and response to endocrine therapy.

PMID: 15501975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 12;279(46):48246-54. Epub 2004 Sep 3.

Role of the tetradecapeptide repeat domain of human histone deacetylase 6 in
cytoplasmic retention.

Bertos NR(1), Gilquin B, Chan GK, Yen TJ, Khochbin S, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Department of Medicine, McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A1, Canada.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) contains tandem catalytic domains and a
ubiquitin-binding zinc finger and displays deacetylase activity toward acetylated
microtubules. Here we show that unlike its orthologs from Caenorhabditis elegans,
Drosophila, and mouse, human HDAC6 possesses a tetradecapeptide repeat domain
located between the second deacetylase domain and the C-terminal
ubiquitin-binding motif. Related to this structural difference, the cytoplasmic
localization of human, but not murine, HDAC6 is resistant to treatment with
leptomycin B (LMB). Although it is dispensable for the deacetylase and ubiquitin 
binding activities of human HDAC6, the tetradecapeptide repeat domain displays
acetyl-microtubule targeting ability. Moreover, it forms a unique structure and
is required for the LMB-resistant cytoplasmic localization of human HDAC6.
Besides the tetradecapeptide repeat domain, human HDAC6 possesses two
LMB-sensitive nuclear export signals and a nuclear localization signal. These
results thus indicate that the cytoplasmic localization for murine and human
HDAC6 proteins is differentially regulated and suggest that the tetradecapeptide 
repeat domain serves as an important sequence element to stably retain human
HDAC6 in the cytoplasm.

PMID: 15347674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biochemistry. 2004 Aug 31;43(34):11083-91.

Kinetics and comparative reactivity of human class I and class IIb histone
deacetylases.

Schultz BE(1), Misialek S, Wu J, Tang J, Conn MT, Tahilramani R, Wong L.

Author information: 
(1)Celera, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, California 94080, USA.
brian.schultz@celera.com

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes modulate gene expression through the
deacetylation of acetylated lysine residues on histone proteins. They operate in 
biological systems as part of multiprotein corepressor complexes. To understand
the reactivity of isolated HDACs and the contribution of cofactor binding to
reactivity, the reaction kinetics of isolated, recombinant human HDACs 1, 2, 3,
6, 8, and 10 were measured using a novel, continuous protease-coupled enzyme
assay. Values of k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m) and the pH dependence of these values
were determined for the reactions of each isozyme with
acetyl-Gly-Ala-(N(epsilon)-acetyl-Lys)-AMC. Values of k(cat) spanned the range of
0.006-2.8 s(-1), and k(cat)/K(m) values ranged from 60 to 110000 M(-1) s(-1). The
pH profiles for both k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m) were bell-shaped for all of the HDAC 
isozymes, with pH optima at approximately pH 8. Values of K(i) for the inhibitor 
trichostatin A were determined for each isozyme. The inhibition constants were
generally similar for all HDAC isozymes, except that the value for HDAC8 was
significantly higher than that for the other isozymes. The reaction of HDAC8 with
an alternative substrate was performed to assess the steric requirements of the
HDAC8 active site, and the effect of phosphorylation on HDAC1 activity was
examined. The results are discussed in terms of the biological roles of the HDAC 
enzymes and the proposed reaction mechanism of acetyllysine hydrolysis by these
enzymes.

PMID: 15323567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cancer Sci. 2004 Jun;95(6):496-502.

Prediction of prognosis of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer with
combination of selected estrogen-regulated genes.

Yoshida N(1), Omoto Y, Inoue A, Eguchi H, Kobayashi Y, Kurosumi M, Saji S,
Suemasu K, Okazaki T, Nakachi K, Fujita T, Hayashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute, Saitama
Cancer Center Hospital, Kita-Adachi-gun, Saitama 362-0806, Japan.

Estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer is a distinct subpopulation of
breast cancer exhibiting a high response rate to endocrine therapy. However, not 
all ER-positive patients respond to the therapy, and a subgrouping of ER-positive
patients based on the physiology of estrogen signaling is expected to be useful
for predicting the prognosis. This study has revealed that selected
estrogen-regulated genes (ERGs) are useful in identification of a poor-prognosis 
population among ER-positive breast cancer patients. First, the expression levels
of 11 ERGs, selected based on our earlier microarray study in cultured cells,
were analyzed by means of real-time reverse transcription-PCR in 14 ER-positive
human breast cancer tissues. The patients were clearly divided into two groups in
cluster analysis. Then, we examined the expression levels of two representative
ERGs, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and insulin-like growth factor binding
protein 4 (IGFBP-4), in 62 ER-positive patients with immunohistochemistry to
assess the impact of ERG expression on prognosis (median follow-up 4409 days).
Positive HDAC6 staining was significantly correlated with a lower disease-free
survival rate. Moreover, when the expression level of HDAC6 was assessed in
combination with IGFBP-4 expression in the nucleus, the poor-prognosis patients
were more accurately identified. This study has identified new candidate ERGs for
prediction of prognosis, and we suggest that combined assessment of the
expression levels of these ERGs will contribute to the clinically useful
stratification of ER-positive breast cancer patients.

PMID: 15182430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Novartis Found Symp. 2004;259:170-7; discussion 178-81, 223-5.

The HDAC complex and cytoskeleton.

Kovacs JJ(1), Hubbert C, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

HDAC6 is a cytoplasmic deacetylase that dynamically associates with the
microtubule and actin cytoskeletons. HDAC6 regulates growth factor-induced
chemotaxis by its unique deacetylase activity towards microtubules or other
substrates. Here we describe a non-catalytic structural domain that is essential 
for HDAC6 function and places HDAC6 as a critical mediator linking the
acetylation and ubiquitination network. This evolutionarily conserved motif,
termed the BUZ domain, has features of a zinc finger and binds both mono- and
polyubiquitinated proteins. Furthermore, the BUZ domain promotes HDAC6
mono-ubiquitination. These results establish the BUZ domain, in addition to the
UIM and CUE domains, as a novel motif that both binds ubiquitin and mediates
mono-ubiquitination. Importantly, the BUZ domain is essential for HDAC6 to
promote chemotaxis, indicating that communication with the ubiquitin network is
critical for proper HDAC6 function. The unique presence of the UIM and CUE
domains in proteins involved in endocytic trafficking suggests that HDAC6 might
also regulate vesicle transport and protein degradation. Indeed, we have found
that HDAC6 is actively transported and concentrated in vesicular compartments. We
propose that an integration of reversible acetylation and ubiquitination by HDAC6
may be a novel component in regulating the cytoskeleton, vesicle transport and
protein degradation.

PMID: 15171253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32737-50. Epub 2004 Apr 20.

RhoA/ROCK activation by growth hormone abrogates p300/histone deacetylase 6
repression of Stat5-mediated transcription.

Ling L(1), Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 30 Medical Drive, Singapore 117609,
Republic of Singapore.

We demonstrate here that growth hormone (GH) stimulates the activation of RhoA
and its substrate Rho kinase (ROCK) in NIH-3T3 cells. GH-stimulated formation of 
GTP-bound RhoA requires JAK2-dependent dissociation of RhoA from its negative
regulator p190 RhoGAP. Inactivation of RhoA does not affect GH-stimulated JAK2
tyrosine phosphorylation nor p44/42 MAPK activity. However, RhoA and ROCK
activities are required for GH-stimulated, Stat5-mediated transcription.
RhoA-dependent enhancement of GH-stimulated, Stat5-mediated transcription is due 
to repression of histone deacetylase 6 activity recruited by transcription
cofactor p300 that negatively regulates GH-stimulated, Stat5-mediated
transcription. We also demonstrate that RhoA is the pivot for cAMP-dependent
protein kinase inhibition of GH-stimulated, Stat5-mediated transcription as a
consequence of cAMP-dependent protein kinase inactivation of RhoA through serine 
residue 188 of RhoA. We have therefore provided a novel mechanism by which a
Ras-like small GTPase, RhoA, can regulate Stat5-mediated transcription.

PMID: 15102857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Zygote. 2003 Nov;11(4):323-8.

HDAC6-induced premature chromatin compaction in mouse oocytes and fertilised
eggs.

Verdel A(1), Seigneurin-Berny D, Faure AK, Eddahbi M, Khochbin S, Nonchev S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute Albert Bonniot, INSERM U309, La Tronche, France.

Chromatin remodelling in the fertilised mouse egg is intimately linked to protein
synthesis and degradation, to protamine by histone replacement and to specific
histone modifications. The involvement of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the
beginning of development is poorly understood. HDACs are essential for cell
proliferation and in the control of gene expression in a wide variety of
mammalian systems. Here we focus on mHDAC6, a recently identified class II
histone deacetylase, and we analyse its expression and localisation in oocytes
and pronuclear zygotes. By indirect immunofluorescence we show that mHDAC6 is
detected in the cytoplasm of germinal vesicle (GV) stage oocytes and 1-cell
embryos. Ectopic expression of this enzyme after injection into germinal vesicles
and pronuclei alters the nuclear structure and causes premature compaction of the
chromatin. Our data suggest that the effect of condensation is linked to the
ubiquitin-binding activity of mHDAC6, rather than to its function as a
deacetylase.

PMID: 15085732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Immunity. 2004 Apr;20(4):417-28.

HDAC6 deacetylase activity links the tubulin cytoskeleton with immune synapse
organization.

Serrador JM(1), Cabrero JR, Sancho D, Mittelbrunn M, Urzainqui A, Sánchez-Madrid 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital de la Princesa, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, E-28006 Madrid, Spain.

We investigated the role of acetylated microtubules in the antigen-specific
interaction of T helper and antigen-presenting cells (APCs). In T cells,
acetylated microtubules concentrated at contact site with APCs, surrounding
clusters of CD3 and LFA-1. TcR engagement induced a transient deacetylation of
microtubules at early times and an enhanced acetylation at late times. Confocal
videomicroscopy studies revealed that the HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase was
translocated and concentrated at the contact site of T cells with APCs.
Overexpression of HDAC6 but not a dead deacetylase mutant in T cells disorganized
CD3 and LFA-1 at the immune synapse. This effect was reverted by treatment with
the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A. The antigen-specific translocation of
the microtubule organizing center (MTOC) and IL-2 production were also severely
impaired by overexpression of HDAC6. Our results underscore the key role for
HDAC6 in the organization of the immune synapse and the antigen-specific
reorientation of the MTOC.

PMID: 15084271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Bioorg Med Chem. 2004 Mar 15;12(6):1351-6.

Toward an HDAC6 inhibitor: synthesis and conformational analysis of cyclic
hexapeptide hydroxamic acid designed from alpha-tubulin sequence.

Jose B(1), Okamura S, Kato T, Nishino N, Sumida Y, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)CREST Research Project, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama 332-001, 
Japan.

A cyclic hexapeptide hydroxamic acid inhibitor for HDAC6 has been designed and
synthesized on the basis of the facts that alpha-tubulin is the substrate of
HDAC6 and of the excellent inhibitory activity of cyclic tetrapeptide hydroxamic 
acids (CHAPs) for HDACs. Unexpectedly, cyclic hexapeptide hydroxamic acid showed 
very low HDAC inhibitory activity. To explain the low activity, we have carried
out conformation analysis and compared it to the crystal structure of
alpha-tubulin. The conformation around the acetylated lysine of the cyclic
hexapeptide substrate or the aminosuberate hydroxamic acid [Asu(NHOH)] of cyclic 
hexapeptide inhibitor is different from that around alpha-tubulin's lysine-40.
The difference in the conformation seems to cause some steric hindrance at the
capping site resulting in poor binding capacity.

PMID: 15018907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cancer Res. 2004 Feb 1;64(3):1079-86.

Histone deacetylase is a target of valproic acid-mediated cellular
differentiation.

Gurvich N(1), Tsygankova OM, Meinkoth JL, Klein PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Valproic acid (VPA), a well-established therapy for seizures and bipolar
disorder, has recently been shown to inhibit histone deacetylases (HDACs).
Similar to more widely studied HDAC inhibitors, VPA can cause growth arrest and
induce differentiation of transformed cells in culture. Whether this effect of
VPA is through inhibition of HDACs or modulation of another target of VPA has not
been tested. We have used a series of VPA analogs to establish a pharmacological 
profile for HDAC inhibition. We find that VPA and its analogs inhibit multiple
HDACs from class I and class II (but not HDAC6 or HDAC10) with a characteristic
order of potency in vitro. These analogs also induce hyperacetylation of core
histones H3 and H4 in intact cells with an order of potency that parallels in
vitro inhibition. VPA and VPA analogs induce differentiation in hematopoietic
cell lines in a p21-dependent manner, and the order of potency for induction of
differentiation parallels the potencies for inhibition in vitro, as well as for
acetylation of histones associated with the p21 promoter, supporting the argument
that differentiation caused by VPA is mediated through inhibition of HDACs. These
findings provide additional evidence that VPA, a well-tolerated, orally
administered drug with extensive clinical experience, may serve as an effective
chemotherapeutic agent through targeting of HDACs.

PMID: 14871841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mol Cell. 2003 Dec;12(6):1349-51.

The missing linker: an unexpected role for a histone deacetylase.

Kopito RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Bio-X Program, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Molecular motors are the long-haul carriers of eukaryotic cells, moving cargos
bidirectionally along microtubule tracks. In the December 12th issue of Cell,
report that HDAC6, a tubulin deacetylase, functions as an adaptor that links
cargos of aggregated protein to the minus end-directed motor, cytoplasmic dynein.

PMID: 14690590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cell. 2003 Dec 12;115(6):727-38.

The deacetylase HDAC6 regulates aggresome formation and cell viability in
response to misfolded protein stress.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Kovacs JJ, McLaurin A, Vance JM, Ito A, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

The efficient clearance of cytotoxic misfolded protein aggregates is critical for
cell survival. Misfolded protein aggregates are transported and removed from the 
cytoplasm by dynein motors via the microtubule network to a novel organelle
termed the aggresome where they are processed. However, the means by which dynein
motors recognize misfolded protein cargo, and the cellular factors that regulate 
aggresome formation, remain unknown. We have discovered that HDAC6, a
microtubule-associated deacetylase, is a component of the aggresome. We
demonstrate that HDAC6 has the capacity to bind both polyubiquitinated misfolded 
proteins and dynein motors, thereby acting to recruit misfolded protein cargo to 
dynein motors for transport to aggresomes. Indeed, cells deficient in HDAC6 fail 
to clear misfolded protein aggregates from the cytoplasm, cannot form aggresomes 
properly, and are hypersensitive to the accumulation of misfolded proteins. These
findings identify HDAC6 as a crucial player in the cellular management of
misfolded protein-induced stress.

PMID: 14675537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 27;279(9):7685-91. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Deactylase inhibitors disrupt cellular complexes containing protein phosphatases 
and deacetylases.

Brush MH(1), Guardiola A, Connor JH, Yao TP, Shenolikar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Affinity isolation of protein serine/threonine phosphatases on the immobilized
phosphatase inhibitor microcystin-LR identified histone deacetylase 1(HDAC1),
HDAC6, and HDAC10 as novel components of cellular phosphatase complexes. Other
HDACs, specifically HDAC2, -3, -4, and -5, were excluded from such complexes. In 
vitro biochemical studies showed that recombinant HDAC6, but not HDAC4, bound
directly to the protein phosphatase (PP)1 catalytic subunit. No association was
observed between HDAC6 and PP2A, another major protein phosphatase. PP1 binding
was mapped to the second catalytic domain and adjacent C-terminal sequences in
HDAC6, and treatment of cells with trichostatin A (TSA) disrupted endogenous
HDAC6.PP1 complexes. Consistent with the inhibition of tubulin deactylase
activity of HDAC6, TSA enhanced cellular tubulin acetylation, and acetylated
tubulin was present in the PP1 complexes from TSA-treated cells. Trapoxin B, a
weak HDAC6 inhibitor, and calyculin A, a cell-permeable phosphatase inhibitor,
had no effect on the stability of the HDAC6.PP1 complexes or on tubulin
acetylation. Mutations that inactivated HDAC6 prevented its incorporation into
cellular PP1 complexes and suggested that when bound together both enzymes were
active. Interestingly, TSA disrupted all the cellular HDAC.phosphatase complexes 
analyzed. This study provided new insight into the mechanism by which HDAC
inhibitors elicited coordinate changes in cellular protein phosphorylation and
acetylation and suggested that changes in these protein modifications at multiple
subcellular sites may contribute to the known ability of HDAC inhibitors to
suppress cell growth and transformation.

PMID: 14670976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Curr Med Chem. 2003 Nov;10(22):2351-8.

From discovery to the coming generation of histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Yoshida M(1), Matsuyama A, Komatsu Y, Nishino N.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetics Laboratory, RIKEN and CREST, JST, Saitama, Japan.
yoshidam@postman.riken.go.jp

Trichostatin A (TSA) is a Streptomyces metabolite that causes differentiation of 
murine erythroleukemia cells as well as specific inhibition of the cell cycle of 
some lower eukaryotes and mammalian cells. The targeted molecule of TSA has been 
shown by genetic and biochemical analyses to be histone deacetylases (HDACs).
Histone acetylation is a key modification to control transcription, and HDACs are
profoundly involved in pathogenesis of cancer through removing acetyl groups from
histones and other transcriptional regulators. Trapoxin (TPX) and FK228 (also
known as FR901228 and depsipeptide because FK228 = FR901228 = depsipeptide),
structurally unrelated microbial metabolites, were also shown to inhibit HDACs.
These HDAC inhibitors cause cell cycle arrest, differentiation and/or apoptosis
of many tumors, suggesting their usefulness for chemotherapy and differentiation 
therapy. In addition, HDAC inhibitors play important roles in identifying the
specific function of the enzymes. Indeed, we identified tubulin as one of the
substrates of HDAC6 by means of differential sensitivity to HDAC inhibitors.
Since recent studies have revealed that HDACs are structurally and functionally
diverse, it should be important to develop inhibitors specific to individual
enzymes as more promising agents for cancer therapy. We have synthesized novel
TSA/TPX hybrids, which will serve as a basis for developing enzyme-specific HDAC 
inhibitors.

PMID: 14529478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Int J Mol Med. 2003 Jul;12(1):87-93.

Cloning and structural characterization of the human histone deacetylase 6 gene.

Voelter-Mahlknecht S(1), Mahlknecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University of Frankfurt Medical Center,
D-60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a central role in the modification of chromatin
structure and thus in the regulation of transcription and cellular
differentiation. Based on structural and functional similarities, mammalian
histone deacetylases may be grouped into three categories, class I HDACs, which
are homologs of the yeast histone deacetylase RPD3, class II HDACs, which share a
significant degree of homology with the yeast histone deacetylase HDA1 and class 
III HDACs which are closely related to the yeast SIR2 protein. We have isolated
and characterized the human HDAC6 genomic sequence, which spans a region of
21,923 bp and which has one single genomic locus. Determination of the
exon-intron splice junctions established that HDAC6 is encoded by 28 exons
ranging in size from 41 bp (exon 5) to 677 bp (exon 24). Characterization of the 
5' flanking genomic region, which precedes the HDAC6 open reading frame, revealed
a TATA- and CCAAT-boxless promoter that contains a 1 kb CpG island. The 3,648 bp 
human HDAC6 mRNA encodes a 1,215 aa protein with a predictive molecular weight of
131.4 kDa. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis localized the human HDAC6 
gene to the subband border of chromosome Xp11.22-23, a region which is
characterized by frequent gains and losses of chromosomal material in several
types of cancer and neurological disorders.

PMID: 12792815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 May 14;125(19):5586-7.

Structural biasing elements for in-cell histone deacetylase paralog selectivity.

Wong JC(1), Hong R, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard Institute of Chemistry
and Cell Biology, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard University, 12
Oxford Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

We use the structural dissection of two 1,3-dioxanes with in-cell histone
deacetylase (HDAC) paralog selectivity to identify key elements for selective
HDAC inhibitors. We demonstrate that o-aminoanilides are inactive toward HDAC6
while apparently inhibiting deacetylases that act upon histone substrates. This
finding has important clinical implications for the development of HDAC
inhibitor-based treatments that do not interfere with microtubule dynamics
associated with HDAC6. We also show that suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA)
alone is a nonparalog-selective HDAC inhibitor and that the 1,3-dioxane diversity
appended to SAHA is essential for HDAC6 paralog selectivity.

PMID: 12733869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Cell. 2003 Apr;11(4):1043-54.

P300 transcriptional repression is mediated by SUMO modification.

Girdwood D(1), Bumpass D, Vaughan OA, Thain A, Anderson LA, Snowden AW,
Garcia-Wilson E, Perkins ND, Hay RT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Street Andrews, North Haugh,
United Kingdom.

p300 and CREB binding protein can both activate and repress transcription. Here, 
we locate the CRD1 transcriptional repression domain between residues 1017 and
1029 of p300. This region contains two copies of the sequence psiKxE that are
modified by the ubiquitin-like protein SUMO-1. Mutations that reduce SUMO
modification increase p300-mediated transcriptional activity and expression of a 
SUMO-specific protease or catalytically inactive Ubc9 relieved repression,
demonstrating that p300 repression was mediated by SUMO conjugation.
SUMO-modified CRD1 domain bound HDAC6 in vitro, and p300 repression was relieved 
by histone deacetylase inhibition and siRNA-mediated ablation of HDAC6
expression. These results reveal a mechanism controlling p300 function and
suggest that SUMO-dependent repression is mediated by recruitment of HDAC6.

PMID: 12718889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Apr 15;100(8):4389-94. Epub 2003 Apr 3.

Domain-selective small-molecule inhibitor of histone deacetylase 6
(HDAC6)-mediated tubulin deacetylation.

Haggarty SJ(1), Koeller KM, Wong JC, Grozinger CM, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, and Harvard Institute of
Chemistry and Cell Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA
02138, USA.

Protein acetylation, especially histone acetylation, is the subject of both
research and clinical investigation. At least four small-molecule histone
deacetylase inhibitors are currently in clinical trials for the treatment of
cancer. These and other inhibitors also affect microtubule acetylation. A
multidimensional, chemical genetic screen of 7,392 small molecules was used to
discover "tubacin," which inhibits alpha-tubulin deacetylation in mammalian
cells. Tubacin does not affect the level of histone acetylation, gene-expression 
patterns, or cell-cycle progression. We provide evidence that class II histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is the intracellular target of tubacin. Only one of the two
catalytic domains of HDAC6 possesses tubulin deacetylase activity, and only this 
domain is bound by tubacin. Tubacin treatment did not affect the stability of
microtubules but did decrease cell motility. HDAC6 overexpression disrupted the
localization of p58, a protein that mediates binding of Golgi elements to
microtubules. Our results highlight the role of alpha-tubulin acetylation in
mediating the localization of microtubule-associated proteins. They also suggest 
that small molecules that selectively inhibit HDAC6-mediated alpha-tubulin
deacetylation, a first example of which is tubacin, might have therapeutic
applications as antimetastatic and antiangiogenic agents.

PMCID: PMC153564
PMID: 12677000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell. 2003 Feb;11(2):437-44.

The human Sir2 ortholog, SIRT2, is an NAD+-dependent tubulin deacetylase.

North BJ(1), Marshall BL, Borra MT, Denu JM, Verdin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, 94141, San 
Francisco, CA, USA

The silent information regulator 2 protein (Sir2p) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is
an NAD-dependent histone deacetylase that plays a critical role in
transcriptional silencing. Here, we report that a human ortholog of Sir2p,
sirtuin type 2 (SIRT2), is a predominantly cytoplasmic protein that colocalizes
with microtubules. SIRT2 deacetylates lysine-40 of alpha-tubulin both in vitro
and in vivo. Knockdown of SIRT2 via siRNA results in tubulin hyperacetylation.
SIRT2 colocalizes and interacts in vivo with HDAC6, another tubulin deacetylase. 
Enzymatic analysis of recombinant SIRT2 in comparison to a yeast homolog of Sir2 
protein (Hst2p) shows a striking preference of SIRT2 for acetylated tubulin
peptide as a substrate relative to acetylated histone H3 peptide. These
observations establish SIRT2 as a bona fide tubulin deacetylase.

PMID: 12620231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. EMBO J. 2003 Mar 3;22(5):1168-79.

HDAC-6 interacts with and deacetylates tubulin and microtubules in vivo.

Zhang Y(1), Li N, Caron C, Matthias G, Hess D, Khochbin S, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, 4058
Basel, Switzerland.

Microtubules are cylindrical cytoskeletal structures found in almost all
eukaryotic cell types which are involved in a great variety of cellular
processes. Reversible acetylation on the epsilon-amino group of alpha-tubulin
Lys40 marks stabilized microtubule structures and may contribute to regulating
microtubule dynamics. Yet, the enzymes catalysing this acetylation/deacetylation 
have remained unidentified until recently. Here we report that beta-tubulin
interacts with histone deacetylase-6 (HDAC-6) in a yeast two-hybrid assay and in 
vitro. We find that HDAC-6 is a micro tubule-associated protein capable of
deacetylating alpha-tubulin in vivo and in vitro. HDAC-6's microtubule binding
and deacetylation functions both depend on the hdac domains. Overexpression of
HDAC-6 in mammalian cells leads to tubulin hypoacetylation. In contrast,
inhibition of HDAC-6 function by two independent mechanisms--pharmacological
(HDAC inhibitors) or genetic (targeted inactivation of HDAC-6 in embryonic stem
cells)--leads to hyperacetylation of tubulin and microtubules. Taken together,
our data provide evidence that HDAC-6 might act as a dual deacetylase for tubulin
and histones, and suggest the possibility that acetylated non-histone proteins
might represent novel targets for pharmacological therapy by HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC150348
PMID: 12606581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Nature. 2003 Jan 16;421(6920):230.

Cell biology: Tubulin acetylation and cell motility.

Palazzo A(1), Ackerman B, Gundersen GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

Comment on
    Nature. 2002 May 23;417(6887):455-8.

PMID: 12529632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. EMBO J. 2002 Dec 16;21(24):6820-31.

In vivo destabilization of dynamic microtubules by HDAC6-mediated deacetylation.

Matsuyama A(1), Shimazu T, Sumida Y, Saito A, Yoshimatsu Y, Seigneurin-Berny D,
Osada H, Komatsu Y, Nishino N, Khochbin S, Horinouchi S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetics Laboratory, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Trichostatin A (TSA) inhibits all histone deacetylases (HDACs) of both class I
and II, whereas trapoxin (TPX) cannot inhibit HDAC6, a cytoplasmic member of
class II HDACs. We took advantage of this differential sensitivity of HDAC6 to
TSA and TPX to identify its substrates. Using this approach, alpha-tubulin was
identified as an HDAC6 substrate. HDAC6 deacetylated alpha-tubulin both in vivo
and in vitro. Our investigations suggest that HDAC6 controls the stability of a
dynamic pool of microtubules. Indeed, we found that highly acetylated
microtubules observed after TSA treatment exhibited delayed drug-induced
depolymerization and that HDAC6 overexpression prompted their induced
depolymerization. Depolymerized tubulin was rapidly deacetylated in vivo, whereas
tubulin acetylation occurred only after polymerization. We therefore suggest that
acetylation and deacetylation are coupled to the microtubule turnover and that
HDAC6 plays a key regulatory role in the stability of the dynamic microtubules.

PMCID: PMC139102
PMID: 12486003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):7982-92.

Runx2 (Cbfa1, AML-3) interacts with histone deacetylase 6 and represses the
p21(CIP1/WAF1) promoter.

Westendorf JJ(1), Zaidi SK, Cascino JE, Kahler R, van Wijnen AJ, Lian JB, Yoshida
M, Stein GS, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery. University of Minnesota Cancer Center.
College of Biological Sciences. Graduate Program in Microbiology, Immunology, and
Cancer Biology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.
weste047@umn.edu

Runx2 (Cbfa1, AML-3) is multifunctional transcription factor that is essential
for osteoblast development. Runx2 binds specific DNA sequences and interacts with
transcriptional coactivators and corepressors to either activate or repress
transcription of tissue-specific genes. In this study, the p21(CIP/WAF1) promoter
was identified as a repressible target of Runx2. A carboxy-terminal repression
domain distinct from the well-characterized TLE/Groucho-binding domain
contributed to Runx2-mediated p21 repression. This carboxy-terminal domain was
sufficient to repress a heterologous GAL reporter. The repressive activity of
this domain was sensitive to the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A but
not to trapoxin B. HDAC6, which is insensitive to trapoxin B, specifically
interacted with the carboxy terminus of Runx2. The HDAC6 interaction domain of
Runx2 was mapped to a region overlapping the nuclear matrix-targeting signal. The
Runx2 carboxy terminus was necessary for recruitment of HDAC6 from the cytoplasm 
to chromatin. HDAC6 also colocalized and coimmunoprecipitated with the nuclear
matrix-associated protein Runx2 in osteoblasts. Finally, we show that HDAC6 is
expressed in differentiating osteoblasts and that the Runx2 carboxy terminus is
necessary for maximal repression of the p21 promoter in preosteoblasts. These
data identify Runx2 as the first transcription factor to interact with HDAC6 and 
suggest that HDAC6 may bind to Runx2 in differentiating osteoblasts to regulate
tissue-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC134736
PMID: 12391164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002 Nov;283(5):F904-11.

NF-kappaB inhibits transcription of the H(+)-K(+)-ATPase alpha(2)-subunit gene:
role of histone deacetylases.

Zhang W(1), Kone BC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and of Integrative Biology, Pharmacology, and
Physiology, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

The H(+)-K(+)-ATPase alpha(2) (HKalpha(2)) gene plays a central role in potassium
homeostasis, yet little is known about its transcriptional control. We recently
demonstrated that the proximal promoter confers basal transcriptional activity in
mouse inner medullary collecting duct 3 cells. We sought to determine whether the
kappaB DNA binding element at -104 to -94 influences basal HKalpha(2) gene
transcription in these cells. Recombinant NF-kappaB p50 footprinted the region
-116/-94 in vitro. Gel shift and supershift analysis revealed NF-kappaB p50- and 
p65-containing DNA-protein complexes in nuclear extracts of mouse inner medullary
collecting duct 3 cells. A promoter-luciferase construct with a mutated -104/-94 
NF-kappaB element exhibited higher activity than the wild-type promoter in
transfection assays. Overexpression of NF-kappaB p50, p65, or their combination
trans-repressed the HKalpha(2) promoter. The histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
trichostatin A partially reversed NF-kappaB-mediated trans-repression of the
HKalpha(2) promoter. HDAC6 overexpression inhibited HKalpha(2) promoter activity,
and HDAC6 coimmunoprecipitated with NF-kappaB p50 and p65. These results suggest 
that HDAC6, recruited to the DNA protein complex, acts with NF-kappaB to suppress
HKalpha(2) transcription and identify NF-kappaB p50 and p65 as novel binding
partners for HDAC6.

PMID: 12372765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 15;99(21):13425-30. Epub 2002 Sep 27.

Histone deacetylase 6 binds polyubiquitin through its zinc finger (PAZ domain)
and copurifies with deubiquitinating enzymes.

Hook SS(1), Orian A, Cowley SM, Eisenman RN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are thought to function as critical mediators of
transcriptional repression. However, the physiological targets and
posttranslational modifications of the class II HDACs are largely unknown. Here
we show that the C terminus of HDAC 6 is both necessary and sufficient for
specific association with polyubiquitin. This region contains a putative zinc
finger but lacks significant similarity to other known ubiquitin binding domains.
Thus, we have designated this region as a PAZ domain, for Polyubiquitin
Associated Zinc finger. Although the PAZ domain possesses homology with the zinc 
finger of deubiquitinating enzymes, it is dispensable for the deubiquitinating
activity we find associated with HDAC6 following immunopurification. We also show
that both HDAC 5 and HDAC 6 are ubiquitinated in vitro and in vivo. However, both
of these proteins are stable in vivo and do not appear to be targeted for rapid
degradation by the proteasome. Thus, HDAC6 is linked to the ubiquitin system via 
ubiquitin conjugation, polyubiquitin binding, and copurification with
deubiquitinating enzymes.

PMCID: PMC129689
PMID: 12354939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 1;62(17):4916-21.

FK228 (depsipeptide) as a natural prodrug that inhibits class I histone
deacetylases.

Furumai R(1), Matsuyama A, Kobashi N, Lee KH, Nishiyama M, Nakajima H, Tanaka A, 
Komatsu Y, Nishino N, Yoshida M, Horinouchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

FK228 is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, the molecular mechanism of
inhibition of which has been unknown. Here we show that reduction of an
intramolecular disulfide bond of FK228 greatly enhanced its inhibitory activity
and that the disulfide bond was rapidly reduced in cells by cellular reducing
activity involving glutathione. Computer modeling suggests that one of the
sulfhydryl groups of the reduced form of FK228 (redFK) interacts with the
active-site zinc, preventing the access of the substrate. HDAC1 and HDAC2 were
more strongly inhibited by redFK than HDAC4 and HDAC6. redFK was less active than
FK228 in inhibiting in vivo HDAC activity, due to rapid inactivation in medium
and serum. Thus, FK228 serves as a stable prodrug to inhibit class I enzymes and 
is activated by reduction after uptake into the cells. The glutathione-mediated
activation also implicates its clinical usefulness for counteracting
glutathione-mediated drug resistance in chemotherapy.

PMID: 12208741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Aug 1;166(3):392-6.

Expression and activity of histone deacetylases in human asthmatic airways.

Ito K(1), Caramori G, Lim S, Oates T, Chung KF, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School 
of Medicine, Dovehouse Street, London, SW3 6LY UK.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Aug 1;166(3):260-1.

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease that is characterized by increased
expression of multiple inflammatory genes. Chromatin modification plays a
critical role in the regulation of these genes. Acetyaltion of histones by
histone acetyltransferases (HATs) is associated with increased gene
transcription, whereas hypocetylation induced by histone deacetylases (HDACs) is 
associated with suppression of gene expression. We have examined the expression
and activity of HATs and HDACs in bronchial biopsies from normal subjects and
subjects with asthma. There was no difference in the site of HDAC1-HDAC6
expression between normal subjects and subjects with asthma, but subjects with
asthma had reduced HDAC enzymatic activity and reduced HDAC1 and HDAC2 protein
expression, as measured by Western blotting. In contrast, subjects with asthma
treated with inhaled steroids were found to have greater HDAC activity than
untreated subjects with asthma, although still lower than control subjects. In
contrast, although there was no change in the site of HAT (CREB binding protein
and p300/CREB binding protein-associated factor) expression, HAT activity was
increased in subjects with asthma. HAT activity was reduced to control levels in 
subjects with asthma treated with inhaled steroids. The increase in HAT activity 
and reduced HDAC activity in asthma may underlie the increased expression of
multiple inflammatory genes, and this is reversed, at least in part, by treatment
with inhaled steroids.

PMID: 12153977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nature. 2002 May 23;417(6887):455-8.

HDAC6 is a microtubule-associated deacetylase.

Hubbert C(1), Guardiola A, Shao R, Kawaguchi Y, Ito A, Nixon A, Yoshida M, Wang
XF, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 Jan 16;421(6920):230.

Reversible acetylation of alpha-tubulin has been implicated in regulating
microtubule stability and function. The distribution of acetylated alpha-tubulin 
is tightly controlled and stereotypic. Acetylated alpha-tubulin is most abundant 
in stable microtubules but is absent from dynamic cellular structures such as
neuronal growth cones and the leading edges of fibroblasts. However, the enzymes 
responsible for regulating tubulin acetylation and deacetylation are not known.
Here we report that a member of the histone deacetylase family, HDAC6, functions 
as a tubulin deacetylase. HDAC6 is localized exclusively in the cytoplasm, where 
it associates with microtubules and localizes with the microtubule motor complex 
containing p150(glued) (ref. 3). In vivo, the overexpression of HDAC6 leads to a 
global deacetylation of alpha-tubulin, whereas a decrease in HDAC6 increases
alpha-tubulin acetylation. In vitro, purified HDAC6 potently deacetylates
alpha-tubulin in assembled microtubules. Furthermore, overexpression of HDAC6
promotes chemotactic cell movement, supporting the idea that HDAC6-mediated
deacetylation regulates microtubule-dependent cell motility. Our results show
that HDAC6 is the tubulin deacetylase, and provide evidence that reversible
acetylation regulates important biological processes beyond histone metabolism
and gene transcription.

PMID: 12024216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25748-55. Epub 2002 Apr 10.

Cloning and functional characterization of HDAC11, a novel member of the human
histone deacetylase family.

Gao L(1), Cueto MA, Asselbergs F, Atadja P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Summit, New
Jersey 07901, USA.

We have cloned and characterized a human cDNA that belongs to the histone
deacetylase family, which we designate as HDAC11. The predicted HDAC11 amino acid
sequence reveals an open reading frame of 347 residues with a corresponding
molecular mass of 39 kDa. Sequence analyses of the putative HDAC11 protein
indicate that it contains conserved residues in the catalytic core regions shared
by both class I and II mammalian HDAC enzymes. Putative orthologues of HDAC11
exist in primate, mouse, Drosophila, and plant. Epitope-tagged HDAC11 protein
expressed in mammalian cells displays histone deacetylase activity in vitro.
Furthermore, HDAC11's enzymatic activity is inhibited by trapoxin, a known
histone deacetylase inhibitor. Multiple tissue Northern blot and real-time PCR
experiments show that the high expression level of HDAC11 transcripts is limited 
to kidney, heart, brain, skeletal muscle, and testis. Epitope-tagged HDAC11
protein localizes predominantly to the cell nucleus. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments indicate that HDAC11 may be present in protein complexes that also
contain HDAC6. These results indicate that HDAC11 is a novel and unique member of
the histone deacetylase family and it may have distinct physiological roles from 
those of the known HDACs.

PMID: 11948178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Mar 1;30(5):1114-23.

Identification of HDAC10, a novel class II human histone deacetylase containing a
leucine-rich domain.

Tong JJ(1), Liu J, Bertos NR, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Department of Medicine, McGill University Health
Center, 687 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A1, Canada.

Histone acetylation is important for regulating chromatin structure and gene
expression. Three classes of mammalian histone deacetylases have been identified.
Among class II, there are five known members, namely HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC7
and HDAC9. Here we describe the identification and characterization of a novel
class II member termed HDAC10. It is a 669 residue polypeptide with a bipartite
modular structure consisting of an N-terminal Hda1p-related putative deacetylase 
domain and a C-terminal leucine-rich domain. HDAC10 is widely expressed in adult 
human tissues and cultured mammalian cells. It is enriched in the cytoplasm and
this enrichment is not sensitive to leptomycin B, a specific inhibitor known to
block the nuclear export of other class II members. The leucine-rich domain of
HDAC10 is responsible for its cytoplasmic enrichment. Recombinant HDAC10 protein 
possesses histone deacetylase activity, which is sensitive to trichostatin A, a
specific inhibitor for known class I and class II histone deacetylases. When
tethered to a promoter, HDAC10 is able to repress transcription. Furthermore,
HDAC10 interacts with HDAC3 but not with HDAC4 or HDAC6. These results indicate
that HDAC10 is a novel class II histone deacetylase possessing a unique
leucine-rich domain.

PMCID: PMC101247
PMID: 11861901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9590-7. Epub 2002 Jan 2.

Human class I histone deacetylase complexes show enhanced catalytic activity in
the presence of ATP and co-immunoprecipitate with the ATP-dependent chaperone
protein Hsp70.

Johnson CA(1), White DA, Lavender JS, O'Neill LP, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Department of Anatomy, University of
Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Antibodies to histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been used to immuno-isolate
deacetylase complexes from HeLa cell extracts. Complexes shown to contain HDAC1, 
HDAC3, HDAC6, and HDAC1+2 as their catalytic subunits have been used in an
antibody-based assay that detects deacetylation of whole histones at defined
lysines. The class II deacetylase HDAC6 was inactive in this assay, but the three
class I enzymes deacetylated all histone lysines tested, although with varying
efficiency. In comparison to HDAC1, HDAC3 preferentially deacetylated lysines 5
and 12 of H4 and lysine 5 of H2A. H4 tails in purified mononucleosomes were
refractory to deacetylation by both HDAC1 and HDAC3, unless ATP was added to the 
reaction mix. Surprisingly, ATP also consistently enhanced cleavage of free,
non-nucleosomal histones, but not small peptides, by both enzyme complexes. We
found no evidence that ATP operates by phosphorylation of components of the HDAC 
complex, but have shown that HDACs 1, 2, and 3 all co-immunoprecipitate with the 
ATP-dependent chaperone protein Hsp70. Another common ATP-dependent chaperone,
Hsp90, was absent from all HDAC complexes tested, whereas Hsp60 associated with
HDAC1 only. We suggest that Hsp chaperone proteins enhance the deacetylase
activity of HDAC complexes by ATP-dependent manipulation of protein substrates.

PMID: 11777905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6656-66. Epub 2001 Dec 5.

Isolation and characterization of a novel class II histone deacetylase, HDAC10.

Fischer DD(1), Cai R, Bhatia U, Asselbergs FA, Song C, Terry R, Trogani N, Widmer
R, Atadja P, Cohen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Summit, New
Jersey 07901, USA.

A novel histone deacetylase, HDAC10, was isolated from a mixed tissue human cDNA 
library. HDAC10 was classified as a class II subfamily member based upon
similarity to HDAC6. The genomic structure of HDAC10 was found to consist of 20
exons. HDAC10 has two sequence variants, HDAC10v1 and HDAC10v2, and two
transcripts were detectable by Northern blot analysis. HDAC10v1 and HDAC10v2 were
found to be identical through exon 17 but diverged after this exon. HDAC10v2 has 
an 82-bp alternate exon that generates a frameshift and shortens the sequence by 
11 amino acids. In this study, the characterization of HDAC10v1 was performed.
HDAC10v1 has an N-terminal catalytic domain, two putative C-terminal
retinoblastoma protein binding domains, and a nuclear hormone receptor binding
motif. The HDAC10v1 enzyme was found to be catalytically active based upon its
ability to deacetylate a (3)H-acetylated histone H4 N-terminal peptide.
Immunofluorescence detection of transfected HDAC10v1-FLAG indicated that the
enzyme is a nuclear protein. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation experiments
indicated that HDAC10v1 associated with HDAC2 and SMRT (silencing mediator for
retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors). In addition, based upon the public data 
base, a single nucleotide polymorphism was found in the C terminus of HDAC10
which changes a Gly residue to Cys, suggesting that HDAC10 molecules containing
these single nucleotide polymorphisms may be folded improperly. HDAC10 extends
the HDAC superfamily and adds to a growing number of HDACs that have been found
to have splice variants, suggesting that RNA processing may play a role in
mediating the activity of HDACs.

PMID: 11739383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3350-6. Epub 2001 Nov 28.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel histone deacetylase HDAC10.

Guardiola AR(1), Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The growing number of proteins controlled by reversible acetylation suggests the 
existence of a large number of acetyltransferases and deacetylases. Here, we
report the identification of a novel class II histone deacetylase, HDAC10.
Homology comparison indicates that HDAC10 is most similar to HDAC6. Both contain 
a unique, putative second catalytic domain not found in other HDACs. In HDAC10,
however, this domain is not functional. This tandem organization of two catalytic
domains confers resistance to the inhibitors trapoxin B and sodium butyrate,
which potently inhibit the deacetylase activity of all other HDAC members. Thus, 
HDAC10 and HDAC6 share unusual structural and pharmacological characteristics.
However, unlike HDAC6, which is normally a cytoplasmic deacetylase, HDAC10
resides in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. In the nucleus, when tethered to a
promoter, HDAC10 represses transcription independent of its deacetylase activity,
indicating that HDAC10 contains a distinct transcriptional repressor domain.
These observations suggest that HDAC10 might uniquely play roles both in the
nucleus, as a transcriptional modulator, and in the cytoplasm in an unidentified 
role. Together, our results identify HDAC10 as a novel deacetylase with distinct 
structure, pharmacology and localization and further expand the complexity of the
HDAC family.

PMID: 11726666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;21(23):8035-44.

Identification of components of the murine histone deacetylase 6 complex: link
between acetylation and ubiquitination signaling pathways.

Seigneurin-Berny D(1), Verdel A, Curtet S, Lemercier C, Garin J, Rousseaux S,
Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de la Différenciation,
INSERM U309, Equipe Chromatine et Expression des Gènes, Institut Albert Bonniot, 
Faculté de Médecine, Domaine de la Merci, 38706 La Tronche Cedex, France.

The immunopurification of the endogenous cytoplasmic murine histone deacetylase 6
(mHDAC6), a member of the class II HDACs, from mouse testis cytosolic extracts
allowed the identification of two associated proteins. Both were mammalian
homologues of yeast proteins known to interact with each other and involved in
the ubiquitin signaling pathway: p97/VCP/Cdc48p, a homologue of yeast Cdc48p, and
phospholipase A2-activating protein, a homologue of yeast UFD3 (ubiquitin fusion 
degradation protein 3). Moreover, in the C-terminal region of mHDAC6, a conserved
zinc finger-containing domain named ZnF-UBP, also present in several
ubiquitin-specific proteases, was discovered and was shown to mediate the
specific binding of ubiquitin by mHDAC6. By using a ubiquitin pull-down approach,
nine major ubiquitin-binding proteins were identified in mouse testis cytosolic
extracts, and mHDAC6 was found to be one of them. All of these findings strongly 
suggest that mHDAC6 could be involved in the control of protein ubiquitination.
The investigation of biochemical properties of the mHDAC6 complex in vitro
further supported this hypothesis and clearly established a link between protein 
acetylation and protein ubiquitination.

PMCID: PMC99970
PMID: 11689694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;48 Suppl 1:S20-6.

Histone deacetylase as a new target for cancer chemotherapy.

Yoshida M(1), Furumai R, Nishiyama M, Komatsu Y, Nishino N, Horinouchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Japan. ayoshida@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Trichostatin A (TSA) and trapoxin (TPX), inhibitors of the eukaryotic cell cycle 
and inducers of morphological reversion of transformed cells, inhibit histone
deacetylase (HDAC) at nanomolar concentrations. Recently, FK228 (also known as
FR901228 and depsipeptide) and MS-275. antitumor agents structurally unrelated to
TSA, have been shown to be potent HDAC inhibitors. These inhibitors activate the 
expression of p21Waf1 in a p53-independent manner. Changes in the expression of
regulators of the cell cycle, differentiation, and apoptosis with increased
histone acetylation may be responsible for the cell cycle arrest and antitumor
activity of HDAC inhibitors. TSA has been suggested to block the catalytic
reaction by chelating a zinc ion in the active site pocket through its hydroxamic
acid group. On the other hand, an epoxyketone has been suggested to be the
functional group of TPX capable of alkylating the enzyme. We synthesized a novel 
TPX analogue containing a hydroxamic acid instead of the epoxyketone. The hybrid 
compound, called cyclic hydroxamic-acid-containing peptide 1 (CHAP1) inhibited
HDAC at low nanomolar concentrations. The HDAC1 inhibition by CHAPI was
reversible, as is that by TSA, in contrast to irreversible inhibition by TPX.
Interestingly, HDAC6, but not HDAC1 or HDAC4, was resistant to TPX and CHAP1,
while TSA inhibited these HDACs to a similar degree. CHAP31, the strongest HDAC
inhibitor obtained from a variety of CHAP derivatives, exhibited antitumor
activity in BDF1 mice bearing B16/BL6 tumor cells. These results suggest that
CHAP31 is promising as a novel therapeutic agent for cancer treatment, and that
CHAP may serve as a basis for new HDAC inhibitors and be useful for combinatorial
synthesis and high-throughput screening.

PMID: 11587361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Blood. 2001 Oct 1;98(7):2116-23.

Histone deacetylase 3 associates with and represses the transcription factor
GATA-2.

Ozawa Y(1), Towatari M, Tsuzuki S, Hayakawa F, Maeda T, Miyata Y, Tanimoto M,
Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2 plays a critical role in the survival
and proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells. This study examined the
interaction of GATA-2 with histone deacetylases (HDACs) to define the involvement
of HDACs in the regulation of GATA-2 function. GATA-2 directly associates with
HDAC3 but not with HDAC1. Consistent with this, HDAC3 suppressed the
transcriptional potential of GATA-2, whereas HDAC1 did not affect
GATA-2-dependent transcription. Results further demonstrated that GATA-2 and
HDAC3 colocalized in the nucleus. These results identify GATA-2 as a nuclear
target for HDAC3-mediated repression. Furthermore, GATA-2 also directly
associated with HDAC5 but not with other class II HDACs examined, that is, HDAC4 
and HDAC6. This is the first demonstration that a tissue-specific transcription
factor directly and selectively interacts with HDAC3 and HDAC5 among HDAC family 
members.

PMID: 11567998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;93(1-2):135-6.

Assignment of the human histone deacetylase 6 gene (HDAC6) to X chromosome p11.23
by in situ hybridization.

Mahlknecht U(1), Schnittger S, Landgraf F, Schoch C, Ottmann OG, Hiddemann W,
Hoelzer D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Frankfurt, Department of Hematology/Oncology, Theodor-Stern-Kai 
7, DF-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Mahlknecht@em.uni-frankfurt.de

PMID: 11474198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biochem Cell Biol. 2001;79(3):243-52.

Class II histone deacetylases: structure, function, and regulation.

Bertos NR(1), Wang AH, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Acetylation of histones, as well as non-histone proteins, plays important roles
in regulating various cellular processes. Dynamic control of protein acetylation 
levels in vivo occurs through the opposing actions of histone acetyltransferases 
and histone deacetylases (HDACs). In the past few years, distinct classes of
HDACs have been identified in mammalian cells. Class I members, such as HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8, are well-known enzymatic transcriptional corepressors
homologous to yeast Rpd3. Class II members, including HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC7,
and HDAC9, possess domains similar to the deacetylase domain of yeast Hdal.
HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7 function as transcriptional corepressors that interact
with the MEF2 transcription factors and the N-CoR, BCoR, and CtBP corepressors.
Intriguingly, HDAC4, HDAC5, and probably HDAC7 are regulated through subcellular 
compartmentalization controlled by site-specific phosphorylation and binding of
14-3-3 proteins; the regulation of these HDACs is thus directly linked to
cellular signaling networks. Both HDAC6 and HDAC9 possess unique structural
modules, so they may have special biological functions. Comprehension of the
structure, function, and regulation of class II deacetylases is important for
elucidating how acetylation regulates functions of histones and other proteins in
vivo.

PMID: 11467738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Apr 15;265(1):90-103.

dSIR2 and dHDAC6: two novel, inhibitor-resistant deacetylases in Drosophila
melanogaster.

Barlow AL(1), van Drunen CM, Johnson CA, Tweedie S, Bird A, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Department of Anatomy, University of
Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

We have identified new members of the histone deacetylase enzyme family in
Drosophila melanogaster. dHDAC6 is a class II deacetylase with two active sites, 
and dSIR2 is an NAD-dependent histone deacetylase. These proteins, together with 
two class I histone deacetylases, dHDAC1 and dHDAC3, have been expressed and
characterized as epitope-tagged recombinant proteins in Schneider SL2 cells. All 
these proteins have in vitro deacetylase activity and are able to deacetylate
core histone H4 at all four acetylatable lysine residues (5, 8, 12, and 16).
Recombinant dHDAC6 and dSIR2 are both insensitive to TSA and HC toxin and
resistant, relative to dHDAC1 and dHDAC3, to inhibition by sodium butyrate.
Indirect immunofluorescence microscopy of stably transfected SL2 lines reveals
that dHDAC1 and dSIR2 are nuclear, dHDAC6 is cytosolic, and dHDAC3 is detectable 
in both cytosol and nucleus. dHDAC6 and dSIR2 elute from Superose 6 columns with 
apparent molecular weights of 90 and 200 kDa, respectively. In contrast, dHDAC1
and dHDAC3elute at 800 and 700 kDa, respectively, suggesting that they are
components of multiprotein complexes. Consistent with this, recombinant dHDAC1
coimmunoprecipitates with components of the Drosophila NuRD complex and dHDAC3
with an as yet unknown 45-kDa protein.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11281647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr;10(7):693-8.

Transcriptional control at regulatory checkpoints by histone deacetylases:
molecular connections between cancer and chromatin.

Wade PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Woodruff Memorial Research Building--Room 7105B, 1639 Pierce Drive,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. pwade@emory.edu

Cancer cells exhibit a set of unique properties that distinguish them from their 
normal counterparts. Among these features are increased growth rates, loss of
differentiation, escape from cell death pathways, evasion of anti-proliferative
signals, a decreased reliance on exogenous growth factors and escape from
replicative senescence. Acquisition of these features by malignant cells requires
impairment of normal cellular control mechanisms. Over the past few years, it has
become increasingly apparent that an important subset of the molecular changes
commonly found in cancer cells involves inappropriate regulation of gene
expression. This review will address regulatory pathways whose disruption
contributes to the malignant phenotype. The failure to deacetylate and thus
repress transcription by the Class I histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 due to 
disruption of the Rb family of proteins has been firmly established as a
mechanism leading to increases in growth rate and cellular proliferation. Recent 
data suggest that this regulatory circuit also executes G(1) checkpoint arrest
downstream of DNA damage, cellular senescence and contact inhibition. In contrast
to this failure to deacetylate, it now seems probable that changes in
differentiation status may result in part from inappropriate deacetylation and
concomitant transcriptional repression mediated by the Class II histone
deacetylases. This inappropriate deacetylation by HDAC4, HDAC5 and HDAC6 follows 
their relocalization from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Thus, multiple classical 
features of cancer cells can be manifested by improper histone deacetylation.

PMID: 11257101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 2;98(1):87-92.

Potent histone deacetylase inhibitors built from trichostatin A and cyclic
tetrapeptide antibiotics including trapoxin.

Furumai R(1), Komatsu Y, Nishino N, Khochbin S, Yoshida M, Horinouchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8657, Japan.

Trichostatin A (TSA) and trapoxin (TPX) are potent inhibitors of histone
deacetylases (HDACs). TSA is proposed to block the catalytic reaction by
chelating a zinc ion in the active-site pocket through its hydroxamic acid group.
On the other hand, the epoxyketone is suggested to be the functional group of TPX
capable of alkylating the enzyme. We synthesized a novel TPX analogue containing 
a hydroxamic acid instead of the epoxyketone. The hybrid compound cyclic
hydroxamic acid-containing peptide (CHAP) 1 inhibited HDAC1 at low nanomolar
concentrations. The HDAC1 inhibition by CHAP1 was reversible as it was by TSA, in
contrast to the irreversible inhibition by TPX. CHAP with an aliphatic chain
length of five, which corresponded to that of acetylated lysine, was stronger
than those with other lengths. These results suggest that TPX is a substrate
mimic and that the replacement of the epoxyketone with the hydroxamic acid
converted TPX to an inhibitor chelating the zinc like TSA. Interestingly, HDAC6, 
but not HDAC1 or HDAC4, was resistant to TPX and CHAP1, whereas TSA inhibited
these HDACs to a similar extent. HDAC6 inhibition by TPX at a high concentration 
was reversible, probably because HDAC6 is not alkylated by TPX. We further
synthesized the counterparts of all known naturally occurring cyclic
tetrapeptides containing the epoxyketone. HDAC1 was highly sensitive to all these
CHAPs much more than HDAC6, indicating that the structure of the cyclic
tetrapeptide framework affects the target enzyme specificity. These results
suggest that CHAP is a unique lead to develop isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC14549
PMID: 11134513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Apr 27;96(9):4868-73.

Three proteins define a class of human histone deacetylases related to yeast
Hda1p.

Grozinger CM(1), Hassig CA, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Gene expression is in part controlled by chromatin remodeling factors and the
acetylation state of nucleosomal histones. The latter process is regulated by
histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases (HDACs). Previously, three
human and five yeast HDAC enzymes had been identified. These can be categorized
into two classes: the first class represented by yeast Rpd3-like proteins and the
second by yeast Hda1-like proteins. Human HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 proteins are
members of the first class, whereas no class II human HDAC proteins had been
identified. The amino acid sequence of Hda1p was used to search the
GenBank/expressed sequence tag databases to identify partial sequences from three
putative class II human HDAC proteins. The corresponding full-length cDNAs were
cloned and defined as HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC6. These proteins possess certain
features present in the conserved catalytic domains of class I human HDACs, but
also contain additional sequence domains. Interestingly, HDAC6 contains an
internal duplication of two catalytic domains, which appear to function
independently of each other. These class II HDAC proteins have differential mRNA 
expression in human tissues and possess in vitro HDAC activity that is inhibited 
by trichostatin A. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicate that these HDAC
proteins are not components of the previously identified HDAC1 and HDAC2 NRD and 
mSin3A complexes. However, HDAC4 and HDAC5 associate with HDAC3 in vivo. This
finding suggests that the human class II HDAC enzymes may function in cellular
processes distinct from those of HDAC1 and HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC21783
PMID: 10220385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


