
1. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Ginsenoside Reduces Cognitive Impairment During Chronic Cerebral Hypoperfusion
Through Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Regulated by Epigenetic Modulation.

Wan Q(1,)(2), Ma X(3), Zhang ZJ(1), Sun T(3), Xia F(1), Zhao G(1), Wu YM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, 710032, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The 254th Hospital of PLA, Tianjin, 300142, People's 
Republic of China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, The Fourth 
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, 710032, People's Republic
of China. (4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, The Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, 710032, People's Republic of China. 
yumeiwu@fmmu.edu.cn.

Increased expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been
associated with memory-enhancing and neuroprotective properties of some drugs
under chronic cerebral hypoperfusion (CCH) condition. Ginsenoside Rd (GSRd), one 
of the main active ingredients in Panax ginseng, is widely used for brain
protection. However, it is poorly understood whether epigenetic mechanisms
implied in the BDNF modulation after GSRd treatment for CCH remain elusive. Here,
we investigated the neuroprotective effects of GSRd and the involved mechanisms. 
We demonstrated that GSRd administration ameliorated CCH-induced impairment of
learning and memory behaviors, evidenced by decreased escape latency and
increased number of crossing the platform in Morris water maze test. This
improvement was associated with promoted neuron survival and increased BDNF
expression in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of CCH mice. GSRd improved
neuron survival and decreased neuron apoptosis and the level of caspase-3 under
oxygen-glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R) by upregulation of BDNF as well 
as in vitro. The levels of acetylated histone H3 (Ac-H3) and histone deacetylase 
(histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)) were altered under OGD/R in a time-dependent
manner, and GSRd reestablished the balance between Ac-H3 and HDAC2 which resulted
in upregulation of BDNF and increased neuron survival. MS-275, an inhibitor of
class I HDACs, abolished the levels of Ac-H3 at the bdnf promoters and enhanced
upregulation of BDNF after GSRd administration, suggesting a synergistic effect
between GSRd and MS-275. All the data suggested that GSRd provided
neuroprotection by epigenetic modulation which accounted for the regulation of
BDNF in CCH mice.

PMID: 27021024  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Bioorg Chem. 2016 Mar 17;66:63-71. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2016.03.008. [Epub ahead
of print]

Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of novel hydroxamic acids bearing
artemisinin skeleton.

Ha VT(1), Kien VT(1), Binh LH(1), Tien VD(1), My NT(1), Nam NH(2), Baltas M(3),
Hahn H(4), Han BW(4), Thao DT(5), Vu TK(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Engineering, Hanoi University of Science and Technology, 1 
Dai Co Viet, Hanoi, Viet Nam. (2)Hanoi University of Pharmacy, 13-15 Le Thanh
Tong, Hanoi, Viet Nam. (3)Synthèse et Physicochimie de Molécules d'Intérêt
Biologique, UMR 5068, Université Paul Sabatier, 118, route de Narbonne, 31062
Toulouse cedex 9, France. (4)Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.
(5)Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology,
18-Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, Hanoi, Viet Nam. (6)School of Chemical Engineering,
Hanoi University of Science and Technology, 1 Dai Co Viet, Hanoi, Viet Nam.
Electronic address: vu.trankhac@hust.edu.vn.

A series of novel hydroxamic acids bearing artemisinin skeleton was designed and 
synthesized. Some compounds in this series exhibited moderate inhibition against 
the whole cell HDAC enzymes. Especially, compound 6g displayed potent
cytotoxicity against three human cancer cell lines, including HepG2 (liver
cancer), MCF-7 (breast cancer) and HL-60 (leukemia cancer), with IC50 values of
2.50, 2.62 and 1.28µg/mL, respectively. Docking studies performed with two potent
compounds 6a and 6g using Autodock Vina showed that both compounds bound to HDAC2
with relatively high binding affinities from -7.1 to 7.0kcal/mol compared to SAHA
(-7.4kcal/mol). It was found in this research that most of the target compounds
seemed to be more cytotoxic toward blood cancer cells (HL-60) than liver (HepG2),
and breast (MCF-7) cancer cells.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27018835  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Aging (Albany NY). 2016 Mar 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigenetic mechanisms underlying cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease
hallmarks in 5XFAD mice.

Griñán-Ferré C(1), Sarroca S(2), Ivanova A(1), Puigoriol-Illamola D(1), Aguado
F(3), Camins A(1), Sanfeliu O(2), Pallàs M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutic Chemistry (Pharmacology Section)
and Institute of Neuroscience, University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB), CSIC, and IDIBAPS, 
08036 Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Cellular Biology, University of
Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

5XFAD is an early-onset mouse transgenic model of Alzheimer disease (AD). Up to
now there are no studies that focus on the epigenetic changes produced as a
result of Aß-42 accumulation and the possible involvement in the different
expression of related AD-genes. Under several behavioral and cognition test, we
found impairment in memory and psychoemotional changes in female 5XFAD mice in
reference to wild type that worsens with age. Cognitive changes correlated with
alterations on protein level analysis and gene expression of markers related with
tau aberrant phosphorylation, amyloidogenic pathway (APP, BACE1), Oxidative
Stress (iNOS, Aldh2) and inflammation (astrogliosis, TNF-a and IL-6); no changes 
were found in non-amyloidogenic pathway indicators such as ADAM10. Epigenetics
changes as higher CpG methylation and transcriptional changes in DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) family were found. Dnmt1 increases in younger 5XFAD
and Dnmt3a and b high levels in the oldest transgenic mice. Similar pattern was
found with histone methyltransferases such as Jarid1a andG9a. Histone deacetylase
2 (Hdac2) or Sirt6, both related with cognition and memory, presented a similar
pattern. Taken together, these hallmarks presented by the 5XFAD model prompted
its use in assessing different potential therapeutic interventions based on
epigenetic targets after earlier amyloid deposition.

PMID: 27013617  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Neurochem. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13621. [Epub ahead of print]

Complex regulation of the regulator of synaptic plasticity histone deacetylase 2 
in the rodent dorsal horn after peripheral injury.

Maiarù M(1), Morgan OB(1), Tochiki KK(1), Hobbiger EJ(1), Rajani K(1), Overington
DW(1), Géranton SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, London, UK.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs), HDAC2 in particular, have been shown to regulate
various forms of learning and memory. Since cognitive processes share mechanisms 
with spinal nociceptive signalling, we decided to investigate HDAC2 expression in
the dorsal horn after peripheral injury. Using immunohistochemistry, we found
that spinal HDAC2 was mainly seen in neurones and astrocytes, with neuronal
expression in naïve tissue 2.6 times greater than that in astrocytes. Cystein
(S)-nitrosylation of HDAC2 releases HDAC2 gene silencing and is controlled by
nitric oxide (NO). 48 h after intraplantar injection of complete Freund's
adjuvant (CFA), there was an ipsilateral increase of the most important NO
producing enzyme in pain states, nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), accompanied by an 
increase in HDAC2 S-nitrosylation. Moreover, a subset of nNOS positive neurones
expressed cFos, a known target of HDAC2, suggesting that de-repression of cFos
expression following HDAC2 S-nitrosylation might occur after noxious stimulation.
We saw no change in global HDAC2 expression in both short and long term pain
states. However, HDAC2 was increased in astrocytes 7 days after neuropathic
injury suggesting that HDAC2 might inhibit astrocytic gene expression in
neuropathic pain states. All together our results indicate that the epigenetic
regulation of transcriptional programs in the dorsal horn after injury is cell
specific. Moreover, the prominent role of NO in persistent pain states suggests
that HDAC2 S-nitrosylation could play a crucial role in the regulation of gene
expression leading to hypersensitivity. This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26998823  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Poult Sci. 2016 Mar 18. pii: pew086. [Epub ahead of print]

Changes in DNA Methylation and Chromatin Structure of Pro-inflammatory Cytokines 
Stimulated by LPS in Broiler Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells.

Shen J(1), Liu Y(1), Ren X(1), Gao K(1), Li Y(1), Li S(1), Yao J(1), Yang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, 712100, P. R. of China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, P. R. of China
yangxj@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

The pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1ß, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a
mediate inflammation, which is a protective response by body to ensure removal of
detrimental stimuli, as well as a healing process for repairing damaged tissue.
The overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines can induce autoimmune diseases
and can be fatal. The aim of this study was to investigate epigenetic mechanisms 
in the regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines expression after
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation of broiler peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC). Gene expression, promoter DNA methylation, and chromatin
accessibility of pro-inflammatory cytokines in untreated and LPS-treated PBMC
were compared. The expression of epigenetic enzymes DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 
1, histone deacetylase (HDAC), and histone acetylase (HAT) were measured after
LPS stimulation. The results showed the activated gene expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines in broiler PBMC stimulated 3 h by LPS. The
demethylation of IL-6 gene - 302 and -264 cytosine-guanine (CpG) sites, as well
as TNF-a gene -371 CpG site, occurred after LPS treatment (P < 0.05), whereas the
methylaiton pattern in the IL-1ß gene promoter region was not affected.
Otherwise, LPS stimulation relaxed the chromatin structure at IL-1ß and IL-6
promoter (P < 0.05). The lower expression of DNMT1 and HDAC2, and higher
expression of p300-CBP-associated factor and tat-interaction protein-60, were
detected in response to LPS (P < 0.05). Our data indicated that after LPS
stimulation for 3 h, IL-1ß and IL-6 promoter are remodeled into an accessible
structure, and the IL-6 and TNF-a promoter are demethylated at special sites,
which possible impact the mRNA expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines.

© 2016 Poultry Science Association Inc.

PMID: 26994192  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 15. pii: canres.2680.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Enhanced histone deacetylase activity in malignant melanoma provokes RAD51 and
FANCD2 triggered drug resistance.

Krumm A(1), Barckhausen C(1), Kücük P(1), Tomaszowski KH(2), Loquai C(3), Fahrer 
J(2), Krämer OH(1), Kaina B(2), Roos WP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Medical Center of the University Mainz. (2)Department
of Toxicology, Medical Center of the University Mainz. (3)Department of
Dermatology, University of Mainz. (4)Institute of Toxicology, Medical Center of
the University Mainz rooswy00@uni-mainz.de.

DNA damaging anticancer drugs remain part of metastatic melanoma therapy.
Epigenetic reprogramming caused by increased histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity 
arising during tumor formation may contribute to resistance of melanomas to the
alkylating drugs temozolomide, dacarbazine and fotemustine. Here we report on the
impact of class I HDACs on the response of malignant melanoma cells treated with 
alkylating agents. The data show that malignant melanomas in situ contain a high 
level of HDAC1/2 and malignant melanoma cells overexpress HDAC1/2/3 compared to
non-cancer cells. Furthermore, pharmacological inhibition of class I HDACs
sensitizes malignant melanoma cells to apoptosis following exposure to alkylating
agents, while not affecting primary melanocytes. Inhibition of HDAC1/2/3 caused
sensitization of melanoma cells to temozolomide in vitro and in melanoma
xenografts in vivo. HDAC1/2/3 inhibition resulted in suppression of DNA
double-strand break (DSB) repair by homologous recombination due to
down-regulation of RAD51 and FANCD2. This sensitized cells to the cytotoxic DNA
lesion O6-methylguanine and caused a synthetic lethal interaction with the
poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase-1 inhibitor olaparib. Furthermore, knockdown
experiments identified HDAC2 as being responsible for the regulation of RAD51.
The influence of class I HDACs on DSB repair by homologous recombination and the 
possible clinical implication on malignant melanoma therapy with temozolomide and
other alkylating drugs suggests a combination approach where class I HDAC
inhibitors such as valproic acid or MS-275 (entinostat) appear to counteract
HDAC- and RAD51/FANCD2-mediated melanoma cell resistance.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26980768  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2016 Mar 9:ajpcell.00351.2015. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00351.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

HDAC2 Regulates FOXO1 during RANKL-Induced Osteoclastogenesis.

Dou C(1), Li N(1), Ding N(1), Liu C(1), Yang X(1), Kang F(1), Cao Z(1), Quan
H(1), Hou T(1), Xu J(1), Dong S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Third Military Medical University. (2)Third Military Medical University
dongshiwu@tmmu.edu.cn.

The bone-resorbing osteoclast (OC) is essential for bone homeostasis, yet
deregulation of OCs contributes to diseases such as osteoporosis, osteopetrosis, 
and rheumatoid arthritis. Here we show that histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is a
key positive regulator during receptor activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B ligand
(RANKL)-induced osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption. Bone marrow macrophages
(BMMs) showed increased HDAC2 expression during osteoclastogenesis. HDAC2
overexpression enhanced, whereas HDAC2 deletion suppressed osteoclastogenesis and
bone resorption using lentivirus infection. Mechanistically, upon RANKL
activation, HDAC2 activated Akt, Akt directly phosphorylates and abrogates FoxO1,
which is a negative regulator during osteoclastogenesis through reducing reactive
oxygen species (ROS). HDAC2 deletion in BMMs resulted in decreased Akt activation
and increased FoxO1 activity during osteoclastogenesis. In conclusion, HDAC2
activates Akt thus suppresses FoxO1 transcription results in enhanced
osteoclastogenesis. Our data imply the potential value of HDAC2 as a new target
in regulating osteoclast differentiation and function.

Copyright © 2016, American Journal of Physiology - Cell Physiology.

PMID: 26962001  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Int J Toxicol. 2016 Mar 8. pii: 1091581816637071. [Epub ahead of print]

Repression of Biotin-Related Proteins by Benzo[a]Pyrene-Induced Epigenetic
Modifications in Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells.

Xia B(1), Yang LQ(2), Huang HY(2), Pang L(3), Yang XF(2), Yi YJ(4), Ren XH(2), Li
J(2), Zhuang ZX(2), Liu JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Shenzhen, China College of Food Science and Technology, Hunan
Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Modern
Toxicology, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen, China. 
(3)College of Horticulture and Gardening, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan, China. (4)College of Food Science and Technology, Hunan
Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Modern
Toxicology, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen, China
junii8@126.com zxzhuang2007@sina.com.

Benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) exposure has been associated with the alteration in
epigenetic marks that are involved in cancer development. Biotinidase (BTD) and
holocarboxylase synthetase (HCS) are 2 major enzymes involved in maintaining the 
homeostasis of biotinylation, and the deregulation of this pathway has been
associated with a number of cancers. However, the link between B[a]P exposure and
the dysregulation of BTD/HCS in B[a]P-associated tumorigenesis is unknown. Here
we showed that the expression of both BTD and HCS was significantly decreased
upon B[a]P treatment in human bronchial epithelial (16HBE) cells. Benzo[a]pyrene 
exposure led to the global loss of DNA methylation by immunofluorescence, which
coincided with the reduction in acetylation levels on histones H3 and H4 in 16HBE
cells. Consistent with decreased histone acetylation, histone deacetylases
(HDACs) HDAC2 and HDAC3 were significantly upregulated in a dosage-dependent
manner. When DNA methylation or HDAC activity was inhibited, we found that the
reduction in BTD and HCS was separately regulated through distinct epigenetic
mechanisms. Together, our results suggested the potential link between B[a]P
toxicity and deregulation of biotin homeostasis pathway in B[a]P-associated
cancer development.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 26960346  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2016 Apr;29(4):479-86. doi: 10.5713/ajas.15.0252.
Epub 2016 Apr 1.

Identification of Histone Deacetylase 2 as a Functional Gene for Skeletal Muscle 
Development in Chickens.

Shahjahan M(1), Liu R(1), Zhao G(1), Wang F(1), Zheng M(1), Zhang J(1), Song
J(1), Wen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Beijing 100193, China.

A previous genome-wide association study (GWAS) exposed histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) as a possible candidate gene for breast muscle weight in chickens. The
present research has examined the possible role of HDAC2 in skeletal muscle
development in chickens. Gene expression was measured by quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction in breast and thigh muscles during both embryonic (four ages) and 
post-hatch (five ages) development and in cultures of primary myoblasts during
both proliferation and differentiation. The expression of HDAC2 increased
significantly across embryonic days (ED) in breast (ED 14, 16, 18, and 21) and
thigh (ED 14 and 18, and ED 14 and 21) muscles suggesting that it possibly plays 
a role in myoblast hyperplasia in both breast and thigh muscles. Transcript
abundance of HDAC2 identified significantly higher in fast growing muscle than
slow growing in chickens at d 90 of age. Expression of HDAC2 during myoblast
proliferation in vitro declined between 24 h and 48 h when expression of the
marker gene paired box 7 (PAX7) increased and cell numbers increased throughout
72 h of culture. During induced differentiation of myoblasts to myotubes, the
abundance of HDAC2 and the marker gene myogenic differentiation 1 (MYOD1), both
increased significantly. Taken together, it is suggested that HDAC2 is most
likely involved in a suppressive fashion in myoblast proliferation and may play a
positive role in myoblast differentiation. The present results confirm the
suggestion that HDAC2 is a functional gene for pre-hatch and post-hatch (fast
growing muscle) development of chicken skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC4782082
PMID: 26949948  [PubMed]


10. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Mar 3. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10598. [Epub ahead of print]

Association of downregulated HDAC 2 with the impaired mitochondrial function and 
cytokine secretion in the monocytes/macrophages from gestational diabetes
mellitus patients.

Qu X(1), Yu H(1), Jia B(1), Yu X(1), Cui Q(1), Liu Z(1), Sun C(2), Chu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of
Qingdao University, Yantai, 264000, Shandong, China. (2)Clinical laboratory,
Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of Qingdao University, Yantai, 264000, Shandong,
China.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is associated with an increased risk of type 
2 diabetes (T2DM) and cardiovascular diseases in later life, yet with underlying 
mechanisms unclear. The present study was to explore the association of
upregulated histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC 2) with the impaired mitochondrial
function and the cytokine secretion in the monocytes/macrophages from GDM
patients. In this study, we examined the mitochondrial function, proinflamatory
cytokine secretion and the HDAC 2 level in the serum or in the
monocytes/macrophages from GDM patients,investigated the influence by HDAC 2
inhibitor, AR-42 (N-hydroxy-4-[[(2S)-3-methyl-2-phenylbutanoyl]amino]benzamide), 
on the mitochondrial function and cytokine secretion in the isolated GDM
monocytes/macrophages. Results demonstrated an increased mitochondria size,
mitochondrial superoxide and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and an
undermined mitochondria membrane potential (MMP) in the GDM
monocytes/macrophages. And the serum levels of interleukin (IL)-1ß, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-a and IL-6 were also markedly higher in the GDM
pregnancies, while the expression and activity of HDAC 2 was downregulated.
Moreover, AR-42-mediated HDAC 2 inhibition in vitro contributed to the impaired
mitochondrial function and the proinflamatory cytokine secretion. In conclusion, 
this study suggests an association of the impaired mitochondrial function and the
promoted proinflamatory cytokine secretion with the reduced HDAC 2 activity in
GDM. These findings may present HDAC 2 as a target for GDM treatment.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26936353  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 27. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7778. [Epub ahead of print]

Significance of the NOR1-FOXA1/HDAC2-Slug regulatory network in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of tumor cells.

Wang W(1,)(2,)(3), Yi M(4), Chen S(1,)(2), Li J(2), Li G(5), Yang J(6), Zheng
P(2), Zhang H(2), Xiong W(2), McCarthy JB(6), Li G(2), Li X(2), Xiang B(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Cancer Hospital and Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Xiangya
Medical School, The Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China.
(2)Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya School of Medicine, The Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Affiliated
Hospital of Jining Medical University, Jining, 272029, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Xiangya Hospital, The Central South University,
Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China. (5)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, The Central South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan,
China. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process is believed to play a crucial
role in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) progression, a squamous cell carcinoma of 
the head and neck with the tendency to metastasize early. At present, much
attention has been given to the inducer of EMT involved in NPC progression, while
antagonists have been less intensively characterized. In this study, unbiased
analysis of EMT-associated gene expression patterns was performed using data
mining of global gene expression profiles derived from NPC samples, leading to
the successful identification of NOR1, FOXA1, and Slug, all of which showed
aberrant expression during NPC progression. The effect of tumor suppressor NOR1
on Slug-induced NPC cells during the EMT process was investigated by use of
ectopic expression and RNA interference methods. The molecular mechanisms
underlying the tumor-suppressing effect of NOR1 on Slug-induced EMT were thought 
to be dependent on the cooperation of NOR1 with the FOXA1-HDAC2 complex. We also 
showed that FOXA1 and HDAC2 bind the slug promoter and directly repress its
transcription. Our data revealed a previously unrecognized role of the
NOR1-FOXA1/HDAC2-Slug network in the regulation of the EMT process and
aggressiveness of NPC.

PMID: 26934447  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Epigenetics. 2016 Feb 18:1-13. [Epub ahead of print]

Gestational stress induces depressive-like and anxiety-like phenotypes through
epigenetic regulation of BDNF expression in offspring hippocampus.

Zheng Y(1), Fan W(1), Zhang X(1), Dong E(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Oncology Department , The second affiliated hospital, Chongqing Medical
University , No.76 Linjiang Road, Yuzhong District , Chongqing , China. (2)b The 
Psychiatric Institute , Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, University
of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago , IL , USA.

Exposure to stressful life events during pregnancy exerts profound effects on
neurodevelopment and increases the risk for several neurodevelopmental disorders 
including major depression. The mechanisms underlying the consequences of
gestational stress are complex and remain to be elucidated. This study
investigated the effects of gestational stress on depressive-like behavior and
epigenetic modifications in young adult offspring. Gestational stress was induced
by a combination of restraint and 24-hour light disturbance to pregnant dams
throughout gestation. Depressive-like and anxiety-like behaviors of young adult
offspring were examined. The expression and promoter methylation of brain derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) were measured using RT-qPCR, Western blot, methylated 
DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). In
addition, the expressions of histone deacetylases (HDACs) and acetylated histone 
H3 lysine 14 (AcH3K14) were also analyzed. Our results show that offspring from
gestational stress dams exhibited depressive-like and anxiety-like behaviors.
Biochemically, stress-offspring showed decreased expression of BDNF, increased
expression of DNMT1, HDAC1, and HDAC2, and decreased expression of AcH3K14 in the
hippocampus as compared to non-stress offspring. Data from MeDIP and ChIP assays 
revealed an increased methylation as well as decreased binding of AcH3K14 on
specific BDNF promoters. Pearson analyses indicated that epigenetic changes
induced by gestational stress were correlated with depressive-like and
anxiety-like behaviors. These data suggest that gestational stress may be a
suitable model for understanding the behavioral and molecular epigenetic changes 
observed in patients with depression.

PMID: 26890656  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. J Neurosci. 2016 Feb 17;36(7):2119-30. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3056-15.2016.

Histone Modification of Nedd4 Ubiquitin Ligase Controls the Loss of AMPA
Receptors and Cognitive Impairment Induced by Repeated Stress.

Wei J(1), Xiong Z(2), Lee JB(2), Cheng J(2), Duffney LJ(2), Matas E(2), Yan Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at
Buffalo, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, New York 14214, and
VA Western New York Healthcare System, Buffalo, New York 14215. (2)Department of 
Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at Buffalo, School of
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, New York 14214, and. (3)Department of 
Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at Buffalo, School of
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, New York 14214, and VA Western New
York Healthcare System, Buffalo, New York 14215 zhenyan@buffalo.edu.

Stress and the major stress hormone corticosterone induce profound influences in 
the brain. Altered histone modification and transcriptional dysfunction have been
implicated in stress-related mental disorders. We previously found that repeated 
stress caused an impairment of prefrontal cortex (PFC)-mediated cognitive
functions by increasing the ubiquitination and degradation of AMPA-type glutamate
receptors via a mechanism depending on the E3 ubiquitin ligase Nedd4. Here, we
demonstrated that in PFC of repeatedly stressed rats, active glucocorticoid
receptor had the increased binding to the glucocorticoid response element of
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) promoter, resulting in the upregulation of HDAC2.
Inhibition or knock-down of HDAC2 blocked the stress-induced impairment of
synaptic transmission, AMPAR expression, and recognition memory. Furthermore, we 
found that, in stressed animals, the HDAC2-dependent downregulation of histone
methyltransferase Ehmt2 (G9a) led to the loss of repressive histone methylation
at the Nedd4-1 promoter and the transcriptional activation of Nedd4. These
results have provided an epigenetic mechanism and a potential treatment strategy 
for the detrimental effects of chronic stress.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Prolonged
stress exposure can induce altered histone modification and transcriptional
dysfunction, which may underlie the profound influence of stress in regulating
brain functions. We report an important finding about the epigenetic mechanism
controlling the detrimental effects of repeated stress on synaptic transmission
and cognitive function. First, it has revealed the stress-induced alteration of
key epigenetic regulators HDAC2 and Ehmt2, which determines the synaptic and
behavioral effects of repeated stress. Second, it has uncovered the
stress-induced histone modification of the target gene Nedd4, an E3 ligase that
is critically involved in the ubiquitination and degradation of AMPA receptors
and cognition. Third, it has provided the epigenetic approach, HDAC2 inhibition
or knock-down, to rescue synaptic and cognitive functions in stressed animals.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/362119-12$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4756151 [Available on 2016-08-17]
PMID: 26888924  [PubMed - in process]


14. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Dec 15;8(12):22217-26. eCollection 2015.

Erythromycin enhances the anti-inflammatory activity of budesonide in COPD rat
model.

Miao L(1), Gao Z(2), Huang F(1), Huang S(1), Zhang R(1), Ma D(1), Wu Q(1), Li
F(1), Chen H(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Zhengzhou University Zhengzhou 450000, Henan Province, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical
University Weifang 261031, Shandong Province, China.

Glucocorticoids (GCs) have been widely applied to treat patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). But the effect of GCs was not ideal. This
study was to observe whether erythromycin could enhance the anti-inflammatory
activity of budesonide in COPD model rats and to explore the mechanism involved. 
In this study, male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into five groups: healthy
control group (H group), COPD model group (C group), erythromycin group (E
group), budesonide group (B group) and erythromycin + budesonide group (E+B
group). The rats in groups of C, E, B and E+B were developed into COPD models.
Different groups were given different drug interventions. The levels of
8-iso-PGF2a, IL-8, and TNF-a in BALF and serum were measured with ELISA. The
protein expression levels of HDAC2, PI3K, and p-AKT in lung tissue were measured 
with Western-blot and immunohistochemistry. The levels of 8-iso-PGF2a, IL-8, and 
TNF-a in BALF and serum were lower in E+B group than those in B group and C group
(all P<0.001).The protein expression level of HDAC2 was higher and PI3K and p-AKT
were lower in E+B group than those in B group and C group (all P<0.001).
Moreover, the expression levels of HDAC2 were negatively correlated with the
levels of 8-iso-PGF2a, IL-8 and TNF-a both in serum and BALF and the expression
levels of PI3K and p-AKT among the five groups, with all P<0.001. We conclude
that erythromycin can enhance the anti-inflammatory activity of budesonide in
COPD model rats, possibly through inhibiting the PI3K/AKT pathway and enhancing
the activity of HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC4729983
PMID: 26885197  [PubMed]


15. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2016 Feb 11:ajpgi.00363.2015. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00363.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Nuclear factor <U+03BA>B Regulates the Expression of Multiple Genes Encoding Liver
Transport Proteins.

Balasubramaniyan N(1), Ananthanarayanan M(2), Suchy FJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado School of Medicine. (2)Yale University. (3)Childrens
Hospital Research Institute frederick.suchy@childrenscolorado.org.

We identified the mechanisms underlying the inhibitory effects of NF-<U+03BA>B on the
expression of genes encoding multiple liver transport proteins. NF-<U+03BA>B binding
sites were found in the promoters of FXR-target genes. An electromobility shift
assay demonstrated the interaction between the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 protein and a BSEP NF-<U+03BA>B
response element. ChIP analysis confirmed binding of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 to the BSEP locus 
but not the FXRE in vitro. NF-<U+03BA>B p65 overexpression in Huh-7 cells repressed
FXR/RXR transactivation of the BSEP and ABCG5/G8 promoters, which was reversed by
expression of the I<U+03BA>Ba super-repressor. NF-<U+03BA>B interacted directly with FXR on
co-immunoprecipitation, suggesting another level for the inhibitory effects of
NF-<U+03BA>B on FXR-target genes. In vivo ChIP analysis with liver nuclei from mice
after 3 days of common bile duct ligation or 6 hours post lipopolysaccharide
injection showed increased recruitment of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 to the Bsep promoter compared
with controls. There was also increased recruitment of the corepressor SMRT,
HDAC3 and HDAC2 to the NF-<U+03BA>B sites. We also found that NF-<U+03BA>B p65 was recruited to
NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites in the promoters of organic solute transporter, OSTa and
OSTß, and activated rather repressed gene expression. NF-<U+03BA>B activation of Osta
and Ostß was associated with increased recruitment of th coactivator CBP/p300 to 
the NF-<U+03BA>BE and depletion of CBP/p300 at the FXRE. These studies demonstrate a
novel role for NF-<U+03BA>B in adaptation to obstructive and LPS-induced cholestasis
acting through recruitment to NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites in the promoters of FXR-target 
genes and possibly through direct interaction with FXR.

Copyright © 2015, American Journal of Physiology- Gastrointestinal and Liver
Physiology.

PMID: 26867564  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. J Mol Med (Berl). 2016 Feb 11. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA-223 controls the expression of histone deacetylase 2: a novel axis in
COPD.

Leuenberger C(1), Schuoler C(1,)(2), Bye H(1), Mignan C(1), Rechsteiner T(1),
Hillinger S(3), Opitz I(3), Marsland B(4), Faiz A(5), Hiemstra PS(6), Timens
W(7), Camici GG(8), Kohler M(1), Huber LC(1), Brock M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonology, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, University of Zurich 
and Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (4)Faculty of Biology and Medicine, Service de
Pneumologie, University of Lausanne, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois
(CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland. (5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. (7)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(8)Center for Molecular Cardiology, Division of Cardiology, University Hospital
of Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (9)Division of Pulmonology,
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
matthias.brock@usz.ch.

Reduced activity of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) has been described in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but the mechanisms resulting
in decreased expression of this important epigenetic modifier remain unknown.
Here, we employed several in vitro experiments to address the role of microRNAs
(miRNAs) on the regulation of HDAC2 in endothelial cells. Manipulation of miRNA
levels in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (HPAEC) was achieved by using 
electroporation with anti-miRNAs and miRNA mimics. Target prediction software
identified miR-223 as a potential repressor of HDAC2. In subsequent stimulation
experiments using inflammatory cytokines known to be increased in patients with
COPD, miR-223 was found to be significantly induced. Functional analysis
demonstrated that overexpression of miR-223 decreased HDAC2 expression and
activity in HPAEC. Conversely, HDAC2 expression and activity was preserved in
anti-miR-223-treated cells. Direct miRNA-target interaction was confirmed by
reporter gene assay. In a next step, reduced expression of HDAC2 was found to
increase the levels of the chemokine fractalkine (CX3CL1). In vivo studies
confirmed elevated expression levels of miR-223 in mice exposed to cigarette
smoke and in emphysematous lung tissue from LPS-treated mice. Moreover, a
significant inverse correlation of miR-223 and HDAC2 expression was found in two 
independent cohorts of COPD patients. These data emphasize that miR-223, the most
prevalent miRNA in COPD, controls expression and activity of HDAC2 in pulmonary
cells, which, in turn, might alter the expression profile of chemokines. This
pathway provides a novel pathogenic link between dysregulated miRNA expression
and epigenetic activity in COPD.KEY MESSAGES: Histone deacetylase 2 is directly
targeted by miR-223. Levels of miR-223 are induced by interleukin-1ß and tumor
necrosis factor-a. miR-223 controls the expression of fractalkine by targeting
histone deacetylase 2. miR-223 levels are increased in COPD mouse models. miR-223
levels inversely correlate with HDAC2 expression in COPD patients.

PMID: 26864305  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. J Vis Exp. 2016 Jan 14;(107). doi: 10.3791/53647.

Examination of Proteins Bound to Nascent DNA in Mammalian Cells Using
BrdU-ChIP-Slot-Western Technique.

Bhaskara S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman
Cancer Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine;
Srividya.Bhaskara@hci.utah.edu.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1,2) localize to the sites of DNA replication. 
In the previous study, using a selective inhibitor and a genetic knockdown
system, we showed novel functions for HDAC1,2 in replication fork progression and
nascent chromatin maintenance in mammalian cells. Additionally, we used a
BrdU-ChIP-Slot-Western technique that combines chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) of bromo-deoxyuridine (BrdU)-labeled DNA with slot blot and Western
analyses to quantitatively measure proteins or histone modification associated
with nascent DNA. Actively dividing cells were treated with HDAC1,2 selective
inhibitor or transfected with siRNAs against Hdac1 and Hdac2 and then newly
synthesized DNA was labeled with the thymidine analog bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU).
The BrdU labeling was done at a time point when there was no significant cell
cycle arrest or apoptosis due to the loss of HDAC1,2 functions. Following
labeling of cells with BrdU, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) of histone
acetylation marks or the chromatin-remodeler was performed with specific
antibodies. BrdU-labeled input DNA and the immunoprecipitated (or ChIPed) DNA was
then spotted onto a membrane using the slot blot technique and immobilized using 
UV. The amount of nascent DNA in each slot was then quantitatively assessed using
Western analysis with an anti-BrdU antibody. The effect of loss of HDAC1,2
functions on the levels of newly synthesized DNA-associated histone acetylation
marks and chromatin remodeler was then determined by normalizing the BrdU-ChIP
signal obtained from the treated samples to the control samples.

PMID: 26863264  [PubMed - in process]


18. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 8. pii: clincanres.1063.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

HDAC inhibition induces microRNA-182 which targets Rad51 and impairs HR repair to
sensitize cells to sapacitabine in acute myelogenous leukemia.

Lai TH(1), Ewald B(2), Zecevic A(3), Liu C(4), Sulda M(2), Papaioannou D(1),
Garzon R(5), Blachly JS(6), Plunkett W(7), Sampath D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Ohio State University. (2)Experimental Therapeutics, Univ of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center. (3)Dept. of Experimental Therapeutics, Univ. of Texas 
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. (4)Experimental Therapeutics, MD Anderson Cancer
Center. (5)Medicine, The Ohio State University. (6)Internal Medicine, Ohio State 
University. (7)Experimental Therapeutics, Univ. of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center. (8)Hematology, Ohio State University deepa.sampath@osumc.edu.

PURPOSE: The double strand breaks elicited by sapacitabine, a clinically active
nucleoside analog prodrug are repaired by Rad51 and the homologous recombination 
repair (HR) pathway which could potentially limit its toxicity. We investigated
the mechanism by which HDAC inhibitors targeted Rad51 and HR to sensitize AML
cells to sapacitabine.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Chromatin immunoprecipitation identified the role of HDACs
in silencing microRNA-182 in AML. Immunoblotting, gene expression, overexpression
or inhibition of miR-182 and luciferase assays established that miR-182 directly 
targeted Rad51. HR reporter assays, apoptotic assays and colony forming assays
established that the miR-182, as well as the HDAC inhibition-mediated decreases
in Rad51 inhibited HR repair and sensitized cells to sapacitabine.
RESULTS: The gene repressors, HDAC1 and HDAC2, became recruited to the promoter
of miR-182 to silence its expression in AML. HDAC inhibition induced miR-182 in
AML cell lines and primary AML blasts. miR-182 targeted Rad51 protein both in
luciferase assays and in AML cells. Overexpression of miR-182, as well as HDAC
inhibition-mediated induction of miR-182 were linked to time- and dose-dependent 
decreases in the levels of Rad51, an inhibition of HR, increased levels of
residual damage and decreased survival after exposure to double strand damage
inducing agents.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings define the mechanism by which HDAC inhibition induces
miR-182 to target Rad51 and highlights a novel pharmacological strategy that
compromises the ability of AML cells to conduct HR, thereby sensitizing AML cells
to DNA damaging agents that activate HR as a repair and potential resistance
mechanism.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26858310  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 Mar;77(3):613-21. doi:
10.1007/s00280-016-2979-9. Epub 2016 Feb 5.

Histone deacetylase 2 regulates doxorubicin (Dox) sensitivity of colorectal
cancer cells by targeting ABCB1 transcription.

Ye P(1), Xing H(2), Lou F(3), Wang K(3), Pan Q(3), Zhou X(3), Gong L(3), Li D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Shaoxing People's Hospital, Shaoxing
Hospital of Zhejiang University, Shaoxing, 312000, China. (2)Department of
Intensive Care, Xiasha Campus, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital Affiliated to Zhejiang
University, School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310019, China. (3)Department of Medical
Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital Affiliated to Zhejiang University, School of 
Medicine, 3# Qingchun Eastern Road, Hangzhou, 310018, China. (4)Department of
Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital Affiliated to Zhejiang University,
School of Medicine, 3# Qingchun Eastern Road, Hangzhou, 310018, China.
lidazju@163.com.

PURPOSE: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been shown to regulate cell cycle,
differentiation, and apoptosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, while their
roles in drug sensitivity remain unclear. The objectives of the present study
were to investigate the effects of HDAC2 on drug resistance of CRC cells.
METHODS: We measured the expression of class I HDACs (HDAC1, 2, 3, 8) in CRC and 
human normal colonic epithelial cells. Additionally, we inhibited HDAC2 via siRNA
or overexpressed it via pcDNA/HDAC2 transfection to evaluate its roles in
doxorubicin (Dox) sensitivity.
RESULTS: Our present study showed HDAC2 was significantly increased in CRC cell
lines as compared to human normal colonic epithelial cells. Silencing of HDAC2
can obviously enhance the sensitivity of HCT-116 and SW480 cells to dDox.
Further, knockdown of HDAC2 can significantly (p < 0.05) downregulate the
expression of ABCB1, while not ABCG2, ABCC1, ABCA1, or ABCC2. Inhibition of HDAC2
decreased ABCB1 promoter activities and the phosphorylation of c-fos and c-Jun,
which can directly interact with the ABCB1 promoter and then promote its
transcription. Overexpression of HDAC2 by pcDNA/HDAC2 transfection significantly 
increased the sensitivity of CRC cells to Dox and upregulated the levels of P-gp,
p-c-fos, and p-c-Jun.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed that HDAC2 can regulate Dox sensitivity of CRC
cells by targeting ABCB1 transcription. It suggested that HDAC2 might be an
important target for CRC therapy. Further, the combination of HDAC2-specific
inhibitor and anticancer drugs including Dox might be an efficiency approach to
elevate the treatment outcome of CRC.

PMID: 26846508  [PubMed - in process]


20. Dis Markers. 2015;2015:285125. doi: 10.1155/2015/285125. Epub 2015 Dec 29.

Reduced Histone H3 Acetylation in CD4(+) T Lymphocytes: Potential Mechanism of
Latent Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults.

Liu XY(1), Xu JF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Yiwu, Zhejiang 322000, China. (2)Department of Surgery,
Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Yiwu,
Zhejiang 322000, China.

Aims. Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) is the result of
gene-environment interactions. Histone acetylation regulates gene expression and 
maybe interpret how environmental factors modify LADA. Hence, we studied the
histone acetylation patterns in CD4(+) T lymphocytes from LADA patients. Methods.
Blood CD4(+) T lymphocytes from 28 patients with LADA and 28 healthy controls
were obtained to detect histone H3 acetylation and H4 acetylation. The gene
expression of histone acetyltransferases (P300 and CREBBP) and histone
deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC7) was measured by real-time polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Results. Compared to healthy controls, reduced global H3
acetylation was observed in LADA patients' CD4(+) T lymphocytes (P < 0.05).
Global level of H4 acetylation was not statistically different. Among LADA,
CD4(+) T lymphocytes H3 acetylation was associated with glycosylated hemoglobin
(HbA1c) and GADA titer. Compared to healthy controls, the expression of histone
acetyltransferases CREBBP in LADA patients was downregulated, and the expression 
of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC7 was upregulated. Conclusion. A concerted 
downregulation of histone H3 acetylation was found in CD4(+) T lymphocytes of
LADA patients, and this might provide evidence of a novel epigenetic explanation 
for the pathogenesis of LADA and its complications.

PMCID: PMC4709642
PMID: 26839444  [PubMed - in process]


21. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 27;11(1):e0147816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147816.
eCollection 2016.

DNMT1 and HDAC2 Cooperate to Facilitate Aberrant Promoter Methylation in
Inorganic Phosphate-Induced Endothelial-Mesenchymal Transition.

Tan X(1,)(2), Xu X(1), Zeisberg M(2,)(3), Zeisberg EM(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Pneumology, Göttingen University Medical Center, 
Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany. (2)Department of Nephrology and
Rheumatology, Göttingen University Medical Center, Georg August University,
Göttingen, Germany. (3)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK),
Göttingen, Germany.

While phosphorus in the form of inorganic or organic phosphate is critically
involved in most cellular functions, high plasma levels of inorganic phosphate
levels have emerged as independent risk factor for cardiac fibrosis,
cardiovascular morbidity and decreased life-expectancy. While the link of high
phosphate and cardiovascular disease is commonly explained by direct cellular
effects of phospho-regulatory hormones, we here explored the possibility of
inorganic phosphate directly eliciting biological responses in cells. We
demonstrate that human coronary endothelial cells (HCAEC) undergo an
endothelial-mesenchymal transition (EndMT) when exposed to high phosphate. We
further demonstrate that such EndMT is initiated by recruitment of aberrantly
phosphorylated DNMT1 to the RASAL1 CpG island promoter by HDAC2, causing aberrant
promoter methylation and transcriptional suppression, ultimately leading to
increased Ras-GTP activity and activation of common EndMT regulators Twist and
Snail. Our studies provide a novel aspect for known adverse effects of high
phosphate levels, as eukaryotic cells are commonly believed to have lost
phosphate-sensing mechanisms of prokaryotes during evolution, rendering them
insensitive to extracellular inorganic orthophosphate. In addition, our studies
provide novel insights into the mechanisms underlying specific targeting of
select genes in context of fibrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4729486
PMID: 26815200  [PubMed - in process]


22. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2016;14(1):10-6.

Dysregulation of Acetylation Enzymes Inanimal Models of Psychostimulant use
Disorders: Evolving Stories.

Lud Cadet J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIDA Intramural Research Program,
251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224. JCADET@intra.nida.nih.gov.

Substance use disorders are neuropsychiatric illnesses that have substantial
negative biopsychosocial impact. These diseases are defined as compulsive abuse
of licit or illicit substances despite adverse medicolegal consequences. Although
much research has been conducted to elucidate the pathobiological bases of these 
disorders, much remains to be done to develop an overarching neurobiological
understanding that might be translatable to beneficial pharmacological therapies.
Recent advances in epigenetics promise to lead to such an elucidation. Here I
provide a brief overview of observations obtained using some models of
psychostimulant administration in rodents. The review identifies CREB binding
protein (CBP), HDAC1, HDAC2, HADC3, HDAC4, and HDAC5 as important players in the 
acetylation and deacetylation processes that occur after contingent or
non-contingent administration of psychostimulants. These observations are
discussed within a framework that suggests a need for better animal models of
addiction in order to bring these epigenetic advances to bear on the
pharmacological treatment of human addicts.

PMCID: PMC4787278 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26813118  [PubMed - in process]


23. BMC Cancer. 2016 Jan 25;16(1):38. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2068-9.

LINE-1 silencing by retinoblastoma proteins is effected through the nucleosomal
and remodeling deacetylase multiprotein complex.

Montoya-Durango DE(1), Ramos KA(2), Bojang P(3), Ruiz L(4), Ramos IN(5), Ramos
KS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
diego.montoya-durango@louisville.edu. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
kenramos@live.com. (3)Department of Medicine, University of Arizona College of
Medicine, Tucson, AZ, 85721, USA. pbojang@email.arizona.edu. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. lorellruiz@gmail.com. (5)Department of Health
Promotion Sciences, University of Arizona College of Public Health, Tucson, AZ,
85721, USA. inramos@email.arizona.edu. (6)Department of Medicine, University of
Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, 85721, USA. ksramos@email.arizona.edu.

BACKGROUND: Long Interspersed Nuclear Element-1 (L1) is an oncogenic mammalian
retroelement silenced early in development via tightly controlled epigenetic
mechanisms. We have previously shown that the regulatory region of human and
murine L1s interact with retinoblastoma (RB) proteins to effect retroelement
silencing. The present studies were conducted to identify the corepressor complex
responsible for RB-mediated silencing of L1.
METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation and silencing RNA technology were used to 
identify the repressor complex that silences L1 in human and murine cells.
RESULTS: Components of the Nucleosomal and Remodeling Deacetylase (NuRD)
multiprotein complex specifically enriched the L1 5'-untranslated DNA sequence in
human and murine cells. Genetic ablation of RB proteins in murine cells
destabilized interactions within the NuRD macromolecular complex and mediated
nuclear rearrangement of Mi2-ß, an ATP-dependent helicase subunit with nucleosome
remodeling activity. Depletion of Mi2-ß, RbAP46 and HDAC2 reduced the repressor
activity of the NuRD complex and reactivated a synthetic L1 reporter in human
cells. Epigenetic reactivation of L1 in RB-null cells by DNA damage was markedly 
enhanced compared to wild type cells.
CONCLUSIONS: RB proteins stabilize interactions of the NuRD corepressor complex
within the L1 promoter to effect L1 silencing. L1 retroelements may serve as a
scaffold on which RB builds heterochromatic regions that regulate chromatin
function.

PMCID: PMC4727354
PMID: 26810492  [PubMed - in process]


24. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147380. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147380.
eCollection 2016.

Decreased Histone Deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in Peripheral Blood Monocytes (PBMCs) of 
COPD Patients.

Tan C(1), Xuan L(2,)(3), Cao S(2), Yu G(1), Hou Q(2), Wang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive
Substances and Functions of Natural Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute/Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is a class I histone deacetylase family
member that plays a critical role in suppressing inflammatory gene expression in 
the airways, lung parenchyma, and alveolar macrophages in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the expression of HDAC2 in
peripheral blood monocytes (PBMCs), nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) p65, and serum
inflammatory cytokine levels in COPD patients, smokers, and non-smokers remains
unclear.
METHODS: PBMCs were obtained from COPD patients, healthy smokers, and healthy
nonsmokers. The HDAC2 and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 expression were quantified by Western Blot.
HDAC activity was assessed by an HDAC fluorometric immunoprecipitation activity
assay kit. Serum tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) and interleukin-8 (IL-8)
levels were measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: HDAC2 expression and HDAC activity were decreased in PBMCs in COPD
patients compared with smokers and non-smokers. Increased NF-<U+03BA>B p65 expression,
serum TNF-a and IL-8 levels were observed in COPD patients compared with
nonsmokers. The FEV1%pred was positively correlated with HDAC2 expression and
HDAC activity in COPD patients. Smokers had decreased HDAC activity, increased
NF-<U+03BA>B p65 expression and serum TNF-a compared with nonsmokers.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC2 expression was decreased in PBMCs of COPD patients and was
correlated with disease severity. The reduction of HDAC2 expression not only
directly enhances the expression of inflammatory genes, but may account for the
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B mediated inflammation. Decreased HDAC2 may serve as a
potential biomarker of COPD and predict the decline of lung function.

PMCID: PMC4726592
PMID: 26809128  [PubMed - in process]


25. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Jan 21. pii: S1094-5539(16)30002-5. doi:
10.1016/j.pupt.2016.01.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Update on Molecular Mechanisms of Corticosteroid Resistance in Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Jiang Z(1), Zhu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, No.
180, Feng Lin Road Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic address:
jiang.zhilong@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine,
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, No. 180, Feng Lin Road Shanghai 200032,
China. Electronic address: zhu.lei@zs-hospital.sh.cn.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an inflammatory and irreversible 
pulmonary disorder that is characterized by inflammation and airway destruction. 
In recent years, COPD has become a global epidemic due to increased air pollution
and exposure to cigarette smoke. Current therapeutics using bronchiodialator and 
anti-inflammatory corticosteroids are most widely used for all patients with
persistent COPD, but these approaches are disappointing due to limited
improvement in symptom control and survival rate. More importantly, a certain
number of COPD patients are resistant to the corticosteroid treatment and thus
their symptoms worsen. Therefore, more effective anti-inflammatory drugs and
combinational treatment are required. Understanding of the underlying molecular
and immunological mechanisms is critical to developing new therapeutics. Lung
inflammation and the released pro-inflammatory cytokines affect glucocorticoid
receptor (GR), histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and surfactant protein D (SP-D)
activities in many cell types. Macrophages, neutrophils, airway epithelial cells 
and lymphocytes are involved in the induction of corticosteroid resistance. This 
review updated the recent advances in molecular and immunological mechanisms of
steroid resistance among patients and animal models with COPD. Meanwhile we
discussed novel therapeutic approaches in controlling lung inflammation and
improving corticosteroid sensitivity among the steroid resistant patients with
COPD.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26805715  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Front Cell Neurosci. 2016 Jan 12;9:510. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00510.
eCollection 2015.

Subcellular Localization of Class I Histone Deacetylases in the Developing
Xenopus tectum.

Guo X(1), Ruan H(1), Li X(2), Qin L(2), Tao Y(3), Qi X(1), Gao J(1), Gan L(1),
Duan S(2), Shen W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Organ Development and Regeneration, College of Life
and Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University Hangzhou, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology of Ministry of Health of China, Key Laboratory
of Neurobiology, Department of Neurobiology, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine Hangzhou, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University Nanjing, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are thought to localize in the nucleus to regulate
gene transcription and play pivotal roles in neurogenesis, apoptosis, and
plasticity. However, the subcellular distribution of class I HDACs in the
developing brain remains unclear. Here, we show that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are located 
in both the mitochondria and the nucleus in the Xenopus laevis stage 34 tectum
and are mainly restricted to the nucleus following further brain development.
HDAC3 is widely present in the mitochondria, nucleus, and cytoplasm during early 
tectal development and is mainly distributed in the nucleus in stage 45 tectum.
In contrast, HDAC8 is broadly located in the mitochondria, nucleus, and cytoplasm
during tectal development. These data demonstrate that HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3
are transiently localized in the mitochondria and that the subcellular
distribution of class I HDACs in the Xenopus tectum is heterogeneous.
Furthermore, we observed that spherical mitochondria accumulate in the cytoplasm 
at earlier stages, whereas elongated mitochondria are evenly distributed in the
tectum at later stages. The activity of histone acetylation (H4K12) remains low
in mitochondria during tectal development. Pharmacological blockades of HDACs
using a broad spectrum HDAC inhibitor of Trichostatin A (TSA) or specific class I
HDAC inhibitors of MS-275 and MGCD0103 decrease the number of mitochondria in the
tectum at stage 34. These findings highlight a link between the subcellular
distribution of class I HDACs and mitochondrial dynamics in the developing optic 
tectum of Xenopus laevis.

PMCID: PMC4709447
PMID: 26793062  [PubMed]


27. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 18;6:19340. doi: 10.1038/srep19340.

dbEM: A database of epigenetic modifiers curated from cancerous and normal
genomes.

Singh Nanda J(1), Kumar R(1), Raghava GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Centre, CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology,
Chandigarh-160036, India.

We have developed a database called dbEM (database of Epigenetic Modifiers) to
maintain the genomic information of about 167 epigenetic modifiers/proteins,
which are considered as potential cancer targets. In dbEM, modifiers are
classified on functional basis and comprise of 48 histone methyl transferases, 33
chromatin remodelers and 31 histone demethylases. dbEM maintains the genomic
information like mutations, copy number variation and gene expression in
thousands of tumor samples, cancer cell lines and healthy samples. This
information is obtained from public resources viz. COSMIC, CCLE and 1000-genome
project. Gene essentiality data retrieved from COLT database further highlights
the importance of various epigenetic proteins for cancer survival. We have also
reported the sequence profiles, tertiary structures and post-translational
modifications of these epigenetic proteins in cancer. It also contains
information of 54 drug molecules against different epigenetic proteins. A wide
range of tools have been integrated in dbEM e.g. Search, BLAST, Alignment and
Profile based prediction. In our analysis, we found that epigenetic proteins
DNMT3A, HDAC2, KDM6A, and TET2 are highly mutated in variety of cancers. We are
confident that dbEM will be very useful in cancer research particularly in the
field of epigenetic proteins based cancer therapeutics. This database is
available for public at URL: http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/dbem.

PMCID: PMC4726101
PMID: 26777304  [PubMed - in process]


28. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2016 Feb;37(2):228-34. doi: 10.1038/aps.2015.79. Epub 2016
Jan 18.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors attenuate P-aIgA1-induced cell proliferation and
extracellular matrix synthesis in human renal mesangial cells in vitro.

Dai Q(1,)(2,)(3), Liu J(1), Du YL(1), Hao X(1), Ying J(1), Tan Y(4), He LQ(5),
Wang WM(1), Chen N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (2)Department of Nephrology, the Central
Hospital of Xuhui District, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Department of Nephrology, 
Punan Hospital, Shanghai 200125, China. (4)Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Shanghai 200025, China. (5)Department of Nephrology, Shuguang Hospital, Shanghai 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200021, China.

AIM: Aberrantly glycosylated IgA1 is a key factor in the pathogenesis of IgA
nephropathy (IgAN). In this study we investigated the effects of aggregated IgA1 
derived from IgAN patients (P-aIgA1) on human renal mesangial cells (HMCs) and
the anti-proliferative and antifibrotic effects of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors in vitro.
METHODS: Three types of IgA1 were prepared, ie, N-IgA1 (IgA1 from healthy
volunteers), P-IgA1 (IgA1 from IgAN patients), and P-aIgA1 (aggregated IgA1 from 
IgAN patients). The isolated IgA1 was heated for thermal polymerization. The
proliferation of human renal mesangial cells (HMCs) were assessed using MTT
assay. The expression levels of relevant proteins were examined using
immunoblotting assays or immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: P-aIgA1 (25-250 µg/mL) dose-dependently promoted the proliferation of
HMCs, and markedly increased the protein levels of type I histone deacetylase
(HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC8) in the cells. Both P-IgA1 and N-IgA1 were much weaker in
stimulating cell proliferation and HDAC expression. P-aIgA1 (50 µg/mL) markedly
increased the protein levels of Col1a1 and PAI-1, as well as pSmad2/3 and pStat3 
in the cells. Pretreatment with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA, 250
nmol/L) or valproic acid (VPA, 400 µg/mL) partially reversed P-aIgA1-induced cell
proliferation and extracellular matrix synthesis in HMCs.
CONCLUSION: P-aIgA1 produces pro-proliferative and profibrotic actions in HMCs
via upregulating the expression of HDACs, and subsequently activating
TGF-ß/Smad2/3 and Jak2/Stat3 signaling pathways. Both VPA and TSA attenuate
P-aIgA1-induced cell proliferation and fibrosis in HMCs.

PMCID: PMC4753372
PMID: 26775659  [PubMed - in process]


29. Neoplasma. 2016;63(2):193-200. doi: 10.4149/203_150422N214.

Chidamide and 5-flurouracil show a synergistic antitumor effect on human colon
cancer xenografts in nude mice.

Liu L, Qiu S, Liu Y, Liu Z, Zheng Y, Su X, Chen B, Chen H.

Chidamide is a novel histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that increases the
acetylation of histone H3 by inhibiting the activity of HDAC1 and HDAC2. We
previously found that treatment of human colon cancer cells with chidamide led to
cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest at G0/1 phase in vitro. The present study
extended the observations in vivo and explored the underlying molecular
mechanisms. In nude mice bearing human colon cancer LoVo cell xenografts,
chidamide alone or in combination with 5-flurouracil (5-Fu) reduced the
expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2, accompanied with increased acetylation of histone 
H3. Chidamide alone inhibited the tumor growth and induce cell apoptosis in
tumor-bearing mice. Combined treatment of chidamide with 5-Fu enhanced the
anti-tumor activity of 5-Fu. Western blotting analysis showed that chidamide
alone or in combination with 5-Fu upregulated the expressions of cleaved
Caspase-3 and cleaved poly-ADP (adenosine diphosphate)-ribose polymerase (PARP). 
In addition, chidamide alone or in combination with 5-Fu increased the p53,
phosphorylated-p53 (p-p53), p21 and <U+03B3>H2AX levels, but suppressed cyclin dependent
kinase 4 (CDK4) expression in tumor cells. Chidamide alone or in combination with
5-Fu down regulated the expressions of p-AKT, p-mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR), p-p70S6K, p-Raf, and p44/42 mitogen activated protein kinase (Erk1/2),
indicating the blockage of these signaling pathways. The results demonstrated
that chidamide alone or in combination with 5-Fu exerted anti-tumor activity in
nude mice bearing human colon cancer LoVo cell xenografts, and several signaling 
pathways might be involved in the chidamide-induced tumor growth inhibition and
tumor cell apoptosis.

PMID: 26774139  [PubMed - in process]


30. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Feb;15(2):299-312. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0618. Epub
2016 Jan 15.

Inhibition of Class I Histone Deacetylases 1 and 2 Promotes Urothelial Carcinoma 
Cell Death by Various Mechanisms.

Pinkerneil M(1), Hoffmann MJ(1), Deenen R(2), Köhrer K(2), Arent T(3), Schulz
WA(1), Niegisch G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Dusseldorf,
Germany. (2)Biological and Medical Research Center (BMFZ), Medical Faculty,
Heinrich Heine University, Dusseldorf, Germany. (3)Institute of Forensic
Medicine, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Dusseldorf, Germany.
(4)Department of Urology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Dusseldorf,
Germany. Guenter.Niegisch@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

Class I histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 contribute to cell proliferation and
are commonly upregulated in urothelial carcinoma. To evaluate whether specific
inhibition of these enzymes might serve as an appropriate therapy for urothelial 
carcinoma, siRNA-mediated knockdown and specific pharmacologic inhibition of
HDAC1 and HDAC2 were applied in urothelial carcinoma cell lines (UCC) with
distinct HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression profiles. HDACs and response marker proteins 
were followed by Western blotting and qRT-PCR. Effects of class I HDAC
suppression on UCCs were analyzed by viability, colony forming, and caspase-3/7
assays; flow cytometry, senescence and lactate dehydrogenase cytotoxicity assays;
and immunofluorescence staining. Whereas single knockdowns of HDAC1 or HDAC2 were
impeded by compensatory upregulation of the other isoenzyme, efficient double
knockdown of HDAC1 and HDAC2 reduced proliferation by up to 80% and induced
apoptosis-like cell death in all UCCs. Clonogenic growth was cell line- and
HDAC-dependently reduced, with double knockdown of HDAC1 and HDAC2 being usually 
most efficient. Class I HDAC-specific inhibitors, especially the more specific
HDAC1/2 inhibitors romidepsin and givinostat, significantly reduced proliferation
of all UCCs (IC50, 3.36 nmol/L-4.59 µmol/L). Romidepsin and givinostat also
significantly inhibited clonogenic growth of UCCs, with minor effects on
nontumorigenic controls. Intriguingly, these compounds induced primarily S-phase 
disturbances and nonapoptotic cell death in UCCs. Thus, although both ways of
inhibiting HDAC1/2 share mechanisms and efficaciously inhibit cell proliferation,
their modes of action differ substantially. Regardless, combined inhibition of
HDAC1/2 appears to represent a promising strategy for urothelial carcinoma
therapy. Mol Cancer Ther; 15(2); 299-312. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26772204  [PubMed - in process]


31. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan 4. [Epub ahead of print]

p21 and CK2 interaction-mediated HDAC2 phosphorylation modulates KLF4 acetylation
to regulate bladder cancer cell proliferation.

Jia ZM(1,)(2), Ai X(3), Teng JF(2), Wang YP(1), Wang BJ(1), Zhang X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Clinical Division of Surgery, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, 100853, China. (2)Department of Urology, Military General
Hospital of Beijing PLA, Beijing, 100700, China. (3)Department of Urology,
Military General Hospital of Beijing PLA, Beijing, 100700, China.
aixing0007@163.com. (4)Department of Urology, Clinical Division of Surgery,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100853, China. zhangxu_2016@sina.com.

Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is a transcription factor involved in both tumor
suppression and oncogenesis as a transcriptional activator or repressor in a
context-dependent manner. KLF4 acts as a regulator of p53 depending on p21 status
in breast cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying the distinct role of KLF4
remain poorly understood. Here, we revealed that p21 depletion converted KLF4
from a cell cycle inhibitor to a promoter of bladder cancer cell proliferation.
Additionally, KLF4 was acetylated in a p21-dependent manner to inhibit bladder
cancer cell growth as a tumor suppressor. However, deacetylated KLF4 functioned
as an oncogene promoting bladder cancer cell proliferation. Mechanistically, p21 
and CK2 interaction, but not CK2 alone, enhanced HDAC2 phosphorylation and
restricted KLF4 deacetylation and subsequent tumor promotion. Furthermore, we
observed that KLF4 was acetylated by CBP/p300 and that overexpression of CBP
resulted in KLF4 acetylation and tumor suppression even in p21-depleted bladder
cancer cells. Moreover, we discovered that Notch-1 knockdown-induced KLF4 is
acetylated form of KLF4, which may mediate Notch-1 function in bladder cancer
cell proliferation. Our data demonstrate that KLF4 acts as a tumor suppressor or 
oncogene to activate or repress target gene transcription depending on its
acetylation status, which is regulated by p21 and CK2 interaction-mediated HDAC2 
phosphorylation. Targeting KLF4 at the post-transcriptional levels may provide
novel insight for bladder cancer therapy.

PMID: 26729194  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. Cell Tissue Res. 2016 Jan 4. [Epub ahead of print]

Neuroprotective effects of a chromatin modifier on ischemia/reperfusion neurons: 
implication of its regulation of BCL2 transactivation by ERa signaling.

Guo J(1), Zhang T(2), Yu J(2), Li HZ(1), Zhao C(1), Qiu J(3), Zhao B(2), Zhao
J(4), Li W(5), Zhao TZ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an, 710038, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tangdu 
Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 710038, People's Republic of
China. (3)Department of Neurology, General Hospital of Shenyang Military Command,
Shenyang, 110015, People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Histology and
Embryology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 710032, People's Republic 
of China. (5)Department of Histology and Embryology, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, 710032, People's Republic of China. liweipepeyato@163.com.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, 710038, People's Republic of China. zhaotianzhi1981@163.com.

An understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of
estrogen receptor alpha (ERa)-mediated neuroprotective effects is valuable for
the development of therapeutic strategy against neuronal ischemic injury. Here,
we report the upregulated expression of metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), a
master chromatin modifier and transcriptional regulator, in the murine middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model. Inhibition of MTA1 expression by in vivo 
short interfering RNA treatment potentiated neuronal apoptosis in a
caspase-3-dependent manner and thereafter aggravated MCAO-induced neuronal
damage. Mechanistically, the pro-survival effects of MTA1 required the
participation of ERa signaling. We also provide in vitro evidence that MTA1
enhances the binding of ERa with the BCL2 promoter upon ischemic insults via
recruitment of HDAC2 together with other unidentified coregulators, thus
promoting the ERa-mediated transactivation of the BCL2 gene. Collectively, our
results suggest that the augmentation of endogenous MTA1 expression during
neuronal ischemic injury acts additionally to an endocrinous cascade
orchestrating intimate interactions between ERa and BCL2 pathways and operates as
an indispensable defensive mechanism in response to neuronal ischemia/reperfusion
stress. Future studies in this field will shed light on the modulation of the
complicated neuroprotective effects by estrogen signaling.

PMID: 26728277  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. Science. 2016 Jan 1;351(6268):aac6633. doi: 10.1126/science.aac6633.

Epigenetic (re)programming of caste-specific behavior in the ant Camponotus
floridanus.

Simola DF(1), Graham RJ(2), Brady CM(3), Enzmann BL(4), Desplan C(5), Ray A(6),
Zwiebel LJ(7), Bonasio R(3), Reinberg D(8), Liebig J(9), Berger SL(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Program in Epigenetics,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. simola@upenn.edu
danny.reinberg@nyumc.org juergen.liebig@asu.edu bergers@upenn.edu. (2)Program in 
Epigenetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Department 
of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Program in Epigenetics,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (4)School of Life
Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. (5)Department of
Biology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA. (6)Department of
Entomology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA. (7)Department of 
Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biochemistry, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. simola@upenn.edu
danny.reinberg@nyumc.org juergen.liebig@asu.edu bergers@upenn.edu. (9)School of
Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. simola@upenn.edu
danny.reinberg@nyumc.org juergen.liebig@asu.edu bergers@upenn.edu. (10)Department
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Program in Epigenetics, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Department of Biology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Department of Genetics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
simola@upenn.edu danny.reinberg@nyumc.org juergen.liebig@asu.edu
bergers@upenn.edu.

Eusocial insects organize themselves into behavioral castes whose regulation has 
been proposed to involve epigenetic processes, including histone modification. In
the carpenter ant Camponotus floridanus, morphologically distinct worker castes
called minors and majors exhibit pronounced differences in foraging and scouting 
behaviors. We found that these behaviors are regulated by histone acetylation
likely catalyzed by the conserved acetyltransferase CBP. Transcriptome and
chromatin analysis in brains of scouting minors fed pharmacological inhibitors of
CBP and histone deacetylases (HDACs) revealed hundreds of genes linked to
hyperacetylated regions targeted by CBP. Majors rarely forage, but injection of a
HDAC inhibitor or small interfering RNAs against the HDAC Rpd3 into young major
brains induced and sustained foraging in a CBP-dependent manner. Our results
suggest that behavioral plasticity in animals may be regulated in an epigenetic
manner via histone modification.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26722000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Neurotox Res. 2015 Dec 31. [Epub ahead of print]

An Acute Methamphetamine Injection Downregulates the Expression of Several
Histone Deacetylases (HDACs) in the Mouse Nucleus Accumbens: Potential Regulatory
Role of HDAC2 Expression.

Torres OV(1), Ladenheim B(1), Jayanthi S(1), McCoy MT(1), Krasnova IN(1), Vautier
FA(2), Cadet JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, DHHS/NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD,
21224, USA. (2)Transgenic Core Facility, DHHS/NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD,
21224, USA. (3)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, DHHS/NIH/NIDA
Intramural Research Program, National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview
Boulevard, Baltimore, MD, 21224, USA. jcadet@intra.nida.nih.gov.

Methamphetamine (METH) administration alters gene expression in the nucleus
accumbens (NAc). We recently demonstrated that an acute METH injection produced
prolonged increases in the expression of immediate early genes in the NAc of
HDAC2-deficient mice, suggesting that HDAC2 might be an important regulator of
gene expression in the rodent brain. Here, we tested the possibility that HDAC2
deletion might also impact METH-induced changes in the expression of various HDAC
classes in the NAc. Wild-type (WT) and HDAC2 knockout (KO) mice were given a METH
(20 mg/kg) injection, and NAc tissue was collected at 1, 2, and 8 h post
treatment. We found that METH decreased HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC7, HDAC8, and HDAC11
mRNA expression but increased HDAC6 mRNA levels in the NAc of WT mice. In
contrast, the METH injection increased HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC7, HDAC8, and HDAC11
mRNA levels in HDAC2KO mice. These observations suggest that METH may induce
large-scale transcriptional changes in the NAc by regulating the expression of
several HDACs, in part, via HDAC2-dependent mechanisms since some of the HDACs
showed differential responses between the two genotypes. Our findings further
implicate HDACs as potential novel therapeutic targets for neurotoxic
complications associated with the abuse of certain psychostimulants.

PMID: 26721795  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


35. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 12;291(7):3531-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.675488. Epub 2015 
Dec 23.

Regulation of Histone Acetylation by Autophagy in Parkinson Disease.

Park G(1), Tan J(2), Garcia G(3), Kang Y(3), Salvesen G(4), Zhang Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Graduate Program of Biomedical Science, Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, the University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California 92037. (2)the State Key Laboratory of Medical
Genetics, Xiangya Medical School, Central South University, Hunan 410078, China, 
and. (3)the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California
92037. (4)From the Graduate Program of Biomedical Science, Sanford-Burnham
Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, the Sanford-Burnham
Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037. (5)From the Graduate
Program of Biomedical Science, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, California 92037, the State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Xiangya
Medical School, Central South University, Hunan 410078, China, and the
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037
zhangzhuohua@sklmg.edu.cn.

Parkinson disease (PD) is the most common age-dependent neurodegenerative
movement disorder. Accumulated evidence indicates both environmental and genetic 
factors play important roles in PD pathogenesis, but the potential interaction
between environment and genetics in PD etiology remains largely elusive. Here, we
report that PD-related neurotoxins induce both expression and acetylation of
multiple sites of histones in cultured human cells and mouse midbrain
dopaminergic (DA) neurons. Consistently, levels of histone acetylation are
markedly higher in midbrain DA neurons of PD patients compared to those of their 
matched control individuals. Further analysis reveals that multiple histone
deacetylases (HDACs) are concurrently decreased in 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium
(MPP(+))-treated cells and 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-treated
mouse brains, as well as midbrain tissues of human PD patients. Finally,
inhibition of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) protects, whereas inhibition of
HDAC1 and HDAC2 potentiates, MPP(+)-induced cell death. Pharmacological and
genetic inhibition of autophagy suppresses MPP(+)-induced HDACs degradation. The 
study reveals that PD environmental factors induce HDACs degradation and histone 
acetylation increase in DA neurons via autophagy and identifies an epigenetic
mechanism in PD pathogenesis.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4751393 [Available on 2017-02-12]
PMID: 26699403  [PubMed - in process]


36. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):4695-711. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6618.

The role of HDAC2 in chromatin remodelling and response to chemotherapy in
ovarian cancer.

Huang R(1), Langdon SP(1), Tse M(1), Mullen P(2), Um IH(2), Faratian D(1),
Harrison DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. (2)School of Medicine, University
of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9TF, UK.

Chromatin undergoes structural changes in response to extracellular and
environmental signals. We observed changes in nuclear morphology in cancer tissue
biopsied after chemotherapy and hypothesised that these DNA damage-induced
changes are mediated by histone deacetylases (HDACs). Nuclear morphological
changes in cell lines (PE01 and PE04 models) and a xenograft model (OV1002) were 
measured in response to platinum chemotherapy by image analysis of nuclear
texture. HDAC2 expression increased in PEO1 cells treated with cisplatin at 24h, 
which was accompanied by increased expression of heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1).
HDAC2 and HP1 expression were also increased after carboplatin treatment in the
OV1002 carboplatin-sensitive xenograft model but not in the insensitive HOX424
model. Expression of DNA damage response pathways (pBRCA1, <U+03B3>H2AX, pATM, pATR)
showed time-dependent changes after cisplatin treatment. HDAC2 knockdown by siRNA
reduced HP1 expression, induced DNA double strand breaks (DSB) measured by <U+03B3>H2AX,
and interfered with the activation of DNA damage response induced by cisplatin.
Furthermore, HDAC2 depletion affected <U+03B3>H2AX foci formation, cell cycle
distribution, and apoptosis triggered by cisplatin, and was additive to the
inhibitory effect of cisplatin in cell lines. By inhibiting expression of HDAC2, 
reversible alterations in chromatin patterns during cisplatin treatment were
observed. These results demonstrate quantifiable alterations in nuclear
morphology after chemotherapy, and implicate HDAC2 in higher order chromatin
changes and cellular DNA damage responses in ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo.

PMID: 26683361  [PubMed - in process]


37. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb;13(2):1373-80. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4676. Epub 2015 Dec
11.

1,25(OH)2D3 inhibits the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma via
downregulating HDAC2 and upregulating P21(WAFI/CIP1).

Huang J(1), Yang G(2), Huang Y(3), Kong W(1), Zhang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical College,
Guiyang, Guizhou 550004, P.R. China. (2)Medical Laboratory, Guizhou Medical
University, Guiyang, Guizhou 550004, P.R. China. (3)Biochemistry Department,
Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou 550004, P.R. 
China.

Vitamin D, termed 1,25(OH)2D3 in it's active form, activity is associated with a 
reduced risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and is an important immune
regulator. However, the detail molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of
1,25(OH)2D3 on the progression of HCC are widely unknown. Histone deacetwylase 2 
(HDAC2) is usually expressed at high levels in tumors, and its downregulation
leads to high expression levels of cell cycle components, including
p21(WAF1/Cip1), a well-characterized modulator, which is critical in cell
senescence and apoptosis. The present study investigated whether vitamin D
inhibits HCC via the regulation of HDAC2 and p21(WAF1/Cip1). Firstly, the toxic
concentrations of 1,25(OH)2D3 were determined, according to trypan blue and
[3H]thymidine incorporation assays. Secondly, HCC cells lines were treated with
different concentrations of 1,25(OH)2D3. The expression of HDAC2 was either
silenced via short hairpin (sh)RNA or induced by transfection of plasmids
expressing the HDAC2 gene in certain HCC cells. Finally the mRNA and protein
levels of HDAC2 and p21(WAF1/Cip1) were measured using reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot analyses.
The results revealed that 1,25(OH)2D3 treatment reduced the expression of HDAC2
and increased the expression of p21(WAF1/Cip1), in a dose-dependent manner,
resulting in the reduction of HCC growth. Elevated levels of HDAC2 reduced the
expression of p21(WAF1/Cip1), resulting in an increase in HCC growth. HDAC2 shRNA
increased the expression of p21(WAF1/Cip1), resulting in reduction in HCC growth.
Thus, 1,25(OH)2D3 exerted antitumorigenic effects through decreasing the
expression levels of HDAC2 and increasing the expression of p21(WAF1/Cip1), which
inhibited the development of HCC and may indicate the possible underlying
mechanism. These results suggest that vitamin D3 may be developed as a potential 
drug for effective therapy in the treatment of HCC.

PMID: 26676829  [PubMed - in process]


38. Cytotechnology. 2015 Dec 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential developmental competence and gene expression patterns in buffalo
(Bubalus bubalis) nuclear transfer embryos reconstructed with fetal fibroblasts
and amnion mesenchymal stem cells.

Sadeesh Em(1), Shah F(2), Yadav PS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Physiology and Reproduction, ICAR-Central Institute for
Research on Buffaloes, Hisar, 125001, India. sadeeshcirb@gmail.com. (2)Department
of Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry, Lala Lajpat Rai University of
Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Hisar, 125004, India. (3)Division of Animal
Physiology and Reproduction, ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes,
Hisar, 125001, India.

The developmental ability and gene expression pattern at 8- to 16-cell and
blastocyst stages of buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) nuclear transfer (NT) embryos from
fetal fibroblasts (FFs), amnion mesenchymal stem cells (AMSCs) and in vitro
fertilized (IVF) embryos were compared in the present studies. The in vitro
expanded buffalo FFs showed a typical "S" shape growth curve with a doubling time
of 41.4 h and stained positive for vimentin. The in vitro cultured
undifferentiated AMSCs showed a doubling time of 39.5 h and stained positive for 
alkaline phosphatase, and these cells also showed expression of pluripotency
markers (OCT 4, SOX 2, NANOG), and mesenchymal stem cell markers (CD29, CD44) and
were negative for haematopoietic marker (CD34) genes at different passages.
Further, when AMSCs were exposed to corresponding induction conditions, these
cells differentiated into adipogenic, chondrogenic and osteogenic lineages which 
were confirmed through oil red O, alcian blue and alizarin staining,
respectively. Donor cells at 3-4 passage were employed for NT. The cleavage rate 
was significantly (P < 0.05) higher in IVF than in FF-NT and AMSC-NT embryos
(82.6 ± 8.2 vs. 64.6 ± 1.3 and 72.3 ± 2.2 %, respectively). However, blastocyst
rates in IVF and AMSC-NT embryos (30.6 ± 2.7 and 28.9 ± 3.1 %) did not differ and
were significantly (P < 0.05) higher than FF-NT (19.5 ± 1.8 %). Total cell number
did not show significant (P > 0.05) differences between IVF and AMSC-NT embryos
(186.7 ± 4.2, 171.2 ± 3.8, respectively) but were significantly (P < 0.05) higher
than that from FF-NT (151.3 ± 4.1). Alterations in the expression pattern of
genes implicated in transcription and pluripotency (OCT4, STAT3, NANOG), DNA
methylation (DNMT1, DNMT3A), histone deacetylation (HDAC2), growth factor
signaling and imprinting (IGF2, IGF2R), apoptosis (BAX, BCL2), metabolism (GLUT1)
and oxidative stress (MnSOD) regulation were observed in cloned embryos. The
transcripts or expression patterns in AMSC-NT embryos more closely followed that 
of the in vitro derived embryos compared with FF-NT embryos. The results
demonstrate that multipotent amnion MSCs have a greater potential as donor cells 
than FFs in achieving enhanced production of cloned buffalo embryos.

PMID: 26660476  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. Anesthesiology. 2016 Mar;124(3):624-40. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000000981.

Epigenetic Manipulation of Brain-derived Neurotrophic Factor Improves Memory
Deficiency Induced by Neonatal Anesthesia in Rats.

Wu J(1), Bie B, Naguib M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of General Anesthesia, Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Although neonatal exposure to anesthetic drugs is associated with
memory deficiency in rodent models and possibly in pediatric patients, the
underlying mechanisms remain elusive. The authors tested their hypothesis that
exposure of the developing brain to anesthesia triggers epigenetic modification, 
involving the enhanced interaction among transcription factors (histone
deacetylase 2, methyl-cytosine-phosphate-guanine-binding protein 2, and DNA
methyltransferase 1) in Bdnf promoter region(s) that inhibit brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression, resulting in insufficient drive for local 
translation of synaptic mRNAs. The authors further hypothesized that noninvasive 
environmental enrichment (EE) will attenuate anesthesia-induced epigenetic
inhibition of BDNF signaling and memory loss in rodent models.
METHODS: Seven days after birth (P7), neonatal rats were randomly assigned to
receive either isoflurane anesthesia for 6 h or sham anesthesia. On P21, pups
were weaned, and animals were randomly assigned to EE or a standard cage
environment (no EE). Behavioral, molecular, and electrophysiological studies were
performed on rats on P65.
RESULTS: The authors found a substantial reduction of hippocampal BDNF (n = 6 to 
7) resulting from the transcriptional factors-mediated epigenetic modification in
the promoter region of Bdnf exon IV in rats exposed postnatally to anesthetic
drugs. This BDNF reduction led to the insufficient drive for the synthesis of
synaptic proteins (n = 6 to 8), thus contributing to the hippocampal synaptic (n 
= 8 to 11) and cognitive dysfunction (n = 10) induced by neonatal anesthesia.
These effects were mitigated by the exposure to an enriched environment.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study elucidated the epigenetic mechanism
underlying memory deficiency induced by neonatal anesthesia and propose EE as a
potential therapeutic approach.

PMID: 26649423  [PubMed - in process]


40. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Nov;19(22):4293-9.

Expression data analysis to identify key target genes in visceral fat tissue
associated with obstructive sleep apnea.

Chen JH(1), Yang R, Wang YP, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Wuhan University,
Renmin Hospital, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. liweihua1975@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to screen key genes related to
mechanisms and consequences of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)-induced
perturbations in visceral fat tissue depots.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Microarray data of GSE38792, comprising 10 visceral fat
samples from OSA patients and 8 visceral fat samples from control subjects, was
obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in visceral fat samples from OSA patients 
compared with controls using Bioconductor package limma. Gene Ontology (GO) and
pathway enrichment analyses were carried out to identify significantly altered
biological functions. Furthermore, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network
was constructed with STRING database and visualized with Cytoscape software.
Additionally, the transcriptional regulatory relationships were screened using
UCSC ENCODE Genome Browser.
RESULTS: A total of 380 DEGs were identified, of which 188 were up-regulated and 
192 were down-regulated. The DEGs were involved in different GO terms and
pathways, mainly associated with metabolism such as proteolysis. PPI network
analysis revealed that Actin, Alpha 1, Skeletal Muscle (ACTA1), Histone
Deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), and Small Ubiquitin-Like Modifier 1 (SUMO1) were hub
proteins. In addition, HDAC2 was shown to encode a transcription factor (TF) and 
it could regulate 3 DEGs.
CONCLUSIONS: Genes such as ACTA1, HDAC2, and SUMO1 were presumed to play critical
roles in the mechanisms and consequences of OSA-induced perturbations in visceral
fat tissue depots, which may be useful for deeply studying the mechanisms
underlying OSA.

PMID: 26636516  [PubMed - in process]


41. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):10707-15. eCollection 2015.

USP17-mediated deubiquitination and stabilization of HDAC2 in cigarette smoke
extract-induced inflammation.

Song H(1), Tao L(1), Chen C(2), Pan L(1), Hao J(1), Ni Y(1), Li D(2), Li B(2),
Shi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai 200025, P. R China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Molecular Virology and Immunology, Unit of Molecular Immunology, Institute
Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy
of Sciences (CAS) Shanghai 200031, P. R China.

Histone deacetylase HDAC2 regulates genes transcription via removing the acetyl
group from histones. Glucocorticoids, the most potent anti-inflammatory treatment
available for inflammatory diseases, inhibit the expression of inflammatory genes
by recruiting HDAC2 to activated genes. In the lungs of patients who smoke and
have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma, glucocorticoids are 
not effective enough to suppress airway inflammation, which is so called
"glucocorticoid resistance", due to decreased HDAC2 level caused by cigarette
smoke. We report that the ubiquitin-specific protease USP17 interacts with HDAC2.
USP17 deubiquitinates and stabilizes the protein level of HDAC2. In cigarette
smoke extract-exposed airway epithelial cells and macrophages, HDAC2 is
excessively ubiquitinated and degraded in the proteasome attributed to low
expression of USP17. Furthermore, over-expression of USP17 blocks the destruction
of HDAC2 induced by cigarette smoke extract. These results provide a new insight 
into the mechanisms of glucocorticoid resistance in airway inflammatory disease. 
Small molecules which can specifically induce the expression of USP17 might be
useful in reversing glucocorticoid resistance.

PMCID: PMC4637596
PMID: 26617781  [PubMed - in process]


42. J Cell Sci. 2016 Jan 1;129(1):51-64. doi: 10.1242/jcs.176701. Epub 2015 Nov 24.

LPS impairs oxygen utilization in epithelia by triggering degradation of the
mitochondrial enzyme Alcat1.

Zou C(1), Synan MJ(1), Li J(1), Xiong S(2), Manni ML(1), Liu Y(1), Chen BB(1),
Zhao Y(1), Shiva S(3), Tyurina YY(4), Jiang J(4), Lee JS(1), Das S(1), Ray A(1), 
Ray P(1), Kagan VE(5), Mallampalli RK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Acute Lung Injury Center of Excellence, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (2)Institute of Biomedicine & National
Engineering Research Center of Genetic Medicine, College of Life Science and
Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510630, China. (3)Department of
Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213, USA. (4)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical
Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA Department of
Environmental and Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Acute Lung Injury Center of Excellence,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA Department of Cell Biology
and Physiology and Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213, USA Medical Specialty Service Line, Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare
System, Pittsburgh, PA 15240, USA mallampallirk@upmc.edu.

Cardiolipin (also known as PDL6) is an indispensable lipid required for
mitochondrial respiration that is generated through de novo synthesis and
remodeling. Here, the cardiolipin remodeling enzyme,
acyl-CoA:lysocardiolipin-acyltransferase-1 (Alcat1; SwissProt ID, Q6UWP7) is
destabilized in epithelia by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) impairing mitochondrial
function. Exposure to LPS selectively decreased levels of carbon 20
(C20)-containing cardiolipin molecular species, whereas the content of C18 or C16
species was not significantly altered, consistent with decreased levels of
Alcat1. Alcat1 is a labile protein that is lysosomally degraded by the ubiquitin 
E3 ligase Skp-Cullin-F-box containing the Fbxo28 subunit (SCF-Fbxo28) that
targets Alcat1 for monoubiquitylation at residue K183. Interestingly, K183 is
also an acetylation-acceptor site, and acetylation conferred stability to the
enzyme. Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) interacted with Alcat1, and expression of a
plasmid encoding HDAC2 or treatment of cells with LPS deacetylated and
destabilized Alcat1, whereas treatment of cells with a pan-HDAC inhibitor
increased Alcat1 levels. Alcat1 degradation was partially abrogated in
LPS-treated cells that had been silenced for HDAC2 or treated with MLN4924, an
inhibitor of Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases. Thus, LPS increases HDAC2-mediated
Alcat1 deacetylation and facilitates SCF-Fbxo28-mediated disposal of Alcat1, thus
impairing mitochondrial integrity.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4732295 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26604221  [PubMed - in process]


43. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2016 Jan;56(1):62-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.10.004. Epub
2015 Oct 27.

Therapeutic fetal-globin inducers reduce transcriptional repression in
hemoglobinopathy erythroid progenitors through distinct mechanisms.

Dai Y(1), Sangerman J(1), Luo HY(2), Fucharoen S(3), Chui DH(2), Faller DV(4),
Perrine SP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hemoglobinopathy Thalassemia Research Unit and Cancer Center, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States. (2)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United
States. (3)Thalassemia Research Center, Mahidol University, Phuttamonthon,
Thailand. (4)Hemoglobinopathy Thalassemia Research Unit and Cancer Center, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States; Phoenicia BioSciences, 
Inc., Newton, MA, United States. (5)Hemoglobinopathy Thalassemia Research Unit
and Cancer Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United
States; Phoenicia BioSciences, Inc., Newton, MA, United States; Center for
Hemoglobin Research in Minorities, Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Howard
University College of Medicine, Washington DC, United States. Electronic address:
sperrine@bu.edu.

Pharmacologic augmentation of <U+03B3>-globin expression sufficient to reduce anemia and
clinical severity in patients with diverse hemoglobinopathies has been
challenging. In studies here, representative molecules from four chemical
classes, representing several distinct primary mechanisms of action, were
investigated for effects on <U+03B3>-globin transcriptional repressors, including
components of the NuRD complex (LSD1 and HDACs 2-3), and the downstream repressor
BCL11A, in erythroid progenitors from hemoglobinopathy patients. Two HDAC
inhibitors (MS-275 and SB939), a short-chain fatty acid derivative (sodium
dimethylbutyrate [SDMB]), and an agent identified in high-throughput screening,
Benserazide, were studied. These therapeutics induced <U+03B3>-globin mRNA in
progenitors above same subject controls up to 20-fold, and increased
F-reticulocytes up to 20%. Cellular protein levels of BCL11A, LSD-1, and KLF1
were suppressed by the compounds. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated a 3.6-fold reduction in LSD1 and HDAC3 occupancy in the <U+03B3>-globin
gene promoter with Benserazide exposure, 3-fold reduction in LSD-1 and HDAC2
occupancy in the <U+03B3>-globin gene promoter with SDMB exposure, while markers of gene
activation (histone H3K9 acetylation and H3K4 demethylation), were enriched
5.7-fold. These findings identify clinical-stage oral therapeutics which inhibit 
or displace major co-repressors of <U+03B3>-globin gene transcription and may suggest a 
rationale for combination therapy to produce enhanced efficacy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4667977 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26603726  [PubMed - in process]


44. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Feb;1859(2):269-79. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.11.006.
Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Neuronal gene repression in Niemann-Pick type C models is mediated by the
c-Abl/HDAC2 signaling pathway.

Contreras PS(1), Gonzalez-Zuñiga M(2), González-Hódar L(3), Yáñez MJ(1), Dulcey
A(4), Marugan J(4), Seto E(5), Alvarez AR(6), Zanlungo S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, Santiago, Chile; CARE UC Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago, Chile; Departamento de Gastroenterología, Facultad de Medicina,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (2)Department of Cell 
and Molecular Biology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Gastroenterología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (4)National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. 
(5)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (6)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; CARE UC Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. Electronic address:
aalvarez@bio.puc.cl. (7)Departamento de Gastroenterología, Facultad de Medicina, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; FONDAP Center for
Genome Regulation (CGR), Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: silvana@med.puc.cl.

BACKGROUND: Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is a fatal neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by the accumulation of free cholesterol in lysosomes.
There are currently no effective FDA-approved treatments for NPC, although in the
last years the inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) has emerged as a
potential treatment for this disease. However, the molecular mechanisms that
deregulate HDAC activity in NPC disease are unknown. Previously our group had
shown that the proapoptotic tyrosine kinase c-Abl signaling is activated in NPC
neurons. Here, we demonstrate that c-Abl activity increases HDAC2 levels inducing
neuronal gene repression of key synaptic genes in NPC models.
RESULTS: Our data show that: i) HDAC2 levels and activity are increased in NPC
neuronal models and in Npc1(-/-) mice; ii) inhibition of c-Abl or c-Abl
deficiency prevents the increase of HDAC2 protein levels and activity in NPC
neuronal models; iii) c-Abl inhibition decreases the levels of HDAC2 tyrosine
phosphorylation; iv) treatment with methyl-ß-cyclodextrin and vitamin E decreases
the activation of the c-Abl/HDAC2 pathway in NPC neurons; v) in vivo treatment
with two c-Abl inhibitors prevents the increase of HDAC2 protein levels in the
brain of Npc1(-/-) mice; and vi) c-Abl inhibition prevents HDAC2 recruitment to
the promoter of neuronal genes, triggering an increase in their expression.
CONCLUSION: Our data show the involvement of the c-Abl/HDAC2 signaling pathway in
the regulation of neuronal gene expression in NPC neuronal models. Thus,
inhibition of c-Abl could be a pharmacological target for preventing the
deleterious effects of increased HDAC2 levels in NPC disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26603102  [PubMed - in process]


45. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Nov 23;36(3):462-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00639-15.

Essential Nonredundant Function of the Catalytic Activity of Histone Deacetylase 
2 in Mouse Development.

Hagelkruys A(1), Mattes K(1), Moos V(1), Rennmayr M(1), Ringbauer M(1), Sawicka
A(1), Seiser C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria. (2)Department of Medical
Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna
Biocenter, Vienna, Austria christian.seiser@univie.ac.at.

The class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2 play partially redundant
roles in the regulation of gene expression and mouse development. As part of
multisubunit corepressor complexes, these two deacetylases exhibit both enzymatic
and nonenzymatic functions. To examine the impact of the catalytic activities of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2, we generated knock-in mice expressing catalytically inactive
isoforms, which are still incorporated into the HDAC1/HDAC2 corepressor
complexes. Surprisingly, heterozygous mice expressing catalytically inactive
HDAC2 die within a few hours after birth, while heterozygous HDAC1 mutant mice
are indistinguishable from wild-type littermates. Heterozygous HDAC2 mutant mice 
show an unaltered composition but reduced associated deacetylase activity of
corepressor complexes and exhibit a more severe phenotype than HDAC2-null mice.
They display changes in brain architecture accompanied by premature expression of
the key regulator protein kinase C delta. Our study reveals a dominant negative
effect of catalytically inactive HDAC2 on specific corepressor complexes
resulting in histone hyperacetylation, transcriptional derepression, and,
ultimately, perinatal lethality.

Copyright © 2016 Hagelkruys et al.

PMCID: PMC4719423
PMID: 26598605  [PubMed - in process]


46. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Dec;29(2):235-45. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.11.016.
Epub 2015 Nov 14.

The anti-malaria drug artesunate inhibits cigarette smoke and ovalbumin
concurrent exposure-induced airway inflammation and might reverse glucocorticoid 
insensitivity.

Luo Q(1), Lin J(2), Zhang L(3), Li H(4), Pan L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, 
China; Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Diseases,
China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China; Graduate School of Peking Union 
Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. Electronic 
address: jiangtao_l@263.net. (3)Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)Institute of Clinical
Medical Science, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The anti-malaria drug artesunate has been shown to attenuate
experimental allergic asthma via inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
(PI3K)/Akt pathway. This study was to further determine the effects of artesunate
on cigarette smoke and ovalbumin (OVA) concurrent exposure-induced airway
inflammation, the related mechanism, and glucocorticoid insensitivity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In vivo: Female BALB/c mice concurrently exposed to
cigarette smoke and OVA developed mixed eosinophilic and neutrophilic airway
inflammation. Airway hyper-responsiveness, total and differential cell counts,
and pro-inflammatory cytokine levels (interleukin (IL)-4, IL-8, IL-13 and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-a) in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were measured.
Lung tissue sections were stained for histological analysis, and proteins were
extracted for Western blotting. Artesunate reduced methacholine-induced airway
hyper-responsiveness, suppressed pulmonary inflammation cell recruitment and
IL-4, IL-8, IL-13 and TNF-a levels, selectively inhibited PI3Kd/Akt pathway, and 
restored HDAC2 activity. In vitro: BEAS-2B cells were exposed to cigarette smoke 
extract (CSE) for 6h and then stimulated with TNF-a overnight. Glucocorticoid
sensitivity was evaluated by the inhibition of TNF-a-induced IL-8 production by
dexamethasone. CSE reduced the effects of dexamethasone on TNF-a-induced IL-8
production in BEAS-2B cells, while artesunate reversed CSE-induced glucocorticoid
insensitivity and restored HDAC2 deactivation induced by CSE.
CONCLUSION: Artesunate ameliorated cigarette smoke and OVA concurrent
exposure-induced airway inflammation, inhibited the PI3Kd/Akt pathway, restored
HDAC2 activity, and reversed CSE-induced glucocorticoid insensitivity in BEAS-2B 
cells. These findings indicate that artesunate might play a protective role in
asthma induced by cigarette smoke and glucocorticoid insensitivity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26590116  [PubMed - in process]


47. Cell Rep. 2015 Nov 24;13(8):1552-60. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.10.031. Epub 2015
Nov 12.

A DNMT3A2-HDAC2 Complex Is Essential for Genomic Imprinting and Genome Integrity 
in Mouse Oocytes.

Ma P(1), de Waal E(2), Weaver JR(2), Bartolomei MS(2), Schultz RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Department of
Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic
address: rschultz@sas.upenn.edu.

Maternal genomic imprints are established during oogenesis. Histone deacetylases 
(HDACs) 1 and 2 are required for oocyte development in mouse, but their role in
genomic imprinting is unknown. We find that Hdac1:Hdac2(-/-) double-mutant
growing oocytes exhibit global DNA hypomethylation and fail to establish
imprinting marks for Igf2r, Peg3, and Srnpn. Global hypomethylation correlates
with increased retrotransposon expression and double-strand DNA breaks.
Nuclear-associated DNMT3A2 is reduced in double-mutant oocytes, and injecting
these oocytes with Hdac2 partially restores DNMT3A2 nuclear staining. DNMT3A2
co-immunoprecipitates with HDAC2 in mouse embryonic stem cells. Partial loss of
nuclear DNMT3A2 and HDAC2 occurs in Sin3a(-/-) oocytes, which exhibit decreased
DNA methylation of imprinting control regions for Igf2r and Srnpn, but not Peg3. 
These results suggest seminal roles of HDAC1/2 in establishing maternal genomic
imprints and maintaining genomic integrity in oocytes mediated in part through a 
SIN3A complex that interacts with DNMT3A2.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4662907
PMID: 26586441  [PubMed - in process]


48. Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Nov 17. doi: 10.4143/crt.2015.206. [Epub ahead of print]

Isotype-Specific Inhibition of Histone Deacetylases: Identification of Optimal
Targets for Radiosensitization.

Kim JH(1,)(2), Moon SH(1), No M(3), Kim JJ(1,)(3), Choi EJ(3), Cho BJ(3), Kim
JS(1,)(3), Kim IH(1,)(4,)(2), Kim IA(1,)(4,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Institute of Radiation Medicine, Medical Research
Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Medical Science Research
Institute, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea. (4)Cancer
Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Purpose: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors radiosensitize tumor cells. To
elucidate mechanisms underlying radiosensitization by HDAC inhibition,
understanding of differential contributions of HDAC isotypes is needed. The aim
of this study was to investigate involvement of known HDAC isotypes in modulation
of cellular radiosensitivity.
Materials and Methods: Because pharmacologic HDAC inhibitors lack
isotype-specificity, RNA interference against 11 HDAC isotypes was used to
inhibit HDAC in an isotype-specific manner. Radiation cell survival was evaluated
using a clonogenic assay in SQ20B cells transfected with small interfering RNA
specifically targeting HDAC isotypes. Immunocytochemistry was performed for
detection of <U+03B3>H2AX foci. Protein expression was measured using Western blotting.
Results: Among 11 HDAC isotypes tested, specific inhibition of 7 isotypes (HDAC1,
HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC6, HDAC7, HDAC10, and HDAC11) enhanced radiation lethality in
SQ20B cells. Radiosensitization by inhibition of these HDAC isotypes was
accompanied by delay of DNA double strand break repair. Radiosensitivity of SQ20B
cells was not altered by selective inhibition of the remaining 4 isotypes (HDAC2,
HDAC5, HDAC8, and HDAC9). Inhibition of HDAC isotypes resulted in downregulation 
of various proteins involved in pro-survival and DNA damage repair pathways.
Conclusion: s Isotype-specificity exists in HDAC inhibition-induced
radiosensitization. Different HDAC isotypes are differentially involved in
modulation of cellular radiosensitivity.

PMID: 26582395  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


49. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Oct 28;6:905. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00905. eCollection
2015.

Changes in the nuclear proteome of developing wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) grain.

Bonnot T(1), Bancel E(1), Chambon C(2), Boudet J(1), Branlard G(1), Martre P(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMR1095 Genetics, Diversity and Ecophysiology of Cereals, Institut National de
la Recherche Agronomique Clermont-Ferrand, France ; UMR1095 Genetics, Diversity
and Ecophysiology of Cereals, Blaise Pascal University Aubière, France.
(2)Metabolism Exploration Platform Proteomic Component, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique Saint-Genès Champanelle, France.

Wheat grain end-use value is determined by complex molecular interactions that
occur during grain development, including those in the cell nucleus. However, our
knowledge of how the nuclear proteome changes during grain development is
limited. Here, we analyzed nuclear proteins of developing wheat grains collected 
during the cellularization, effective grain-filling, and maturation phases of
development, respectively. Nuclear proteins were extracted and separated by
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Image analysis revealed 371 and 299
reproducible spots in gels with first dimension separation along pH 4-7 and pH
6-11 isoelectric gradients, respectively. The relative abundance of 464 (67%)
protein spots changed during grain development. Abundance profiles of these
proteins clustered in six groups associated with the major phases and phase
transitions of grain development. Using nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry to analyse 387 variant and non-variant protein spots, 114 different 
proteins were identified that were classified into 16 functional classes. We
noted that some proteins involved in the regulation of transcription, like
HMG1/2-like protein and histone deacetylase HDAC2, were most abundant before the 
phase transition from cellularization to grain-filling, suggesting that major
transcriptional changes occur during this key developmental phase. The maturation
period was characterized by high relative abundance of proteins involved in
ribosome biogenesis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier
PXD002999.

PMCID: PMC4623401
PMID: 26579155  [PubMed]


50. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2015 Aug;18(8):827-31.

Squid ink polysaccharide reduces cyclophosphamide-induced testicular damage via
Nrf2/ARE activation pathway in mice.

Le X(1), Luo P(1), Gu Y(1), Tao Y(1), Liu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Science, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, China.

OBJECTIVES: Cyclophosphamide (CP) toxicity on testis was hampered by squid ink
polysaccharide (SIP) via restoration of antioxidant ability in our previous
investigations. This study investigated roles of Nrf2/ARE signal pathway in
testis of treated mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Kunming mice were employed to undergo treatment with 
SIP and/or CP. Protein levels of Nrf2, keap-1, histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2),
quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO-1), and heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and phosphorylation
level of protein kinase C (PKC) in testis were evaluated by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Data showed that SIP elevated expressions of NQO-1 and HO-1 genes, two
downstream target molecules of Nrf2, via activating Nrf2 to play preventive roles
on CP-treated testis, and further discovered that upstream regulators of Nrf2,
keap-1, HDAC2, and PKC, were concerned with the regulation of Nrf2.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that SIP could effectively weaken CP-associated
testicular damage via Nrf2/ARE signal pathway.

PMCID: PMC4633467
PMID: 26557973  [PubMed]


51. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):E6562-70. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1518894112. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Sigma-1 receptor mediates cocaine-induced transcriptional regulation by
recruiting chromatin-remodeling factors at the nuclear envelope.

Tsai SY(1), Chuang JY(2), Tsai MS(1), Wang XF(3), Xi ZX(3), Hung JJ(4), Chang
WC(5), Bonci A(6), Su TP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Pathobiology Section, Integrative Neuroscience Research Branch,
National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD 21224; (2)Cellular Pathobiology Section,
Integrative Neuroscience Research Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services,
Baltimore, MD 21224; The Ph.D. Program for Neural Regenerative Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan; (3)Molecular Targets and Medication
Discovery Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD 21224;
(4)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan; (5)Graduate Institute of Medical Science,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan; (6)Cellular Neurobiology Branch,
Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD
21224; Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94608; Solomon H. Snyder Neuroscience Institute, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205. (7)Cellular Pathobiology Section, Integrative
Neuroscience Research Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD
21224; TSU@intra.nida.nih.gov.

The sigma-1 receptor (Sig-1R) chaperone at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) plays
important roles in cellular regulation. Here we found a new function of Sig-1R,
in that it translocates from the ER to the nuclear envelope (NE) to recruit
chromatin-remodeling molecules and regulate the gene transcription thereof.
Sig-1Rs mainly reside at the ER-mitochondrion interface. However, on stimulation 
by agonists such as cocaine, Sig-1Rs translocate from ER to the NE, where Sig-1Rs
bind NE protein emerin and recruit chromatin-remodeling molecules, including
lamin A/C, barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF), and histone deacetylase
(HDAC), to form a complex with the gene repressor specific protein 3 (Sp3).
Knockdown of Sig-1Rs attenuates the complex formation. Cocaine was found to
suppress the gene expression of monoamine oxidase B (MAOB) in the brain of
wild-type but not Sig-1R knockout mouse. A single dose of cocaine (20 mg/kg) in
rats suppresses the level of MAOB at nuclear accumbens without affecting the
level of dopamine transporter. Daily injections of cocaine in rats caused
behavioral sensitization. Withdrawal from cocaine in cocaine-sensitized rats
induced an apparent time-dependent rebound of the MAOB protein level to about
200% over control on day 14 after withdrawal. Treatment of cocaine-withdrawn rats
with the MAOB inhibitor deprenyl completely alleviated the behavioral
sensitization to cocaine. Our results demonstrate a role of Sig-1R in
transcriptional regulation and suggest cocaine may work through this newly
discovered genomic action to achieve its addictive action. Results also suggest
the MAOB inhibitor deprenyl as a therapeutic agent to block certain actions of
cocaine during withdrawal.

PMCID: PMC4664336
PMID: 26554014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 1;99:53-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.10.018. Epub 2015 
Nov 10.

Arginase-2 is cooperatively up-regulated by nitric oxide and histone deacetylase 
inhibition in human umbilical artery endothelial cells.

Krause BJ(1), Hernandez C(2), Caniuguir A(2), Vasquez-Devaud P(2), Carrasco-Wong 
I(2), Uauy R(3), Casanello P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. Electronic address:
bjkrause@uc.cl. (2)Division of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (3)Division of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago, Chile. (4)Division of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Division of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: pcasane@uc.cl.

Arginase-2 counteracts endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) activity in human
endothelium, and its expression is negatively controlled by histone deacetylase
(HDAC2). Conversely NO inhibits HDAC and previous studies suggest that arginase-2
is up-regulated by NO. We studied whether NO regulates arginase-2 expression in
umbilical artery endothelial cells (HUAEC) increasing ARG2 promoter
accessibility. HUAEC exposed to NOC-18 (NO donor, 1-100µM, 0-24h) showed an
increase in arginase-2 but a decrease in eNOS mRNA levels in a time-dependent
manner, with a maximal effect at 100µM (24h). Conversely NOS inhibition with
L-NAME (100µM) reduced arginase-2 mRNA and protein levels, an effect reverted by 
co-incubation with NOC-18. Treatment with TSA paralleled the effects of NO on
arginase-2 and eNOS at mRNA and protein levels, with maximal effect at 10µM.
Co-incubation of NOC-18 (100µM) with a sub-maximal concentration of TSA (1µM)
potentiated the increase in arginase-2 mRNA levels, whilst L-NAME prevented
TSA-dependent arginase-2 induction. The effects on arginase-2 mRNA were
paralleled by changes in chromatin accessibility, as well as increased levels of 
H3K9 and H4K12 acetylation, at ARG2 proximal (-579 to -367 and -280 to -73bp from
TSS) and core (-121 to +126bp from TSS) promoter. Finally NO-dependent arginase-2
induction was prevented by pre-incubation for 10min with the cysteine blocker
MMTS (10mM). These data showed for the first time that NO up-regulates arginase-2
expression in primary cultured human endothelial cells by an epigenetic-mediated 
mechanism increasing ARG2 promoter accessibility suggesting a negative regulatory
loop for eNOS activity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26551598  [PubMed - in process]


53. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.428. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis C virus core protein interacts with Snail and histone deacetylases to
promote the metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Nie D(1), Shan X(1), Nie L(1), Duan Y(1), Chen Z(1), Yang Y(1), Li Z(1), Tian
L(1), Gao Q(1), Shan Y(1), Tang N(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital and the Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of 
Infectious Diseases designated by the Chinese Ministry of Education, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

Downregulation of E-cadherin by the transcriptional repressor Snail is associated
with acquisition of metastatic potential. Although hepatitis C virus (HCV) core
protein has been implicated in hepatocarcinogenesis, it is unclear whether Snail 
is involved in HCV core-induced dysregulation of E-cadherin. Herein, we
investigated the mechanism by which HCV core induces E-cadherin repression and
the role of Snail in HCV core-mediated invasiveness and metastasis. We found that
HCV infection, especially HCV core expression, effectively induced the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in hepatoma cells by repressing
E-cadherin. HCV core interacted with Snail and enhanced its binding to the E-box 
in the promoter region of E-cadherin, leading to decreased E-cadherin promoter
activity. We found that HCV core, Snail, and the histone deacetylases HDAC1/HDAC2
formed a co-repressor complex at the E-cadherin promoter. Moreover, HCV core was 
shown to stabilize Snail through activation of the PI3K/Akt/GSK3ß pathway.
Silencing Snail expression restored E-cadherin expression and inhibited HCV
core-promoted tumor growth and distant lung metastasis in vivo. Collectively,
these results demonstrated that HCV core induced EMT by interacting with the
transcriptional repressor complex Snail/HDACs at the E-cadherin promoter, which
led to E-cadherin repression and increased invasiveness of hepatoma cells. These 
findings increase understanding of factors regulating metastasis in hepatoma and 
may ultimately lead to the development of novel treatment strategies for
HCV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.Oncogene advance online publication, 9
November 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.428.

PMID: 26549030  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


54. Neurobiol Aging. 2016 Jan;37:103-16. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.10.001.
Epub 2015 Oct 9.

A novel histone deacetylase 1 and 2 isoform-specific inhibitor alleviates
experimental Parkinson's disease.

Choong CJ(1), Sasaki T(1), Hayakawa H(1), Yasuda T(2), Baba K(1), Hirata Y(3),
Uesato S(3), Mochizuki H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan. (2)Department of Human Genetics, National Center for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology,
Faculty of Chemistry, Materials and Bioengineering, Kansai University, Osaka,
Japan. (4)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan. Electronic address: hmochizuki@neurol.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.

With increased histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and histone hypoacetylation
being implicated in neurodegeneration, HDAC inhibitors have been reported to have
considerable therapeutic potential. Yet, existing inhibitors lack specificity and
may show substantial adverse effect. In this study, we identified a novel HDAC1/2
isoform-specific inhibitor, K560, with protective effects against
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+))- and/or
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced neuronal death in
both in vitro and in vivo Parkinson's disease model. K560 attenuated cell death
induced by MPP(+) in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells through the sustained
expression of an antiapoptotic protein, X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP).
Inhibition of XIAP expression by locked nucleic acid antisense oligonucleotides
abolished the protective effect of K560. Inactivation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase cascades, reduced p53 phosphorylation, and down-regulation of
p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis on K560 treatment were also observed.
Furthermore, pre- and post-oral administration of K560 to mice prevented
MPTP-induced loss of dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra, suggesting that
selective inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 by K560 may pave the way to new
strategies for Parkinson's disease treatment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26545632  [PubMed - in process]


55. Lung Cancer. 2015 Dec;90(3):598-603. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.10.023. Epub
2015 Oct 27.

Expression of epigenetic modifiers is not significantly altered by exposure to
secondhand smoke.

Tommasi S(1), Zheng A(2), Besaratinia A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, USC Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, M/C 9603, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. Electronic address:
tommasi@med.usc.edu. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine, USC Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, M/C 9603, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA.

OBJECTIVES: Secondhand smoke (SHS) is a major risk factor for lung cancer in
nonsmokers. DNA damage-derived mutagenicity is a well-established mechanism of
SHS-carcinogenicity; however very little is known about the impact of SHS
exposure on the epigenome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We have investigated whether exposure to SHS can modulate 
the expression of key epigenetic regulators responsible for the establishment
and/or maintenance of DNA methylation and histone modification patterns in vivo. 
We have sub-chronically exposed mice to a mutagenic but non-tumorigenic dose of
SHS, and subsequently determined the expression levels of major epigenetic
modifiers in the lungs of SHS-exposed mice, immediately after termination of
exposure and following 7-month recovery in clean air.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Quantification of the expression of genes encoding DNA
methyltransferases (Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b and Dnmt3l), methyl binding domain
proteins (Mecp2, Mbd2 and Mbd3) and histone deacetylases (Hdac1 and Hdac2) by
quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis showed
modest but not statistically significant differences in the relative
transcription of these key epigenetic regulators between SHS-exposed mice and
age-matched controls. The non-significant changes in the expression of main
epigenetic modifiers in SHS-exposed mice imply that SHS may predominantly induce 
genotoxic effects, particularly at non-tumorigenic doses, whereas epigenetic
effects may only be secondary and manifest en route to tumor formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26525280  [PubMed - in process]


56. J Med Genet. 2016 Jan;53(1):24-33. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103225. Epub 2015 
Oct 28.

MicroRNA-129-1 acts as tumour suppressor and induces cell cycle arrest of GBM
cancer cells through targeting IGF2BP3 and MAPK1.

Kouhkan F(1), Mobarra N(2), Soufi-Zomorrod M(3), Keramati F(1), Hosseini Rad
SM(1), Fathi-Roudsari M(4), Tavakoli R(1), Hajarizadeh A(1), Ziaei S(5), Lahmi
R(6), Hanif H(7), Soleimani M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering, Stem Cell Technology 
Research Center, Tehran, Iran. (2)Metabolic Disorders Research Center, School of 
Medicine, Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran. (3)Department of
Hematology, School of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, 
Iran. (5)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering, Stem Cell
Technology Research Center, Tehran, Iran Department of Basic Sciences, Faculty of
Paramedical Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran. (6)Department of Neuroscience, Aging and Stem Cell Research Center,
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (8)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetic
Engineering, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, Tehran, Iran Department of
Hematology, School of Medicine, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNA-129-1 (miR-129-1) seems to behave as a tumour suppressor
since its decreased expression is associated with different tumours such as
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). GBM is the most common form of brain tumours
originating from glial cells. The impact of miR-129-1 downregulation on GBM
pathogenesis has yet to be elucidated.
METHODS: MiR-129-1 was overexpressed in GBM cells, and its effect on
proliferation was investigated by cell cycle assay. MiR-129-1 predicted targets
(CDK6, IGF1, HDAC2, IGF2BP3 and MAPK1) were also evaluated by western blot and
luciferase assay.
RESULTS: Restoration of miR-129-1 reduced cell proliferation and induced G1
accumulation, significantly. Several functional assays confirmed IGF2BP3, MAPK1
and CDK6 as targets of miR-129-1. Despite the fact that IGF1 expression can be
suppressed by miR-129-1, through 3'-untranslated region complementary sequence,
we could not find any association between IGF1 expression and GBM. MiR-129-1
expression inversely correlates with CDK6, IGF2BP3 and MAPK1 in primary clinical 
samples.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to propose miR129-1 as a negative regulator
of IGF2BP3 and MAPK1 and also a cell cycle arrest inducer in GBM cells. Our data 
suggests miR-129-1 as a potential tumour suppressor and presents a rationale for 
the use of miR-129-1 as a novel strategy to improve treatment response in GBM.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26510428  [PubMed - in process]


57. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 28;10(10):e0140699. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140699.
eCollection 2015.

Fetal Alcohol Exposure Reduces Dopamine Receptor D2 and Increases Pituitary
Weight and Prolactin Production via Epigenetic Mechanisms.

Gangisetty O(1), Wynne O(1), Jabbar S(1), Nasello C(2), Sarkar DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Program, Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, United States of
America. (2)Department of Genetics, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 
New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, United States of America.

Recent evidence indicated that alcohol exposure during the fetal period increases
the susceptibility to tumor development in mammary and prostate tissues. Whether 
fetal alcohol exposure increases the susceptibility to prolactin-producing tumor 
(prolactinoma) development in the pituitary was studied by employing the animal
model of estradiol-induced prolactinomas in Fischer 344 female rats. We employed 
an animal model of fetal alcohol exposure that simulates binge alcohol drinking
during the first two trimesters of human pregnancy and involves feeding pregnant 
rats with a liquid diet containing 6.7% alcohol during gestational day 7 to day
21. Control rats were pair-fed with isocaloric liquid diet or fed ad libitum with
rat chow diet. Adult alcohol exposed and control female offspring rats were used 
in this study on the day of estrus or after estrogen treatment. Results show that
fetal alcohol-exposed rats had increased levels of pituitary weight, pituitary
prolactin (PRL) protein and mRNA, and plasma PRL. However, these rats show
decreased pituitary levels of dopamine D2 receptor (D2R) mRNA and protein and
increased pituitary levels of D2R promoter methylation. Also, they show elevated 
pituitary mRNA levels of DNA methylating genes (DNMT1, DNMT3b, MeCP2) and histone
modifying genes (HDAC2, HDAC4, G9a). When fetal alcohol exposed rats were treated
neonatally with a DNA methylation inhibitor 5-Aza deoxycytidine and/or a HDAC
inhibitor trichostatin-A their pituitary D2R mRNA, pituitary weights and plasma
PRL levels were normalized. These data suggest that fetal alcohol exposure
programs the pituitary to increase the susceptibility to the development of
prolactinomas possibly by enhancing the methylation of the D2R gene promoter and 
repressing the synthesis and control of D2R on PRL-producing cells.

PMCID: PMC4624904
PMID: 26509893  [PubMed - in process]


58. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Dec;8(6):752-64. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.115.001134. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Eya4 Induces Hypertrophy via Regulation of p27kip1.

Williams T(1), Hundertmark M(1), Nordbeck P(1), Voll S(1), Arias-Loza PA(1),
Oppelt D(1), Mühlfelder M(1), Schraut S(1), Elsner I(1), Czolbe M(1), Seidlmayer 
L(1), Heinze B(1), Hahner S(1), Heinze K(1), Schönberger J(1), Jakob P(1), Ritter
O(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine I, University Hospital Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
Germany (T.W., M.H., P.N., P.A.A.-L., D.O., M.M., S.S., I.E., M.C., L.S., B.H.,
S.H., J.S., O.R.); Comprehensive Heart Failure Center Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
Germany (T.W., M.C., O.R.); Experimental Physics V, University Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany (P.N., S.V., P.J.); DFG Research Center for Experimental
Biomedicine, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany (K.H.); and Department
of Cardiology and Pneumology, Medical University Brandenburg, Brandenburg,
Germany (O.R.). (2)From the Department of Medicine I, University Hospital
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany (T.W., M.H., P.N., P.A.A.-L., D.O., M.M., S.S.,
I.E., M.C., L.S., B.H., S.H., J.S., O.R.); Comprehensive Heart Failure Center
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany (T.W., M.C., O.R.); Experimental Physics V,
University Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany (P.N., S.V., P.J.); DFG Research Center 
for Experimental Biomedicine, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany (K.H.);
and Department of Cardiology and Pneumology, Medical University Brandenburg,
Brandenburg, Germany (O.R.). o.ritter@klinikum-brandenburg.de Williams_T@ukw.de.

BACKGROUND: E193, a heterozygous truncating mutation in the human transcription
cofactor Eyes absent 4 (Eya4), causes hearing impairment followed by dilative
cardiomyopathy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, we first show Eya4 and E193 alter the
expression of p27(kip1) in vitro, suggesting Eya4 is a negative regulator of p27.
Next, we generated transgenic mice with cardiac-specific overexpression of Eya4
or E193. Luciferase and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed Eya4 and
E193 bind and regulate p27 expression in a contradictory manner. Activity and
phosphorylation status of the downstream molecules casein kinase-2a and histone
deacetylase 2 were significantly elevated in Eya4- but significantly reduced in
E193-overexpressing animals compared with wild-type littermates. Magnetic
resonance imaging and hemodynamic analysis indicate Eya4-overexpression results
in an age-dependent development of hypertrophy already under baseline conditions 
with no obvious functional effects, whereas E193 animals develop onset of
dilative cardiomyopathy as seen in human E193 patients. Both cardiac phenotypes
were aggravated on pressure overload. Finally, we identified a new heterozygous
truncating Eya4 mutation, E215, which leads to similar clinical features of
disease and a stable myocardial expression of the mutant protein as seen with
E193.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results implicate Eya4/Six1 regulates normal cardiac function
via p27/casein kinase-2a/histone deacetylase 2 and indicate that mutations within
this transcriptional complex and signaling cascade lead to the development of
cardiomyopathy.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26499333  [PubMed - in process]


59. Respir Res. 2015 Oct 24;16:130. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0287-2.

Lymphocyte senescence in COPD is associated with decreased histone deacetylase 2 
expression by pro-inflammatory lymphocytes.

Hodge G(1,)(2), Jersmann H(3,)(4), Tran HB(5), Roscioli E(6), Holmes M(7,)(8),
Reynolds PN(9,)(10), Hodge S(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Research, Hanson Institute and Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal
Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
greg.hodge@health.sa.gov.au. (2)Department of Medicine, University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. greg.hodge@health.sa.gov.au. (3)Lung
Research, Hanson Institute and Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide
Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
hubertus.jersmann@health.sa.gov.au. (4)Department of Medicine, University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
hubertus.jersmann@health.sa.gov.au. (5)Lung Research, Hanson Institute and
Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. hai.tran@health.sa.gov.au. (6)Lung Research, Hanson
Institute and Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia. eugene.roscioli@health.sa.gov.au. (7)Lung Research,
Hanson Institute and Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. mark.holmes@health.sa.gov.au. (8)Department
of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
mark.holmes@health.sa.gov.au. (9)Lung Research, Hanson Institute and Department
of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. paul.reynolds@health.sa.gov.au. (10)Department of Medicine, University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
paul.reynolds@health.sa.gov.au. (11)Lung Research, Hanson Institute and
Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. sandra.hodge@health.sa.gov.au. (12)Department of Medicine, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
sandra.hodge@health.sa.gov.au.

BACKGROUND: Histone acetyltransferases (HAT) and histone deacetylases (HDAC) are 
enzymes that upregulate and down-regulate pro-inflammatory gene transcription
respectively. HDAC2 is required by corticosteroids to switch off activated
inflammatory genes and is reduced in lung macrophages in COPD. We have shown that
COPD patients have increased steroid resistant CD28null (senescent)
pro-inflammatory T and NKT-like peripheral blood cells (particularly CD8+
subsets) and we hypothesized that these changes would be associated with a loss
of HDAC2 from these senescent pro-inflammatory lymphocytes.
METHODS: Blood was collected from 10 COPD and 10 aged-matched controls.
Intracellular pro-inflammatory cytokines, IFN<U+03B3> and TNFa, and expression of CD28, 
HDAC2 and HAT, were determined in lymphocyte subsets in the presence of<U+2009>±<U+2009>5 mg/ml
theophylline (HDAC2 activator), 10 µM prednisolone and 2.5 ng/ml cyclosporine A
(immunosuppressant), using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: There was a loss of HDAC2 from CD28null CD8+ T and NKT-like cells in
COPD. There was a significant negative correlation between HDAC2 expression and
the percentage of CD28null CD8+ T and NKT-like cells producing IFN<U+03B3> or TNFa in
all subjects (eg, COPD: R<U+2009>= -.763, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 for T-cell IFN<U+03B3>). There was a
synergistic upregulation of HDAC2 and associated decrease in pro-inflammatory
cytokine production in CD28nullCD8+ T and NKT-like cells in the presence of 5
mg/L theophylline<U+2009>+<U+2009>10(-6) M prednisolone or 2.5 ng/mL cyclosporine A (CsA).
CONCLUSIONS: Lymphocyte senescence in COPD is associated with loss of HDAC2 in
CD28nullCD8+ T and NKT-like cells. Alternative treatment options such as combined
theophylline with low-dose CsA, that inhibit these pro-inflammatory cells, may
reduce systemic inflammation in COPD.

PMCID: PMC4619495
PMID: 26498345  [PubMed - in process]


60. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2015 Nov 28;17(44):29483-8. doi: 10.1039/c5cp05633k. Epub
2015 Oct 23.

Inhibition mechanism of SAHA in HDAC: a revisit.

Zhou J(1), Wu R, Luo HB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006,
P. R. China. luohb77@mail.sysu.edu.cn wurb3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

SAHA (vorinostat, Merck) is a famous clinical drug for zinc-containing histone
deacetylase (HDAC) targets against cancer and several other human disorders,
whose inhibition mechanism (namely the protonation mechanism) upon binding to
HDAC has been debated for more than ten years. It is very challenging to verify
experimentally and is still controversial theoretically. The popular
"Class-dependent" (namely "Tyr-dependent") hypothesis is that the deprotonation
of SAHA is mostly regulated by the conserved Tyr308 in class I HDAC while it is
replaced by the His843 in class IIa HDAC. Herein, by elaborate QM(DFT)/MM MD
simulations, we exclude the prevalent "Class-dependent" mechanism and advance a
novel "Metal-dependent" mechanism, where the remote second metal site (K(+) in
most HDAC and Ca(2+) in HDAC2) determines the protonation of SAHA. This
proof-of-principle "Metal-dependent" mechanism opens up a new avenue to utilize
the second metal site for isoform-selective inhibitor design.

PMID: 26497064  [PubMed - in process]


61. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2015 Oct 25;67(5):447-54.

Selective class I histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress persistent spontaneous 
nociception and thermal hypersensitivity in a rat model of bee venom-induced
inflammatory pain.

Yang F(1), Yang Y(1), Wang Y(2,)(3), Yang F(2), Li CL(2,)(3), Wang XL(2,)(3), Li 
Z(2,)(3), Chen J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Sciences of Pain, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China. (2)Institute for Biomedical
Sciences of Pain and Institute for Functional Brain Disorders, Tangdu Hospital,
the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710038, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Brain Stress and Behavior, PLA, Xi'an 710038, China. (4)Beijing Institute for
Brain Disorders, Beijing 100069, China. junchen@fmmu.edu.cn.

To confirm whether class I histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are effective 
in relief of peripheral inflammatory pain, the effects of two selective
inhibitors, MS-275 and MGCD0103, were studied in rats inflamed by subcutaneous
(s.c.) injection of bee venom (BV). The BV test is characterized by displaying
both persistent spontaneous nociception (PSN) and primary hypersensitivity.
Intrathecal (i.t.) pre-treatment of either MS-275 or MGCD0103 with a single dose 
of 60 nmol/20 µL resulted in profound suppression of both PSN and primary thermal
hypersensitivity but without significant influence upon the primary mechanical
hypersensitivity and mirror-image thermal hypersensitivity. Moreover, the
up-regulation of both HDAC1 and HDAC2 induced by s.c. BV injection was completely
suppressed by i.t. pre-treatment of MS-275. The present results provide with
another new line of evidence showing involvement of epigenetic regulation of
chromatin structure by HDAC1/2-mediated histone hypoacetylation in the BV-induced
PSN and thermal hypersensitivity and demonstrate the beneficial effects of class 
I HDACIs in prevention of peripheral inflammatory pain from occurring.

PMID: 26490061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Neurobiol Dis. 2016 Jan;85:25-34. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.012. Epub 2015 Oct
17.

Protection by dietary restriction in the YAC128 mouse model of Huntington's
disease: Relation to genes regulating histone acetylation and HTT.

Moreno CL(1), Ehrlich ME(2), Mobbs CV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY 10029, USA; Friedman Brain Institute, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic
address: Cesar.moreno@mssm.edu. (2)Friedman Brain Institute, New York, NY 10029, 
USA; Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address:
Michelle.ehrlich@mssm.edu. (3)Friedman Brain Institute, New York, NY 10029, USA; 
Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029, USA; Department of Endocrinology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Geriatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: Charles.mobbs@mssm.edu.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by
metabolic, cognitive, and motor deficits. HD is caused by an expanded CAG repeat 
in the first exon of the HTT gene, resulting in an expanded polyglutamine
section. Dietary restriction (DR) increases lifespan and ameliorates age-related 
pathologies, including in a model of HD, but the mechanisms mediating these
protective effects are unknown. We report metabolic and behavioral effects of DR 
in the full-length YAC128 HD mouse model, and associated transcriptional changes 
in hypothalamus and striatum. DR corrected many effects of the transgene
including increased body weight, decreased blood glucose, and impaired motor
function. These changes were associated with reduced striatal human (but not
mouse) HTT expression, as well as alteration in gene expression regulating
histone acetylation modifications, particularly Hdac2. Other mRNAs related to
Huntington's pathology in striatal tissue showed significant modulation by the
transgene, dietary restriction or both. These results establish a protective role
of DR in a transgenic model that contains the complete human HTT gene and for the
first time suggest a role for DR in lowering HTT level, which correlates with
severity of symptoms.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26485309  [PubMed - in process]


63. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Dec 5;242:227-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2015.10.014. Epub
2015 Oct 19.

Ginsenoside 20(s)-Rh2 as potent natural histone deacetylase inhibitors
suppressing the growth of human leukemia cells.

Liu ZH(1), Li J(1), Xia J(2), Jiang R(1), Zuo GW(3), Li XP(1), Chen Y(1), Xiong
W(1), Chen DL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Department 
of Human Anatomy, Chongqing Medical and Health School, Chongqing 400016, China.
(3)Key Laboratories of Clinical Diagnostics, Province and Ministry of Education, 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (4)Laboratory of Stem Cell
and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and Embryology, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, China. Electronic address: xinmengyuandlc@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Activation and abnormal expression of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) which is important target for cancer therapeutics are related 
to the occurrence of human leukemia. 20(s)-Ginsenoside Rh2 (20(s)-Rh2) may be a
potential HDAC inhibitor (HDACi) of leukemia, but the mechanism has not been
reported.
METHODS: The cell proliferation and apoptosis was assessed in cultured K562 and
KG-1a cells. The protein expression was measured with immunoblotting. The
activities of HDAC and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) were measured with BCA.
In vivo experiments were performed on naked mice carrying K562 cells for
assessment of tumor growth, apoptosis, protein expression, and HDAC/HAT
activities.
RESULTS: 20(s)-Rh2 effectively induced cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase and
apoptosis in K562 and KG1-a cells, decreased the levels of proteins associated
with cell proliferation (Cyclin D1, Bcl-2, ERK, p-ERK) and activated
pro-apoptotic proteins (Bax, cleaved Caspase-3, p38, p-p38, JNK, p-JNK).
20(s)-Rh2 down-regulated HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6, increased histone H3 acetylation
and HAT activity. Moreover, 20(s)-Rh2 inhibited the growth of human leukemia
xenograft tumors in vivo.
CONCLUSION: 20(s)-Rh2 inhibited the proliferation of K562 and KG1-a cell by
reducing the expression and activity of HDACs, increasing histone acetylation,
and regulating key proteins in the downstream signaling pathways. Therefore,
20(s)-Rh2 could become a potential natural HDACi for chemotherapy of leukemia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26482938  [PubMed - in process]


64. Pharmacol Rep. 2015 Dec;67(6):1124-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pharep.2015.04.004. Epub
2015 Apr 22.

Valproic acid (VPA) reduces sensorimotor gating deficits and HDAC2 overexpression
in the MAM animal model of schizophrenia.

Bator E(1), Latusz J(1), Radaszkiewicz A(1), Wedzony K(1), Mackowiak M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Brain Biostructure, Institute of Pharmacology, 
Polish Academy of Sciences, Kraków, Poland. (2)Laboratory of Pharmacology and
Brain Biostructure, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Kraków, Poland. Electronic address: mackow@if-pan.krakow.pl.

BACKGROUND: Evidence indicates that the disruption of epigenetic processes might 
play an important role in the development of schizophrenia symptoms. The present 
study investigated the role of histone acetylation in the development of
sensorimotor gating deficits in a neurodevelopmental model of schizophrenia based
on prenatal administration of methylazoxymethanol (MAM) at embryonic day 17.
METHODS: Valproic acid (VPA), an inhibitor of class I histone deacetylases, was
administered (250 mg/kg, twice a day for 7 consecutive days) in early adolescence
(23rd-29th day) or early adulthood (63rd-69th day) to rats. The effect of VPA
treatment on the sensorimotor gating deficits induced by prenatal MAM
administration was analyzed in adult rats at postnatal day 70 (P70). In addition,
the effects of VPA administration (at the same doses) on MAM-induced changes in
the levels of histone H3 acetylation at lysine 9 (H3K9ac) and histone deacetylase
2 (HDAC2) in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) were determined at P70 using
Western blot.
RESULTS: VPA administration in either adolescence or early adulthood prevented
the sensorimotor gating deficits induced by MAM. However, VPA administration in
early adolescence or early adulthood did not alter H3K9ac levels induced by MAM. 
In contrast, VPA administration in either adolescence or adulthood prevented the 
increase in HDAC2 level evoked by MAM.
CONCLUSIONS: Prenatal MAM administration impaired histone acetylation in the
mPFC, which might be involved in the development of some of the neurobehavioral
deficits (i.e., sensorimotor gating deficits) associated with schizophrenia.
Blockade of HDAC2 might prevent the disruption of sensorimotor gating in
adulthood.

Copyright © 2015 Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences. Published
by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26481530  [PubMed - in process]


65. Toxicol Lett. 2016 Jan 5;240(1):43-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.10.009. Epub
2015 Oct 19.

The tobacco smoke component acrolein induces glucocorticoid resistant gene
expression via inhibition of histone deacetylase.

Randall MJ(1), Haenen GR(2), Bouwman FG(3), van der Vliet A(4), Bast A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD
Maastricht, The Netherlands; Department of Pathology, College of Medicine,
University of Vermont, 89 Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. Electronic 
address: mjrandal@uvm.edu. (2)Department of Toxicology, Maastricht University,
P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Human
Biology, Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The
Netherlands. (4)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of
Vermont, 89 Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the leading cause of cigarette
smoke-related death worldwide. Acrolein, a crucial reactive electrophile found in
cigarette smoke mimics many of the toxic effects of cigarette smoke-exposure in
the lung. In macrophages, cigarette smoke is known to hinder histone deacetylases
(HDACs), glucocorticoid-regulated enzymes that play an important role in the
pathogenesis of glucocorticoid resistant inflammation, a common feature of COPD. 
Thus, we hypothesize that acrolein plays a role in COPD-associated glucocorticoid
resistance. To examine the role of acrolein on glucocorticoid resistance, U937
monocytes, differentiated with PMA to macrophage-like cells were treated with
acrolein for 0.5h followed by stimulation with hydrocortisone for 8h, or treated 
simultaneously with LPS and hydrocortisone for 8h without acrolein. GSH and
nuclear HDAC activity were measured, or gene expression was analyzed by qPCR.
Acrolein-mediated TNFa gene expression was not suppressed by hydrocortisone
whereas LPS-induced TNFa expression was suppressed. Acrolein also significantly
inhibited nuclear HDAC activity in macrophage-like cells. Incubation of
recombinant HDAC2 with acrolein led to the formation of an HDAC2-acrolein adduct 
identified by mass spectrometry. Therefore, these results suggest that
acrolein-induced inflammatory gene expression is resistant to suppression by the 
endogenous glucocorticoid, hydrocortisone.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4725588 [Available on 2016-12-05]
PMID: 26481333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 15;5:15067. doi: 10.1038/srep15067.

Antroquinonol Lowers Brain Amyloid-ß Levels and Improves Spatial Learning and
Memory in a Transgenic Mouse Model of Alzheimer's Disease.

Chang WH(1), Chen MC(2), Cheng IH(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Brain Science, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Biological Chemistry, R&D, Golden Biotechnology Corporation, New
Taipei City, Taiwan. (3)Brain Research Center, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Infection and Immunity Research Center, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia. The deposition of
brain amyloid-ß peptides (Aß), which are cleaved from amyloid precursor protein
(APP), is one of the pathological hallmarks of AD. Aß-induced oxidative stress
and neuroinflammation play important roles in the pathogenesis of AD.
Antroquinonol, a ubiquinone derivative isolated from Antrodia camphorata, has
been shown to reduce oxidative stress and inflammatory cytokines via activating
the nuclear transcription factor erythroid-2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) pathway,
which is downregulated in AD. Therefore, we examined whether antroquinonol could 
improve AD-like pathological and behavioral deficits in the APP transgenic mouse 
model. We found that antroquinonol was able to cross the blood-brain barrier and 
had no adverse effects via oral intake. Two months of antroquinonol consumption
improved learning and memory in the Morris water maze test, reduced hippocampal
Aß levels, and reduced the degree of astrogliosis. These effects may be mediated 
through the increase of Nrf2 and the decrease of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)
levels. These findings suggest that antroquinonol could have beneficial effects
on AD-like deficits in APP transgenic mouse.

PMCID: PMC4606808
PMID: 26469245  [PubMed - in process]


67. MAbs. 2016 Jan 2;8(1):37-42. doi: 10.1080/19420862.2015.1098795. Epub 2015 Oct
14.

A monoclonal antibody specific for prophase phosphorylation of histone
deacetylase 1: a readout for early mitotic cells.

Segré CV(1,)(2,)(3), Senese S(1,)(4,)(3), Loponte S(1,)(3), Santaguida S(1,)(5), 
Soffientini P(1,)(6), Grigorean G(1,)(7), Cinquanta M(8), Ossolengo G(8), Seiser 
C(9), Chiocca S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Experimental Oncology ; European Institute of Oncology ; Via
Adamello 16; 20139 Milan , Italy. (2)b Present addresses: Fondazione Umberto
Veronesi ; Piazza Velasca 5; 20121 Milano , Italy. (3)i These authors equally
contributed to the work. (4)c Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry ;
University of California; Los Angeles ; Los Angeles , CA 90095 , USA. (5)d Koch
Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT; Massachusetts Institute of
Technology ; Cambridge , USA. (6)e IFOM; the FIRC Institute for Molecular
Oncology Foundation ; via Adamello 16; 20139 Milan , Italy. (7)f Chromatography
and Mass Spectrometry Division; Thermo Fisher Scientific ; 1400 Northpoint
Parkway; Suite 10; West Palm Beach ; Fl 33407 , USA. (8)g Consortium for Genomic 
Technologies - COGENTECH ; via Adamello 16; 20139 Milan , Italy. (9)h Max F.
Perutz Laboratories; Medical University of Vienna ; Vienna Biocenter , Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are modification enzymes that regulate a plethora of
biological processes. HDAC1, a crucial epigenetic modifier, is deregulated in
cancer and subjected to a variety of post-translational modifications. Here, we
describe the generation of a new monoclonal antibody that specifically recognizes
a novel highly dynamic prophase phosphorylation of serine 406-HDAC1, providing a 
powerful tool for detecting early mitotic cells.

PMID: 26467746  [PubMed - in process]


68. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Nov 20;33(33):3930-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.60.2573. Epub 2015
Oct 12.

Genome-Wide Association Study of Event-Free Survival in Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma Treated With Immunochemotherapy.

Ghesquieres H(1), Slager SL(1), Jardin F(1), Veron AS(1), Asmann YW(1), Maurer
MJ(1), Fest T(1), Habermann TM(1), Bene MC(1), Novak AJ(1), Mareschal S(1),
Haioun C(1), Lamy T(1), Ansell SM(1), Tilly H(1), Witzig TE(1), Weiner GJ(1),
Feldman AL(1), Dogan A(1), Cunningham JM(1), Olswold CL(1), Molina TJ(1), Link
BK(1), Milpied N(1), Cox DG(1), Salles GA(1), Cerhan JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hervé Ghesquieres, Universite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Centre Leon Berard;
Amelie S. Veron and David G. Cox, L'Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U1052, Cancer Research Center of Lyon, Centre Leon
Berard, Lyon; Hervé Ghesquieres and Gilles A. Salles, Faculté de Médecine
Lyon-Sud; Gilles A. Salles, Universite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Centre Hospitalier 
Lyon Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Pierre-Bénite; Fabrice Jardin, Sylvain
Mareschal, and Herve Tilly, INSERM U918, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen; Thierry
Fest, INSERM U917, Université de Rennes 1, Hopital Pontchaillou; Thierry Lamy,
Université de Rennes 1, Hopital Pontchaillou, Rennes; Marie C. Bene, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Nantes, Nantes; Corinne Haioun, Hospital Henri Mondor, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP) and University Paris Est, Créteil; 
Thierry Jo Molina, Universite Paris Descartes, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker, Paris; Noel
Milpied, University Hospital and University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France; Hervé 
Ghesquieres, Susan L. Slager, Matthew J. Maurer, Thomas M. Habermann, Anne J.
Novak, Stephen M. Ansell, Thomas E. Witzig, Andrew L. Feldman, Ahmet Dogan, Julie
M. Cunningham, Curtis L. Olswold, and James R. Cerhan, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN; Yan W. Asmann, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL; and George J. Weiner and Brian 
K. Link, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA. (2)Hervé Ghesquieres, Universite
Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Centre Leon Berard; Amelie S. Veron and David G. Cox,
L'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U1052,
Cancer Research Center of Lyon, Centre Leon Berard, Lyon; Hervé Ghesquieres and
Gilles A. Salles, Faculté de Médecine Lyon-Sud; Gilles A. Salles, Universite
Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Pierre-Bénite; Fabrice Jardin, Sylvain Mareschal, and Herve Tilly, INSERM U918,
Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen; Thierry Fest, INSERM U917, Université de Rennes 1,
Hopital Pontchaillou; Thierry Lamy, Université de Rennes 1, Hopital Pontchaillou,
Rennes; Marie C. Bene, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Nantes, Nantes; Corinne
Haioun, Hospital Henri Mondor, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP) and 
University Paris Est, Créteil; Thierry Jo Molina, Universite Paris Descartes,
AP-HP, Hôpital Necker, Paris; Noel Milpied, University Hospital and University of
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France; Hervé Ghesquieres, Susan L. Slager, Matthew J.
Maurer, Thomas M. Habermann, Anne J. Novak, Stephen M. Ansell, Thomas E. Witzig, 
Andrew L. Feldman, Ahmet Dogan, Julie M. Cunningham, Curtis L. Olswold, and James
R. Cerhan, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Yan W. Asmann, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, 
FL; and George J. Weiner and Brian K. Link, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.
cerhan.james@mayo.edu.

PURPOSE: We performed a multistage genome-wide association study to identify
inherited genetic variants that predict outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
patients treated with immunochemotherapy.
METHODS: We conducted a meta-analysis of two genome-wide association study data
sets, one from the LNH2003B trial (N = 540), a prospective clinical trial from
the Lymphoma Study Association, and the other from the Molecular Epidemiology
Resource study (N = 312), a prospective observational study from the University
of Iowa-Mayo Clinic Lymphoma Specialized Program of Research Excellence. Top
single nucleotide polymorphisms were then genotyped in independent cohorts of
patients from the Specialized Program of Research Excellence (N = 391) and the
Groupe Ouest-Est des Leucémies Aiguës et Maladies du Sang (GOELAMS) -075
randomized trial (N = 294). We calculated the hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% CIs for
event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS) using a log-additive genetic 
model with adjustment for age, sex, and age-adjusted International Prognostic
Index.
RESULTS: In a meta-analysis of the four studies, the top loci for EFS were marked
by rs7712513 at 5q23.2 (near SNX2 and SNCAIP; HR, 1.39; 95% CI, 1.23 to 1.57; P =
2.08 × 10(-7)), and rs7765004 at 6q21 (near MARCKS and HDAC2; HR, 1.38; 95% CI,
1.22 to 1.57; P = 7.09 × 10(-7)), although they did not reach conventional
genome-wide significance (P = 5 × 10(-8)). Both rs7712513 (HR, 1.49; 95% CI, 1.29
to 1.72; P = 3.53 × 10(-8)) and rs7765004 (HR, 1.47; 95% CI, 1.27 to 1.71; P =
5.36 × 10(-7)) were also associated with OS. In exploratory analyses, a
two-single nucleotide polymorphism risk score was highly predictive of EFS (P =
1.78 × 10(-12)) and was independent of treatment, IPI, and cell-of-origin
classification.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides encouraging evidence for associations between loci
at 5q23.2 and 6q21 with EFS and OS in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
treated with immunochemotherapy, suggesting novel biology and the potential
contribution of host genetics to the prognosis of this aggressive malignancy.

© 2015 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

PMID: 26460308  [PubMed - in process]


69. Int J Oncol. 2015 Dec;47(6):2264-75. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3192. Epub 2015 Oct 7.

Radiation-induced modulation of immunogenic genes in tumor cells is regulated by 
both histone deacetylases and DNA methyltransferases.

Cacan E(1), Greer SF(1), Garnett-Benson C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30302, USA.

Radiation treatment is a pivotal therapy for several cancer types, including
colorectal cancer. It has been shown that sublethal doses of radiation modulate
gene expression, making tumor cells more susceptible to T-cell-mediated immune
attack. We have recently shown that low dose radiation enhances expression of
multiple death receptors (Fas, DR4 and DR5) and co-stimulatory molecules (4-1BBL 
and OX-40L) in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells; however, it is unclear how ionizing
radiation (IR) enhances expression of these molecules mechanistically. In the
present study, we elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which radiation controls 
expression of these molecules in CRC. Here we report that, enhanced expression of
these genes following radiation treatment of CRC cells is due, in part, to
changes in DNA methylation and histone acetylation. We observed that radiation (5
Gy) significantly increased histone acetylation at the promoter regions of
4-1BBL, Fas and DR5 but not OX-40L. However, radiation did not induce changes in 
the global levels of acetylated histone H3 suggesting specificity of IR-induced
changes. Furthermore, evaluation of epigenetic controlling enzymes revealed that 
IR did not alter overall cellular levels of HDACs (HDAC1, HDAC2 or HDAC3) or
DNMTs (DNMT1, DNMT3a, or DNMT3b). Instead, radiation decreased binding of HDAC2
and HDAC3 at the promoter regions of Fas and 4-1BBL, respectively. Radiation also
resulted in reduced DNMT1 at both the Fas and 4-1BBL promoter regions but not a
control gene. We conclude that single dose radiation can influence the expression
of immune response relevant genes in colorectal tumor cells by altering the
binding of epigenetic enzymes, and modulating histone acetylation, at specific
gene promoters.

PMID: 26458736  [PubMed - in process]


70. Blood. 2015 Nov 19;126(21):2392-403. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-632984. Epub 2015
Oct 7.

Functional-genetic dissection of HDAC dependencies in mouse lymphoid and myeloid 
malignancies.

Matthews GM(1), Mehdipour P(2), Cluse LA(1), Falkenberg KJ(3), Wang E(4), Roth
M(5), Santoro F(2), Vidacs E(1), Stanley K(1), House CM(6), Rusche JR(7), Vakoc
CR(4), Zuber J(5), Minucci S(8), Johnstone RW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; (2)Department of Experimental
Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy; (3)Cancer Therapeutics
Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria;
Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia;
(4)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY; (5)Research Institute
of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria; (6)Sir Peter MacCallum
Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
(7)Repligen Corporation, Waltham, MA; (8)Department of Experimental Oncology,
European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy; Drug Development Program, European 
Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy; and Department of Biosciences, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACis) have demonstrated activity in
hematological and solid malignancies. Vorinostat, romidepsin, belinostat, and
panobinostat are Food and Drug Administration-approved for hematological
malignancies and inhibit class II and/or class I HDACs, including HDAC1, 2, 3,
and 6. We combined genetic and pharmacological approaches to investigate whether 
suppression of individual or multiple Hdacs phenocopied broad-acting HDACis in 3 
genetically distinct leukemias and lymphomas. Individual Hdacs were depleted in
murine acute myeloid leukemias (MLL-AF9;Nras(G12D); PML-RARa acute promyelocytic 
leukemia [APL] cells) and Eµ-Myc lymphoma in vitro and in vivo. Strikingly,
Hdac3-depleted cells were selected against in competitive assays for all 3 tumor 
types. Decreased proliferation following Hdac3 knockdown was not prevented by
BCL-2 overexpression, caspase inhibition, or knockout of Cdkn1a in Eµ-Myc
lymphoma, and depletion of Hdac3 in vivo significantly reduced tumor burden.
Interestingly, APL cells depleted of Hdac3 demonstrated a more differentiated
phenotype. Consistent with these genetic studies, the HDAC3 inhibitor RGFP966
reduced proliferation of Eµ-Myc lymphoma and induced differentiation in APL.
Genetic codepletion of Hdac1 with Hdac2 was pro-apoptotic in Eµ-Myc lymphoma in
vitro and in vivo and was phenocopied by the HDAC1/2-specific agent RGFP233. This
study demonstrates the importance of HDAC3 for the proliferation of leukemia and 
lymphoma cells, suggesting that HDAC3-selective inhibitors could prove useful for
the treatment of hematological malignancies. Moreover, our results demonstrate
that codepletion of Hdac1 with Hdac2 mediates a robust pro-apoptotic response.
Our integrated genetic and pharmacological approach provides important insights
into the individual or combinations of HDACs that could be prioritized for
targeting in a range of hematological malignancies.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4653767 [Available on 2016-11-19]
PMID: 26447190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Brain Pathol. 2015 Oct 7. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12326. [Epub ahead of print]

Pediatric targeted therapy: Clinical feasibility of personalized diagnostics in
children with relapsed and progressive tumors.

Selt F(1,)(2,)(3), Deiß A(1), Korshunov A(4,)(5), Capper D(4,)(5), Witt H(2,)(6),
van Tilburg CM(2,)(3), Jones DT(6), Witt R(1,)(2,)(3), Sahm F(4,)(5), Reuss
D(4,)(5), Kölsche C(4,)(5), Ecker J(1), Oehme I(1), Hielscher T(7), von Deimling 
A(4,)(5), Kulozik AE(2), Pfister SM(2,)(6,)(3), Witt O(1,)(2,)(3), Milde
T(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology (G340), German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Section of
Pediatric Brain Tumors, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and
Immunology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, 69120,
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)National Center for Tumor diseases (NCT), Clinical Trial 
Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 350, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany. (4)Department of
Neuropathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 224, 69120,
Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology (G380), German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), and German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg,
Germany. (6)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology (B062), German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), and German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Division of Biostatistics (C060), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.

The "Pediatric Targeted Therapy" (PTT) program aims to identify the presence and 
activity of druggable targets and evaluate the clinical benefit of a personalized
treatment approach in relapsed or progressive tumors on an individual basis. 10
markers (HDAC2, HR23B, p-AKT, p-ERK, p-S6, p-EGFR, PDGFR-alpha/beta, p53, and
BRAFV600E) were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Pediatric patients with tumors 
independent of the histological diagnosis, with relapse or progression after
treatment according to standard protocols were included. n=61/145 (42%) cases
were elegible for analysis between 2009 and 2013, the most common entities being 
brain tumors. Immunohistochemical stainings were evaluated by the H-Score
(0-300). In 93% of the cases potentially actionable targets were identified. The 
expressed or activated pathways were HDACs (83.0% of cases positive), EGFR
(87.2%), PDGFR (75.9%), p53 (50.0%), MAPK/ERK (43.3%), and PI3K/mTOR (36.1%).
Follow-up revealed partial or full implementation of PTT results in treatment
decision making in 41% of the cases. Prolonged disease stabilization responses in
single cases were noticed, however response rates did not differ from cases
treated with other modalities. Further studies evaluating the feasibility and
clinical benefit of personalized diagnostic approaches using paraffin material
are warranted. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2015 International Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 26445087  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


72. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Sep 15;6:199. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00199. eCollection
2015.

Systems pharmacology of adiposity reveals inhibition of EP300 as a common
therapeutic mechanism of caloric restriction and resveratrol for obesity.

Nishimura Y(1), Sasagawa S(2), Ariyoshi M(2), Ichikawa S(2), Shimada Y(2),
Kawaguchi K(2), Kawase R(2), Yamamoto R(3), Uehara T(3), Yanai T(3), Takata R(3),
Tanaka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Mie 
University Medical Zebrafish Research Center Tsu, Japan ; Department of Systems
Pharmacology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Department 
of Omics Medicine, Mie University Industrial Technology Innovation Institute Tsu,
Japan ; Department of Bioinformatics, Mie University Life Science Research Center
Tsu, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine Tsu, Japan. (3)Product Development Research Institute, Mercian
Corporation Fujisawa, Japan.

Both caloric restriction (CR) and resveratrol (RSV) have beneficial effects on
obesity. However, the biochemical pathways that mediate these beneficial effects 
might be complex and interconnected and have not been fully elucidated. To reveal
the common therapeutic mechanism of CR and RSV, we performed a comparative
transcriptome analysis of adipose tissues from diet-induced obese (DIO) zebrafish
and obese humans. We identified nine genes in DIO zebrafish and seven genes in
obese humans whose expressions were regulated by CR and RSV. Although the gene
lists did not overlap except for one gene, the gene ontologies enriched in the
gene lists were highly overlapped, and included genes involved in adipocyte
differentiation, lipid storage and lipid metabolism. Bioinformatic analysis of
cis-regulatory sequences of these genes revealed that their transcriptional
regulators also overlapped, including EP300, HDAC2, CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and
FOXA2. We also identified 15 and 46 genes that were dysregulated in the adipose
tissue of DIO zebrafish and obese humans, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis
identified EP300, HDAC2, and CEBPB as common transcriptional regulators for these
genes. EP300 is a histone and lysyl acetyltransferase that modulates the function
of histone and various proteins including CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and FOXA2. We
demonstrated that adiposity in larval zebrafish was significantly reduced by
C646, an inhibitor of EP300 that antagonizes acetyl-CoA. The reduction of
adiposity by C646 was not significantly different from that induced by RSV or
co-treatment of C646 and RSV. These results indicate that the inhibition of EP300
might be a common therapeutic mechanism between CR and RSV in adipose tissues of 
obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC4569862
PMID: 26441656  [PubMed]


73. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 2;10(10):e0139588. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139588.
eCollection 2015.

Exploration of Novel Inhibitors for Class I Histone Deacetylase Isoforms by QSAR 
Modeling and Molecular Dynamics Simulation Assays.

Noor Z(1), Afzal N(1), Rashid S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Quaid I Azam University, Islamabad,
Pakistan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(11):e0143155.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are metal-dependent enzymes and considered as
important targets for cell functioning. Particularly, higher expression of class 
I HDACs is common in the onset of multiple malignancies which results in
deregulation of many target genes involved in cell growth, differentiation and
survival. Although substantial attempts have been made to control the irregular
functioning of HDACs by employing various inhibitors with high sensitivity
towards transformed cells, limited success has been achieved in epigenetic cancer
therapy. Here in this study, we used ligand-based pharmacophore and 2-dimensional
quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR) modeling approaches for
targeting class I HDAC isoforms. Pharmacophore models were generated by taking
into account the known IC50 values and experimental energy scores with extensive 
validations. The QSAR model having an external R2 value of 0.93 was employed for 
virtual screening of compound libraries. 10 potential lead compounds (C1-C10)
were short-listed having strong binding affinities for HDACs, out of which 2
compounds (C8 and C9) were able to interact with all members of class I HDACs.
The potential binding modes of HDAC2 and HDAC8 to C8 were explored through
molecular dynamics simulations. Overall, bioactivity and ligand efficiency
(binding energy/non-hydrogen atoms) profiles suggested that proposed hits may be 
more effective inhibitors for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4592208
PMID: 26431201  [PubMed - in process]


74. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.349. [Epub ahead of print]

USP4 inhibits p53 and NF-<U+03BA>B through deubiquitinating and stabilizing HDAC2.

Li Z(1,)(2), Hao Q(1,)(2), Luo J(3), Xiong J(1,)(2), Zhang S(4), Wang T(1), Bai
L(5), Wang W(2), Chen M(2), Wang W(2), Gu L(2), Lv K(6,)(7), Chen J(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology and School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. (2)Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Marine
Genetic Resources, Third Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration,
Xiamen, China. (3)Department of Radiotherapy, Changzhou Tumor Hospital, Soochow
University, Changzhou, China. (4)School of Radiation Medicine and Protection and 
Collaborative Innovation Center of Radiation Medicine of Jiangsu Higher Education
Institutions, Soochow University, Suzhou, China. (5)Zhongshan Hospital Xiamen
University, Xiamen, China. (6)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School
of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are major epigenetic modulators involved in a broad 
spectrum of human diseases including cancers. As HDACs are promising targets of
cancer therapy, it is important to understand the mechanisms of HDAC regulation. 
In this study, we show that ubiquitin-specific peptidase 4 (USP4) interacts
directly with and deubiquitinates HDAC2, leading to the stabilization of HDAC2.
Accumulation of HDAC2 in USP4-overexpression cells leads to compromised p53
acetylation as well as crippled p53 transcriptional activation, accumulation and 
apoptotic response upon DNA damage. Moreover, USP4 targets HDAC2 to downregulate 
tumor necrosis factor TNFa-induced nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B activation. Taken
together, our study provides a novel insight into the ubiquitination and
stability of HDAC2 and uncovers a previously unknown function of USP4 in
cancers.Oncogene advance online publication, 28 September 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.349.

PMID: 26411366  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


75. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016 Jan;154(1):164-70. doi:
10.1177/0194599815606911. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

Histone Deacetylase 2 in Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss Patients in Response
to Intratympanic Methylprednisolone Perfusion.

Hou J(1), She W(2), Du X(3), Dai Y(1), Xie L(4), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanjing Drum Tower
Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Medical School
of Nanjing University, Nanjing, China shewandong@163.com. (3)Hough Ear Institute,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (4)Department of Otolaryngology, Nanjing Children's
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with sudden
sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL) who were refractory to systemic glucocorticoid
treatment and to identify the relationship between the level of HDAC2 and
glucocorticoid insensitivity.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective clinical study.
SETTING: This study was conducted in Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing
University Medical School.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: PBMCs were collected from 42 refractory SSNHL patients.
After a 10-day intratympanic methylprednisolone perfusion (IMP) and systemic
Ginkgo biloba extract treatment, the SSNHL patients were divided into 2 groups
according to their hearing recovery after IMP (IMP sensitive and insensitive).
Real-time polymerase chain reaction and HDAC2 protein assays were used to detect 
the relative expression levels of HDAC2 in PBMCs. The HDAC2 mRNA expression and
protein levels in PBMCs collected from 17 volunteers were used as normal HDAC2
reference levels.
RESULTS: Compared with normal reference levels, HDAC2 protein levels were
significantly reduced, while the HDAC2 mRNA expression was much higher in all
refractory SSNHL patients before IMP. HDAC2 mRNA expression and HDAC2 protein
levels were significantly elevated in the IMP-sensitive group, while no change
was observed in the IMP-insensitive group after IMP plus systemic antioxidant
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced HDAC2 protein levels may be 1 of the mechanistic
underpinnings of corticosteroid insensitivity in refractory SSNHL patients. IMP
can increase HDAC2 protein levels and the expression of HDAC2 mRNA in
IMP-sensitive patients. HDAC2 protein levels might be regulated through
posttranslational modifications.

© American Academy of OtolaryngologyHead and Neck Surgery Foundation 2015.

PMID: 26408561  [PubMed - in process]


76. Yi Chuan. 2015 Sep;37(9):918-25. doi: 10.16288/j.yczz.15-128.

Transcriptome screening and verification of genes related to metabolism affected 
by histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Jihong C(1), Weiting L(2), Cheng W(1), Guorong X(1), Huanxin X(1), Pinglong L(1),
Ye T(1), Peng W(1), Jiari L(2), Lianrui D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jiujiang Third People's Hospital, Jiujiang 332000, China. (2)Institute for
Translational Medicine, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330000, China. (3)The
Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330000, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are responsible for catalyzing the deacetylation of 
histones, which closely related to many biological processes such as cell
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. In recent years, HDAC inhibitors
(HADCIs), with the anti-tumor potential, have been hot-spots of drug screening.
Although the latest studies suggested that HDAC2 might influence the metabolism, 
the mechanism of HDACIs in metabolic regulation is still unclear. Here, we
integrated the gene expression profiling of HDACIs (TSA and SAHA) in
hepatocellular carcinoma cell (HepG2). The results showed 380 differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) and 35 KEGG pathways enriched by DEGs in TSA-treatment
group. Most of DEGs (177/380) and KEGG pathways (23/35) from TSA-treatment groups
were confirmed by SAHA-treatment. About half of KEGG pathways (9/23) were related
to metabolism ,and nearly one third of common DEGs (66/177) were involved in
metabolic process. Moreover, HDAC2 siRNA experiment verified the effect of HDACIs
on metabolic genes, suggesting that HDACIs potentially present a practical value 
to prevent tumor and other metabolism-related diseases.

PMID: 26399531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. FASEB J. 2016 Feb;30(2):525-43. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-275529. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

The cell- and tissue-specific transcription mechanism of the TATA-less syntaxin
1A gene.

Nakayama T(1), Mikoshiba K(2), Akagawa K(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Physiology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan;
and RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Neuro-Developmental Disorder Research Group,
Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, Saitama, Japan
nakayama@ks.kyorin-u.ac.jp. (2)*Department of Physiology, Kyorin University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; and RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Neuro-Developmental Disorder Research Group, Laboratory for Developmental
Neurobiology, Saitama, Japan.

Syntaxin 1A (Stx1a) plays an important role in regulation of neuronal synaptic
function. To clarify the mechanism of basic transcriptional regulation and
neuron-specific transcription of Stx1a we cloned the Stx1a gene from rat, in
which knowledge of the expression profile was accumulated, and elucidated that
Stx1a consisting of 10 exons, possesses multiple transcription initiation sites
and a 204-bp core promoter region (CPR) essential for transcription in PC12
cells. The TATA-less, conserved, GC-rich CPR has 2 specific protein (SP) sites
that bind SP1 and are responsible for 65% of promoter activity. The endogenous
CPR, including 23 CpG sites, is not methylated in PC12 cells, which express Stx1a
and fetal rat skin keratinocyte (FRSK) cells, which do not, although an exogenous
methylated CPR suppresses reporter activity in both lines. Trichostatin A (TSA)
and class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, but not 5-azacytidine, induce 
Stx1a in FRSK cells. Acetylated histone H3 only associates to the CPR in FRSK
cells after TSA addition, whereas the high acetylated histone H3-CPR association 
in PC12 cells was unchanged following treatment. HDAC inhibitor induction of
Stx1a was negated by mithramycin A and deletion/mutation of 2 SP sites. HDAC1,
HDAC2, and HDAC8 detach from the CPR when treated with TSA in FRSK cells and are 
associated with the CPR in lungs, and acetylated histone H3 associates to this
region in the brain. In the first study characterizing a syntaxin promoter, we
show that association of SP1 and acetylated histone H3 to CPR is important for
Stx1a transcription and that HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC8 decide cell/tissue
specificity in a suppressive manner.-Nakayama, T., Mikoshiba, K., Akagawa, K. The
cell- and tissue-specific transcription mechanism of the TATA-less syntaxin 1A
gene.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26391271  [PubMed - in process]


78. Viruses. 2015 Sep 15;7(9):4978-96. doi: 10.3390/v7092858.

Alterations of Nuclear Architecture and Epigenetic Signatures during African
Swine Fever Virus Infection.

Simões M(1), Rino J(2), Pinheiro I(3), Martins C(4), Ferreira F(5).

Author information: 
(1)CIISA, Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida
Universidade Técnica, 1300-477 Lisboa, Portugal. maggiesimo@gmail.com.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal. joserino@medicina.ulisboa.pt. (3)Department of
Epigenetics, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, 79108
Freiburg, Germany. inespirespinheiro@gmail.com. (4)CIISA, Faculdade de Medicina
Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Universidade Técnica, 1300-477
Lisboa, Portugal. cmartins@fmv.ulisboa.pt. (5)CIISA, Faculdade de Medicina
Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Universidade Técnica, 1300-477
Lisboa, Portugal. fernandof@fmv.ulisboa.pt.

Viral interactions with host nucleus have been thoroughly studied, clarifying
molecular mechanisms and providing new antiviral targets. Considering that
African swine fever virus (ASFV) intranuclear phase of infection is poorly
understood, viral interplay with subnuclear domains and chromatin architecture
were addressed. Nuclear speckles, Cajal bodies, and promyelocytic leukaemia
nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) were evaluated by immunofluorescence microscopy and
Western blot. Further, efficient PML protein knockdown by shRNA lentiviral
transduction was used to determine PML-NBs relevance during infection. Nuclear
distribution of different histone H3 methylation marks at lysine's 9, 27 and 36, 
heterochromatin protein 1 isoforms (HP1a, HPß and HP<U+03B3>) and several histone
deacetylases (HDACs) were also evaluated to assess chromatin status of the host. 
Our results reveal morphological disruption of all studied subnuclear domains and
severe reduction of viral progeny in PML-knockdown cells. ASFV promotes H3K9me3
and HP1ß foci formation from early infection, followed by HP1a and HDAC2 nuclear 
enrichment, suggesting heterochromatinization of host genome. Finally, closeness 
between DNA damage response factors, disrupted PML-NBs, and virus-induced
heterochromatic regions were identified. In sum, our results demonstrate that
ASFV orchestrates spatio-temporal nuclear rearrangements, changing subnuclear
domains, relocating Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Rad-3 related (ATR)-related
factors and promoting heterochromatinization, probably controlling transcription,
repressing host gene expression, and favouring viral replication.

PMCID: PMC4584302
PMID: 26389938  [PubMed - in process]


79. J Thorac Dis. 2015 Jul;7(7):1189-97. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2015.05.18.

Clarithromycin might attenuate the airway inflammation of smoke-exposed asthmatic
mice via affecting HDAC2.

Hao M(1), Lin J(1), Shu J(1), Zhang X(1), Luo Q(1), Pan L(1), Guo J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Peking University China-Japan Friendship School of Clinical Medicine,
Beijing 100029, China ; 2 Peking University China-Japan Friendship School of
Clinical Medicine, Beijing 100029, China ; 3 Clinical Research Institute of
China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing 100029, China ; 4 Department of
Respiratory Diseases, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing 100029, China ; 5 
Graduate School Peking Union Medical College &Chinese Academy of Medical Science,
Beijng 100029, China.

BACKGROUND: Smoke has been proved to be one of the most dangerous ingredients
leading to the unsatisfying treatment response of asthmatics to inhaled
corticosteroids (ICS) therapy. Macrolides, a class of antibiotics, possess the
traits of immunomodulation and anti-inflammation besides antimicrobial activity. 
Given that studies on the efficacy of macrolides on the refractory asthma patient
have diverting conclusions, this article was carried on to investigate the
effects of macrolide on the airway inflammation of smoke-exposed asthmatic mice.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were chosen to be the subjects of this study. They were
raised to establish asthma model (OVA group); and one asthma group were exposed
to the smoke (SEA group), one asthma group were treat with clarithromycin (CAM
group) after smoke exposure. Control group mice were used as parallel comparison.
Total inspiratory resistance (RL), expiratory resistance of the lung (Re) and
lung compliance (Cdyn) were the main index to evaluate airway hyperresponsiveness
(AHR). The histopathological change was studied to assess lung tissue
inflammation. Cell counts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were also tested
to represent airway inflammation. IL-4 and CXCL1 in BALF and serum were also used
to evaluate the airway inflammation. Histone deacelytase2 (HDAC2) activity of
lung tissues was measure by assay kit. HDAC2 expression in the lung tissue had
been detected by western blot.
RESULTS: Re, RL and Cdyn were monitored to represent airway responsiveness. All
of the three indicators in SEA group were significantly different from control
group, while clarithromycin improved airway responsiveness and the three
indicator were statistically significant (P<0.01). Histopathology observation had
showed massive infiltration of inflammatory cells in both OVA group and SEA
group, while inflammation infiltration attenuated in CAM group. Total cell counts
in SEA group was much higher than that in CAM group (P=0.019), so were
neutrophils (P=0.022) and eosinophils (P=0.042); while macrophages in SEA group
decreased when compared to CAM group (P=0.026), IL-4 and CXCL1 level in CAM group
were significantly decreased in comparison to those in SEA group (P=0.031,
P=0.017). HDAC2 activity in SEA group decreased significantly when compared to
control group (P=0.010); while HDAC2 activity in CAM group was improved and
significantly better than that in SEA group (P=0.038). The expression of HADC2 in
CAM group improved significantly when compared to that in SEA group (P=0.022).
CONCLUSIONS: Clarithromycin could improve AHR and attenuate airway inflammation
in smoke exposed asthmatic mice which may involve HDAC2. Macrolides might have
the potential to serve as the adjunctive treatment to some refractory asthmatics 
who are smokers or passive smokers.

PMCID: PMC4522485
PMID: 26380735  [PubMed]


80. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(20):3292-305. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1087620.

Glutamine contributes to maintenance of mouse embryonic stem cell self-renewal
through PKC-dependent downregulation of HDAC1 and DNMT1/3a.

Ryu JM(1), Lee SH(2), Seong JK(3,)(4), Han HJ(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Veterinary Physiology ; College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul 
National University ; Seoul , Korea. (2)b Medical Science Research Institute,
Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital ; Seoul , Korea. (3)c BK21 PLUS Program
for Creative Veterinary Science Research and Research Institute for Veterinary
Science, Seoul National University ; Seoul , Korea. (4)d Department of Anatomy
and Cell Biology ; Korea Mouse Phenotyping Center (KMPC), College of Veterinary
Medicine, Seoul National University ; Seoul , Korea.

Although glutamine (Gln) is not an essential amino acid, it is considered a
critical substrate in many key metabolic processes that control a variety of
physiological functions and are involved in regulating early embryonic
development. Thus, we investigated the effect of Gln on regulation of mouse
embryonic stem cell (mESC) self-renewal and related signaling pathways. Gln
deprivation decreased Oct4 expression as well as expression of cell cycle
regulatory proteins. However, Gln treatment retained the expression of cell cycle
regulatory proteins and the Oct4 in mESCs, which were blocked by compound 968 (a 
glutaminase inhibitor). In addition, Gln stimulated PI3K/Akt pathway, which
subsequently elicited PKC<U+03F5> translocation to membrane without an influx of
intracellular Ca(2+). Inhibition of Akt and PKC blocked Gln-induced Oct4
expression and proliferation. Gln also stimulated mTOR phosphorylation in a
time-dependent manner, which abolished by PKC inhibition. Furthermore, Gln
increased the cellular population of both Oct4 and bromodeoxyuridine positive
cells, suggesting that Gln regulates self-renewal ability of mESCs. Gln induced a
decrease in HDAC1, but not in HDAC2, which were blocked by PKC inhibitors. Gln
treatment resulted in an increase in global histone acetylation and methylation. 
In addition, Gln significantly reduced methylation of the Oct4 promoter region
through decrease in DNMT1 and DNMT3a expression, which were blocked by PKC and
HDAC inhibitors. In conclusion, Gln stimulates mESC proliferation and maintains
mESC undifferentiation status through transcription regulation via the Akt, PKC<U+03F5>,
and mTOR signaling pathways.

PMID: 26375799  [PubMed - in process]


81. Muscle Nerve. 2015 Dec;52(6):1098-101. doi: 10.1002/mus.24912. Epub 2015 Oct 10.

Differential expression of HDAC and HAT genes in atrophying skeletal muscle.

Beharry AW(1), Judge AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, 101 S. Newell Drive, P.O. Box 100154,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA, 32610.

INTRODUCTION: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins, which counter the activity of 
histone acetyltransferases (HATs), are necessary for normal muscle atrophy in
response to several pathophysiological conditions. Despite this, it remains
unknown whether a common or unique transcriptional profile of HDAC and HAT genes 
exist during the progression of muscle atrophy.
METHODS: Muscles were harvested from cast immobilized, denervated, or nutrient
deprived animals for quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
analysis of HDAC and HAT gene expression.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of Hdac2, Hdac4, Hdac6, Sirt1, p300, Cbp, and Pcaf
increased, and Hdac7 decreased in skeletal muscle in each experimental model of
muscle atrophy. Hdac1 and Hdac3 were increased only in cast immobilized and
denervated muscles.
CONCLUSIONS: While specific HDACs and HATs are increased in multiple models of
muscle atrophy, increased expression of class I HDACs was unique to muscle
disuse, reinforcing that specific HDAC inhibitors may be more effective than
pan-HDAC inhibitors at countering muscle atrophy. Muscle Nerve 52: 1098-1101,
2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4715560 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26372908  [PubMed - in process]


82. Circ Heart Fail. 2015 Nov;8(6):1094-104. doi:
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.114.001781. Epub 2015 Sep 14.

HDACs Regulate miR-133a Expression in Pressure Overload-Induced Cardiac Fibrosis.

Renaud L(1), Harris LG(1), Mani SK(1), Kasiganesan H(1), Chou JC(1), Baicu CF(1),
Van Laer A(1), Akerman AW(1), Stroud RE(1), Jones JA(1), Zile MR(1), Menick
DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Gazes Cardiac
Research Institute (L.R., L.G.H., S.K.M., H.K., C.F.B., A.V.L., M.R.Z., D.R.M.), 
Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgical
Research (A.W.A., R.E.S., J.A.J.), and Department of Drug Discovery and
Biomedical Sciences, College of Pharmacy (J.C.C.), The Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston; and Research Services, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC (J.A.J., M.R.Z., D.R.M.). (2)From the
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Gazes Cardiac Research Institute 
(L.R., L.G.H., S.K.M., H.K., C.F.B., A.V.L., M.R.Z., D.R.M.), Division of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgical Research (A.W.A.,
R.E.S., J.A.J.), and Department of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy (J.C.C.), The Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston; and Research Services, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Charleston, SC (J.A.J., M.R.Z., D.R.M.). menickd@musc.edu.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) serve a
significant role in the pathogenesis of a variety of cardiovascular diseases. The
transcriptional regulation of miRNAs is poorly understood in cardiac hypertrophy.
We investigated whether the expression of miR-133a is epigenetically regulated by
class I and IIb HDACs during hypertrophic remodeling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transverse aortic constriction (TAC) was performed in CD1
mice to induce pressure overload hypertrophy. Mice were treated with class I and 
IIb HDAC inhibitor (HDACi) via drinking water for 2 and 4 weeks post TAC. miRNA
expression was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Echocardiography was performed at baseline and post TAC end points for structural
and functional assessment. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to identify
HDACs and transcription factors associated with miR-133a promoter. miR-133a
expression was downregulated by 0.7- and 0.5-fold at 2 and 4 weeks post TAC,
respectively, when compared with vehicle control (P<0.05). HDAC inhibition
prevented this significant decrease 2 weeks post TAC and maintained miR-133a
expression near vehicle control levels, which coincided with (1) a decrease in
connective tissue growth factor expression, (2) a reduction in cardiac fibrosis
and left atrium diameter (marker of end-diastolic pressure), suggesting an
improvement in diastolic function. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are present on the miR-133a enhancer regions.
CONCLUSIONS: The results reveal that HDACs play a role in the regulation of
pressure overload-induced miR-133a downregulation. This work is the first to
provide insight into an epigenetic-miRNA regulatory pathway in pressure
overload-induced cardiac fibrosis.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4651803 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26371176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2015 Oct;39(10):1939-50. doi: 10.1111/acer.12850. Epub 2015
Sep 13.

Histone Deacetylase Gene Expression Following Binge Alcohol Consumption in Rats
and Humans.

López-Moreno JA(1), Marcos M(2), Calleja-Conde J(1), Echeverry-Alzate V(1),
Bühler KM(1), Costa-Alba P(3), Bernardo E(4), Laso FJ(2), Rodríguez de Fonseca
F(5), Nadal R(6), Viveros MP(7), Maldonado R(8), Giné E(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, School of Psychology, Complutense University of
Madrid, Madrid, Spain. (2)Alcoholism Unit, Department of Internal Medicine,
University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (3)Emergency Department,
University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (4)Department of Vascular
Biology and Inflammation, Fundación Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (5)Fundación IMABIS, Laboratorio de
Medicina Regenerativa, Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos Haya, Málaga,
Spain. (6)Psychobiology Unit, School of Psychology, Institut de Neurociències,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Department of Physiology 
(Animal Physiology II), School of Biology, Complutense University of Madrid,
Madrid, Spain. (8)Laboratori de Neurofarmacologia, Departament de Ciències
Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Cellular Biology, School of Medicine, Complutense University of 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol binge drinking is one of the most common patterns of
excessive alcohol use and recent data would suggest that histone deacetylases
(HDACs) gene expression profiling could be useful as a biomarker for psychiatric 
disorders.
METHODS: This study aimed to characterize the gene expression patterns of Hdac
1-11 in samples of rat peripheral blood, liver, heart, prefrontal cortex, and
amygdala following repeated binge alcohol consumption and to determine the
parallelism of Hdac gene expression between rats and humans in peripheral blood. 
To accomplish this goal, we examined Hdac gene expression following 1, 4, or 8
alcohol binges (3 g/kg, orally) in the rat, in patients who were admitted to the 
hospital emergency department for acute alcohol intoxication, and in rats trained
in daily operant alcohol self-administration.
RESULTS: We primarily found that acute alcohol binging reduced gene expression
(Hdac1-10) in the peripheral blood of alcohol-naïve rats and that this effect was
attenuated following repeated alcohol binges. There was also a reduction of Hdac 
gene expression in the liver (Hdac2,4,5), whereas there was increased expression 
in the heart (Hdac1,7,8) and amygdala (Hdac1,2,5). Additionally, increased blood 
alcohol concentrations were measured in rat blood at 1 to 4 hours following
repeated alcohol binging, and the only group that developed hepatic steotosis
(fatty liver) were those animals exposed to 8 alcohol binge events. Finally, both
binge consumption of alcohol in humans and daily operant alcohol
self-administration in rats increased Hdac gene expression in peripheral blood.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that increases in HDAC gene expression within
the peripheral blood are associated with chronic alcohol consumption, whereas
HDAC gene expression is reduced following initial exposure to alcohol.

Copyright © 2015 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMID: 26365275  [PubMed - in process]


84. Thorax. 2015 Nov;70(11):1022-32. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206411. Epub 2015
Sep 10.

Aberrant expression and activity of histone deacetylases in sporadic idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis.

Korfei M(1), Skwarna S(1), Henneke I(1), MacKenzie B(1), Klymenko O(1), Saito
S(2), Ruppert C(3), von der Beck D(1), Mahavadi P(1), Klepetko W(4), Bellusci
S(3), Crestani B(5), Pullamsetti SS(6), Fink L(7), Seeger W(3), Krämer OH(8),
Guenther A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen,
Germany Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the
German Center for Lung Research (DZL). (2)Department of Medicine, Section of
Pulmonary Diseases, Critical Care and Environmental Medicine, Tulane University
Health Science Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany Universities of
Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung
Research (DZL) Excellence Cluster Cardio-Pulmonary System (ECCPS), Giessen,
Germany. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Vienna General Hospital, Vienna,
Austria European IPF Network and European IPF Registry. (5)CHU Paris Nord-Val de 
Seine, Hôpital Xavier Bichat-Claude Bernard, Paris, France European IPF Network
and European IPF Registry. (6)Department of Internal Medicine,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany Universities of Giessen and
Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL) 
Department of Lung Development and Remodeling, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and
Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany. (7)Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung 
Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL) Excellence
Cluster Cardio-Pulmonary System (ECCPS), Giessen, Germany Institute of Pathology 
and Cytology, Wetzlar, Germany. (8)Department of Toxicology, University Medical
Center, Mainz, Germany. (9)Department of Internal Medicine,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany Universities of Giessen and
Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL) 
Excellence Cluster Cardio-Pulmonary System (ECCPS), Giessen, Germany Agaplesion
Lung Clinic Waldhof Elgershausen, Greifenstein, Germany European IPF Network and 
European IPF Registry.

BACKGROUND: Activation and differentiation of fibroblasts into contractile
protein-expressing myofibroblasts and their acquired apoptosis-resistant
phenotype are critical factors towards the development of idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis (IPF), a fatal disease characterised by distorted pulmonary structure
and excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. The molecular mechanisms
underlying these processes in IPF remain incompletely understood. We investigated
the possible implication of aberrant overexpression and activity of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) in IPF.
METHODS: We analysed lung tissues from patients with sporadic IPF (n=26) and
non-diseased control lungs (n=16) for expression of class I and II HDACs. Primary
IPF fibroblasts were treated with HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) LBH589 or valproic acid
(VPA).
RESULTS: Compared to control lungs, protein levels of class I (HDAC1, HDAC2,
HDAC3, HDAC8) and class II HDACs (HDAC4, HDAC 5, HDAC 7, HDAC 9) were
significantly elevated in IPF lungs. Using immunohistochemistry, strong induction
of nearly all HDAC enzymes was observed in myofibroblasts of fibroblast foci and 
in abnormal bronchiolar basal cells at sites of aberrant re-epithelialisation in 
IPF lungs, but not in controls. Treatment of primary IPF fibroblasts with the
pan-HDACi LBH589 resulted in significantly reduced expression of genes associated
with ECM synthesis, proliferation and cell survival, as well as in suppression of
HDAC7, and was paralleled by induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress and
apoptosis. The profibrotic and apoptosis-resistant phenotype of IPF fibroblasts
was also partly attenuated by the class I HDACi VPA.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant overexpression of HDACs in basal cells of IPF lungs may
contribute to the bronchiolisation process in this disease. Similarly, generation
and apoptosis resistance of IPF fibroblasts are mediated by enhanced activity of 
HDAC enzymes. Therefore, pan-HDAC inhibition by LBH589 may present a novel
therapeutic option for patients with IPF.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26359372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Oct;15(10):598. doi: 10.1038/nri3912. Epub 2015 Sep 11.

Inflammation: TET2: the terminator.

Bird L.

Comment on
    Nature. 2015 Sep 17;525(7569):389-93.

PMID: 26358395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biol Reprod. 2015 Oct;93(4):89. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.133504. Epub 2015 Sep
9.

Maternal SIN3A regulates reprogramming of gene expression during mouse
preimplantation development.

Jimenez R(1), Melo EO(1), Davydenko O(2), Ma J(1), Mainigi M(2), Franke V(3),
Schultz RM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Bioinformatics Group, 
Division of Biology, Faculty of Science, Zagreb University, Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
rschultz@sas.upenn.edu.

The oocyte-to-embryo transition entails genome activation and a dramatic
reprogramming of gene expression that is required for continued development.
Superimposed on genome activation and reprogramming is development of a
transcriptionally repressive state at the level of chromatin structure. Inducing 
global histone hyperacetylation relieves this repression and histone deacetylases
1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) are involved in establishing the repressive state.
Because SIN3A is an HDAC1/2-containing complex, we investigated whether it is
involved in reprogramming gene expression during the course of genome activation.
We find that Sin3a mRNA is recruited during maturation and that inhibiting its
recruitment not only inhibits development beyond the 2-cell stage but also
compromises the fidelity of reprogramming gene expression. The SIN3A that is
synthesized during oocyte maturation reaches a maximum level in the mid-1-cell
embryo and is essentially absent by the mid-2-cell stage. Overexpressing SIN3A in
1-cell embryos has no obvious effect on pre- and postimplantation development.
These results provide a mechanism by which reprogramming can occur using a
maternally inherited transcription machinery, namely, recruitment of mRNAs
encoding transcription factors and chromatin remodelers, such as SIN3A.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4711907 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26353893  [PubMed - in process]


87. BMC Cancer. 2015 Sep 9;15:628. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1635-9.

DKK1 is a potential novel mediator of cisplatin-refractoriness in non-small cell 
lung cancer cell lines.

Salim H(1), Zong D(2), Hååg P(3), Novak M(4), Mörk B(5), Lewensohn R(6), Lundholm
L(7), Viktorsson K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. Hogir.Salim@ki.se. (2)Karolinska
Biomics Center, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171
76, Stockholm, Sweden. Dali.Zong@nih.gov. (3)Karolinska Biomics Center,
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm,
Sweden. Petra.Haag@ki.se. (4)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Metka.Novak@ki.se. (5)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Birgitta.Mork@ki.se. (6)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Rolf.Lewensohn@ki.se. (7)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Lovisa.Lundholm@su.se. (8)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Kristina.Viktorsson@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Platinum compounds are the mainstay of chemotherapy for lung cancer. 
Unfortunately treatment failure remains a critical issue since about 60% of all
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients display intrinsic platinum
resistance.
METHODS: We analyzed global gene expression profiles of NSCLC clones surviving a 
pulse treatment with cisplatin and mapped deregulated signaling networks in
silico by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Further validation was done using
siRNA.
RESULTS: The pooled cisplatin-surviving NSCLC clones from each of the biological 
replicates demonstrated heterogeneous gene expression patterns both in terms of
the number and the identity of the altered genes. Genes involved in Wnt signaling
pathway (Dickkopf-1, DKK1), DNA repair machinery (XRCC2) and
cell-cell/cell-matrix interaction (FMN1, LGALS9) were among the top deregulated
genes by microarray in these replicates and were validated by q-RT-PCR. We
focused on DKK1 which previously was reported to be overexpressed in NSCLC
patients. IPA network analysis revealed coordinate up-regulation of several DKK1 
transcriptional regulators (TCF4, EZH2, DNAJB6 and HDAC2) in cisplatin-surviving 
clones from that biological replicate. Knockdown of DKK1 by siRNA sensitized for 
cisplatin in two different NSCLC cell lines and in ovarian A2780 cells, but not
in the A2780 cis subline made resistant to cisplatin by chronic exposure,
suggesting a role of DKK1 in intrinsic but not acquired platinum refractoriness.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified DKK1 as a possible marker of a cisplatin-refractory
phenotype and as a potential novel therapeutic target to improve platinum
response of NSCLC cells.

PMCID: PMC4565013
PMID: 26353782  [PubMed - in process]


88. Oncol Rep. 2015 Nov;34(5):2238-50. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4263. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 independently predict mortality in hepatocellular carcinoma by a 
competing risk regression model in a Southeast Asian population.

Ler SY(1), Leung CH(2), Khin LW(3), Lu GD(4), Salto-Tellez M(5), Hartman M(6),
Iau PT(6), Yap CT(1), Hooi SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore. (2)School of Chemical and Life
Sciences, Singapore Polytechnic, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(3)Investigational Medicine Unit, Dean's Office, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore and National University Health System,
Singapore, Republic of Singapore. (4)School of Public Health, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi, P.R. China. (5)Cancer Science Institute of
Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(6)Department of Surgery, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore and National University Health System, Singapore, Republic of
Singapore.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes involved in transcriptional repression. 
We aimed to examine the significance of HDAC1 and HDAC2 gene expression in the
prediction of recurrence and survival in 156 patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) among a South East Asian population who underwent curative
surgical resection in Singapore. We found that HDAC1 and HDAC2 were upregulated
in the majority of HCC tissues. The presence of HDAC1 in tumor tissues was
correlated with poor tumor differentiation. Notably, HDAC1 expression in adjacent
non-tumor hepatic tissues was correlated with the presence of satellite nodules
and multiple lesions, suggesting that HDAC1 upregulation within the field of HCC 
may contribute to tumor spread. Using competing risk regression analysis, we
found that increased cancer-specific mortality was significantly associated with 
HDAC2 expression. Mortality was also increased with high HDAC1 expression. In the
liver cancer cell lines, HEP3B, HEPG2, PLC5, and a colorectal cancer cell line,
HCT116, the combined knockdown of HDAC1 and HDAC2 increased cell death and
reduced cell proliferation as well as colony formation. In contrast, knockdown of
either HDAC1 or HDAC2 alone had minimal effects on cell death and proliferation. 
Taken together, our study suggests that both HDAC1 and HDAC2 exert pro-survival
effects in HCC cells, and the combination of isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors
against both HDACs may be effective in targeting HCC to reduce mortality.

PMCID: PMC4583520
PMID: 26352599  [PubMed - in process]


89. Z Rheumatol. 2015 Dec;74(10):902-10. doi: 10.1007/s00393-015-1619-9.

JHDM1D and HDAC1-3 mRNA expression levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Nawrocki MJ(1), Strugala AJ(2), Piotrowski P(3,)(4), Wudarski M(5), Olesinska
M(5), Jagodzinski PP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St, 60-781, Poznan, Poland. mjnawrocki@ump.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Molecular and Systems Biology, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry
Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St,
60-781, Poznan, Poland. (4)Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of
Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Street, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Institute of
Rheumatology, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic relapsing autoimmune 
disease characterized by production of autoantibodies against a series of nuclear
antigens and by chronic inflammation. The etiology of SLE is the result of
interactions between genetic, epigenetic, hormonal, and environmental factors.
Changes in histone acetylation and methylation contribute to structural chromatin
modifications.
OBJECTIVE: We studied the histone demethylase JHDM1D and histone deacetylases
HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 transcript levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from patients diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Furthermore, the association of JHDM1D, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 transcript levels
with gender, age, and major clinical manifestations were analyzed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) 
analysis was used to determine JHDM1D, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 mRNA expression
levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 30 patients with SLE
and 36 healthy controls.
RESULTS: Significantly lower HDAC2 transcript levels (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006785) and
significantly higher JHDM1D (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0000002) and HDAC1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010581) transcript
levels in SLE patients were observed compared with healthy controls. Higher
JHDM1D mRNA expression was detected in active SLE patients when compared with
inactive patients (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). Furthermore, the JHDM1D transcript levels were
positively correlated with disease activity (r(s) =<U+2009>0.368, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.045), while
HDAC2 mRNA expression was positively correlated with disease duration (r(s)
=<U+2009>0.502, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0047).
CONCLUSION: Our analyses confirmed the importance of epigenetic alterations
(histone demethylation and acetylation) in SLE etiology. Moreover, our results
suggest that the presence of some clinical manifestations, like hematological
disease and anti-Ro antibody, might be associated with the dysregulation of
histone demethylase and deacetylases mRNA expression levels.

PMID: 26347123  [PubMed - in process]


90. Acupunct Med. 2015 Sep 7. pii: acupmed-2014-010674. doi:
10.1136/acupmed-2014-010674. [Epub ahead of print]

Long-term effects of acupuncture treatment on airway smooth muscle in a rat model
of smoke-induced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Li J(1), Wu S(1), Tang H(1), Huang W(1), Wang L(2), Zhou H(1), Zhou M(1), Wang
H(1), Li J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei University of Chinese Medicine/Hubei Provincial Collaborative Innovation
Center of Preventive Treatment by Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Wuhan, China.
(2)Hubei University of Chinese Medicine/Hubei Provincial Collaborative Innovation
Center of Preventive Treatment by Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Wuhan, China Taihe
Hospital, Affiliated to Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, China.
(3)Department of Acupuncture, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most
common lung diseases. It is a chronic inflammatory process characterised by
airway obstruction and progressive lung inflammation, associated with difficulty 
breathing and insensitivity to corticosteroid therapy. Although there is some
preliminary evidence to suggest a beneficial effect of acupuncture on COPD, its
mechanism of action has not been investigated. Our aim was to examine the
anti-inflammatory effects of acupuncture in a rat model of COPD induced by
exposure to cigarette smoke (CS).
METHODS: Sixty Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to the smoke of 15 cigarettes for
1 h/day, 6 days/week for 3 months to induce COPD and treated with acupuncture at 
BL13 (Feishu), BL23 (Shenshu) and Dingchuan (COPD+Acupuncture, n=15), sham
acupuncture (COPD+Sham, n=15) or left untreated (n=15). Exposed rats were
compared with controls not exposed to CS (control, n=15). Pulmonary function was 
measured, and tumour necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-8 (IL-8) levels
were determined in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid by ELISA. Histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) protein and mRNA expression were examined in lung tissue and in bronchus.
RESULTS: Acupuncture treatment appeared to protect pulmonary function and reduce 
the COPD-induced inflammatory response by decreasing cell inflammation and the
production of TNF-a and IL-8. Acupuncture also enhanced HDAC2 mRNA and protein
expression, suggesting a possible direct effect on protein structure through
post-translational modifications.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that acupuncture regulates inflammatory
cytokines and contributes to lung protection in a rat model of smoke-induced COPD
by modulating HDAC2.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26345700  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


91. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167(12):3011-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37344. Epub 2015
Sep 3.

A microdeletion encompassing PHF21A in an individual with global developmental
delay and craniofacial anomalies.

Labonne JD(1,)(2), Vogt J(3), Reali L(3), Kong IK(4), Layman LC(1,)(2,)(5), Kim
HG(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Reproductive Endocrinology, Infertility and Genetics, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia. (3)West Midlands Regional Genetics Service,
Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Animal 
Science, Division of Applied Life Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Physiology, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.

In Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS), the full phenotypic spectrum is manifested
when deletions are at least 2.1<U+2009>Mb in size at 11p11.2. The PSS-associated genes
EXT2 and ALX4, together with PHF21A, all map to this region flanked by markers
D11S1393 and D11S1319. Being proximal to EXT2 and ALX4, a 1.1<U+2009>Mb region
containing 12 annotated genes had been identified by deletion mapping to explain 
PSS phenotypes except multiple exostoses and parietal foramina. Here, we report a
male patient with partial PSS phenotypes including global developmental delay,
craniofacial anomalies, minor limb anomalies, and micropenis. Using microarray,
qPCR, RT-qPCR, and Western blot analyses, we refined the candidate gene region,
which harbors five genes, by excluding two genes, SLC35C1 and CRY2, which
resulted in a corroborating role of PHF21A in developmental delay and
craniofacial anomalies. This microdeletion contains the least number of genes at 
11p11.2 reported to date. Additionally, we also discuss the phenotypes observed
in our patient with respect to those of published cases of microdeletions across 
the Potocki-Shaffer interval. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26333423  [PubMed - in process]


92. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(9):1434-7. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00364.

Regulation of Histone Deacetylase 6 Activity via S-Nitrosylation.

Okuda K(1), Ito A, Uehara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University.

Nitric oxide (NO) is a gaseous regulatory factor produced by NO synthases (NOS)
and it plays several critical roles via S-nitrosylation of protein cysteine
residues. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) functions in the maintenance/balance of
chromatin acetylation and contributes to transcriptional supression. It has been 
reported that S-nitrosylation of HDAC2 is involved in the regulation of
deacetylase activity. However, it remains unknown whether other subtypes of the
HDAC family are S-nitrosylated. In the present study, we found that HDAC6 is a
target of NO. A biotin-switch assay revealed that endogenous HDAC6 is
S-nitrosylated by both NO donors and NO derived from the inducible type of NOS in
cells treated with cytokines. NO led to suppressed deacetylase activity in vitro 
and increased acetylated a-tubulin, a major substrate for HDAC6, in A549 cells.
These findings suggest that S-nitrosylation of HDAC6 plays a pivotal role in the 
regulation of protein acetylation.

PMID: 26328501  [PubMed - in process]


93. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015 Nov 15;309(10):L1112-23. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00077.2015. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3ß modulation of glucocorticoid responsiveness in COPD.

Ngkelo A(1), Hoffmann RF(2), Durham AL(1), Marwick JA(3), Brandenburg SM(2), de
Bruin HG(2), Jonker MR(2), Rossios C(1), Tsitsiou E(4), Caramori G(5), Contoli
M(5), Casolari P(5), Monaco F(6), Andò F(7), Speciale G(8), Kilty I(9), Chung
KF(1), Papi A(5), Lindsay MA(10), Ten Hacken NH(11), van den Berge M(11), Timens 
W(12), Barnes PJ(1), van Oosterhout AJ(12), Adcock IM(13), Kirkham PA(1), Heijink
IH(14).

Author information: 
(1)Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom; (2)University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, Groningen, The
Netherlands; (3)Medical Research Council Centre for Inflammation Research,
Queen's Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh Medical School,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom; (4)Respiratory Research Group, Faculty of Medical and 
Human Sciences, University of Manchester, and National Institute for Health
Research Translational Research Facility in Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospital of South Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; (5)Dipartimento di
Scienze Mediche, Sezione di Medicina Interna e Cardiorespiratoria, Centro per lo 
Studio delle Malattie Infiammatorie Croniche delle Vie Aeree e Patologie Fumo
Correlate dell'Apparato Respiratorio (formerly termed Centro di Ricerca su Asma e
BPCO), Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy; (6)Thoracic Surgery Unit,
Cardiovascular and Thoracic Department, University of Messina, Messina, Italy;
(7)Pneumology Unit, Cardiovascular and Thoracic Department, University of
Messina, Italy; (8)Department of Human Pathology "Gaetano Barresi," University of
Messina, Messina, Italy; (9)Pfizer, Inflammation and Remodeling Research Unit,
Cambridge, Massachusetts; (10)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University
of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, United Kingdom; (11)University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Pulmonology, Groningen, The
Netherlands; and University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, Groningen Research Institute for Asthma Research Institute, Groningen,
The Netherlands. (12)University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, Groningen, The
Netherlands; University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, Groningen Research Institute for Asthma Research Institute, Groningen,
The Netherlands. (13)Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; ian.adcock@imperial.ac.uk.
(14)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Pathology and Medical Biology, Groningen, The Netherlands; University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Pulmonology,
Groningen, The Netherlands; and University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, Groningen Research Institute for Asthma Research
Institute, Groningen, The Netherlands.

In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), oxidative stress regulates the
inflammatory response of bronchial epithelium and monocytes/macrophages through
kinase modulation and has been linked to glucocorticoid unresponsiveness.
Glycogen synthase-3ß (GSK3ß) inactivation plays a key role in mediating signaling
processes upon reactive oxygen species (ROS) exposure. We hypothesized that GSK3ß
is involved in oxidative stress-induced glucocorticoid insensitivity in COPD. We 
studied levels of phospho-GSK3ß-Ser9, a marker of GSK3ß inactivation, in lung
sections and cultured monocytes and bronchial epithelial cells of COPD patients, 
control smokers, and nonsmokers. We observed increased levels of
phospho-GSK3ß-Ser9 in monocytes, alveolar macrophages, and bronchial epithelial
cells from COPD patients and control smokers compared with nonsmokers.
Pharmacological inactivation of GSK3ß did not affect CXCL8 or
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) expression but resulted
in glucocorticoid insensitivity in vitro in both inflammatory and structural
cells. Further mechanistic studies in monocyte and bronchial epithelial cell
lines showed that GSK3ß inactivation is a common effector of oxidative
stress-induced activation of the MEK/ERK-1/2 and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/Akt signaling pathways leading to glucocorticoid unresponsiveness. In
primary monocytes, the mechanism involved modulation of histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) activity in response to GSK3ß inactivation. In conclusion, we demonstrate
for the first time that ROS-induced glucocorticoid unresponsiveness in COPD is
mediated through GSK3ß, acting as a ROS-sensitive hub.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4652154 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 26320152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Dec;135(12):3034-40. doi: 10.1038/jid.2015.336. Epub 2015
Aug 28.

Platelet-Activating Factor Induces Epigenetic Modifications in Human Mast Cells.

Damiani E(1,)(2), Puebla-Osorio N(2), Gorbea E(2), Ullrich SE(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze delle Vita e dell'Ambiente, Università Politecnica
delle Marche, Ancona, Italy. (2)Department of Immunology, Unit 902, The Center
for Cancer Immunology Research, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (3)The Graduate School for Biomedical Sciences,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Dec;135(12):2911-3.

UV radiation-induced systemic immune suppression is a major risk factor for skin 
cancer induction. The migration of dermal mast cells from the skin to the
draining lymph nodes has a prominent role in activating systemic immune
suppression. UV-induced keratinocyte-derived platelet-activating factor (PAF)
activates mast cell migration, in part by upregulating the expression of CXCR4 on
the surface of mast cells. Others have indicated that epigenetic mechanisms
regulate CXCR4 expression; therefore, we asked whether PAF activates epigenetic
mechanisms in mast cells. Human mast cells were treated with PAF, and the effect 
on DNA methylation and/or acetylation was measured. PAF suppressed the expression
of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 1 and 3b. On the other hand, PAF increased p300
histone acetyltransferase expression, and the acetylation of histone H3, which
coincided with a decreased expression of the histone deacetylase HDAC2. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays indicated that PAF treatment activated the acetylation
of the CXCR4 promoter. Finally, inhibiting histone acetylation blocked p300
upregulation and suppressed PAF-induced surface expression of CXCR4. Our findings
suggest a novel molecular mechanism for PAF, activation of epigenetic
modifications. We suggest that PAF may serve as an endogenous molecular mediator 
that links the environment (UV radiation) with the epigenome.

PMCID: PMC4648694 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26316070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Org Biomol Chem. 2015 Oct 28;13(40):10226-35. doi: 10.1039/c5ob01509j. Epub 2015 
Aug 26.

Pyrimidinedione-mediated selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors with
antitumor activity in colorectal cancer HCT116 cells.

Liu YM(1), Lee HY, Lai MJ, Pan SL, Huang HL, Kuo FC, Chen MC, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wuxing
Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. jpl@tmu.edu.tw.

We synthesized a series of pyrimidinedione derivatives and evaluated their
activities. The results indicate that compound 6,
4-[5-fluoro-2,6-dioxo-3-(tetrahydro-furan-2-yl)-3,6-dihydro-2H-pyrimidin-1-ylmeth
yl]-N-hydroxy-benzamide, exhibits potent antiproliferative activity, apoptosis
induction with cleavage of caspase and PARP, and enhanced tendency to inhibit
HDAC6 (IC50 = 12.4 nM) activity over HDAC1 (IC50 = 1710 nM) and HDAC2 (IC50 =
5500 nM). Compound 6 also inhibits tumor growth and is less toxic than parent 4
in vivo. These data provide compelling evidence that compound 6 is a potential
antitumor compound with HDAC6 targeted inhibitory activity and may be tested for 
preclinical investigation for cancer treatment.

PMID: 26309122  [PubMed - in process]


96. Pharmacology. 2015;96(3-4):184-91. doi: 10.1159/000438864. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Novel Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Modulates Cardiac Peroxisome
Proliferator-Activated Receptors and Inflammatory Cytokines in Heart Failure.

Lkhagva B(1), Lin YK, Kao YH, Chazo TF, Chung CC, Chen SA, Chen YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) affects cardiac metabolism and inflammation.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a critical role in cardiac pathophysiology.
This study investigated whether HDAC inhibition can regulate HF by modifying
cardiac inflammation and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
isoforms.
METHODS: Echocardiography, electrocardiography, ELISA and Western blot were
performed in rats with isoproterenol-induced HF, with and without orally
administered MPT0E014 (a novel HDAC inhibitor, 50 mg/kg for 7 consecutive days).
RESULTS: The left ventricles (LVs) of HF rats expressed significantly higher
levels of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC4 and HDAC6 than the healthy LVs did. HF rats 
treated with MPT0E014 exhibited improved cardiac fraction shortening with
reducing chamber size. The MPT0E014-treated HF LVs exhibited a smaller increase
in the expression of interleukin (IL)-6, p22, SMAD2/3, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, PPAR isoforms and circulatory tumor growth factor-ß1
than the untreated HF LVs did. Moreover, MPT0E014-treated HF LVs expressed less
fibroblast growth factor receptor than untreated HF LVs did.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC inhibition can improve cardiac function and attenuate the
effects of HF on cardiac metabolism and inflammation, which might contribute to
the beneficial effects of HDAC inhibition in HF.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26304494  [PubMed - in process]


97. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 24;5:13396. doi: 10.1038/srep13396.

CAMKII-conditional deletion of histone deacetylase 2 potentiates acute
methamphetamine-induced expression of immediate early genes in the mouse nucleus 
accumbens.

Torres OV(1), McCoy MT(1), Ladenheim B(1), Jayanthi S(1), Brannock C(1), Tulloch 
I(2), Krasnova IN(1), Cadet JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, DHHS/NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224. (2)Department of Psychology,
Stevenson University, Stevenson, MD 21283.

Methamphetamine (METH) produces increases in the expression of immediate early
genes (IEGs) and of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in the rat nucleus accumbens
(NAc). Here, we tested whether HDAC2 deletion influenced the effects of METH on
IEG expression in the NAc. Microarray analyses showed no baseline differences in 
IEG expression between wild-type (WT) and HDAC2 knockout (KO) mice.
Quantitative-PCR analysis shows that an acute METH injection produced
time-dependent increases in mRNA levels of several IEGs in both genotypes.
Interestingly, HDAC2KO mice displayed greater METH-induced increases in Egr1 and 
Egr2 mRNA levels measured at one hour post-injection. The levels of Fosb, Fra2,
Egr1, and Egr3 mRNAs stayed elevated in the HDAC2KO mice 2 hours after the METH
injection whereas these mRNAs had normalized in the WT mice. In WT mice, METH
caused increased HDAC2 recruitment to the promoters some IEGs at 2 hours post
injection. METH-induced prolonged increases in Fosb, Fra2, Egr1, and Egr3 mRNA
levels in HDAC2KO mice were associated with increased enrichment of
phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) on the promoters of these genes. Based on our
observations, we hypothesize that HDAC2 may regulate the expression of these
genes, in part, by prolonging the actions of pCREB in the mouse NAc.

PMCID: PMC4547138
PMID: 26300473  [PubMed - in process]


98. Nature. 2015 Sep 17;525(7569):389-93. doi: 10.1038/nature15252. Epub 2015 Aug 19.

Tet2 is required to resolve inflammation by recruiting Hdac2 to specifically
repress IL-6.

Zhang Q(1,)(2), Zhao K(1), Shen Q(2), Han Y(2), Gu Y(2), Li X(1), Zhao D(1), Liu 
Y(2), Wang C(1), Zhang X(2), Su X(2), Liu J(2), Ge W(1), Levine RL(3), Li N(2),
Cao X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology &Department of
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China. (2)National Key
Laboratory of Medical Immunology &Institute of Immunology, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China. (3)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis
Program and Leukemia Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Oct;15(10):598.

Epigenetic modifiers have fundamental roles in defining unique cellular identity 
through the establishment and maintenance of lineage-specific chromatin and
methylation status. Several DNA modifications such as 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
(5hmC) are catalysed by the ten eleven translocation (Tet) methylcytosine
dioxygenase family members, and the roles of Tet proteins in regulating chromatin
architecture and gene transcription independently of DNA methylation have been
gradually uncovered. However, the regulation of immunity and inflammation by Tet 
proteins independent of their role in modulating DNA methylation remains largely 
unknown. Here we show that Tet2 selectively mediates active repression of
interleukin-6 (IL-6) transcription during inflammation resolution in innate
myeloid cells, including dendritic cells and macrophages. Loss of Tet2 resulted
in the upregulation of several inflammatory mediators, including IL-6, at late
phase during the response to lipopolysaccharide challenge. Tet2-deficient mice
were more susceptible to endotoxin shock and dextran-sulfate-sodium-induced
colitis, displaying a more severe inflammatory phenotype and increased IL-6
production compared to wild-type mice. I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6>, an IL-6-specific transcription
factor, mediated specific targeting of Tet2 to the Il6 promoter, further
indicating opposite regulatory roles of I<U+03BA>B<U+03B6> at initial and resolution phases of 
inflammation. For the repression mechanism, independent of DNA methylation and
hydroxymethylation, Tet2 recruited Hdac2 and repressed transcription of Il6 via
histone deacetylation. We provide mechanistic evidence for the gene-specific
transcription repression activity of Tet2 via histone deacetylation and for the
prevention of constant transcription activation at the chromatin level for
resolving inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4697747
PMID: 26287468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Med Chem. 2015 Sep 10;58(17):6803-18. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00545. Epub
2015 Aug 27.

Potent and Selective Inhibitors of Histone Deacetylase-3 Containing Chiral
Oxazoline Capping Groups and a N-(2-Aminophenyl)-benzamide Binding Unit.

Marson CM(1), Matthews CJ(1), Atkinson SJ(2), Lamadema N(3), Thomas NS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University College London , Christopher Ingold
Laboratories, 20 Gordon Street, London WC1H OAJ, U.K. (2)Epinova DPU,
Immuno-Inflammation Therapy Area Unit, GlaxoSmithKline , Gunnels Wood Road,
Stevenage, Herts SG1 2NY, U.K. (3)Department of Haematological Medicine,
Leukaemia Sciences Laboratories, Rayne Institute, King's College London , 123
Coldharbour Lane, London SE5 9NU, U.K.

A novel series of potent chiral inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC) is
described that contains an oxazoline capping group and a
N-(2-aminophenyl)-benzamide unit. Among several new inhibitors of this type
exhibiting Class I selectivity and potent inhibition of HDAC3-NCoR2, in vitro
assays for the inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3-NCoR2 by
N-(2-aminophenyl)-benzamide 15k gave respective IC50 values of 80, 110, and 6 nM.
Weak inhibition of all other HDAC isoforms (HDAC4, 5, 6, 7, and 9: IC50 > 100<U+202F>000
nM; HDAC8: IC50 = 25<U+202F>000 nM; HDAC10: IC50 > 4000 nM; HDAC11: IC50 > 2000 nM)
confirmed the Class I selectivity of 15k. 2-Aminoimidazolinyl,
2-thioimidazolinyl, and 2-aminooxazolinyl units were shown to be effective
replacements for the pyrimidine ring present in many other
2-(aminophenyl)-benzamides previously reported, but the 2-aminooxazolinyl unit
was the most potent in inhibiting HDAC3-NCoR2. Many of the new HDAC inhibitors
showed higher solubilities and lower binding to human serum albumin than that of 
Mocetinostat. Increases in histone H3K9 acetylation in the human cell lines U937 
and PC-3 was observed for all three oxazolinyl inhibitors evaluated; those HDAC
inhibitors also lowered cyclin E expression in U937 cells but not in PC-3 cells, 
indicating underlying differences in the mechanisms of action of the inhibitors
on those two cell lines.

PMID: 26287310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. BMC Res Notes. 2015 Aug 18;8:356. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1336-0.

Insulin and IGF-1, but not 17ß-estradiol, alter the subcellular localization of
MIER1a in MCF7 breast carcinoma cells.

Li S(1), Paterno GD(2), Gillespie LL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of BioMedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St John's, NL, A1B 3V6,
Canada. s.li@mun.ca. (2)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of
BioMedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St
John's, NL, A1B 3V6, Canada. gpaterno@mun.ca. (3)Terry Fox Cancer Research
Laboratories, Division of BioMedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial
University of Newfoundland, St John's, NL, A1B 3V6, Canada. lgillesp@mun.ca.

BACKGROUND: MIER1a is a transcriptional regulator that interacts with estrogen
receptor a and inhibits estrogen-stimulated growth of breast carcinoma cells.
Interestingly, analysis of MIER1a subcellular localization in breast samples
revealed a stepwise shift from the nucleus to the cytoplasm during progression to
invasive carcinoma. Previously, we demonstrated that MIER1a is nuclear in MCF7
cells yet it does not contain a nuclear localization signal. Instead MIER1a is
targeted to the nucleus through interaction and co-transport with HDAC 1 and 2.
RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrate that treatment of MCF7 breast carcinoma
cells with either insulin or insulin-like growth factor affects the subcellular
localization of MIER1a. Both factors reduce the percentage of cells with nuclear 
MIER1a from 81 and 89 to 41 and 56%, respectively. Treatment with 17ß-estradiol, 
on the other hand, had no effect and MIER1a remained nuclear.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that insulin and IGF-1 can contribute to loss
of nuclear MIER1a in the MCF7 breast carcinoma cell line.

PMCID: PMC4539687
PMID: 26281834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:163140. doi: 10.1155/2015/163140. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Trichostatin A Ameliorated Endotoxin-Induced
Neuroinflammation and Cognitive Dysfunction.

Hsing CH(1), Hung SK(2), Chen YC(3), Wei TS(4), Sun DP(5), Wang JJ(3), Yeh CH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan 710, Taiwan ;
Department of Anesthesiology, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan 710, Taiwan ;
Department of Anesthesiology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Buddhist Dalin Tzu Chi General Hospital,
Chiayi 622, Taiwan ; School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien 970, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Research, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan 710, Taiwan ;
Department of Anesthesiology, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan 710, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan 710, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Surgery, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan 710, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Medicinal Botanicals and Health Applications, Da-Yeh University,
Changhua 515, Taiwan.

Excessive production of cytokines by microglia may cause cognitive dysfunction
and long-lasting behavioral changes. Activating the peripheral innate immune
system stimulates cytokine secretion in the central nervous system, which
modulates cognitive function. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) modulate cytokine
synthesis and release. Trichostatin A (TSA), an HDAC inhibitor, is documented to 
be anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective. We investigated whether TSA reduces
lipopolysaccharide- (LPS-) induced neuroinflammation and cognitive dysfunction.
ICR mice were first intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected with vehicle or TSA
(0.3<U+2009>mg/kg). One hour later, they were injected (i.p.) with saline or Escherichia
coli LPS (1<U+2009>mg/kg). We analyzed the food and water intake, body weight loss, and 
sucrose preference of the injected mice and then determined the microglia
activation and inflammatory cytokine expression in the brains of LPS-treated mice
and LPS-treated BV-2 microglial cells. In the TSA-pretreated mice, microglial
activation was lower, anhedonia did not occur, and LPS-induced cognitive
dysfunction (anorexia, weight loss, and social withdrawal) was attenuated.
Moreover, mRNA expression of HDAC2, HDAC5, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO),
TNF-a, MCP-1, and IL-1ß in the brain of LPS-challenged mice and in the
LPS-treated BV-2 microglial cells was lower. TSA diminished LPS-induced
inflammatory responses in the mouse brain and modulated the cytokine-associated
changes in cognitive function, which might be specifically related to reducing
HDAC2 and HDAC5 expression.

PMCID: PMC4530275
PMID: 26273133  [PubMed - in process]


102. J Neurosci. 2015 Aug 12;35(32):11399-414. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0345-15.2015.

The Autotaxin-Lysophosphatidic Acid Axis Modulates Histone Acetylation and Gene
Expression during Oligodendrocyte Differentiation.

Wheeler NA(1), Lister JA(2), Fuss B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anatomy and Neurobiology and. (2)Human and Molecular Genetics, 
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23298.
(3)Departments of Anatomy and Neurobiology and bfuss@vcu.edu.

During development, oligodendrocytes (OLGs), the myelinating cells of the CNS,
undergo a stepwise progression during which OLG progenitors, specified from
neural stem/progenitor cells, differentiate into fully mature myelinating OLGs.
This progression along the OLG lineage is characterized by well synchronized
changes in morphology and gene expression patterns. The latter have been found to
be particularly critical during the early stages of the lineage, and they have
been well described to be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms, especially by the
activity of the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. The data presented here
identify the extracellular factor autotaxin (ATX) as a novel upstream signal
modulating HDAC1/2 activity and gene expression in cells of the OLG lineage.
Using the zebrafish as an in vivo model system as well as rodent primary OLG
cultures, this functional property of ATX was found to be mediated by its
lysophospholipase D (lysoPLD) activity, which has been well characterized to
generate the lipid signaling molecule lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). More
specifically, the lysoPLD activity of ATX was found to modulate HDAC1/2 regulated
gene expression during a time window coinciding with the transition from OLG
progenitor to early differentiating OLG. In contrast, HDAC1/2 regulated gene
expression during the transition from neural stem/progenitor to OLG progenitor
appeared unaffected by ATX and its lysoPLD activity. Thus, together, our data
suggest that an ATX-LPA-HDAC1/2 axis regulates OLG differentiation specifically
during the transition from OLG progenitor to early differentiating OLG and via a 
molecular mechanism that is evolutionarily conserved from at least zebrafish to
rodent.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The formation of the axon insulating and
supporting myelin sheath by differentiating oligodendrocytes (OLGs) in the CNS is
considered an essential step during vertebrate development. In addition, loss
and/or dysfunction of the myelin sheath has been associated with a variety of
neurologic diseases in which repair is limited, despite the presence of
progenitor cells with the potential to differentiate into myelinating OLGs. This 
study characterizes the autotaxin-lysophosphatidic acid signaling axis as a
modulator of OLG differentiation in vivo in the developing zebrafish and in vitro
in rodent OLGs in culture. These findings provide novel insight into the
regulation of developmental myelination, and they are likely to lead to advancing
studies related to the stimulation of myelin repair under pathologic conditions.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3511399-16$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4532767
PMID: 26269646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. BMC Neurosci. 2015 Aug 11;16:51. doi: 10.1186/s12868-015-0188-9.

A 72-hour high fat diet increases transcript levels of the neuropeptide galanin
in the dorsal hippocampus of the rat.

Gan L(1,)(2), England E(3), Yang JY(4), Toulme N(5), Ambati S(6), Hartzell DL(7),
Meagher RB(8), Baile CA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Medicine Department, Rongchang Campus, Southwest University,
Rongchang, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. gl9089@gmail.com. (2)Animal and
Dairy Science, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. gl9089@gmail.com.
(3)Neuroscience Division Biomedical and Health Sciences Institute, University of 
Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. emilyre@uga.edu. (4)Animal and Dairy Science,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. jyyang@uga.edu. (5)College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. natoulme@uga.edu. (6)Animal and
Dairy Science, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. asuresh@uga.edu. (7)Animal
and Dairy Science, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. dhartzel@uga.edu.
(8)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
meagher@uga.edu. (9)Animal and Dairy Science, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 
USA. emilyre@uga.edu.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence identifies the hippocampus, a brain structure
commonly associated with learning and memory, as key to the regulation of food
intake and the development and consequences of obesity. Intake of a high fat diet
(HFD) results in altered consumptive behavior, hippocampal damage, and cognitive 
deficits. While many studies report the effects of HFD after chronic consumption 
and in the instance of obesity, few examine the events that occur following acute
HFD consumption. In this study, male rats were fed either a control diet (10% fat
by kcal) or HFD (45% fat by kcal) for 72 h. At the end of the 72-h period, serum 
and tissues were collected and weighed. Brains were rapidly frozen or
formalin-fixed in preparation for qRT-PCR or immunohistochemistry, respectively.
RESULTS: Acute intake of HFD resulted in higher serum levels of leptin and
cholesterol, with no significant changes in final body weight or adipose tissue
mass. In the dorsal hippocampus, transcription of the neuroprotective peptide
galanin was significantly upregulated along with a trend for an increase in
brain-derived neurotrophic factor and histone deacetylase 2 in the rats fed HFD. 
In the ventral hippocampus, there was a significant increase in histone
deacetylase 4 and a decrease in galanin receptor 1 in this group. Results from
immunohistochemistry validate strong presence of the galanin peptide in the
CA1/CA2 region of the dorsal hippocampus.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide evidence for a distinct response in specific
functional regions of the hippocampus following acute HFD intake.

PMCID: PMC4531388
PMID: 26260473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Oct;45(10):2834-46. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445344. Epub 2015 Sep
1.

Gain-of-function STAT1 mutations impair STAT3 activity in patients with chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC).

Zheng J(1), van de Veerdonk FL(2), Crossland KL(1), Smeekens SP(2), Chan CM(3),
Al Shehri T(1), Abinun M(1,)(4), Gennery AR(1,)(4), Mann J(5), Lendrem DW(3),
Netea MG(2), Rowan AD(3), Lilic D(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Primary Immune Deficiency Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud 
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Musculoskeletal Research
Group, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (4)Department of Paediatric Immunology,
Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (5)Fibrosis Research
Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK. (6)Regional Immunology and Allergy Department, Royal Victoria Infirmary,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) triggered production
of Th-17 cytokines mediates protective immunity against fungi. Mutations
affecting the STAT3/interleukin 17 (IL-17) pathway cause selective susceptibility
to fungal (Candida) infections, a hallmark of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
(CMC). In patients with autosomal dominant CMC, we and others previously reported
defective Th17 responses and underlying gain-of-function (GOF) STAT1 mutations,
but how this affects STAT3 function leading to decreased IL-17 is unclear. We
also assessed how GOF-STAT1 mutations affect STAT3 activation, DNA binding, gene 
expression, cytokine production, and epigenetic modifications. We excluded
impaired STAT3 phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and sequestration of STAT3
into STAT1/STAT3 heterodimers and confirm significantly reduced transcription of 
STAT3-inducible genes (RORC/IL-17/IL-22/IL-10/c-Fos/SOCS3/c-Myc) as likely
underlying mechanism. STAT binding to the high affinity sis-inducible element was
intact but binding to an endogenous STAT3 DNA target was impaired. Reduced
STAT3-dependent gene transcription was reversed by inhibiting STAT1 activation
with fludarabine or enhancing histone, but not STAT1 or STAT3 acetylation with
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors trichostatin A or ITF2357. Silencing HDAC1,
HDAC2, and HDAC3 indicated a role for HDAC1 and 2. Reduced STAT3-dependent gene
transcription underlies low Th-17 responses in GOF-STAT1 CMC, which can be
reversed by inhibiting acetylation, offering novel targets for future therapies.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26255980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mutat Res. 2015 Jun;776:16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2015.01.005. Epub 2015 Jan
24.

Damaged DNA-binding protein down-regulates epigenetic mark H3K56Ac through
histone deacetylase 1 and 2.

Zhu Q(1), Battu A(1), Ray A(1), Wani G(1), Qian J(1), He J(1), Wang QE(1), Wani
AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United
States. (2)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, United States; Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United States; James Cancer Hospital and
Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United 
States. Electronic address: wani.2@osu.edu.

Acetylated histone H3 lysine 56 (H3K56Ac) is one of the reversible histone
post-translational modifications (PTMs) responsive to DNA damage. We previously
described a biphasic decrease and increase of epigenetic mark H3K56Ac in response
to ultraviolet radiation (UVR)-induced DNA damage. Here, we report a new function
of UV damaged DNA-binding protein (DDB) in deacetylation of H3K56Ac through
specific histone deacetylases (HDACs). We show that simultaneous depletion of
HDAC1/2 compromises the deacetylation of H3K56Ac, while depletion of HDAC1 or
HDAC2 alone has no effect on H3K56Ac. The H3K56Ac deacetylation does not require 
functional nucleotide excision repair (NER) factors XPA and XPC, but depends on
the function of upstream factors DDB1 and DDB2. UVR enhances the association of
DDB2 with HDAC1 and, enforced DDB2 expression leads to translocation of HDAC1 to 
UVR-damaged chromatin. HDAC1 and HDAC2 are recruited to UVR-induced DNA damage
spots, which are visualized by anti-XPC immunofluorescence. Dual HDAC1/2
depletion decreases XPC ubiquitination, but does not affect the recruitment of
DDB2 to DNA damage. By contrast, the local accumulation of <U+03B3>H2AX at UVR-induced
DNA damage spots was compromised upon HDAC1 as well as dual HDAC1/2 depletions.
Additionally, UVR-induced ATM activation decreased in H12899 cells expressing
H3K56Ac-mimicing H3K56Q. These results revealed a novel role of DDB in H3K56Ac
deacetylation during early step of NER and the existence of active functional
cross-talk between DDB-mediated damage recognition and H3K56Ac deacetylation.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26255936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015 Oct 1;309(7):L677-86. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00051.2015. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Computational genomic analysis of PARK7 interactome reveals high BBS1 gene
expression as a prognostic factor favoring survival in malignant pleural
mesothelioma.

Vavougios GD(1), Solenov EI(2), Hatzoglou C(3), Baturina GS(4), Katkova LE(4),
Molyvdas PA(5), Gourgoulianis KI(1), Zarogiannis SG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Thessaly, BIOPOLIS, Larissa, Greece; (2)Institute of Cytology and Genetics of the
Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia;
Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russia; and. (3)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, BIOPOLIS,
Larissa, Greece; Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Thessaly, BIOPOLIS, Larissa, Greece. (4)Institute of Cytology and Genetics of the
Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia;
(5)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly,
BIOPOLIS, Larissa, Greece. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Thessaly, BIOPOLIS, Larissa, Greece; Department of
Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, BIOPOLIS, Larissa,
Greece szarog@med.uth.gr.

The aim of our study was to assess the differential gene expression of Parkinson 
protein 7 (PARK7) interactome in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) using data 
mining techniques to identify novel candidate genes that may play a role in the
pathogenicity of MPM. We constructed the PARK7 interactome using the
ConsensusPathDB database. We then interrogated the Oncomine Cancer Microarray
database using the Gordon Mesothelioma Study, for differential gene expression of
the PARK7 interactome. In ConsensusPathDB, 38 protein interactors of PARK7 were
identified. In the Gordon Mesothelioma Study, 34 of them were assessed out of
which SUMO1, UBC3, KIAA0101, HDAC2, DAXX, RBBP4, BBS1, NONO, RBBP7, HTRA2, and
STUB1 were significantly overexpressed whereas TRAF6 and MTA2 were significantly 
underexpressed in MPM patients (network 2). Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier analysis
revealed that MPM patients with high BBS1 expression had a median overall
survival of 16.5 vs. 8.7 mo of those that had low expression. For validation
purposes, we performed a meta-analysis in Oncomine database in five sarcoma
datasets. Eight network 2 genes (KIAA0101, HDAC2, SUMO1, RBBP4, NONO, RBBP7,
HTRA2, and MTA2) were significantly differentially expressed in an array of 18
different sarcoma types. Finally, Gene Ontology annotation enrichment analysis
revealed significant roles of the PARK7 interactome in NuRD, CHD, and SWI/SNF
protein complexes. In conclusion, we identified 13 novel genes differentially
expressed in MPM, never reported before. Among them, BBS1 emerged as a novel
predictor of overall survival in MPM. Finally, we identified that PARK7
interactome is involved in novel pathways pertinent in MPM disease.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26254420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Exp Neurol. 2015 Nov;273:92-104. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.07.026. Epub 2015 
Jul 31.

Rapid changes in expression of class I and IV histone deacetylases during
epileptogenesis in mouse models of temporal lobe epilepsy.

Jagirdar R(1), Drexel M(1), Kirchmair E(1), Tasan RO(1), Sperk G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical University Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck,
Austria. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Medical University Innsbruck, 6020
Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic address: guenther.sperk@i-med.ac.at.

A prominent role of epigenetic mechanisms in manifestation of epilepsy has been
proposed. Thus altered histone H3 and H4 acetylation has been demonstrated in
experimental models of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). We now investigated changes 
in the expression of the class I and class IV histone deacetylases (HDAC) in two 
complementary mouse TLE models. Unilateral intrahippocampal injection of kainic
acid (KA) induced a status epilepticus lasting 6 to 24h, development of
spontaneous limbic seizures (2 to 3 days after KA injection) and chronic
epilepsy, as revealed by telemetric recordings of the EEGs. Mice were killed at
different intervals after KA injection and expression of HDAC mRNAs was
investigated by in situ hybridization. We observed marked decreases in the
expression of HDACs 1, 2 and 11 (by up to 75%) in the granule cell and pyramidal 
cell layers of the hippocampus during the acute status epilepticus (2 to 6h after
KA injection). This was followed by increased expression of all class I HDAC
mRNAs in all principal cell layers of the hippocampus after 12 to 48 h. In the
chronic phase, 14 and 28 days after KA, only modest increases in the expression
of HDAC1 mRNA were observed in granule and pyramidal cells. Immunohistochemistry 
using an antibody detecting HDAC2 revealed results consistent with the mRNA data 
and indicates also expression in glial cells on the injection side. Similar
changes as seen in the KA model were observed after a pilocarpine-induced status 
epilepticus except that decreases in HDACs 2, 3 and 8 were also seen at the
chronic 28 day interval. The prominent decreases in HDAC expression during status
epilepticus are consistent with the previously demonstrated increased expression 
of numerous proteins and with the augmented acetylation of histone H4. It is
suggested that respective putative gene products could facilitate proconvulsive
as well as anticonvulsive mechanisms. The increased expression of all class I
HDACs during the "silent phase", on the other hand, may be related to decreased
histone acetylation, which could cause a decrease in expression of certain
proteins, a mechanism that could also promote epileptogenesis. Thus, addressing
HDAC expression may have a therapeutic potential in interfering with a status
epilepticus and with the manifestation of TLE.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26238735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Aug;36(4):508-22. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1555611.
Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Identifying Molecular Targets for New Drug Development for Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease: What Does the Future Hold?

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom.

There is an urgent need to develop more effective therapies for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that target the underlying inflammatory
disease process. Current therapies with long-acting bronchodilators and inhaled
corticosteroids fail to prevent either disease progression or mortality, as they 
do not suppress the underlying inflammation. With better understanding of the
inflammatory and destructive process in the pathophysiology of COPD, several new 
therapeutic targets have been identified. Several mediator antagonists or
inhibitors tested in COPD have so far been disappointing. Broad-spectrum
anti-inflammatory drugs may be more effective, and include inhibitors of the
proinflammatory enzymes phosphodiesterase-4, p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase, Janus-activated kinases, NF-<U+03BA>B kinase, and PI3kinase-<U+03B3> and -d, but side
effects after oral administration are a major limitation; therefore, in future
inhaled delivery may be necessary. A new promising approach is reversal of
corticosteroid resistance through increasing histone deacetylase-2 activity. This
might be achieved by existing treatments such as theophylline, nortriptyline, and
macrolides, or more selectively by PI3kinase-d inhibitors. Other treatments in
development target oxidative stress, the failure to resolve inflammation,
aberrant repair mechanisms, and accelerated lung aging.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMID: 26238638  [PubMed - in process]


109. Cytotechnology. 2015 Jul 30. [Epub ahead of print]

A comparative study on expression profile of developmentally important genes
during pre-implantation stages in buffalo hand-made cloned embryos derived from
adult fibroblasts and amniotic fluid derived stem cells.

Em S(1), Shah F, Kataria M, Yadav PS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Physiology and Reproduction, ICAR-Central Institute for
Research on Buffaloes, Hisar, 125001, India, sadeeshcirb@gmail.com.

Abnormal gene expression in somatic cell nuclear transfer embryos due to aberrant
epigenetic modifications of the donor nucleus may account for much of the
observed diminished viability and developmental abnormalities. The present study 
compared the developmentally important gene expression pattern at 4-cell, 8- to
16-cell, morula, and blastocyst stages of buffalo nuclear transfer (NT) embryos
from adult fibroblasts (AFs) and amniotic fluid stem cells (AFSCs). In vitro
fertilized embryos were used as control embryos. Alterations in the expression
pattern of genes implicated in transcription and pluripotency (OCT4, STAT3,
NANOG), DNA methylation (DNMT1, DNMT3A), histone deacetylation (HDAC2), growth
factor signaling, and imprinting (IGF2, IGF2R), apoptosis (BAX, BCL2), oxidative 
stress (MnSOD), metabolism (GLUT1) regulation were observed in cloned embryos.
The expression of transcripts in AFSC-NT embryos more closely followed that of
the in vitro fertilized embryos compared with AF-NT embryos. It is concluded that
AFSCs with a relatively undifferentiated genome may serve as suitable donors
which could be reprogrammed more efficiently to reactivate expression of early
embryonic genes in buffalo NT.

PMID: 26224482  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


110. Bioinformatics. 2015 Nov 15;31(22):3561-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv430.
Epub 2015 Jul 25.

Statistically identifying tumor suppressors and oncogenes from pan-cancer
genome-sequencing data.

Kumar RD(1), Searleman AC(2), Swamidass SJ(3), Griffith OL(4), Bose R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Computational and Systems Biology Program, Washington University in St 
Louis. (2)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine. (3)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Washington
University in St Louis, Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine and. (4)Division of Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Division of Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine.

MOTIVATION: Several tools exist to identify cancer driver genes based on somatic 
mutation data. However, these tools do not account for subclasses of cancer
genes: oncogenes, which undergo gain-of-function events, and tumor suppressor
genes (TSGs) which undergo loss-of-function. A method which accounts for these
subclasses could improve performance while also suggesting a mechanism of action 
for new putative cancer genes.
RESULTS: We develop a panel of five complementary statistical tests and assess
their performance against a curated set of 99 HiConf cancer genes using a
pan-cancer dataset of 1.7 million mutations. We identify patient bias as a novel 
signal for cancer gene discovery, and use it to significantly improve detection
of oncogenes over existing methods (AUROC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.894). Additionally, our test of
truncation event rate separates oncogenes and TSGs from one another
(AUROC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.922). Finally, a random forest integrating the five tests further
improves performance and identifies new cancer genes, including CACNG3, HDAC2,
HIST1H1E, NXF1, GPS2 and HLA-DRB1.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: All mutation data, instructions, functions for
computing the statistics and integrating them, as well as the HiConf gene panel, 
are available at www.github.com/Bose-Lab/Improved-Detection-of-Cancer-Genes.
CONTACT: rbose@dom.wustl.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4757952 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 26209800  [PubMed - in process]


111. Int J Dev Biol. 2015;59(4-6):171-7. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.150071tz.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 are required for brain development.

Jaworska J(1), Ziemka-Nalecz M, Zalewska T.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroRepair Department, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Epigenetic modifications of histones have been implicated in the regulation of
cell specific expression of genes required for neuronal development. The best
studied post-translational (epigenetic) modification of histones is the process
of reversible acetylation. Two types of enzymes - histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) establish and maintain specific patterns 
of histone acetylation in balance, thereby contributing to both transcriptional
activation and repression of specific sets of genes. Histone deacetylases
catalyze the removal of acetyl groups from selected lysine residues in the
conserved tails of core histone proteins and are considered as transcriptional
corepressors. A significant amount of data implicates HDACs in diverse biological
processes, including tissue specific developmental program by silencing specific 
growth-inhibitory genes. In line with this, gene disruption studies have shown
that the class I deacetylases, HDAC1 and HDAC2 play an essential role in nervous 
system development. In the present review, we briefly highlight current insights 
supporting the function of histone deacetylases in rodent brain development and
discuss present knowledge referring to their role in neurogenesis, taking into
consideration results obtained in culture systems and in in vivo studies.

PMID: 26198144  [PubMed - in process]


112. Proteomics. 2015 Oct;15(19):3296-309. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400568. Epub 2015 Aug 
13.

Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis reveals <U+03B3>-bisabolene inducing p53-mediated
apoptosis of human oral squamous cell carcinoma via HDAC2 inhibition and ERK1/2
activation.

Jou YJ(1,)(2), Chen CJ(3,)(4), Liu YC(4), Way TD(5), Lai CH(6), Hua CH(7), Wang
CY(8), Huang SH(9), Kao JY(2), Lin CW(1,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (2)Department of biochemistry, College of life
sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)Graduate
Institute of Integrated Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Proteomics Core Laboratory, Department of Medical Research, China Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Department of Biological Science and
Technology, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (6)Department of
Microbiology, School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan. (8)School of Chinese Pharmaceutical Sciences and Chinese Medicine
Resources, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (9)Department of
Biotechnology, College of Health Science, Asia University, Wufeng, Taichung,
Taiwan.

<U+03B3>-Bisabolene, one of main components in cardamom, showed potent in vitro and in
vivo anti-proliferative activities against human oral squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC). <U+03B3>-Bisabolene activated caspases-3/9 and decreased mitochondrial memebrane
potential, leading to apoptosis of OSCC cell lines (Ca9-22 and SAS), but not
normal oral fibroblast cells. Phosphoproteome profiling of OSCC cells treated
with <U+03B3>-bisabolene was identified using TiO2-PDMS plate and LC-MS/MS, then
confirmed using Western blotting and real-time RT-PCR assays. Phosphoproteome
profiling revealed that <U+03B3>-bisabolene increased the phosphorylation of ERK1/2,
protein phosphatases 1 (PP1), and p53, as well as decreased the phosphorylation
of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in the process of apoptosis induction.
Protein-protein interaction network analysis proposed the involvement of
PP1-HDAC2-p53 and ERK1/2-p53 pathways in <U+03B3>-bisabolene-induced apoptosis.
Subsequent assays indicated <U+03B3>-bisabolene eliciting p53 acetylation that enhanced 
the expression of p53-regulated apoptotic genes. PP1 inhibitor-2 restored the
status of HDAC2 phosphorylation, reducing p53 acetylation and PUMA mRNA
expression in <U+03B3>-bisabolene-treated Ca9-22 and SAS cells. Meanwhile, MEK and ERK
inhibitors significantly decreased <U+03B3>-bisabolene-induced PUMA expression in both
cancer cell lines. Notably, the results ascertained the involvement of
PP1-HDAC2-p53 and ERK1/2-p53 pathways in mitochondria-mediated apoptosis of
<U+03B3>-bisabolene-treated cells. This study demonstrated <U+03B3>-bisabolene displaying
potent anti-proliferative and apoptosis-inducing activities against OSCC in vitro
and in vivo, elucidating molecular mechanisms of <U+03B3>-bisabolene-induced apoptosis. 
The novel insight could be useful for developing anti-cancer drugs.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26194454  [PubMed - in process]


113. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Oct 1;288(1):40-51. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.07.013.
Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Developmental exposure to 50 parts-per-billion arsenic influences histone
modifications and associated epigenetic machinery in a region- and sex-specific
manner in the adult mouse brain.

Tyler CR(1), Hafez AK(1), Solomon ER(1), Allan AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, 
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. (2)Department of Neurosciences, University of New
Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. Electronic address:
aallan@salud.unm.edu.

Epidemiological studies report that arsenic exposure via drinking water adversely
impacts cognitive development in children and, in adults, can lead to greater
psychiatric disease susceptibility, among other conditions. While it is known
that arsenic toxicity has a profound effect on the epigenetic landscape, very few
studies have investigated its effects on chromatin architecture in the brain. We 
have previously demonstrated that exposure to a low level of arsenic (50ppb)
during all three trimesters of fetal/neonatal development induces deficits in
adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus (DG), depressive-like
symptoms, and alterations in gene expression in the adult mouse brain. As
epigenetic processes control these outcomes, here we assess the impact of our
developmental arsenic exposure (DAE) paradigm on global histone posttranslational
modifications and associated chromatin-modifying proteins in the dentate gyrus
and frontal cortex (FC) of adult male and female mice. DAE influenced histone 3K4
trimethylation with increased levels in the male DG and FC and decreased levels
in the female DG (no change in female FC). The histone methyltransferase MLL
exhibited a similar sex- and region-specific expression profile as H3K4me3
levels, while histone demethylase KDM5B expression trended in the opposite
direction. DAE increased histone 3K9 acetylation levels in the male DG along with
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) expression of GCN5 and decreased H3K9ac levels in
the male FC along with decreased HAT expression of GCN5 and PCAF. DAE decreased
expression of histone deacetylase enzymes HDAC1 and HDAC2, which were concurrent 
with increased H3K9ac levels but only in the female DG. Levels of H3 and H3K9me3 
were not influenced by DAE in either brain region of either sex. These findings
suggest that exposure to a low, environmentally relevant level of arsenic during 
development leads to long-lasting changes in histone methylation and acetylation 
in the adult brain due to aberrant expression of epigenetic machinery based on
region and sex.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4579037 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26193056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 15;10(7):e0126566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126566.
eCollection 2015.

Molecular Mechanism of the Cell Death Induced by the Histone Deacetylase Pan
Inhibitor LBH589 (Panobinostat) in Wilms Tumor Cells.

Yan-Fang T(1), Zhi-Heng L(1), Li-Xiao X(1), Fang F(1), Jun L(1), Gang L(1), Lan
C(1), Na-Na W(1), Xiao-Juan D(2), Li-Chao S(3), Wen-Li Z(1), Pei-Fang X(1), He
Z(1), Guang-Hao S(1), Yan-Hong L(1), Yi-Ping L(1), Yun-Yun X(1), Hui-Ting Z(1),
Yi W(1), Mei-Fang J(1), Lin L(1), Jian N(4), Shao-Yan H(1), Xue-Ming Z(1), Xing
F(1), Jian W(1), Jian P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, the 5th Hospital of
Chinese PLA, Yin chuan, China. (3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Cancer Institute (Hospital), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing, China. (4)Translational Research Center, Second
Hospital, The Second Clinical School, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Wilms tumor (WT) is an embryonic kidney cancer, for which histone
acetylation might be a therapeutic target. LBH589, a novel targeted agent,
suppresses histone deacetylases in many tumors. This study investigated the
antitumor activity of LBH589 in SK-NEP-1 and G401 cells.
METHODS: SK-NEP-1 and G401 cell growth was assessed by CCK-8 and in nude mice
experiments. Annexin V/propidium iodide staining followed by flow cytometry
detected apoptosis in cell culture. Gene expressions of LBH589-treated tumor
cells were analyzed using an Arraystar Human LncRNA Array. The Multi Experiment
View cluster software analyzed the expression data. Differentially expressed
genes from the cluster analyses were imported into the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
tool.
RESULTS: LBH589 inhibited cell proliferation of SK-NEP-1 and G401 cells in a
dose-dependent manner. Annexin V, TUNEL and Hochest 33342 staining analysis
showed that LBH589-treated cells showed more apoptotic features compared with the
control. LBH589 treatment inhibited the growth of SK-NEP-1 xenograft tumors in
nude mice. Arraystar Human LncRNA Array analysis of genes and lncRNAs regulated
by LBH589 identified 6653 mRNAs and 8135 lncRNAs in LBH589-treated SK-NEP-1
cells. The most enriched gene ontology terms were those involved in nucleosome
assembly. KEGG pathway analysis identified cell cycle proteins, including CCNA2, 
CCNB2, CCND1, CCND2, CDK4, CDKN1B and HDAC2, etc. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
identified important upstream molecules: HIST2H3C, HIST1H4A, HIST1A, HIST1C,
HIST1D, histone H1, histone H3, RPRM, HSP70 and MYC.
CONCLUSIONS: LBH589 treatment caused apoptosis and inhibition of cell
proliferation of SK-NEP-1and G401 cells. LBH589 had a significant effect and few 
side effects on SK-NEP-1 xenograft tumors. Expression profiling, and GO, KEGG and
IPA analyses identified new targets and a new "network" of genes responding to
LBH589 treatment in SK-NEP-1 cells. RPRM, HSP70 and MYC may be important
regulators during LBH589 treatment. Our results provide new clues to the
proapoptotic mechanism of LBH589.

PMCID: PMC4503685
PMID: 26176219  [PubMed - in process]


115. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Feb;231(2):436-48. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25090.

Distinct Roles for Intestinal Epithelial Cell-Specific Hdac1 and Hdac2 in the
Regulation of Murine Intestinal Homeostasis.

Gonneaud A(1), Turgeon N(1), Boudreau F(1), Perreault N(1), Rivard N(1), Asselin 
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Pavillon de recherche appliquée
sur le cancer, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

The intestinal epithelium responds to and transmits signals from the microbiota
and the mucosal immune system to insure intestinal homeostasis. These
interactions are in part conveyed by epigenetic modifications, which respond to
environmental changes. Protein acetylation is an epigenetic signal regulated by
histone deacetylases, including Hdac1 and Hdac2. We have previously shown that
villin-Cre-inducible intestinal epithelial cell (IEC)-specific Hdac1 and Hdac2
deletions disturb intestinal homeostasis. To determine the role of Hdac1 and
Hdac2 in the regulation of IEC function and the establishment of the dual
knockout phenotype, we have generated villin-Cre murine models expressing one
Hdac1 allele without Hdac2, or one Hdac2 allele without Hdac1. We have also
investigated the effect of short-term deletion of both genes in
naphtoflavone-inducible Ah-Cre and tamoxifen-inducible villin-Cre(ER) mice. Mice 
with one Hdac1 allele displayed normal tissue architecture, but increased
sensitivity to DSS-induced colitis. In contrast, mice with one Hdac2 allele
displayed intestinal architecture defects, increased proliferation, decreased
goblet cell numbers as opposed to Paneth cells, increased immune cell
infiltration associated with fibrosis, and increased sensitivity to DSS-induced
colitis. In comparison to dual knockout mice, intermediary activation of Notch,
mTOR, and Stat3 signaling pathways was observed. While villin-Cre(ER) Hdac1 and
Hdac2 deletions led to an impaired epithelium and differentiation defects,
Ah-Cre-mediated deletion resulted in blunted proliferation associated with the
induction of a DNA damage response. Our results suggest that IEC determination
and intestinal homeostasis are highly dependent on Hdac1 and Hdac2 activity
levels, and that changes in the IEC acetylome may alter the mucosal environment.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26174178  [PubMed - in process]


116. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2015 Jun;3(3):e00135. doi: 10.1002/prp2.135. Epub 2015
May 24.

Antidepressant activity of fingolimod in mice.

di Nuzzo L(1), Orlando R(2), Tognoli C(3), Di Pietro P(4), Bertini G(3), Miele
J(1), Bucci D(4), Motolese M(4), Scaccianoce S(1), Caruso A(1), Mauro G(5), De
Lucia C(1), Battaglia G(4), Bruno V(6), Fabene PF(3), Nicoletti F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University Sapienza of Rome Rome,
Italy. (2)IRCCS Associazione Oasi Maria S.S., Institute for Research on Mental
Retardation and Brain Aging Troina, Italy. (3)Department of Neurological and
Movement Sciences, University of Verona Verona, Italy. (4)IRCCS Neuromed
Pozzilli, Italy. (5)Institute of Psychiatry, Catholic University of Sacred Heart 
Rome, Italy. (6)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University Sapienza of
Rome Rome, Italy ; IRCCS Neuromed Pozzilli, Italy.

Recent findings indicate that fingolimod, the first oral drug approved for the
treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS), acts as a direct inhibitor of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) and enhances the production of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) in the CNS. Both mechanisms are relevant to the pathophysiology and
treatment of major depression. We examined the antidepressant activity of
fingolimod in mice subjected to chronic unpredictable stress (CUS), a model of
reactive depression endowed with face and pharmacological validity. Chronic
treatment with fingolimod (3 mg kg(-1), i.p., once a day for 4 weeks) reduced the
immobility time in the forced swim test (FST) in a large proportion of CUS mice. 
This treatment also caused anxiogenic-like effects in the social interaction test
without affecting anxiety-like behavior in the elevated plus maze or spatial
learning in the water maze. CUS mice showed reduced BDNF levels and enhanced
HDAC2 levels in the hippocampus. These changes were reversed by fingolimod
exclusively in mice that showed a behavioral response to the drug in the FST.
Fingolimod treatment also enhanced H3 histone K14-acetylation and adult
neurogenesis in the hippocampus of CUS mice. Fingolimod did not affect most of
the parameters we have tested in unstressed control mice. The antidepressant-like
activity of fingolimod was confirmed in mice chronically treated with
corticosterone. These findings show for the first time that fingolimod exerts
antidepressant-like effect acting in a "disease-dependent" manner, and raise the 
interesting possibility that the drug could relieve depressive symptoms in MS
patients independently of its disease-modifying effect on MS.

PMCID: PMC4492751
PMID: 26171219  [PubMed]


117. Trends Neurosci. 2015 Aug;38(8):506-16. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.06.002. Epub
2015 Jul 4.

Positive allosteric modulators of metabotropic glutamate 2 receptors in
schizophrenia treatment.

Ellaithy A(1), Younkin J(1), González-Maeso J(2), Logothetis DE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. (2)Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, School of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23298, USA; Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, and The Friedman Brain
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
Electronic address: jgmaeso@vcu.edu. (3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
School of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.
Electronic address: delogothetis@vcu.edu.

The past two decades have witnessed a rise in the 'NMDA receptor hypofunction'
hypothesis for schizophrenia, a devastating disorder that affects around 1% of
the population worldwide. A variety of presynaptic, postsynaptic, and regulatory 
proteins involved in glutamatergic signaling have thus been proposed as potential
therapeutic targets. This review focuses on positive allosteric modulation of
metabotropic glutamate 2 receptors (mGlu2Rs) and discusses how recent preclinical
epigenetic data may provide a molecular explanation for the discrepant results of
clinical studies, further stimulating the field to exploit the promise of mGlu2R 
as a target for schizophrenia treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4530036 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26148747  [PubMed - in process]


118. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2015;18(7):693-700.

Discovery of a Novel HDAC2 Inhibitor by a Scaffold-Merging Hybrid Query.

Basant N, Lin X, Reid TE, Karla PK, Wang XS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Howard University,
2300 4th St. NW, Washington, DC 20059, USA. x.simon.wang@gmail.com.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are part of a vast family of enzymes with crucial
roles in numerous biological processes, largely through their repressive
influence on transcription, with serious implications in a variety of human
diseases. Among different isoforms, human HDAC2 in particular draws attention as 
a promising target for the treatment of cancer and memory deficits associated
with neurodegenerative diseases. Now the challenge is to obtain a compound that
is structurally novel and truly selective to HDAC2 because most current HDAC2
inhibitors do not show isoforms selectivity and suffer from metabolic
instability. In order to identify novel, and isoform-selective inhibitors for
human HDAC2, we designed a shape-based hybrid query from multiple scaffolds of
known chemical classes and validated it to be a more effective approach to
discover diverse scaffolds than single-molecule query. The hybrid query-based
screening rendered a hit compound with the N-benzylaniline scaffold which showed 
moderate inhibitory activity against HDAC2, and its chemical structure is diverse
compared to known HDAC2 inhibitors. Notably, this compound shows the selectivity 
against the HDAC6, a Class II enzyme, thus has the potential to further develop
into the class- and isoform-selective inhibitors. Our present study supplies an
useful approach to identifying novel HDAC2 inhibitors, and can be extended to the
inquires of other important biomedical targets as well.

PMCID: PMC4677828
PMID: 26144283  [PubMed - in process]


119. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2015 Jul;67:137-43. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2015.06.011. Epub 2015 
Jun 30.

Epigenetic regulation of Dnmt3a and Arc gene expression after electroconvulsive
stimulation in the rat.

Dyrvig M(1), Gøtzsche CR(2), Woldbye DP(2), Lichota J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Department of Health Science and Technology,
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. (2)Laboratory of Neural Plasticity,
Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Department of Health Science 
and Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. Electronic address:
jlichota@hst.aau.dk.

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) remains one of the most effective treatments of
major depression. Unfortunately, some patients report side effects, of which the 
most prominent are memory deficits. The immediate early gene Arc plays a critical
role in the maintenance phase of long-term potentiation and consolidation of
memory in the rat brain. We recently observed increased methylation of the Arc
promoter 24h after acute electroconvulsive stimulation (ECS) in rats, which could
cause decreased Arc expression and provide an explanation for the observed memory
deficits. In the present study we investigated the methylation and expression
changes of Arc at 48h post-ECS and determined the role of de-novo methylation in 
that process. We initially measured expression of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmt1
and Dnmt3a) and Arc 1, 4, 8, 16, 24, and 48h after a single ECS. Arc expression
increased approximately 10-fold at 1 and 4h after ECS, and subsequently decreased
below sham levels. Four hours after ECS we also observed a significant increase
in Dnmt3a expression, which was attenuated in a second experiment by the use of
DNMT inhibitor decitabine (5-aza-2-deoxycytidine). We then investigated Arc gene 
expression and methylation changes at 48h post-ECS and we found a slightly
reduced Arc expression in ECS-treated rats as compared to sham. In animals that
received decitabine we observed a significant decrease in Dnmt3a expression and
an increase of Arc expression in both ECS and sham groups. The same tendency for 
reduced Arc expression after ECS, as compared to sham was observed despite the
blocking of DNA methylation with decitabine. The DNA methylation as measured by
pyrosequencing is decreased 48h post-ECS both in the promoter and intragenic
regions as a response to ECS regardless of the treatment with decitabine. Overall
the results suggest that DNA methylation is involved in regulating Arc expression
but is not the causal mechanism responsible for reducing Arc expression after
ECS. We speculate that the decrease is caused by ECS-induced HDAC2 upregulation
and decreased H3 acetylation at the Arc promoter.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26141855  [PubMed - in process]


120. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Jun;9(6):2225-2228. Epub 2015 Mar 20.

Effect of the angiotensin II receptor blocker valsartan on cardiac hypertrophy
and myocardial histone deacetylase expression in rats with aortic constriction.

Xu WP(1), Yao TQ(1), Jiang YB(2), Zhang MZ(1), Wang YP(1), Yu Y(1), Li JX(1), Li 
YG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xin Hua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Cardiology, Taixing People's Hospital, Taixing, Jiangsu 225400, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to observe the myocardial expression of members 
of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) family (HDAC2, HDAC5 and HDAC9) in rats with or
without myocardial hypertrophy (MH) in the presence and absence of the
angiotensin II receptor blocker valsartan. Adult male Wistar rats were randomly
divided into three groups (n=6/group): Sham-operated control rats, treated with
distilled water (1 ml/day) through gavage; rats with MH (established through
aortic constriction), treated with distilled water (1 ml/day) through gavage; and
MH + valsartan rats, treated with 20 mg/kg/day valsartan through gavage.
Treatments commenced one day after surgery and continued for eight weeks. Body
weight (BW), heart weight (HW) and plasma atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and
brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels were determined, and the myocardial
expression of HDAC2, HDAC5 and HDAC9 was analyzed through a reverse transcription
semi-quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The BWs of the rats in the three
groups were similar at baseline; however, after eight weeks the BW of the rats in
the MH + valsartan group was significantly reduced compared with that of the MH
rats. Furthermore, the HW/BW ratio and plasma ANP and BNP levels were increased, 
the myocardial HDAC2 expression was significantly upregulated and the HDAC5 and
HDAC9 expression was significantly downregulated in the MH rats compared with
those in the control rats; however, these changes were significantly attenuated
by valsartan. Modulation of myocardial HDAC5, HDAC9 and HDAC2 expression may
therefore be one of the anti-hypertrophic mechanisms of valsartan in this rat MH 
model.

PMCID: PMC4473348
PMID: 26136964  [PubMed]


121. Med Chem. 2015;11(8):725-35.

Novel 3-substituted-2-oxoindoline-based N-hydroxypropenamides as histone
deacetylase inhibitors and antitumor agents.

Dung do TM, Dung PT, Oanh DT, Hai PT, Huong le TT, Loi VD, Hahn H, Han BW, Kim J,
Han SB, Nam NH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hanoi University of Pharmacy, 13-15 Le Thanh Tong, Hanoi, Vietnam.
shan@chungbuk.ac.kr oanhdtk@hup.edu.vn shan@chungbuk.ac.kr.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are currently a group of validated targets for
anticancer drug discovery and development. In our research program to find novel 
small molecules targeting these enzymes, we designed and synthesized two series
of 3-hydroxyimino-2-oxoindoline- and 3- methoxyimino-2-oxoindoline-based
N-hydroxypropenamides (3a-g, 6a-g). The results show that these propenamides
potently inhibited HDAC2 with IC50 values in sub-micromolar range, approximately 
10-fold lower than that of SAHA (also known as suberoylanilohydroxamic acid).
Evaluation of cytotoxicity of these compounds in three human cancer cell lines
revealed that most of the synthesized compounds were up to 5-fold more cytotoxic 
than SAHA. Docking studies showed that the compounds bound to HDAC2 at the
binding site with higher binding affinities compared to SAHA. Our present results
demonstrate that these novel 3-substituted-2-oxoindoline-based
N-hydroxypropenamides are potential for further development as anticancer agents.

PMID: 26133355  [PubMed - in process]


122. ASN Neuro. 2015 Jun 30;7(3). pii: 1759091415593066. doi:
10.1177/1759091415593066. Print 2015 May-Jun.

Combined HDAC1 and HDAC2 Depletion Promotes Retinal Ganglion Cell Survival After 
Injury Through Reduction of p53 Target Gene Expression.

Lebrun-Julien F(1), Suter U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology (ETH) Zürich, CH, Switzerland
frederic.lebrun@biol.ethz.ch. (2)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences,
Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zürich, CH,
Switzerland.

Histones deacetylases (HDACs), besides their function as epigenetic regulators,
deacetylate and critically regulate the activity of nonhistone targets. In
particular, HDACs control partially the proapoptotic activity of p53 by balancing
its acetylation state. HDAC inhibitors have revealed neuroprotective properties
in different models, but the exact mechanisms of action remain poorly understood.
We have generated a conditional knockout mouse model targeting retinal ganglion
cells (RGCs) to investigate specifically the functional role of HDAC1 and HDAC2
in an acute model of optic nerve injury. Our results demonstrate that combined
HDAC1 and HDAC2 ablation promotes survival of axotomized RGCs. Based on global
gene expression analyses, we identified the p53-PUMA apoptosis-inducing axis to
be strongly activated in axotomized mouse RGCs. Specific HDAC1/2 ablation
inhibited this apoptotic pathway by impairing the crucial acetylation status of
p53 and reducing PUMA expression, thereby contributing to the ensuing enhanced
neuroprotection due to HDAC1/2 depletion. HDAC1/2 inhibition and the affected
downstream signaling components emerge as specific targets for developing
therapeutic strategies in neuroprotection.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMCID: PMC4720215
PMID: 26129908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Oct 15;414:143-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.05.037. Epub 
2015 Jun 24.

Histone hypoacetylation and increased histone deacetylases in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from patients with Graves' disease.

Yan N(1), Zhou JZ(2), Zhang JA(3), Cai T(2), Zhang W(2), Wang Y(2), Muhali FS(2),
Guan L(2), Song RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (2)Clinical Research Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Endocrinology, 
Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
zhangjinan@hotmail.com.

The objective of this study was to investigate histone modification patterns in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with Graves' disease (GD).
Thirty GD patients and 20 healthy controls were enrolled in this study. Global
histone H3/H4 acetylation levels of PBMCs in all subjects were detected by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. mRNA levels of histone-related chromatin
modifier genes were measured by real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Global histone H4 acetylation level in
PBMCs of GD patients was significantly decreased compared with controls
(p=0.005). The mRNA expression of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 were
significantly increased in PBMCs of GD patients compared with controls (p=0.004
and 0.018; respectively). No significant difference was observed either in SIRT1 
or in HATs mRNA including p300, CREBBP between GD patients and controls (p>0.05).
Our findings firstly suggested that histone acetylation modifications are
aberrant in PBMCs of GD patients, possibly due to the deregulation of epigenetic 
modifier genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26116233  [PubMed - in process]


124. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 25;10(6):e0131760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131760.
eCollection 2015.

Decreased Expression of CoREST1 and CoREST2 Together with LSD1 and HDAC1/2 during
Neuronal Differentiation.

Sáez JE(1), Gómez AV(1), Barrios ÁP(1), Parada GE(1), Galdames L(1), González
M(1), Andrés ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0133555.

CoREST (CoREST1, rcor1) transcriptional corepressor together with the histone
demethylase LSD1 (KDM1A) and the histone deacetylases HDAC1/2 form
LSD1-CoREST-HDAC (LCH) transcriptional complexes to regulate gene expression.
CoREST1 belong to a family that also comprises CoREST2 (rcor2) and CoREST3
(rcor3). CoREST1 represses the expression of neuronal genes during neuronal
differentiation. However, the role of paralogs CoREST2 and CoREST3 in this
process is just starting to emerge. Here, we report the expression of all CoRESTs
and partners LSD1 and HDAC1/2 in two models of neuronal differentiation:
Nerve-Growth-Factor (NGF)-induced neuronal phenotype of PC12 cells, and in vitro 
maturation of embryonic rat cortical neurons. In both models, a concomitant and
gradual decrease of LSD1, HDAC1, HDAC2, CoREST1, and CoREST2, but not CoREST3 was
observed. As required by the study, full-length rat rcor1 gene was identified
using in silico analysis of available rat genome. The work was also complemented 
by the analysis of rat RNA-seq databases. The analysis showed that all CoRESTs,
including the identified four splicing variants of rat CoREST3, display a wide
expression in adult tissues. Moreover, the analysis of RNA-seq databases showed
that CoREST2 displays a higher expression than CoREST1 and CoREST3 in the mature 
brain. Immunofluorescent assays and immunoblots of adult rat brain showed that
all CoRESTs are present in both glia and neurons. Regarding functional
partnership, CoREST2 and CoREST3 interact with all LSD1 splicing variants. In
conclusion, neuronal differentiation is accompanied by decreased expression of
all core components of LCH complexes, but not CoREST3. The combination of the
differential transcriptional repressor capacity of LCH complexes and variable
protein levels of its different components should result in a finely tuned gene
expression during neuronal differentiation and in the adult brain.

PMCID: PMC4482511
PMID: 26111147  [PubMed - in process]


125. Biol Reprod. 2015 Aug;93(2):33. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.129106. Epub 2015 Jun
24.

Nucleolar Translocation of Histone Deacetylase 2 Is Involved in Regulation of
Transcriptional Silencing in the Cat Germinal Vesicle.

Lee PC(1), Wildt DE(1), Comizzoli P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Species Survival, Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute,
National Zoological Park, Washington, District of Columbia, and Front Royal,
Virginia. (2)Center for Species Survival, Smithsonian Conservation Biology
Institute, National Zoological Park, Washington, District of Columbia, and Front 
Royal, Virginia comizzolip@si.edu.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is a key transcriptional coregulator that is
suspected to play a role during oogenesis. It is known that RNA transcription in 
the cat germinal vesicle (GV) stops during folliculogenesis at the late antral
follicle stage and is unrelated to histone deacetylation or chromatin
condensation. The objective of the present study was to determine if and how
HDAC2 participates in transcription regulation in the cat GV. Spatiotemporal
HDAC2 protein expression was examined by immunostaining oocytes from primary to
large antral follicles. HDAC2 was detected in the majority of GVs within oocytes 
from early, small, and large antral follicles. At early and small antral stages, 
HDAC2 was found primarily in the GV's nucleoplasm. There then was a significant
shift in HDAC2 localization into the nucleolus, mostly in oocytes from large
antral follicles. Assessments revealed that transcription was active in oocytes
that contained nucleoplasm-localized HDAC2, whereas nucleolar-bound HDAC2 was
associated with loss of both global transcription and ribosomal RNA presence at
all antral stages. When oocytes were exposed to the HDAC inhibitor valproic acid,
results indicated that HDAC regulated transcriptional activity in the
nucleoplasm, but not in the nucleolus. Collective results suggest that nucleolar 
translocation of HDAC2 is associated with transcriptional silencing in the GV,
thereby likely contributing to an oocyte's acquisition of competence.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4706296 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26108793  [PubMed - in process]


126. J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep;60(9):479-84. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.66. Epub 2015 Jun 11.

Genetic analysis of common variants in the HDAC2 gene with schizophrenia
susceptibility in Han Chinese.

Chen G(1,)(2), Guan F(1,)(2,)(3), Lin H(4), Li L(1,)(2), Fu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Psychiatry, School of Medicine & Forensics, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. (2)Key Laboratory of National Ministry of
Health for Forensic Sciences, School of Medicine & Forensics, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes Related to
Diseases, Ministry of Education, Xi'an, China. (4)Department of Psychiatry, Xi'an
Mental Health Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a complex psychiatric disorder that is strongly influenced
by a genetic component. Recent studies suggested that histone deacetylases
(HDACs) might increase the expression of several key genes in the brain and may
also be associated with susceptibility to SCZ. Among human HDACs, HDAC2 is a
critical modulator of gene regulation. Here, we designed a two-stage case-control
study to thoroughly examine the association between the HDAC2 gene and SCZ. A
total of 19 common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the region of the
HDAC2 gene were analyzed in the test group of 1430 patients and 2862 matched
healthy controls. A comparison of the genotype and allele frequencies of the SNPs
between cases and controls revealed that three SNPs, rs13212283, rs6568819 and
rs9488289, were nominally associated with SCZ. However, we failed to observe any 
association between these SNPs and SCZ in the validation group consisting of 896 
cases and 1815 matched healthy controls. Furthermore, haplotypic analysis also
confirmed the negative results. Our results provide preliminary evidence that
HDAC2 may not confer susceptibility to SCZ in Han Chinese. Additional genetic
studies from a large population are required to obtain more conclusive results.

PMID: 26063464  [PubMed - in process]


127. Mol Cytogenet. 2015 Apr 28;8:31. doi: 10.1186/s13039-015-0134-7. eCollection
2015.

Clinical and molecular characterization of a patient with interstitial 6q21q22.1 
deletion.

Tassano E(1), Mirabelli-Badenier M(2), Veneselli E(2), Puliti A(3), Lerone M(4), 
Vaccari CM(5), Morana G(6), Porta S(1), Gimelli G(1), Cuoco C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Citogenetica, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, L.goG.Gaslini 5, 16147
Genova, Italy. (2)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department of Neurosciences and
Rehabilitation, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy. (3)Department of
Neurosciences Rehabilitation Ophthalmology Genetics Maternal and Child Health
(DiNOGMI), University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy ; U.O.C. Genetica Medica, Istituto
Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy. (4)U.O.C. Genetica Medica, Istituto Giannina
Gaslini, Genova, Italy. (5)Department of Neurosciences Rehabilitation
Ophthalmology Genetics Maternal and Child Health (DiNOGMI), University of Genoa, 
Genoa, Italy. (6)Pediatric Neuroradiology Unit, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Interstitial 6q deletions, involving the 6q15q25 chromosomal region, 
are rare events characterized by variable phenotypes and no clear
karyotype/phenotype correlation has been determined yet.
RESULTS: We present a child with a 6q21q22.1 deletion, characterized by
array-CGH, associated with developmental delay, intellectual disability,
microcephaly, facial dysmorphisms, skeletal, muscle, and brain anomalies.
DISCUSSION: In our patient, the 6q21q22.1 deleted region contains ten genes
(TRAF3IP2, FYN, WISP3, TUBE1, LAMA4, MARCKS, HDAC2, HS3ST5, FRK, COL10A1) and two
desert gene regions. We discuss here if these genes had some role in determining 
the phenotype of our patient in order to establish a possible karyotype/phenotype
correlation.

PMCID: PMC4457201
PMID: 26052347  [PubMed]


128. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Sep;136(3):781-791.e9. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.04.023. Epub 2015 Jun 2.

IL-10 disrupts the Brd4-docking sites to inhibit LPS-induced CXCL8 and TNF-a
expression in monocytes: Implications for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Castellucci M(1), Rossato M(1), Calzetti F(1), Tamassia N(1), Zeminian S(2),
Cassatella MA(1), Bazzoni F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Diagnostics, Division of General Pathology,
University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (2)Ospedale San Pellegrino, Castiglione
delle Stiviere, Mantova, Italy. (3)Department of Pathology and Diagnostics,
Division of General Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. Electronic
address: flavia.bazzoni@univr.it.

BACKGROUND: IL-10 is well known for its ability to block the expression and
production of numerous proinflammatory cytokines, in this manner preventing the
development of excessive or chronic immune activation. IL-10-induced
transcriptional repression of CXCL8 and TNFA genes consists of 2 distinct phases:
an early phase, occurring rapidly and in a protein synthesis-independent manner, 
followed by a second phase that is more delayed and dependent on protein
synthesis.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify the mechanisms through which IL-10 rapidly and
directly suppresses LPS-induced CXCL8 and TNF-a transcription, which might be
defective under pathologic conditions.
METHODS: The molecular events triggered by IL-10 in LPS-activated monocytes at
the CXCL8 and TNFA loci were investigated by using the chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay.
RESULTS: Inhibition of LPS-induced CXCL8 and TNF-a expression by IL-10 proceeds
through a common mechanism targeting LPS-induced phosphorylation of the nuclear
factor <U+03BA>B p65 serine 276 residue (pS276p65). As a result, all the
pS276p65-dependent events occurring at the CXCL8 and TNFA loci are consistently
reduced, ultimately leading to a reduction in transcript elongation.
Additionally, IL-10 selectively controls CXCL8 transcript elongation through
histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2-dependent covalent chromatin modifications,
disrupting the assembly of the transcriptional machinery. Remarkably, PBMCs from 
patients with acute-phase chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which express
negligible HDAC2 levels, are scarcely affected by IL-10 in terms of inhibition of
CXCL8 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides mechanistic evidence that IL-10 creates a
chromatin environment that decreases the transcriptional rate of CXCL8 and TNF-a 
to Toll-like receptor 4-activating signals. Data identify novel molecular targets
for therapeutic strategies aimed at dampening inflammation in pathologies such as
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, in which reduced intracellular HDAC2
levels have been described.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26044852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Cutan Med Surg. 2016 Jan;20(1):40-3. doi: 10.1177/1203475415589055. Epub 2015
Jun 1.

Assessment of Tissue Level of Histone Deactylase-2 (HDAC-2) in Patients With
Mycosis Fungoides.

El Tawdy A(1), Amin I(1), Abdel Hay R(2), Rashed L(1), Gad Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. (2)Faculty of Medicine,
Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt raniamounir@kasralainy.edu.eg. (3)National Cancer 
Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Histone deactylases (HDAC) have a role in the pathogenesis of mycosis
fungoides (MF) through their actions on different apoptosis pathways.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the possible role played by HDAC-2 in MF by estimating the
tissue expression of HDAC2 mRNA in different stages of MF.
METHODS: This study included 28 MF patients and 30 controls. The HDAC-2 levels
were detected by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Correlations of
HDAC-2 levels with clinical presentation and different stages of MF were
analyzed.
RESULTS: Mean HDAC-2 level was significantly higher in patients (P < .001) than
in controls. HDAC-2 highest mean value was significantly detected in patients
with stage IIb, and the lowest mean value was detected in patients with stage Ia 
(P < .001).
CONCLUSION: Up-regulation of tissue HDAC-2 in MF patients might develop a new
approach in the understanding of the pathogenesis of MF. Histone deactylases are 
important targets for molecular cancer therapeutics.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26033703  [PubMed - in process]


130. Medchemcomm. 2015 Apr 1;6(4):613-618.

Discovery of a new class of histone deacetylase inhibitors with a novel zinc
binding group.

Li Y(1), Woster PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences, South Carolina College
of Pharmacy, Medical University of South Carolina, 70 President St., Charleston, 
SC 29425.

Small molecules featuring a hydroxamic acid or a benzamide zinc binding group
(ZBG) are the most thoroughly studied histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors.
However, concerns about the pharmacokinetic liabilities of the hydroxamic acid
moiety and potential metabolic toxicity of the aniline portion of benzamide HDAC 
inhibitors have stimulated research efforts aimed at discovering alternative
ZBGs. Here we report the 2-(oxazol-2-yl)phenol moiety as a novel ZBG that can be 
used to produce compounds that are potent HDAC inhibitors. A series of analogues 
with this novel ZBG have been synthesized, and these analogues exhibit selective 
inhibition against HDAC1 as well as the class IIb HDACs (HDAC6 and HDAC10).
Compound 10 possesses an IC50 value of 7.5 µM in the MV-4-11 leukemia cell line, 
and induces a comparable amount of acetylated histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and
p21Waf1/CIP1 as 0.5 µM of SAHA. Modeling of compound 10 in the active site of
HDAC2 demonstrates that the 2-(oxazol-2-yl)phenol moiety has a zinc-binding
pattern similar to benzamide HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4440699
PMID: 26005563  [PubMed]


131. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 May 19;16(5):11482-99. doi: 10.3390/ijms160511482.

Anti-Fibrotic Effects of Class I HDAC Inhibitor, Mocetinostat Is Associated with 
IL-6/Stat3 Signaling in Ischemic Heart Failure.

Nural-Guvener H(1), Zakharova L(2), Feehery L(3), Sljukic S(4), Gaballa M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun 
City, AZ 85351, USA. feyzaguvener@gmail.com. (2)Cardiovascular Research
Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA.
hbssmode@yahoo.com. (3)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Banner Sun Health
Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA. lorraine.feehery@bannerhealth.com.
(4)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun 
City, AZ 85351, USA. zana.sljukic@gmail.com. (5)Cardiovascular Research
Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA.
gaballalab@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have linked histone deacetylases (HDAC) to remodeling 
of the heart and cardiac fibrosis in heart failure. However, the molecular
mechanisms linking chromatin remodeling events with observed anti-fibrotic
effects are unknown. Here, we investigated the molecular players involved in
anti-fibrotic effects of HDAC inhibition in congestive heart failure (CHF)
myocardium and cardiac fibroblasts in vivo.
METHODS AND RESULTS: MI was created by coronary artery occlusion. Class I HDACs
were inhibited in three-week post MI rats by intraperitoneal injection of
Mocetinostat (20 mg/kg/day) for duration of three weeks. Cardiac function and
heart tissue were analyzed at six week post-MI. CD90+ cardiac fibroblasts were
isolated from ventricles through enzymatic digestion of heart. In vivo treatment 
of CHF animals with Mocetinostat reduced CHF-dependent up-regulation of HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in CHF myocardium, improved cardiac function and decreased scar size and
total collagen amount. Moreover, expression of pro-fibrotic markers, collagen-1, 
fibronectin and Connective Tissue Growth Factor (CTGF) were reduced in the left
ventricle (LV) of Mocetinostat-treated CHF hearts. Cardiac fibroblasts isolated
from Mocetinostat-treated CHF ventricles showed a decrease in expression of
collagen I and III, fibronectin and Timp1. In addition, Mocetinostat attenuated
CHF-induced elevation of IL-6 levels in CHF myocardium and cardiac fibroblasts.
In parallel, levels of pSTAT3 were reduced via Mocetinostat in CHF myocardium.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-fibrotic effects of Mocetinostat in CHF are associated with the
IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway. In addition, our study demonstrates in vivo
regulation of cardiac fibroblasts via HDAC inhibition.

PMCID: PMC4463712
PMID: 25997003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biomed Sci Instrum. 2015;51:423-30.

Blast Induced Neurotrauma Leads To Changes In The Epigenome.

Bailey ZS(1), Sujith Sajja VS, Hubbard WB, VandeVord PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Tech.

Blast induced neurotrauma (BINT) leads to widespread aberrant gene expression and
molecular changes resulting in cognitive impairment. Enzymes such as HDAC2,
HDAC6, SIRT1, DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b control histone acetylation and DNA
methylation which play a major role in regulation of the transcriptome. Changes
in the expression of these enzymes have been implicated in the pathology of
traumatic brain injury (TBI) and Alzheimer<U+0092>s disease (AD). We hypothesize that
blast exposure will lead to changes in the expression of these enzymes which play
a key role in injury progression and pathology. This study looked to identify
epigenome changes in the acute stages of BINT using an established rodent model. 
Real time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analyses were used to assess
gene expression and protein level changes compared to sham. No significant
changes were seen 24 hours after blast exposure. However, several changes were
observed at 72 hours following blast exposure. There was a significant increase
in expression of HDAC2 and HDAC6 in the hippocampus which correlated with
elevated HDAC2 protein levels. SIRT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b levels were all reduced
in the hippocampus. In the medial prefrontal cortex, DNMT1 and DNMT3b were
significantly reduced. The results indicated that blast exposure causes acute
changes in gene expression and protein levels of epigenetic markers which
correlate with changes observed in AD pathology. These epigenomic changes could
provide novel targets for therapeutic interventions following BINT.

PMID: 25996748  [PubMed]


133. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 9;112(23):7291-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1415845112. Epub 2015 May 20.

Basolateral amygdala bidirectionally modulates stress-induced hippocampal
learning and memory deficits through a p25/Cdk5-dependent pathway.

Rei D(1), Mason X(1), Seo J(1), Gräff J(1), Rudenko A(1), Wang J(1), Rueda R(1), 
Siegert S(1), Cho S(1), Canter RG(1), Mungenast AE(1), Deisseroth K(2), Tsai
LH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 and.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305. (3)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory,
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 and lhtsai@mit.edu.

Repeated stress has been suggested to underlie learning and memory deficits via
the basolateral amygdala (BLA) and the hippocampus; however, the functional
contribution of BLA inputs to the hippocampus and their molecular repercussions
are not well understood. Here we show that repeated stress is accompanied by
generation of the Cdk5 (cyclin-dependent kinase 5)-activator p25, up-regulation
and phosphorylation of glucocorticoid receptors, increased HDAC2 expression, and 
reduced expression of memory-related genes in the hippocampus. A combination of
optogenetic and pharmacosynthetic approaches shows that BLA activation is both
necessary and sufficient for stress-associated molecular changes and memory
impairments. Furthermore, we show that this effect relies on direct glutamatergic
projections from the BLA to the dorsal hippocampus. Finally, we show that p25
generation is necessary for the stress-induced memory dysfunction. Taken
together, our data provide a neural circuit model for stress-induced hippocampal 
memory deficits through BLA activity-dependent p25 generation.

PMCID: PMC4466741
PMID: 25995364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Neurochem. 2015 Aug;134(4):642-51. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13171. Epub 2015 Jun 4.

Hippocampal chromatin-modifying enzymes are pivotal for scopolamine-induced
synaptic plasticity gene expression changes and memory impairment.

Singh P(1), Konar A(1), Kumar A(1), Srivas S(1), Thakur MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Brain Research Centre,
Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

The amnesic potential of scopolamine is well manifested through synaptic
plasticity gene expression changes and behavioral paradigms of memory impairment.
However, the underlying mechanism remains obscure and consequently ideal
therapeutic target is lacking. In this context, chromatin-modifying enzymes,
which regulate memory gene expression changes, deserve major attention.
Therefore, we analyzed the expression of chromatin-modifying enzymes and recovery
potential of enzyme modulators in scopolamine-induced amnesia. Scopolamine
administration drastically up-regulated DNA methyltransferases (DNMT1) and HDAC2 
expression while CREB-binding protein (CBP), DNMT3a and DNMT3b remained
unaffected. HDAC inhibitor sodium butyrate and DNMT inhibitor Aza-2'deoxycytidine
recovered scopolamine-impaired hippocampal-dependent memory consolidation with
concomitant increase in the expression of synaptic plasticity genes Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and Arc and level of histone H3K9 and H3K14
acetylation and decrease in DNA methylation level. Sodium butyrate showed more
pronounced effect than Aza-2'deoxycytidine and their co-administration did not
exhibit synergistic effect on gene expression. Taken together, we showed for the 
first time that scopolamine-induced up-regulation of chromatin-modifying enzymes,
HDAC2 and DNMT1, leads to gene expression changes and consequent decline in
memory consolidation. Our findings on the action of scopolamine as an epigenetic 
modulator can pave a path for ideal therapeutic targets. We propose the following
putative pathway for scopolamine-mediated memory impairment; scopolamine
up-regulates hippocampal DNMT1 and HDAC2 expression, induces methylation and
deacetylation of BDNF and Arc promoter, represses gene expression and eventually 
impairs memory consolidation. On the other hand, Aza-2 and NaB inhibit DNMT1 and 
HDAC2 respectively, up-regulate BDNF and Arc expression and recover memory
consolidation. We elucidate the action of scopolamine as an epigenetic modulator 
and hope that DNMT1 and HDAC2 would be ideal therapeutic targets for memory
disorders.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 25982413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Neuroscience. 2015 Aug 6;300:104-15. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.05.017.
Epub 2015 May 14.

Effects of combined nicotine and fluoxetine treatment on adult hippocampal
neurogenesis and conditioned place preference.

Faillace MP(1), Zwiller J(2), Bernabeu RO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Fisiología e Instituto de Fisiología y Biofísica
(IFIBIO-Houssay), Universidad de Buenos Aires, Paraguay 2155, Buenos Aires
C1121ABG, Argentina. Electronic address: pfaillace@qb.ffyb.uba.ar. (2)Laboratoire
de Neurosciences Cognitives et Adaptatives, UMR 7364, CNRS, Université de
Strasbourg, 12 rue Goethe, Strasbourg, France. Electronic address:
zwiller@unistra.fr. (3)Departmento de Fisiología e Instituto de Fisiología y
Biofísica (IFIBIO-Houssay), Universidad de Buenos Aires, Paraguay 2155, Buenos
Aires C1121ABG, Argentina. Electronic address: rbernabeu@fmed.uba.ar.

Adult neurogenesis occurs in mammals within the dentate gyrus, a hippocampal
subarea. It is known to be induced by antidepressant treatment and reduced in
response to nicotine administration. We checked here whether the antidepressant
fluoxetine would inverse the decrease in hippocampal neurogenesis caused by
nicotine. It is shown that repeated, but not a single injection of rats with
fluoxetine was able to abolish the decrease in adult dentate cell proliferation
produced by nicotine treatment. We measured the expression of several biochemical
parameters known to be associated with neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus. Both
drugs increased the expression of p75 neurotrophin receptor, which promotes
proliferation and early maturation of dentate gyrus cells. Using the conditioned 
place preference (CPP) paradigm, we also gave both drugs in a context in which
their rewarding properties could be measured. Fluoxetine produced a significant
but less robust CPP than nicotine. A single injection of fluoxetine was found to 
reduce nicotine-induced CPP. Moreover, the rewarding properties of nicotine were 
completely abolished in response to repeated fluoxetine injections. Expression of
nicotine-induced CPP was accompanied by an increase of phospho-CREB (cyclic
AMP-responsive element-binding protein) and HDAC2 (histone deacetylase 2)
expression in the nucleus accumbens. The data suggest that fluoxetine reward, as 
opposed to nicotine reward, depends on dentate gyrus neurogenesis. Since
fluoxetine was able to disrupt the association between nicotine and the
environment, this antidepressant may be tested as a treatment for nicotine
addiction using cue exposure therapy.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25981209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncotarget. 2015 May 20;6(14):12481-92.

Induction of c-Cbl contributes to anti-cancer effects of HDAC inhibitor in lung
cancer.

Wei TT(1), Lin YC(1,)(2), Lin PH(1), Shih JY(3), Chou CW(1), Huang WJ(4), Yang
YC(5), Hsiao PW(5), Chen CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Far-Eastern Memorial
Hospital, New Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Agricultural Biotechnology Research
Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Here we found loss of c-Cbl, an E3 ligase, expression in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) compared with its adjacent normal tissue in patient specimens.
HDAC inhibition by WJ or knockdown of HDAC 1, HDAC2, HDAC3 or HDAC6 all induced
c-Cbl. Ectopic expression of c-Cbl induced decreased EGFR, inhibited growth in
NSCLC cells. Knockdown of EGFR inhibited NSCLC growth. Mutation of EGFR at Y1045 
decreased WJ-induced growth inhibition as well as in vivo anti-cancer effect and 
EGFR degradation mediated by WJ. Time-lapse confocal analysis showed
co-localization of c-Cbl and EGFR after WJ treatment. Furthermore, WJ inhibited
lung tumor growth through c-Cbl induction in orthotopic and tail vein injected
models. C-Cbl up-regulation induced by HDACi is a potential strategy for NSCLC
treatment.

PMCID: PMC4494952
PMID: 25980579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Neurosci. 2015 May 13;35(19):7332-48. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2174-14.2015.

Sp3/REST/HDAC1/HDAC2 Complex Represses and Sp1/HIF-1/p300 Complex Activates ncx1 
Gene Transcription, in Brain Ischemia and in Ischemic Brain Preconditioning, by
Epigenetic Mechanism.

Formisano L(1), Guida N(2), Valsecchi V(3), Cantile M(3), Cuomo O(3), Vinciguerra
A(3), Laudati G(3), Pignataro G(3), Sirabella R(2), Di Renzo G(3), Annunziato
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and
Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples,
Naples 80131, Italy, Division of Pharmacology, Department of Science and
Technology, University of Sannio, 82100 Benevento, Italy, and. (2)IRCSS SDN,
Naples 80131, Italy. (3)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience,
Reproductive and Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II" University
of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy. (4)Division of Pharmacology, Department of
Neuroscience, Reproductive and Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico 
II" University of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy, IRCSS SDN, Naples 80131, Italy
lannunzi@unina.it.

The Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger 1 (NCX1) is reduced in stroke by the RE1-silencing
transcription factor (REST), whereas it is increased in ischemic brain
preconditioning (PC) by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). Because ncx1 brain
promoter (ncx1-Br) has five putative consensus sequences, named Sp1A-E, for the
specificity protein (Sp) family of transcription factors (Sp1-4), we investigated
the role of this family in regulating ncx1 transcription in rat cortical neurons.
Here we found that Sp1 is a transcriptional activator, whereas Sp3 is a
transcriptional repressor of ncx1, and that both bind ncx1-Br in a
sequence-specific manner, modulating ncx1 transcription through the Sp1 sites
C-E. Furthermore, by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) in rats, 
the transcriptional repressors Sp3 and REST colocalized with the two
histone-deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2 on the ncx1-Br, with a consequent
hypoacetylation. Contrarily, in PC+tMCAO the transcriptional activators Sp1 and
HIF-1 colocalized with histone acetyltransferase p300 on ncx1-Br with a
consequent hyperacetylation. In addition, in neurons silenced with siRNA of NCX1 
and subjected to oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) (3 h) plus reoxygenation
(RX) (24 h), the neuroprotection of Class I HDAC inhibitor MS-275 was
counteracted, whereas in neurons overexpressing NCX1 and subjected to ischemic
preconditioning (PC+OGD/RX), the neurotoxic effect of p300 inhibitor C646 was
prevented. Collectively, these results demonstrate that NCX1 expression is
regulated by the Sp3/REST/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex in tMCAO and by the Sp1/HIF-1/p300 
complex in PC+tMCAO and that epigenetic intervention, by modulating the
acetylation of ncx1-Br, may be a strategy for the development of innovative
therapeutic intervention in stroke.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357332-17$15.00/0.

PMID: 25972164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13757-71.

Loss of the deubiquitylase BAP1 alters class I histone deacetylase expression and
sensitivity of mesothelioma cells to HDAC inhibitors.

Sacco JJ(1), Kenyani J(1), Butt Z(1), Carter R(1), Chew HY(1,)(2), Cheeseman
LP(1,)(3), Darling S(1), Denny M(1), Urbé S(1), Clague MJ(1), Coulson JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Institute of Translational Medicine,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. (2)Current address: Cancer Stem Cell
Biology, Agency for Science Technology and Research, Genome Institute of
Singapore, Singapore. (3)Current address: MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
Cambridge, UK.

Histone deacetylases are important targets for cancer therapeutics, but their
regulation is poorly understood. Our data show coordinated transcription of HDAC1
and HDAC2 in lung cancer cell lines, but suggest HDAC2 protein expression is
cell-context specific. Through an unbiased siRNA screen we found that
BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) regulates their expression, with HDAC2 reduced 
and HDAC1 increased in BAP1 depleted cells. BAP1 loss-of-function is increasingly
reported in cancers including thoracic malignancies, with frequent mutation in
malignant pleural mesothelioma. Endogenous HDAC2 directly correlates with BAP1
across a panel of lung cancer cell lines, and is downregulated in mesothelioma
cell lines with genetic BAP1 inactivation. We find that BAP1 regulates HDAC2 by
increasing transcript abundance, rather than opposing its ubiquitylation.
Importantly, although total cellular HDAC activity is unaffected by transient
depletion of HDAC2 or of BAP1 due to HDAC1 compensation, this isoenzyme imbalance
sensitizes MSTO-211H cells to HDAC inhibitors. However, other established
mesothelioma cell lines with low endogenous HDAC2 have adapted to become more
resistant to HDAC inhibition. Our work establishes a mechanism by which BAP1 loss
alters sensitivity of cancer cells to HDAC inhibitors. Assessment of BAP1 and
HDAC expression may ultimately help identify patients likely to respond to HDAC
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4537048
PMID: 25970771  [PubMed - in process]


139. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015 Jul 15;309(2):L139-46. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00292.2014. Epub 2015 May 8.

Combination of erythromycin and dexamethasone improves corticosteroid sensitivity
induced by CSE through inhibiting PI3K-d/Akt pathway and increasing GR
expression.

Sun XJ(1), Li ZH(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhou G(1), Zhang JQ(1), Deng JM(1), Bai J(1),
Liu GN(1), Li MH(1), MacNee W(2), Zhong XN(3), He ZY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China; and. (2)EIGI Colt Laboratory,
Medical Research Council Center for Inflammation Research, Queen's Medical
Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China; and xnzhong101@sina.com.

Corticosteroid insensitivity, which is induced by cigarette smoke extract (CSE), 
is a significant barrier when treating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Erythromycin (EM) has been shown to have an anti-inflammatory role in
some chronic airway inflammatory diseases, particularly diffuse panbronchiolitis 
and cystic fibrosis. Here, we explored whether the combination therapy of EM and 
dexamethasone (Dex) reverses corticosteroid insensitivity and investigated the
molecular mechanism by which this occurs. We demonstrated that the combination of
EM and Dex restored corticosteroid sensitivity in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) from COPD patients and U937 cells after CSE exposure. Moreover,
pretreatment with 10, 50, or 100 µg/ml EM reversed the HDAC2 protein reduction
induced by CSE exposure in a dose-dependent manner. U937 cells exposed to CSE
show a reduction in histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity, which was potently
reversed by EM or combination treatment. Although 10 and 17.5% CSE increased
phosphorylated Akt (PAkt) expression in a concentration-dependent manner,
preapplication of EM and the combination treatment in particular blocked this
PAkt increase. Total Akt levels were unaffected by CSE or EM treatments.
Furthermore, the combination treatment enhanced glucocorticoid receptor (GR)a
expression. Our results demonstrate that the combination therapy of EM and Dex
can restore corticosteroid sensitivity through inhibition of the PI3K-d/Akt
pathway and enhancing GRa expression.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25957293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Jul 1;23(13):3457-71. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.04.028. Epub 
2015 Apr 16.

Discovery, bioactivity and docking simulation of Vorinostat analogues containing 
1,2,4-oxadiazole moiety as potent histone deacetylase inhibitors and antitumor
agents.

Cai J(1), Wei H(2), Hong KH(3), Wu X(4), Zong X(1), Cao M(5), Wang P(5), Li L(5),
Sun C(1), Chen B(5), Zhou G(5), Chen J(1), Ji M(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Institute of Pharmaceutical
Engineering, Southeast University, 87 Dingjiaqiao, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096, PR
China. (2)College of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural 
University, Qingdao 266109, PR China. (3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and
the Institute for Therapeutics Discovery and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biosciences,
University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA. (5)School of Biological Science & 
Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, PR China. (6)School of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Institute of Pharmaceutical Engineering,
Southeast University, 87 Dingjiaqiao, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096, PR China; School
of Biological Science & Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing
210096, PR China; Suzhou Key Laboratory of Biomaterials and Technologies &
Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Suzhou
215123, PR China. Electronic address: jimin@seu.edu.cn.

In our study, three series of hydroxamate, 2-aminobenzamide, and trifluoromethyl 
ketone analogues have been designed and synthesized. The synthesized compounds
were investigated for their in vitro antiproliferative activities using the
MTT-based assay against three human cancer cell lines including A549, NCI-H661,
and U937. Most analogues exhibited higher antiproliferative activities against
human acute myeloid leukemia cell U937 than the other two human lung cancer cell 
lines. Furthermore, the compounds were examined against HDAC1, 2, and 8 isoforms.
Docking study of compounds 6h, 9b, and 10a suggested that they might bind tightly
to the binding pocket of HDAC2 and/or HDAC8. The results suggest that these
compounds might have potential as lead compounds for the development of
anti-tumor drugs with HDACs inhibitory activities.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25953722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56(12):3426-33. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1034705. Epub 2015
May 26.

Analysis of class I and II histone deacetylase gene expression in human leukemia.

Yang H(1), Maddipoti S(1), Quesada A(1), Bohannan Z(1), Cabrero Calvo M(1), Colla
S(1), Wei Y(1), Estecio M(1,)(2), Wierda W(1), Bueso-Ramos C(3), Garcia-Manero
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Leukemia , University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center ,
Houston , TX , USA. (2)b Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis , University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , TX , USA. (3)c Department of
Hematopathology , University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , TX , 
USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are well-characterized anti-leukemia agents
and HDAC gene expression deregulation has been reported in various types of
cancers. This study sought to characterize HDAC gene expression patterns in
several types of leukemia. To do so, a systematic study was performed of the mRNA
expression of all drug-targetable HDACs for which reagents were available. This
was done by real-time PCR in 24 leukemia cell lines and 39 leukemia patients,
which included AML, MDS and CLL patients, some of whom received HDAC inhibitor
treatment. Among the samples analyzed, there was no discernible pattern in HDAC
expression. HDAC expression was generally increased in CLL patients, except for
HDAC2 and HDAC4. HDAC expression was also generally increased in VPA-treated
MOLT4 cells. However, this increased expression was not seen in AML patients
treated with vorinostat. In summary, increased HDAC expression was noted in CLL
patients in general, but the HDAC expression patterns in myeloid malignancies
appear to be heterogeneous, which implies that the role of HDACs in leukemia may 
be related to global expression or protein function rather than specific
expression patterns.

PMCID: PMC4762655 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 25944469  [PubMed - in process]


142. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 May;31(5):630-3, 638.

[Cigarette smoke extract induces senescence of murine skeletal muscle cells by
oxidative stress-induced down-regulation of histone deacetylase 2].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu W(1), Su W(1), Yang X(1), Bai J(1), Zhong X(1), He Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning 530021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether cigarette smoke extract (CSE) induces the
senescence of skeletal muscle cells by oxidative stress-induced down-regulation
of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2).
METHODS: C2C12 myoblasts were induced to differentiate into skeletal muscle
cells. H2O2 and N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) were used to investigate the effects of
CSE on oxidative stress, cell senescence and the expression of HDAC2 in skeletal 
muscle cells, and detect the changes of the activities of malondialdehyde (MDA), 
superoxide dismutase (SOD), reactive oxygen species (ROS) and glutathione
peroxidase (GSH-Px). Cell senescence was identified by senescence-associated
ß-galactosidase staining. The expressions of HDAC2 mRNA and protein were measured
by real-time quantitative PCR and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, MDA concentration and ROS activity
significantly increased, the activities of SOD and GSH-Px significantly
decreased, the expression of ß-galactosidase was up-regulated, and the
expressions of HDAC2 mRNA and protein were down-regulated in the CSE group and
the H2O2 group. However, the changes in the CSE group were reversed after the
pretreatment of NAC.
CONCLUSION: CSE may lead to the senescence of murine skeletal muscle cells by
oxidative stress-induced down-regulation of HDAC2.

PMID: 25940290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jun 23;43(11):5409-22. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv430. Epub 2015
May 1.

An HDAC2-TET1 switch at distinct chromatin regions significantly promotes the
maturation of pre-iPS to iPS cells.

Wei T(1), Chen W(1), Wang X(2), Zhang M(2), Chen J(1), Zhu S(1), Chen L(1), Yang 
D(1), Wang G(1), Jia W(1), Yu Y(1), Duan T(1), Wu M(3), Liu H(3), Gao S(1), Kang 
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Translational Research Center of Shanghai First Maternity &
Infant Hospital, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease Research,
School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, 1239 Siping Road,
Shanghai 200092, PR China. (2)Group of Epigenetic Reprogramming, State Key
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China. (3)Department of Embryology and Histology, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, PR China. (4)Clinical and Translational Research
Center of Shanghai First Maternity & Infant Hospital, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Signaling and Disease Research, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji
University, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, PR China jhkang@tongji.edu.cn.

The maturation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) is one of the limiting
steps of somatic cell reprogramming, but the underlying mechanism is largely
unknown. Here, we reported that knockdown of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)
specifically promoted the maturation of iPS cells. Further studies showed that
HDAC2 knockdown significantly increased histone acetylation, facilitated TET1
binding and DNA demethylation at the promoters of iPS cell maturation-related
genes during the transition of pre-iPS cells to a fully reprogrammed state. We
also found that HDAC2 competed with TET1 in the binding of the RbAp46 protein at 
the promoters of maturation genes and knockdown of TET1 markedly prevented the
activation of these genes. Collectively, our data not only demonstrated a novel
intrinsic mechanism that the HDAC2-TET1 switch critically regulates iPS cell
maturation, but also revealed an underlying mechanism of the interplay between
histone acetylation and DNA demethylation in gene regulation.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4477660
PMID: 25934799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2015 Jul;48(7):654-64. doi: 10.1590/1414-431X20154271. Epub 
2015 Apr 28.

Treatment with 1,25(OH)2D3 induced HDAC2 expression and reduced NF-<U+03BA>B p65
expression in a rat model of OVA-induced asthma.

Zhou Y(1), Wang GF(1), Yang L(1), Liu F(1), Kang JQ(1), Wang RL(1), Gu W(1), Wang
CY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology Medicine, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiatong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Recent evidence indicates that a deficiency of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25[OH]2D3) may influence asthma pathogenesis; however, its roles in regulating
specific molecular transcription mechanisms remain unclear. We aimed to
investigate the effect of 1,25(OH)2D3 on the expression and enzyme activity of
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and its synergistic effects with dexamethasone (Dx)
in the inhibition of inflammatory cytokine secretion in a rat asthma model.
Healthy Wistar rats were randomly divided into 6 groups: control, asthma,
1,25(OH)2D3 pretreatment, 1,25(OH)2D3 treatment, Dx treatment, and Dx and
1,25(OH)2D3 treatment. Pulmonary inflammation was induced by ovalbumin (OVA)
sensitization and challenge (OVA/OVA). Inflammatory cells and cytokines in the
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and histological changes in lung tissue were
examined. Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) p65 and HDAC2 expression levels were
assessed with Western blot analyses and quantitative reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Enzyme activity measurements and
immunohistochemical detection of HDAC2 were also performed. Our data demonstrated
that 1,25(OH)2D3 reduced the airway inflammatory response and the level of
inflammatory cytokines in BAL. Although NF-<U+03BA>B p65 expression was attenuated in
the pretreatment and treatment groups, the expression and enzyme activity of
HDAC2 were increased. In addition, 1,25(OH)2D3 and Dx had synergistic effects on 
the suppression of total cell infusion, cytokine release, and NF-<U+03BA>B p65
expression, and they also increased HDAC2 expression and activity in OVA/OVA
rats. Collectively, our results indicated that 1,25(OH)2D3 might be useful as a
novel HDAC2 activator in the treatment of asthma.

PMCID: PMC4512106
PMID: 25923460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(8):3543-9.

Differentially expressed genes in metastatic advanced Egyptian bladder cancer.

Zekri AR(1), Hassan ZK, Bahnassy AA, Khaled HM, El-Rouby MN, Haggag RM, Abu-Taleb
FM.

Author information: 
(1)Virology and Immunology Unit, Cancer Biology Department, National Cancer
Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt E-mail : hildahafez@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Bladder cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Gene
expression profiling using microarray technologies improves the understanding of 
cancer biology. The aim of this study was to determine the gene expression
profile in Egyptian bladder cancer patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Samples from 29 human bladder cancers and adjacent
non-neoplastic tissues were analyzed by cDNA microarray, with hierarchical
clustering and multidimensional analysis.
RESULTS: Five hundred and sixteen genes were differentially expressed of which
SOS1, HDAC2, PLXNC1, GTSE1, ULK2, IRS2, ABCA12, TOP3A, HES1, and SRP68 genes were
involved in 33 different pathways. The most frequently detected genes were: SOS1 
in 20 different pathways; HDAC2 in 5 different pathways; IRS2 in 3 different
pathways. There were 388 down-regulated genes. PLCB2 was involved in 11 different
pathways, MDM2 in 9 pathways, FZD4 in 5 pathways, p15 and FGF12 in 4 pathways,
POLE2 in 3 pathways, and MCM4 and POLR2E in 2 pathways. Thirty genes showed
significant differences between transitional cell cancer (TCC) and squamous cell 
cancer (SCC) samples. Unsupervised cluster analysis of DNA microarray data
revealed a clear distinction between low and high grade tumors. In addition 26
genes showed significant differences between low and high tumor stages, including
fragile histidine triad, Ras and sialyltransferase 8 (alpha) and 16 showed
significant differences between low and high tumor grades, like methionine
adenosyl transferase II, beta.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study identified some genes, that can be used as
molecular biomarkers or target genes in Egyptian bladder cancer patients.

PMID: 25921176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eur J Med Chem. 2015;96:1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.04.002. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Discovery and preliminary evaluation of 2-aminobenzamide and hydroxamate
derivatives containing 1,2,4-oxadiazole moiety as potent histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Cai J(1), Wei H(2), Hong KH(3), Wu X(4), Cao M(5), Zong X(1), Li L(5), Sun C(1), 
Chen J(1), Ji M(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Institute of Pharmaceutical
Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096, PR China. (2)College 
of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University,
Qingdao 266109, PR China. (3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and the Institute 
for Therapeutics Discovery and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN 55414, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, KS 66045, USA. (5)School of Biological Science & Medical Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, PR China. (6)School of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Institute of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096, PR China; School of Biological Science &
Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, PR China; Suzhou Key
Laboratory of Biomaterials and Technologies & Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Suzhou 215123, PR China. Electronic address: 
jimin@seu.edu.cn.

Using Entinostat as a lead compound, 2-aminobenzamide and hydroxamate derivatives
have been designed and synthesized. The entire target compounds were investigated
for their in vitro antiproliferative activities using the MTT-based assay against
five human cancer cell lines including U937, A549, NCI-H661, MDA-MB-231 and
HCT116. 2-Aminobenzamide series of compounds (10a-10j) demonstrated the most
significant inhibition against human acute monocytic myeloid leukemia cell line
U937, but no or poor activities against two human lung cancer cell lines.
Furthermore, the target compounds were screened for their inhibitory activities
against HDAC 1, 2, and 8. 2-Aminobenzamide derivatives (10) manifested a higher
selectivity for HDAC 1 over HDAC 2, but were not active against HDAC 8. In
contrast, most hydroxamate derivatives (11) inhibit HDAC 8 with lower IC50 values
than SAHA and Entinostat. Docking study with selected compounds 10f and 11a
revealed that the compounds might bind tightly to the binding pockets in HDAC 2
and HDAC 8, respectively. The results suggest that they may be promising lead
compounds for the development of novel anti-tumor drug potentially via inhibiting
HDACs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25874326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Jul;19(7):1742-55. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12550. Epub 2015 Apr
11.

Belinostat, a potent HDACi, exerts antileukaemic effect in human acute
promyelocytic leukaemia cells via chromatin remodelling.

Valiuliene G(1), Stirblyte I(1), Cicenaite D(1), Kaupinis A(2), Valius M(2),
Navakauskiene R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania. (2)Proteomics Centre, Institute of Biochemistry, 
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Epigenetic changes play a significant role in leukaemia pathogenesis, therefore
histone deacetylases (HDACis) are widely accepted as an attractive strategy for
acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) treatment. Belinostat (Bel, PXD101), a
hydroxamate-type HDACi, has proved to be a promising cure in clinical trials for 
solid tumours and haematological malignancies. However, insight into molecular
effects of Bel on APL, is still lacking. In this study, we investigated the
effect of Bel alone and in combination with differentiation inducer retinoic acid
(RA) on human promyelocytic leukaemia NB4 and HL-60 cells. We found that
treatment with Bel, depending on the dosage used, inhibits cell proliferation,
whereas in combination with RA enhances and accelerates granulocytic leukaemia
cell differentiation. We also evaluated the effect of used treatments with Bel
and RA on certain epigenetic modifiers (HDAC1, HDAC2, PCAF) as well as cell cycle
regulators (p27) gene expression and protein level modulation. We showed that Bel
in combination with RA up-regulates basal histone H4 hyperacetylation level more 
strongly compared to Bel or RA alone. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assay indicated that Bel induces the accumulation of hyperacetylated histone H4
at the p27 promoter region. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that in control
NB4 cells, hyperacetylated histone H4 is mainly found in association with
proteins involved in DNA replication and transcription, whereas after Bel
treatment it is found with proteins implicated in pro-apoptotic processes, in
defence against oxidative stress and tumour suppression. Summarizing, our study
provides some novel insights into the molecular mechanisms of HDACi Bel action on
APL cells.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4511371
PMID: 25864732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Oct;28(2):813-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.03.050.
Epub 2015 Apr 9.

Molecular control of CD4(+) T cell lineage plasticity and integrity.

Ellmeier W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology, Center for
Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna,
Lazarettgasse 19, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
wilfried.ellmeier@meduniwien.ac.at.

CD4(+) helper T cells and CD8(+) cytotoxic T cells form the two major subsets of 
peripheral T lymphocytes. Helper T cells fulfill crucial roles in the activation 
and coordination of the immune response, while cytotoxic T cells kill
virus-infected or tumor cells. Recent data suggest that the lineage identify of
helper T cells is not fixed and that CD4(+) T cells under certain physiological
conditions can be reprogrammed to express CD8 lineage genes and to develop into
intestinal intraepithelial CD4(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes that lack the
expression of the key helper T cell lineage commitment factor ThPOK. Moreover,
the analysis of mice with a conditional deletion of the transcription factor
ThPOK or the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 indicated that CD8 lineage
genes are actively repressed in CD4(+) T cells in order to maintain the lineage
integrity of helper T cells. In this review I summarize recent studies that
indicate plasticity of CD4(+) T cells towards a CTL program and that demonstrate 
that ThPOK and HDAC1-HDAC2 are part of a transcriptional regulatory circuit that 
counteracts the activity of the transcription factor Runx3 to maintain CD4(+) T
cell lineage integrity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25864621  [PubMed - in process]


149. J Clin Diagn Res. 2015 Feb;9(2):OC10-3. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/10803.5527. Epub
2015 Feb 1.

The Study of Efficacy, Tolerability and Safety of Theophylline Given Along with
Formoterol Plus Budesonide in COPD.

Subramanian(1), Ragulan(1), Jindal A(2), Viswambhar V(3), V AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & 
Research Institute , Chennai, India . (2)Post Graduate Student, Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & Research Institute , Chennai, India . 
(3)Assistant Professor, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital & 
Research Institute , Chennai, India .

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common disease
causing significant socioeconomic burden. COPD patients, commonly smokers develop
resistance to inhaled steroids attributed to deficiency of histone deacetylase 2 
(HDAC2). The study of relationship between systemic inflammation and functional
performance demonstrated that increased CRP level is inversely related to six
minute walk distance (SMWD) and Forced Expired Volume in one second (FEV1).
Theophylline restores HDAC2 activity thereby unlocking steroid resistance and
potentiating inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) action culminating in reduced airway
inflammation and mortality.
AIM: To study the effects of addition of Theophylline to the combination of
Formoterol plus Budesonide on various objective and subjective parameters in
moderate to severe COPD patients and to assess the safety profile of the
combination. Setting and Study design: A single blinded, prospective, randomized,
placebo controlled study at a tertiary care hospital in Jaipur, India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty eight patients diagnosed with moderate to severe
COPD were randomized into two groups. Group A patients received Formoterol 24µg
plus budesonide 800µg daily in divided doses along with Theophylline while group 
B patients received Formoterol 24µg plus budesonide 800µg daily in divided doses 
along with placebo tablets. Both groups were followed up on 15th, 30th &60th day.
During every visit all patients were assessed subjectively (symptom scoring) and 
objectively (spirometry, CRP, SMWT) and adverse effects if any were recorded. The
obtained data subject to statistical analysis using"Graph pad Instat3" software.
RESULTS: Statistically significant improvement with a decline in total symptom
score (p < 0.0001) was found with respect to "Night symptoms"&"SOB on rising" in 
group A. Theophylline group showed significant improvement in SMWD and FEV1.Mean 
fall in CRP was greater in Group A (not statistically significant). No side
effects requiring withdrawal of drug were noted with Theophylline.
CONCLUSION: Addition of Theophylline to Formoterol plus Budesonide reduces
dyspnea, improves exercise performance and pulmonary functions in moderate to
severe COPD. Further studies are required to explore if reduced dosage would have
equal efficacy with better safety and tolerability profile.

PMCID: PMC4378761
PMID: 25859479  [PubMed]


150. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2015 Apr 3;3:22. doi: 10.1186/s40478-015-0201-7.

Targeting class I histone deacetylase 2 in MYC amplified group 3 medulloblastoma.

Ecker J, Oehme I, Mazitschek R, Korshunov A, Kool M, Hielscher T, Kiss J, Selt F,
Konrad C, Lodrini M, Deubzer HE, von Deimling A, Kulozik AE, Pfister SM, Witt O, 
Milde T.

INTRODUCTION: Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most frequent malignant brain tumor in 
children. Four subgroups with distinct genetic, epigenetic and clinical
characteristics have been identified. Survival remains particularly poor in
patients with Group 3 tumors harbouring a MYC amplification. We herein explore
the molecular mechanisms and translational implications of class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition in MYC driven MBs.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Expression of HDACs in primary MB subgroups was compared to
normal brain tissue. A panel of MB cell lines, including Group 3 MYC amplified
cell lines, were used as model systems. Cells were treated with HDAC inhibitors
(HDACi) selectively targeting class I or IIa HDACs. Depletion of HDAC2 was
performed. Intracellular HDAC activity, cellular viability, metabolic activity,
caspase activity, cell cycle progression, RNA and protein expression were
analyzed.
RESULTS: HDAC2 was found to be overexpressed in MB subgroups with poor prognosis 
(SHH, Group 3 and Group 4) compared to normal brain and the WNT subgroup.
Inhibition of the enzymatic activity of the class I HDACs reduced metabolic
activity, cell number, and viability in contrast to inhibition of class IIa
HDACs. Increased sensitivity to HDACi was specifically observed in MYC amplified 
cells. Depletion of HDAC2 increased H4 acetylation and induced cell death.
Simulation of clinical pharmacokinetics showed time-dependent on target activity 
that correlated with binding kinetics of HDACi compounds.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that HDAC2 is a valid drug target in patients with MYC
amplified MB. HDACi should cover HDAC2 in their inhibitory profile and timing and
dosing regimen in clinical trials should take binding kinetics of compounds into 
consideration.

PMCID: PMC4382927
PMID: 25853389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jul 5;409:51-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.03.023. Epub
2015 Apr 2.

Selective inhibition of prostaglandin E2 receptors EP2 and EP4 modulates DNA
methylation and histone modification machinery proteins in human endometriotic
cells.

Arosh JA(1), Lee J(2), Starzinski-Powitz A(3), Banu SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Endocrinology and Cell Signaling Laboratory, Department of
Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
Texas A&M University, College Station, 77843 Texas, USA. Electronic address:
jarosh@cvm.tamu.edu. (2)Reproductive Endocrinology and Cell Signaling Laboratory,
Department of Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 77843 Texas, USA.
(3)Molekulare Zellbiologie und Humangenetik, Institut für Zellbiologie und
Neurowissenschaft, Siesmayerstraße 70, Geb. B, 60323 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Endometriosis is an inflammatory gynecological disease of reproductive-age women.
The prevalence of endometriosis is 5-10% in reproductive-age women. Modern
medical treatments are directed to inhibit the action of estrogen in
endometriotic cells. However, hormonal therapies targeting estrogen can be
prescribed only for a short time because of their undesirable side effects.
Recent studies from our laboratory, using human endometriotic epithelial cell
line 12Z and stromal cell line 22B derived from red lesion, discovered that
selective inhibition of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) receptors EP2 and EP4 inhibits
adhesion, invasion, growth, and survival of 12Z and 22B cells by modulating
integrins, MMPs and TIMPs, cell cycle, survival, and intrinsic apoptotic
pathways, suggesting multiple epigenetic mechanisms. The novel findings of the
present study indicate that selective pharmacological inhibition of EP2 and EP4: 
(i) decreases expression of DNMT3a, DNMT3b, H3K9me3, H3K27me3, SUV39H1, HP1a,
H3K27, EZH2, JMJD2a, HDAC1, HDAC3, MeCP2, CoREST and Sin3A; (ii) increases
expression of H3K4me3, H3H9ac, H3K27ac; and (iii) does not modulate the
expression of DNMT1, hSET1, LSD1, MBD1, p300, HDAC2, and JMJD3 epigenetic
machinery proteins in an epithelial and stromal cell specific manner. In this
study, we report for the first time that inhibition of PGE2-EP2/EP4 signaling
modulates DNA methylation, H3 histone methylation and acetylation, and epigenetic
memory machinery proteins in human endometriotic epithelial cells and stromal
cells. Thus, targeting EP2 and EP4 receptors may emerge as long-term nonsteroidal
therapy for treatment of active endometriotic lesions in women.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25843056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Oct;82:607-19. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.03.019. Epub 2015 Mar 
24.

Potential role of adolescent alcohol exposure-induced amygdaloid histone
modifications in anxiety and alcohol intake during adulthood.

Pandey SC(1), Sakharkar AJ(2), Tang L(2), Zhang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL
60612, USA; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA; Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: scpandey@uic.edu. (2)Department of
Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA; Jesse
Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Binge drinking is common during adolescence and can lead to the development of
psychiatric disorders, including alcoholism in adulthood. Here, the role and
persistent effects of histone modifications during adolescent intermittent
ethanol (AIE) exposure in the development of anxiety and alcoholism in adulthood 
were investigated. Rats received intermittent ethanol exposure during post-natal 
days 28-41, and anxiety-like behaviors were measured after 1 and 24 h of the last
AIE. The effects of AIE on anxiety-like and alcohol-drinking behaviors in
adulthood were measured with or without treatment with the histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA). Amygdaloid brain regions were collected
to measure HDAC activity, global and gene-specific histone H3 acetylation,
expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and activity-regulated
cytoskeleton-associated (Arc) protein and dendritic spine density (DSD).
Adolescent rats displayed anxiety-like behaviors after 24 h, but not 1 h, of last
AIE with a concomitant increase in nuclear and cytosolic amygdaloid HDAC activity
and HDAC2 and HDAC4 levels leading to deficits in histone (H3-K9) acetylation in 
the central (CeA) and medial (MeA), but not in basolateral nucleus of amygdala
(BLA). Interestingly, some of AIE-induced epigenetic changes such as, increased
nuclear HDAC activity, HDAC2 expression, and decreased global histone acetylation
persisted in adulthood. In addition, AIE decreased BDNF exons I and IV and Arc
promoter specific histone H3 acetylation that was associated with decreased BDNF,
Arc expression and DSD in the CeA and MeA during adulthood. AIE also induced
anxiety-like behaviors and enhanced ethanol intake in adulthood, which was
attenuated by TSA treatment via normalization of deficits in histone H3
acetylation of BDNF and Arc genes. These novel results indicate that AIE induces 
long-lasting effects on histone modifications and deficits in synaptic events in 
the amygdala, which are associated with anxiety-like and alcohol drinking
behaviors in adulthood.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4581895 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25814047  [PubMed - in process]


153. J Mol Biol. 2015 May 22;427(10):1949-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.03.010. Epub
2015 Mar 24.

The pentameric nucleoplasmin fold is present in Drosophila FKBP39 and a large
number of chromatin-related proteins.

Edlich-Muth C(1), Artero JB(2), Callow P(2), Przewloka MR(3), Watson AA(1), Zhang
W(1), Glover DM(3), Debski J(4), Dadlez M(4), Round AR(5), Forsyth VT(2), Laue
ED(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, CB2
1GA Cambridge, United Kingdom. (2)Life Sciences Group, Institut Laue-Langevin, 71
Avenue des Martyrs, CS 20156, Grenoble, Cedex 9, France; Faculty of Natural
Sciences, Keele University, ST5 5BG Staffordshire, United Kingdom. (3)Department 
of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, CB2 3EH Cambridge, United
Kingdom. (4)Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Department of Biophysics, Institute of 
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 5A Pawinskiego Street,
02-106 Warsaw, Poland. (5)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Grenoble
Outstation, 71 Avenue des Martyrs, 38042 Grenoble, France; Unit for Virus
Host-Cell Interactions, University Grenoble Alpes-European Molecular Biology
Laboratory-CNRS, 71 Avenue des Martyrs, 38042 Grenoble, France; Faculty of
Natural Sciences, Keele University, ST5 5BG Staffordshire, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, CB2
1GA Cambridge, United Kingdom. Electronic address: e.d.laue@bioc.cam.ac.uk.

Nucleoplasmin is a histone chaperone that consists of a pentameric N-terminal
domain and an unstructured C-terminal tail. The pentameric core domain, a
doughnut-like structure with a central pore, is only found in the nucleoplasmin
family. Here, we report the first structure of a nucleoplasmin-like domain (NPL) 
from the unrelated Drosophila protein, FKBP39, and we present evidence that this 
protein associates with chromatin. Furthermore, we show that two other chromatin 
proteins, Arabidopsis thaliana histone deacetylase type 2 (HD2) and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae Fpr4, share the NPL fold and form pentamers, or a dimer of pentamers
in the case of HD2. Thus, we propose a new family of proteins that share the
pentameric nucleoplasmin-like NPL domain and are found in protists, fungi, plants
and animals.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4414354
PMID: 25813344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 26;11(3):e1004785. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004785.
eCollection 2015.

Positive role of promyelocytic leukemia protein in type I interferon response and
its regulation by human cytomegalovirus.

Kim YE(1), Ahn JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea.

Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML), a major component of PML nuclear bodies
(also known as nuclear domain 10), is involved in diverse cellular processes such
as cell proliferation, apoptosis, gene regulation, and DNA damage response. PML
also acts as a restriction factor that suppresses incoming viral genomes,
therefore playing an important role in intrinsic defense. Here, we show that PML 
positively regulates type I interferon response by promoting transcription of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and that this regulation by PML is
counteracted by human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) IE1 protein. Small hairpin
RNA-mediated PML knockdown in human fibroblasts reduced ISG induction by
treatment of interferon-ß or infection with UV-inactivated HCMV. PML was required
for accumulation of activated STAT1 and STAT2, interacted with them and HDAC1 and
HDAC2, and was associated with ISG promoters after HCMV infection. During HCMV
infection, viral IE1 protein interacted with PML, STAT1, STAT2, and HDACs.
Analysis of IE1 mutant viruses revealed that, in addition to the STAT2-binding
domain, the PML-binding domain of IE1 was necessary for suppression of
interferon-ß-mediated ISG transcription, and that IE1 inhibited ISG transcription
by sequestering interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) in a manner requiring
its binding of PML and STAT2, but not of HDACs. In conclusion, our results
demonstrate that PML participates in type I interferon-induced ISG expression by 
regulating ISGF3, and that this regulation by PML is counteracted by HCMV IE1,
highlighting a widely shared viral strategy targeting PML to evade intrinsic and 
innate defense mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4374831
PMID: 25812002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Phytother Res. 2015 Jun;29(6):925-32. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5334. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

The Flavonoid 7,4'-Dihydroxyflavone Inhibits MUC5AC Gene Expression, Production, 
and Secretion via Regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT6, and HDAC2.

Liu C(1), Weir D(2), Busse P(2), Yang N(1), Zhou Z(1,)(3), Emala C(4), Li XM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA. (3)Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China. (4)Department of Anesthesiology, Columbia University, New York,
NY, USA.

Mucus overproduction is a significant component of the pathophysiology of
obstructive lung diseases. Currently, there are only a few medications available 
that inhibit mucus production. Previous studies showed that glycyrrhizin, a
triterpenoid in Glycyrrhiza uralensis inhibits mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) mRNA and
protein expression. Other potential mucus production inhibitory compounds
contained within in G.<U+2009>uralensis have not been fully investigated. The aim of the
present study was to determine if the G.<U+2009>uralensis flavonoid
7,4'-dihydroxyflavone (7,4'-DHF) inhibits MUC5AC gene expression, mucus
production, and secretion, and if so, to elucidate the mechanism of this
inhibition. 7,4'-Dihydroxyflavone significantly decreased phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate-stimulated NCI-H292 human airway epithelial cell MUC5AC gene
expression and mucus production, at a 28-fold lower concentration than
glycyrrhizin (The half maximal inhibitory concentration IC50 value of 1.4<U+2009>µM vs
38<U+2009>µM, respectively); 7,4'-DHF also inhibited MUC5AC mucus secretion. Inhibition 
was associated with the suppression of nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer 
of activated B cells (NF-<U+03BA>B), signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 
(STAT6) activation, and enhanced histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) expression. In a
murine model of asthma, 7,4'-DHF-treated mice exhibited a marked reduction in
MUC5AC secretion in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid compared with control mice. 
These findings, together with previous findings linking NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT6, and HDAC2
modulation to the control of MUC5AC expression, demonstrate that 7,4'-DHF is a
newly identified component of G.<U+2009>uralensis that regulates MUC5AC expression and
secretion via regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT6, and HDAC2.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4706450 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25809288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Am J Hematol. 2015 Jul;90(7):624-8. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24019. Epub 2015 May 28.

Inactivation of HDAC1 or HDAC2 induces gamma globin expression without altering
cell cycle or proliferation.

Esrick EB(1,)(2), McConkey M(3), Lin K(3), Frisbee A(3), Ebert BL(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Harvard Medical School, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (3)Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Other than hydroxyurea, no pharmacologic agents are clinically available for
fetal hemoglobin (HbF) induction in sickle cell disease (SCD). An optimal
candidate would induce HbF without causing cell cycle inhibition and would act
independently of hydroxyurea in order to yield additional HbF induction when
combined. We explored whether inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 or HDAC2
could achieve these goals. In human erythroid progenitor cells, shRNA knockdown
of the HDAC1 or HDAC2 genes induced gamma globin, without altering cellular
proliferation in vitro, and without altering cell cycle phase. Treatment with
hydroxyurea in combination with HDAC2 knockdown yielded a further increase in
gamma globin expression. Additionally, when CD34+ cells were treated with both
hydroxyurea and MS-275 (an inhibitor of HDAC 1, 2, and 3), an additive induction 
of relative gamma globin expression was achieved. Our findings support further
clinical investigation of HDAC inhibitors in combination with hydroxyurea in SCD 
patients.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25808664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Med Food. 2015 Jul;18(7):793-801. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2014.3342. Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Gallic Acid Decreases Inflammatory Cytokine Secretion Through Histone
Acetyltransferase/Histone Deacetylase Regulation in High Glucose-Induced Human
Monocytes.

Lee W(1), Lee SY(2), Son YJ(3), Yun JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Science & Technology, Samsung Medical 
Center , Seoul, South Korea . (2)2 Department of Life Science, Gachon University 
, Kyeonggi, South Korea . (3)3 Department of Pharmacy, Sunchon National
University , Sunchon, Jeonnam, South Korea . (4)4 Department of Food and
Nutrition, Chonnam National University , Gwangju, South Korea .

Hyperglycemia contributes to diabetes and several diabetes-related complications.
Gallic acid is a polyhydroxy phenolic compound found in various natural products.
In this study, we investigated the effects and mechanism of gallic acid on
proinflammatory cytokine secretion in high glucose-induced human monocytes (THP-1
cells). THP-1 cells were cultured under normoglycemic or hyperglycemic
conditions, in the absence or presence of gallic acid. Hyperglycemic conditions
significantly induced histone acetylation, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation, 
and proinflammatory cytokine release from THP-1 cells, whereas gallic acid
suppressed NF-<U+03BA>B activity and cytokine release. It also significantly reduced
CREB-binding protein/p300 (CBP/p300, a NF-<U+03BA>B coactivator) gene expression,
acetylation levels, and CBP/p300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. In
addition, histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) expression was significantly induced.
These results suggest that gallic acid inhibits hyperglycemic-induced cytokine
production in monocytes through epigenetic changes involving NF-<U+03BA>B. Therefore,
gallic acid may have potential for the treatment and prevention of diabetes and
its complications.

PMID: 25807193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 10;6(10):8089-102.

MicroRNA-31 functions as a tumor suppressor by regulating cell cycle and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition regulatory proteins in liver cancer.

Kim HS(1,)(2), Lee KS(3), Bae HJ(1,)(2), Eun JW(1,)(2), Shen Q(1,)(2), Park
SJ(1,)(2), Shin WC(1,)(2), Yang HD(1,)(2), Park M(1,)(2), Park WS(1,)(2), Kang
YK(3), Nam SW(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Oncogenomics, Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Functional RNomics
Research Center, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea, Gyeonggi-do, Korea. (4)Cancer Evolution Research Center, Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

MicroRNA-31 (miR-31) is among the most frequently altered microRNAs in human
cancers and altered expression of miR-31 has been detected in a large variety of 
tumor types, but the functional role of miR-31 still hold both tumor suppressive 
and oncogenic roles in different tumor types. MiR-31 expression was
down-regulated in a large cohort of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients, and 
low expression of miR-31 was significantly associated with poor prognosis of HCC 
patients. Ectopic expression of miR-31 mimics suppressed HCC cell growth by
transcriptional deregulation of cell cycle proteins. Additional study evidenced
miR-31 directly to suppress HDAC2 and CDK2 expression by inhibiting mRNA
translation in HCC cells. We also found that ectopic expression of miR-31 mimics 
reduced metastatic potential of HCC cells by selectively regulating
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulatory proteins such as N-cadherin,
E-cadherin, vimentin and fibronectin. HCC tissues derived from chemical-induced
rat liver cancer models validated that miR-31 expression is significantly
down-regulated, and that those cell cycle- and EMT-regulatory proteins are
deregulated in rat liver cancer. Overall, we suggest that miR-31 functions as a
tumor suppressor by selectively regulating cell cycle and EMT regulatory proteins
in human hepatocarcinogenesis providing a novel target for the molecular
treatment of liver malignancies.

PMCID: PMC4480737
PMID: 25797269  [PubMed - in process]


159. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 May;82:201-12. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.03.011. Epub
2015 Mar 17.

miR-200c-SUMOylated KLF4 feedback loop acts as a switch in transcriptional
programs that control VSMC proliferation.

Zheng B(1), Bernier M(2), Zhang XH(3), Suzuki T(4), Nie CQ(3), Li YH(3), Zhang
Y(5), Song LL(3), Shi HJ(3), Liu Y(3), Zheng CY(3), Wen JK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hebei Medical University,
Zhongshan East Road, Shijiazhuang 050017, China. Electronic address:
doublezb@sina.com. (2)Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National Institute on
Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (3)Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hebei Medical University, Zhongshan East
Road, Shijiazhuang 050017, China. (4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Urinary Surgery, Second
Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Pingan Road, Shijiazhuang 050000, China.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hebei Medical University,
Zhongshan East Road, Shijiazhuang 050017, China. Electronic address:
wjk@hebmu.edu.cn.

The regulation of vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation is an
important issue because it has major implications for the prevention of
pathological vascular conditions. Using microRNA array screen, we found the
expression levels of 200 unique miRNAs in hyperplasic tissues. Among them,
miR-200c expression substantially was down-regulated. The objective of this work 
was to assess the function of miR-200c and SUMOylated Kr<U+03CB>ppel-like transcription 
factor 4 (KLF4) in the regulation of VSMC proliferation in both cultured cells
and animal models of balloon injury. Under basal conditions, we found that
miR-200c inhibited the expression of KLF4 and the SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9.
Upon PDGF-BB treatment, Ubc9 interacted with and promoted the SUMOylation of
KLF4, which allowed the recruitment of transcriptional corepressors (e.g.,
nuclear receptor corepressor (NCoR) and HDAC2) to the miR-200c promoter. The
reduction in miR-200c levels led to increased target gene expression (e.g., Ubc9 
and KLF4), which further repressed miR-200c levels and accelerated VSMC
proliferation. These results demonstrate that induction of a miR-200c-SUMOylated 
KLF4 feedback loop is a significant aspect of the PDGF-BB proliferative response 
in VSMCs and that targeting Ubc9 represents a novel approach for the prevention
of restenosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25791170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Jun;83:14-20. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.03.010. Epub
2015 Mar 16.

Non-sirtuin histone deacetylases in the control of cardiac aging.

Ferguson BS(1), McKinsey TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado,
Denver, 12700 E. 19th Ave Aurora, CO 80045-0508, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, 
Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado, Denver, 12700 E. 19th Ave Aurora,
CO 80045-0508, USA. Electronic address: timothy.mckinsey@ucdenver.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the removal of acetyl-groups from lysine
residues within nucelosomal histone tails and thousands of non-histone proteins. 
The 18 mammalian HDACs are grouped into four classes. Classes I, II and IV HDACs 
employ zinc as a co-factor for catalytic activity, while class III HDACs (also
known as sirtuins) require NAD+ for enzymatic function. Small molecule inhibitors
of zinc-dependent HDACs are efficacious in multiple pre-clinical models of
pressure overload and ischemic cardiomyopathy, reducing pathological hypertrophy 
and fibrosis, and improving contractile function. Emerging data have revealed
numerous mechanisms by which HDAC inhibitors benefit the heart, including
suppression of oxidative stress and inflammation, inhibition of MAP kinase
signaling, and enhancement of cardiac protein aggregate clearance and autophagic 
flux. Here, we summarize recent findings with zinc-dependent HDACs and HDAC
inhibitors in the heart, focusing on newly described functions for distinct HDAC 
isoforms (e.g. HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC6). Potential for pharmacological HDAC
inhibition as a means of treating age-related cardiac dysfunction is also
discussed. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: CV Aging.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4459895 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25791169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Chest. 2016 Jan;149(1):62-73. doi: 10.1378/chest.14-2637. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Oxidative and Nitrosative Stress and Histone Deacetylase-2 Activity in
Exacerbations of COPD.

Footitt J(1), Mallia P(1), Durham AL(2), Ho WE(3), Trujillo-Torralbo MB(4),
Telcian AG(5), Del Rosario A(4), Chang C(3), Peh HY(3), Kebadze T(5), Aniscenko
J(5), Stanciu L(5), Essilfie-Quaye S(2), Ito K(2), Barnes PJ(2), Elkin SL(4), Kon
OM(1), Wong WS(3), Adcock IM(2), Johnston SL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Infection Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College, London, England; Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, England;
Centre for Respiratory Infection, Imperial College, London, England. (2)Airways
Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London,
England. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University Health System, Singapore. (4)Airway Disease Infection Section,
National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, England; Imperial
College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, England. (5)Airway Disease Infection
Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, England.
(6)Airway Disease Infection Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College, London, England; Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, England;
Centre for Respiratory Infection, Imperial College, London, England. Electronic
address: s.johnston@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Respiratory virus infections are commonly associated with COPD
exacerbations, but little is known about the mechanisms linking virus infection
to exacerbations. Pathogenic mechanisms in stable COPD include oxidative and
nitrosative stress and reduced activity of histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2), but
their roles in COPD exacerbations is unknown. We investigated oxidative and
nitrosative stress (O&NS) and HDAC2 in COPD exacerbations using experimental
rhinovirus infection.
METHODS: Nine subjects with COPD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung 
Disease stage II), 10 smokers, and 11 nonsmokers were successfully infected with 
rhinovirus. Markers of O&NS-associated cellular damage, and inflammatory
mediators and proteases were measured in sputum, and HDAC2 activity was measured 
in sputum and bronchoalveolar macrophages. In an in vitro model, monocyte-derived
THP-1 cells were infected with rhinovirus and nitrosylation and activity of HDAC2
was measured.
RESULTS: Rhinovirus infection induced significant increases in airways
inflammation and markers of O&NS in subjects with COPD. O&NS markers correlated
with virus load and inflammatory markers. Macrophage HDAC2 activity was reduced
during exacerbation and correlated inversely with virus load, inflammatory
markers, and nitrosative stress. Sputum macrophage HDAC2 activity pre-infection
was inversely associated with sputum virus load and inflammatory markers during
exacerbation. Rhinovirus infection of monocytes induced nitrosylation of HDAC2
and reduced HDAC2 activity; inhibition of O&NS inhibited rhinovirus-induced
inflammatory cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: O&NS, airways inflammation, and impaired HDAC2 may be important
mechanisms of virus-induced COPD exacerbations. Therapies targeting these
mechanisms offer potential new treatments for COPD exacerbations.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4700054
PMID: 25790167  [PubMed - in process]


162. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 18;5:9222. doi: 10.1038/srep09222.

Designed angiopoietin-1 variant, COMP-angiopoietin-1, rescues erectile function
through healthy cavernous angiogenesis in a hypercholesterolemic mouse.

Ryu JK(1), Kim WJ(2), Koh YJ(3), Piao S(2), Jin HR(2), Lee SW(4), Choi MJ(2),
Shin HY(2), Kwon MH(2), Jung K(3), Koh GY(3), Suh JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] National Research Center for Sexual Medicine and Department of Urology,
Inha University School of Medicine, Incheon 400-711, Republic of Korea [2] Inha
Research Institute for Medical Sciences, Inha University School of Medicine,
Incheon 400-711, Republic of Korea. (2)National Research Center for Sexual
Medicine and Department of Urology, Inha University School of Medicine, Incheon
400-711, Republic of Korea. (3)National Research Laboratory of Vascular Biology
and Stem Cells and Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701, Republic
of Korea. (4)1] Department of Internal Medicine and Innovative Research Institute
for Cell Therapy, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea
[2] Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Despite the advent of oral phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, curative treatment for
erectile dysfunction (ED) remains unavailable. Recently, the link between ED and 
cardiovascular disease was unveiled and the main etiology of ED was found to be
vasculogenic. Therefore, neovascularization is a promising strategy for curing
ED. Angiopoietin-1 (Ang1) is an angiogenic growth factor that promotes the
generation of stable and functional vasculature. Here, we demonstrate that local 
delivery of the soluble, stable, and potent Ang1 variant, COMP-Ang1 gene or
protein, into the penises of hypercholesterolemic mice increases cavernous
angiogenesis, eNOS phosphorylation, and cGMP expression, resulting in full
recovery of erectile function and cavernous blood flow up to 8 weeks after
treatment. COMP-Ang1-induced promotion of cavernous angiogenesis and erectile
function was abolished in Nos3(-/-) mice and in the presence of the NOS
inhibitor, L-NAME. COMP-Ang1 also restored the integrity of endothelial cell-cell
junction by down-regulating the expression of histone deacetylase 2 in the penis 
of hypercholesterolemic mice and in primary cultured mouse cavernous endothelial 
cells. These findings constitute a new paradigm toward curative treatment of both
cavernous angiopathy and ED.

PMCID: PMC4363832
PMID: 25783805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Learn Mem. 2015 Mar 16;22(4):225-31. doi: 10.1101/lm.036699.114. Print 2015 Apr.

The Class I HDAC inhibitor RGFP963 enhances consolidation of cued fear
extinction.

Bowers ME(1), Xia B(2), Carreiro S(2), Ressler KJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Neuroscience and Psychiatric Disorders, Emory University, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30329, USA. (2)RepliGen Waltham, Massachusetts 02453, USA. (3)Behavioral 
Neuroscience and Psychiatric Disorders, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30329,
USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815, USA
kressle@emory.edu.

Evidence indicates that broad, nonspecific histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition 
enhances learning and memory, however, the contribution of the various HDACs to
specific forms of learning is incompletely understood. Here, we show that the
Class I HDAC inhibitor, RGFP963, enhances consolidation of cued fear extinction. 
However, RGFP966, a strong inhibitor of HDAC3, does not significantly enhance
consolidation of cued fear extinction. These data extend previous evidence that
demonstrate the Class I HDACs play a role in the consolidation of long-term
memory, suggesting that HDAC1 and/or HDAC2, but less likely HDAC3, may function
as negative regulators of extinction retention. The development of specific HDAC 
inhibitors, such as RGFP963, will further illuminate the role of specific HDACs
in various types of learning and memory. Moreover, HDAC inhibitors that enhance
cued fear extinction may show translational promise for the treatment of
fear-related disorders, including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

© 2015 Bowers et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4371170
PMID: 25776040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Development. 2015 Mar 15;142(6):1180-92. doi: 10.1242/dev.113506.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 regulate Wnt and p53 pathways in the ureteric bud
epithelium.

Chen S(1), Yao X(1), Li Y(1), Saifudeen Z(1), Bachvarov D(2), El-Dahr SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Tulane University
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada G1R 2J6. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Tulane University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA seldahr@tulane.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate a broad range of biological processes
through removal of acetyl groups from histones as well as non-histone proteins.
Our previous studies showed that Hdac1 and Hdac2 are bound to promoters of key
renal developmental regulators and that HDAC activity is required for embryonic
kidney gene expression. However, the existence of many HDAC isoforms in embryonic
kidneys raises questions concerning the possible specificity or redundancy of
their functions. We report here that targeted deletion of both the Hdac1 and
Hdac2 genes from the ureteric bud (UB) cell lineage of mice causes bilateral
renal hypodysplasia. One copy of either Hdac1 or Hdac2 is sufficient to sustain
normal renal development. In addition to defective cell proliferation and
survival, genome-wide transcriptional profiling revealed that the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway is specifically impaired in UB(Hdac1,2-/-) kidneys. Our results
also demonstrate that loss of Hdac1 and Hdac2 in the UB epithelium leads to
marked hyperacetylation of the tumor suppressor protein p53 on lysine 370, 379
and 383; these post-translational modifications are known to boost p53 stability 
and transcriptional activity. Genetic deletion of p53 partially rescues the
development of UB(Hdac1,2-/-) kidneys. Together, these data indicate that Hdac1
and Hdac2 are crucial for kidney development. They perform redundant, yet
essential, cell lineage-autonomous functions via p53-dependent and -independent
pathways.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4360175
PMID: 25758227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Mar 31;43(6):3100-13. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv168. Epub 2015 
Mar 9.

An intrinsically disordered region of methyl-CpG binding domain protein 2 (MBD2) 
recruits the histone deacetylase core of the NuRD complex.

Desai MA(1), Webb HD(2), Sinanan LM(3), Scarsdale JN(4), Walavalkar NM(3), Ginder
GD(5), Williams DC Jr(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics and Massey Cancer Center, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and 
Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. 
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (4)Institute of Structural Biology
and Drug Design, Center for the Study of Biological Complexity, and Massey Cancer
Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. (5)Departments
of Internal Medicine, Human and Molecular Genetics, and Microbiology and
Immunology and Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
VA 23298, USA gdginder@vcu.edu. (6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
david_willjr@med.unc.edu.

The MBD2-NuRD (Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase) complex is an epigenetic
reader of DNA methylation that regulates genes involved in normal development and
neoplastic diseases. To delineate the architecture and functional interactions of
the MBD2-NuRD complex, we previously solved the structures of MBD2 bound to
methylated DNA and a coiled-coil interaction between MBD2 and p66a that recruits 
the CHD4 nucleosome remodeling protein to the complex. The work presented here
identifies novel structural and functional features of a previously
uncharacterized domain of MBD2 (MBD2IDR). Biophysical analyses show that the
MBD2IDR is an intrinsically disordered region (IDR). However, despite this
inherent disorder, MBD2IDR increases the overall binding affinity of MBD2 for
methylated DNA. MBD2IDR also recruits the histone deacetylase core components
(RbAp48, HDAC2 and MTA2) of NuRD through a critical contact region requiring two 
contiguous amino acid residues, Arg(286) and Leu(287). Mutating these residues
abrogates interaction of MBD2 with the histone deacetylase core and impairs the
ability of MBD2 to repress the methylated tumor suppressor gene PRSS8 in
MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells. These findings expand our knowledge of the
multi-dimensional interactions of the MBD2-NuRD complex that govern its function.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4381075
PMID: 25753662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Mar;31(3):312-5, 320.

[Cigarette smoke extract down-regulates expression of histone deacetylase 2 and
increases inflammatory cytokines releasing from murine C2C12 skeletal muscle
myocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma Z(1), Zhong X(1), He Z(1), Liang Y(1), Huang D(1), Xiao Y(1), Mao C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning 530021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe changes of inflammatory mediators, histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in murine C2C12 skeletal muscle myocytes
after exposed to cigarette smoke.
METHODS: Murine C2C12 skeletal muscle myocytes were cultured and treated with
cigarette smoke extract (CSE). MTT assay was used to detect the effect of CSE on 
cell proliferation to determine appropriate concentration of CSE. The C2C12 cells
cultured for 6-7 days were planted in six-well plates, and divided into control
group, (6.25, 12.50, 25.0) mL/L CSE groups. The cells were cultured for 24 hours.
The levels of interleukin-8 (IL-8) and tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) in the
supernatant were measured by ELISA. The mRNA level of HDAC2 was determined by
real-time quantitative PCR. The protein level of HDAC2 was detected by Western
blotting. HDAC2/NF-<U+03BA>B compound was determined by the method of
co-immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: MTT assay showed that CSE at the concentration of 50 mL/L inhibited
proliferation of C2C12 cells. After 24-hour treatment with CSE, IL-8 and TNF-a
releasing from C2C12 cells increased and the level of HDAC2 mRNA and protein were
reduced, which were CSE dose-dependent. Co-immunoprecipitation confirmed that
HDAC2/NF-<U+03BA>B compound existed in the CSE-exposed C2C12 cells.
CONCLUSION: CSE can down-regulate the expression of HDAC2 and increase
inflammatory cytokines releasing from C2C12 cells.

PMID: 25744833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Neuroepigenetics. 2015 Jan 1;1:34-40.

HDAC2 expression in parvalbumin interneurons regulates synaptic plasticity in the
mouse visual cortex.

Nott A(1), Cho S(1), Seo J(1), Tsai LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139,
United States.

An experience-dependent postnatal increase in GABAergic inhibition in the visual 
cortex is important for the closure of a critical period of enhanced synaptic
plasticity. Although maturation of the subclass of Parvalbumin (Pv)-expressing
GABAergic interneurons is known to contribute to critical period closure, the
role of epigenetics on cortical inhibition and synaptic plasticity has not been
explored. The transcription regulator, histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), has been
shown to modulate synaptic plasticity and learning processes in hippocampal
excitatory neurons. We found that genetic deletion of HDAC2 specifically from
Pv-interneurons reduces inhibitory input in the visual cortex of adult mice, and 
coincides with enhanced long-term depression (LTD) that is more typical of young 
mice. These findings show that HDAC2 loss in Pv-interneurons leads to a delayed
closure of the critical period in the visual cortex and supports the hypothesis
that HDAC2 is a key negative regulator of synaptic plasticity in the adult brain.

PMCID: PMC4331030
PMID: 25705589  [PubMed]


168. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):7123-35.

Sumoylation of HDAC2 promotes NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent gene expression.

Wagner T(1), Kiweler N(2), Wolff K(1), Knauer SK(3), Brandl A(1), Hemmerich P(4),
Dannenberg JH(5), Heinzel T(1), Schneider G(6), Krämer OH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biomedicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Department of Biochemistry, Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Toxicology, University Medical Center, Mainz, Germany. (3)Centre
for Medical Biotechnology, Molecular Biology II, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Essen, Germany. (4)Leibniz-Institute for Age Research, Fritz-Lipmann-Institute,
Jena, Germany. (5)Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Klinikum rechts der Isar, II. Medizinische Klinik,
Technische Universität München, München, Germany.

The transcription factor nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) is crucial for the maintenance
of homeostasis. It is incompletely understood how nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B and the crosstalk
of NF-<U+03BA>B with other transcription factors are controlled. Here, we demonstrate
that the epigenetic regulator histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) activates NF-<U+03BA>B in
transformed and primary cells. This function depends on both, the catalytic
activity and an intact HDAC2 sumoylation motif. Several mechanisms account for
the induction of NF-<U+03BA>B through HDAC2. The expression of wild-type HDAC2 can
increase the nuclear presence of NF-<U+03BA>B. In addition, the ribosomal S6 kinase 1
(RSK1) and the tumor suppressor p53 contribute to the regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B by
HDAC2. Moreover, TP53 mRNA expression is positively regulated by wild-type HDAC2 
but not by sumoylation-deficient HDAC2. Thus, sumoylation of HDAC2 integrates
NF-<U+03BA>B signaling involving p53 and RSK1. Since HDAC2-dependent NF-<U+03BA>B activity
protects colon cancer cells from genotoxic stress, our data also suggest that
high HDAC2 levels, which are frequently found in tumors, are linked to
chemoresistance. Accordingly, inhibitors of NF-<U+03BA>B and of the NF-<U+03BA>B/p53-regulated 
anti-apoptotic protein survivin significantly sensitize colon carcinoma cells
expressing wild-type HDAC2 to apoptosis induced by the genotoxin doxorubicin.
Hence, the HDAC2-dependent signaling node we describe here may offer an
interesting therapeutic option.

PMCID: PMC4466673
PMID: 25704882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Arch Toxicol. 2015 Jun;89(6):899-921. doi: 10.1007/s00204-015-1474-0. Epub 2015
Feb 22.

Microsatellite instability: an update.

Yamamoto H(1), Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, 216-8511, Japan,
h-yama@marianna-u.ac.jp.

Deficient DNA mismatch repair (MMR) results in a strong mutator phenotype known
as microsatellite instability (MSI), which is a hallmark of Lynch
syndrome-associated cancers. MSI is characterized by length alterations within
simple repeated sequences that are called microsatellites. Lynch syndrome is
primarily caused by mutations in the MMR genes, mainly MLH1 and MSH2, and less
frequently in MSH6, and rarely PMS2, and large genomic rearrangements account for
5-20 % of all mutations. Germ line hemiallelic methylations of MLH1 or MSH2 are
termed as epimutations and have been identified as causative of Lynch syndrome.
Moreover, germ line 3' deletions of EPCAM gene is involved in MSH2 methylation.
MSI is also observed in about 15 % of sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC), gastric
cancer (GC), and endometrial cancer (EC), and at lower frequencies in other
cancers, often in association with hypermethylation of the MLH1 gene.
Trimethylation of histone H3 on Lys36 (H3K36 me3) is an epigenetic histone mark
that was required for DNA MMR in vivo. Thus, mutations in the H3K36
trimethyltransferase SETD2 have been reported as a potential cause of MSI.
Genetic, epigenetic, and transcriptomic differences have been identified between 
cancers with and without MSI. Recent comprehensive molecular characterizations of
CRC, EC, and GC by The Cancer Genome Atlas indicate that MSI+ cancers are
distinct biological entities. The BRAF V600E mutation is specifically associated 
with sporadic MSI+ CRCs with methylated MLH1, but is not associated with Lynch
syndrome-related CRCs. Accumulating evidence indicates a role of interactions
between MSI and microRNA (miRNA) in the pathogenesis of MSI-positive (MSI+)
cancer. As another new mechanism underlying MSI, overexpression of miR-155 or
miR-21 has been shown to downregulate the expression of the MMR genes. Gene
targets of frameshift mutations caused by MSI are involved in various cellular
functions, including DNA repair (MSH3 and MSH6), cell signaling (TGFBR2 and
ACVR2A), apoptosis (BAX), epigenetic regulation (HDAC2 and ARID1A), and miRNA
processing (TARBP2 and XPO5), and a subset of MSI+ CRCs reportedly shows the
mutated miRNA machinery phenotype. Moreover, microsatellite repeats in miRNA
genes, such as hsa-miR-1273c, may be novel MSI targets for CRC, and mutations in 
noncoding regulatory regions of MRE11, BAX (Bax<U+0394>2), and HSP110 (HSP110<U+0394>E9) may
affect the efficiency of chemotherapy. Thus, analyses of MSI and its related
molecular alterations in cancers are increasingly relevant in clinical settings, 
and MSI is a useful screening marker for identifying patients with Lynch syndrome
and a prognostic factor for chemotherapeutic interventions. In this review, we
summarize recent advances in the pathogenesis of MSI and focus on genome-wide
analyses that indicate the potential use of MSI and related alterations as
biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets.

PMID: 25701956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 10;290(15):9701-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620872. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

p15RS/RPRD1A (p15INK4b-related sequence/regulation of nuclear pre-mRNA
domain-containing protein 1A) interacts with HDAC2 in inhibition of the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Liu C(1), Zhang Y(1), Li J(2), Wang Y(1), Ren F(1), Zhou Y(3), Wu Y(4), Feng
Y(1), Zhou Y(3), Su F(3), Jia B(5), Wang D(6), Chang Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology,
School of Medicine, School of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for 
Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, the State
Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Sichuan 610041, China. (2)the Department
of Immunology, Third Military Medical School, Chongqing 610041, China. (3)From
the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of
Medicine, School of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor
Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (4)From the State Key
Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Medicine, School 
of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Therapeutics,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, the F. M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115. 
(5)the Departments of Surgical Oncology and Pathology, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China, and. (6)From the State Key Laboratory of
Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Medicine, School of Life
Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China, the State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Sichuan 610041, China, the Bioinformatics Division and Center for
Synthetic and Systems Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(7)From the State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology,
School of Medicine, School of Life Sciences, National Engineering Laboratory for 
Anti-tumor Therapeutics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, the State
Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Sichuan 610041, China,
zhijiec@tsinghua.edu.cn.

We previously reported that p15RS (p15INK4b-related sequence), a regulation of
nuclear pre-mRNA domain containing protein, inhibited Wnt signaling by
interrupting the formation of the ß-catenin·TCF4 complex. However, how p15RS
functions as an intrinsic repressor to repress transcription remains unclear. In 
this study, we show that p15RS, through a specific interaction with HDAC2
(histone deacetylase 2), a deacetylase that regulates gene transcription,
maintains histone H3 in a deacetylated state in the promoter region of
Wnt-targeted genes where ß-catenin·TCF4 is bound. We observed that histone
deacetylase inhibitors impair the ability of p15RS in inhibiting Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling. Depletion of HDAC2 markedly disabled p15RS inhibition of
Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated transcription. Interestingly, overexpression of p15RS
decreases the level of acetylated histone H3 in the c-MYC promoter. Finally, we
demonstrate that p15RS significantly enhances the association of HDAC2 and TCF4
and enhances the occupancy of HDAC2 to DNA, resulting in the deacetylation of
histone H3 and the failure of ß-catenin interaction. We propose that p15RS acts
as an intrinsic transcriptional repressor for Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated gene
transcription at least partially through recruiting HDAC2 to occupy the promoter 
and maintaining deacetylated histone H3.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4392270 [Available on 2016-04-10]
PMID: 25697359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Poult Sci. 2015 Apr;94(4):706-21. doi: 10.3382/ps/pev016. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

DNA methylation and histone modification patterns during the late embryonic and
early postnatal development of chickens.

Li C(1), Guo S(1), Zhang M(1), Gao J(1), Guo Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Hubei Collaborative Innovation
Center for Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, College of Animal Science and
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, P. R. China. (2)State
Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for
Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, College of Animal Science and Technology,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, P. R. China guoyum@cau.edu.cn.

Early mammalian embryonic cells have been proven to be essential for embryonic
development and the health of neonates. A series of epigenetic reprogramming
events, including DNA methylation and histone modifications, occur during early
embryonic development. However, epigenetic marks in late embryos and neonates are
not well understood, especially in avian species. To investigate the epigenetic
patterns of developing embryos and posthatched chicks, embryos at embryonic day 5
(E5), E8, E11, E14, E17, and E20 and newly hatched chicks on day of life 1 (D1), 
D7, D14, D21 were collected. The levels of global DNA methylation and histone H3 
at lysine 9 residue (H3K9) modifications were measured in samples of liver,
jejunum, and breast skeletal muscles by Western blotting and immunofluorescence
staining. According to our data, decreased levels of proliferating cell nuclear
antigen expression were found in the liver and a V-shaped pattern of
proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression was found in the jejunum. The level
of proliferating cell nuclear antigen in muscle was relatively stable. Caspase 3 
expression gradually decreased over time in liver, was stable in the jejunum, and
increased in muscle. Levels of DNA methylation and H3K9 acetylation decreased in 
liver over time, while the pattern was N-shaped in jejunal tissue and W-shaped in
pectoral muscles, and these changes were accompanied by dynamic changes of DNA
methyltransferases, histone acetyltransferases 1, and histone deacetylase 2.
Moreover, dimethylation, trimethylation, and acetylation of H3K9 were expressed
in a time- and tissue-dependent manner. After birth, epigenetic marks were
relatively stable and found at lower levels. These results indicate that
spatiotemporal specific epigenetic alterations could be critical for the late
development of chick embryos and neonates.

© 2015 Poultry Science Association Inc.

PMID: 25691759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2348-58. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1290. 
Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Selective Inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 as a Potential Therapeutic Option for
B-ALL.

Stubbs MC(1), Kim W(2), Bariteau M(2), Davis T(2), Vempati S(2), Minehart J(3),
Witkin M(3), Qi J(4), Krivtsov AV(5), Bradner JE(4), Kung AL(6), Armstrong SA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. mstubbs@incyte.com. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer 
Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Human Oncology
and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer 
Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Human Oncology and 
Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
(6)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have recently emerged as
efficacious therapies that target epigenetic mechanisms in hematologic
malignancies. One such hematologic malignancy, B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (B-ALL), may be highly dependent on epigenetic regulation for leukemia
development and maintenance, and thus sensitive to small-molecule inhibitors that
target epigenetic mechanisms.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A panel of B-ALL cell lines was tested for sensitivity to
HDACi with varying isoform sensitivity. Isoform-specific shRNAs were used as
further validation of HDACs as relevant therapeutic targets in B-ALL. Mouse
xenografts of B-cell malignancy-derived cell lines and a pediatric B-ALL were
used to demonstrate pharmacologic efficacy.
RESULTS: Nonselective HDAC inhibitors were cytotoxic to a panel of B-ALL cell
lines as well as to xenografted human leukemia patient samples. Assessment of
isoform-specific HDACi indicated that targeting HDAC1-3 with class I
HDAC-specific inhibitors was sufficient to inhibit growth of B-ALL cell lines.
Furthermore, shRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC1 or HDAC2 resulted in growth
inhibition in these cells. We then assessed a compound that specifically inhibits
only HDAC1 and HDAC2. This compound suppressed growth and induced apoptosis in
B-ALL cell lines in vitro and in vivo, whereas it was far less effective against 
other B-cell-derived malignancies.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we show that HDAC inhibitors are a potential therapeutic
option for B-ALL, and that a more specific inhibitor of HDAC1 and HDAC2 could be 
therapeutically useful for patients with B-ALL.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4433811 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25688158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cell J. 2015 Winter;16(4):466-75. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

DNA Methylation and Histone Acetylation Patterns in Cultured Bovine Adipose
Tissue-Derived Stem Cells (BADSCs).

Abouhamzeh B(1), Salehi M(2), Hosseini A(3), Masteri-Farahani AR(4), Fadai F(4), 
Heidari MH(4), Nourozian M(4), Soleimani M(5), Khorashadizadeh M(6),
Mossahebi-Mohammadi M(7), Mansouri A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Cell Biology and Anatomical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (2)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Biotechnology,
Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran. (3)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (4)Department of Cell Biology and
Anatomical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (5)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medical Science, 
Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (6)Department of Medical Biotechnology,
School of Advanced Medical Technology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (7)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Stem Cell Technology Research
Center, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Many studies have focused on the epigenetic characteristics of donor
cells to improve somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT). We hypothesized that the
epigenetic status and chromatin structure of undifferentiated bovine adipose
tissue-derived stem cells (BADSCs) would not remain constant during different
passages. The objective of this study was to determine the mRNA expression
patterns of DNA methyltransferases (DNMT1, DNMT3a, DNMT3b) and histone
deacetyltransferses (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3) in BADSCs. In addition, we compared the
measured levels of octamer binding protein-4 expression (OCT4) and acetylation of
H3K9 (H3K9ac) in BADSCs cultures and different passages in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, subcutaneous fat was obtained 
from adult cows immediately post-mortem. Relative level of DNMTs and HDACs was
examined using quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (q-PCR), and the 
level of OCT4 and H3K9ac was analyzed by flow cytometry at passages 3 (P3), 5
(P5) and 7 (P7).
RESULTS: The OCT4 protein level was similar at P3 and P5 but a significant
decrease in its level was seen at P7. The highest and lowest levels of H3K9ac
were observed at P5 and P7, respectively. At P5, the expression of HDACs and
DNMTs was significantly decreased. In contrast, a remarkable increase in the
expression of DNMTs was observed at P7.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated that the epigenetic status of BADSCs was
variable during culture. The P5 cells showed the highest level of stemness and
multipotency and the lowest level of chromatin compaction. Therefore, we suggest 
that P5 cells may be more efficient for SCNT compared with other passages.

PMCID: PMC4297485
PMID: 25685737  [PubMed]


174. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Feb 11;16(2):3915-31. doi: 10.3390/ijms16023915.

Valproic acid as a potential inhibitor of Plasmodium falciparum histone
deacetylase 1 (PfHDAC1): an in silico approach.

Elbadawi MA(1), Awadalla MK(2), Hamid MM(3), Mohamed MA(4), Awad TA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Khartoum,
Khartoum 11111, Sudan. mabadawi@uofk.edu. (2)College of Pharmacy, University of
Hail, Hail 81451, Saudi Arabia. mkaawadalla@yahoo.com. (3)Department of
Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Institute of Endemic Diseases, University of
Khartoum, Khartoum 11111, Sudan. mahdi@iend.org. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Khartoum, Khartoum 11111, Sudan.
mawadalla@uofk.edu. (5)Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Research Institute, National
Centre of Research, Khartoum 11111, Sudan. talaladlan@hotmail.com.

A new Plasmodium falciparum histone deacetylase1 (PfHDAC1) homology model was
built based on the highest sequence identity available template human histone
deacetylase 2 structure. The generated model was carefully evaluated for
stereochemical accuracy, folding correctness and overall structure quality. All
evaluations were acceptable and consistent. Docking a group of hydroxamic acid
histone deacetylase inhibitors and valproic acid has shown binding poses that
agree well with inhibitor-bound histone deacetylase-solved structural
interactions. Docking affinity dG scores were in agreement with available
experimental binding affinities. Further, enzyme-ligand complex stability and
reliability were investigated by running 5-nanosecond molecular dynamics
simulations. Thorough analysis of the simulation trajectories has shown that
enzyme-ligand complexes were stable during the simulation period. Interestingly, 
the calculated theoretical binding energies of the docked hydroxamic acid
inhibitors have shown that the model can discriminate between strong and weaker
inhibitors and agrees well with the experimental affinities reported in the
literature. The model and the docking methodology can be used in screening
virtual libraries for PfHDAC1 inhibitors, since the docking scores have ranked
ligands in accordance with experimental binding affinities. Valproic acid
calculated theoretical binding energy suggests that it may inhibit PfHDAC1.

PMCID: PMC4346934
PMID: 25679451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Apr;81:18-22. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.01.019. Epub
2015 Feb 2.

NEDDylation promotes endothelial dysfunction: a role for HDAC2.

Pandey D(1), Hori D(2), Kim JH(1), Bergman Y(1), Berkowitz DE(3), Romer LH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287-4904, USA. (2)Department of
Surgery, Division of Cardiac Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287-4904, USA. (3)Department of Anesthesiology and
Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21287-4904, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287-4904, USA. (4)Department of
Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287-4904, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287-4904, USA;
Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287-4904, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287-4904, USA; Center for Cell Dynamics,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287-4904, USA.
Electronic address: LRomer@jhmi.edu.

Emerging evidence strongly supports a role for HDAC2 in the transcriptional
regulation of endothelial genes and vascular function. We have recently
demonstrated that HDAC2 reciprocally regulates the transcription of Arginase2,
which is itself a critical modulator of endothelial function via eNOS. Moreover
HDAC2 levels are decreased in response to the atherogenic stimulus OxLDL via a
mechanism that is apparently dependent upon proteasomal degradation. NEDDylation 
is a post-translational protein modification that is tightly linked to
ubiquitination and thereby protein degradation. We propose that changes in
NEDDylation may modulate vascular endothelial function in part through
alterations in the proteasomal degradation of HDAC2. In HAEC, OxLDL exposure
augmented global protein NEDDylation. Pre-incubation of mouse aortic rings with
the NEDDylation activating enzyme inhibitor, MLN4924, prevented OxLDL-induced
endothelial dysfunction. In HAEC, MLN enhanced HDAC2 abundance, decreased
expression and activity of Arginase2, and blocked OxLDL-mediated reduction of
HDAC2. Additionally, HDAC2 was shown to be a substrate for NEDD8 conjugation and 
this interaction was potentiated by OxLDL. Further, HDAC2 levels were
reciprocally regulated by ectopic expression of NEDD8 and the de-NEDDylating
enzyme SENP8. Our findings indicate that the observed improvement in endothelial 
dysfunction with inhibition of NEDDylation activating enzyme is likely due to an 
HDAC2-dependent decrease in Arginase2. NEDDylation activating enzyme may
therefore be a novel target in endothelial dysfunction and atherogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25655932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Feb 27;43(4):2033-44. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv068. Epub 2015 
Feb 4.

Structural and functional characterization of a cell cycle associated HDAC1/2
complex reveals the structural basis for complex assembly and nucleosome
targeting.

Itoh T(1), Fairall L(1), Muskett FW(1), Milano CP(1), Watson PJ(1), Arnaudo N(2),
Saleh A(1), Millard CJ(1), El-Mezgueldi M(1), Martino F(2), Schwabe JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Structural Biology, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Leicester, Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, UK. (2)MRC Laboratory
of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge Biomedical Campus,
Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. (3)Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Structural Biology,
Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Lancaster Road, Leicester
LE1 9HN, UK john.schwabe@le.ac.uk.

Recent proteomic studies have identified a novel histone deacetylase complex that
is upregulated during mitosis and is associated with cyclin A. This complex is
conserved from nematodes to man and contains histone deacetylases 1 and 2, the
MIDEAS corepressor protein and a protein called DNTTIP1 whose function was
hitherto poorly understood. Here, we report the structures of two domains from
DNTTIP1. The amino-terminal region forms a tight dimerization domain with a novel
structural fold that interacts with and mediates assembly of the HDAC1:MIDEAS
complex. The carboxy-terminal domain of DNTTIP1 has a structure related to the
SKI/SNO/DAC domain, despite lacking obvious sequence homology. We show that this 
domain in DNTTIP1 mediates interaction with both DNA and nucleosomes. Thus,
DNTTIP1 acts as a dimeric chromatin binding module in the HDAC1:MIDEAS
corepressor complex.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4344507
PMID: 25653165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Feb 27;43(4):2008-21. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv046. Epub 2015 
Feb 4.

Spatial re-organization of myogenic regulatory sequences temporally controls gene
expression.

Harada A(1), Mallappa C(2), Okada S(1), Butler JT(2), Baker SP(3), Lawrence
JB(2), Ohkawa Y(4), Imbalzano AN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Medical Initiatives, JST-CREST, Faculty of Medicine,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (2)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 
01655, USA. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA Department of Quantitative
Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655,
USA. (4)Department of Advanced Medical Initiatives, JST-CREST, Faculty of
Medicine, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 
01655, USA anthony.imbalzano@umassmed.edu. (5)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 
01655, USA anthony.imbalzano@umassmed.edu.

During skeletal muscle differentiation, the activation of some tissue-specific
genes occurs immediately while others are delayed. The molecular basis
controlling temporal gene regulation is poorly understood. We show that the
regulatory sequences, but not other regions of genes expressed at late times of
myogenesis, are in close physical proximity in differentiating embryonic tissue
and in differentiating culture cells, despite these genes being located on
different chromosomes. Formation of these inter-chromosomal interactions requires
the lineage-determinant MyoD and functional Brg1, the ATPase subunit of SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling enzymes. Ectopic expression of myogenin and a specific Mef2 
isoform induced myogenic differentiation without activating endogenous MyoD
expression. Under these conditions, the regulatory sequences of late gene loci
were not in close proximity, and these genes were prematurely activated. The data
indicate that the spatial organization of late genes contributes to temporal
regulation of myogenic transcription by restricting late gene expression during
the early stages of myogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4344497
PMID: 25653159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. FASEB J. 2015 May;29(5):2070-80. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-257931. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 collectively regulate intestinal stem cell homeostasis.

Zimberlin CD(1), Lancini C(1), Sno R(1), Rosekrans SL(1), McLean CM(1), Vlaming
H(1), van den Brink GR(1), Bots M(1), Medema JP(1), Dannenberg JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory for Experimental Oncology and Radiobiology, Center for
Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Tygat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research and
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; and Cancer Genomics Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)*Laboratory for Experimental Oncology and Radiobiology, Center for
Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Tygat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research and
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; and Cancer Genomics Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands 
j.dannenberg@nki.nl.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are posttranslational modifiers that deacetylate
proteins. Despite their crucial role in numerous biological processes, the use of
broad-range HDAC inhibitors (HDACi), has shown clinical efficacy. However,
undesired side effects highlight the necessity to better understand the biology
of different HDACs and target the relevant HDACs. Using a novel mouse model, in
which HDAC1 and HDAC2 can be simultaneously deleted in the intestine of adult
mice, we show that the simultaneous deletion of HDAC1 and HDAC2 leads to a rapid 
loss of intestinal homeostasis. Importantly, this deletion cannot be sustained,
and 8 days after initial ablation, stem cells that have escaped HDAC1 or HDAC2
deletion swiftly repopulate the intestinal lining. In vitro ablation of HDAC1 and
HDAC2 using intestinal organoid cultures resulted in a down-regulation of
multiple intestinal stem cell markers and functional loss of clonogenic capacity.
Importantly, treatment of wild-type organoids with class I-specific HDACi MS-275 
also induced a similar loss of stemness, providing a possible rationale for the
gastrointestinal side effects often observed in HDACi-treated patients. In
conclusion, these data show that HDAC1 and HDAC2 have a redundant function and
are essential to maintain intestinal homeostasis.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25648995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Chem Sci. 2015 Jan 1;6(1):804-815.

Kinetically Selective Inhibitors of Histone Deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) as Cognition
Enhancers.

Wagner FF(1), Zhang YL(1), Fass DM(2), Joseph N(3), Gale JP(1), Weïwer M(1),
McCarren P(1), Fisher SL(4), Kaya T(1), Zhao WN(5), Reis SA(5), Hennig KM(5),
Thomas M(1), Lemercier BC(1), Lewis MC(1), Guan JS(3), Moyer MP(1), Scolnick
E(1), Haggarty SJ(5), Tsai LH(3), Holson EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research; Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT; 7
Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Stanley Center for
Psychiatric Research; Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT; 7 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA ; SL Fisher Consulting, LLC, PO Box 3052,
Framingham, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research; Broad
Institute of Harvard and MIT; 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA ;
Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (4)SL Fisher
Consulting, LLC, PO Box 3052, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA. (5)Stanley Center
for Psychiatric Research; Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT; 7 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA ; Chemical Neurobiology Laboratory, Center for
Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Neurology
and Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Aiming towards the development of novel nootropic therapeutics to address the
cognitive impairment common to a range of brain disorders, we set out to develop 
highly selective small molecule inhibitors of HDAC2, a chromatin modifying
histone deacetylase implicated in memory formation and synaptic plasticity. Novel
ortho-aminoanilide inhibitors were designed and evaluated for their ability to
selectively inhibit HDAC2 versus the other Class I HDACs. Kinetic and
thermodynamic binding properties were essential elements of our design strategy
and two novel classes of ortho-aminoanilides, that exhibit kinetic selectivity
(biased residence time) for HDAC2 versus the highly homologous isoform HDAC1,
were identified. These kinetically selective HDAC2 inhibitors (BRD6688 and
BRD4884) increased H4K12 and H3K9 histone acetylation in primary mouse neuronal
cell culture assays, in the hippocampus of CK-p25 mice, a model of
neurodegenerative disease, and rescued the associated memory deficits of these
mice in a cognition behavioural model. These studies demonstrate for the first
time that selective pharmacological inhibition of HDAC2 is feasible and that
inhibition of the catalytic activity of this enzyme may serve as a therapeutic
approach towards enhancing the learning and memory processes that are affected in
many neurological and psychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC4310013
PMID: 25642316  [PubMed]


180. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2014;165(4):229-43. doi: 10.1159/000370067. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Exacerbating factors induce different gene expression profiles in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from asthmatics, patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and healthy subjects.

Pniewska E(1), Sokolowska M, Kuprys-Lipinska I, Kacprzak D, Kuna P, Pawliczak R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergology, Immunology and Dermatology, Department of
Immunopathology, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences and Postgraduate Training,
Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Despite several common phenotypic features, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma differ with regard to their causative 
factors and pathophysiology. Both diseases may be exacerbated by environmental
factors, however, the molecular profiles of disease episodes have not been
comprehensively studied. We identified differences in gene and protein expression
profiles expressed by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of COPD patients,
patients with atopic asthma and healthy subjects when challenged with
exacerbating factors in vitro: lipopolysaccharide (LPS), house dust mite (HDM)
and cat allergen.
METHODS: PBMC isolated from patients with severe atopic asthma and COPD, as well 
as healthy subjects were stimulated with rDer p 1 DG, rFel d 1 DG and LPS. The
changes in the expression of 47 genes belonging to five groups (phospholipase A2,
eicosanoids, transcription factors, cytokines and airway remodeling) were studied
using TaqMan low density array cards. Immunoblotting was used to study relative
protein expression.
RESULTS: rDer p 1 significantly up-regulated the expression of PLA2G4A, PLA2G6,
PLA2G15, CYSLTR1, LB4R2, PTGS1, PTGS2, FOXP1, GATA3, HDAC2, IREB2, PPARG, STAT4, 
TSLP and CHI3L1 genes in asthmatics in comparison to healthy subjects. LPS
induced significant expression of ANXA1 and LTA4H in asthmatics when compared to 
COPD patients and healthy subjects. SOX6,STAT4 and IL1RL1 were induced in COPD
after LPS stimulation. Analysis of protein expression revealed a pattern similar 
to mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: LPS-induced exacerbation of asthma and COPD is characterized by
differential expression of selected genes in PBMC. HDM allergen changed the
expression profile of inflammatory genes between patients with asthma of atopic
origin and healthy controls.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25634111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Chem Inf Model. 2015 Feb 23;55(2):374-88. doi: 10.1021/ci5005515. Epub 2015 Feb
9.

Comparative modeling and benchmarking data sets for human histone deacetylases
and sirtuin families.

Xia J(1), Tilahun EL, Kebede EH, Reid TE, Zhang L, Wang XS.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University , 38 Xueyuan Road, Beijing 100191, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are an important class of drug targets for the
treatment of cancers, neurodegenerative diseases, and other types of diseases.
Virtual screening (VS) has become fairly effective approaches for drug discovery 
of novel and highly selective histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs). To
facilitate the process, we constructed maximal unbiased benchmarking data sets
for HDACs (MUBD-HDACs) using our recently published methods that were originally 
developed for building unbiased benchmarking sets for ligand-based virtual
screening (LBVS). The MUBD-HDACs cover all four classes including Class III
(Sirtuins family) and 14 HDAC isoforms, composed of 631 inhibitors and 24609
unbiased decoys. Its ligand sets have been validated extensively as chemically
diverse, while the decoy sets were shown to be property-matching with ligands and
maximal unbiased in terms of "artificial enrichment" and "analogue bias". We also
conducted comparative studies with DUD-E and DEKOIS 2.0 sets against HDAC2 and
HDAC8 targets and demonstrate that our MUBD-HDACs are unique in that they can be 
applied unbiasedly to both LBVS and SBVS approaches. In addition, we defined a
novel metric, i.e. NLBScore, to detect the "2D bias" and "LBVS favorable" effect 
within the benchmarking sets. In summary, MUBD-HDACs are the only comprehensive
and maximal-unbiased benchmark data sets for HDACs (including Sirtuins) that are 
available so far. MUBD-HDACs are freely available at http://www.xswlab.org/ .

PMCID: PMC4677826
PMID: 25633490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Ann Oncol. 2015 May;26(5):973-81. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv033. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

A phase II study of SB939, a novel pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor, in patients
with translocation-associated recurrent/metastatic sarcomas-NCIC-CTG IND 200.

Chu QS(1), Nielsen TO(2), Alcindor T(3), Gupta A(4), Endo M(5), Goytain A(2), Xu 
H(6), Verma S(7), Tozer R(8), Knowling M(2), Bramwell VB(9), Powers J(6), Seymour
LK(6), Eisenhauer EA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, Cross Cancer Institute, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton quincy.chu@albertahealthservices.ca.
(2)Department of Pathology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, McGill University,
Montreal. (4)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, Mount Sinai
Hospital/Princess Margaret Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Investigational New Drug Program, NCIC-Clinical Trials Group, Kingston.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Ottawa Cancer Centre, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa. (8)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, Jurvinski Cancer
Centre, McMaster University, Hamilton. (9)Division of Medical Oncology,
Department of Oncology, Tom Baker Cancer Centre, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: A subgroup of sarcomas is characterized by defining chromosomal
translocations, creating fusion transcription factor oncogenes. Resultant fusion 
oncoproteins associate with chromatin-modifying complexes containing histone
deacetylases (HDAC), and lead to epigenetic transcriptional dysregulation. HDAC
inhibitors were shown to be effective in vitro, reversing gene repression by
these complexes, restoring PTEN expression and apoptosis via the PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: SB939 is an oral inhibitor of classes 1 and 2 HDAC.
Eligible patients with recurrent or metastatic translocation-associated sarcoma
(TAS) by local pathology were treated with 60 mg/day every other day for 3 of 4
weeks. Central pathology review was conducted with fusion oncogenes
characterized, and HDAC2 expression correlated with efficacy in pre-specified
methods.
RESULTS: Twenty-two patients were treated with a median of 2 cycles. Fourteen
patients were assessable for response with confirmed specific chromosomal
translocations; 8 had a best response of stable disease (SD) (median duration 5.4
months) with no confirmed objective responses. The 3-month progression-free
survival (PFS) rate was 49%. Among those with HDAC2 score =5, 7/10 had SD, versus
0/3 with HDAC2 score <5. SB939 was considered as well tolerated with <10%
patients experienced =grade 3 toxicity.
CONCLUSION: This study was stopped prematurely due to prolonged unavailability of
SB939. No objective responses were seen. Although the observed SD in HDAC2 high
patients was interesting, due to the small sample size, no definitive conclusion 
can be drawn about the efficacy of SB939 in this patient population.
CLINICAL TRIAL: NCT01112384.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25632070  [PubMed - in process]


183. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Aug 5;601:11-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.01.051. Epub 2015 
Jan 23.

Molecular mechanisms of synaptic remodeling in alcoholism.

Kyzar EJ(1), Pandey SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Jesse Brown
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Chicago, IL, USA; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address: scpandey@uic.edu.

Alcohol use and alcohol addiction represent dysfunctional brain circuits
resulting from neuroadaptive changes during protracted alcohol exposure and its
withdrawal. Alcohol exerts a potent effect on synaptic plasticity and dendritic
spine formation in specific brain regions, providing a neuroanatomical substrate 
for the pathophysiology of alcoholism. Epigenetics has recently emerged as a
critical regulator of gene expression and synaptic plasticity-related events in
the brain. Alcohol exposure and withdrawal induce changes in crucial epigenetic
processes in the emotional brain circuitry (amygdala) that may be relevant to the
negative affective state defined as the "dark side" of addiction. Here, we review
the literature concerning synaptic plasticity and epigenetics, with a particular 
focus on molecular events related to dendritic remodeling during alcohol abuse
and alcoholism. Targeting epigenetic processes that modulate synaptic plasticity 
may yield novel treatments for alcoholism.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4506731 [Available on 2016-08-05]
PMID: 25623036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2015 Mar-Apr;48:33-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2015.01.006. Epub 
2015 Jan 22.

Phytanic acid induces Neuro2a cell death via histone deacetylase activation and
mitochondrial dysfunction.

Nagai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenetic Medicine, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi
409-3898, Japan. Electronic address: kaoru@yamanashi.ac.jp.

Phytanic acid is a branched fatty acid that is a metabolic intermediate of
chlorophyll. In this study, the effects of phytanic acid on Histone deacetylase
(Hdac) activity were examined in an in vitro enzyme assay and in neuronal Neuro2a
cells. Several fatty acids have been shown to be Hdac inhibitors, but phytanic
acid enhanced the enzyme activity in vitro. In Neuro2a cells, phytanic acid
significantly reduced histone acetylation and induced cell death, which was
inhibited by an Hdac inhibitor, sodium butyrate. Theophylline, a common Hdac
activator, had a similar effect on Neuro2a cell viability, and this effect was
also inhibited by sodium butyrate. Phytanic acid decreased the level of
intracellular active mitochondria, while butyrate increased this level. The
cytotoxic effect of phytanic acid was also abolished by a caspase-9 inhibitor.
Apicidin, a Hdac2- and 3-specific inhibitor, reduced the cellular toxicity, which
suggests that the toxicity of phytanic acid depends on activation of the Hdac2
and 3 subtypes. Overall, these results show that phytanic acid induces
mitochondrial abnormality and cell death via activation of Hdac2, 3 in Neuro2a
cells. This effect of Hdac activation by phytanic acid may produce neuronal
damage in Refsum disease and other peroxisomal disorders, which is caused by
accumulation of phytanic acid.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25619426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 Jan 22;18(7):pyv004. doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyv004.

Aberrant Monoaminergic System in Thyroid Hormone Receptor-ß Deficient Mice as a
Model of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.

Ookubo M(1), Sadamatsu M(1), Yoshimura A(1), Suzuki S(1), Kato N(1), Kojima H(1),
Yamada N(1), Kanai H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan
(Drs Ookubo, Yoshimura, Yamada, and Kanai); Department of Psychiatry, Minakuchi
Hospital, Shiga, Japan (Dr Ookubo); Department of Psychology and Psychiatry,
Human Sciences, Kinjo Gakuin University, Aich, Japan (Dr Sadamatsu); Department
of Thyroid and Endocrinology, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima, Japan (Dr 
Suzuki); Department of Psychiatry, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan (Dr Kato); Department of Molecular Genetics in Medicine, Shiga University
of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan (Dr. Kojima); Department of Psychiatry, Japanese
Red Cross Society Nagahama Hospital, Shiga, Japan (Dr. Kanai). (2)Department of
Psychiatry, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan (Drs Ookubo,
Yoshimura, Yamada, and Kanai); Department of Psychiatry, Minakuchi Hospital,
Shiga, Japan (Dr Ookubo); Department of Psychology and Psychiatry, Human
Sciences, Kinjo Gakuin University, Aich, Japan (Dr Sadamatsu); Department of
Thyroid and Endocrinology, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima, Japan (Dr
Suzuki); Department of Psychiatry, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan (Dr Kato); Department of Molecular Genetics in Medicine, Shiga University
of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan (Dr. Kojima); Department of Psychiatry, Japanese
Red Cross Society Nagahama Hospital, Shiga, Japan (Dr. Kanai).
h-kanai@nagahama.jrc.or.jp.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormone receptors are divided into 2 functional types: TRa
and TRß. Thyroid hormone receptors play pivotal roles in the developing brain,
and disruption of thyroid hormone receptors can produce permanent behavioral
abnormality in animal models and humans.
METHODS: Here we examined behavioralchanges, regional monoamine metabolism, and
expression of epigenetic modulatory proteins, including acetylated histone H3 and
histone deacetylase, in the developing brain of TRa-disrupted (TRa (0/0) ) and
TRß-deficient (TRß (-/-) ) mice. Tissue concentrations of dopamine, serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine) and their metabolites in the mesocorticolimbic pathway were
measured.
RESULTS: TRß (-/-) mice, a model of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder,
showed significantly high exploratory activity and reduced habituation, whereas
TRa (0/0) mice showed normal exploratory activity. The biochemical profiles of
dopamine and 5-hydroxytryptamine showed significantly low dopamine metabolic
rates in the caudate putamen and nucleus accumbens and overall low
5-hydroxytryptamine metabolic rates in TRß (-/-) mice, but not in TRa (0/0) mice.
Furthermore, the expression of acetylated histone H3 was low in the dorsal raphe 
of TRß (-/-) mice, and histone deacetylase 2/3 proteins were widely increased in 
the mesolimbic system.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that TRß deficiency causes dysfunction of the
monoaminergic system, accompanied by epigenetic disruption during the brain
maturation process.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

PMCID: PMC4540106
PMID: 25612897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(1):115-24. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.987070.

Down regulation of miR-202 modulates Mxd1 and Sin3A repressor complexes to induce
apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells.

Farhana L(1), Dawson MI, Fontana JA.

Author information: 
(1)a John D Dingell VA Medical Center; Department of Oncology ; Detroit , MI USA.

Aberrant regulation of microRNA expression in pancreatic cancers has been shown
to play an important role in its inherent poor prognosis and malignant potential.
MicroRNAs have also been shown to inhibit translation of genes by targeting the
3'-untranslated region (3-UTR) of mRNAs resulting in the inhibition of
translation and often destruction of the mRNA. In the present study we
investigated the role of the microRNA miR-202 in the apoptotic pathways of
pancreatic cancer cells. The adamantyl-related molecule, 3-Cl-AHPC down-regulated
expression of miR-202 and miR-578 resulting in the increased expression of mRNA
and protein expression of their target genes, Max dimerization protein 1
(Mxd1/Mad1) and the Sin3A associated protein 18 (SAP18). Overexpression of
pre-miR-202 led to diminished levels of Mxd1 and blocked the 3-Cl-AHPC-mediated
increase in Mxd1 mRNA expression. The addition of the microRNA inhibitor
2'-O-methylated miR-202 enhanced the 3-Cl-AHPC-mediated increase of Mxd1 mRNA
levels as well as 3-CI-AHPC-mediated apoptosis. We found increased Mxd1 bound to 
the Sin3A repressor protein complex through its increased binding with HDAC-2 and
subsequently enhanced transcriptional repression in cells as evidenced by
increased HDAC activity. Mxd1 also repressed human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT) mRNA expression through its increased binding to the hTERT 
promoter site and resulted in decreased telomerase activity in cells. Our results
demonstrate that down regulation of miR-202 increased the expression of its
target Mxd1, followed by Mxd1 recruitment to the Sin3A repressor complex and
through its dimerization with Max, and increased repression of Myc-Max target
proteins.

PMCID: PMC4623045
PMID: 25611699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 21;35(3):1250-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2444-14.2015.

HDAC2 selectively regulates FOXO3a-mediated gene transcription during oxidative
stress-induced neuronal cell death.

Peng S(1), Zhao S(2), Yan F(3), Cheng J(2), Huang L(2), Chen H(2), Liu Q(4), Ji
X(5), Yuan Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China, Center of Alzheimer's
Disease, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing, 100069, China, and
College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Institute
of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (3)The
Cerebrovascular Diseases Research Institute, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100053, China. (4)High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, 230031, China. (5)The Cerebrovascular Diseases
Research Institute, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, Beijing,
100053, China, jixm@ccmu.edu.cn zqyuan@ibp.ac.cn. (6)State Key Laboratory of
Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China, Center of Alzheimer's Disease, Beijing Institute
for Brain Disorders, Beijing, 100069, China, and jixm@ccmu.edu.cn
zqyuan@ibp.ac.cn.

All neurodegenerative diseases are associated with oxidative stress-induced
neuronal death. Forkhead box O3a (FOXO3a) is a key transcription factor involved 
in neuronal apoptosis. However, how FOXO3a forms complexes and functions in
oxidative stress processing remains largely unknown. In the present study, we
show that histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) forms a physical complex with FOXO3a,
which plays an important role in FOXO3a-dependent gene transcription and
oxidative stress-induced mouse cerebellar granule neuron (CGN) apoptosis.
Interestingly, we also found that HDAC2 became selectively enriched in the
promoter region of the p21 gene, but not those of other target genes, and
inhibited FOXO3a-mediated p21 transcription. Furthermore, we found that oxidative
stress reduced the interaction between FOXO3a and HDAC2, leading to an increased 
histone H4K16 acetylation level in the p21 promoter region and upregulated p21
expression in a manner independent of p53 or E2F1. Phosphorylation of HDAC2 at
Ser 394 is important for the HDAC2-FOXO3a interaction, and we found that cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion reduced phosphorylation of HDAC2 at Ser 394 and mitigated
the HDAC2-FOXO3a interaction in mouse brain tissue. Our study reveals the novel
regulation of FOXO3a-mediated selective gene transcription via epigenetic
modification in the process of oxidative stress-induced cell death, which could
be exploited therapeutically.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/351250-10$15.00/0.

PMID: 25609639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Inflamm (Lond). 2014 Dec 20;11(1):43. doi: 10.1186/s12950-014-0043-2.
eCollection 2014.

The histone deacetylase Hdac1 regulates inflammatory signalling in intestinal
epithelial cells.

Gonneaud A(1), Gagné JM(1), Turgeon N(1), Asselin C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1E 4K8 Canada.

BACKGROUND: It has recently been found that both nuclear epithelial-expressed
histone deacetylases Hdac1 and Hdac2 are important to insure intestinal
homeostasis and control the mucosal inflammatory response in vivo. In addition,
HDAC inhibitors modulate epithelial cell inflammatory responses in cancer cells. 
However, little is known of the specific role of different HDAC, notably Hdac1,
in the regulation of inflammatory gene expression in intestinal epithelial cells 
(IEC).
METHODS: We investigated the role of Hdac1 in non-transformed IEC-6 rat cells
infected with lentiviral vectors expressing specific Hdac1 shRNAs, to suppress
Hdac1 expression. Proliferation was assessed by cell counting. Deacetylase
activity was measured with a colorimetric HDAC assay. Cells were treated with
IL-1ß and/or the JQ1 bromodomain acetyl-binding inhibitor. Nuclear protein levels
of Hdac1, Hdac2, phosphorylated or unphosphorylated NF-<U+03BA>B p65 or C/EBPß, and
NF-<U+03BA>B p50 and actin were determined by Western blot. Chemokine and acute phase
protein expression was assessed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis. Secreted
cytokine and chemokine levels were assessed with a protein array. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments were done to assess RNA polymerase II
recruitment.
RESULTS: Reduced Hdac1 protein levels led to Hdac2 protein increases and
decreased cell proliferation. Hdac1 depletion prolonged nuclear IL-1ß-induced
phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 protein on Ser536 as opposed to total p65, and of
C/EBPß on Ser105. In addition, semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed three
patterns of expression caused by Hdac1 depletion, namely increased basal and
IL-1ß-stimulated levels (Hp, Kng1), increased IL-1ß-stimulated levels (Cxcl2) and
decreased basal levels with normal IL-1ß induction levels (Ccl2, Ccl5, Cxcl1,
C3). Secreted cytokine and chemokine measurements confirmed that Hdac1 played
roles both as an IL-1ß signalling repressor and activator. Hdac1 depletion did
not alter the JQ1 dependent inhibition of basal and IL-1ß-induced inflammatory
gene expression. Hdac1 depletion led to decreased basal levels of RNA polymerase 
II enrichment on the Ccl2 promoter, as opposed to the Gapdh promoter, correlating
with decreased Ccl2 basal mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Hdac1 is a major nuclear HDAC controlling IL-1ß-dependent
inflammatory response in IEC, notably by regulating gene-specific transcriptional
responses. Hdac1 may be important in restricting basal and inflammatory-induced
gene levels to defined ranges of expression.

PMCID: PMC4299484
PMID: 25606026  [PubMed]


189. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):26528-40. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3100.

Selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 induces p53-dependent survivin
downregulation through MDM2 proteasomal degradation.

Seo SK(1), Hwang CS(2), Choe TB(3), Hong SI(4), Yi JY(5), Hwang SG(1), Lee HG(6),
Oh ST(7), Lee YH(7), Park IC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological &
Medical Sciences, Gongneung-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Human
Resource Biobank, Cheil General Hospital, Catholic Kwandong University College of
Medicine, Jung-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Microbiological
Engineering, Kon-Kuk University, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Korea Cancer Center Hospital, Korea
Institute of Radiological & Medical Sciences, Gongneung-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (5)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of
Radiological & Medical Sciences, Gongneung-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Yonsei 
University, Seongsan-no, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (7)Department of
Radiation Oncology, College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Seongsan-no,
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

In the present study, we found that selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) with small inhibitory RNA (siRNA) induced survivin downregulation in a
p53-dependent manner. Interestingly, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) or
knockdown of HDAC2 induced downregulation of Mdm2, a negative regulator of p53,
at the protein level. SAHA and/or HDAC2 siRNA increased Mdm2 ubiquitination, and 
MG132, an inhibitor of proteosome function, prevented HDAC2 inhibition-induced
degradation of Mdm2. Clinically, the mRNA levels of HDAC2 and survivin were
prominently overexpressed in lung cancer patients compared to normal lung
tissues. Silencing of HDAC2 enhanced the cell death caused by ionizing radiation 
in lung cancer cells. Collectively, our results indicate that selective
inhibition of HDAC2 causes survivin downregulation through activation of p53,
which is mediated by downregulation of Mdm2. They further suggest that HDAC2 may 
exert a dominant effect on lung cancer cell survival by sustaining Mdm2-survivin 
levels.

PMCID: PMC4694920
PMID: 25605253  [PubMed - in process]


190. Reprod Domest Anim. 2015 Apr;50(2):292-8. doi: 10.1111/rda.12487. Epub 2015 Jan
21.

Effects of co-culture of cumulus oocyte complexes with denuded oocytes during in 
vitro maturation on the developmental competence of cloned bovine embryos.

Ha AN(1), Fakruzzaman M, Lee KL, Bang JI, Deb GK, Wang Z, Kong IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 Plus),
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Korea.

This study evaluated the effects of co-culture of immature cumulus oocyte
complexes (COCs) with denuded immature oocytes (DO) during in vitro maturation on
the developmental competence and quality of cloned bovine embryos. We
demonstrated that developmental competence, judged by the blastocyst formation
rate, was significantly higher in the co-cultured somatic cell nuclear transfer
(SCNT+DO, 37.1 ± 1.1%) group than that in the non-co-cultured somatic cell
nuclear transfer (SCNT-DO, 25.1 ± 0.9%) group and was very similar to that in the
control IVF (IVF, 38.8 ± 2.8%) group. Moreover, the total cell number per
blastocyst in the SCNT+DO group (101.7 ± 6.2) was higher than that in the SCNT-DO
group (81.7 ± 4.3), while still less than that in the IVF group (133.3 ± 6.0).
Furthermore, our data showed that mRNA levels of the methylation-related genes
DNMT1 and DNMT3a in the SCNT+DO group were similar to that in the IVF group,
while they were significantly higher in the SCNT-DO group. Similarly, while the
mRNA levels of the deacetylation-related genes HDAC2 and HDAC3 were significantly
higher in the SCNT-DO group, they were comparable between the IVF and SCNT+DO
groups. However, the mRNA levels of HDAC1 and DNMT3B were significantly higher in
the SCNT+DO group than in the other groups. In conclusion, the present study
demonstrated that co-culture of COCs with DO improves the in vitro developmental 
competence and quality of cloned embryos, as evidenced by increased total cell
number.

© 2015 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 25605137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):4863-87.

HDAC1,2 inhibition impairs EZH2- and BBAP-mediated DNA repair to overcome
chemoresistance in EZH2 gain-of-function mutant diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Johnson DP(1), Spitz GS(2), Tharkar S(2), Quayle SN(3), Shearstone JR(3), Jones
S(3), McDowell ME(2), Wellman H(2), Tyler JK(4), Cairns BR(1), Chandrasekharan
MB(2), Bhaskara S(2,)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (2)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA. (3)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Gain-of-function mutations in the catalytic site of EZH2 (Enhancer of Zeste
Homologue 2), is observed in about 22% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
cases. Here we show that selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 1,2
(HDAC1,2) activity using a small molecule inhibitor causes cytotoxic or
cytostatic effects in EZH2 gain-of-function mutant (EZH2GOF) DLBCL cells. Our
results show that blocking the activity of HDAC1,2 increases global H3K27ac
without causing a concomitant global decrease in H3K27me3 levels. Our data shows 
that inhibition of HDAC1,2 is sufficient to decrease H3K27me3 present at DSBs,
decrease DSB repair and activate the DNA damage response in these cells. In
addition to increased H3K27me3, we found that the EZH2GOF DLBCL cells overexpress
another chemotherapy resistance factor - B-lymphoma and BAL-associated protein
(BBAP). BBAP monoubiquitinates histone H4K91, a residue that is also subjected to
acetylation. Our results show that selective inhibition of HDAC1,2 increases
H4K91ac, decreases BBAP-mediated H4K91 monoubiquitination, impairs BBAP-dependent
DSB repair and sensitizes the refractory EZH2GOF DLBCL cells to treatment with
doxorubicin, a chemotherapy agent. Hence, selective HDAC1,2 inhibition provides a
novel DNA repair mechanism-based therapeutic approach as it can overcome both
EZH2- and BBAP-mediated DSB repair in the EZH2GOF DLBCL cells.

PMCID: PMC4467121
PMID: 25605023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 30;9(12):e116252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116252.
eCollection 2014.

Activation of the RhoB signaling pathway by thyroid hormone receptor ß in thyroid
cancer cells.

Ichijo S(1), Furuya F(1), Shimura H(2), Hayashi Y(3), Takahashi K(1), Ohta K(1), 
Kobayashi T(1), Kitamura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima,
Japan. (3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Division of Molecular and
Cellular Adaptation, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya
University, Nagoya, Japan.

Thyroid hormone receptor (TR) mediates the crucial effects of the thyroid hormone
(T3) on cellular growth, development, and differentiation. Decreased expression
or inactivating somatic mutations of TRs have been found in human cancers of the 
liver, breast, lung, and thyroid. The mechanisms of TR-associated carcinogenesis 
are still not clear. To establish the function of TRß in thyroid cancer cell
proliferation, we constructed a recombinant adenovirus vector, AdTRß, which
expresses human TRß1 cDNA. Thyroid cancer cell lines in which TRß protein levels 
were significantly decreased as compared to intact thyroid tissues were infected 
with AdTRß and the function of TRß on cell proliferation and migration was
analyzed. Ligand-bound TRß induced HDAC1 and HDAC3 dissociation from, and histone
acetylation associated with the RhoB promoter and enhanced the expression of RhoB
mRNA and protein. In AdTRß-infected cells, T3 and farnesyl transferase inhibitor 
(FTI)-treatment induced the distribution of RhoB on the cell membrane and
enhanced the abundance of active GTP-bound RhoB. This RhoB protein led to
p21-associated cell-cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase, following inhibition of cell
proliferation and invasion. Conversely, lowering cellular RhoB by small
interfering RNA knockdown in AdTRß-infected cells led to downregulation of p21
and inhibited cell-cycle arrest. The growth of BHP18-21v tumor xenografts in vivo
was significantly inhibited by AdTRß injection with FTIs-treatment, as compared
to control virus-injected tumors. This novel signaling pathway triggered by
ligand-bound TRß provides insight into possible mechanisms of proliferation and
invasion of thyroid cancer and may provide new therapeutic targets for thyroid
cancers.

PMCID: PMC4280201
PMID: 25548921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 30;9(12):e116183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116183.
eCollection 2014.

Sodium butyrate promotes the differentiation of rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem 
cells to smooth muscle cells through histone acetylation.

Liu J(1), Wang Y(1), Wu Y(2), Ni B(2), Liang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Southwest Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR China. (2)Institutions of Immunology,
PLA, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR China.

Establishing an effective method to improve stem cell differentiation is crucial 
in stem cell transplantation. Here we aimed to explore whether and how sodium
butyrate (NaB) induces rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to
differentiate into bladder smooth muscle cells (SMCs). We found that NaB
significantly suppressed MSC proliferation and promoted MSCs differentiation into
SMCs, as evidenced by the enhanced expression of SMC specific genes in the MSCs. 
Co-culturing the MSCs with SMCs in a transwell system promoted the
differentiation of MSCs into SMCs. NaB again promoted MSC differentiation in this
system. Furthermore, NaB enhanced the acetylation of SMC gene-associated H3K9 and
H4, and decreased the expression of HDAC2 and down-regulated the recruitment of
HDAC2 to the promoter regions of SMC specific genes. Finally, we found that NaB
significantly promoted MSC depolarization and increased the intracellular calcium
level of MSCs upon carbachol stimulation. These results demonstrated that NaB
effectively promotes MSC differentiation into SMCs, possibly by the marked
inhibition of HDAC2 expression and disassociation of HDAC2 recruitment to SMC
specific genes in MSCs, which further induces high levels of H3K9ace and H4ace
and the enhanced expression of target genes, and this strategy could potentially 
be applied in clinical tissue engineering and cell transplantation.

PMCID: PMC4280132
PMID: 25548915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Breast Cancer. 2014 Dec;17(4):323-31. doi: 10.4048/jbc.2014.17.4.323. Epub 2014
Dec 26.

Expression of Histone Deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6 in Invasive
Ductal Carcinomas of the Breast.

Seo J(1), Min SK(1), Park HR(1), Kim DH(1), Kwon MJ(1), Kim LS(2), Ju YS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym
University College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea. (2)Division of Breast and
Endocrine Surgery, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University
College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea. (3)Department of Occupation and Environmental
Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University College of
Medicine, Anyang, Korea.

PURPOSE: DNA deacetylation by histone deacetylase (HDAC) is an important
mechanism involved in the oncogenic tumorigenesis of breast cancer. Previous
studies have reported an association of the estrogen receptor (ER) with HDACs and
demonstrated the efficacy of HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of breast cancers 
via in vitro experiments. In this study, we examined the association of HDAC
expression with clinicopathological parameters and disease-specific survival.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6 was
performed using tissue microarrays in 300 invasive ductal carcinomas. IHC scoring
was determined by multiplication of the intensity (0 to 3) and the proportion (0 
to 4) of staining, and we classified tumors into low- and high-HDAC expression
groups.
RESULTS: High expression of HDAC1 was correlated with the molecular subtype
(p=0.001) and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) amplification (p=0.012).
High expression of HDAC6 was correlated with a younger age (p<0.001), ER
expression (p=0.025), progesterone receptor expression (p=0.034), molecular
subtype (p=0.023), and HER2 amplification (p=0.011). High HDAC1 expression was
correlated with luminal A tumors (p=0.001), while high HDAC6 expression was more 
common in luminal B tumors (p=0.023). Although the expression of HDACs did not
exhibit prognostic significance in the entire cohort, high expression of HDAC1
and HDAC6 was associated with improved overall survival (OS) in patients with
ER-positive tumors (p=0.017 and p=0.029, respectively), and high expression of
HDAC2 was correlated with improved OS in ER-negative tumors (p=0.048) on
univariate analysis. Furthermore, high HDAC6 expression was associated with
improved disease-free survival (p=0.048) on multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: HDAC1 expression is significantly correlated with the molecular
subtypes of tumors, with the highest expression being observed in luminal A
tumors. HDAC6 is a significantly correlated with ER expression and the molecular 
subtype, thereby supporting the estrogen regulatory property of HDAC6. HDAC1 and 
HDAC6 expression are good prognostic factors for ER-positive tumors.

PMCID: PMC4278050
PMID: 25548579  [PubMed]


195. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):687-92. doi: 10.1021/cb500767c. Epub 2015 Jan 2.

Computational design of a time-dependent histone deacetylase 2 selective
inhibitor.

Zhou J(1), Li M(1), Chen N(1), Wang S(2), Luo HB(1), Zhang Y(2,)(3), Wu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, 
P.R. China. (2)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, New York 
10003, United States. (3)§NYU-ECNU Center for Computational Chemistry at NYU
Shanghai, Shanghai 200062, P.R. China.

Development of isoform-selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors is of
great biological and medical interest. Among 11 zinc-dependent HDAC isoforms, it 
is particularly challenging to achieve isoform inhibition selectivity between
HDAC1 and HDAC2 due to their very high structural similarities. In this work, by 
developing and applying a novel de novo reaction-mechanism-based inhibitor design
strategy to exploit the reactivity difference, we have discovered the first
HDAC2-selective inhibitor, ß-hydroxymethyl chalcone. Our bioassay experiments
show that this new compound has a unique time-dependent selective inhibition on
HDAC2, leading to about 20-fold isoform-selectivity against HDAC1. Furthermore,
our ab initio QM/MM molecular dynamics simulations, a state-of-the-art approach
to study reactions in biological systems, have elucidated how the ß-hydroxymethyl
chalcone can achieve the distinct time-dependent inhibition toward HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC4372102
PMID: 25546141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Adv Bioinformatics. 2014;2014:812148. doi: 10.1155/2014/812148. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Ligand Based Pharmacophore Modeling and Virtual Screening Studies to Design Novel
HDAC2 Inhibitors.

Kandakatla N(1), Ramakrishnan G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Sathyabama University, Jeppiaar Nagar, Chennai
600119, India.

Histone deacetylases 2 (HDAC2), Class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) family,
emerged as an important therapeutic target for the treatment of various cancers. 
A total of 48 inhibitors of two different chemotypes were used to generate
pharmacophore model using 3D QSAR pharmacophore generation (HypoGen algorithm)
module in Discovery Studio. The best HypoGen model consists of four pharmacophore
features namely, one hydrogen bond acceptor (HBA), and one hydrogen donor (HBD), 
one hydrophobic (HYP) and one aromatic centres, (RA). This model was validated
against 20 test set compounds and this model was utilized as a 3D query for
virtual screening to validate against NCI and Maybridge database and the hits
further screened by Lipinski's rule of 5, and a total of 382 hit compounds from
NCI and 243 hit compounds from Maybridge were found and were subjected to
molecular docking in the active site of HDAC2 (PDB: 3MAX). Finally eight hit
compounds, NSC108392, NSC127064, NSC110782, and NSC748337 from NCI database and
MFCD01935795, MFCD00830779, MFCD00661790, and MFCD00124221 from Maybridge
database, were considered as novel potential HDAC2 inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4265523
PMID: 25525429  [PubMed]


197. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 19;33:108. doi: 10.1186/s13046-014-0108-3.

Histone acetyltransferase inhibitor II induces apoptosis in glioma cell lines via
the p53 signaling pathway.

Xu LX(1), Li ZH(2), Tao YF(3), Li RH(4), Fang F(5), Zhao H(6), Li G(7), Li YH(8),
Wang J(9), Feng X(10), Pan J(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital affiliated to Soochow
University, Suzhou, 215006, China. xulixiao2013@hotmail.com. (2)Institute of
Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital affiliated to Soochow University, Suzhou,
215006, China. szlizhiheng@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Children's Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China.
taoyanfang1982@163.com. (4)Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital of
Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China. 474235744@qq.com. (5)Institute of
Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital affiliated to Soochow University, Suzhou,
215006, China. baseff77@gmail.com. (6)Institute of Pediatric Research, Children's
Hospital affiliated to Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China.
623863179@qq.com. (7)Institute of Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital
affiliated to Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China.
ligangmailbox@hotmail.com. (8)Institute of Pediatric Research, Children's
Hospital affiliated to Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China.
lyh072006@hotmail.com. (9)Institute of Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital
affiliated to Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China. wj196312@vip.163.com.
(10)Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou,
215006, China. xing_feng66@hotmail.com. (11)Department of Hematology and
Oncology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, 215006, China.
panjian2008@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitors can inhibit proliferation 
and induce apoptosis in cancer cell lines. The novel cell-permeable
p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP)-selective HAT inhibitor HATi II can reduce
histone H3 acetylation and induce chromatin condensation in HeLa cells. Here, we 
examined the effects and mechanism of action of HATi II in glioma cell lines.
METHODS: Cell viability was assessed using the CCK-8 assay. Cell cycle analysis
was performed using flow cytometry. Apoptosis was evaluated using Annexin V
staining and flow cytometry, Hoechst 33342 staining and the TUNEL assay.
Expression and cleavage of caspase-3, caspase-9 and poly ADP-ribose polymerase
(PARP) were assessed by Western blotting. Statistical analysis was performed
using two-tailed Student's t-tests. The gene expression profiles of U251 glioma
cells treated with HATi II or DMSO were analyzed using the Arraystar Human 8 x
60 K LncRNA/mRNA expression array; data was analyzed using MEV (Multi Experiment 
View) cluster software. Datasets representing genes with altered expression
profiles (=2-fold) derived from the cluster analyses were subjected to gene
ontology and pathway analysis.
RESULTS: HATi II inhibited the proliferation of U251, U87, HS683 and SHG44 cells 
in a dose-dependent manner. HATi II induced cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase, 
and induced significant levels of apoptosis, apoptotic body formation and DNA
fragmentation in HATi II-treated U251 and SHG44 cells. HATi II induced cleavage
of caspase-3, caspase-9 and PARP in U251 and SHG44 cells. In HATi II-treated U251
cells, 965 genes were upregulated, 984 genes were downregulated and 3492/33327
lncRNAs were differentially expressed. GO analysis showed the differentially
expressed genes with known functions are involved in a variety of processes;
alcoholism, p53 signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and
transcriptional mis-regulation in cancer were the four most significant pathways.
Upregulation of p53 signaling pathway-related genes in HATi II-treated cells was 
confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting.
CONCLUSIONS: HATi II inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis via the
caspase-dependent pathway in human glioma cell lines, possibly by activating the 
p53 signaling pathway. HATi II deserves further investigation as a novel
treatment for glioma.

PMCID: PMC4321714
PMID: 25523932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Sep 16;94(34):2699-703.

[Effects of smoking on expressions of HIF-1a and HDAC2 in asthmatic mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu H(1), Dai Y(2), Xia M(1), Chen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou 325027, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Second Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325027, China.
Email: daiyr@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of smoking on airway inflammation through the
expressions of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and histone deacetylase-2
(HDAC2) in asthmatic mice.
METHODS: A total of 30 female SPF BALB/c mice were divided randomly into 3 groups
of control (C), asthma (A) and smoking asthma (S). The latter two groups were
sensitized and challenged with ovalbumin (OVA) for asthmatic modeling. The mice
of group S were placed into a self-made fumigating box for passive smoking. While
group S was sensitized and challenged with normal saline instead of OVA. The
pathological changes of different groups were observed. The different cell counts
of bronchoalveolar fluid (BALF) were analyzed. The expressions of HIF-1a and
HDAC2 were detected by immunohistochemistry. The level of interleukin (IL)-8 in
BALF was detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). And the levels of
HIF-1a and HDAC2 in lung homogenate were measured by Western blot.
RESULTS: The ratios of eosinophil (EOS) to total cell numbers of BALF in groups A
and S were significantly higher than that in group C ((8.90 ± 1.60)%, (7.52 ±
0.63)% vs (0.60 ± 0.10)%, both P < 0.01), while the ratio of neutrophile (NEU) in
group S was higher than that in group A ((18.24 ± 5.19)% vs (8.46 ± 1.58)%, P <
0.01). Western blot showed that HIF-1a expressions in lung homogenate of groups A
and S were significantly elevated than that in groups C (0.144 ± 0.008, 0.238 ±
0.015 vs 0.081 ± 0.005, both P < 0.01). While the HIF-1a level of group S was
higher than that of group A (P < 0.01). And the expressions of HDAC2 in groups A 
and S significantly decreased than that in group C (0.287 ± 0.008, 0.164 ± 0.015 
vs 0.452 ± 0.041, both P < 0.01). While the HDAC2 level of group S was lower than
that of group A (P < 0.01). The BALF level of IL-8 in group S was higher than
those in groups A and C ((42.07 ± 4.54) vs (21.66 ± 2.78), (14.33 ± 3.73) pg/ml, 
both P < 0.01). There were significantly negative correlations between the
expressions of HIF-1a and HDAC2 (r = -0.950, P < 0.01) in lung as well as HDAC2
in lung and IL-8 (r = -0.855, P < 0.01) in BALF.
CONCLUSION: Cigarette smoking aggravates the airway inflammation through a
down-regulated expression of HDAC2 by activating HIF-1a.

PMID: 25511602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Jan;91:88-98. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2014.12.002. Epub 2014 Dec 
11.

Carbocysteine restores steroid sensitivity by targeting histone deacetylase 2 in 
a thiol/GSH-dependent manner.

Song Y(1), Lu HZ(1), Xu JR(1), Wang XL(1), Zhou W(1), Hou LN(1), Zhu L(1), Yu
ZH(1), Chen HZ(2), Cui YY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai 200025, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address:
hongzhuan_chen@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address:
yongyaocui@hotmail.com.

Steroid insensitivity is commonly observed in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Here, we report the effects and mechanisms of carbocysteine
(S-CMC), a mucolytic agent, in cellular and animal models of oxidative
stress-mediated steroid insensitivity. The following results were obtained:
oxidative stress induced higher levels of interleukin-8 (IL-8) and tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-a), which are insensitive to dexamethasone (DEX). The failure
of DEX was improved by the addition of S-CMC by increasing histone deacetylase 2 
(HDAC2) expression/activity. S-CMC also counteracted the oxidative stress-induced
increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and decreases in glutathione
(GSH) levels and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity. Moreover, oxidative
stress-induced events were decreased by the thiol-reducing agent dithiothreitol
(DTT), enhanced by the thiol-oxidizing agent diamide, and the ability of DEX was 
strengthened by DTT. In addition, the oxidative stress-induced decrease in HDAC2 
activity was counteracted by S-CMC by increasing thiol/GSH levels, which
exhibited a direct interaction with HDAC2. S-CMC treatment increased HDAC2
recruitment and suppressed H4 acetylation of the IL-8 promoter, and this effect
was further ablated by addition of buthionine sulfoximine, a specific inhibitor
of GSH synthesis. Our results indicate that S-CMC restored steroid sensitivity by
increasing HDAC2 expression/activity in a thiol/GSH-dependent manner and suggest 
that S-CMC may be useful in a combination therapy with glucocorticoids for
treatment of steroid-insensitive pulmonary diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25500537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Sci Signal. 2014 Dec 9;7(355):re12. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaa0069.

Histone deacetylases in memory and cognition.

Penney J(1), Tsai LH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (2)Picower
Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. lhtsai@mit.edu.

Over the past 30 years, lysine acetylation of histone and nonhistone proteins has
become established as a key modulator of gene expression regulating numerous
aspects of cell biology. Neuronal growth and plasticity are no exception; roles
for lysine acetylation and deacetylation in brain function and dysfunction
continue to be uncovered. Transcriptional programs coupling synaptic activity to 
changes in gene expression are critical to the plasticity mechanisms underlying
higher brain functions. These transcriptional programs can be modulated by
changes in histone acetylation, and in many cases, transcription factors and
histone-modifying enzymes are recruited together to plasticity-associated genes. 
Lysine acetylation, catalyzed by lysine acetyltransferases (KATs), generally
promotes cognitive performance, whereas the opposing process, catalyzed by
histone lysine deacetylases (HDACs), appears to negatively regulate cognition in 
multiple brain regions. Consistently, mutation or deregulation of different KATs 
or HDACs contributes to neurological dysfunction and neurodegeneration. HDAC
inhibitors have shown promise as a treatment to combat the cognitive decline
associated with aging and neurodegenerative disease, as well as to ameliorate the
symptoms of depression and posttraumatic stress disorder, among others. In this
review, we discuss the evidence for the roles of HDACs in cognitive function as
well as in neurological disorders and disease. In particular, we focus on HDAC2, 
which plays a central role in coupling lysine acetylation to synaptic plasticity 
and mediates many of the effects of HDAC inhibition in cognition and disease.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25492968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(18):2869-78. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.946834.

BRG1, the ATPase subunit of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, interacts with 
HDAC2 to modulate telomerase expression in human cancer cells.

Wu S(1), Ge Y, Huang L, Liu H, Xue Y, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)a The School of Life Sciences ; Tsinghua University ; Beijing , PR China.

Telomerase is often upregulated during initiation and/or progression of human
tumors, suggesting that repression of telomerase might inhibit cancer growth or
progression. Here, we report that BRG1, the ATPase subunit of the SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complex, is a general suppressor of hTERT transcription in
human cancer cells. While overexpression of BRG1 inhibits hTERT transcription,
depletion of BRG1 stimulates transcription of hTERT, leading to higher telomerase
activity and longer telomeres. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that
BRG1 binds to the transcription start site (TSS) of the hTERT promoter and forms 
a ternary complex with histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2). BRG1 remodels chromatin
structure to facilitate the action of HDAC2, leading to deacetylation of H3K9ac
and H4ac at the TSS and suppression of hTERT transcription. On the other hand,
ß-catenin binds to the TSS and stimulates hTERT transcription. Thus, BRG1/HDAC2
and ß-catenin constitute a manipulative apparatus at the TSS to play opposite but
complementary roles in regulating hTERT expression. These results uncover a
yin-yang mechanism in modulating hTERT transcription and provide explanation for 
limited transcription of hTERT in human cancer cells. BRG1/HDAC2 may have a
potential as an anti-cancer therapeutic and/or for reactivating cellular
proliferative capacity in the context of in vitro tissue engineering.

PMCID: PMC4612678
PMID: 25486475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(24):3909-20. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.973310.

Oncogenic STRAP functions as a novel negative regulator of E-cadherin and
p21(Cip1) by modulating the transcription factor Sp1.

Jin L(1), Datta PK.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Hematology and Oncology; Department of Medicine; UAB
Comprehensive Cancer Center; University of Alabama at Birmingham ; Birmingham ,
AL USA.

We have previously reported the identification of a novel WD-domain protein,
STRAP that plays a role in maintenance of mesenchymal morphology by regulating
E-cadherin and that enhances tumorigenicity partly by downregulating CDK
inhibitor p21(Cip1). However, the functional mechanism of regulation of
E-cadherin and p21(Cip1) by STRAP is unknown. Here, we have employed STRAP knock 
out and knockdown cell models (mouse embryonic fibroblast, human cancer cell
lines) to show how STRAP downregulates E-cadherin and p21(Cip1) by abrogating the
binding of Sp1 to its consensus binding sites. Moreover, ChIP assays suggest that
STRAP recruits HDAC1 to Sp1 binding sites in p21(Cip1) promoter. Interestingly,
loss of STRAP can stabilize Sp1 by repressing its ubiquitination in G1 phase,
resulting in an enhanced expression of p21(Cip1) by >4.5-fold and cell cycle
arrest. Using Bioinformatics and Microarray analyses, we have observed that 87%
mouse genes downregulated by STRAP have conserved Sp1 binding sites. In NSCLC,
the expression levels of STRAP inversely correlated with that of Sp1 (60%). These
results suggest a novel mechanism of regulation of E-cadherin and p21(Cip1) by
STRAP by modulating Sp1-dependent transcription, and higher expression of STRAP
in lung cancer may contribute to downregulation of E-cadherin and p21(Cip1) and
to tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC4614439
PMID: 25483064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 20;6(2):886-901.

HDAC2 deregulation in tumorigenesis is causally connected to repression of immune
modulation and defense escape.

Conte M(1), Dell'Aversana C(2), Benedetti R(1), Petraglia F(1), Carissimo A(1),
Petrizzi VB(3), D'Arco AM(3), Abbondanza C(1), Nebbioso A(1), Altucci L(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General Pathology, Seconda
Università degli Studi di Napoli, vico L. De Crecchio, Naples, IT. (2)Institute
of Genetics and Biophysics, IGB 'Adriano Buzzati-Traverso', Via P. Castellino,
Naples, IT. (3)Division of Onco-Hematology, Umberto I Hospital, via S. Francesco,
Nocera Inferiore (SA), IT. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General 
Pathology, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, vico L. De Crecchio, Naples,
IT.Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, IGB 'Adriano Buzzati-Traverso', Via P.
Castellino, Naples, IT.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is overexpressed or mutated in several disorders
such as hematological cancers, and plays a critical role in transcriptional
regulation, cell cycle progression and developmental processes. Here, we
performed comparative transcriptome analyses in acute myeloid leukemia to
investigate the biological implications of HDAC2 silencing versus its enzymatic
inhibition using epigenetic-based drug(s). By gene expression analysis of
HDAC2-silenced vs wild-type cells, we found that HDAC2 has a specific role in
leukemogenesis. Gene expression profiling of U937 cell line with or without
treatment of the well-known HDAC inhibitor vorinostat (SAHA) identifies and
characterizes several gene clusters where inhibition of HDAC2 'mimics' its
silencing, as well as those where HDAC2 is selectively and exclusively regulated 
by HDAC2 protein expression levels. These findings may represent an important
tool for better understanding the mechanisms underpinning immune regulation,
particularly in the study of major histocompatibility complex class II genes.

PMCID: PMC4359263
PMID: 25473896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2015 Feb;352(2):236-43. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.219345. Epub 
2014 Dec 2.

MS-275 inhibits aroclor 1254-induced SH-SY5Y neuronal cell toxicity by preventing
the formation of the HDAC3/REST complex on the synapsin-1 promoter.

Formisano L(1), Guida N(2), Laudati G(2), Mascolo L(2), Di Renzo G(2), Canzoniero
LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Science and Technology, University of 
Sannio, Benevento, Italy (L.F., L.M.T.C.); and Division of Pharmacology,
Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and Odontostomatologic Sciences, School 
of Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples, Naples, Italy (L.F., N.G., G.L.,
L.M., G.D.R., L.M.T.C.) cformisa@unisannio.it. (2)Division of Pharmacology,
Department of Science and Technology, University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy
(L.F., L.M.T.C.); and Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience,
Reproductive and Odontostomatologic Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II"
University of Naples, Naples, Italy (L.F., N.G., G.L., L.M., G.D.R., L.M.T.C.).

Polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) exposure has been associated with
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, and dementia. Neuronal death elicited by the PCB mixture Aroclor 1254 
(A1254) has been attributed to an increase in RE-1-silencing transcription factor
(REST), which, in turn, correlates with a decrease in the synapsin-1 promoter
gene. Although histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are known to be
neuroprotective in several neurologic disorders, the core mechanisms governing
this effect are not yet understood. Here, to examine how HDAC class I
[N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[N-(pyridin-3-yl-methoxycarbonyl)aminomethyl]-benzamide
(MS-275)] and HDAC class II
[3-[5-(3-(3-fluorophenyl)-3-oxopropen-1-yl)-1-methyl-1H-pyrrol-2-yl]-N-hydroxy-2-
propenamide (MC-1568)] inhibitors prevent A1254-induced neuronal cell death, we
exposed SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells to A1254. Exposure to A1254 (30.6 µM) for 24 
and 48 hours resulted in a time-dependent cell death. Indeed, after 48 hours,
MS-275, but not MC-1568, reverted A1254-induced cell death in a dose-dependent
manner. Furthermore, A1254 significantly increased HDAC3, but not HDAC1 or HDAC2.
Interestingly, REST physically interacted with HDAC3 after A1254 exposure.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that MS-275 reverted the increased 
levels of HDAC3 binding and decreased acetylation of histone H3 within the
synapsin-1 promoter region, thus reverting synapsin-1 mRNA reduction. Moreover,
REST knockdown by small interfering RNA (siRNA) prevented HDAC3 from binding to
the synapsin-1 promoter. Likewise, HDAC3 siRNA significantly reduced
A1254-induced cell toxicity in SH-SY5Y cells and cortical neurons. Hence, this
study demonstrates that inhibition of HDAC class I attenuates A1254-induced
neuronal cell death by preventing HDAC3 binding and histone deacetylation within 
the synapsin-1 promoter region.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25467131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Dec 15;564:203-10. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.10.005.
Epub 2014 Oct 22.

The contribution of activating transcription factor 3 to apoptosis of human
colorectal cancer cells by protocatechualdehyde, a naturally occurring phenolic
compound.

Lee JR(1), Lee MH(1), Eo HJ(2), Park GH(2), Song HM(2), Kim MK(2), Lee JW(2),
Jeong JB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Gyeongbuk Institute for Bio-industry, Andong 760380, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Bioresource Sciences, Andong National University, Andong 760749,
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Bioresource Sciences, Andong National
University, Andong 760749, Republic of Korea; Institute of Agricultural Science
and Technology, Andong National University, Andong 760749, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: jjb0403@anu.ac.kr.

Protocatechualdehyde (PCA) is one of the important compounds found in barley,
green cavendish bananas and grapevine leaves. PCA shows anti-cancer activities in
breast, leukemia and colorectal cancer cells. Previous study reported that PCA
exerts anti-cancer activity through down-regulating cyclin D1 and HDAC2 in human 
colorectal cancer cells. However, the underlying mechanisms for the expression of
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) by PCA has not been studied. Thus, we
performed in vitro study to investigate if treatment of PCA affects ATF3
expression and ATF3-mediated apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cells. PCA
decreased cell viability in a dose-dependent manner in HCT116 and SW480 cells. In
addition, PCA reduced cell viability in MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and HepG-2 cells.
Exposure of PCA activated the levels of ATF3 protein and mRNA in HCT116 and SW480
cells. Inhibition of ERK1/2/ by PD98059 and p38 by SB203580 inhibited PCA-induced
ATF3 expression and transcriptional activation. ATF3-knockdown inhibited
PCA-induced apoptosis and cell viability. In addition, ATF3 overexpression
enhanced PCA-mediated cleavage of PARP. These findings suggest that inhibition of
cell viability and apoptosis by PCA may be result of ATF3 expression through
ERK1/2 and p38-mediated transcriptional activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25447816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Clin Invest. 2014 Dec;124(12):5521. doi: 10.1172/JCI79606. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Retraction: Denitrosylation of HDAC2 by targeting Nrf2 restores
glucocorticosteroid sensitivity in macrophages from COPD patients.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Malhotra D, Thimmulappa RK, Mercado N, Ito K, Kombairaju P, Kumar S, Ma J,
Feller-Kopman D, Wise R, Barnes P, Biswal S. J Clin Invest. 2011
Nov;121(11):4289-302.

PMCID: PMC4297205
PMID: 25438060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 20;34(34):4509-18. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.382. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

LRH-1 controls proliferation in breast tumor cells by regulating CDKN1A gene
expression.

Bianco S(1), Jangal M(1), Garneau D(1), Gévry N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biologie, Faculté des sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, 2500 
boulevard de l'Université, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.

Liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1, NR5A2) is an orphan nuclear receptor that has an
essential role in cancer progression, notably in breast cancer. Although its role
in promoting cancer cell proliferation and migration is well documented, the
molecular basis is not completely established. Here, we report that LRH-1
inhibition affects two- and three-dimensional cell proliferation of different
types of breast cancer cells, including estrogen receptor a (ERa)-positive and
triple-negative cells. This phenotype is accompanied by the upregulation of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CDKN1A (aka p21(CIP1/WAF1)) in a
p53-independent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis shows that LRH-1
cooperates with FOXA1 and binds directly to CDKN1A promoter and a distal
regulatory region found at -62<U+2009>kb from its transcriptional start sites, allowing 
repression of CDKN1A transcription. LRH-1 or FOXA1 depletion induces CDKN1A
upregulation by removing histone deacetylase 2 from the promoter and distal
regulatory elements and permitting histone acetylation in these regions. Analysis
of breast cancer samples reveals that a high LRH-1 level is inversely correlated 
with CDKN1A expression in breast cancer patients and is associated with poor
prognosis. This study reveals a novel mechanism of control of cell proliferation 
by LRH-1 regulating CDKN1A transcription in breast cancer cells, independent of
ERa and p53 status. Targeting LRH-1 may provide an attractive prospect for
treatment of tumors that are resistant to hormonal and targeted therapy.

PMID: 25435372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jan 2;456(1):320-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.11.079. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, reverses epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition in colorectal cancer SW480 and prostate cancer PC3 cells.

Wang X(1), Xu J(1), Wang H(2), Wu L(1), Yuan W(1), Du J(3), Cai S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacy College, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. (2)Department of 
Medical Laboratory, Anhui Provincial Hospital, Hefei 230001, China. (3)Department
of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China. Electronic address:
dujun@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (4)Pharmacy College, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, 
China. Electronic address: csh5689@sina.com.

Trichostatin A (TSA) is a kind of classical histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor.
In this study, we reported the reversal effects of TSA on EMT and investigated
the possible involved molecular mechanisms in SW480 and PC3 cells. Firstly, we
observed that TSA induced the reversal process of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in SW480 and PC3 cells, resulting in attenuated cell invasion
and migration abilities. TSA-induced EMT reversal was characterized by
up-regulation of E-cadherin and down-regulation of Vimentin. Then, treatment with
TSA also decreased the expression of transcription factor Slug. Furthermore,
over-expression of Slug significantly caused down-regulation of E-cadherin and
up-regulation of Vimentin. Meanwhile, TSA treatment in Slug-expressing cells
could prevent these changes. These findings suggested that Slug played a crucial 
role in TSA-induced EMT reversal. Additionally, the study showed that TSA could
induce the increase of HDAC1 and HDAC2 on the Slug gene promoter, which might be 
responsible for the suppression of Slug. Overall, TSA could reverse EMT in SW480 
and PC3 cells and TSA-mediated down-regulation of Slug was involved in the
reversal process.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25434997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Transl Psychiatry. 2014 Nov 25;4:e485. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.125.

Hippocampal and behavioral dysfunctions in a mouse model of environmental stress:
normalization by agomelatine.

Boulle F(1), Massart R(2), Stragier E(3), Païzanis E(3), Zaidan L(3), Marday
S(3), Gabriel C(4), Mocaer E(4), Mongeau R(5), Lanfumey L(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, INSERM UMR 894, Paris, France [2]
Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands [3] European Graduate School for Neuroscience (EURON),
Maastricht, The Netherlands [4] Université Paris Descartes Paris 5, Paris,
France. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)1] Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, INSERM
UMR 894, Paris, France [2] UPMC, Université Paris 6, UMR S677, Paris, France.
(4)IRIS, Suresnes, France. (5)1] Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, INSERM
UMR 894, Paris, France [2] Université Paris Descartes Paris 5, Paris, France.

Stress-induced alterations in neuronal plasticity and in hippocampal functions
have been suggested to be involved in the development of mood disorders. In this 
context, we investigated in the hippocampus the activation of intracellular
signaling cascades, the expression of epigenetic markers and plasticity-related
genes in a mouse model of stress-induced hyperactivity and of mixed affective
disorders. We also determined whether the antidepressant drug agomelatine, a
MT1/MT2 melatonergic receptor agonist/5-HT2C receptor antagonist, could prevent
some neurobiological and behavioral alterations produced by stress. C57BL/6J
mice, exposed for 3 weeks to daily unpredictable socio-environmental stressors of
mild intensity, were treated during the whole procedure with agomelatine
(50<U+2009>mg<U+2009>kg(-1) per day, intraperitoneal). Stressed mice displayed robust increases
in emotional arousal, vigilance and motor activity, together with a reward
deficit and a reduction in anxiety-like behavior. Neurobiological investigations 
showed an increased phosphorylation of intracellular signaling proteins,
including Atf1, Creb and p38, in the hippocampus of stressed mice. Decreased
hippocampal level of the repressive epigenetic marks HDAC2 and H3K9me2, as well
as increased level of the permissive mark H3K9/14ac suggested that chronic mild
stress was associated with increased gene transcription, and clear-cut evidence
was further indicated by changes in neuroplasticity-related genes, including Arc,
Bcl2, Bdnf, Gdnf, Igf1 and Neurod1. Together with other findings, the present
data suggest that chronic ultra-mild stress can model the hyperactivity or
psychomotor agitation, as well as the mixed affective behaviors often observed
during the manic state of bipolar disorder patients. Interestingly, agomelatine
could normalize both the behavioral and the molecular alterations induced by
stress, providing further insights into the mechanism of action of this new
generation antidepressant drug.

PMCID: PMC4259995
PMID: 25423137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. BMC Biol. 2014 Nov 19;12:95. doi: 10.1186/s12915-014-0095-z.

Suppression of histone deacetylation promotes the differentiation of human
pluripotent stem cells towards neural progenitor cells.

Yang J(1), Tang Y(2), Liu H(3), Guo F(4), Ni J(5), Le W(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. yangjuan@sibs.ac.cn. (2)Key 
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. tangyu-sky@163.com.
(3)Center for Translational Research of Neurology Disease, The 1st Affiliated
Hospital, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. liu_hui0505@163.com. (4)Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. fguo@sibs.ac.cn. (5)Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. nijun@sibs.ac.cn. (6)Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. wdle@sibs.ac.cn. (7)Center
for Translational Research of Neurology Disease, The 1st Affiliated Hospital,
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. wdle@sibs.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Emerging studies of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) raise new
prospects for neurodegenerative disease modeling and cell replacement therapies. 
Therefore, understanding the mechanisms underlying the commitment of neural
progenitor cells (NPCs) is important for the application of hPSCs in
neurodegenerative disease therapies. It has been reported that epigenetic
modifications of histones play important roles in neural differentiation, but the
exact mechanisms in regulating hPSC differentiation towards NPCs are not fully
elucidated.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that suppression of histone deacetylases (HDACs)
promoted the differentiation of hPSCs towards NPCs. Application of HDAC
inhibitors (HDACi) increased the expression of neuroectodermal markers and
enhanced the neuroectodermal specification once neural differentiation was
initiated, thereby leading to more NPC generation. Similarly, the transcriptome
analysis showed that HDACi increased the expression levels of ectodermal markers 
and triggered the NPC differentiation related pathways, while decreasing the
expression levels of endodermal and mesodermal markers. Furthermore, we
documented that HDAC3 but not HDAC1 or HDAC2 was the critical regulator
participating in NPC differentiation, and knockdown of HDAC3's cofactor SMRT
exhibited a similar effect as HDAC3 on NPC generation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals that HDACs, especially HDAC3, negatively regulate 
the differentiation of hPSCs towards NPCs at an earlier stage of neural
differentiation. Moreover, HDAC3 might function by forming a repressor complex
with its cofactor SMRT during this process. Thus, our findings uncover an
important epigenetic mechanism of HDAC3 in the differentiation of hPSCs towards
NPCs.

PMCID: PMC4254204
PMID: 25406762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. BMB Rep. 2015 Mar;48(3):131-8.

Role of histone deacetylase 2 and its posttranslational modifications in cardiac 
hypertrophy.

Eom GH(1), Kook H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Medical Research Center for Gene Regulation,
Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Korea.

Cardiac hypertrophy is a form of global remodeling, although the initial step
seems to be an adaptation to increased hemodynamic demands. The characteristics
of cardiac hypertrophy include the functional reactivation of the arrested fetal 
gene program, where histone deacetylases (HDACs) are closely linked in the
development of the process. To date, mammalian HDACs are divided into four
classes: I, II, III, and IV. By structural similarities, class II HDACs are then 
subdivided into IIa and IIb. Among class I and II HDACs, HDAC2, 4, 5, and 9 have 
been reported to be involved in hypertrophic responses; HDAC4, 5, and 9 are
negative regulators, whereas HDAC2 is a pro-hypertrophic mediator. The molecular 
function and regulation of class IIa HDACs depend largely on the
phosphorylation-mediated cytosolic redistribution, whereas those of HDAC2 take
place primarily in the nucleus. In response to stresses, posttranslational
modification (PTM) processes, dynamic modifications after the translation of
proteins, are involved in the regulation of the activities of those
hypertrophy-related HDACs. In this article, we briefly review 1) the activation
of HDAC2 in the development of cardiac hypertrophy and 2) the PTM of HDAC2 and
its implications in the regulation of HDAC2 activity.

PMCID: PMC4453031
PMID: 25388210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Nov 5;15(11):20240-53. doi: 10.3390/ijms151120240.

Pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy response requires janus kinase
2-histone deacetylase 2 signaling.

Ying H(1), Xu MC(2), Tan JH(3), Shen JH(4), Wang H(5), Zhang DF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Pu Dong New Area People's Hospital,
Shanghai 200120, China. yingyinghuang126@126.com. (2)Department of Cardiology,
Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China.
xumaochunchina@163.com. (3)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Pu Dong New Area
People's Hospital, Shanghai 200120, China. anjinghuahua@yeah.net. (4)Department
of Cardiology, Shanghai Pu Dong New Area People's Hospital, Shanghai 200120,
China. jinghua1981126@126.com. (5)Fudan University Shanghai Medical College
Centre of Medical Experiments, Shanghai 200040, China. wanghao197136@yeah.net.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Pu Dong New Area People's Hospital,
Shanghai 200120, China. drdaifuzhang163@163.com.

Pressure overload induces cardiac hypertrophy through activation of Janus kinase 
2 (Jak2), however, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. In the
current study, we tested whether histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) was involved in
the process. We found that angiotensin II (Ang-II)-induced re-expression of fetal
genes (Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)) in
cultured cardiomyocytes was prevented by the Jak2 inhibitor AG-490 and HDAC2
inhibitor Trichostatin-A (TSA), or by Jak2/HDAC2 siRNA knockdown. On the other
hand, myocardial cells with Jak2 or HDAC2 over-expression were hyper-sensitive to
Ang-II. In vivo, pressure overload by transverse aorta binding (AB) induced a
significant cardiac hypertrophic response as well as re-expression of ANP and BNP
in mice heart, which were markedly reduced by AG-490 and TSA. Significantly,
AG-490, the Jak2 inhibitor, largely suppressed pressure overload-/Ang-II-induced 
HDAC2 nuclear exportation in vivo and in vitro. Meanwhile, TSA or HDAC2 siRNA
knockdown reduced Ang-II-induced ANP/BNP expression in Jak2 over-expressed H9c2
cardiomyocytes. Together, these results suggest that HDAC2 might be a downstream 
effector of Jak2 to mediate cardiac hypertrophic response by pressure overload or
Ang-II.

PMCID: PMC4264164
PMID: 25380525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):738-56. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22245. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Characterization of brain cell nuclei with decondensed chromatin.

Yu P(1), McKinney EC(1), Kandasamy MM(1), Albert AL(2), Meagher RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Davison Life Sciences Building,
Athens, Georgia, 30602. (2)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia, 30322.

Although multipotent cell types have enlarged nuclei with decondensed chromatin, 
this property has not been exploited to enhance the characterization of neural
progenitor cell (NPC) populations in the brain. We found that mouse brain cell
nuclei that expressed exceptionally high levels of the pan neuronal marker
NeuN/FOX3 (NeuN-High) had decondensed chromatin relative to most NeuN-Low or
NeuN-Neg (negative) nuclei. Purified NeuN-High nuclei expressed significantly
higher levels of transcripts encoding markers of neurogenesis, neuroplasticity,
and learning and memory (ARC, BDNF, ERG1, HOMER1, NFL/NEF1, SYT1), subunits of
chromatin modifying machinery (SIRT1, HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC11, KAT2B, KAT3A, KAT3B, 
KAT5, DMNT1, DNMT3A, Gadd45a, Gadd45b) and markers of NPC and cell cycle activity
(BRN2, FOXG1, KLF4, c-MYC, OCT4, PCNA, SHH, SOX2) relative to neuronal NeuN-Low
or to mostly non-neuronal NeuN-Neg nuclei. NeuN-High nuclei expressed higher
levels of HDAC1, 2, 4, and 5 proteins. The cortex, hippocampus, hypothalamus,
thalamus, and nucleus accumbens contained high percentages of large decondensed
NeuN-High nuclei, while the cerebellum, and pons contained very few. NeuN-High
nuclei have the properties consistent with their being derived from extremely
active neurons with elevated rates of chromatin modification and/or NPC-like
cells with multilineage developmental potential. The further analysis of
decondensed neural cell nuclei should provide novel insights into neurobiology
and neurodegenerative disease.

© 2014 The Authors Developmental Neurobiology Published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMID: 25369517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Jan;41(1):26-38. doi: 10.1111/apt.13008. Epub 2014
Nov 4.

Review article: selective histone deacetylase isoforms as potential therapeutic
targets in inflammatory bowel diseases.

Felice C(1), Lewis A, Armuzzi A, Lindsay JO, Silver A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Digestive Diseases, Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK; IBD Unit, Internal Medicine and
Gastroenterology, Complesso Integrato Columbus, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: A link between histone deacetylases (HDACs) and intestinal
inflammation has been established. HDAC inhibitors that target gut-selective
inflammatory pathways represent a potential new therapeutic strategy in patients 
with refractory inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD).
AIMS: To review the use of selective HDAC inhibitors to treat gut inflammation
and to highlight potential improvements in selectivity/sensitivity by additional 
targeting of HDAC-regulating microRNAs (miRNAs).
METHODS: Original articles and reviews have been identified using PubMed search
terms: 'histone deacetylase', 'HDAC inhibitor', 'inflammatory bowel disease',
'gut inflammation,' and 'microRNA and HDAC'.
RESULTS: The use of butyrate in distal colitis provided the first evidence that
inhibition of HDACs decreases intestinal inflammation in IBD. HDAC inhibitors,
such as valproic acid, vorinostat and givinostat, reduce inflammation and tissue 
damage in experimental murine colitis. Potential mechanisms of action for HDAC
inhibitors include increased apoptosis, reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokine
release, regulation of transcription factors and modulation of HDAC-regulatory
miRNAs. HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC6, HDAC9 and HDAC10 isoforms seem to be specifically
involved in chronic intestinal inflammation, justifying the use of selective
inhibitors as new therapeutic strategies in IBD. Controlling miRNAs for these
isoforms can be identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The pro-inflammatory influence of HDACs in the gut has been
confirmed, but mostly in murine studies. Considerably more human data are
required to permit development of selective HDAC inhibitors for IBD treatment.
Inhibition of key HDAC isoforms in combination with modulation of HDAC-regulatory
miRNAs has potential as a novel therapeutic approach.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25367825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Pediatrics. 2014 Nov;134 Suppl 3:S147-8. doi: 10.1542/peds.2014-1817Z.

Passive smoking impairs histone deacetylase-2 in children with severe asthma.

Rathkopf MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anchorage, AK.

PMID: 25363932  [PubMed]


216. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis. 2014 Oct 20;31(3):219-26.

Prevention of Pulmonary Fibrosis via Trichostatin A (TSA) in Bleomycin Induced
Rats.

Ye Q(1), Li Y, Jiang H, Xiong J, Xu J, Qin H, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University.Shanghai,200127,China. docyq@163.com.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effects of non selective histone deacetylase
inhibitors Trichostatin A (TSA)on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. To
investigate the effects of non selective histone deacetylase inhibitors
Trichostatin A ( TSA ) on HDAC2, p-SMAD2, HDAC2 mRNA, SMAD2mRNA in pulmonary
fibrosis rats and investigate impossible mechanism.
METHODS: 46 SPF level male SD rats were randomly divided into four groups: ten
for normal control group, fourteen for model control group I, twelve for model
control group II and ten for treatment group. Rat pulmonary fibrosis was induced 
by bleomycin(5mg/kg) via single intratracheal perfusion in the two model control 
groups and treatment group. Normal control mice were instilled with a
corresponding volume of 0.9% saline intratracheally. Treatment group was treated 
by the dilution of TSA 2mg/kg DMSO 60ul and0.9% saline 1.2ml intraperitoneal
injection from the next day ,once a day for three days. Model control group II
was treated by the dilution of DMSO 60ul and0.9% saline 1.2ml intraperitoneal
injection from the next day once a day for three days. Model control group I and 
normal control group were treated by 0.9% saline 1.2ml intraperitoneal injection 
from the next day once a day for three days. All the animals were sacrificed on
the 21 day after modeling. The pathological changes were observed by hematoxylin 
and eosin(HE)stain and masson trichrome stain. The expression of HDAC2 mRNA,SMAD2
mRNA were measured by real-time PCR. The protein level of HDAC2 and p-SMAD2 in
serum was measured by Western blot.
RESULTS: The pulmonary fibrosis in treatment group were significantly alleviated 
compared to the two model control groups (P<0.05). Real-time PCR showed that the 
treatment group had lower expression of lung tissue HDAC2 mRNA than the two model
control groups and normal control group (P<0.05). The expression of lung tissue
SMAD2 mRNA increased in the two model control groups and treatment group
(P<0.05),but there were no significant differences among the three
groups(P>0.05). Western blot indicated that the protein level of HDAC2 and
p-SMAD2 in serum increased in the two model control groups compared with normal
control group(P<0.05).But treatment group had lower protein level of HDAC2
(P<0.05) and no significant difference in the protein level of p-SMAD2 compared
to the two model control groups (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Non selective histone deacetylase inhibitors of Trichostatin A (TSA) 
can reduce the bleomycin induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats. TSA attenuates
pulmonary fibrosis and it can inhibit HDAC2 expression at the gene and protein
level. Bleomycin induced fibrosis has the relationship with p-SMAD2 in gene and
protein levels, but TSA inhibit bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis effect with no
relation with SMAD2 phosphorylation pathways.

PMID: 25363222  [PubMed - in process]


217. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jan;11(1):105-12. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2733. Epub 2014 Oct 21.

Ampelopsin induces apoptosis by regulating multiple c-Myc/S-phase
kinase-associated protein 2/F-box and WD repeat-containing protein 7/histone
deacetylase 2 pathways in human lung adenocarcinoma cells.

Chen XM(1), Xie XB(2), Zhao Q(1), Wang F(3), Bai Y(4), Yin JQ(2), Jiang H(3), Xie
XL(3), Jia Q(3), Huang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Basic Science, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510182, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Musculoskeletal Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China. (3)Institute of Biology,
Guizhou Academy of Sciences, Guiyang, Guizhou 550009, P.R. China. (4)Guangzhou
Institute of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510230, P.R. China.

Ampelopsin (AMP), a plant flavonoid, has been reported to inhibit cell growth
and/or induce apoptosis in various types of tumor. The aim of the present study
was to assess the apoptosis-inducing activity of AMP in A549 human lung
adenocarcinoma epithelial cells and the associated underlying mechanism. A549
cells were incubated with different concentrations of AMP in culture medium. Cell
growth and apoptosis were evaluated by MTT assay and Annexin V/propidium iodide
double staining and flow cytometry, respectively. In addition, western blotting
and reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis were
used to examine the time-dependent changes in protein expression. Certain changes
in apoptotic protein expression were detected following exposure to AMP,
including X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein release, reduced B-cell
lymphoma 2, myeloid cell leukemia 1 and survivin expression levels, increased
Bcl-2-associated X protein expression levels and cleaved-poly ADP ribose
polymerase expression. The results revealed that AMP was a potent inhibitor of
A549 cell proliferation. The c-Myc/S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) and
histone deacetylase (HDAC)1/2 pathways were found to exert an important role in
AMP-induced A549 cell apoptosis, as increased levels of c-Myc mRNA and reduced
levels of c-Myc/Skp2 and HDAC1 and 2 proteins following AMP treatment were
observed. The levels of F-box and WD repeat-containing protein 7a (Fbw7a), Fbw7ß,
Fbw7<U+03B3>, phosphorylated-(p-)c-Myc (Thr58) and glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK3ß)
proteins involved in c-Myc ubiquitin-dependent degradation were also analyzed.
Following exposure to AMP, the expression levels of Fbw7a, Fbw7<U+03B3> and GSK3ß were
reduced and p-c-Myc (Thr58) expression levels were increased. The results suggest
that AMP exerts an anticancer effect, which is associated with the degradation of
c-Myc, Skp2 and HDAC1 and 2. The ability of AMP to induce apoptosis independently
of Fbwa and Fbw7<U+03B3> suggests a possible use in drug-resistant cancer associated
with Fbw7 deficiency. Understanding the exact underlying mechanism requires
further investigation of the association between c-Myc and Fbw7a/<U+03B3> reversal, and 
analysis of whether Thr58 phosphorylation of c-Myc is dependent on GSK3ß.

PMCID: PMC4237074
PMID: 25333250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Dyn. 2015 Jan;244(1):43-55. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24217. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Contrasting roles for MyoD in organizing myogenic promoter structures during
embryonic skeletal muscle development.

Cho OH(1), Mallappa C, Hernández-Hernández JM, Rivera-Pérez JA, Imbalzano AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Among the complexities of skeletal muscle differentiation is a
temporal distinction in the onset of expression of different lineage-specific
genes. The lineage-determining factor MyoD is bound to myogenic genes at the
onset of differentiation whether gene activation is immediate or delayed. How
temporal regulation of differentiation-specific genes is established remains
unclear.
RESULTS: Using embryonic tissue, we addressed the molecular differences in the
organization of the myogenin and muscle creatine kinase (MCK) gene promoters by
examining regulatory factor binding as a function of both time and spatial
organization during somitogenesis. At the myogenin promoter, binding of the
homeodomain factor Pbx1 coincided with H3 hyperacetylation and was followed by
binding of co-activators that modulate chromatin structure. MyoD and myogenin
binding occurred subsequently, demonstrating that Pbx1 facilitates chromatin
remodeling and modification before myogenic regulatory factor binding. At the
same time, the MCK promoter was bound by HDAC2 and MyoD, and activating histone
marks were largely absent. The association of HDAC2 and MyoD was confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation, proximity ligation assay (PLA), and sequential ChIP.
CONCLUSIONS: MyoD differentially promotes activated and repressed chromatin
structures at myogenic genes early after the onset of skeletal muscle
differentiation in the developing mouse embryo.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4276533
PMID: 25329411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Cancer Res Ther. 2014 Jul-Sep;10(3):469-78. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.137937.

Epigenetic therapy of cancer with histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Lakshmaiah KC, Jacob LA, Aparna S(1), Lokanatha D, Saldanha SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kidwai Memorial Institute of Oncology,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.

Epigenetics is the study of heritable alterations in gene expression that are not
accompanied by the corresponding change in DNA sequence. Three interlinked
epigenetic processes regulate gene expression at the level of chromatin, namely
DNA methylation, nucleosomal remodeling and histone covalent modifications.
Post-translational modifications that occur on certain amino acid residues of the
tails of histone proteins modify chromatin structure and form the basis for
"histone code". The enzymes Histone Acetyl Transferase (HAT) and Histone
Deacetylase (HDAC) control the level of acetylation of histones and thereby alter
gene expression. In many cancers, the balance between HAT and HDAC is altered.
HDAC enzymes are grouped into four different classes namely Class I (HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8), Class II (HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC7, HDAC9, and
HDAC10), Class III HDAC and Class IV (HDAC11). Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors
(HDACI) exert anticancer activity by promoting acetylation of histones as well as
by promoting acetylation of non-histone protein substrates. The effects of HDACI 
on gene transcription are complex. They cause cell cycle arrest, inhibit DNA
repair, induce apoptosis and acetylate non histone proteins causing downstream
alterations in gene expression. HDACI are a diverse group of compounds, which
vary in structure, biological activity, and specificity. In general, HDACIs
contain a zinc-binding domain, a capping group, and a straight chain linker
connecting the two. They are classified into four classes namely short chain
fatty acids, hydroxamic acids, cyclic peptides and synthetic benzamides. This
review describes the clinical utility of HDACI as monotherapy as well as
combination therapy with other treatment modalities such as chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Adverse effects and shortcomings of treatment with HDACI are also
discussed in detail.

PMID: 25313724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Histopathology. 2015 Jan;66(2):270-82. doi: 10.1111/his.12534. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Nuclear expression of histone deacetylases and their histone modifications
predicts clinical outcome in colorectal cancer.

Benard A(1), Goossens-Beumer IJ, van Hoesel AQ, Horati H, de Graaf W, Putter H,
Zeestraten EC, Liefers GJ, van de Velde CJ, Kuppen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

AIMS: Epigenetic changes are of crucial importance in cancer development and are 
potentially reversible; they are therefore targets of interest for anti-cancer
therapy. The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical prognostic value
of the histone deacetylases SIRT1, HDAC1 and HDAC2 and the histone modifications 
H4K16Ac and H3K56Ac in colorectal cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The epigenetic markers were immunohistochemically stained on
tissue microarrays containing colorectal tumours (n = 254) and normal colorectal 
tissues (n = 50). Nuclear expression was assessed on the semi-automated Ariol
system. Multivariate trend survival analyses of the combined markers showed
better patient survival and less tumour recurrence when more markers showed high 
nuclear expression. For the combination of the histone deacetylases and H3K56Ac, 
the hazard ratio (HR) for overall survival (OS) was 0.82 [95% confidence interval
(CI) 0.72-0.94; P = 0.005] and the HR for distant recurrence-free survival (DRFS)
was 0.77 (95% CI 0.64-0.92; P = 0.003) per additional marker showing high
expression. Similarly, for the combination of histone deactylases and H4K16Ac,
HRs of 0.86 (95% CI 0.76-0.97; P = 0.01) for OS and 0.79 (95% CI 0.68-0.93; P =
0.006) for DRFS were observed per additional marker showing high expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The studied epigenetic markers showed clinical prognostic value in
colorectal cancer, both as individual markers and when combined into multimarker 
analyses. These results indicate that epigenetic mechanisms play an important
role in colorectal carcinogenesis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25307864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 24;453(3):576-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.122. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

The JNK1/JNK3 interactome--contributions by the JNK3 unique N-terminus and JNK
common docking site residues.

Chen WK(1), Yeap YY(1), Bogoyevitch MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.
Electronic address: marieb@unimelb.edu.au.

The c-Jun N-terminal Kinases (JNKs) play important roles in cell responses to
stress or growth factor stimulation. The JNK1a1 isoform shares >90% identity with
a predominantly neuronal JNK3a1 isoform, but JNK3a1 also includes a distinctive
38 amino acid N-terminal sequence. To address the outstanding question of the
potential for these JNK isoforms to have different binding partners that mediate 
different biological actions, the work presented here refined the yeast
two-hybrid approach to identify and categorize binding partners for JNK1a1 and
JNK3a1. Specifically, site-directed mutagenesis of the JNK1a1 common docking (CD)
domain that mediates typical JNK-binding domain (JBD)-dependent interactions,
truncation of the distinctive JNK3 N-terminal domain (i.e. <U+0394>N JNK3a1), and
interaction evaluation in the yeast two-hybrid system defined the interacting
partners as either JNK1-specific interactors (ATF7, FUS, KCNE4, PIAS1, SHANK1,
TKT), typical JBD-dependent interactors shared by JNK1a1 and JNK3a1 (AKAP6,
BMPR2, EEF1A1, GFAP, GRIP2, GTF2F1, HDAC2, MAP1B, MYO9B, PTPN2, RABGAP1, RUSC2,
SUMO1, SYPL1, TOPBP1, ZNF668), or JNK3-specific partners (ATXN1, NNAT, PTGDS)
dependent on interaction with the JNK3 N-terminal extension. The interacting
partners ATF7, AKAP6, and ATXN1 were explored further as representatives of these
different classes. Two potential JBDs were identified in ATF7 as important for
its interaction with JNK1a1, but additionally an interaction between ATF7 and <U+0394>N 
JNK3a1 was shown to be JBD-dependent, suggesting that the JNK3a1 N-terminus
prevents interaction with some proteins. For the shared partner AKAP6, one of the
multiple potential JBDs predicted by sequence analysis was important for the
AKAP6-JNK interaction in the yeast screening system as well as in mammalian
cells. Finally, the ATXN1-JNK3a1 interaction was dependent on the JNK3a1
N-terminus in a mammalian cell context. These studies therefore highlight a
diversity of potential JNK-interacting partners with both JBD-dependent as well
as JBD-independent modes of interaction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25301550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Feb;36(2):648-63. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.08.029. Epub 2014 Sep 6.

Oleuropein aglycone protects against pyroglutamylated-3 amyloid-ß toxicity:
biochemical, epigenetic and functional correlates.

Luccarini I(1), Grossi C(1), Rigacci S(2), Coppi E(3), Pugliese AM(1), Pantano
D(1), la Marca G(4), Ed Dami T(4), Berti A(2), Stefani M(2), Casamenti F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health,
Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio",
University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (3)Department of Health Sciences,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (4)Department of Neuroscience,
Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health, Division of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Department of NEUROFARBA,
Newborn Screening, Clinical Chemistry and Pharmacology Lab, Meyer Children's
University Hospital, Florence, Italy. (5)Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, 
Drug Research and Child Health, Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy. Electronic address:
fiorella.casamenti@unifi.it.

Amyloid-ß (Aß) fragments, oligomeric Aß aggregates, and pyroglutamylated-Aß
peptides, as well as epigenetic mechanisms and autophagy dysfunction all appear
to contribute in various ways to Alzheimer's disease progression. We previously
showed that dietary supplementation of oleuropein aglycone, a natural phenol
abundant in the extra virgin olive oil, can be protective by reducing Aß42
deposits in the brain of young and middle-aged TgCRND8 mice. Here, we extended
our study to aged TgCRND8 mice showing increased pE3-Aß in the brain deposits. We
report that oleuropein aglycone is active against glutaminylcyclase-catalyzed
pE3-Aß generation reducing enzyme expression and interferes both with Aß42 and
pE3-Aß aggregation. Moreover, the phenol astonishingly activates neuronal
autophagy even in mice at advanced stage of pathology, where it increases histone
3 and 4 acetylation, which matches both a decrease of histone deacetylase 2
expression and a significant improvement of synaptic function. The occurrence of 
these functional, epigenetic, and histopathologic beneficial effects even at a
late stage of the pathology suggests that the phenol could be beneficial at the
therapeutic, in addition to the prevention, level.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25293421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Apr;31:111-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2014.09.004. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

Compare the efficacy of inhaled budesonide and systemic methylprednisolone on
systemic inflammation of AECOPD.

Sun X(1), He Z(2), Zhang J(3), Deng J(3), Bai J(3), Li M(3), Zhong X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China; Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Liuzhou People's Hospital, Liuzhou, Guangxi 545006, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. Electronic address:
zhiyi-river@163.com. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China.

BACKGROUND: Corticosteroids have been shown to improve the outcome of acute
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (AECOPD). However, whether 
inhaled corticosteroids (IC) alone have similar effects with systemic
corticosteroid (SCS) is still unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy of inhaled budesonide and systemic
methylprednisolone on systemic inflammation of AECOPD.
METHODS: 30 AECOPD patients were randomly divided into two group. Budesonide
group (15 cases) were treated with inhaled budesonide (3 mg Bid);
methylprednisolone group (15 cases) were treated with systemic methylprednisolone
(methylprednisolone acetate injectable suspension 40 mg Qd for three days and
then methylprednisolone tablets 8 mg Bid). Observe symptoms, lung function, blood
gas analysis and adverse effects of the patients in two groups. Peripheral blood 
samples were collected before and after treatment for 1 day, 4 days and 7 days.
Interleukin-8 (IL-8) and TNF-a levels were determined by an enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Hs-CRP levels were detected by automatic biochemical
analyzer. Western blotting was used to determine histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)
protein expression.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Symptoms, pulmonary function and blood gas
analysis were significantly improved after treatment in the two groups (P < 0.05)
and no significant differences between the two groups (P > 0.05). There were no
significant differences of IL-8, TNF-a and hs-CRP levels in the two groups
(P > 0.05). Besides, the levels of HDAC2 protein expression before treatment were
significantly lower comparing to that after treatment for 4 and 7 days. Incidence
of adverse events (heart rate, blood pressure, glycemic, sleep condition,
gastrointestinal symptoms) in budesonide group was lower than methylprednisolone 
group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled budesonide and systemic methylprednisolone have the same
effects on systemic inflammation of AECOPD. Inhaled corticosteroid alone could
instead systemic corticosteroid in AECOPD treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25281894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Nov 28;12(44):8966-76. doi: 10.1039/c4ob00542b.

Effect of C7-substitution of 1-arylsulfonyl-5-(N-hydroxyacrylamide)indolines on
the selectivity towards a subclass of histone deacetylases.

Lee HY(1), Wang LT, Li YH, Pan SL, Chen YL, Teng CM, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wuxing
Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. jpl@tmu.edu.tw.

This study focused on the substitution effect at position C7 of
1-arylsulfonyl-5-(N-hydroxyacrylamide)indolines. Compound 9,
(E)-3-(7-amino-1-(4-methoxyphenylsulfonyl)indolin-5-yl)-N-hydroxyacrylamide,
displayed 4- to 14-fold more potent antiproliferative activity than vorinostat
(SAHA, 1). Notably, 9 possessed specific histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitory
activity toward HDAC1 and HDAC2, but had no effect on HDAC6, indicating that 9
has the potential to be developed as a class I HDAC inhibitor. In a xenograft
tumor model, 9 suppressed the growth of HCT116 cells at 100 mg kg(-1), which led 
to a TGI (tumor growth inhibition) of 40.3%. Taken together, the C7 substitutions
have a crucial effect on class I HDACs, which is beneficial for synthesizing
efficient anticancer agents.

PMID: 25277250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 15;5(17):7677-90.

A central role for TRPS1 in the control of cell cycle and cancer development.

Wu L(1), Wang Y(1), Liu Y(2), Yu S(2), Xie H(2), Shi X(2), Qin S(3), Ma F(3), Tan
TZ(4), Thiery JP(5), Chen L(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Disease, Ministry of
Education, Institute of Life Science, Southeast University, Nanjing, PR China.
Contributed equally to this work. (2)The Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes
and Human Disease, Ministry of Education, Institute of Life Science, Southeast
University, Nanjing, PR China. (3)Laboratory for Comparative Genomics and
Bioinformatics and Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Biotechnology,
College of Life Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China. (4)Cancer
Science Institute, National University of Singapore, 14 Medical Drive, Singapore.
(5)Cancer Science Institute, National University of Singapore, 14 Medical Drive, 
Singapore. Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, 61 Biopolis Drive,
Singapore. Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, Singapore.

The eukaryotic cell cycle is controlled by a complex regulatory network, which is
still poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that TRPS1, an atypical GATA factor,
modulates cell proliferation and controls cell cycle progression. Silencing TRPS1
had a differential effect on the expression of nine key cell cycle-related genes.
Eight of these genes are known to be involved in the regulation of the G2 phase
and the G2/M transition of the cell cycle. Using cell synchronization studies, we
confirmed that TRPS1 plays an important role in the control of cells in these
phases of the cell cycle. We also show that silencing TRPS1 controls the
expression of 53BP1, but not TP53. TRPS1 silencing also decreases the expression 
of two histone deacetylases, HDAC2 and HDAC4, as well as the overall HDAC
activity in the cells, and leads to the subsequent increase in the acetylation of
histone4 K16 but not of histone3 K9 or K18. Finally, we demonstrate that TRPS1
expression is elevated in luminal breast cancer cells and luminal breast cancer
tissues as compared with other breast cancer subtypes. Overall, our study
proposes that TRPS1 acts as a central hub in the control of cell cycle and
proliferation during cancer development.

PMCID: PMC4202153
PMID: 25277197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 2;9(9):e108520. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108520. eCollection
2014.

Further characterization of HDAC and SIRT gene expression patterns in pancreatic 
cancer and their relation to disease outcome.

Ouaïssi M(1), Silvy F(2), Loncle C(3), Ferraz da Silva D(4), Martins Abreu C(4), 
Martinez E(2), Berthézene P(3), Cadra S(3), Le Treut YP(5), Hardwigsen J(5),
Sastre B(1), Sielezneff I(6), Benkoel L(7), Delgrande J(8), Ouaissi A(9), Iovanna
J(3), Lombardo D(2), Mas E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille University, CRO2, UMR_S 911, Marseille, France; INSERM UMR 911, 
Marseille, France; AP-HM, Timone Hospital, Department of Digestive and visceral
Surgery, Marseille, France. (2)Aix-Marseille University, CRO2, UMR_S 911,
Marseille, France; INSERM UMR 911, Marseille, France. (3)Aix-Marseille
University, CRCM, UMR_S 1068, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CNRS, UMR7258, Marseille,
France; INSERM, UMR 1068, Marseille, France. (4)Aix-Marseille University, CRO2,
UMR_S 911, Marseille, France; INSERM UMR 911, Marseille, France; Faculdade de
Farmácia da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (5)AP-HM, La Conception
Hospital, Department of hepatic transplantation and general surgery, Marseille,
France; Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France. (6)AP-HM, Timone Hospital,
Department of Digestive and visceral Surgery, Marseille, France; Aix-Marseille
University, Marseille, France. (7)INSERM UMR 911, Marseille, France. (8)AP-HM,
Timone Hospital, Department of histopathology, Marseille, France. (9)Faculdade de
Farmácia da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas is ranking 4 for patient' death from
malignant disease in Western countries, with no satisfactory treatment. We
re-examined more precisely the histone deacetylases (HDAC) and Sirtuin (SIRT)
gene expression patterns in pancreatic cancer with more pancreatic tumors and
normal tissues. We also examined the possible relationship between HDAC gene
expression levels and long term disease outcome. Moreover, we have evaluated by
using an in vitro model system of human pancreatic tumor cell line whether HDAC7 
knockdown may affect the cell behavior. We analyzed 29 pancreatic adenocarcinoma 
(PA), 9 chronic pancreatitis (CP), 8 benign pancreatic (BP) and 11 normal
pancreatic tissues. Concerning pancreatic adenocarcinoma, we were able to collect
biopsies at the tumor periphery. To assess the possible involvement of HDAC7 in
cell proliferation capacity, we have generated recombinant human Panc-1 tumor
which underexpressed or overexpressed HDAC7. The expression of HDAC1,2,3,4,7 and 
Nur77 increased in PA samples at levels significantly higher than those observed 
in the CP group (p = 0.0160; 0.0114; 0.0227; 0.0440; 0.0136; 0.0004,
respectively). The expression of HDAC7, was significantly greater in the PA
compared with BP tissue samples (p = 0.05). Mean mRNA transcription levels of PA 
for HDAC7 and HDAC2 were higher when compared to their counterpart biopsies taken
at the tumor periphery (p = 0.0346, 0.0053, respectively). Moreover, the data
obtained using confocal microscopy and a quantitative method of
immunofluorescence staining strongly support the HDAC7 overexpression in PA
surgical specimens. The number of deaths and recurrences at the end of follow up 
were significantly greater in patients with overexpression of HDAC7.
Interestingly, the rate of growth was significantly reduced in the case of cell
carrying shRNA construct targeting HDAC7 encoding gene when compared to the
parental Panc-1 tumor cells (p = 0.0015) at 48 h and 96 h (p = 0.0021). This
study strongly support the notion that HDAC7play a role in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma progression.

PMCID: PMC4183483
PMID: 25275504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Neurosci. 2014 Oct 1;34(40):13535-48. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1305-14.2014.

Interaction of nNOS with PSD-95 negatively controls regenerative repair after
stroke.

Luo CX(1), Lin YH(2), Qian XD(2), Tang Y(2), Zhou HH(2), Jin X(2), Ni HY(2),
Zhang FY(2), Qin C(2), Li F(3), Zhang Y(2), Wu HY(4), Chang L(2), Zhu DY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cerebrovascular Disease, Institution of Stem Cells and
Neuroregeneration, and Departments of Pharmacology and. (2)Laboratory of
Cerebrovascular Disease, Departments of Pharmacology and. (3)Medicinal Chemistry,
School of Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, People's Republic
of China. (4)Institution of Stem Cells and Neuroregeneration, and Departments of 
Pharmacology and. (5)Laboratory of Cerebrovascular Disease, Institution of Stem
Cells and Neuroregeneration, and Departments of Pharmacology and
dyzhu@njmu.edu.cn.

Stroke is a major public health concern. The lack of effective therapies
heightens the need for new therapeutic targets. Mammalian brain has the ability
to rewire itself to restore lost functionalities. Promoting regenerative repair, 
including neurogenesis and dendritic remodeling, may offer a new therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of stroke. Here, we report that interaction of
neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) with the protein postsynaptic density-95
(PSD-95) negatively controls regenerative repair after stroke in rats.
Dissociating nNOS-PSD-95 coupling in neurons promotes neuronal differentiation of
neural stem cells (NSCs), facilitates the migration of newborn cells into the
injured area, and enhances neurite growth of newborn neurons and dendritic spine 
formation of mature neurons in the ischemic brain of rats. More importantly,
blocking nNOS-PSD-95 binding during the recovery stage improves stroke outcome
via the promotion of regenerative repair in rats. Histone deacetylase 2 in NSCs
may mediate the role of nNOS-PSD-95 association. Thus, nNOS-PSD-95 can serve as a
target for regenerative repair after stroke.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3413535-14$15.00/0.

PMID: 25274829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Oct;30(10):1062-6.

[Regulatory effect of ginsenoside Rh2 on HDAC1/2 activity and cyclin in human
erythroleukemia K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Xia J(1), Chen D(1), Zuo G(2), Wei Q(1), You Z(1), Li D(1), Liu Z(1), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Provincial 
and Ministry of Education Key Laboratories of Clinical Diagnostics, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of the 20(S)-ginsenoside Rh2 [Rh2(S)]on
cell proliferation, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 activity, and
expression of cyclin in human erythroleukemia K562 cells.
METHODS: The K562 cells were treated with Rh2(S) at various concentrations (10-80
µmol/L). Cell proliferation activity was detected by CCK-8 assay. Flow cytometry 
(FCM) was used to detect cell cycle and apoptotic changes. The HDAC activity of
cells was measured by chemical colorimetry. The protein expressions of HDAC1,
HDAC2, cyclin D1, CDK4, p16INK4A and p21 after 48 hour-treatment of Rh2 (S) (10, 
20, 40, 60 µmol/L) were examined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: The proliferation of K562 cells was inhibited by Rh2 (S) (20-80 µmol/L) 
in dose-and time-dependent manner. FCM analyses revealed that the number of the
K562 cells treated with 60 µmol/L Rh2(S) was arrested in G0/G1 phase. The
apoptosis rates of K562 cells were respectively (8.09±0.86)%, (9.44±0.53)% and
(22.80±2.16)% after induced by 20, 40, 60 µmol/L Rh2(S), which showed
statistically significant difference (P<0.05) compared with the control group
(2.63±0.14)%. HDAC activity of the cells treated with Rh2(S) (40, 60 µmol/L) was 
reduced. Western blotting showed that the expressions of HDAC1, HDAC2, cyclin D1 
and CDK4 decreased after induced by Rh2(S), and p16INK4A, p21 proteins were
enhanced significantly.
CONCLUSION: The Rh2(S) can inhibit the proliferation of K562 cells and induce its
cycle arrest and apoptosis through inhibiting HDAC1 and HDAC2 activity,
down-regulating the expression of cyclin D1 and activating p16INK4A and p21.

PMID: 25270209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Med Chem. 2015;11(3):296-304.

5-aryl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-based hydroxamic acids as histone deacetylase inhibitors
and antitumor agents: synthesis, bioevaluation and docking study.

Huong TT, Dung do TM, Oanh DT, Lan TT, Dung PT, Loi VD, Kim KR, Han BW, Yun J,
Kang JS, Kim Y, Han SB, Nam NH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Hanoi University of Pharmacy, 13-15 Le
Thanh Tong, Hanoi, Vietnam. namnh@hup.edu.vn.

The search for newer histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors has attracted a great 
deal of interest of medicinal chemists worldwide, especially after the first HDAC
inhibitor (Zolinza(®), widely known as SAHA or Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid)
was approved by the FDA for the treatment of Tcell lymphoma in 2006. As a
continuity of our ongoing research in this area, we designed and synthesized a
series of 5-aryl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-based hydroxamic acids as analogues of SAHA
and evaluated their biological activities. Most of the compounds in this series, 
e.g. compounds with 5-aryl moiety being 2- furfuryl (5a), 5-bromofuran-2-yl (5b),
5-methylfuran-2-yl (5c), thiophen-2-yl (5d), 5-methylthiophen-2-yl (5f) and
pyridyl (5g-i), were found to have potent anticancer cytotoxicity with IC50
values of generally 5- to 10-fold lower than that of SAHA in 4 human cancer cell 
lines assayed. Those compounds with potent cytotoxicity were also found to have
strong HDAC inhibition effects. Docking studies revealed that compounds 5a and 5d
displayed high affinities towards HDAC2 and 8.

PMID: 25256241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Neurotherapeutics. 2015 Jan;12(1):185-99. doi: 10.1007/s13311-014-0304-z.

Neuroprotective properties of cannabigerol in Huntington's disease: studies in
R6/2 mice and 3-nitropropionate-lesioned mice.

Valdeolivas S(1), Navarrete C, Cantarero I, Bellido ML, Muñoz E, Sagredo O.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de
Investigación en Neuroquímica, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, 28040, Spain.

Different plant-derived and synthetic cannabinoids have shown to be
neuroprotective in experimental models of Huntington's disease (HD) through
cannabinoid receptor-dependent and/or independent mechanisms. Herein, we studied 
the effects of cannabigerol (CBG), a nonpsychotropic phytocannabinoid, in 2
different in vivo models of HD. CBG was extremely active as neuroprotectant in
mice intoxicated with 3-nitropropionate (3NP), improving motor deficits and
preserving striatal neurons against 3NP toxicity. In addition, CBG attenuated the
reactive microgliosis and the upregulation of proinflammatory markers induced by 
3NP, and improved the levels of antioxidant defenses that were also significantly
reduced by 3NP. We also investigated the neuroprotective properties of CBG in
R6/2 mice. Treatment with this phytocannabinoid produced a much lower, but
significant, recovery in the deteriorated rotarod performance typical of R6/2
mice. Using HD array analysis, we were able to identify a series of genes linked 
to this disease (e.g., symplekin, Sin3a, Rcor1, histone deacetylase 2,
huntingtin-associated protein 1, d subunit of the gamma-aminobutyric acid-A
receptor (GABA-A), and hippocalcin), whose expression was altered in R6/2 mice
but partially normalized by CBG treatment. We also observed a modest improvement 
in the gene expression for brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
(PPAR<U+03B3>), which is altered in these mice, as well as a small, but significant,
reduction in the aggregation of mutant huntingtin in the striatal parenchyma in
CBG-treated animals. In conclusion, our results open new research avenues for the
use of CBG, alone or in combination with other phytocannabinoids or therapies,
for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases such as HD.

PMCID: PMC4322067
PMID: 25252936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2014 Nov;126:83-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2014.09.009. Epub 
2014 Sep 19.

Epigenetic suppression of hippocampal BDNF mediates the memory deficiency induced
by amyloid fibrils.

Wang BY(1), Zhong Y(2), Zhao Z(1), Miao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The Sixth People's Hospital affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200233, China. (2)Department of Geriatrics, The
Sixth People's Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200233, China. Electronic address: zhongyuansh01@163.com.

Accumulating evidences demonstrated that epigenetic modification of the
expression of specific genes contributed to the pathogenesis of neurological
disorders with dementia, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). Emerging reports
also found the reduction of hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 
in the patients and rodent models of AD, while the mechanism and functional
significance remain debated. The present study aims to study the epigenetic
mechanism underlying the BDNF reduction and its functional significance in the
rats with hippocampal infusion of amyloid fibrils. In the rats injected with
amyloid fibrils, significant decreases of BDNF expression and the mRNA of Bdnf
exon VI were found in the hippocampal CA1 area. Significantly increased
hippocampal HDAC2 expression and its occupancy in the promoter region of Bdnf
exon VI were also observed, thus contributing to the histone H3 deacetylation and
BDNF suppression in the hippocampal CA1 in the rats injected with amyloid
fibrils. Inhibition of HDAC2 activity by trichostatin A substantially recovered
the histone H3 acetylation in the promoter region of Bdnf exon VI and BDNF
expression, thus mitigating the synaptic dysfunction and memory deficiency
induced by amyloid fibrils. These results elucidate the epigenetic mechanism
underlying the BDNF reduction induced by amyloid fibrils, and provided novel
insights into the pathogenic mechanism of Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25242807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Sep 9;3(3):502-15. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.07.008.
Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Neural stem cell differentiation is dictated by distinct actions of nuclear
receptor corepressors and histone deacetylases.

Castelo-Branco G(1), Lilja T(2), Wallenborg K(2), Falcão AM(3), Marques SC(4),
Gracias A(2), Solum D(5), Paap R(2), Walfridsson J(2), Teixeira AI(2), Rosenfeld 
MG(5), Jepsen K(5), Hermanson O(6).

Author information: 
(1)Linnaeus Center in Developmental Biology for Regenerative Medicine (DBRM),
Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden;
Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
goncalo.castelo-branco@ki.se. (2)Linnaeus Center in Developmental Biology for
Regenerative Medicine (DBRM), Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 
17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Linnaeus Center in Developmental Biology for
Regenerative Medicine (DBRM), Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 
17177 Stockholm, Sweden; Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of
Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm,
Sweden. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego (UCSD), 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0648, USA.
(6)Linnaeus Center in Developmental Biology for Regenerative Medicine (DBRM),
Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
Electronic address: ola.hermanson@ki.se.

Signaling factors including retinoic acid (RA) and thyroid hormone (T3) promote
neuronal, oligodendrocyte, and astrocyte differentiation of cortical neural stem 
cells (NSCs). However, the functional specificity of transcriptional repressor
checkpoints controlling these differentiation programs remains unclear. Here, we 
show by genome-wide analysis that histone deacetylase (HDAC)2 and HDAC3 show
overlapping and distinct promoter occupancy at neuronal and
oligodendrocyte-related genes in NSCs. The absence of HDAC3, but not HDAC2,
initiated a neuronal differentiation pathway in NSCs. The ablation of the
corepressor NCOR or HDAC2, in conjunction with T3 treatment, resulted in
increased expression of oligodendrocyte genes, revealing a direct HDAC2-mediated 
repression of Sox8 and Sox10 expression. Interestingly, Sox10 was required also
for maintaining the more differentiated state by repression of stem cell
programming factors such as Sox2 and Sox9. Distinct and nonredundant actions of
NCORs and HDACs are thus critical for control of lineage progression and
differentiation programs in neural progenitors.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4266002
PMID: 25241747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Dec;351(3):510-8. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.217315. Epub
2014 Sep 17.

Downregulation of Ca2+-activated Cl- channel TMEM16A by the inhibition of histone
deacetylase in TMEM16A-expressing cancer cells.

Matsuba S(1), Niwa S(1), Muraki K(1), Kanatsuka S(1), Nakazono Y(1), Hatano N(1),
Fujii M(1), Zhan P(1), Suzuki T(1), Ohya S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Division of Pathological Sciences, Kyoto
Pharmaceutical University, Kyoto, Japan (S.M., S.N., S.K., Y.N., M.F., S.O.);
Laboratory of Cellular Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Nagoya, Japan (K.M., N.H.); and Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan (P.Z., T.S.). (2)Department of
Pharmacology, Division of Pathological Sciences, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University,
Kyoto, Japan (S.M., S.N., S.K., Y.N., M.F., S.O.); Laboratory of Cellular
Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Aichi-Gakuin University, Nagoya, Japan (K.M.,
N.H.); and Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan (P.Z., T.S.) sohya@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp.

The Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) channel transmembrane proteins with unknown function
16 A (TMEM16A; also known as anoctamin 1 or discovered on gastrointestinal
stromal tumor 1) plays an important role in facilitating the cell growth and
metastasis of TMEM16A-expressing cancer cells. Histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors (HDACi) are useful agents for cancer therapy, but it remains unclear
whether ion channels are epigenetically regulated by them. Using real-time
polymerase chain reaction, Western blot analysis, and whole-cell patch-clamp
assays, we found a significant decrease in TMEM16A expression and its functional 
activity was induced by the vorinostat, a pan-HDACi in TMEM16A-expressing human
cancer cell lines, the prostatic cancer cell line PC-3, and the breast cancer
cell line YMB-1. TMEM16A downregulation was not induced by the chemotherapy drug 
paclitaxel in either cell type. Pharmacologic blockade of HDAC3 by 1 µM T247
[N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[1-(2-thiophen-3-ylethyl)-1H-[1],[2],[3]triazol-4-yl]benzami
de], a HDAC3-selective HDACi, elicited a large decrease in TMEM16A expression and
functional activity in both cell types, and pharmacologic blockade of HDAC2 by
AATB [4-(acetylamino)-N-[2-amino-5-(2-thienyl)phenyl]-benzamide; 300 nM] elicited
partial inhibition of TMEM16A expression (~40%) in both. Pharmacologic blockade
of HDAC1 or HDAC6 did not elicit any significant change in TMEM16A expression,
respectively. In addition, inhibition of HDAC3 induced by small interfering RNA
elicited a large decrease in TMEM16A transcripts in both cell types. Taken
together, in malignancies with a frequent gene amplification of TMEM16A, HDAC3
inhibition may exert suppressive effects on cancer cell viability via
downregulation of TMEM16A.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25232193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;223(1):47-66. doi: 10.1530/JOE-14-0111.

Phthalate exposure in utero causes epigenetic changes and impairs insulin
signalling.

Rajesh P(1), Balasubramanian K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of EndocrinologyDr ALM Post Graduate Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Madras, Taramani, Chennai 600 113, India. (2)Department
of EndocrinologyDr ALM Post Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Madras, Taramani, Chennai 600 113, India kbala82@hotmail.com.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) is an endocrine-disrupting chemical (EDC),
widely used as a plasticiser. Developmental exposure to EDCs could alter
epigenetic programming and result in adult-onset disease. We investigated whether
DEHP exposure during development affects glucose homoeostasis in the F1 offspring
as a result of impaired insulin signal transduction in gastrocnemius muscle.
Pregnant Wistar rats were administered DEHP (0, 1, 10 and 100<U+200A>mg/kg per day) from
embryonic days 9-21 orally. DEHP-exposed offspring exhibited elevated blood
glucose, impaired serum insulin, glucose tolerance and insulin tolerance, along
with reduced insulin receptor, glucose uptake and oxidation in the muscle at
postnatal day 60. The levels of insulin signalling molecules and their
phosphorylation were down-regulated in DEHP-exposed offspring. However,
phosphorylated IRS1(Ser636/639), which impedes binding of downstream effectors
and the negative regulator (PTEN) of PIP3, was increased in DEHP-exposed groups. 
Down-regulation of glucose transporter 4 (Glut4 (Slc2a4)) gene expression and
increased GLUT4(Ser488) phosphorylation, which decreases its intrinsic activity
and translocation towards the plasma membrane, were recorded. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays detected decreased MYOD binding and increased histone 
deacetylase 2 interaction towards Glut4, indicative of the tight chromatin
structure at the Glut4 promoter. Increased DNMTs and global DNA methylation
levels were also observed. Furthermore, methylation of Glut4 at the MYOD-binding 
site was increased in DEHP-exposed groups. These findings indicate that,
gestational DEHP exposure predisposes F1 offspring to glucometabolic dysfunction 
at adulthood by down-regulating the expression of critical genes involved in the 
insulin signalling pathway. Furthermore, DEHP-induced epigenetic alterations in
Glut4 appear to play a significant role in disposition towards this metabolic
abnormality.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25232145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct;42(18):11339-48. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku791. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

The transcriptional co-repressor TLE3 suppresses basal signaling on a subset of
estrogen receptor a target genes.

Jangal M(1), Couture JP(1), Bianco S(1), Magnani L(2), Mohammed H(3), Gévry N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biologie, Faculté des sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, 2500 
boulevard de l'Université, Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada. (2)Department of
Surgery and Cancer, Imperial Centre for Translational and Experimental Medecine, 
Imperial College Hammersmith, London W12 0NN, UK. (3)Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(4)Département de biologie, Faculté des sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, 2500 
boulevard de l'Université, Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada
nicolas.gevry@usherbrooke.ca.

Chromatin constitutes a repressive barrier to the process of ligand-dependent
transcriptional activity of nuclear receptors. Nucleosomes prevent the binding of
estrogen receptor a (ERa) in absence of ligand and thus represent an important
level of transcriptional regulation. Here, we show that in breast cancer MCF-7
cells, TLE3, a co-repressor of the Groucho/Grg/TLE family, interacts with FoxA1
and is detected at regulatory elements of ERa target genes in absence of
estrogen. As a result, the chromatin is maintained in a basal state of
acetylation, thus preventing ligand-independent activation of transcription. In
absence of TLE3, the basal expression of ERa target genes induced by E2 is
increased. At the TFF1 gene, the recruitment of TLE3 to the chromatin is
FoxA1-dependent and prevents ERa and RNA polymerase II recruitment to TFF1 gene
regulatory elements. Moreover, the interaction of TLE3 with HDAC2 results in the 
maintenance of acetylation at a basal level. We also provide evidence that TLE3
is recruited at several other regulatory elements of ERa target genes and is
probably an important co-regulator of the E2 signaling pathway. In sum, our
results describe a mechanism by which TLE3 affects ligand dependency in
ERa-regulated gene expression via its binding restricting function and its role
in gene regulation by histone acetylation.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4191390
PMID: 25223786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Cell Signal. 2014 Dec;26(12):2912-20. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.09.005. Epub
2014 Sep 16.

Class I HDAC inhibition stimulates cardiac protein SUMOylation through a
post-translational mechanism.

Blakeslee WW(1), Wysoczynski CL(2), Fritz KS(3), Nyborg JK(4), Churchill ME(2),
McKinsey TA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado Denver,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA; Department of Pharmacology, University 
of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO,
USA. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado Denver,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. (4)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado Denver,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA; Department of Pharmacology, University 
of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. Electronic address:
timothy.mckinsey@ucdenver.edu.

Lysine residues are subject to a multitude of reversible post-translational
modifications, including acetylation and SUMOylation. In the heart, enhancement
of lysine acetylation or SUMOylation using histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors 
or SUMO-1 gene transfer, respectively, has been shown to be cardioprotective.
Here, we addressed whether there is crosstalk between lysine acetylation and
SUMOylation in the heart. Treatment of cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts
with pharmacological inhibitors of HDAC catalytic activity robustly increased
conjugation of SUMO-1, but not SUMO-2/3, to several high molecular weight
proteins in both cell types. The use of a battery of selective HDAC inhibitors
and short hairpin RNAs demonstrated that HDAC2, which is a class I HDAC, is the
primary HDAC isoform that controls cardiac protein SUMOylation. HDAC inhibitors
stimulated protein SUMOylation in the absence of de novo gene transcription or
protein synthesis, revealing a post-translational mechanism of HDAC inhibitor
action. HDAC inhibition did not suppress the activity of de-SUMOylating enzymes, 
suggesting that increased protein SUMOylation in HDAC inhibitor-treated cells is 
due to stimulation of SUMO-1 conjugation rather than blockade of SUMO-1 cleavage.
Consistent with this, multiple components of the SUMO conjugation machinery were 
capable of being acetylated in vitro. These findings reveal a novel role for
reversible lysine acetylation in the control of SUMOylation in the heart, and
suggest that cardioprotective actions of HDAC inhibitors are in part due to
stimulation of protein SUMO-1-ylation in myocytes and fibroblasts.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4252807
PMID: 25220405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Cell. 2014 Oct 2;56(1):163-73. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.013. Epub 2014
Sep 11.

c-Abl stabilizes HDAC2 levels by tyrosine phosphorylation repressing neuronal
gene expression in Alzheimer's disease.

Gonzalez-Zuñiga M(1), Contreras PS(2), Estrada LD(1), Chamorro D(3), Villagra
A(4), Zanlungo S(5), Seto E(6), Alvarez AR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, Santiago 8331010, Chile; Biological and Chemistry Sciences Department,
Universidad Bernardo O'Higgins, Santiago 8370993, Chile. (2)Department of Cell & 
Molecular Biology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago 8331010,
Chile; Department of Gastroenterology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 
Santiago 8331010, Chile. (3)Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago 8331010, Chile. (4)Department of
Immunology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612,
USA. (5)Department of Gastroenterology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago 8331010, Chile. (6)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. (7)Department of Cell
& Molecular Biology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago 8331010, 
Chile. Electronic address: aalvarez@bio.puc.cl.

In Alzheimer's disease (AD), there is a decrease in neuronal gene expression
induced by HDAC2 increase; however, the mechanisms involved are not fully
elucidated. Here, we described how the tyrosine kinase c-Abl increases HDAC2
levels, inducing transcriptional repression of synaptic genes. Our data
demonstrate that (1) in neurons, c-Abl inhibition with Imatinib prevents the
AßO-induced increase in HDAC2 levels; (2) c-Abl knockdown cells show a decrease
in HDAC2 levels, while c-Abl overexpression increases them; (3) c-Abl inhibition 
reduces HDAC2-dependent repression activity and HDAC2 recruitment to the promoter
of several synaptic genes, increasing their expression; (4) c-Abl induces
tyrosine phosphorylation of HDAC2, a posttranslational modification, affecting
both its stability and repression activity; and (5) treatment with Imatinib
decreases HDAC2 levels in a transgenic mice model of AD. Our results support the 
participation of the c-Abl/HDAC2 signaling pathway in the epigenetic blockade of 
gene expression in AD pathology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25219501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 Oct 30;86:639-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.09.024. Epub
2014 Sep 8.

Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of 1, 3-disubstituted-pyrazole
derivatives as new class I and IIb histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Yao Y(1), Liao C(2), Li Z(3), Wang Z(1), Sun Q(1), Liu C(1), Yang Y(2), Tu Z(4), 
Jiang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. (2)School of
Medical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230009, China. 
(3)The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. Electronic address:
tu_zhengchao@gibh.ac.cn. (5)Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, Guangzhou
Institute of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510530, China. Electronic address: jiang_sheng@gibh.ac.cn.

A novel series of HDAC inhibitors demonstrating class I and IIb subtype
selectivity have been identified using a scaffold-hopping strategy. Several
designed compounds showed better selectivity for class I and IIb over class IIa
HDAC isoforms comparing to the FDA approved HDAC targeting drug SAHA. A
representative lead compound 22 bearing a biphenyl moiety demonstrated promising 
class I and IIb HDAC isoforms selectivity and in vitro anticancer activities
against several cancer cell lines. This work could serve as a fundamental
platform for further exploration of selective HDAC inhibitors using designed
molecular scaffold.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Neurosci. 2014 Sep 10;34(37):12547-59. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0324-14.2014.

A positive autoregulatory BDNF feedback loop via C/EBPß mediates hippocampal
memory consolidation.

Bambah-Mukku D(1), Travaglia A(2), Chen DY(3), Pollonini G(2), Alberini CM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York 10003 and
Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029. (2)Center for Neural Science, New York 
University, New York, New York 10003 and. (3)Department of Neuroscience and
Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York 10029. (4)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York
10003 and ca60@nyu.edu.

Little is known about the temporal progression and regulation of the mechanisms
underlying memory consolidation. Brain-derived-neurotrophic-factor (BDNF) has
been shown to mediate the maintenance of memory consolidation, but the mechanisms
of this regulation remain unclear. Using inhibitory avoidance (IA) in rats, here 
we show that a hippocampal BDNF-positive autoregulatory feedback loop via
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBPß) is necessary to mediate memory
consolidation. At training, a very rapid, learning-induced requirement of BDNF
accompanied by rapid de novo translation controls the induction of a persistent
activation of cAMP-response element binding-protein (CREB) and C/EBPß expression.
The latter, in turn, controls an increase in expression of bdnf exon IV
transcripts and BDNF protein, both of which are necessary and, together with the 
initial BDNF requirement, mediate memory consolidation. The autoregulatory loop
terminates by 48 h after training with decreased C/EBPß and pCREB and increased
methyl-CpG binding protein-2, histone-deacetylase-2, and switch-independent-3a
binding at the bdnf exon IV promoter.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3412547-13$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4160783
PMID: 25209292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Endocrinology. 2014 Dec;155(12):4762-73. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1565. Epub 2014 Sep
9.

Inactivation of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) but not HDAC2 is required for the
glucocorticoid-dependent CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBPa) expression and
preadipocyte differentiation.

Kuzmochka C(1), Abdou HS, Haché RJ, Atlas E.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Ontario, Canada ON POM Reproduction,
Mother and Youth Health (H.-S.A.), CHUQ Research Centre, Quebec city, Quebec,
Canada G1R2J6; Environmental Health Science and Research Bureau (E.A.), Health
Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada M3J1P3; and York University (R.J.G.H.), Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada K1A0K9.

Several drugs currently used in the management of mood disorders, epilepsy (ie,
valproic acid), or the control of inflammation (ie, corticosteroids) have been
shown to promote visceral obesity in humans by increasing the number of newly
formed adipocytes. Valproic acid is classified as a nonspecific histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, along with trichostatin A and butyric acid. In
vitro experiments have demonstrated that such molecules greatly enhance the rate 
of preadipocyte differentiation, similarly to the effect of corticosteroids. The 
glucocorticoid receptor stimulates adipogenesis in part by enhancing the
transcription of C/ebpa through the titration, and subsequent degradation, of
HDAC1 from the C/ebpa promoter. There is, however, controversy in the literature 
as to the role of HDACs during adipogenesis. In this study, we sought to
demonstrate, using 2 different strategies, the definite role of HDAC1 in
adipogenesis. By using small interference RNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC1 and by 
generating an enzymatically inactive HDAC1D181A by site-directed mutagenesis, we 
were able to show that HDAC1, but not HDAC2, suppresses glucocorticoid
receptor-potentiated preadipocyte differentiation by decreasing
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/ebp)a and Ppar<U+03B3> expression levels at the onset 
of differentiation. Finally, we demonstrate that HDAC1D181A acts as a dominant
negative mutant of HDAC1 during adipogenesis by modulating C/EBPß transcriptional
activity on the C/ebpa promoter.

PMID: 25203139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cryobiology. 2014 Oct;69(2):333-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2014.08.008. Epub 2014
Sep 3.

Global DNA modifications suppress transcription in brown adipose tissue during
hibernation.

Biggar Y(1), Storey KB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Department of Biology, Carleton University,
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. (2)Institute of Biochemistry and Department of
Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. Electronic address:
kenneth_storey@carleton.ca.

Hibernation is crucial to winter survival for many small mammals and is
characterized by prolonged periods of torpor during which strong global controls 
are applied to suppress energy-expensive cellular processes. We hypothesized that
one strategy of energy conservation is a global reduction in gene transcription
imparted by reversible modifications to DNA and to proteins involved in chromatin
packing. Transcriptional regulation during hibernation was examined over
euthermic control groups and five stages of the torpor/arousal cycle in brown
adipose tissue of thirteen-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus).
Brown adipose is crucial to hibernation success because it is responsible for the
non-shivering thermogenesis that rewarms animals during arousal. A direct
modification of DNA during torpor was revealed by a 1.7-fold increase in global
DNA methylation during long term torpor as compared with euthermic controls.
Acetylation of histone H3 (on Lys23) was reduced by about 50% when squirrels
entered torpor, which would result in increased chromatin packing (and
transcriptional repression). This was accompanied by strong increases in histone 
deacetylase protein levels during torpor; e.g. HDAC1 and HDAC4 levels rose by
1.5- and 6-fold, respectively. Protein levels of two co-repressors of
transcription, MBD1 and HP1, also increased by 1.9- and 1.5-fold, respectively,
in long-term torpor and remained high during early arousal. MBD1, HP1 and HDACs
all returned to near control values during interbout indicating a reversal of
their inhibitory actions. Overall, the data presents strong evidence for a global
suppression of transcription during torpor via the action of epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms in brown adipose tissue of hibernating thirteen-lined
ground squirrels.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25192827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Toxicology. 2014 Nov 5;325:144-50. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2014.08.011. Epub 2014 Aug 
29.

5-Fluorouracil causes severe CNS demyelination by disruption of
TCF7L2/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex in adolescent mice.

Weng Q(1), Tan B(2), Wang J(2), Wang J(2), Zhou H(3), Shi J(3), He Q(4), Yang
B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and
Research, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address:
wengqinjie@zju.edu.cn. (2)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (3)Departments of
Pediatrics and Obstetrics/Gynecology, Institute of Stem Cell and Developmental
Biology, West China Second Hospital, Chengdu 61004, China. (4)Institute of
Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China; Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and Research, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Several studies have showed the anti-cancer efficacy of 5-FU (5-fluorouracil) on 
pediatric tumors. Although the delayed demyelination induced by 5-FU in adult
patients has been reported, the effect of 5-FU on oligodendrocyte myelination in 
adolescence is still unknown. Here, we demonstrate that systemic administration
with 5-FU leads to immediate demyelination in the central nervous system (CNS) of
adolescent mice, which is mainly attributed to the death of OLs. Gene-chip
microarray transcriptome analysis identifies that oligodendrocyte-specific factor
TCF7L2 may be a toxic target of 5-FU-impaired myelination. 5-FU-decreased TCF7L2 
results in disruption of the interaction between TCF7L2 and HDAC1/2. Inhibition
of crucial myelination-promoting factors by 5-FU is more significantly
antagonized by co-transfection of TCF7L2, HDAC1 and HDAC2 than TCF7L2 alone. Our 
findings reveal that 5-FU could acutely induce the severe myelin degeneration in 
adolescence and disruption of TCF7L2/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex is at least partially
involved in 5-FU-induced demyelination.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25178657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cell Rep. 2014 Sep 11;8(5):1497-508. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.059. Epub 2014
Aug 28.

The BCL6 RD2 domain governs commitment of activated B cells to form germinal
centers.

Huang C(1), Gonzalez DG(2), Cote CM(2), Jiang Y(1), Hatzi K(1), Teater M(1), Dai 
K(3), Hla T(3), Haberman AM(4), Melnick A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine
and Immunobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (3)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY
10065, USA. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Immunobiology, Yale
University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: ann.haberman@yale.edu. 
(5)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address:
amm2014@med.cornell.edu.

To understand how the Bcl6 transcriptional repressor functions in the immune
system, we disrupted its RD2 repression domain in mice. Bcl6RD2(MUT) mice exhibit
a complete loss of germinal center (GC) formation but retain normal
extrafollicular responses. Bcl6RD2(MUT) antigen-engaged B cells migrate to the
interfollicular zone and interact with cognate T helper cells. However, these
cells fail to complete early GC-commitment differentiation and coalesce as
nascent GC aggregates. Bcl6 directly binds and represses trafficking receptors
S1pr1 and Gpr183 by recruiting Hdac2 through the RD2 domain. Deregulation of
these genes impairs B cell migration and may contribute to GC failure in
Bcl6RD2(MUT) mice. The development of functional GC-TFH cells was partially
impaired in Bcl6RD2(MUT) mice. In contrast to Bcl6(-/-) mice, Bcl6RD2(MUT)
animals experience no inflammatory disease or macrophage deregulation. These
results reveal an essential role for RD2 repression in early GC commitment and
striking biochemical specificity in Bcl6 control of humoral and innate
immune-cell phenotypes.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4163070
PMID: 25176650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biomed Sci. 2014 Aug 27;21:85. doi: 10.1186/s12929-014-0085-z.

AIRE acetylation and deacetylation: effect on protein stability and
transactivation activity.

Incani F, Serra M, Meloni A, Cossu C, Saba L, Cabras T, Messana I, Rosatelli MC.

BACKGROUND: The AIRE protein plays a remarkable role as a regulator of central
tolerance by controlling the promiscuous expression of tissue-specific antigens
in thymic medullary epithelial cells. Defects in AIRE gene cause the autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy- candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, a rare disease frequent in 
Iranian Jews, Finns, and Sardinian population.
RESULTS: In this study, we have precisely mapped, by mass spectrometry
experiments, the sites of protein acetylation and, by mutagenesis assays, we have
described a set of acetylated lysines as being crucial in influencing the
subcellular localization of AIRE. Furthermore, we have also determined that the
de-acetyltransferase enzymes HDAC1-2 are involved in the lysine de-acetylation of
AIRE.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of our results and those reported in literature, we
propose a model in which lysines acetylation increases the stability of AIRE in
the nucleus. In addition, we observed that the interaction of AIRE with
deacetylases complexes inhibits its transcriptional activity and is probably
responsible for the instability of AIRE, which becomes more susceptible to
degradation in the proteasome.

PMCID: PMC4256887
PMID: 25158603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Nov;1839(11):1170-82. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.08.006. Epub 2014 Aug 19.

A chromatin modifier regulates Sertoli cell response to mono-(2-ethylhexyl)
phthalate (MEHP) via tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2 (TIMP2) signaling.

Zhang C(1), Lai JH(2), Hu B(3), Zhang S(4), Zhao J(5), Li W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Fourth Military Medical
University, No. 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China; Department of General
Surgery, 3rd Hospital of PLA, No. 45 Dongfeng Road, Bao Ji 721004, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, 3rd Hospital of PLA, No. 45 Dongfeng Road, Bao 
Ji 721004, China. (3)Department of Blood Transfusion, 3rd Hospital of PLA, No. 45
Dongfeng Road, Bao Ji 721004, China. (4)Reproductive Medicine Center, Department 
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710038, China. (5)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and
Embryology, Fourth Military Medical University, No. 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an 
710032, China. (6)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Fourth
Military Medical University, No. 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China.
Electronic address: liweipepeyato@163.com.

Epigenetic silencing mechanisms are essential for regulating germ cell apoptosis 
in response to different stimuli during complicated spermatogenesis. Herein, we
report the potential signaling events related to up-regulation of metastasis
associated protein 1 (Mta1), a master chromatin modifier, during
mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (MEHP)-induced Sertoli cells (SCs) injury. Mta1
up-regulation correlated to the gradual increases of MYC expression in
MEHP-treated SCs. Selective knockdown of MYC abolished MEHP-induced activation of
Mta1, suggesting that MYC may regulate the Mta1 signaling following MEHP injury. 
Furthermore, MTA1 acted as a specific corepressor of tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase 2 (Timp2) during SCs injury. Mta1 repressed Timp2 expression
either directly by recruiting histone deacetylase 2 onto the Timp2 promoter or
indirectly by enhancing NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated inflammatory responses during MEHP injury.
This transcriptional and post-translational down-regulation of Timp2/TIMP2
expression consequently resulted in the stimulated activation of matrix
metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) in SCs, which should ultimately promote germ cell
death upon MEHP insult. From a functional standpoint, inhibition of endogenous
Mta1 expression along with anti-inflammation treatment in cultured SCs could
rescue MEHP-inhibited TIMP2 and subsequently rebalanced MMP2 activity to the
control level. Together with the recently reported essential role of TIMP2/MMP2
signaling in MEHP-induced specific disruption of junctional complexes in the
seminiferous epithelium, our results further substantiate a critical role of Mta1
in the control of SCs response to MEHP stimulation. The MYC/Mta1/TIMP2 circuit
may serve as an important scavenger mechanism to help to maintain the capacity of
damaged SCs to support germ cell development following MEHP injury.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25153068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. BMC Cancer. 2014 Aug 20;14:604. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-604.

High nuclear expression levels of histone-modifying enzymes LSD1, HDAC2 and SIRT1
in tumor cells correlate with decreased survival and increased relapse in breast 
cancer patients.

Derr RS, van Hoesel AQ, Benard A, Goossens-Beumer IJ, Sajet A, Dekker-Ensink NG, 
de Kruijf EM, Bastiaannet E, Smit VT, van de Velde CJ, Kuppen PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, K6-R, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), P,O, Box
9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. p.j.k.kuppen@lumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease with a highly variable
clinical outcome in which both genetic and epigenetic changes have critical
roles. We investigated tumor expression levels of histone-modifying enzymes LSD1,
HDAC2 and SIRT1 in relation with patient survival and tumor relapse in a
retrospective cohort of 460 breast cancer patients. Additionally, we correlated
expression levels with tumor differentiation and tumor cell proliferation.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining for LSD1, HDAC2 and SIRT1 was performed on 
tissue microarrays of tumor and corresponding normal formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissues from breast cancer patients. Median nuclear expression 
levels in tumor tissues were used to divide the patients into low and high
expression categories. In combined expression analyses, patients were divided
into four subgroups: 1, all enzymes below-median; 2, one enzyme above-median; 3, 
two enzymes above-median; 4, all three enzymes above-median. The Cox proportional
hazard model was used for univariate and multivariate survival analyses. The
Pearson Chi-square method was used to assess correlation of combined expression
levels with tumor cell proliferation and tumor differentiation.
RESULTS: Expression of LSD1 and SIRT1, but not of HDAC2, was significantly
increased in tumor tissues compared to their normal counterparts (both p <
0.001). Multivariate survival analyses identified SIRT1 as independent prognostic
factor for relapse-free survival (RFS) with a hazard ratio (HR) of 1.34 (95% CI =
1.04-1.74, p = 0.02). For overall survival (OS), no significant differences were 
found when the individual enzymes were analyzed. Analyses of combined expression 
levels of the three histone-modifying enzymes correlated with OS (p = 0.03) and
RFS (p = 0.006) with a HR of respectively 1.49 (95% CI = 1.07-2.08) and 1.68 (95%
CI = 1.16-2.44) in multivariate analyses and were also related to tumor
differentiation (p < 0.001) and tumor cell proliferation (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: When the combined expression levels were analyzed, high expression
of LSD1, HDAC2 and SIRT1 showed shorter patient survival time and shorter time to
tumor relapse and correlated with poor tumor differentiation and a high level of 
tumor cell proliferation. Expression of these histone-modifying enzymes might
therefore be involved in breast cancer pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4148956
PMID: 25139823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e102684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102684.
eCollection 2014.

Selective HDAC inhibition for the disruption of latent HIV-1 infection.

Barton KM(1), Archin NM(2), Keedy KS(1), Espeseth AS(3), Zhang YL(4), Gale J(4), 
Wagner FF(4), Holson EB(4), Margolis DM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (2)Department
of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, United States of America. (3)Department of Antiviral Research, Merck
Research Laboratories, West Point, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(4)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United 
States of America. (5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of
America; Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America; Department of
Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, United States of America.

Selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have emerged as a potential
anti-latency therapy for persistent human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
infection. We utilized a combination of small molecule inhibitors and short
hairpin (sh)RNA-mediated gene knockdown strategies to delineate the key HDAC(s)
to be targeted for selective induction of latent HIV-1 expression. Individual
depletion of HDAC3 significantly induced expression from the HIV-1 promoter in
the 2D10 latency cell line model. However, depletion of HDAC1 or -2 alone or in
combination did not significantly induce HIV-1 expression. Co-depletion of HDAC2 
and -3 resulted in a significant increase in expression from the HIV-1 promoter. 
Furthermore, concurrent knockdown of HDAC1, -2, and -3 resulted in a significant 
increase in expression from the HIV-1 promoter. Using small molecule HDAC
inhibitors of differing selectivity to ablate the residual HDAC activity that
remained after (sh)RNA depletion, the effect of depletion of HDAC3 was further
enhanced. Enzymatic inhibition of HDAC3 with the selective small-molecule
inhibitor BRD3308 activated HIV-1 transcription in the 2D10 cell line.
Furthermore, ex vivo exposure to BRD3308 induced outgrowth of HIV-1 from resting 
CD4+ T cells isolated from antiretroviral-treated, aviremic HIV+ patients. Taken 
together these findings suggest that HDAC3 is an essential target to disrupt
HIV-1 latency, and inhibition of HDAC2 may also contribute to the effort to purge
and eradicate latent HIV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC4138023
PMID: 25136952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Learn Mem. 2014 Aug 15;21(9):457-67. doi: 10.1101/lm.034033.113. Print 2014 Sep.

17ß-Estradiol regulates histone alterations associated with memory consolidation 
and increases Bdnf promoter acetylation in middle-aged female mice.

Fortress AM(1), Kim J(1), Poole RL(2), Gould TJ(2), Frick KM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin 53211, USA. (2)Department of Psychology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA. (3)Department of Psychology, University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53211, USA frickk@uwm.edu.

Histone acetylation is essential for hippocampal memory formation in young adult 
rodents. Although dysfunctional histone acetylation has been associated with
age-related memory decline in male rodents, little is known about whether histone
acetylation is altered by aging in female rodents. In young female mice, the
ability of 17ß-estradiol (E2) to enhance object recognition memory consolidation 
requires histone H3 acetylation in the dorsal hippocampus. However, the extent to
which histone acetylation is regulated by E2 in middle-aged females is unknown.
The mnemonic benefits of E2 in aging females appear to be greatest in middle age,
and so pinpointing the molecular mechanisms through which E2 enhances memory at
this age could lead to the development of safer and more effective treatments for
maintaining memory function without the side effects of current therapies. Here, 
we show that dorsal hippocampal infusion of E2 rapidly enhanced object
recognition and spatial memory, and increased histone H3 acetylation in the
dorsal hippocampus, while also significantly reducing levels of histone
deacetylase (HDAC2 and HDAC3) proteins. E2 specifically increased histone H3
acetylation at Bdnf promoters pII and pIV in the dorsal hippocampus of both young
and middle-aged mice, despite age-related decreases in pI and pIV acetylation.
Furthermore, levels of mature BDNF and pro-BDNF proteins in the dorsal
hippocampus were increased by E2 in middle-aged females. Together, these data
suggest that the middle-aged female dorsal hippocampus remains epigenetically
responsive to E2, and that E2 may enhance memory in middle-aged females via
epigenetic regulation of Bdnf.

© 2014 Fortress et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4138358
PMID: 25128537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Aging (Albany NY). 2014 Aug;6(8):621-44.

D-beta-hydroxybutyrate extends lifespan in C. elegans.

Edwards C(1), Canfield J(2), Copes N(2), Rehan M(2), Lipps D(1), Bradshaw PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA . (2)Department of Cell Biology,
Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL
33620, USA.

The ketone body beta-hydroxybutyrate (ßHB) is a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor and has been shown to be protective in many disease models, but its
effects on aging are not well studied. Therefore we determined the effect of ßHB 
supplementation on the lifespan ofC. elegans nematodes. ßHB supplementation
extended mean lifespan by approximately 20%. RNAi knockdown of HDACs hda-2 or
hda-3 also increased lifespan and further prevented ßHB-mediated lifespan
extension. ßHB-mediated lifespan extension required the DAF-16/FOXO and SKN-1/Nrf
longevity pathways, the sirtuin SIR-2.1, and the AMP kinase subunit AAK-2. ßHB
did not extend lifespan in a genetic model of dietary restriction indicating that
ßHB is likely functioning through a similar mechanism. ßHB addition also
upregulated <U+0392>HB dehydrogenase activity and increased oxygen consumption in the
worms. RNAi knockdown of F55E10.6, a short chain dehydrogenase and SKN-1 target
gene, prevented the increased lifespan and ßHB dehydrogenase activity induced by 
ßHB addition, suggesting that F55E10.6 functions as an inducible ßHB
dehydrogenase. Furthermore, ßHB supplementation increased worm thermotolerance
and partially prevented glucose toxicity. It also delayed Alzheimer's
amyloid-beta toxicity and decreased Parkinson's alpha-synuclein aggregation. The 
results indicate that D-ßHB extends lifespan through inhibiting HDACs and through
the activation of conserved stress response pathways.

PMCID: PMC4169858
PMID: 25127866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. FEBS J. 2015 May;282(9):1774-85. doi: 10.1111/febs.12972. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Towards elucidating the stability, dynamics and architecture of the nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase complex by using quantitative interaction proteomics.

Kloet SL(1), Baymaz HI, Makowski M, Groenewold V, Jansen PW, Berendsen M, Niazi
H, Kops GJ, Vermeulen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex is an evolutionarily
conserved chromatin-associated protein complex. Although the subunit composition 
of the mammalian complex is fairly well characterized, less is known about the
stability and dynamics of these interactions. Furthermore, detailed information
regarding protein-protein interaction surfaces within the complex is still
largely lacking. Here, we show that the NuRD complex interacts with a number of
substoichiometric zinc finger-containing proteins. Some of these interactions are
salt-sensitive (ZNF512B and SALL4), whereas others (ZMYND8) are not. The
stoichiometry of the core subunits is not affected by high salt concentrations,
indicating that the core complex is stabilized by hydrophobic interactions.
Interestingly, the RBBP4 and RBBP7 proteins are sensitive to high nonionic
detergent concentrations during affinity purification. In a subunit exchange
assay with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-treated
nuclear extracts, RBBP4 and RBBP7 were identified as dynamic core subunits of the
NuRD complex, consistent with their proposed role as histone chaperones. Finally,
using cross-linking MS, we have uncovered novel features of NuRD molecular
architecture that complement our affinity purification-MS/MS data. Altogether,
these findings extend our understanding of MBD3-NuRD structure and
stability.STRUCTURED DIGITAL ABSTRACT: MBD3 physically interacts with ZNF512B,
HDAC1, ZMYND8, GATAD2B, SALL4, GATAD2A, ZNF592, MTA3, ZNF687, CDK2AP1, CHD3,
ZNF532, HDAC2, MTA2, CHD4, MTA1, KPNA2, CHD5, RBBP4 and RBBP7 by pull down (View 
interaction) CDK2AP1 physically interacts with MBD3, MTA3, HDAC2, GATAD2A, CHD4, 
CDK2AP1, MTA2, HDAC1, MTA1, CHD3, GATAD2B, MBD2, RBBP4 and RBBP7 by pull down
(View interaction) MBD3 physically interacts with MTA2, MTA3, RBBP4, RBBP7,
HDAC2, HDAC1, CHD4, CHD3 and MTA1 by cross-linking study (View interaction).

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25123934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cell Host Microbe. 2014 Aug 13;16(2):177-86. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2014.06.014.

A Plasmodium falciparum histone deacetylase regulates antigenic variation and
gametocyte conversion.

Coleman BI(1), Skillman KM(1), Jiang RH(1), Childs LM(2), Altenhofen LM(3),
Ganter M(1), Leung Y(1), Goldowitz I(1), Kafsack BF(3), Marti M(1), Llinás M(3), 
Buckee CO(2), Duraisingh MT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Epidemiology and Center for
Communicable Disease Dynamics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biology and Lewis-Sigler Institute for
Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: mduraisi@hsph.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2014 Aug 13;16(2):148-50.
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2014 Oct;12(10):655.

The asexual forms of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum are adapted for
chronic persistence in human red blood cells, continuously evading host immunity 
using epigenetically regulated antigenic variation of virulence-associated genes.
Parasite survival on a population level also requires differentiation into sexual
forms, an obligatory step for further human transmission. We reveal that the
essential nuclear gene, P. falciparum histone deacetylase 2 (PfHda2), is a global
silencer of virulence gene expression and controls the frequency of switching
from the asexual cycle to sexual development. PfHda2 depletion leads to
dysregulated expression of both virulence-associated var genes and PfAP2-g, a
transcription factor controlling sexual conversion, and is accompanied by
increases in gametocytogenesis. Mathematical modeling further indicates that
PfHda2 has likely evolved to optimize the parasite's infectious period by
achieving low frequencies of virulence gene expression switching and sexual
conversion. This common regulation of cellular transcriptional programs
mechanistically links parasite transmissibility and virulence.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4188636
PMID: 25121747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 15;5(15):5965-77.

Identification of a gene expression driven progression pathway in myxoid
liposarcoma.

De Cecco L(1), Negri T(2), Brich S(3), Mauro V(3), Bozzi F(3), Dagrada G(3),
Disciglio V(4), Sanfilippo R(5), Gronchi A(6), D'Incalci M(7), Casali PG(5),
Canevari S(4), Pierotti MA(8), Pilotti S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Experimental Oncology
and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan
Italy; These authors contributed equally to this work. (2)Laboratory of
Experimental Molecular Pathology, Department of Diagnostic Pathology and
Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan Italy; These
authors contributed equally to this work. (3)Laboratory of Experimental Molecular
Pathology, Department of Diagnostic Pathology and Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan Italy. (4)Functional Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine,
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan Italy. (5)Adult Mesenchymal
Tumor Medical Oncology Unit, Cancer Medicine Department, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan Italy. (6)Department of Surgery, Fondazione 
IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan Italy. (7)Department of Oncology,
IRCCS, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan, Italy.
(8)Scientific Directorate, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan 
Italy.

AIM: to investigate the events involved in the progression of myxoid liposarcoma 
(MLS). Gene expression profiling and immunohistochemical/biochemical analyses
were applied to specimens representative of the opposite ends of the MLS
spectrum: pure myxoid (ML) and pure round cell (RC) liposarcomas. The analyses
revealed the involvement of both coding and non coding RNAs (SNORDs located in
DLK1-DIO3 region) and support a model of stepwise progression mainly driven by
epigenetic changes involving tumour vascular supply and tumoral cellular
component. In this model, a switch in the vascular landscape from a normal to a
pro-angiogenic signature and the silencing of DLK1-DIO3 region mark the
progression from ML to RC in concert with the acquisition by the latter of the
over-expression of YYI/C-MYC/HDAC2, together with over-expression of genes
involved in cell proliferation and stemness: MKNK2, MSX1 and TRIM71. Taken
together, these findings strongly suggest that to progress from ML to RC
liposarcoma the cells have to overcome the epigenetic silencing restriction point
in order to reset their new stem-like differentiation signature. Our findings
provide a first attempt at identifying the missing links between ML and RC
liposarcomas, that may also have broader applications in other
clinico-pathological settings characterised by a spectrum of progression.

PMCID: PMC4171605
PMID: 25115389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cryobiology. 2014 Oct;69(2):256-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2014.07.015. Epub
2014 Aug 6.

Vitrification of bovine oocytes at different meiotic stages using the Cryotop
method: assessment of morphological, molecular and functional patterns.

Sprícigo JF(1), Morais K(2), Ferreira AR(3), Machado GM(1), Gomes AC(2), Rumpf
R(4), Franco MM(2), Dode MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, University of Brasilia,
Brasília, DF, Brazil. (2)Embrapa Genetic Resources and Biotechnology, Laboratory 
of Animal Reproduction, Brasília, DF, Brazil. (3)School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of São Paulo State, Botucatu, SP, Brazil. (4)Geneal, Animal
Reproduction Inc., Uberaba, MG, Brazil. (5)School of Agriculture and Veterinary
Medicine, University of Brasilia, Brasília, DF, Brazil; Embrapa Genetic Resources
and Biotechnology, Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, Brasília, DF, Brazil.
Electronic address: Margot.dode@embrapa.br.

This study aimed to investigate the functional, morphological and molecular
patterns of bovine oocytes vitrified at different times during in vitro
maturation (IVM). Four groups of oocytes were used: non-vitrified control oocytes
(CG), oocytes vitrified at 0 h (V0), oocytes vitrified after 8 h of IVM (V8) and 
oocytes vitrified after 22 h of IVM (V22). After vitrification, the oocytes were 
warmed and then returned to the incubator to complete a total of 24h of IVM. To
evaluate the effect of vitrification, the nuclear maturation and fertilization
rates were assessed by lacmoid staining and ultrastructural electron microscopy. 
The cleavage and blastocyst rates were evaluated at D2, D7 and D8. The expression
levels of CASP3, TP53, HDAC2, SUV39H1 and DNMT1 were investigated by RT-qPCR. The
nuclear maturation, oocyte fertilization, cleavage and blastocyst rates were
higher (P < 0.05) in the CG group (80%; 81.3%; 88.5%; and 35.8%) than in the V0
(44%; 44.6%; 22.7%; and 2.6%), V8 (50%; 63%; 21.5%; and 2.2%) and V22 (55.5%;
66.9%; 24.1%; and 4.6%) groups. Ultrastructural analysis revealed significant
damage within the cytoplasm of all vitrified groups, but more severe degeneration
was observed in the V22 group. The gene expression profiles were not affected by 
vitrification (P > 0.05). In conclusion, cytoplasm degeneration seems to be the
most severe form of damage caused by vitrification. The use of the Cryotop method
for vitrification severely reduces bovine oocyte viability regardless of whether 
it is performed at GV, GVBD or MII stage.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25106744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Med Sci. 2014 Jul 17;11(10):994-1000. doi: 10.7150/ijms.8522. eCollection
2014.

Expression of histone deacetylases in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and its
clinical significance.

Lee SH(1), Yoo C(2), Im S(2), Jung JH(2), Choi HJ(2), Yoo J(2).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Hospital Pathology, St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (2)2. Department of Hospital Pathology, St.
Vincent's Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Suwon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase inhibitors are a new class of drugs used in
treatment of malignant tumors. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most 
common type of B-cell lymphoma, and it accounts for more than 40% of all B-cell
lymphomas. In this study, we aimed to determine the expression patterns of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) in DLBCL, to examine whether HDAC expression
patterns differ among cases, and to assess whether these findings have clinical
significance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We selected 91 cases of DLBCL diagnosed at St. Vincent
Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, from 2001-2012. We performed a
pathology slide review and collected clinical data including age, sex, tumor
site, survival time, and mortality. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed
using primary antibodies for HDACs, including HDAC1 and 2 of class I, HDAC4 and 5
of class IIa, and HDAC6 of class IIb. Expression site was determined to be
nuclear, cytoplasmic, or both. Staining intensities were graded as low and high. 
We assessed correlations between HDAC expression levels and clinical data and
survival analysis.
RESULTS: Of the 91 cases examined, 46 (50.5%) were men and 45 (49.5%) were women.
Most of the patients were elderly, and 74 (81.3%) cases were older than 46 y.
Forty-six (50.5%) cases showed lymph node involvement, and 45 (49.5%) cases
showed lymphoma at extranodal sites. In nodal lymphoma, staining was strongly
positive for HDAC2, whereas staining was weak or negative for HDAC4; however,
there was no significant correlation with survival. But nodal lymphoma cases with
high nuclear expression of HDAC2 and nodal lymphoma cases with high nuclear
expression of HDAC2 and low nuclear expression of HDAC4 showed significantly
shorter survival times compared with other cases.
CONCLUSIONS: High nuclear expression of HDAC2 may play an important role in
survival of DLBCL patients, especially in those with nodal lymphoma, which is
associated with a shorter survival time. Our results may have important
implications for treatment of DLBCL by epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC4115238
PMID: 25076845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 26;289(39):27065-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.585653. Epub
2014 Jul 29.

Chronic ethanol consumption inhibits glucokinase transcriptional activity by Atf3
and triggers metabolic syndrome in vivo.

Kim JY(1), Hwang JY(2), Lee DY(3), Song EH(1), Park KJ(4), Kim GH(1), Jeong
EA(1), Lee YJ(1), Go MJ(2), Kim DJ(5), Lee SS(6), Kim BJ(2), Song J(1), Roh
GS(7), Gao B(8), Kim WH(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Metabolic Disease, Center for Biomedical Science.
(2)Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genomic Science,
National Institutes of Health, Osong-eup, Cheongwon-gun, Chungbuk 363-951, Korea.
(3)From the Division of Metabolic Disease, Center for Biomedical Science, the
Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul 136-701, Korea. (4)From the Division of Metabolic Disease,
Center for Biomedical Science, the Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Chungbuk National University School of Medicine, Cheongju 361-763,
Korea, and. (5)the Departments of Psychiatry and. (6)Endocrinology, College of
Medicine, Catholic University, Bucheon 420-743, Korea. (7)the Department of
Anatomy and Neurobiology, Institute of Health Sciences, Gyeongsang National
University, Jinju, Gyeongnam 660-751, Korea. (8)the Laboratory of Liver Diseases,
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.
(9)From the Division of Metabolic Disease, Center for Biomedical Science,
jhkwh@nih.go.kr.

Chronic ethanol consumption induces pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction through
glucokinase (Gck) nitration and down-regulation, leading to impaired glucose
tolerance and insulin resistance, but the underlying mechanism remains largely
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that Gck gene expression and promoter activity in
pancreatic ß-cells were suppressed by chronic ethanol exposure in vivo and in
vitro, whereas expression of activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3) and its
binding to the putative Atf/Creb site (from -287 to -158 bp) on the Gck promoter 
were up-regulated. Furthermore, in vitro ethanol-induced Atf3 inhibited the
positive effect of Pdx-1 on Gck transcriptional regulation, enhanced recruitment 
of Hdac1/2 and histone H3 deacetylation, and subsequently augmented the
interaction of Hdac1/Pdx-1 on the Gck promoter, which were diminished by Atf3
siRNA. In vivo Atf3-silencing reversed ethanol-mediated Gck down-regulation and
ß-cell dysfunction, followed by the amelioration of impaired glucose tolerance
and insulin resistance. Together, we identified that ethanol-induced Atf3 fosters
ß-cell dysfunction via Gck down-regulation and that its loss ameliorates
metabolic syndrome and could be a potential therapeutic target in treating type 2
diabetes. The Atf3 gene is associated with the induction of type 2 diabetes and
alcohol consumption-induced metabolic impairment and thus may be the major
negative regulator for glucose homeostasis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4175344
PMID: 25074928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1846(2):524-38. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.07.010. 
Epub 2014 Jul 27.

Histone deacetylase 2 controls p53 and is a critical factor in tumorigenesis.

Wagner T(1), Brand P(2), Heinzel T(2), Krämer OH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Department of Biochemistry, Friedrich Schiller University of Jena,
Hans-Knöll-Str. 2, 07745 Jena, Germany. Electronic address:
tobias.wagner@uni-jena.de. (2)Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Institute of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Department of Biochemistry, Friedrich Schiller
University of Jena, Hans-Knöll-Str. 2, 07745 Jena, Germany. (3)Department of
Toxicology, University Medical Center, Obere Zahlbacher Str. 67, 55131 Mainz,
Germany. Electronic address: okraemer@uni-mainz.de.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) regulates biological processes by deacetylation of 
histones and non-histone proteins. HDAC2 is overexpressed in numerous cancer
types, suggesting general cancer-relevant functions of HDAC2. In human tumors the
TP53 gene encoding p53 is frequently mutated and wild-type p53 is often disarmed.
Molecular pathways inactivating wild-type p53 often remain to be defined and
understood. Remarkably, current data link HDAC2 to the regulation of the tumor
suppressor p53 by deacetylation and to the maintenance of genomic stability.
Here, we summarize recent findings on HDAC2 overexpression in solid and
hematopoietic cancers with a focus on mechanisms connecting HDAC2 and p53 in
vitro and in vivo. In addition, we present an evidence-based model that
integrates molecular pathways and feedback loops by which p53 and further
transcription factors govern the expression and the ubiquitin-dependent
proteasomal degradation of HDAC2 and of p53 itself. Understanding the
interactions between p53 and HDAC2 might aid in the development of new
therapeutic approaches against cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25072962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Gastroenterology. 2014 Nov;147(5):1084-93. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.07.030.
Epub 2014 Jul 25.

A GAPDH-mediated trans-nitrosylation pathway is required for feedback inhibition 
of bile salt synthesis in rat liver.

Rodríguez-Ortigosa CM(1), Celay J(2), Olivas I(2), Juanarena N(2), Arcelus S(3), 
Uriarte I(4), Marín JJ(5), Avila MA(3), Medina JF(3), Prieto J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy, Center for Applied Medical Research, 
University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
en el área temática de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Pamplona, 
Spain. Electronic address: crodriguez@unav.es. (2)Division of Hepatology and Gene
Therapy, Center for Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona,
Spain. (3)Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy, Center for Applied Medical
Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red en el área temática de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas
(CIBERehd), Pamplona, Spain. (4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en el
área temática de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Pamplona, Spain.
(5)Laboratory of Experimental Hepatology and Drug Targeting, University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en el área 
temática de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Salamanca, Spain.
(6)Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy, Center for Applied Medical Research, 
University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
en el área temática de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Pamplona, 
Spain; Liver Unit, University of Navarra Clinic, Pamplona, Spain. Electronic
address: jprieto@unav.es.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Bile salts inhibit their own production by inducing the
nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner (SHP) (encoded by NR0B2), which
contributes to repression of the gene encoding cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase
(CYP7A1), a key enzyme for the control of bile salt synthesis. On the other hand,
bile salts stimulate hepatic synthesis of nitric oxide. We investigated the role 
of nitric oxide signaling in the control of CYP7A1 expression and the involvement
in this process of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), which
participates in intracellular propagation of nitric oxide signals.
METHODS: We studied the effects of inhibitors of nitric oxide synthesis
(L-NG-nitroarginine methyl ester [L-NAME]) or protein nitrosylation (via
dithiothreitol) on bile salt homeostasis in male Wistar rats placed on a
cholate-rich diet for 5 days and in cultured primary hepatocytes. S-nitrosylation
of GAPDH was assessed using a biotin-switch assay. Interacions of SHP with other 
proteins and with the Cyp7a1 promoter sequence were studied using
immunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. We reduced
the GAPDH levels in H35 cells with small interfering RNAs. GAPDH nitrosylation
was assessed in normal and cholestatic rat and human livers.
RESULTS: Rats placed on cholate-rich diets and given L-NAME had increased
intrahepatic and biliary levels of bile salts, and deficiency in repression of
CYP7A1 (at the messenger RNA and protein levels) in liver tissue, despite
preserved induction of SHP. In cultured hepatocytes, L-NAME or dithiothreitol
blocked cholate-induced down-regulation of CYP7A1 without impairing
SHP up-regulation. In hepatocytes, cholate promoted S-nitrosylation of GAPDH and 
its translocation to the nucleus, accompanied by S-nitrosylation of histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), deacetylases that participate,
respectively, in the formation of Cyp7a1 and Shp repressor complexes. Knockdown
of GAPDH prevented repression of CYP7A1 by cholate, and blocking nuclear
transport of nitrosylated GAPDH reduced cholate-induced nitrosylation of HDAC2
and SIRT1; this effect was accompanied by abrogation of Cyp7a1 repression.
Cholate induced binding of SHP to HDAC2 and its recruitment to the Cyp7a1
promoter; these processes were inhibited by blocking nitric oxide synthesis.
Levels of nitrosylated GAPDH and nitrosylated HDAC2 were increased in cholestatic
human and rat livers reflecting increased concentrations of bile salts in these
conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: In rat liver, excess levels of bile salts activate a GAPDH-mediated 
transnitrosylation cascade that provides feedback inhibition of bile salt
synthesis.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25066374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Neurochem Int. 2014 Oct;76:114-21. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2014.07.005. Epub 2014
Jul 21.

Histone deacetylase mediates the decrease in drebrin cluster density induced by
amyloid beta oligomers.

Ishizuka Y(1), Shimizu H(1), Takagi E(1), Kato M(1), Yamagata H(2), Mikuni M(3), 
Shirao T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. (2)Division of
Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, Yamaguchi University Graduate School
of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minamikougushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan. (3)Department 
of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. (4)Department of
Neurobiology and Behavior, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-39-22 
Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. Electronic address:
tshirao@gunma-u.ac.jp.

Dendritic spine defects are found in a number of cognitive disorders, including
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Amyloid beta (Aß) toxicity is mediated not only by the 
fibrillar form of the protein, but also by the soluble oligomers (Aß-derived
diffusible ligands, ADDLs). Drebrin is an actin-binding protein that is located
at mature dendritic spines. Because drebrin expression is decreased in AD brains 
and in cultured neurons exposed to Aß, it is thought that drebrin is closely
associated with cognitive functions. Recent studies show that histone deacetylase
(HDAC) activity is elevated in the AD mouse model, and that memory impairments in
these animals can be ameliorated by HDAC inhibitors. In addition, spine loss and 
memory impairment in HDAC2 over-expressing mice are ameliorated by chronic HDAC
inhibitor treatment. Therefore, we hypothesized that the regulation of histone
acetylation/deacetylation is critical to synaptic functioning. In this study, we 
examined the relationship between HDAC activity and synaptic defects induced by
ADDLs using an HDAC inhibitor, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA). We show
that ADDLs reduce the cluster density of drebrin along dendrites without reducing
drebrin expression. SAHA markedly increased the acetylation of histone proteins, 
and it simultaneously attenuated the ADDL-induced decrease in drebrin cluster
density. In comparison, SAHA treatment did not affect the density of drebrin
clusters or dendritic protrusions in control neurons. Therefore, SAHA likely
inhibits ADDL-induced drebrin loss from dendritic spines by stabilizing drebrin
in these structures, rather than by increasing drebrin clusters or dendritic
protrusions. Taken together, our findings suggest that HDAC is involved in
ADDL-induced synaptic defects, and that the regulation of histone acetylation
plays an important role in modulating actin cytoskeletal dynamics in dendritic
spines under cellular stress conditions, such as ADDL exposure.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25058791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:769867. doi: 10.1155/2014/769867. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

In silico investigation of traditional Chinese medicine compounds to inhibit
human histone deacetylase 2 for patients with Alzheimer's disease.

Hung TC(1), Lee WY(2), Chen KB(3), Chan YC(4), Lee CC(4), Chen CY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan 
; School of Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung
40402, Taiwan ; Department of Neurosurgery, China Medical University Hospital,
No. 2, Yude Road, North District, Taichung 40447, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Biomedical Informatics, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan ; School of
Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan ;
Department of Anesthesiology, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung 40447, 
Taiwan. (4)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical University,
Taichung 40402, Taiwan. (5)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Asia University,
Taichung 41354, Taiwan ; School of Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan ; Research Center for Chinese Medicine &
Acupuncture, China Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan ; Human Genetic
Center, Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital,
Taichung 40447, Taiwan.

Human histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) has been identified as being associated with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), a neuropathic degenerative disease. In this study, we
screen the world's largest Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) database for
natural compounds that may be useful as lead compounds in the search for
inhibitors of HDAC2 function. The technique of molecular docking was employed to 
select the ten top TCM candidates. We used three prediction models, multiple
linear regression (MLR), support vector machine (SVM), and the Bayes network
toolbox (BNT), to predict the bioactivity of the TCM candidates. Molecular
dynamics simulation provides the protein-ligand interactions of compounds. The
bioactivity predictions of pIC50 values suggest that the TCM candidatesm,
(-)-Bontl ferulate, monomethylcurcumin, and ningposides C, have a greater effect 
on HDAC2 inhibition. The structure variation caused by the hydrogen bonds and
hydrophobic interactions between protein-ligand interactions indicates that these
compounds have an inhibitory effect on the protein.

PMCID: PMC4090436
PMID: 25045700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Fibrogenesis Tissue Repair. 2014 Jul 2;7:10. doi: 10.1186/1755-1536-7-10.
eCollection 2014.

HDAC class I inhibitor, Mocetinostat, reverses cardiac fibrosis in heart failure 
and diminishes CD90+ cardiac myofibroblast activation.

Nural-Guvener HF(1), Zakharova L(1), Nimlos J(1), Popovic S(1), Mastroeni D(2),
Gaballa MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute,
10515 W. Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA. (2)L. J Roberts Center for
Alzheimer's Research at Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA.

BACKGROUND: Interstitial fibrosis and fibrotic scar formation contribute to
cardiac remodeling and loss of cardiac function in myocardial infarction (MI) and
heart failure. Recent studies showed that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
retard fibrosis formation in acute MI settings. However, it is unknown whether
HDAC inhibition can reverse cardiac fibrosis in ischemic heart failure. In
addition, specific HDAC isoforms involved in cardiac fibrosis and myofibroblast
activation are not well defined. Thus, the purpose of this study is to determine 
the effects of selective class I HDAC inhibition on cardiac fibroblasts
activation and cardiac fibrosis in a congestive heart failure (CHF) model
secondary to MI.
METHODS: MI was created by left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery
occlusion. Class I HDACs were selectively inhibited via Mocetinostat in CD90+
fibroblasts isolated from atrial and ventricular heart tissue in vitro. In vivo, 
Class I HDACs were inhibited in 3 weeks post MI rats by injecting Mocetinostat
for the duration of 3 weeks. Cardiac function and heart tissue were analyzed at
6 weeks post MI.
RESULTS: In sham hearts, HDAC1 and HDAC2 displayed differential expression
patterns where HDAC1 mainly expressed in cardiac fibroblast and HDAC2 in
cardiomyocytes. On the other hand, we showed that HDAC1 and 2 were upregulated in
CHF hearts, and were found to co-localize with CD90+ cardiac fibroblasts. In vivo
treatment of CHF animals with Mocetinostat improved left ventricle end diastolic 
pressure and dp/dt max and decreased the total collagen amount. In vitro
treatment of CD90+ cells with Mocetinostat reversed myofibroblast phenotype as
indicated by a decrease in a-Smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), Collagen III, and
Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2). Furthermore, Mocetinostat increased
E-cadherin, induced ß-catenin localization to the membrane, and reduced Akt/GSK3ß
signaling in atrial cardiac fibroblasts. In addition, Mocetinostat treatment of
atrial CD90+ cells upregulated cleaved-Caspase3 and activated the p53/p21 axis.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results demonstrate upregulation of HDAC1 and 2 
in CHF. In addition, HDAC inhibition reverses interstitial fibrosis in CHF.
Possible anti-fibrotic actions of HDAC inhibition include reversal of
myofibroblast activation and induction of cell cycle arrest/apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4094898
PMID: 25024745  [PubMed]


261. Int J Med Sci. 2014 Jul 5;11(9):955-61. doi: 10.7150/ijms.9316. eCollection 2014.

Cyclic phosphatidic acid inhibits alkyl-glycerophosphate-induced downregulation
of histone deacetylase 2 expression and suppresses the inflammatory response in
human coronary artery endothelial cells.

Tsukahara T(1), Haniu H(2), Matsuda Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Hematology and Immunology, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1
Daigaku, Uchinada, Ishikawa 920-0293, Japan. (2)2. Institue for Biomedical
Sciences, Shinshu University Interdisciplinary Cluster for Cutting Edge Research 
3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan. (3)3. Clinical Pharmacology
Educational Center, Nihon Pharmaceutical University, Ina-machi, Saitama 362-0806,
Japan.

Activation of the endothelium by alkyl-glycerophosphate (AGP) has been implicated
in the development of atherosclerosis. Our previous study suggested that cyclic
phosphatidic acid (cPA) inhibits arterial wall remodeling in a rat model in vivo.
However, the mechanisms through which specific target genes are regulated during 
this process remain unclear. Here, we examined whether cPA inhibited AGP-induced 
expression of class I histone deacetylases (HDACs, namely HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3,
and HDAC8), which may affect subsequent transcriptional activity of target genes.
Our experimental results showed that human coronary artery endothelial cells
(HCAECs) expressed high levels of HDAC2 and low levels HDAC1, HDAC3, and HDAC8.
Moreover, AGP treatment induced downregulation of HDAC2 expression in HCAECs.
However, cotreatment with cPA inhibited this downregulation of HDAC2 expression. 
Interestingly, treatment with AGP increased the expression and secretion of
endogenous interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8; however, this effect was inhibited when
HCAECs were cotreated with cPA or the synthetic peroxisome proliferator-activator
receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) antagonist T0070907. Thus, our data suggested that cPA may
have beneficial effects in inflammation-related cardiovascular disease by
controlling HDAC2 regulation.

PMCID: PMC4081316
PMID: 25013374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Lung Cancer. 2014 Sep;85(3):442-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.010. Epub 2014 
Jun 21.

MicroRNA-binding site SNPs in deregulated genes are associated with clinical
outcome of non-small cell lung cancer.

Xu J(1), Tian S(2), Yin Z(3), Wu S(4), Liu L(1), Qian Y(1), Pei D(1), Gao W(1),
Xu J(1), Yin Y(1), Liu P(1), Shu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Jintan People's
Hospital Affiliated to Jiangsu University, Jintan 213200, China. (3)Department of
Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China. (4)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China. (5)Department of Oncology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.
Electronic address: shuyongqian@csco.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 3'-untranslated regions of 
cancer-related genes might affect regulation by microRNAs and contribute to
cancer patients' outcome.
METHODS: We used public databases to identify SNPs within miRNA-binding sites in 
deregulated genes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A total of 13 SNPs in 10
genes were included and genotyped by SNaPshot assay in 576 NSCLC patients.
Associations between SNPs, overall survival (OS) and chemotherapy response were
evaluated by Cox regression and logistic regression. We then examined the
functionality of the significant polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Two SNPs (TYMS rs2790 and MICA rs9266825) were significantly associated 
with OS. In the combined analysis, an increasing number of unfavorable loci was
associated with a poorer prognosis (P for trend<0.001) and patients having 2-3
unfavorable loci had a 1.61-fold elevated risk of death (95% confidence interval:
1.20-2.15), compared with those carrying 0-1 unfavorable loci. A significant
effect of SNPs on platinum-based chemotherapy response was observed among 296
advanced NSCLC patients without surgical operation: rs2790, rs4246215 and rs1882.
Further analysis using mRNA expression data from the HapMap suggested that these 
significant loci (FEN1 rs4246215, HDAC2 rs11391, MICA rs1882 and rs9266825) were 
closely associated with host genes expression. In vitro functional study for TYMS
rs2790 was carried out. Luciferase assay showed a lower expression level for
rs2790 G allele as compared with A allele, and the hsa-miR-1248 had an effect on 
modulation of TYMS gene.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that miRNA-binding site SNPs in deregulated genes
may serve as candidate prognostic markers of NSCLC clinical outcome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24997136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Sep;74:99-107. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.06.017. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Redox-sensitive gene-regulatory events controlling aberrant matrix
metalloproteinase-1 expression.

Bartling TR(1), Subbaram S(2), Clark RR(1), Chandrasekaran A(1), Kar S(3),
Melendez JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering, State University of New York,
Albany, NY 12203, USA. (2)Center for Cell Biology & Cancer Research, Albany
Medical College, Albany, NY 12208, USA. (3)Pediatrics, Albany Medical College,
Albany, NY 12208, USA. (4)College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering, State
University of New York, Albany, NY 12203, USA. Electronic address:
jmelendez@albany.edu.

Aberrant matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) expression contributes to the
pathogenesis of many degenerative disease processes that are associated with
increased oxidative damage or stress. We and others have established that shifts 
in steady-state H2O2 production resulting from enforced antioxidant gene
expression, senescence, or UV irradiation control MMP-1 expression. Here we
establish that histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) protein levels and its occupancy of 
the MMP-1 promoter are decreased in response to enforced manganese superoxide
dismutase (Sod2) expression. Inhibition of HDAC activity further accentuates the 
redox-dependent expression of MMP-1. Sod2-dependent decreases in HDAC2 are
associated with increases in a proteasome-sensitive pool of ubiquitinylated HDAC2
and MMP-1-specific histone H3 acetylation. Sod2 overexpression also enhanced
recruitment of Ets-1, c-Jun, c-Fos, and the histone acetyltransferase PCAF to the
distal and proximal regions of the MMP-1 promoter. Furthermore, the
Sod2-dependent expression of MMP-1 can be reversed by silencing the
transcriptional activator c-Jun. All of the above Sod2-dependent alterations are 
largely reversed by catalase coexpression, indicating that the redox control of
MMP-1 is H2O2-dependent. These findings identify a novel redox regulation of
MMP-1 transcription that involves site-specific promoter recruitment of both
activating factors and chromatin-modifying enzymes, which converge to maximally
drive MMP-1 gene expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4146650
PMID: 24973648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Anim Reprod Sci. 2014 Aug;148(3-4):153-63. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2014.06.002. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Dynamic changes of histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation in pre-implantational pig
embryos derived from somatic cell nuclear transfer.

Zhou N(1), Cao Z(2), Wu R(1), Liu X(1), Tao J(1), Chen Z(1), Song D(1), Han F(1),
Li Y(1), Fang F(1), Zhang X(1), Zhang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Provincial Laboratory of Local Livestock and Poultry, Genetical Resource
Conservation and Breeding, College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui
Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, China. (2)Anhui Provincial Laboratory of
Local Livestock and Poultry, Genetical Resource Conservation and Breeding,
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei
230036, China; State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological 
Science, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. (3)Anhui
Provincial Laboratory of Local Livestock and Poultry, Genetical Resource
Conservation and Breeding, College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui
Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, China. Electronic address:
yunhaizhang@ahau.edu.cn.

Histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac) is an active epigenetic modification
which has been revealed to be associated with active gene expression. It was
hypothesized that H3K27ac might also participate in the porcine somatic
reprogramming process during early development of SCNT-derived embryos. The
spatial and temporal expression profiles of H3K27ac were investigated at
different developmental stages in SCNT embryos compared with in vitro
fertilization (IVF) and parthenogenetic activation (PA) counterparts.
Specifically, results showed that amounts of H3K27ac gradually decreased from the
earliest pronuclear stage to 8-cell stage, corresponding to the major embryonic
genome activation (EGA), followed by re-acetylation of H3K27 from the morula
stage onwards accompanying the first cell lineage specification in IVF embryos.
Similar dynamic patterns of H3K27ac signal was observed at all developmental
stages of porcine SCNT and PA embryos except for the hatched stage in which
amounts of H3K27ac in SCNT and PA embryos was slightly less than that in IVF
counterparts. Moreover, the gradual decrease of H3K27ac before EGA was
demonstrated to be an active process independent of DNA replication, RNA and
protein synthesis. The expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, MBD3 and CBP genes were well
correlated with the dynamic changes of H3K27ac mark. Overall, these results
indicate that H3K27ac is only defective in late SCNT blastocysts, and that the
dynamic changes of this marker might also underlie the EGA and initial cell
lineage specification during early embryo development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24972950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J BUON. 2014 Apr-Jun;19(2):497-501.

Effect of downregulated histone deacetylase 2 expression on cell proliferation
and cell cycle in cervical cancer.

Hua F(1), Sun J, Guo F, Yin S, Zhang Q, Zhang W, Liang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Xinxiang Medical University, Weihui, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effects and molecular mechanism of downregulated
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) expression on cell proliferation and cell cycle in 
cervical cancer Hela cells.
METHODS: HDAC2 small interfering (si)RNA and control siRNA were transfected into 
cervical cancer Hela cells. A cell proliferation assay using a cell counting
kit-8 was applied to analyze the change in cell proliferation before and after
transfection. Flow cytometry was used to detect the change in cell cycle
distribution before and after transfection. Finally, Western blot was used to
detect changes in the expression of cell proliferation and cell cycle-related
proteins.
RESULTS: HDAC2 siRNA significantly downregulated the expression of HDAC2 proteins
in cervical cancer cells, markedly inhibiting their proliferation. In addition,
the percentage of Hela cells in the G0/G1 phase in the HDAC2 siRNA group was
63.3±2.0%, significantly higher than those in the untreated group (29.3±1.7%) or 
the control siRNA group (29.4±1.7%) (F=354.181, p=0.000). Furthermore, Western
blot analyses demonstrated that downregulated HDAC2 expression inhibited the
expression of cyclin D1, cyclin E, and cdk2 proteins but elevated the expression 
of p21 protein.
CONCLUSION: The proliferation inhibition and cell cycle arrest mediated by
downregulated HDAC2 expression may be tightly associated with the decrease of
cyclin D1, cyclin E, and cdk2 proteins expression and the increase in p21 protein
expression.

PMID: 24965412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Development. 2014 Jul;141(13):2621-32. doi: 10.1242/dev.106237.

Gene expression profiling identifies the zinc-finger protein Charlatan as a
regulator of intestinal stem cells in Drosophila.

Amcheslavsky A(1), Nie Y(1), Li Q(1), He F(2), Tsuda L(3), Markstein M(4), Ip
YT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (2)Department of Microbiology and Physiological
Systems, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(3)Animal Models of Aging, National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu,
Aichi 474-8511, Japan. (4)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA 01003, USA. (5)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA tony.ip@umassmed.edu.

Intestinal stem cells (ISCs) in the adult Drosophila midgut can respond to tissue
damage and support repair. We used genetic manipulation to increase the number of
ISC-like cells in the adult midgut and performed gene expression profiling to
identify potential ISC regulators. A detailed analysis of one of these potential 
regulators, the zinc-finger protein Charlatan, was carried out. MARCM clonal
analysis and RNAi in precursor cells showed that loss of Chn function caused
severe ISC division defects, including loss of EdU incorporation, phosphorylated 
histone 3 staining and expression of the mitotic protein Cdc2. Loss of Charlatan 
also led to a much reduced histone acetylation staining in precursor cells. Both 
the histone acetylation and ISC division defects could be rescued by the
simultaneous decrease of the Histone Deacetylase 2. The overexpression of
Charlatan blocked differentiation reversibly, but loss of Charlatan did not lead 
to automatic differentiation. The results together suggest that Charlatan does
not simply act as an anti-differentiation factor but instead functions to
maintain a chromatin structure that is compatible with stem cell properties,
including proliferation.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4067959
PMID: 24961799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 8;111(27):9840-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1321330111. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2 are essential for accurate cell division and
the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells.

Jamaladdin S(1), Kelly RD(1), O'Regan L(1), Dovey OM(2), Hodson GE(1), Millard
CJ(1), Portolano N(1), Fry AM(1), Schwabe JW(1), Cowley SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 9HN, United
Kingdom; and. (2)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambs CB10 1SA, United
Kingdom. (3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1
9HN, United Kingdom; and smc57@le.ac.uk.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) form the core catalytic components of
corepressor complexes that modulate gene expression. In most cell types, deletion
of both Hdac1 and Hdac2 is required to generate a discernible phenotype,
suggesting their activity is largely redundant. We have therefore generated an ES
cell line in which Hdac1 and Hdac2 can be inactivated simultaneously. Loss of
HDAC1/2 resulted in a 60% reduction in total HDAC activity and a loss of cell
viability. Cell death is dependent upon cell cycle progression, because
differentiated, nonproliferating cells retain their viability. Furthermore, we
observe increased mitotic defects, chromatin bridges, and micronuclei, suggesting
HDAC1/2 are necessary for accurate chromosome segregation. Consistent with a
critical role in the regulation of gene expression, microarray analysis of
Hdac1/2-deleted cells reveals 1,708 differentially expressed genes. Significantly
for the maintenance of stem cell self-renewal, we detected a reduction in the
expression of the pluripotent transcription factors, Oct4, Nanog, Esrrb, and
Rex1. HDAC1/2 activity is regulated through binding of an inositol tetraphosphate
molecule (IP4) sandwiched between the HDAC and its cognate corepressor. This
raises the important question of whether IP4 regulates the activity of the
complex in cells. By rescuing the viability of double-knockout cells, we
demonstrate for the first time (to our knowledge) that mutations that abolish IP4
binding reduce the activity of HDAC1/2 in vivo. Our data indicate that HDAC1/2
have essential and pleiotropic roles in cellular proliferation and regulate stem 
cell self-renewal by maintaining expression of key pluripotent transcription
factors.

PMCID: PMC4103379
PMID: 24958871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;74(17):4752-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3531. Epub
2014 Jun 23.

Antitumor effects in hepatocarcinoma of isoform-selective inhibition of HDAC2.

Lee YH(1), Seo D(2), Choi KJ(3), Andersen JB(2), Won MA(3), Kitade M(2),
Gómez-Quiroz LE(2), Judge AD(4), Marquardt JU(2), Raggi C(2), Conner EA(2),
MacLachlan I(4), Factor VM(2), Thorgeirsson SS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. Department of Radiation
Oncology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
snorri_thorgeirsson@nih.gov yhlee87@yuhs.ac. (2)Laboratory of Experimental
Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Tekmira Pharmaceuticals, Corp., Burnaby,
British Columbia, Canada. (5)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Center
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
snorri_thorgeirsson@nih.gov yhlee87@yuhs.ac.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is a chromatin modifier involved in epigenetic
regulation of cell cycle, apoptosis, and differentiation that is upregulated
commonly in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, we show that
specific targeting of this HDAC isoform is sufficient to inhibit HCC progression.
siRNA-mediated silencing of HDAC inhibited HCC cell growth by blocking cell-cycle
progression and inducing apoptosis. These effects were associated with
deregulation of HDAC-regulated genes that control cell cycle, apoptosis, and
lipid metabolism, specifically, by upregulation of p27 and acetylated p53 and by 
downregulation of CDK6 and BCL2. We found that HDAC2 silencing in HCC cells also 
strongly inhibited PPAR<U+03B3> signaling and other regulators of glycolysis (ChREBPa
and GLUT4) and lipogenesis (SREBP1C and FAS), eliciting a marked decrease in fat 
accumulation. Notably, systemic delivery of HDAC2 siRNA encapsulated in lipid
nanoparticles was sufficient to blunt the growth of human HCC in a murine
xenograft model. Our findings offer preclinical proof-of-concept for HDAC2
blockade as a systemic therapy for liver cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4155016
PMID: 24958469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2014 Sep;20(9):874-6. doi: 10.1111/cns.12301. Epub 2014 Jun
23.

Methamphetamine induces dynamic changes of histone deacetylases in different
phases of behavioral sensitization.

Li H(1), Li F, Wu N, Su RB, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of New Drug Evaluation, Beijing Institute of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Beijing, China.

PMID: 24954603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Oncotarget. 2014 Jun 30;5(12):4257-68.

Histone deacetylase 2 and N-Myc reduce p53 protein phosphorylation at serine 46
by repressing gene transcription of tumor protein 53-induced nuclear protein 1.

Shahbazi J(1), Scarlett CJ, Norris MD, Liu B, Haber M, Tee AE, Carrier A, Biankin
AV, London WB, Marshall GM, Lock RB, Liu T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Sydney, Australia;
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, UNSW Science, University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. (2)School of Women's and Children's Health,
UNSW Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

Myc oncoproteins and histone deacetylases (HDACs) exert oncogenic effects by
modulating gene transcription. Paradoxically, N-Myc induces p53 gene expression. 
Tumor protein 53-induced nuclear protein 1 (TP53INP1) phosphorylates p53 protein 
at serine 46, leading to enhanced p53 activity, transcriptional activation of p53
target genes and programmed cell death. Here we aimed to identify the mechanism
through which N-Myc overexpressing p53 wild-type neuroblastoma cells acquired
resistance to apoptosis. TP53INP1 was found to be one of the genes most
significantly repressed by HDAC2 and N-Myc according to Affymetrix microarray
gene expression datasets. HDAC2 and N-Myc reduced TP53INP1 gene expression by
direct binding to the TP53INP1 gene promoter, leading to transcriptional
repression of TP53INP1, p53 protein de-phosphorylation at serine 46,
neuroblastoma cell proliferation and survival. Moreover, low levels of TP53INP1
expression in human neuroblastoma tissues correlated with high levels of N-Myc
expression and poor patient outcome, and the BET bromodomain inhibitors JQ1 and
I-BET151 reduced N-Myc expression and reactivated TP53INP1 expression in
neuroblastoma cells. These findings identify TP53INP1 repression as an important 
co-factor for N-Myc oncogenesis, and provide further evidence for the potential
application of BET bromodomain inhibitors in the therapy of N-Myc-induced
neuroblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4147321
PMID: 24952595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Neurotoxicology. 2014 Sep;44:98-109. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2014.06.006. Epub 2014 
Jun 18.

Fluoxetine treatment ameliorates depression induced by perinatal arsenic exposure
via a neurogenic mechanism.

Tyler CR(1), Solomon BR(1), Ulibarri AL(1), Allan AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medicine, University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. (2)Department of
Neurosciences, School of Medicine, University of New Mexico Health Sciences
Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. Electronic address: aallan@salud.unm.edu.

Several epidemiological studies have reported an association between arsenic
exposure and increased rates of psychiatric disorders, including depression, in
exposed populations. We have previously demonstrated that developmental exposure 
to low amounts of arsenic induces depression in adulthood along with several
morphological and molecular aberrations, particularly associated with the
hippocampus and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The extent and
potential reversibility of this toxin-induced damage has not been characterized
to date. In this study, we assessed the effects of fluoxetine, a selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressant, on adult animals exposed to arsenic 
during development. Perinatal arsenic exposure (PAE) induced depressive-like
symptoms in a mild learned helplessness task and in the forced swim task after
acute exposure to a predator odor (2,4,5-trimethylthiazoline, TMT). Chronic
fluoxetine treatment prevented these behaviors in both tasks in arsenic-exposed
animals and ameliorated arsenic-induced blunted stress responses, as measured by 
corticosterone (CORT) levels before and after TMT exposure. Morphologically,
chronic fluoxetine treatment reversed deficits in adult hippocampal neurogenesis 
(AHN) after PAE, specifically differentiation and survival of neural progenitor
cells. Protein expression of BDNF, CREB, the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), and
HDAC2 was significantly increased in the dentate gyrus of arsenic animals after
fluoxetine treatment. This study demonstrates that damage induced by perinatal
arsenic exposure is reversible with chronic fluoxetine treatment resulting in
restored resiliency to depression via a neurogenic mechanism.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4180420
PMID: 24952232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. FASEB J. 2014 Oct;28(10):4265-79. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-250654. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Overexpression of histone deacetylases in cancer cells is controlled by interplay
of transcription factors and epigenetic modulators.

Yang H(1), Salz T(2), Zajac-Kaye M(1), Liao D(1), Huang S(3), Qiu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and. (2)Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA qiuy@ufl.edu
sumingh@ufl.edu. (4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and qiuy@ufl.edu
sumingh@ufl.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) that deacetylate histone and nonhistone proteins
play crucial roles in a variety of cellular processes. The overexpression of
HDACs is reported in many cancer types and is directly linked to accelerated cell
proliferation and survival. However, little is known about how HDAC expression is
regulated in cancer cells. In this study, we found that HDAC1 and HDAC2 promoters
are regulated through collaborative binding of transcription factors Sp1/Sp3 and 
epigenetic modulators, including histone H3K4 methyltransferase SET1 and histone 
acetyltransferase p300, whose levels are also elevated in colon cancer cell lines
and patient samples. Interestingly, Sp1 and Sp3 differentially regulate HDAC1 and
HDAC2 promoter activity. In addition, Sp1/Sp3 recruits SET1 and p300 to the
promoters. SET1 knockdown (KD) results in a loss of the H3K4 trimethylation mark 
at the promoters, as well as destabilizes p300 at the promoters. Conversely, p300
also influences SET1 recruitment and H3K4me3 level, indicating a crosstalk
between p300 and SET1. Further, SET1 KD reduces Sp1 binding to the HDAC1 promoter
through the increase of Sp1 acetylation. These results indicate that interactions
among transcription factors and epigenetic modulators orchestrate the activation 
of HDAC1 and HDAC2 promoter activity in colon cancer cells.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4202103
PMID: 24948597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Reprogram. 2014 Aug;16(4):266-75. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0086. Epub 2014 Jun
19.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor induces the expression of select epithelial genes
in mouse utricle sensory epithelia-derived progenitor cells.

Hu Z(1), Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-HNS, Wayne State University School of Medicine , 
Detroit, MI, 48201.

Mouse utricle sensory epithelial cell-derived progenitor cells (MUCs), which have
hair cell progenitor and mesenchymal features via epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) as previously described, provide a potential approach for hair
cell regeneration via cell transplantation. In this study, we treated MUCs with
trichostatin A (TSA) to determine whether histone deacetylase inhibitor is able
to stimulate the expression of epithelial genes in MUCs, an essential step for
guiding mesenchymal-like MUCs to become sensory epithelial cells. After 72 h of
TSA treatment, MUCs acquired epithelial-like features, which were indicated by
increased expression of epithelial markers such as Cdh1, Krt18, and Dsp.
Additionally, TSA decreased the expression of mesenchymal markers, including
Zeb1, Zeb2, Snai1, and Snai2, and prosensory genes Lfng, Six1, and Dlx5.
Moreover, the expression of the hair cell genes Atoh1 and Myo6 was increased in
TSA-treated MUCs. We also observed significantly decreased expression of Hdac2
and Hdac3 in TSA-treated MUCs. However, no remarkable change was detected in
protein expression using immunofluorescence, indicating that TSA-induced HDAC
inhibition may contribute to the initial stage of the mesenchymal-to-epithelial
phenotypic change. In the future, more work is needed to induce hair cell
regeneration using inner ear tissue-derived progenitors to achieve an entire
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.

PMCID: PMC4116094
PMID: 24945595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Jul;38(7):1865-73. doi: 10.1111/acer.12465. Epub 2014 
Jun 18.

Acute ethanol alters multiple histone modifications at model gene promoters in
the cerebral cortex.

Finegersh A(1), Homanics GE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anesthesiology and Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, University 
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: Ethanol (EtOH) exposure alters gene expression in the cerebral cortex
(CCx); however, mechanisms of EtOH-induced gene regulation are not well
understood. We hypothesized that EtOH regulates gene expression by differentially
altering histone modifications at gene promoters that are up- and down-regulated 
by EtOH. Such epigenetic mechanisms may ultimately contribute to EtOH-induced
neuro-adaptations that underlie tolerance, dependence, and EtOH-use disorders.
METHODS: Eight-week-old, male C57BL/6J mice were treated with 3 g/kg EtOH
(intraperitoneally) or saline and sacrificed 6 hours after injection; the CCx and
hippocampus (HC) were immediately removed and flash frozen. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation was used to study the association of model gene promoters
with histone modifications. Western blot was used to detect global changes in the
histone modifications studied. We also used a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
array to identify changes in expression of chromatin-modifying enzymes.
RESULTS: In CCx, acute EtOH decreased expression of Gad1, Hdac2, and Hdac11,
which was associated with decreased histone acetylation at the Gad1 and Hdac2
promoters; we also identified increased expression of Mt1, Mt2, Egr1, which was
associated with increased H3K4me3 levels at the Mt2 promoter and decreased
H3K27me3 levels at the Mt1 promoter. We identified an increase in global levels
of H3K4me3 in CCx as well as a global increase in H3K9ac and H3K14ac in HC. The
PCR array identified decreased expression of Csrp2 bp, Hdac2, and Hdac11 as well 
as increased expression of Kat2b in CCx.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute EtOH induces chromatin remodeling at model up- and
down-regulated genes in CCx. Different patterns of histone modifications at these
gene promoters indicate that EtOH may be acting through multiple
histone-modifying enzymes to alter gene expression; in particular, differential
expression of Kat2b, Hdac2, Hdac11, and Csrp2 bp in CCx may mediate EtOH-induced 
chromatin remodeling. Additional studies are necessary to determine the
relationship between EtOH-induced changes in histone-modifying enzymes, specific 
EtOH-induced histone modifications, and gene expression.

Copyright © 2014 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC4107049
PMID: 24942484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Exp Ther Med. 2014 May;7(5):1327-1331. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Effect of Quanzhenyiqitang on apoptosis of alveolar macrophages and expression of
histone deacetylase 2 in rats with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Li DZ(1), Ruan SW(2), Chen ZB(3), Wang CE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350000, P.R.
China ; Department of Respiration, The Second Affiliated People's Hospital of
Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350000, P.R.
China. (2)Medical Center of the Affiliated People's Hospital of Fujian University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350000, P.R. China. (3)The Fujian
Research Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350000, P.R.
China. (4)Department of Respiration, The Second Affiliated People's Hospital of
Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350000, P.R.
China.

This study aimed to investigate the effect of Quanzhenyiqitang on alveolar
macrophages (AMs) in a rat model of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
In addition, the induction of apoptosis and regulation of histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) was studied to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of Quanzhenyiqitang
treatment of COPD. Quanzhenyiqitang-treated serum was applied to AMs obtained
from rats with COPD. A blank (control) group, an untreated serum group and an
aminophylline group were also observed to evaluate the differences in AM
apoptosis status, as well as the expression levels of caspase-9, caspase-8 and
HDAC2. Compared with the control group, Quanzhenyiqitang-treated serum resulted
in higher levels of caspase-9 and caspase-8 expression, increased apoptosis of
AMs and increased expression of HDAC2 by AMs. In conclusion, Quanzhenyiqitang is 
capable of inducing apoptosis of AMs, which are the primary inflammatory cells in
COPD, and modulating the expression of the important inflammatory factor HDAC2,
producing an overall anti-inflammatory effect.

PMCID: PMC3991511
PMID: 24940433  [PubMed]


276. Int J Med Sci. 2014 May 30;11(8):788-95. doi: 10.7150/ijms.8417. eCollection
2014.

Spatiotemporal expression of HDAC2 during the postnatal development of the rat
hippocampus.

Hou N(1), Gong M(1), Bi Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Tan B(2), Liu Y(1), Wei X(1), Chen
J(1), Li T(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Children Nutrition Research Center, Children's Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China; ; 2. Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Translational Medical Research in Cognitive Development and Learning and Memory
Disorders, Chongqing 400014, China. (2)2. Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of
Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Translational
Medical Research in Cognitive Development and Learning and Memory Disorders,
Chongqing 400014, China.

BACKGROUND: Histone acetylation, which is a chromatin modification of histone
tails, can dynamically regulate the expression of various genes in normal
development. HDAC2 is a negative regulatory factor of acetylation and closely
related to learning and memory. NSE is a nerve marker and vital for maintaining
physiological functions in nervous system. Currently, few studies associated with
the expression pattern of HDAC2 in postnatal rat hippocampus have been reported. 
This study aimed to explore the temporal and spatial expression pattern of HDAC2,
helping to reveal the expression characteristics of HDAC2 during postnatal
neuronal maturation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: With NSE as a biomarker of neuronal maturation at
postnatal days 1, 3, 7 and weeks 2, 4, and 8 (P1D, P3D, P7D, P2W, P4W, P8W), the 
expression patterns of HDAC2 in rat hippocampus were examined using real-time PCR
and western blotting. Additionally, the subcellular distribution of HDAC2 was
analysed by immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: We found that HDAC2 was highly expressed in the neonatal period and
decreased gradually. HDAC2 expression was widely distributed in neurons of
hippocampal CA1, CA3 and DG regions and gradually shifted from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm during postnatal development. Altogether, the expression of HDAC2
decreased gradually with different subcellular localizations throughout
development.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed results indicate that the expression levels of HDAC2
become lower and with different subcellular localizations in neurons during
hippocampal neuronal maturation, suggesting the specific expression
characteristics of HDAC2 might play an important role during postnatal
learning-memory function and development.

PMCID: PMC4057485
PMID: 24936141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biogerontology. 2014 Aug;15(4):339-46. doi: 10.1007/s10522-014-9504-5. Epub 2014 
Jun 13.

Reduced recognition memory is correlated with decrease in DNA methyltransferase1 
and increase in histone deacetylase2 protein expression in old male mice.

Singh P(1), Thakur MK.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, Brain
Research Centre, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 221 005, India.

Chromatin modifying enzymes DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), histone deacetylase
(HDAC) 2 and CREB binding protein (CBP) play a crucial role in memory,
particularly during consolidation process which declines with advancing age.
However, the expression of these enzymes and their effect on memory consolidation
during aging are not clearly understood. In the present study, novel object
recognition test was used to assess the memory consolidation followed by
expression analysis of DNMTs, HDAC2 and CBP in the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus of young, adult and old male mice. Object recognition memory was
reduced in old as compared to young and adult. DNMT1 protein expression was high 
in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of young male mice, but declined gradually
with age. On the other hand, HDAC2 mRNA and protein expression increased in the
hippocampus of old male mice as compared to young and adult. Alteration in the
expression of these enzymes is correlated with reduced recognition memory in old.

PMID: 24924148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 11;9(6):e99467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099467. eCollection
2014.

Epigenetic regulations of immediate early genes expression involved in memory
formation by the amyloid precursor protein of Alzheimer disease.

Hendrickx A(1), Pierrot N(1), Tasiaux B(1), Schakman O(2), Kienlen-Campard P(1), 
De Smet C(3), Octave JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer Dementia, Institute of Neurosciences (IoNS), Université catholique
de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Cell Physiology, Institute of Neurosciences
(IoNS), Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (3)Genetic &
Epigenetic Alterations in Genomes, de Duve Institute, Université catholique de
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

We previously demonstrated that APP epigenetically regulates Egr1 expression both
in cultured neurons and in vivo. Since Egr1 is an immediate early gene involved
in memory formation, we wondered whether other early genes involved in memory
were regulated by APP and we studied molecular mechanisms involved. By comparing 
prefrontal (PF) cortex from wild type (APP+/+) and APP knockout mice (APP-/-), we
observed that APP down regulates expression of four immediate early genes, Egr1, 
c-Fos, Bdnf and Arc. Down regulation of Egr1, c-Fos and Bdnf transcription
resulted from a decreased enrichment of acetylated histone H4 on the
corresponding gene promoter. Further characterization of H4 acetylation at Egr1
and c-Fos promoters revealed increased acetylation of H4K5 and H4K12 residues in 
APP-/- mice. Whereas APP affected Egr1 promoter activity by reducing access of
the CREB transcription factor, its effect on c-Fos appeared to depend on
increased recruitment of HDAC2 histone deacetylase to the gene promoter. The
physiological relevance of the epigenetic regulation of Egr1 and c-Fos gene
transcription by APP was further analyzed following exposure of mice to novelty. 
Although transcription of Egr1 and c-Fos was increased following exposure of
APP+/+ mice to novelty, such an induction was not possible in APP-/- mice with a 
high basal level of expression of these immediate early genes. Altogether, these 
results demonstrate that APP-mediated regulation of c-Fos and Egr1 by different
epigenetic mechanisms is needed for their induction during exposure to novelty.

PMCID: PMC4053420
PMID: 24919190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Sep;15(9):1198-207. doi: 10.4161/cbt.29500. Epub 2014 Jun 
11.

The interplay between histone deacetylases and c-Myc in the transcriptional
suppression of HPP1 in colon cancer.

Wang J(1), Elahi A(2), Ajidahun A(2), Clark W(2), Hernandez J(2), Achille A(3),
Hao JH(4), Seto E(3), Shibata D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology; H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center &
Research Institute; Tampa, FL USA; Department of Pancreatic Oncology; Cancer
Institute and Hospital of Tianjin Medical University; Tianjin, PR China.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology; H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center &
Research Institute; Tampa, FL USA. (3)Department of Molecular Oncology; H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute; Tampa, FL USA. (4)Department of
Pancreatic Oncology; Cancer Institute and Hospital of Tianjin Medical University;
Tianjin, PR China.

HPP1 (hyperplastic polyposis protein 1), a tumor suppressor gene, is
downregulated by promoter hypermethylation in a number of tumor types including
colon cancer. c-Myc is also known to play a role in the suppression of HPP1
expression via binding to a promoter region cognate E-box site. The contribution 
of histone deacetylation as an additional epigenetic mechanism and its potential 
interplay with c-Myc in the transcriptional regulation of HPP1 are unknown. We
have shown that the treatment of the HPP1-non-expressing colon cancer cell lines,
HCT116 and DLD-1 with HDAC inhibitors results in re-expression of HPP1.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of c-Myc as well as of HDAC2 and HDAC3 in HCT116 and of
HDAC1 and HDAC3 in DLD-1 also resulted in significant re-expression of HPP1.
Co-immunoprecipitation (IP), chromatin IP (ChIP), and sequential ChIP experiments
demonstrated binding of c-Myc to the HPP1 promoter with recruitment of and direct
interaction with HDAC3. In summary, we have demonstrated that c-Myc contributes
to the epigenetic regulation of HPP1 via the dominant recruitment of HDAC3. Our
findings may lead to a greater biologic understanding for the application of
targeted use of HDAC inhibitors for anti-cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4128862
PMID: 24919179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Drugs Today (Barc). 2014 May;50(5):337-45. doi: 10.1358/dot.2014.50.5.2138703.

Belinostat for the treatment of peripheral T-cell lymphomas.

McDermott J(1), Jimeno A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA. (2)Division of Medical Oncology,
Department of Medicine, and Developmental Therapeutics Program, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA. Antonio.Jimeno@ucdenver.edu.

Belinostat is a novel histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that is being
developed in various solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. HDACs have been
found to be important in the epigenetic regulation of cancer progression and
inhibition of these molecules in preclinical studies induces cancer cell
apoptosis and prevents tumor growth. Several HDAC molecules have been found to be
overexpressed in peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) and therefore HDAC inhibition 
has been an important new target in treating these malignancies which have
traditionally had poor outcomes and limited treatment response. Phase I studies
were tested across a broad range of hematologic and solid tumors and showed
stability of disease in various tumor types with low rates of adverse events.
This made it acceptable to proceed with further testing in specific tumor types
to further determine efficacy. Two phase II studies have been completed with
belinostat given intravenously in the relapsed/refractory PTCL setting with at
least 25% overall response and minimal toxicities. These findings have led to a
request for accelerated approval to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for
belinostat in this setting. This review will discuss the preclinical
pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and clinical efficacy to date of belinostat in the
treatment of PTCL.

Copyright 2014 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24918834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Jun 5;14(6):735-51. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.05.006.

Chromatin repressive complexes in stem cells, development, and cancer.

Laugesen A(1), Helin K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Ole
Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; Centre for Epigenetics, University of
Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; The Danish Stem Cell
Center (DanStem), University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200 Copenhagen,
Denmark. (2)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of
Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; Centre for Epigenetics, 
University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; The Danish
Stem Cell Center (DanStem), University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: kristian.helin@bric.ku.dk.

The chromatin environment is essential for the correct specification and
preservation of cell identity through modulation and maintenance of transcription
patterns. Many chromatin regulators are required for development, stem cell
maintenance, and differentiation. Here, we review the roles of the polycomb
repressive complexes, PRC1 and PRC2, and the HDAC1- and HDAC2-containing
complexes, NuRD, Sin3, and CoREST, in stem cells, development, and cancer, as
well as the ongoing efforts to develop therapies targeting these complexes in
human cancer. Furthermore, we discuss the role of repressive complexes in
modulating thresholds for gene activation and their importance for specification 
and maintenance of cell fate.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24905164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2014 Jan 2;5(4):340-5. doi: 10.1021/ml4004233. eCollection
2014.

Delayed and Prolonged Histone Hyperacetylation with a Selective HDAC1/HDAC2
Inhibitor.

Methot JL(1), Hoffman DM(1), Witter DJ(1), Stanton MG(1), Harrington P(1),
Hamblett C(1), Siliphaivanh P(1), Wilson K(1), Hubbs J(1), Heidebrecht R(1), Kral
AM(1), Ozerova N(1), Fleming JC(1), Wang H(1), Szewczak AA(1), Middleton RE(1),
Hughes B(1), Cruz JC(1), Haines BB(1), Chenard M(1), Kenific CM(1), Harsch A(1), 
Secrist JP(1), Miller TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories , 33 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, United States.

The identification and in vitro and in vivo characterization of a potent SHI-1:2 
are described. Kinetic analysis indicated that biaryl inhibitors exhibit slow
binding kinetics in isolated HDAC1 and HDAC2 preparations. Delayed histone
hyperacetylation and gene expression changes were also observed in cell culture, 
and histone acetylation was observed in vivo beyond disappearance of drug from
plasma. In vivo studies further demonstrated that continuous target inhibition
was well tolerated and efficacious in tumor-bearing mice, leading to tumor growth
inhibition with either once-daily or intermittent administration.

PMCID: PMC4027730
PMID: 24900838  [PubMed]


283. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2013 Jun 10;4(8):757-61. doi: 10.1021/ml400158k. eCollection
2013.

Tropolones as lead-like natural products: the development of potent and selective
histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Ononye SN(1), VanHeyst MD(1), Oblak EZ(1), Zhou W(1), Ammar M(1), Anderson AC(1),
Wright DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Connecticut , 69 North
Eagleville Road, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, United States.

Natural products have long been recognized as a rich source of potent
therapeutics but further development is often limited by high structural
complexity and high molecular weight. In contrast, at the core of the
thujaplicins is a lead-like tropolone scaffold characterized by relatively low
molecular weight, ample sites for diversification, and metal-binding
functionality poised for targeting a range of metalloenzyme drug targets. Here,
we describe the development of this underutilized scaffold for the discovery of
tropolone derivatives that function as isozyme-selective inhibitors of the
validated anticancer drug target, histone deacetylase (HDAC). Several
monosubstituted tropolones display remarkable levels of selectivity for HDAC2 and
potently inhibit the growth of T-cell lymphocyte cell lines. The tropolones
represent a new chemotype of isozyme-selective HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4027479
PMID: 24900743  [PubMed]


284. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 18;289(29):20193-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C114.561860. Epub 2014
Jun 3.

A novel suppressive effect of alcohol dehydrogenase 5 in neuronal
differentiation.

Wu K(1), Ren R(1), Su W(1), Wen B(1), Zhang Y(1), Yi F(2), Qiao X(1), Yuan T(1), 
Wang J(1), Liu L(3), Izpisua Belmonte JC(4), Liu GH(5), Chen C(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (2)the Gene Expression
Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037.
(3)the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, California, and. (4)the Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, belmonte@salk.edu. (5)From the
National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China, the Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders, Beijing 100069, China ghliu@ibp.ac.cn. (6)From the National Laboratory
of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100101, China, the Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing 100069,
China changchen@moon.ibp.ac.cn.

Alcohol dehydrogenase 5 (ADH5) is a conserved enzyme for alcohol and aldehyde
metabolism in mammals. Despite dynamic expression throughout neurogenesis, its
role in neuronal development remains unknown. Here we present the first evidence 
that ADH5 is a negative regulator of neuronal differentiation. Gene expression
analyses identify a constant reduction of ADH5 levels throughout neuronal
development. Overexpression of ADH5 reduces both development and adult neuronal
differentiation of mouse neurons. This effect depends on the catalytic activity
of ADH5 and involves ADH5-mediated denitrosation of histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2). Our results indicate that ADH5 counteracts neuronal differentiation of
human neural stem cells and that this effect can be reversed by pharmacological
inhibition of ADH5. Based on these observations, we propose that ADH5 is a novel 
suppressor of neuronal differentiation and maturation. Inhibition of ADH5 may
improve adult neurogenesis in a physiological or pathological setting.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4106335
PMID: 24895131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Brain. 2014 May 15;7:37. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-7-37.

Vorinostat positively regulates synaptic plasticity genes expression and spine
density in HIV infected neurons: role of nicotine in progression of
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder.

Atluri VS, Pilakka-Kanthikeel S, Samikkannu T, Sagar V, Kurapati KR, Saxena SK,
Yndart A, Raymond A, Ding H, Hernandez O, Nair MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of NeuroImmune Pharmacology, Herbert
Wertheim College of Medicine, Florida International University, 11200 SW 8th
Street, Miami, FL -33199, USA. nairm@fiu.edu.

BACKGROUND: HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND) is characterized by
development of cognitive, behavioral and motor abnormalities, and occurs in
approximately 50% of HIV infected individuals. In the United States, the
prevalence of cigarette smoking ranges from 35-70% in HIV-infected individuals
compared to 20% in general population. Cognitive impairment in heavy cigarette
smokers has been well reported. However, the synergistic effects of nicotine and 
HIV infection and the underlying mechanisms in the development of HAND are
unknown.
RESULTS: In this study, we explored the role of nicotine in the progression of
HAND using SK-N-MC, a neuronal cell line. SK-N-MC cells were infected with HIV-1 
in the presence or absence of nicotine for 7 days. We observed significant
increase in HIV infectivity in SK-N-MC treated with nicotine compared to
untreated HIV-infected neuronal cells. HIV and nicotine synergize to
significantly dysregulate the expression of synaptic plasticity genes and spine
density; with a concomitant increase of HDAC2 levels in SK-N-MC cells. In
addition, inhibition of HDAC2 up-regulation with the use of vorinostat resulted
in HIV latency breakdown and recovery of synaptic plasticity genes expression and
spine density in nicotine/HIV alone and in co-treated SK-N-MC cells. Furthermore,
increased eIF2 alpha phosphorylation, which negatively regulates eukaryotic
translational process, was observed in HIV alone and in co-treatment with
nicotine compared to untreated control and nicotine alone treated SK-N-MC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that nicotine and HIV synergize to negatively 
regulate the synaptic plasticity gene expression and spine density and this may
contribute to the increased risk of HAND in HIV infected smokers. Apart from
disrupting latency, vorinostat may be a useful therapeutic to inhibit the
negative regulatory effects on synaptic plasticity in HIV infected nicotine
abusers.

PMCID: PMC4040511
PMID: 24886748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Bioorg Med Chem. 2014 Jul 15;22(14):3720-31. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.05.001. Epub
2014 May 14.

Design and synthesis of novel and highly-active pan-histone deacetylase
(pan-HDAC) inhibitors.

Tashima T(1), Murata H(2), Kodama H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nippon Pharmaceutical Chemicals Co., Ltd, 2-8-18 Chodo, Higashi-Osaka, Osaka
577-0056, Japan. Electronic address: t-tashima@nichiri.co.jp. (2)Nippon
Pharmaceutical Chemicals Co., Ltd, 2-8-18 Chodo, Higashi-Osaka, Osaka 577-0056,
Japan.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitions are known to elicit anticancer effects. We
designed and synthesized several HDAC inhibitors. Among these compounds, compound
40 exhibited a more than 10-fold stronger inhibitory activity compared with that 
of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) against each human HDAC isozyme in
vitro (IC50 values of 40: HDAC1, 0.0038µM; HDAC2, 0.0082µM; HDAC3, 0.015µM;
HDAC8, 0.0060µM; HDAC4, 0.058µM; HDAC9, 0.0052µM; HDAC6, 0.058µM). The dose of
the administered HDAC inhibitors that contain hydroxamic acid as the zinc-binding
group may be reduced by 40. Because the carbostyril subunit is a time-tested
structural component of drugs and biologically active compounds, 40 most likely
exhibits good absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity
(ADMET). Thus, compound 40 is expected to be a promising therapeutic agent or
chemical tool for the investigation of life process.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24864038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. BJU Int. 2014 Dec;114(6):926-36. doi: 10.1111/bju.12812. Epub 2014 Aug 13.

Silencing histone deacetylase 2 using small hairpin RNA induces regression of
fibrotic plaque in a rat model of Peyronie's disease.

Kwon KD(1), Choi MJ, Park JM, Song KM, Kwon MH, Batbold D, Yin GN, Kim WJ, Ryu
JK, Suh JK.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Sexual Medicine, Department of Urology, Inha
University School of Medicine, Incheon, 400-711, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the therapeutic effect of adenovirus encoding histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) small hairpin RNA (Ad-HDAC2 shRNA) in a rat model of
Peyronie's disease (PD) and to determine the mechanisms by which HDAC2 knockdown 
ameliorates fibrotic responses in primary fibroblasts derived from human PD
plaque.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rats were distributed into four groups (n = 6 per group): 
age-matched controls without treatment; rats in which PD has been induced (PD
rats) without treatment; PD rats receiving a single injection of control
adenovirus encoding scrambled small hairpin RNA (Ad-shRNA) (day 15; 1 × 10(8)
pfu/0.1<U+2009>mL phosphate-buffered saline [PBS]); and PD rats receiving a single
injection of Ad-HDAC2 shRNA (day 15; 1 × 10(8) pfu/0.1<U+2009>mL PBS) into the lesion.
PD-like plaque was induced by repeated intratunical injections of 100 µL each of 
human fibrin and thrombin solutions on days 0 and 5. On day 30, the penis was
harvested for histological examination. Fibroblasts isolated from human PD plaque
were pretreated with HDAC2 small interfering (si)RNA (100 pmoL) and then
stimulated with transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1 (10<U+2009>ng/mL) to determine
hydroxyproline levels, procollagen mRNA, apoptosis and protein expression of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) and cyclin D1.
RESULTS: We observed that Ad-HDAC2 shRNA decreased inflammatory cell
infiltration, reduced transnuclear expression of phospho-Smad3 and regressed
fibrotic plaque of the tunica albuginea in PD rats in vivo. siRNA-mediated
silencing of HDAC2 significantly decreased the TGF-ß1-induced
transdifferentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts and collagen production, 
and induced apoptosis by downregulating the expression of PARP1, and decreased
the expression of cyclin D1 (a positive cell-cycle regulator) in primary cultured
fibroblasts derived from human PD plaque in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Specific inhibition of HDAC2 with RNA interference may represent a
novel targeted therapy for PD.

© 2014 The Authors. BJU International © 2014 BJU International.

PMID: 24841412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Jul;34(7):1556-66. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.303685. Epub 2014 May 15.

Transcriptional regulation of endothelial arginase 2 by histone deacetylase 2.

Pandey D(1), Sikka G(1), Bergman Y(1), Kim JH(1), Ryoo S(1), Romer L(1),
Berkowitz D(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine (D.P., G.S., 
Y.B., J.H.K., S.R., L.R., D.B.), Department of Cell Biology (L.R.), Department of
Biomedical Engineering (L.R., D.B.), and Department of Pediatrics and the Center 
for Cell Dynamics (L.R.), Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.
(2)From the Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine (D.P., G.S., 
Y.B., J.H.K., S.R., L.R., D.B.), Department of Cell Biology (L.R.), Department of
Biomedical Engineering (L.R., D.B.), and Department of Pediatrics and the Center 
for Cell Dynamics (L.R.), Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.
dberkow1@jhmi.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Arginase 2 (Arg2) is a critical target in atherosclerosis because it
controls endothelial nitric oxide, proliferation, fibrosis, and inflammation.
Regulators of Arg2 transcription in the endothelium have not been characterized. 
The goal of the current study is to determine the role of specific histone
deacetylases (HDACs) in the regulation of endothelial Arg2 transcription and
endothelial function.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: The HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A increased levels of Arg2 
mRNA, protein, and activity in both human aortic endothelial cells and mouse
aortic rings. These changes occurred in both time- and dose-dependent patterns
and resulted in Arg2-dependent endothelial dysfunction. Trichostatin A and the
atherogenic stimulus oxidized low-density lipoprotein enhanced the activity of
common promoter regions of Arg2. HDAC inhibition with trichostatin A also
decreased endothelial nitric oxide, and these effects were blunted by arginase
inhibition. Nonselective class I HDAC inhibitors enhanced Arg2 expression,
whereas the only selective inhibitor that increased Arg2 expression was
mocetinostat, a selective inhibitor of HDACs 1 and 2. Additionally, mouse aortic 
rings preincubated with mocetinostat exhibited dysfunctional relaxation.
Overexpression of HDAC2 (but not HDAC 1, 3, or 8) cDNA in human aortic
endothelial cells suppressed Arg2 expression in a concentration-dependent manner,
and siRNA knockdown of HDAC2 enhanced Arg2 expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation indicated direct binding of HDAC2 to the Arg2 promoter, and
HDAC2 overexpression in human aortic endothelial cells blocked oxidized
low-density lipoprotein-mediated activation of the Arg2 promoter. Finally,
overexpression of HDAC2 blocked oxidized low-density lipoprotein-mediated
vascular dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC2 is a critical regulator of Arg2 expression and thereby
endothelial nitric oxide and endothelial function. Overexpression or activation
of HDAC2 represents a novel therapy for endothelial dysfunction and
atherosclerosis.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4378272
PMID: 24833798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 11;289(28):19519-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.556555. Epub
2014 May 12.

Retinoic acid and histone deacetylases regulate epigenetic changes in embryonic
stem cells.

Urvalek AM(1), Gudas LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and the Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065. (2)From the
Department of Pharmacology and the Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065 ljgudas@med.cornell.edu.

All-trans-retinoic acid (RA) is a vitamin A metabolite that plays major roles in 
regulating stem cell differentiation and development. RA is the ligand of the
retinoic acid receptor (RAR) family of transcription factors, which interact with
retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) within target gene proximal promoters and
enhancers. Although RA-mediated gene activation is well understood, less is known
about the mechanisms for repression at RA-regulated genes. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments, we show that in embryonic stem cells in the
absence of RA, histone deacetylases (HDACs) differentially bind to various RAREs 
in proximal promoters or enhancer regions of RA-regulated genes; HDAC1, HDAC2,
and HDAC3 bind at RAREs in the Hoxa1 and Cyp26a1 gene regulatory regions, whereas
only HDAC1 binds at the RARß2 RARE. shRNA knockdown of HDAC1, HDAC2, or HDAC3
differentially increases the deposition of the histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation
(H3K27ac) epigenetic mark associated with increases in these three transcripts.
Importantly, RA treatment differentially mediates the removal of HDACs from the
Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, and RARß2 genes and promotes the deposition of the H3K27ac mark
at these genes. Overall, we show that HDACs differentially bind to RA-regulated
genes to control key epigenetic marks involved in stem cell differentiation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4094062
PMID: 24821725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Epigenomics. 2014 Apr;6(2):209-14. doi: 10.2217/epi.14.11.

Inhibition of HDAC3 as a strategy for developing novel diabetes therapeutics.

Meier BC(1), Wagner BK.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Biology Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Modulation of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity has been implicated as a
potential therapeutic strategy for multiple diseases. Recent studies have put a
greater spotlight on metabolic diseases, in particular Type 1 and Type 2
diabetes, as potential indications for which HDAC inhibition could be beneficial.
Evidence suggests that inhibition of HDAC3 protects ß-cells from cytokine-induced
apoptosis, an important event in the development of Type 1 diabetes. On the other
hand, the pathogenesis of Type 2 diabetes involves a combination of peripheral
insulin resistance and pancreatic ß-cell failure. Again, data from the literature
indicate that HDAC3 regulates genes involved in key metabolic events. Together,
these results suggest that selective inhibition of HDAC3 may be an attractive
strategy for targeting these diseases.

PMID: 24811789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. PLoS One. 2014 May 2;9(5):e95520. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095520. eCollection 
2014.

Melittin restores PTEN expression by down-regulating HDAC2 in human hepatocelluar
carcinoma HepG2 cells.

Zhang H(1), Zhao B(1), Huang C(1), Meng XM(1), Bian EB(1), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of pharmacy, Anhui key laboratory of bioactivity of natural products,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui Province, China; Institute for Liver
Diseases of Anhui Medical University (AMU), Hefei, Anhui Province, China.

Melittin is a water-soluble toxic peptide derived from the venom of the bee.
Although many studies show the anti-tumor activity of melittin in human cancer
including glioma cells, the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here the effect
of melittin on human hepatocelluar carcinoma HepG2 cell proliferation in vitro
and further mechanisms was investigated. We found melittin could inhibit cell
proliferation in vitro using Flow cytometry and MTT method. Besides, we
discovered that melittin significantly downregulated the expressions of CyclinD1 
and CDK4. Results of western Blot and Real-time PCR analysis indicated that
melittin was capable to upregulate the expression of PTEN and attenuate histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) expression. Further studies demonstrated that knockdown of 
HDAC2 completely mimicked the effects of melittin on PTEN gene expression.
Conversely, it was that the potential utility of melittin on PTEN expression was 
reversed in cells treated with a recombinant pEGFP-C2-HDAC2 plasmid. In addition,
treatment with melittin caused a downregulation of Akt phosphorylation, while
overexpression of HDAC2 promoted Akt phosphorylation. These findings suggested
that the inhibitory of cell growth by melittin might be led by HDAC2-mediated
PTEN upregulation, Akt inactivation, and inhibition of the PI3K/Akt signaling
pathways.

PMCID: PMC4008415
PMID: 24788349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2014 Jul 16;5(7):588-96. doi: 10.1021/cn500021p. Epub 2014 May
21.

Image-guided synthesis reveals potent blood-brain barrier permeable histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Seo YJ(1), Kang Y, Muench L, Reid A, Caesar S, Jean L, Wagner F, Holson E,
Haggarty SJ, Weiss P, King P, Carter P, Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Hooker JM, Kim SW.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory , Upton, New York
11973, United States.

Recent studies have revealed that several histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, 
which are used to study/treat brain diseases, show low blood-brain barrier (BBB) 
penetration. In addition to low HDAC potency and selectivity observed, poor brain
penetrance may account for the high doses needed to achieve therapeutic efficacy.
Here we report the development and evaluation of highly potent and blood-brain
barrier permeable HDAC inhibitors for CNS applications based on an image-guided
approach involving the parallel synthesis and radiolabeling of a series of
compounds based on the benzamide HDAC inhibitor, MS-275 as a template. BBB
penetration was optimized by rapid carbon-11 labeling and PET imaging in the
baboon model and using the imaging derived data on BBB penetration from each
compound to feed back into the design process. A total of 17 compounds were
evaluated, revealing molecules with both high binding affinity and BBB
permeability. A key element conferring BBB penetration in this benzamide series
was a basic benzylic amine. These derivatives exhibited 1-100 nM inhibitory
activity against recombinant human HDAC1 and HDAC2. Three of the carbon-11
labeled aminomethyl benzamide derivatives showed high BBB penetration
(~0.015%ID/cc) and regional binding heterogeneity in the brain (high in thalamus 
and cerebellum). Taken together this approach has afforded a strategy and a
predictive model for developing highly potent and BBB permeable HDAC inhibitors
for CNS applications and for the discovery of novel candidate molecules for small
molecule probes and drugs.

PMCID: PMC4102966
PMID: 24780082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Allergy. 2014 Jul;69(7):817-27. doi: 10.1111/all.12412. Epub 2014 Apr 29.

Refractory asthma: mechanisms, targets, and therapy.

Trevor JL(1), Deshane JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

Asthma is a common medical condition affecting 300 million people worldwide.
Airway inflammation, smooth muscle bronchoconstriction leading to airflow
obstruction, and mucous hypersecretion are clinical hallmarks of asthma. The
NHLBI Expert Panel Report 3 recommends inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) for patients
with moderate to severe persistent asthma. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) target
gene transcription through their interactions with the glucocorticoid (GC)
receptor (GR) at the glucocorticoid response element (GRE). The GC/GR complex
enhances anti-inflammatory but inhibits pro-inflammatory mediator production.
Classically, asthma has been described as a Th2-associated eosinophil-predominant
disease, but recently alternative models have been described including a
Th17-mediated neutrophil-predominant phenotype resulting in patients with more
severe disease who may be less responsive to steroids. Additional mechanisms of
steroid resistance include increased activity of GR phosphorylating kinases which
modify the interactions of GR with transcription factors to inhibit the ability
of GR to bind with GRE, leading to an increase in pro-inflammatory gene
transcription. Oxidative stress also affects the balance between pro-inflammatory
and anti-inflammatory gene transcription through the modification of
transcription factors and cofactors (such as PI3K) leading to the inhibition of
histone deacetylase 2. Continued investigations into the mechanisms behind
glucocorticoid resistance will lead to novel treatments that improve control of
severe refractory asthma.

© 2014 The Authors. Allergy Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4279947
PMID: 24773466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nat Commun. 2014 Apr 28;5:3680. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4680.

GATA-dependent regulatory switches establish atrioventricular canal specificity
during heart development.

Stefanovic S(1), Barnett P(1), van Duijvenboden K(1), Weber D(2), Gessler M(2),
Christoffels VM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 15, 1105AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Developmental Biochemistry, Biocenter and Comprehensive Heart Failure Center, 
University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, Germany.

The embryonic vertebrate heart tube develops an atrioventricular canal that
divides the atrial and ventricular chambers, forms atrioventricular conduction
tissue and organizes valve development. Here we assess the transcriptional
mechanism underlying this localized differentiation process. We show that
atrioventricular canal-specific enhancers are GATA-binding site-dependent and act
as switches that repress gene activity in the chambers. We find that
atrioventricular canal-specific gene loci are enriched in H3K27ac, a marker of
active enhancers, in atrioventricular canal tissue and depleted in H3K27ac in
chamber tissue. In the atrioventricular canal, Gata4 activates the enhancers in
synergy with Bmp2/Smad signalling, leading to H3K27 acetylation. In contrast, in 
chambers, Gata4 cooperates with pan-cardiac Hdac1 and Hdac2 and chamber-specific 
Hey1 and Hey2, leading to H3K27 deacetylation and repression. We conclude that
atrioventricular canal-specific enhancers are platforms integrating cardiac
transcription factors, broadly active histone modification enzymes and localized 
co-factors to drive atrioventricular canal-specific gene activity.

PMCID: PMC4015328
PMID: 24770533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Med Chem. 2014 May 22;57(10):4009-22. doi: 10.1021/jm401899x. Epub 2014 May 6.

Azaindolylsulfonamides, with a more selective inhibitory effect on histone
deacetylase 6 activity, exhibit antitumor activity in colorectal cancer HCT116
cells.

Lee HY(1), Tsai AC, Chen MC, Shen PJ, Cheng YC, Kuo CC, Pan SL, Liu YM, Liu JF,
Yeh TK, Wang JC, Chang CY, Chang JY, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University , 250
Wuxing Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.

A series of indolylsulfonylcinnamic hydroxamates has been synthesized. Compound
12,
(E)-3-(3-((1H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-1-yl)sulfonyl)phenyl)-N-hydroxyacrylamide,
which has a 7-azaindole core cap, was shown to have antiproliferative activity
against KB, H460, PC3, HSC-3, HONE-1, A549, MCF-7, TSGH, MKN45, HT29, and HCT116 
human cancer cell lines. Pharmacological studies indicated that 12 functions as a
potent HDAC inhibitor with an IC50 value of 0.1 µM. It is highly selective for
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and is 60-fold more active than against HDAC1 and
223-fold more active than against HDAC2. It has a good pharmacokinetic profile
with oral bioavailability of 33%. In in vivo efficacy evaluations in colorectal
HCT116 xenografts, compound 12 suppresses tumor growth more effectively than SAHA
(1, N-hydroxy-N'-phenyloctanediamide) and is therefore seen as a suitable
candidate for further investigation.

PMID: 24766560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Haematologica. 2014 Aug;99(8):1292-303. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.092643. Epub
2014 Apr 24.

Sin3a-associated Hdac1 and Hdac2 are essential for hematopoietic stem cell
homeostasis and contribute differentially to hematopoiesis.

Heideman MR(1), Lancini C(1), Proost N(2), Yanover E(1), Jacobs H(3), Dannenberg 
JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (2)Division of Molecular Genetics, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Division of Biological Stress Response,
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Division of Gene
Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
j.dannenberg@nki.nl.

Class I histone deacetylases are critical regulators of gene transcription by
erasing lysine acetylation. Targeting histone deacetylases using relative
non-specific small molecule inhibitors is of major interest in the treatment of
cancer, neurological disorders and acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
Harnessing the therapeutic potential of histone deacetylase inhibitors requires
full knowledge of individual histone deacetylases in vivo. As hematologic
malignancies show increased sensitivity towards histone deacetylase inhibitors we
targeted deletion of class I Hdac1 and Hdac2 to hematopoietic cell lineages.
Here, we show that Hdac1 and Hdac2 together control hematopoietic stem cell
homeostasis, in a cell-autonomous fashion. Simultaneous loss of Hdac1 and Hdac2
resulted in loss of hematopoietic stem cells and consequently bone marrow
failure. Bone-marrow-specific deletion of Sin3a, a major Hdac1/2 co-repressor,
phenocopied loss of Hdac1 and Hdac2 indicating that Sin3a-associated
HDAC1/2-activity is essential for hematopoietic stem cell homeostasis. Although
Hdac1 and Hdac2 show compensatory and overlapping functions in hematopoiesis,
mice expressing mono-allelic Hdac1 or Hdac2 revealed that Hdac1 and Hdac2
contribute differently to the development of specific hematopoietic lineages.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4116827
PMID: 24763403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 23;34(17):6112-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5212-13.2014.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 control the specification of neural crest cells into peripheral
glia.

Jacob C(1), Lötscher P, Engler S, Baggiolini A, Varum Tavares S, Brügger V, John 
N, Büchmann-Møller S, Snider PL, Conway SJ, Yamaguchi T, Matthias P, Sommer L,
Mantei N, Suter U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich,
CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland, FMI for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland, Institute of Anatomy, University of
Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland, Institute of Zoology, Department of Biology,
University of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland, and Developmental Biology 
and Neonatal Medicine Program, H.B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.

Schwann cells, the myelinating glia of the peripheral nervous system (PNS),
originate from multipotent neural crest cells that also give rise to other cells,
including neurons, melanocytes, chondrocytes, and smooth muscle cells. The
transcription factor Sox10 is required for peripheral glia specification.
However, all neural crest cells express Sox10 and the mechanisms directing neural
crest cells into a specific lineage are poorly understood. We show here that
histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) are essential for the specification of
neural crest cells into Schwann cell precursors and satellite glia, which express
the early determinants of their lineage myelin protein zero (P0) and/or fatty
acid binding protein 7 (Fabp7). In neural crest cells, HDAC1/2 induced expression
of the transcription factor Pax3 by binding and activating the Pax3 promoter. In 
turn, Pax3 was required to maintain high Sox10 levels and to trigger expression
of Fabp7. In addition, HDAC1/2 were bound to the P0 promoter and activated P0
transcription. Consistently, in vivo genetic deletion of HDAC1/2 in mouse neural 
crest cells led to strongly decreased Sox10 expression, no detectable Pax3,
virtually no satellite glia, and no Schwann cell precursors in dorsal root
ganglia and peripheral nerves. Similarly, in vivo ablation of Pax3 in the mouse
neural crest resulted in strongly reduced expression of Sox10 and Fabp7.
Therefore, by controlling the expression of Pax3 and the concerted action of Pax3
and Sox10 on their target genes, HDAC1/2 direct the specification of neural crest
cells into peripheral glia.

PMCID: PMC3996228
PMID: 24760871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Diabetes. 2014 Sep;63(9):2924-34. doi: 10.2337/db14-0066. Epub 2014 Apr 10.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP-3)-deficient mice are
resistant to diet-induced obesity.

Feng B(1), Jiao P(2), Helou Y(3), Li Y(1), He Q(1), Walters MS(4), Salomon A(5), 
Xu H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Hallett Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown
University, Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI. (2)Hallett Center for
Diabetes and Endocrinology, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University, Warren
Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin Province, China. (3)Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Physiology, Brown University, Providence, RI. (4)Department of
Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY. (5)Department of
Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence,
RI Department of Chemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI. (6)Hallett Center
for Diabetes and Endocrinology, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University, Warren
Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI Pathobiology Program, Brown University,
Providence, RI hxu@lifespan.org.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP-3) is a negative regulator of
extracellular signal-related kinase signaling. Our laboratory recently
demonstrated that MKP-3 plays an important role in obesity-related hyperglycemia 
by promoting hepatic glucose output. This study shows that MKP-3 deficiency
attenuates body weight gain induced by a high-fat diet (HFD) and protects mice
from developing obesity-related hepatosteatosis. Triglyceride (TG) contents are
dramatically decreased in the liver of MKP-3(-/-) mice fed an HFD compared with
wild-type (WT) controls. The absence of MKP-3 also reduces adiposity, possibly by
repressing adipocyte differentiation. In addition, MKP-3(-/-) mice display
increased energy expenditure, enhanced peripheral glucose disposal, and improved 
systemic insulin sensitivity. We performed global phosphoproteomic studies to
search for downstream mediators of MKP-3 action in liver lipid metabolism. Our
results revealed that MKP-3 deficiency increases the phosphorylation of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) 1 on serine 393 by 3.3-fold and HDAC2 on serine 394 by
2.33-fold. Activities of HDAC1 and 2 are increased in the livers of MKP-3(-/-)
mice fed an HFD. Reduction of HDAC1/2 activities is sufficient to restore TG
content of MKP-3(-/-) primary hepatocytes to a level similar to that in WT cells.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4141371
PMID: 24722245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Apr;30(4):384-7.

[Erythromycin restores oxidative stress-induced corticosteroid responsiveness of 
human THP-1 cells by up-regulating the expression of histone deacetylase 2].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), He Z(1), Sun X(1), Li Z(1), Zhao L(2), Mao C(1), Huang D(1), Zhang
J(1), Zhong X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning 530021, China. (2)Medical Intensive Care Unit, First
Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of erythromycin (EM) on corticosteroid
insensitivity of human THP-1 cells induced by cigarette smoke extract (CSE) and
its mechanism.
METHODS: THP-1 cells were treated with EM followed by CSE stimulation. Histone
deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) short interference RNA (HDAC2-siRNA) was transfected into
the cells using Lipofectamine(TM); 2000. Interleukin-8 (IL-8) level in
supernatants was measured by ELISA and HDAC2 expression was determined by
real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting.
RESULTS: The inhibition ratio of IL-8 in the EM group was significantly higher
than that in the CSE group, but lower than that in the control group (P<0.05).
The half-maximal inhibitory concentration of dexamethasone (IC50;-Dex) in the EM 
group was lower than that in the CSE group, but higher than that in the control
group (P<0.05). The expression of HDAC2 protein in the EM group was higher than
that in the CSE group, but lower than that in the control group (P<0.05).
Besides, HDAC2 mRNA and HDAC2 protein expressions were lower in the HDAC2-siRNA
group than in the scrambled oligonucleotide (SC) group. EM could reverse HDAC2
mRNA and HDAC2 protein reduction induced by HDAC2-siRNA (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Corticosteroid sensitivity of THP-1 cells could be reduced by CSE. EM
could reverse the corticosteroid insensitivity by up-regulating the expression of
HDAC2 protein.

PMID: 24721407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Toxicology. 2014 Jul 3;321:53-61. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2014.03.011. Epub 2014 Apr
6.

Prenatal caffeine ingestion induces aberrant DNA methylation and histone
acetylation of steroidogenic factor 1 and inhibits fetal adrenal steroidogenesis.

Ping J(1), Wang JF(2), Liu L(3), Yan YE(2), Liu F(2), Lei YY(2), Wang H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Basic Medical School of Wuhan University, Wuhan
430071, China; Research Center of Food and Drug Evaluation, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430071, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Basic Medical School of Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430071, China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Basic Medical
School of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China; Department of Pharmacology,
Medical School of Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434000, China. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, Basic Medical School of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China;
Research Center of Food and Drug Evaluation, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China. Electronic address: wanghui19@whu.edu.cn.

Prenatal caffeine ingestion is one of the risk factors for intrauterine growth
retardation (IUGR). Adrenal plays a pivotal role, mainly through steroidogenesis,
in the regulation of intrauterine homeostasis and in fetal development and
maturation. We have shown that prenatal caffeine ingestion can inhibit fetal
adrenal corticosterone production, but the underlying mechanism is unknown. This 
study investigated the effects of prenatal caffeine ingestion on corticosterone
and its associated synthesized enzymes (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein,
StAR; 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, 3ß-HSD; cytochrome P450 cholesterol side
chain cleavage, P450scc; P450c21; and P450c11) in the fetal adrenal in rats and
further explored the underlying mechanism by analyzing the epigenetic
modification and expression of the key transcription factor steroidogenic
factor-1 (SF-1). The pregnant rats were intragastrically treated with 120 mg/kg.d
caffeine from gestational day 11-20. The results showed that the IUGR rate was
51.2% after caffeine treatment. The contents of corticosterone and the mRNA
levels of StAR, P450scc, P450c21, and P450c11 were decreased significantly in the
fetal adrenal. Furthermore, caffeine reduced both the protein and the mRNA
expression of SF-1 in the fetal adrenal. The epigenetic analysis showed that
caffeine treatment can significantly enhance the mRNA expression of DNA
methyltransferase (Dnmt) 1, Dnmt3a, histone deacetylases (Hdac) 1, and Hdac2. The
detection of DNA methylation by bisulfite-sequencing PCR uncovered a notably
increased total methylation rate in the SF-1 promoter. The ChIP assay showed
decreased acetylation levels of H3K9 and H3K14 in the SF-1 promoter. In
conclusion, prenatal caffeine ingestion is able to induce aberrant DNA
methylation and histone acetylation of the SF-1 promoter in the rat fetal
adrenal. These effects may contribute to the inhibition of the expression of SF-1
and its associated steroidogenic enzymes and the production of corticosterone
during fetal development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24717552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Kidney Int. 2014 Oct;86(4):712-25. doi: 10.1038/ki.2014.111. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Histone deacetylase 4 selectively contributes to podocyte injury in diabetic
nephropathy.

Wang X(1), Liu J(1), Zhen J(2), Zhang C(3), Wan Q(4), Liu G(5), Wei X(1), Zhang
Y(1), Wang Z(1), Han H(1), Xu H(1), Bao C(6), Song Z(1), Zhang X(1), Li N(7), Yi 
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan,
China. (2)Department of Pathology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan,
China. (3)Department of Nephrology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (4)Department of
Nephrology, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, China. 
(5)Department of Nephrology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(6)The Microscopy Characterization Platform, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2014 Oct;86(4):666-8.

Studies have highlighted the importance of histone deacetylase (HDAC)-mediated
epigenetic processes in the development of diabetic complications. Inhibitors of 
HDAC are a novel class of therapeutic agents in diabetic nephropathy, but
currently available inhibitors are mostly nonselective inhibit multiple HDACs,
and different HDACs serve very distinct functions. Therefore, it is essential to 
determine the role of individual HDACs in diabetic nephropathy and develop HDAC
inhibitors with improved specificity. First, we identified the expression
patterns of HDACs and found that, among zinc-dependent HDACs, HDAC2/4/5 were
upregulated in the kidney from streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats, diabetic
db/db mice, and in kidney biopsies from diabetic patients. Podocytes treated with
high glucose, advanced glycation end products, or transforming growth factor-ß
(common detrimental factors in diabetic nephropathy) selectively increased HDAC4 
expression. The role of HDAC4 was evaluated by in vivo gene silencing by
intrarenal lentiviral gene delivery and found to reduce renal injury in diabetic 
rats. Podocyte injury was associated with suppressing autophagy and exacerbating 
inflammation by HDAC4-STAT1 signaling in vitro. Thus, HDAC4 contributes to
podocyte injury and is one of critical components of a signal transduction
pathway that links renal injury to autophagy in diabetic nephropathy.

PMID: 24717296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Jun 15;277(3):231-41. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.03.019. Epub 2014 Apr 5.

Prenatal nicotinic exposure suppresses fetal adrenal steroidogenesis via
steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) deacetylation.

Yan YE(1), Liu L(2), Wang JF(1), Liu F(1), Li XH(1), Qin HQ(1), Wang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Basic Medical School of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Basic Medical School of Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China; Department of Pharmacology, Medical School of Yangtze University,
Jingzhou 434000, China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Basic Medical School of
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China; Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of
Developmentally Originated Disease, Wuhan 430071, China. Electronic address:
wanghui19@whu.edu.cn.

This study aimed to investigate the suppressive effect of nicotine on fetal
adrenal steroidogenesis and to explore the potential role of epigenetic
modification of steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) transcriptional activity in this
process. Nicotine was intragastrically administered to pregnant rats and
NCI-H295A cells were treated with nicotine or trichostatin A (TSA). The
pathomorphology of fetal adrenals, steroid hormone levels, the expression of SF-1
and its target genes, and histone deacetylase (HDAC) mRNA were analyzed. Histone 
modification and DNA methylation of the SF-1 promoter region were assessed using 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and bisulfite sequencing PCR. The
interaction between SF1 and its target genes was observed. Prenatal nicotinic
exposure decreased fetal body weight, increased the IUGR rate and caused
detrimental changes in fetal adrenal. In addition, the levels of corticosterone, 
the expression of SF-1 and its target genes were decreased while HDAC2 expression
was enhanced. Nicotine treatment decreased histone H3K9 and H3K14 acetylation
levels while there was no effect on the methylation frequency on the SF-1
promoter region. Furthermore, in nicotine-treated NCI-H295A cells, lower levels
of steroidogenic synthesis, lower expression of SF-1 and its target genes were
observed while the expression of HDACs was enhanced. The interaction between SF1 
and StAR decreased with nicotine treatment. Nicotine treatment decreased histone 
H3K9 and H3K14 acetylation levels, and addition of TSA reversed the inhibition of
nicotine-mediated SF-1 and its partial target genes. Thus, nicotine-mediated
reduction of SF-1 expression resulted in an inhibitory effect on the expression
of its target genes and steroid production via histone deacetylation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24709674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 May 2;447(2):263-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.03.140. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Sin3B mediates collagen type I gene repression by interferon gamma in vascular
smooth muscle cells.

Weng X(1), Cheng X(1), Wu X(1), Xu H(1), Fang M(1), Xu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Center, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease and 
Molecular Intervention, Department of Pathophysiology, Nanjing Medical
University, China. (2)Atherosclerosis Research Center, Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Disease and Molecular Intervention, Department of Pathophysiology,
Nanjing Medical University, China. Electronic address: yjxu@njmu.edu.cn.

Collagen type I is the primary component of the extracellular matrix (ECM).
Repression of collagen type I gene (COL1A2) transcription by the pro-inflammatory
cytokine interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is a
key step during atherogenesis that leads to the destabilization of the
atherosclerotic plaque. The epigenetic mechanism underlying IFN-<U+03B3> induced COL1A2 
repression is not clearly appreciated. We show here that Sin3B, a component of
the eukaryotic histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex, was recruited to COL1A2
transcription start site in response to IFN-<U+03B3> treatment in VSMCs paralleling
COL1A2 repression. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) mediated silencing of Sin3B
abrogated collagen repression by IFN-<U+03B3> and blocked the erasure of active histone 
marks and the accumulation of repressive histone marks on COL1A2 transcription
start site as evidenced by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Sin3B
cooperated with G9a, a histone H3K9 methyltransferase, to induce a repressive
chromatin structure surrounding the collagen gene transcription start site in
response to IFN-<U+03B3> stimulation. Sin3B was recruited by regulatory factor for X-box
5 (RFX5) to the collagen site through a mechanism that involved HDAC2 mediated
deacetylation of RFX5. Together, our data indicate that a repressor complex that 
contains RFX5, HDAC2, Sin3B, and G9a is responsible for IFN-<U+03B3> induced COL1A2
repression in VSMCs. Targeting individual component of this complex will likely
yield potential therapeutic solutions against atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24709079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Trends Neurosci. 2014 May;37(5):245-6. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2014.03.003. Epub 2014
Apr 1.

An epigenetic way to forget those painful moments.

Diegelmann S(1), Sprecher SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chemin du Musée 10, CH-1700
Fribourg, Switzerland. (2)Department of Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chemin du 
Musée 10, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. Electronic address:
simon.sprecher@unifr.ch.

Traumatic experience can be overwhelming, thus erasing associated memories is
desirable. Although exposure-based and reconsolidation methods have been
developed for recently acquired associations, treatments to modify more distant
memories are rare. Focusing on HDAC2 inhibition during reconsolidation, Gräff and
colleagues recently demonstrated an epigenetic means to attenuate remote fear
memory.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Med Chem. 2014 Apr 24;57(8):3324-41. doi: 10.1021/jm401877m. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Discovery of the first N-hydroxycinnamamide-based histone deacetylase 1/3 dual
inhibitors with potent oral antitumor activity.

Li X(1), Inks ES, Li X, Hou J, Chou CJ, Zhang J, Jiang Y, Zhang Y, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shandong University ,
Ji'nan, Shandong 250012, P. R. China.

In our previous study, we designed and synthesized a novel series of
N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs), among which the
representative compound 14a exhibited promising HDACs inhibition and antitumor
activity. In this current study, we report the development of a more potent class
of N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDACIs, using 14a as lead, among which, compound
11r gave IC50 values of 11.8, 498.1, 3.9, 2000.8, 5700.4, 308.2, and 900.4 nM for
the inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC8, HDAC4, HDAC6, and HDAC11,
exhibiting dual HDAC1/3 selectivity. Compounds 11e, 11r, 11w, and 11y showed
excellent growth inhibition in multiple tumor cell lines. In vivo antitumor assay
in U937 xenograft model identified compound 11r as a potent, orally active HDACI.
To the best of our knowledge, this work constitutes the first report of oral
active N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDACIs with dual HDAC1/3 selectivity.

PMCID: PMC4030833
PMID: 24694055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Nat Immunol. 2014 May;15(5):439-48. doi: 10.1038/ni.2864. Epub 2014 Mar 30.

CD4(+) T cell lineage integrity is controlled by the histone deacetylases HDAC1
and HDAC2.

Boucheron N(1), Tschismarov R(1), Göschl L(2), Moser MA(3), Lagger S(4),
Sakaguchi S(5), Winter M(3), Lenz F(6), Vitko D(7), Breitwieser FP(7), Müller
L(5), Hassan H(5), Bennett KL(7), Colinge J(7), Schreiner W(6), Egawa T(8),
Taniuchi I(9), Matthias P(10), Seiser C(4), Ellmeier W(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology, Center for
Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria. [2]. (2)1] Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology,
Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. [2] Division of Rheumatology, Medicine III, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (3)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max
F. Perutz Laboratories, Vienna Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (4)1] Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories,
Vienna Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. [2]. (5)Division
of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology, Center for Pathophysiology,
Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Division of Biosimulation and Bioinformatics, Center for Medical Statistics,
Informatics, and Intelligent Systems, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (7)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy
of Sciences, Vienna, Austria. (8)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (9)Laboratory for
Transcriptional Regulation, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences-RIKEN
Center for Allergy and Immunology, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (10)1] Friedrich
Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research Foundation, Basel, 
Switzerland. [2] Faculty of Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Sep;15(9):894. Goeschl, Lisa [corrected to Göschl, Lisa].

Molecular mechanisms that maintain lineage integrity of helper T cells are
largely unknown. Here we show histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) as
crucial regulators of this process. Loss of HDAC1 and HDAC2 during late T cell
development led to the appearance of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
II-selected CD4(+) helper T cells that expressed CD8-lineage genes such as Cd8a
and Cd8b1. HDAC1 and HDAC2-deficient T helper type 0 (TH0) and TH1 cells further 
upregulated CD8-lineage genes and acquired a CD8(+) effector T cell program in a 
manner dependent on Runx-CBFß complexes, whereas TH2 cells repressed features of 
the CD8(+) lineage independently of HDAC1 and HDAC2. These results demonstrate
that HDAC1 and HDAC2 maintain integrity of the CD4 lineage by repressing
Runx-CBFß complexes that otherwise induce a CD8(+) effector T cell-like program
in CD4(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC4346201
PMID: 24681565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014 Apr;112(4):339-47.e1-2. doi:
10.1016/j.anai.2014.01.021.

Effect of Antiasthma Simplified Herbal Medicine Intervention on neutrophil
predominant airway inflammation in a ragweed sensitized murine asthma model.

Srivastava KD(1), Dunkin D(2), Liu C(1), Yang N(1), Miller RL(3), Sampson HA(1), 
Li XM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, The Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. (2)Division of Pediatric
Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, The Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. (3)Department of Medicine,
Department of Pediatrics, Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Columbia
University, New York, New York. (4)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department
of Pediatrics, The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
Electronic address: xiu-min.li@mssm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Neutrophil-predominant asthma is less responsive to steroids and
associated with poorer disease control. The effects of Antiasthma Simplified
Herbal Medicine Intervention (ASHMI), a traditional Chinese medicine formula
reported to be efficacious in asthmatic patients and murine asthma models, on
neutrophil predominant asthma are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the effects of standard ASHMI and refined formula ASHMI
(ASHMI(II)) in a neutrophil-predominant murine model of ragweed (RW) asthma and
explore underlying mechanisms.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were systemically sensitized, intranasally challenged with
RW extract, and orally treated with ASHMI, ASHMI(II), or vehicle (water). In a
separate experiment, some RW sensitized mice were treated with dexamethasone
before challenge. After RW challenge, airway hyperreactivity (AHR), total and
differential bronchoalveolar lavage fluid leukocyte counts, lung histologic
features, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid cytokine and chemokine levels were
assessed. RW stimulation of the murine macrophage cell line RAW264.7 was used to 
determine effects of ASHMI active compound ganoderic acid C1 (GAC1) on tumor
necrosis factor a (TNF-a) production and regulation of phosphorylated I<U+03BA>B and
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) levels.
RESULTS: ASHMI and ASHMI(II) markedly reduced AHR, mucous production,
neutrophilic inflammation, and TNF-a, interleukin 8, and interleukin 17 levels
and decreased eosinophilic inflammation and TH2 responses in vivo (P < .01-.001
for all). GAC1 inhibited TNF-a production in RW-stimulated RAW264.7 cells in
association with suppression of phosphorylated I<U+03BA>B and increased HDAC2
expression. Dexamethasone failed to reduce AHR and neutrophilic inflammation.
CONCLUSION: ASHMI treatment was efficacious in a murine model of
neutrophil-predominant asthma via modulation of innate chemokines, TH2 responses,
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B, and HDAC2. ASHMI, and/or its constituent GAC1, may be a
valuable option for treating neutrophil-predominant asthma.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4118772
PMID: 24679734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Jul 1;103(1):100-10. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvu070. Epub 2014 Mar 
27.

Elevated microRNA-155 promotes foam cell formation by targeting HBP1 in
atherogenesis.

Tian FJ(1), An LN(2), Wang GK(1), Zhu JQ(2), Li Q(1), Zhang YY(3), Zeng A(1), Zou
J(1), Zhu RF(1), Han XS(1), Shen N(1), Yang HT(1), Zhao XX(2), Huang S(2), Qin
YW(2), Jing Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Science, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Shanghai
Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, 320 Yue-Yang Rd, Building 41, Room 227, 
Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai,
China. (3)Department of Rheumatology, Huadong Hospital of Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. (4)The Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health 
Science, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, and Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, 320 Yue-Yang Rd, 
Building 41, Room 227, Shanghai 200031, China Department of Cardiology, Changhai 
Hospital, Shanghai, China qjing@sibs.ac.cn.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Jul 1;103(1):5-6.

AIM: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play key roles in inflammatory responses of macrophages. 
However, the function of miRNAs in macrophage-derived foam cell formation is
unclear. Here, we investigated the role of miRNAs in macrophage-derived foam cell
formation and atherosclerotic development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR), we
found that the level of miR-155 expression was increased significantly in both
plasma and macrophages from atherosclerosis (ApoE(-/-)) mice. We identified that 
oxidized low density lipoprotein (oxLDL) induced the expression and release of
miR-155 in macrophages, and that miR-155 was required to mediate oxLDL-induced
lipid uptake and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production of macrophages.
Furthermore, ectopic overexpression and knockdown experiments identified that HMG
box-transcription protein1 (HBP1) is a novel target of miR-155. Knockdown of HBP1
enhanced lipid uptake and ROS production in oxLDL-stimulated macrophages, and
overexpression of HBP1 repressed these effects. Furthermore, bioinformatics
analysis identified three YY1 binding sites in the promoter region of pri-miR-155
and verified YY1 binding directly to its promoter region. Detailed analysis
showed that the YY1/HDAC2/4 complex negatively regulated the expression of
miR-155 to suppress oxLDL-induced foam cell formation. Importantly, inhibition of
miR-155 by a systemically delivered antagomiR-155 decreased clearly lipid-loading
in macrophages and reduced atherosclerotic plaques in ApoE(-/-) mice. Moreover,
we observed that the level of miR-155 expression was up-regulated in CD14(+)
monocytes from patients with coronary heart disease.
CONCLUSION: Our findings reveal a new regulatory pathway of
YY1/HDACs/miR-155/HBP1 in macrophage-derived foam cell formation during early
atherogenesis and suggest that miR-155 is a potential therapeutic target for
atherosclerosis.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2014. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24675724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jul;35(7):6373-81. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1841-0. Epub 2014
Mar 26.

Differential expression of histone deacetylase and acetyltransferase genes in
gastric cancer and their modulation by trichostatin A.

Wisnieski F(1), Calcagno DQ, Leal MF, Chen ES, Gigek CO, Santos LC, Pontes TB,
Rasmussen LT, Payão SL, Assumpção PP, Lourenço LG, Demachki S, Artigiani R,
Burbano RR, Smith MC.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, Rua Botucatu, 740, São Paulo, 04023900, Brazil,
fernandawis@yahoo.com.br.

Gastric cancer is still the second leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide, even though its incidence and mortality have declined over the recent 
few decades. Epigenetic control using histone deacetylase inhibitors, such as
trichostatin A (TSA), is a promising cancer therapy. This study aimed to assess
the messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of three histone deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2, and 
HDAC3), two histone acetyltransferases (GCN5 and PCAF), and two possible targets 
of these histone modifiers (MYC and CDKN1A) in 50 matched pairs of gastric tumors
and corresponding adjacent nontumors samples from patients with gastric
adenocarcinoma, as well as their correlations and their possible associations
with clinicopathological features. Additionally, we evaluated whether these genes
are sensitive to TSA in gastric cancer cell lines. Our results demonstrated
downregulation of HDAC1, PCAF, and CDKN1A in gastric tumors compared with
adjacent nontumors (P < 0.05). On the other hand, upregulation of HDAC2, GCN5,
and MYC was observed in gastric tumors compared with adjacent nontumors (P <
0.05). The mRNA level of MYC was correlated to HDAC3 and GCN5 (P < 0.05), whereas
CDKN1A was correlated to HDAC1 and GCN5 (P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively). In
addition, the reduced expression of PCAF was associated with intestinal-type
gastric cancer (P = 0.03) and TNM stages I/II (P = 0.01). The increased
expression of GCN5 was associated with advanced stage gastric cancer (P = 0.02)
and tumor invasion (P = 0.03). The gastric cell lines treated with TSA showed
different patterns of histone deacetylase and acetyltransferase mRNA expression, 
downregulation of MYC, and upregulation of CDKN1A. Our findings suggest that
alteration of histone modifier genes play an important role in gastric
carcinogenesis, contributing to MYC and CDKN1A deregulation. In addition, all
genes studied here are modulated by TSA, although this modulation appears to be
dependent of the genetic background of the cell line.

PMID: 24668547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Neurochem Int. 2014 Nov;77:17-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2014.03.006. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Histone deacetylase expression in white matter oligodendrocytes after stroke.

Kassis H(1), Chopp M(2), Liu XS(1), Shehadah A(1), Roberts C(1), Zhang ZG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA;
Department of Physics, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.
Electronic address: zhazh@neuro.hfh.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) constitute a super-family of enzymes grouped into
four major classes (Class I-IV) that deacetylate histone tails leading to
chromatin condensation and gene repression. Whether stroke-induced
oligodendrogenesis is related to the expression of individual HDACs in the
oligodendrocyte lineage has not been investigated. We found that 2 days after
stroke, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) and mature oligodendrocytes
(OLGs) were substantially reduced in the peri-infarct corpus callosum, whereas at
7 days after stroke, a robust increase in OPCs and OLGs was observed. Ischemic
brains isolated from rats sacrificed 7 days after stroke were used to test levels
of individual members of Class I (1 and 2) and Class II (4 and 5) HDACs in white 
matter oligodendrocytes during stroke-induced oligodendrogenesis. Double
immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that stroke substantially increased the
number of NG2+OPCs with nuclear HDAC1 and HDAC2 immunoreactivity and cytoplasmic 
HDAC4 which were associated with augmentation of proliferating OPCs, as
determined by BrdU and Ki67 double reactive cells after stroke. A decrease in
HDAC1 and an increase in HDAC2 immunoreactivity were detected in mature
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) positive OLGs, which paralleled an increase in
newly generated BrdU positive OLGs in the peri-infarct corpus callosum.
Concurrently, stroke substantially decreased the acetylation levels of histones
H3 and H4 in both OPCs and OLGs. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that 
stroke induces distinct profiles of Class I and Class II HDACs in white matter
OPCs and OLGs, suggesting that the individual members of Class I and II HDACs
play divergent roles in the regulation of OPC proliferation and differentiation
during brain repair after stroke.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4332872
PMID: 24657831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Jul;72:138-45. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.03.005. Epub
2014 Mar 13.

Selective inhibition of class I but not class IIb histone deacetylases exerts
cardiac protection from ischemia reperfusion.

Aune SE(1), Herr DJ(1), Mani SK(1), Menick DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gazes Cardiac Research Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 114
Doughty St., Charleston, SC 29425, USA. (2)Gazes Cardiac Research Institute,
Medical University of South Carolina, 114 Doughty St., Charleston, SC 29425, USA.
Electronic address: menickd@musc.edu.

While inhibition of class I/IIb histone deacetylases (HDACs) protects the
mammalian heart from ischemia reperfusion (IR) injury, class selective effects
remain unexamined. We hypothesized that selective inhibition of class I HDACs
would preserve left ventricular contractile function following IR in isolated
hearts. Male Sprague Dawley rats (n=6 per group) were injected with vehicle
(dimethylsulfoxide, 0.63mg/kg), the class I/IIb HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A
(1mg/kg), the class I HDAC inhibitor entinostat (MS-275, 10mg/kg), or the HDAC6
(class IIb) inhibitor tubastatin A (10mg/kg). After 24h, hearts were isolated and
perfused in Langendorff mode for 30min (Sham) or subjected to 30min global
ischemia and 120min global reperfusion (IR). A saline filled balloon attached to 
a pressure transducer was placed in the LV to monitor contractile function. After
perfusion, LV tissue was collected for measurements of antioxidant protein levels
and infarct area. At the conclusion of IR, MS-275 pretreatment was associated
with significant preservation of developed pressure, rate of pressure generation,
rate of pressure relaxation and rate pressure product, as compared to vehicle
treated hearts. There was significant reduction of infarct area with MS-275
pretreatment. Contractile function was not significantly restored in hearts
treated with trichostatin A or tubastatin A. Mitochondrial superoxide dismutase
(SOD2) and catalase protein and mRNA in hearts from animals pretreated with
MS-275 were increased following IR, as compared to Sham. This was associated with
a dramatic enrichment of nuclear FOXO3a transcription factor, which mediates the 
expression of SOD2 and catalase. Tubastatin A treatment was associated with
significantly decreased catalase levels after IR. Class I HDAC inhibition elicits
protection of contractile function following IR, which is associated with
increased expression of endogenous antioxidant enzymes. Class I/IIb HDAC
inhibition with trichostatin A or selective inhibition of HDAC6 with tubastatin A
was not protective. This study highlights the need for the development of new
strategies that target specific HDAC isoforms in cardiac ischemia reperfusion.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4046340
PMID: 24632412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. FEBS J. 2014 Feb;281(3):851-61.

Oncogenic potential of CK2a and its regulatory role in EGF-induced HDAC2
expression in human liver cancer.

Kim HS, Chang YG, Bae HJ, Eun JW, Shen Q, Park SJ, Shin WC, Lee EK, Park S, Ahn
YM, Park WS, Lee JY, Nam SW.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is aberrantly regulated and plays a pivotal role in
the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) through regulation of
cell-cycle components at the transcriptional level, but the underlying mechanism 
leading to oncogenic HDAC2 remains unknown. In this study, we show that
expression of CK2a (casein kinase II a subunit) was up-regulated in a large
cohort of human HCC patients, and that high expression of CK2a was significantly 
associated with poor prognosis of HCC patients in terms of five-year overall
survival. It was also found that CK2a over-expression positively correlated with 
HDAC2 over-expression in a subset of HCCs. We observed that treatment with
epidermal growth factor (EGF) elicited an increase in CK2a expression and Akt
phosphorylation, causing induction of HDAC2 expression in liver cancer cells. It 
was also observed that ectopic expression of dominant-negative CK2a blocked
EGF-induced HDAC2 expression, and that ectopic CK2a expression attenuated the
suppressive effect of Akt knockdown on HDAC2 expression in liver cancer cells.
Targeted disruption of CK2a influenced the cell cycle, causing a significant
increase in the number of liver cancer cells remaining in G2/M phase, and
suppressed growth via repression of Cdc25c and cyclin B in liver cancer cells.
Taken together, our findings suggest the oncogenic potential of CK2a in liver
tumorigenesis. Furthermore, a regulatory mechanism for HDAC2 expression is
proposed whereby EGF induces transcriptional activation of HDAC2 by CK2a/Akt
activation in liver cancer cells. Therefore, this makes CK2a a promising target
in cancer therapy.

PMID: 24616922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Neuropharmacology. 2014 Jun;81:292-302. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2014.02.017.
Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Possible additional antidepressant-like mechanism of sodium butyrate: targeting
the hippocampus.

Han A(1), Sung YB(1), Chung SY(2), Kwon MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, CHA University, 222
Yatap-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do 463-836, South Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, DIRAMS, 40 Jwadong-gil, Jangan-eup, Gijang-gun, Busan
619-953, South Korea. (3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, CHA
University, 222 Yatap-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do 463-836, South
Korea. Electronic address: minsoo100@cha.ac.kr.

Chromatin remodeling mediated by histone acetylation might be involved in the
pathophysiology and the treatment of depression. Recently, it has been reported
that the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, such as sodium butyrate (SB),
could be a potential therapeutic agent for depression treatment. In the present
study, we aimed to clarify the antidepressant mechanism of SB in the hippocampus.
The mice were exposed to chronic restraint stress (CRS) for 14 consecutive days
(2 h/day) to induce depression-like behaviors. To assess depression-like
behaviors, sucrose preference test, light dark test (LD), tail suspension test
(TST), and forced swim test (FST) were performed after CRS. We observed that CRS 
decreased HDAC2 and 5 mRNA and protein levels in the hippocampus. In addition, SB
co-treatment decreased the depression-like behaviors that are induced by CRS. SB 
prevented and normalized the phosphorylation of cAMP response element binding
protein (pCREB), acetylation of histone H3 (AceH3), HDAC2, and brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression level that were decreased by CRS in the
hippocampus. These results suggest that the decreased HDAC2 and 5 expressions in 
the hippocampus of CRS may be a type of spontaneous coping response against CRS. 
However, it seems to be unsuccessful to prevent depression induction since
reduction of pCREB, AceH3 and BDNF were accompanied by CRS in the hippocampus.
Moreover, the reduced AceH3 level may be associated with the decreased pCREB,
which appears to lead to the decreased BDNF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24607816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Sep;17(9):1487-500. doi:
10.1017/S1461145714000248. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

Repeated treatment with electroconvulsive seizures induces HDAC2 expression and
down-regulation of NMDA receptor-related genes through histone deacetylation in
the rat frontal cortex.

Park HG(1), Yu HS(1), Park S(1), Ahn YM(1), Kim YS(2), Kim SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University
Hospital,Seoul,Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Neuropsychiatry,Dongguk
University International Hospital, Dongguk University Medical School,Goyang-si,
Gyeonggi-do,Republic of Korea.

The enzymatic activity of histone deacetylases (HDACs) leads to a histone
deacetylation-mediated condensed chromatic structure, resulting in
transcriptional repression, which has been implicated in the modifications of
neural circuits and behaviors. Repeated treatment with electroconvulsive seizure 
(ECS) induces changes in histone acetylation, expression of various genes, and
intrabrain cellular changes, including neurogenesis. In this study, we examined
the effects of repeated ECS on the expression of class I HDACs and related
changes in histone modifications and gene expression in the rat frontal cortex.
Ten days of repeated ECS treatments (E10X) up-regulated HDAC2 expression at the
mRNA and protein levels in the rat frontal cortex compared with sham-treated
controls; this was evident in the nuclei of neuronal cells in the prefrontal,
cingulate, orbital, and insular cortices. Among the known HDAC2 target genes,
mRNA expression of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor signaling-related genes, 
including early growth response-1 (Egr1), c-Fos, glutamate receptor, ionotropic, 
N-methyl d-aspartate 2A (Nr2a), Nr2b, neuritin1 (Nrn1), and
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II alpha (Camk2a), were decreased,
and the histone acetylation of H3 and/or H4 proteins was also reduced by E10X.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that HDAC2 occupancy in the
promoters of down-regulated genes was increased significantly. Moreover,
administration of sodium butyrate, a HDAC inhibitor, during the course of E10X
ameliorated the ECS-induced down-regulation of genes in the rat frontal cortex.
These findings suggest that induction of HDAC2 by repeated ECS treatment could
play an important role in the down-regulation of NMDA receptor signaling-related 
genes in the rat frontal cortex through histone modification.

PMID: 24606669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(3):1403-10.

Reversal of resistance towards cisplatin by curcumin in cervical cancer cells.

Roy M(1), Mukherjee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis and Toxicology, Chittaranjan
National Cancer Institute, Kolkata, India E-mail : mitacnci@yahoo.co.in.

Epigenetic regulators like histone deacetylases (1 and 2), and viral
onco-proteins (E6/E7) are known to be overexpressed in cervical cancer cells. The
present study was designed to investigate the effect of curcumin on HDACs (1 and 
2) and HPV E6/E7 in the cervical cancer cell line SiHa and a drug resistant clone
SiHaR (derived from SiHa). It was further intended to investigate whether
curcumin could sensitize the cells towards cisplatin induced cell killing by
modulation of multi drug resistant proteins like MRP1 and Pgp1. Curcumin
inhibited HDACs, HPV expression and differentially increased acetylation and
up-regulation of p53 in SiHa and SiHaR, leading to cell cycle arrest at G1-S
phase. Up-regulation of pRb, p21, p27 and corresponding inhibition of cyclin D1
and CDK4 were observed. Cisplatin resistance in SiHaR due to over-expression of
MRP1 and Pgp1 was overcome by curcumin. Curcumin also sensitized both the
cervical cancer cells towards cisplatin induced cell killing. Inhibition of HDACs
and HPVs led to cell cycle arrest at G1/S phase by alteration of cell cycle
regulatory proteins. Suppression of MRP1 and Pgp1 by curcumin resulted in
sensitization of cervical cancer cells, lowering the chemotherapeutic dose of the
drug cisplatin.

PMID: 24606473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Jul;115(7):1225-33. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24802.

Class II HDACs and neuronal regeneration.

Tang BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University Health System, Singapore, Singapore; NUS Graduate School for
Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Medical
Drive, Singapore, 117597, Singapore.

The vastly more superior regenerative capacity of the axons of peripheral nerves 
over central nervous system (CNS) neurons has been partly attributed to the
former's intrinsic capacity to initiate and sustain the functionality of a new
growth cone. Growth cone generation involves a myriad of processes that centers
around the organization of microtubule bundles. Histone deacetylases (HDACs)
modulate a wide range of key neuronal processes such as neural progenitor
differentiation, learning and memory, neuronal death, and degeneration. HDAC
inhibitors have been shown to be beneficial in attenuating neuronal death and
promoting neurite outgrowth and axonal regeneration. Recent advances have
provided insights on how manipulating HDAC activities, particularly the type II
HDACs 5 and 6, which deacetylate tubulin, may benefit axonal regeneration. These 
advances are discussed herein.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24604703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 4;9(3):e91083. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091083. eCollection 
2014.

Lipopolysaccharide induces up-regulation of TGF-a through HDAC2 in a rat model of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia.

Ni W(1), Lin N(1), He H(1), Zhu J(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)XinHua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China. (2)XinHua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China; MOE and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Children's Environmental
Health, Shanghai, China.

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is characterized by alveolar simplification with
decreased alveolar number and increased airspace. Previous studies suggested that
transforming growth factor-a (TGF-a) may contribute to arrested alveolar
development in BPD. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) control cellular signaling and
gene expression. HDAC2 is crucial for suppression of inflammatory gene
expression. Here we investigated whether HDAC2 was involved in the arrest of
alveolarization, as well as the ability of HDAC2 to regulate TGF-a expression in 
a rat model of BPD induced by intra-amniotic injection of lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). Results showed that LPS exposure led to a suppression of both HDAC1 and
HDAC2 expression and activity, induced TGF-a expression, and disrupted alveolar
morphology. Mechanistic studies showed that overexpression of HDAC2, but not
HDAC1, suppressed LPS-induced TGF-a expression. Moreover, the HDAC inhibitor TSA 
or downregulation of HDAC2 by siRNA both significantly increased TGF-a expression
in cultured myofibroblasts. Finally, preservation of HDAC activity by
theophylline treatment improved alveolar development and attenuated TGF-a
release. Together, these findings indicate that attenuation of TGF-a-mediated
effects in the lung by enhancing HDAC2 may have a therapeutic effect on treating 
BPD.

PMCID: PMC3942494
PMID: 24595367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 May;50:112-22. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.02.019.
Epub 2014 Mar 1.

Identification of NuRSERY, a new functional HDAC complex composed by HDAC5,
GATA1, EKLF and pERK present in human erythroid cells.

Varricchio L(1), Dell'Aversana C(2), Nebbioso A(3), Migliaccio G(4), Altucci
L(5), Mai A(6), Grazzini G(7), Bieker JJ(8), Migliaccio AR(9).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy, New 
York, NY, USA. (2)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, "Adriano Buzzati
Traverso", IGB, P. Castellino 111, Italy. (3)Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, L. De Crecchio 7, 
Naples, Italy. (4)Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Istituto Superiore di Sanita',
Viale Regina Elena 299, Italy. (5)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, "Adriano 
Buzzati Traverso", IGB, P. Castellino 111, Italy; Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, L. De Crecchio 7, 
Naples, Italy. (6)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di
Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, Università "Sapienza", P.le A. Moro 5, Italy.
(7)Centro Nazionale Sangue, via Giano della Bella 27, Rome, Italy.
(8)Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One
Gustave L. Levy, New York, NY, USA. (9)Hematology/Oncology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy, New York, NY, USA; Hematology, Oncology and
Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanita', Viale Regina Elena 299, Italy.
Electronic address: annarita.migliaccio@mssm.edu.

To clarify the role of HDACs in erythropoiesis, expression, activity and function
of class I (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3) and class IIa (HDAC4, HDAC5) HDACs during in
vitro maturation of human erythroblasts were compared. During erythroid
maturation, expression of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 remained constant and activity
and GATA1 association (its partner of the NuRD complex), of HDAC1 increased. By
contrast, HDAC4 content drastically decreased and HDAC5 remained constant in
content but decreased in activity. In erythroid cells, pull down experiments
identified the presence of a novel complex formed by HDAC5, GATA1, EKLF and pERK 
which was instead undetectable in cells of the megakaryocytic lineage. With
erythroid maturation, association among HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF persisted but
levels of pERK sharply decreased. Treatment of erythroleukemic cells with
inhibitors of ERK phosphorylation reduced by >90% the total and nuclear content
of HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF, suggesting that ERK phosphorylation is required for the
formation of this complex. Based on the function of class IIa HDACs as chaperones
of other proteins to the nucleus and the erythroid-specificity of HDAC5
localization, this novel HDAC complex was named nuclear remodeling shuttle
erythroid (NuRSERY). Exposure of erythroid cells to the class II-selective HDAC
inhibitor (HDACi) APHA9 increased <U+03B3>/(<U+03B3>+ß) globin expression ratios (Mai et al.,
2007), suggesting that NuRSERY may regulate globin gene expression. In agreement 
with this hypothesis, exposure of erythroid cells to APHA9 greatly reduced the
association among HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF. Since exposure to APHA9 did not affect
survival rates or p21 activation, NuRSERY may represent a novel, possibly less
toxic, target for epigenetic therapies of hemoglobinopaties and other disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4003889
PMID: 24594363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Dec;50(3):937-44. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8659-z. Epub 2014
Feb 21.

Epigenetic enhancement of brain-derived neurotrophic factor signaling pathway
improves cognitive impairments induced by isoflurane exposure in aged rats.

Ji M(1), Dong L, Jia M, Liu W, Zhang M, Ju L, Yang J, Xie Z, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China.

Isoflurane-induced cognitive impairments are well documented in animal models;
yet, the molecular mechanisms remain largely to be determined. In the present
study, 22-month-old male Sprague-Dawley rats received 2 h of 1.5 % isoflurane or 
100 % oxygen daily for 3 consecutive days. For the intervention study, the rats
were intraperitoneally injected with 1.2 g/kg sodium butyrate 2 h before
isoflurane exposure. Our data showed that repeated isoflurane exposure
significantly decreased the freezing time to context and the freezing time to
tone in the fear conditioning test, which was associated with upregulated histone
deacetylase 2, reduced histone acetylation, and increased inflammation and
apoptosis in the hippocampus, and impairments of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF)-tyrosine kinase receptor B (TrkB) and the downstream signaling
pathway phospho-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase and phospho-cAMP response
element-binding protein. These results suggest that isoflurane-induced cognitive 
impairments are associated with the declines in chromatin histone acetylation and
the resulting downregulation of BDNF-TrkB signaling pathway. Moreover, the
cognitive impairments and the signaling deficits can be rescued by histone
deacetylase inhibitor sodium butyrate. Therefore, epigenetic enhancement of
BDNF-TrkB signaling may be a promising strategy for reversing isoflurane-induced 
cognitive impairments.

PMCID: PMC4141042
PMID: 24553857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Aug;17(8):1207-20. doi:
10.1017/S1461145714000054. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors on amygdaloid histone acetylation and
neuropeptide Y expression: a role in anxiety-like and alcohol-drinking
behaviours.

Sakharkar AJ(1), Zhang H(1), Tang L(1), Baxstrom K(1), Shi G(1), Moonat S(1),
Pandey SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry,University of Illinois at Chicago,Chicago, IL
60612,USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated the involvement of epigenetic mechanisms in
psychiatric disorders, including alcoholism. Here, we investigated the effects of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA) on amygdaloid
HDAC-induced histone deacetylation and neuropeptide Y (NPY) expression and on
anxiety-like and alcohol-drinking behaviours in alcohol-preferring (P) and
-non-preferring (NP) rats. It was found that P rats displayed higher anxiety-like
and alcohol-drinking behaviours, higher amygdaloid nuclear, but not cytosolic,
HDAC activity, which was associated with increased HDAC2 protein levels and
deficits in histone acetylation and NPY expression in the central (CeA) and
medial nucleus of amygdala (MeA), as compared to NP rats. TSA treatment
attenuated the anxiety-like and alcohol-drinking behaviours, with concomitant
reductions in amygdaloid nuclear, but not cytosolic HDAC activity, and HDAC2, but
not HDAC4, protein levels in the CeA and MeA of P rats, without effect in NP
rats. TSA treatment also increased global histone acetylation (H3-K9 and H4-K8)
and NPY expression in the CeA and MeA of P, but not in NP rats. Histone H3
acetylation within the NPY promoter was also innately lower in the amygdala of P 
rats compared with NP rats; which was normalized by TSA treatment. Voluntary
ethanol intake in P, but not NP rats, produced anxiolytic effects and decreased
the HDAC2 levels and increased histone acetylation in the CeA and MeA. These
results suggest that higher HDAC2 expression-related deficits in histone
acetylation may be involved in lower NPY expression in the amygdala of P rats,
and operative in controlling anxiety-like and alcohol-drinking behaviours.

PMCID: PMC4140694
PMID: 24528596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Jun;171(12):3023-36. doi: 10.1111/bph.12636.

Effects of topiramate on ethanol-cocaine interactions and DNA methyltransferase
gene expression in the rat prefrontal cortex.

Echeverry-Alzate V(1), Giné E, Bühler KM, Calleja-Conde J, Olmos P, Gorriti MA,
Nadal R, Rodríguez de Fonseca F, López-Moreno JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, School of Psychology, Campus de Somosaguas,
Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Recent and ongoing clinical studies have indicated that
topiramate (Topamax®) could be effective in treating ethanol or cocaine abuse.
However, the effects of topiramate on the co-administration of ethanol and
cocaine remain largely unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We studied the effects of topiramate, in Wistar rats, on
operant ethanol self-administration with the co-administration of cocaine (i.p.).
The psychomotor effects of topiramate were examined before ethanol
self-administration and cocaine exposure. Blood samples were collected to analyse
ethanol and cocaine metabolism (blood ethanol levels and benzoylecgonine).
Quantitative real-time PCR was used to characterize the gene expression in the
prefrontal cortex.
KEY RESULTS: Topiramate prevented the cocaine-induced increased response to
ethanol in a dose-dependent manner without causing any motor impairment by
itself. This effect was observed when topiramate was administered before ethanol 
access, but not when topiramate was administered before the cocaine injection.
Topiramate did not block cocaine-induced psychomotor stimulation. Topiramate
reduced blood ethanol levels but did not affect cocaine metabolism. Ethanol
increased the gene expression of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a), the
corepressor Dnmt1-associated protein 1 (Dmap1), and the RNA methyltransferase
Trdmt1. These effects were prevented by topiramate or cocaine. Gene expression of
histone deacetylase-2 and glutamate receptor kainate-1 were only increased by
cocaine treatment. Topiramate and cocaine co-administration caused an
up-regulation of dopamine (Drd1, Th) and opioid (Oprm1) receptor genes.
Topiramate showed a tendency to alter episodic-like memory.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Topiramate is an effective inhibitor of the
cocaine-induced increase in operant ethanol self-administration.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4055203
PMID: 24527678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Circ Res. 2014 Mar 28;114(7):1133-43. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.303429. Epub
2014 Feb 13.

Regulation of acetylation of histone deacetylase 2 by p300/CBP-associated
factor/histone deacetylase 5 in the development of cardiac hypertrophy.

Eom GH(1), Nam YS, Oh JG, Choe N, Min HK, Yoo EK, Kang G, Nguyen VH, Min JJ, Kim 
JK, Lee IK, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN, Park WJ, Kook H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology (G.H.E., J.-K.K., H.K.) and Medical
Research Center for Gene Regulation (G.H.E., Y.S.N., N.C., H.-K.M., H.K.),
Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Republic of Korea; Global
Research Laboratory and College of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science
and Technology, Gwangju, Republic of Korea (J.G.O., W.J.P.); Department of
Internal Medicine, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu,
Republic of Korea (E.-K.Y., I.-K.L.); Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Chonnam 
National University Hospital, Gwangju, Republic of Korea (G.K., J.-K.K.);
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea (V.H.N., J.-J.M.); and Department of Molecular
Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX (R.B.-D.,
E.N.O.).

RATIONALE: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are closely involved in cardiac
reprogramming. Although the functional roles of class I and class IIa HDACs are
well established, the significance of interclass crosstalk in the development of 
cardiac hypertrophy remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: Recently, we suggested that casein kinase 2a1-dependent
phosphorylation of HDAC2 leads to enzymatic activation, which in turn induces
cardiac hypertrophy. Here we report an alternative post-translational activation 
mechanism of HDAC2 that involves acetylation of HDAC2 mediated by
p300/CBP-associated factor/HDAC5.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Hdac2 was acetylated in response to hypertrophic stresses in
both cardiomyocytes and a mouse model. Acetylation was reduced by a histone
acetyltransferase inhibitor but was increased by a nonspecific HDAC inhibitor.
The enzymatic activity of Hdac2 was positively correlated with its acetylation
status. p300/CBP-associated factor bound to Hdac2 and induced acetylation. The
HDAC2 K75 residue was responsible for hypertrophic stress-induced acetylation.
The acetylation-resistant Hdac2 K75R showed a significant decrease in
phosphorylation on S394, which led to the loss of intrinsic activity. Hdac5, one 
of class IIa HDACs, directly deacetylated Hdac2. Acetylation of Hdac2 was
increased in Hdac5-null mice. When an acetylation-mimicking mutant of Hdac2 was
infected into cardiomyocytes, the antihypertrophic effect of either nuclear
tethering of Hdac5 with leptomycin B or Hdac5 overexpression was reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results suggest a novel mechanism by which the
balance of HDAC2 acetylation is regulated by p300/CBP-associated factor and HDAC5
in the development of cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 24526703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Apr 1;306(7):G594-605. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00393.2013. Epub 2014 Feb 13.

The acetylome regulators Hdac1 and Hdac2 differently modulate intestinal
epithelial cell dependent homeostatic responses in experimental colitis.

Turgeon N(1), Gagné JM, Blais M, Gendron FP, Boudreau F, Asselin C.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Histone deacetylases (Hdac) remove acetyl groups from proteins, influencing
global and specific gene expression. Hdacs control inflammation, as shown by Hdac
inhibitor-dependent protection from dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced murine
colitis. Although tissue-specific Hdac knockouts show redundant and specific
functions, little is known of their intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) role. We
have shown previously that dual Hdac1/Hdac2 IEC-specific loss disrupts cell
proliferation and determination, with decreased secretory cell numbers and
altered barrier function. We thus investigated how compound Hdac1/Hdac2 or Hdac2 
IEC-specific deficiency alters the inflammatory response. Floxed Hdac1 and Hdac2 
and villin-Cre mice were interbred. Compound Hdac1/Hdac2 IEC-deficient mice
showed chronic basal inflammation, with increased basal disease activity index
(DAI) and deregulated Reg gene colonic expression. DSS-treated dual Hdac1/Hdac2
IEC-deficient mice displayed increased DAI, histological score, intestinal
permeability, and inflammatory gene expression. In contrast to double knockouts, 
Hdac2 IEC-specific loss did not affect IEC determination and growth, nor result
in chronic inflammation. However, Hdac2 disruption protected against DSS colitis,
as shown by decreased DAI, intestinal permeability and caspase-3 cleavage. Hdac2 
IEC-specific deficient mice displayed increased expression of IEC gene subsets,
such as colonic antimicrobial Reg3b and Reg3g mRNAs, and decreased expression of 
immune cell function-related genes. Our data show that Hdac1 and Hdac2 are
essential IEC homeostasis regulators. IEC-specific Hdac1 and Hdac2 may act as
epigenetic sensors and transmitters of environmental cues and regulate
IEC-mediated mucosal homeostatic and inflammatory responses. Different levels of 
IEC Hdac activity may lead to positive or negative outcomes on intestinal
homeostasis during inflammation.

PMID: 24525021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014 Apr 15;306(8):R519-26. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00253.2013. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Consuming a Western diet for two weeks suppresses fetal genes in mouse hearts.

Medford HM(1), Cox EJ, Miller LE, Marsh SA.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University,
Spokane, Washington; and.

Diets high in sugar and saturated fat (Western diet) contribute to obesity and
pathophysiology of metabolic syndrome. A common physiological response to obesity
is hypertension, which induces cardiac remodeling and hypertrophy. Hypertrophy is
regulated at the level of chromatin by repressor element 1-silencing
transcription factor (REST), and pathological hypertrophy is associated with
reexpression of a fetal cardiac gene program. Reactivation of fetal genes is
commonly observed in hypertension-induced hypertrophy; however, this response is 
blunted in diabetic hearts, partially due to upregulation of the
posttranslational modification O-linked-ß-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) to
proteins by O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). OGT and O-GlcNAc are found in
chromatin-modifying complexes, but it is unknown whether they play a role in
Western diet-induced hypertrophic remodeling. Therefore, we investigated the
interactions between O-GlcNAc, OGT, and the fetal gene-regulating transcription
factor complex REST/mammalian switch-independent 3A/histone deacetylase (HDAC).
Five-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were fed a Western (n = 12) or control diet (n = 
12) for 2 wk to examine the early hypertrophic response. Western diet-fed mice
exhibited fasting hyperglycemia and increased body weight (P < 0.05). As expected
for this short duration of feeding, cardiac hypertrophy was not yet evident. We
found that REST is O-GlcNAcylated and physically interacts with OGT in mouse
hearts. Western blot analysis showed that HDAC protein levels were not different 
between groups; however, relative to controls, Western diet hearts showed
increased REST and decreased ANP and skeletal a-actin. Transcript levels of HDAC2
and cardiac a-actin were decreased in Western diet hearts. These data suggest
that REST coordinates regulation of diet-induced hypertrophy at the level of
chromatin.

PMCID: PMC4121485
PMID: 24523346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Endocrinology. 2014 May;155(5):1751-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1868. Epub 2014 Feb 
7.

Early-life stress reduces DNA methylation of the Pomc gene in male mice.

Wu Y(1), Patchev AV, Daniel G, Almeida OF, Spengler D.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.

Early-life stress (ELS) increases the vulnerability thresholds for stress-related
diseases such as major depression and anxiety by inducing alterations in the
structure and function of neural circuits and endocrine pathways. We previously
demonstrated the contribution of epigenetic mechanisms to the long-term
programming of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis activity following ELS
exposure in male mice. Here, ELS comprising daily separation of pups from their
dams on postnatal days 1-10 was observed to up-regulate the expression of the
pituitary proopiomelanocortin (Pomc) gene; POMC serves as a prohormone for ACTH, 
a key mediator of the adrenocortical response to stress. Detailed analysis
revealed that the increase in Pomc mRNA levels results from a reduction in DNA
methylation at a critical regulatory region of the Pomc gene; interestingly, this
change occurs with some delay after ELS and persists for up to 1 year. Using a
Pomc-expressing pituitary cell line (AtT20), we confirmed a role for DNA
methylation in restraining Pomc expression under resting conditions:
specifically, we show that CpG site-specific methylation of the Pomc promoter
represses Pomc mRNA transcription. Further, we show high-affinity binding of
methyl-CpG binding protein-2 to the distal promoter of Pomc, suggesting that
methyl-CpG binding protein-2 acts in association with the chromatin modifiers
histone deacetylase 2 and DNA methyltransferase 1 to repress Pomc gene
expression. Collectively, these experiments contribute to our understanding of
the mechanisms through which environmental cues are translated into stable
changes ("cellular memory") in neuroendocrine cells.

PMID: 24506071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 28;9(1):e84611. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084611. eCollection
2014.

TFPI1 mediates resistance to doxorubicin in breast cancer cells by inducing a
hypoxic-like response.

Davies GF(1), Berg A(2), Postnikoff SD(1), Wilson HL(3), Arnason TG(4), Kusalik
A(2), Harkness TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada. (2)Department of Computer Science, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada. (3)Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization (VIDO), University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
Canada.

Thrombin and hypoxia are important players in breast cancer progression. Breast
cancers often develop drug resistance, but mechanisms linking thrombin and
hypoxia to drug resistance remain unresolved. Our studies using Doxorubicin (DOX)
resistant MCF7 breast cancer cells reveals a mechanism linking DOX exposure with 
hypoxic induction of DOX resistance. Global expression changes between parental
and DOX resistant MCF7 cells were examined. Westerns, Northerns and
immunocytochemistry were used to validate drug resistance and differentially
expressed genes. A cluster of genes involved in the anticoagulation pathway, with
Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor 1 (TFPI1) the top hit, was identified. Plasmids
overexpressing TFPI1 were utilized, and 1% O2 was used to test the effects of
hypoxia on drug resistance. Lastly, microarray datasets from patients with drug
resistant breast tumors were interrogated for TFPI1 expression levels. TFPI1
protein levels were found elevated in 3 additional DOX resistant cells lines,
from humans and rats, indicating evolutionarily conservation of the effect.
Elevated TFPI1 in DOX resistant cells was active, as thrombin protein levels were
coincidentally low. We observed elevated HIF1a protein in DOX resistant cells,
and in cells with forced expression of TFPI1, suggesting TFPI1 induces HIF1a.
TFPI1 also induced c-MYC, c-SRC, and HDAC2 protein, as well as DOX resistance in 
parental cells. Growth of cells in 1% O2 induced elevated HIF1a, BCRP and MDR-1
protein, and these cells were resistant to DOX. Our in vitro results were
consistent with in vivo patient datasets, as tumors harboring increased BCRP and 
MDR-1 expression also had increased TFPI1 expression. Our observations are
clinically relevant indicating that DOX treatment induces an anticoagulation
cascade, leading to inhibition of thrombin and the expression of HIF1a. This in
turn activates a pathway leading to drug resistance.

PMCID: PMC3904823
PMID: 24489651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(2):212-6.

Partial least squares based gene expression analysis in estrogen receptor
positive and negative breast tumors.

Ma W(1), Zhang TF, Lu P, Lu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Department, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
China. shihsin_l@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is categorized into two broad groups: estrogen receptor
positive (ER+) and ER negative (ER-) groups. Previous study proposed that under
trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy, tumor initiating cell (TIC) featured 
ER- tumors response better than ER+ tumors. Exploration of the molecular
difference of these two groups may help developing new therapeutic strategies,
especially for ER- patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: With gene expression profile from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database, we performed partial least squares (PLS) based analysis, 
which is more sensitive than common variance/regression analysis.
RESULTS: We acquired 512 differentially expressed genes. Four pathways were found
to be enriched with differentially expressed genes, involving immune system,
metabolism and genetic information processing process. Network analysis
identified five hub genes with degrees higher than 10, including APP, ESR1,
SMAD3, HDAC2, and PRKAA1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide new understanding for the molecular difference 
between TIC featured ER- and ER+ breast tumors with the hope offer supports for
therapeutic studies.

PMID: 24488910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014 Feb;40:96-107. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.11.004. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Rapid changes in histone deacetylases and inflammatory gene expression in expert 
meditators.

Kaliman P(1), Alvarez-López MJ(2), Cosín-Tomás M(2), Rosenkranz MA(3), Lutz A(4),
Davidson RJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de Barcelona IIBB-CSIC-IDIBAPS,
c/Rosselló 161, 6th floor, E-08036 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
pkaliman@ub.edu. (2)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona, Joan XXIII s/n,
08028 Barcelona, Spain. (3)Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and Behavior,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705-2280,
USA; Center for Investigating Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI 
53705-2280, USA. (4)Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and Behavior, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705-2280, USA; Center
for Investigating Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI 53705-2280, 
USA; Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, Lyon 1
University, Lyon, France. (5)Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and Behavior,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705-2280,
USA; Center for Investigating Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI 
53705-2280, USA; Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI
53705-2280, USA. Electronic address: rjdavids@wisc.edu.

BACKGROUND: A growing body of research shows that mindfulness meditation can
alter neural, behavioral and biochemical processes. However, the mechanisms
responsible for such clinically relevant effects remain elusive.
METHODS: Here we explored the impact of a day of intensive practice of
mindfulness meditation in experienced subjects (n=19) on the expression of
circadian, chromatin modulatory and inflammatory genes in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC). In parallel, we analyzed a control group of subjects
with no meditation experience who engaged in leisure activities in the same
environment (n=21). PBMC from all participants were obtained before (t1) and
after (t2) the intervention (t2-t1=8h) and gene expression was analyzed using
custom pathway focused quantitative-real time PCR assays. Both groups were also
presented with the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST).
RESULTS: Core clock gene expression at baseline (t1) was similar between groups
and their rhythmicity was not influenced in meditators by the intensive day of
practice. Similarly, we found that all the epigenetic regulatory enzymes and
inflammatory genes analyzed exhibited similar basal expression levels in the two 
groups. In contrast, after the brief intervention we detected reduced expression 
of histone deacetylase genes (HDAC 2, 3 and 9), alterations in global
modification of histones (H4ac; H3K4me3) and decreased expression of
pro-inflammatory genes (RIPK2 and COX2) in meditators compared with controls. We 
found that the expression of RIPK2 and HDAC2 genes was associated with a faster
cortisol recovery to the TSST in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The regulation of HDACs and inflammatory pathways may represent some
of the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic potential of mindfulness-based
interventions. Our findings set the foundation for future studies to further
assess meditation strategies for the treatment of chronic inflammatory
conditions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4039194
PMID: 24485481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 17;9(1):e85823. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085823. eCollection
2014.

Identification of proteins related to epigenetic regulation in the malignant
transformation of aberrant karyotypic human embryonic stem cells by quantitative 
proteomics.

Sun Y(1), Yang Y(2), Zeng S(3), Tan Y(1), Lu G(4), Lin G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South University,
Changsha, China ; National Engineering and Research Center of Human Stem Cells,
Changsha, China ; Key Laboratory of Stem Cells and Reproductive Engineering,
Ministry of Health, Changsha, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for
Infectious Diseases of Ministry of Education of China, The Second Affiliated
Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. (3)Institute of
Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South University, Changsha,
China. (4)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South
University, Changsha, China ; National Engineering and Research Center of Human
Stem Cells, Changsha, China.

Previous reports have demonstrated that human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) tend
to develop genomic alterations and progress to a malignant state during long-term
in vitro culture. This raises concerns of the clinical safety in using cultured
hESCs. However, transformed hESCs might serve as an excellent model to determine 
the process of embryonic stem cell transition. In this study, ITRAQ-based tandem 
mass spectrometry was used to quantify normal and aberrant karyotypic hESCs
proteins from simple to more complex karyotypic abnormalities. We identified and 
quantified 2583 proteins, and found that the expression levels of 316 proteins
that represented at least 23 functional molecular groups were significantly
different in both normal and abnormal hESCs. Dysregulated protein expression in
epigenetic regulation was further verified in six pairs of hESC lines in early
and late passage. In summary, this study is the first large-scale quantitative
proteomic analysis of the malignant transformation of aberrant karyotypic hESCs. 
The data generated should serve as a useful reference of stem cell-derived tumor 
progression. Increased expression of both HDAC2 and CTNNB1 are detected as early 
as the pre-neoplastic stage, and might serve as prognostic markers in the
malignant transformation of hESCs.

PMCID: PMC3895013
PMID: 24465727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):6991-7002. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.511444. Epub
2014 Jan 22.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors modulate the transcriptional regulation of
guanylyl cyclase/natriuretic peptide receptor-a gene: interactive roles of
modified histones, histone acetyltransferase, p300, AND Sp1.

Kumar P(1), Tripathi S, Pandey KN.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center,
School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112.

Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) binds guanylyl cyclase-A/natriuretic peptide
receptor-A (GC-A/NPRA) and produces the intracellular second messenger, cGMP,
which regulates cardiovascular homeostasis. We sought to determine the function
of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in regulating Npr1 (coding for GC-A/NPRA) gene
transcription, using primary mouse mesangial cells treated with class-specific
HDAC inhibitors (HDACi). Trichostatin A, a pan inhibitor, and mocetinostat
(MGCD0103), a class I HDAC inhibitor, significantly enhanced Npr1 promoter
activity (by 8- and 10-fold, respectively), mRNA levels (4- and 5.3-fold,
respectively), and NPRA protein (2.7- and 3.5-fold, respectively). However,
MC1568 (class II HDAC inhibitor) had no discernible effect. Overexpression of
HDAC1 and HDAC2 significantly attenuated Npr1 promoter activity, whereas HDAC3
and HDAC8 had no effect. HDACi-treated cultured cells in vitro and intact animals
in vivo showed significantly reduced binding of HDAC1 and -2 and increased
accumulation of acetylated H3-K9/14 and H4-K12 at the Npr1 promoter. Deletional
analyses of the Npr1 promoter along with ectopic overexpression and inhibition of
Sp1 confirmed that HDACi-induced Npr1 gene transcription is accomplished by Sp1
activation. Furthermore, HDACi attenuated the interaction of Sp1 with HDAC1/2 and
promoted Sp1 association with p300 and p300/cAMP-binding protein-associated
factor; it also promoted the recruitment of p300 and p300/cAMP-binding
protein-associated factor to the Npr1 promoter. Our results demonstrate that
trichostatin A and MGCD0103 enhanced Npr1 gene expression through inhibition of
HDAC1/2 and increased both acetylation of histones (H3-K9/14, H4-K12) and Sp1 by 
p300, and their recruitment to Npr1 promoter. Our findings define a novel
epigenetic regulatory mechanism that governs Npr1 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3945360
PMID: 24451378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):7092-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.527507. Epub 2014
Jan 22.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) protein-dependent deacetylation of mortality factor
4-like 1 (MORF4L1) protein enhances its homodimerization.

Chen Y(1), Li J, Dunn S, Xiong S, Chen W, Zhao Y, Chen BB, Mallampalli RK, Zou C.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Acute Lung Injury Center of Excellence, and.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 5;289(36):24943.

Histone acetyltransferase mortality factor 4-like 1 (MORF4L1) is a relatively new
histone acetyltransferase component that exists as a homodimer to exert its
epigenetic function. The mechanism of MORF4L1 self-assembly is unknown. Here we
report that Lys-148 deacetylation is indispensable for facilitating MORF4L1
self-assembly into a homodimeric unit. Among a stretch of ~10 amino acids in the 
NH2 terminus between the chromodomain and MORF4-related gene (MRG) domain within 
MORF4L1, Lys-148 is normally acetylated. Substitution of Lys-148 with arginine
augments MORF4L1 self-assembly. However, acetylation mimics of MORF4L1, including
K148L and K148Q, abolished its self-assembly of the histone acetyltransferase
component. HDAC2, a deacetylase, interacts with and keeps MORF4L1 in a
deacetylation status at Lys(148) that triggers MORF4L1 self-assembly. Knockdown
of HDAC2 reduces MORF4L1 self-assembly. HDAC2-dependent deacetylation of MORF4L1 
enhances MORF4L1 homodimerization, thus facilitating the functionality of complex
formation to repress cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3945369
PMID: 24451372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Biochemistry. 2014 Feb 4;53(4):725-34. doi: 10.1021/bi400936h. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Divergent kinetics differentiate the mechanism of action of two HDAC inhibitors.

Kral AM(1), Ozerova N, Close J, Jung J, Chenard M, Fleming J, Haines BB,
Harrington P, Maclean J, Miller TA, Secrist P, Wang H, Heidebrecht RW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Merck & Co., Inc. , 33 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
United States.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play diverse roles in many diseases including
cancer, sarcopenia, and Alzheimer's. Different isoforms of HDACs appear to play
disparate roles in the cell and are associated with specific diseases; as such, a
substantial effort has been made to develop isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors.
Our group focused on developing HDAC1/HDAC2-specific inhibitors as a cancer
therapeutic. In the course of characterizing the mechanism of inhibition of a
novel HDAC1/2-selective inhibitor, it was determined that it did not exhibit
classical Michaelis-Menten kinetic behavior; this result is in contrast to the
seminal HDAC inhibitor SAHA. Enzymatic assays, along with a newly developed
binding assay, were used to determine the rates of binding and the affinities of 
both the HDAC1/2-selective inhibitor and SAHA. The mechanism of action studies
identified a potential conformational change required for optimal binding by the 
selective inhibitor. A model of this putative conformational change is proposed.

PMID: 24450491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Development. 2014 Feb;141(3):604-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.100487.

A single allele of Hdac2 but not Hdac1 is sufficient for normal mouse brain
development in the absence of its paralog.

Hagelkruys A(1), Lagger S, Krahmer J, Leopoldi A, Artaker M, Pusch O, Zezula J,
Weissmann S, Xie Y, Schöfer C, Schlederer M, Brosch G, Matthias P, Selfridge J,
Lassmann H, Knoblich JA, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna 1030, Austria.

The histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 are crucial regulators of chromatin
structure and gene expression, thereby controlling important developmental
processes. In the mouse brain, HDAC1 and HDAC2 exhibit different developmental
stage- and lineage-specific expression patterns. To examine the individual
contribution of these deacetylases during brain development, we deleted different
combinations of Hdac1 and Hdac2 alleles in neural cells. Ablation of Hdac1 or
Hdac2 by Nestin-Cre had no obvious consequences on brain development and
architecture owing to compensation by the paralog. By contrast, combined deletion
of Hdac1 and Hdac2 resulted in impaired chromatin structure, DNA damage,
apoptosis and embryonic lethality. To dissect the individual roles of HDAC1 and
HDAC2, we expressed single alleles of either Hdac1 or Hdac2 in the absence of the
respective paralog in neural cells. The DNA-damage phenotype observed in double
knockout brains was prevented by expression of a single allele of either Hdac1 or
Hdac2. Strikingly, Hdac1(-/-)Hdac2(+/-) brains showed normal development and no
obvious phenotype, whereas Hdac1(+/-)Hdac2(-/-) mice displayed impaired brain
development and perinatal lethality. Hdac1(+/-)Hdac2(-/-) neural precursor cells 
showed reduced proliferation and premature differentiation mediated by
overexpression of protein kinase C, delta, which is a direct target of HDAC2.
Importantly, chemical inhibition or knockdown of protein kinase C delta was
sufficient to rescue the phenotype of neural progenitor cells in vitro. Our data 
indicate that HDAC1 and HDAC2 have a common function in maintaining proper
chromatin structures and show that HDAC2 has a unique role by controlling the
fate of neural progenitors during normal brain development.

PMCID: PMC4773893
PMID: 24449838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 15;74(6):1728-38. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2109. Epub
2014 Jan 21.

HDAC2 provides a critical support to malignant progression of hepatocellular
carcinoma through feedback control of mTORC1 and AKT.

Noh JH(1), Bae HJ, Eun JW, Shen Q, Park SJ, Kim HS, Nam B, Shin WC, Lee EK, Lee
K, Jang JJ, Park WS, Lee JY, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Pathology and Biochemistry, College of
Medicine; Functional RNomics Research Center; Cancer Evolution Research Center,
The Catholic University of Korea; and Department of Pathology, College of
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Aberrant regulation of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) contributes to malignant
progression in various cancers, but the underlying mechanism leading to the
activation of oncogenic HDAC2 remains unknown. In this study, we show that HDAC2 
expression is upregulated in a large cohort of patients with human hepatocellular
carcinoma, and that high expression of HDAC2 was significantly associated with
poor prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. We found that
mTORC1/NF-<U+03BA>Bp50 signaling is necessary for the growth factor-induced HDAC2 and is
sustained in hepatocellular carcinoma, but not in normal hepatic cells. Growth
factor-induced mTORC1 activates the nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>Bp50, where it
binds to the intragenic sequences of the HDAC2 gene and promotes its
transcription. Hepatocellular carcinoma tissues derived from chemical-induced
mouse and rat liver cancer models validated that mTORC1 activation and NF-<U+03BA>Bp50
nuclear translocation are essential for the transcriptional activation of
oncogenic HDAC2 in hepatocellular carcinoma. In addition, we demonstrate that
HDAC2 is required to maintain mTORC1 activity by stabilizing the mTOR/RAPTOR
complex. Elevated expression of HDAC2 triggers a positive feedback loop that
activates AKT phosphorylation via the transcriptional modulation of
phosphoinositide signaling molecules. Bioinformatics analysis of HDAC2 signature 
and immunoblot analysis of mesenchymal genes also evidenced that HDAC2 plays a
role in the malignant behavior of tumor cells by Snail induction and
simultaneously E-cadherin suppression in hepatocellular carcinoma cells. These
findings establish a molecular mechanism responsible for the activation of
oncogenic HDAC2, which explains how growth factor-induced HDAC2 maintains
mitogenic signaling and function during hepatocellular malignant progression and 
provide a novel strategy for therapeutic intervention in liver cancer. Cancer
Res; 74(6); 1728-38. ©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24448241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Nutr Biochem. 2014 Feb;25(2):259-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2013.10.015. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

Prenatal caloric restriction enhances DNA methylation and MeCP2 recruitment with 
reduced murine placental glucose transporter isoform 3 expression.

Ganguly A(1), Chen Y(2), Shin BC(1), Devaskar SU(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology,
Neonatal Research Center of UCLA Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute,
David Geffen School of Medicine UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1752, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology,
Neonatal Research Center of UCLA Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute,
David Geffen School of Medicine UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1752, USA; Department
of General Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, 
Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology, Neonatal Research Center of
UCLA Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute, David Geffen School of
Medicine UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1752, USA. Electronic address:
sdevaskar@mednet.ucla.edu.

Diminished transplacental glucose transport plays an important role in prenatal
calorie restriction (CR) induced reduction in fetal growth. Fetal growth
restriction (FGR) has an impact in shaping the adult phenotype with
transgenerational implications. To understand the mechanisms underlying prenatal 
CR-induced transplacental glucose transport, we examined the epigenetic
regulation of placental glucose transporter (Glut1 and Glut3) expression. We
restricted calories by 50% in C57BL6 pregnant mice from gestational days 10 to 19
(CR; n=8) vs. controls (CON; n=8) and observed a 50% diminution in placental
Glut3 expression (P<.05) with no effect on Glut1 expression by reverse
transcription and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). CR
enhanced DNA methylation of a CpG island situated ~1000 bp upstream from the
transcriptional start site of the glut3 gene, with no such effect on the glut1
gene as assessed by methylation-sensitive PCR and bisulfite sequencing. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated enhanced MeCP2 binding to the CpG 
island of the glut3 gene in response to CR vs. CON (P<.05). Sequential ChIP
demonstrated that enhanced MeCP2 binding of the glut3-(m)CpG island enhanced
histone deacetylase 2 recruitment (P<.05) but interfered with Sp1 binding
(P<.001), although it did not affect Sp3 or Creb/pCreb interaction. We conclude
that late-gestation CR enhanced DNA methylation of the placental glut3 gene. This
epigenetic change augmented specific nuclear protein-DNA complex formation that
was associated with prenatal CR-induced reduction of placental glut3 expression
and thereby transplacental glucose transport. This molecular complex provides
novel targets for developing therapeutic interventions aimed at reversing FGR.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4208916
PMID: 24445052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Feb;17(2):223-31. doi: 10.1038/nn.3618. Epub 2014 Jan 19.

Epigenetic suppression of neuroligin 1 underlies amyloid-induced memory
deficiency.

Bie B(1), Wu J(1), Yang H(2), Xu JJ(2), Brown DL(2), Naguib M(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of General Anesthesiology, Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. [2]. (2)Department of General Anesthesiology,
Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2014 Mar;10(3):122.

Amyloid-induced microglial activation and neuroinflammation impair central
synapses and memory function, although the mechanism remains unclear. Neuroligin 
1 (NLGN1), a postsynaptic protein found in central excitatory synapses, governs
excitatory synaptic efficacy and plasticity in the brain. Here we found, in
rodents, that amyloid fibril-induced neuroinflammation enhanced the interaction
between histone deacetylase 2 and methyl-CpG-binding protein 2, leading to
suppressed histone H3 acetylation and enhanced cytosine methylation in the Nlgn1 
promoter region and decreased NLGN1 expression, underlying amyloid-induced memory
deficiency. Manipulation of microglia-associated neuroinflammation modulated the 
epigenetic modification of the Nlgn1 promoter, hippocampal glutamatergic
transmission and memory function. These findings link neuroinflammation, synaptic
efficacy and memory, thus providing insight into the pathogenesis of
amyloid-associated diseases.

PMID: 24441681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2014 Mar;7(3):351-61. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0254. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Class I HDACs are mediators of smoke carcinogen-induced stabilization of DNMT1
and serve as promising targets for chemoprevention of lung cancer.

Brodie SA(1), Li G, El-Kommos A, Kang H, Ramalingam SS, Behera M, Gandhi K,
Kowalski J, Sica GL, Khuri FR, Vertino PM, Brandes JC.

Author information: 
(1)Atlanta VAMC, Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322.
johann.brandes@emory.edu.

DNA methylation is an early event in bronchial carcinogenesis and increased DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT)1 protein expression is a crucial step in the oncogenic
transformation of epithelia. Here, we investigate the role of class I histone
deacetylases (HDAC) 1 to 3 in the stabilization of DNMT1 protein and as a
potential therapeutic target for lung cancer chemoprevention. Long-term exposure 
of immortalized bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC-3KT) to low doses of
tobacco-related carcinogens led to oncogenic transformation, increased HDAC
expression, cell-cycle independent increased DNMT1 stability, and DNA
hypermethylation. Overexpression of HDACs was associated with increased DNMT1
stability and knockdown of HDACs reduced DNMT1 protein levels and induced DNMT1
acetylation. This suggests a causal relationship among increased class I HDACs
levels, upregulation of DNMT1 protein, and subsequent promoter hypermethylation. 
Targeting of class I HDACs with valproic acid (VPA) was associated with reduced
HDAC expression and a profound reduction of DNMT1 protein level. Treatment of
transformed bronchial epithelial cells with VPA resulted in reduced colony
formation, demethylation of the aberrantly methylated SFRP2 promoter, and
derepression of SFRP2 transcription. These data suggest that inhibition of HDAC
activity may reverse or prevent carcinogen-induced transformation. Finally,
immunohistochemistry on human lung cancer specimens revealed a significant
increase in DNMT1, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 expression, supporting our hypotheses 
that class I HDACs are mediators of DNMT1 stability. In summary, our study
provides evidence for an important role of class I HDACs in controlling the
stability of DNMT1 and suggests that HDAC inhibition could be an attractive
approach for lung cancer chemoprevention.

PMCID: PMC3955098
PMID: 24441677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2014 Mar;7(3):319-29. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0313-T. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Requirement and epigenetics reprogramming of Nrf2 in suppression of tumor
promoter TPA-induced mouse skin cell transformation by sulforaphane.

Su ZY(1), Zhang C, Lee JH, Shu L, Wu TY, Khor TO, Conney AH, Lu YP, Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Prevention Research, Department of Pharmaceutics, Ernest
Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 160
Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854. KongT@pharmacy.rutgers.edu.

Nrf2 is a transcription factor that plays critical roles in regulating the
expression of cellular defensive antioxidants and detoxification enzymes.
However, the role of Nrf2 and Nrf2's epigenetics reprogramming in skin tumor
transformation is unknown. In this study, we investigated the inhibitory role and
epigenetics of Nrf2 on tumor transformation induced by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) in mouse skin epidermal JB6 (JB6 P+)
cells and the anticancer effect of sulforaphane (SFN), an isothiocyanate found in
cruciferous vegetables. After five days of treatment, SFN significantly inhibited
TPA-induced JB6 cellular transformation and SFN enhanced the nuclear
translocation of Nrf2 and increased the mRNA and protein levels of the Nrf2
target genes HO-1, NQO1 and UGT1A1. Knockdown of Nrf2 attenuated the induction of
Nrf2, HO-1 and NQO1 by SFN, enhanced TPA-induced colony formation and dampened
the inhibitory effect of SFN on TPA-induced JB6 transformation. Epigenetics
investigation using bisulfite genomic sequencing showed that SFN decreased the
methylation ratio of the first 15 CpGs of the Nrf2 gene promoter, which was
corroborated by increased Nrf2 mRNA expression. Furthermore, SFN strongly reduced
the protein expression of DNA methyltransferases (DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b). SFN 
also inhibited the total histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and decreased the
protein expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC4. Collectively, these results 
suggest that the anti-cancer effect of SFN against TPA-induced neoplastic
transformation of mouse skin could involve the epigenetic reprogramming of
anti-cancer genes such as Nrf2, leading to the epigenetic reactivation of Nrf2
and the subsequent induction of downstream target genes involved in cellular
protection.

PMID: 24441674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Cell. 2014 Jan 16;156(1-2):261-76. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.12.020.

Epigenetic priming of memory updating during reconsolidation to attenuate remote 
fear memories.

Gräff J(1), Joseph NF(1), Horn ME(2), Samiei A(3), Meng J(2), Seo J(2), Rei D(2),
Bero AW(2), Phan TX(2), Wagner F(4), Holson E(4), Xu J(5), Sun J(5), Neve RL(3), 
Mach RH(5), Haggarty SJ(6), Tsai LH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Broad Institute 
of Harvard University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA. (2)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (3)Picower
Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (4)Broad
Institute of Harvard University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (5)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Department of
Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(6)Broad Institute of Harvard University and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for Human Genetic Research,
Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (7)Picower Institute for Learning and
Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department
of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Broad Institute of Harvard University and Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address:
lhtsai@mit.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2014 Mar;15(3):134-5.

Traumatic events generate some of the most enduring forms of memories. Despite
the elevated lifetime prevalence of anxiety disorders, effective strategies to
attenuate long-term traumatic memories are scarce. The most efficacious
treatments to diminish recent (i.e., day-old) traumata capitalize on memory
updating mechanisms during reconsolidation that are initiated upon memory recall.
Here, we show that, in mice, successful reconsolidation-updating paradigms for
recent memories fail to attenuate remote (i.e., month-old) ones. We find that,
whereas recent memory recall induces a limited period of hippocampal
neuroplasticity mediated, in part, by S-nitrosylation of HDAC2 and histone
acetylation, such plasticity is absent for remote memories. However, by using an 
HDAC2-targeting inhibitor (HDACi) during reconsolidation, even remote memories
can be persistently attenuated. This intervention epigenetically primes the
expression of neuroplasticity-related genes, which is accompanied by higher
metabolic, synaptic, and structural plasticity. Thus, applying HDACis during
memory reconsolidation might constitute a treatment option for remote traumata.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3986862
PMID: 24439381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Mar;41(3):1511-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2996-2. Epub 2014
Jan 5.

VPA inhibits renal cancer cell migration by targeting HDAC2 and down-regulating
HIF-1a.

Yang FQ(1), Liu M, Yang FP, Che J, Li W, Zhai W, Wang GC, Zheng JH, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University, No
301, Yanchang Mid-Road, Shanghai, 200072, China.

Cell migration plays major roles in human renal cancer-related death, but the
molecular mechanisms remain unclear. Valproic acid (VPA) is a broad-spectrum
inhibitor of class I and II histone deacetylases and shows great anticancer
activity in a variety of human cancers. In this study, we found that VPA
significantly inhibited cell migration but not proliferation of human renal
cancer ACHN cells. Mechanistic studies found that VPA significantly inhibited the
expression of HIF-1a. Knockdown of HIF-1a could obviously inhibited cell
migration, while over-expression of HIF-1a markedly rescued the inhibition of VPA
on cell migration. Further studies found that knockdown of HDAC2 completely
mimicked the effects of VPA on HIF-1a and cell migration, and over-expression of 
HIF-1a could also rescue the effects of HDAC2 knockdown on cell migration.
Collectively, these results indicated that the potential of specific inhibition
of HDAC2 by small molecular chemicals may lead to future therapeutic agents in
human renal cancer treatment.

PMID: 24390319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e84046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084046.
eCollection 2013.

Nuclear localization of the transcriptional regulator MIER1a requires interaction
with HDAC1/2 in breast cancer cells.

Li S(1), Paterno GD(1), Gillespie LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of BioMedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
Newfoundland, Canada.

MIER1a is a transcriptional regulator that functions in gene repression through
its ability to interact with various chromatin modifiers and transcription
factors. We have also shown that MIER1a interacts with ERa and inhibits
estrogen-stimulated growth. While MIER1a is localized in the nucleus of MCF7
cells, previous studies have shown that it does not contain a nuclear
localization signal. In this report, we investigate the mechanism involved in
transporting MIER1a into the nucleus. We explored the possibility that MIER1a is 
transported into the nucleus through a 'piggyback' mechanism. One obvious choice 
is via interaction with ERa, however we demonstrate that nuclear targeting of
MIER1a does not require ERa. Knockdown of ERa reduced protein expression to 22%
of control, but did not alter the percentage of cells with nuclear MIER1a (98%
nuclear with scrambled shRNA vs. 95% with ERa shRNA). Further evidence was
obtained using two stable transfectants derived from the ER-negative MDA231 cell 
line: MC2 (ERa+) and VC5 (ERa-). Confocal analysis showed no difference in MIER1a
localization (86% nuclear in MC2 vs. 89% in VC5). These data demonstrate that ERa
is not involved in nuclear localization of MIER1a. To identify the critical
MIER1a sequence, we performed a deletion analysis and determined that the ELM2
domain was necessary and sufficient for nuclear localization. This domain binds
HDAC1 & 2, therefore we investigated their role. Confocal analysis of an MIER1a
containing an ELM2 point mutation previously shown to abolish HDAC binding
revealed that this mutation results in almost complete loss of nuclear targeting:
10% nuclear vs. 97% with WT-MIER1a. Moreover, double knockdown of HDAC1 and 2
caused a reduction in percent nuclear from 86% to 44%. The results of this study 
demonstrate that nuclear targeting of MIER1a requires an intact ELM2 domain and
is dependent on interaction with HDAC1/2.

PMCID: PMC3869823
PMID: 24376786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Cell Biochem. 2014 May;115(5):866-73. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24729.

SUMOylated aNAC potentiates transcriptional repression by FIAT.

Hekmatnejad B(1), Akhouayri O, Jafarov T, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Shriners Hospitals for Children - Canada, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada, H3G 1A6; Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, H3A 1B1.

The transcriptional coregulator aNAC (Nascent polypeptide associated complex And 
Coregulator alpha) and the transcriptional repressor FIAT (Factor Inhibiting
ATF4-mediated Transcription) interact but the biological relevance of this
interaction remains unclear. The activity of aNAC is extensively modulated by
post-translational modifications (PTMs). We identified a novel aNAC PTM through
covalent attachment of the Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifier (SUMO1). Recombinant
aNAC was a SUMO1 target in in vitro SUMOylation assays and we confirmed that aNAC
is conjugated to SUMO1 in cultured osteoblasts and in calvarial tissue. The amino
acid sequence of aNAC contains one copy of the composite "phospho-sumoyl switch" 
motif that couples sequential phosphorylation and SUMOylation. We found that aNAC
is selectively SUMOylated at lysine residue 127 within the motif and that
SUMOylation is enhanced when a phosphomimetic mutation is introduced at the
nearby serine residue 132. SUMOylation did not alter the DNA-binding capacity of 
aNAC. The S132D, hyper-SUMOylated aNAC mutant specifically interacted with
histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) and enhanced the inhibitory activity of FIAT on
ATF4-mediated transcription from the Osteocalcin gene promoter. This effect
required binding of SUMOylated aNAC to the target promoter. We propose that
maximal transcriptional repression by FIAT requires its interaction with
SUMOylated, HDAC2-interacting aNAC.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24375853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Apr;95(4):651-9. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1013565. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Histone deacetylase isoforms regulate innate immune responses by deacetylating
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1.

Jeong Y(1), Du R, Zhu X, Yin S, Wang J, Cui H, Cao W, Lowenstein CJ.

Author information: 
(1)2.Jiangsu Key Lab of Molecular Medicine, 22 Hankou Rd., Nanjing, China,
210093. wangsencao@nju.edu.cn.

The MAPK pathway mediates TLR signaling during innate immune responses. We
discovered previously that MKP-1 is acetylated, enhancing its interaction with
its MAPK substrates and deactivating TLR signaling. As HDACs modulate
inflammation by deacetylating histone and nonhistone proteins, we hypothesized
that HDACs may regulate LPS-induced inflammation by deacetylating MKP-1. We found
that mouse macrophages expressed a subset of HDAC isoforms (HDAC1, HDAC2, and
HDAC3), which all interacted with MKP-1. Genetic silencing or pharmacologic
inhibition of HDAC1, -2, and -3 increased MKP-1 acetylation in cells.
Furthermore, knockdown or pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC1, -2, and -3 decreased
LPS-induced phosphorylation of the MAPK member p38. Also, pharmacologic
inhibition of HDAC did not decrease MAPK signaling in MKP-1 null cells. Finally, 
inhibition of HDAC1, -2, and -3 decreased LPS-induced expression of TNF-a, IL-1ß,
iNOS (NOS2), and nitrite synthesis. Taken together, our results show that HDAC1, 
-2, and -3 deacetylate MKP-1 and that this post-translational modification
increases MAPK signaling and innate immune signaling. Thus, HDAC1, -2, and -3
isoforms are potential therapeutic targets in inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 24374966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):6383-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.536805. Epub 2013 
Dec 24.

Down-regulated peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) in lung
epithelial cells promotes a PPAR<U+03B3> agonist-reversible proinflammatory phenotype in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Lakshmi SP(1), Reddy AT, Zhang Y, Sciurba FC, Mallampalli RK, Duncan SR, Reddy
RC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical
Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213 and.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive inflammatory
condition and a leading cause of death, with no available cure. We assessed the
actions in pulmonary epithelial cells of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), a nuclear hormone receptor with anti-inflammatory effects,
whose role in COPD is largely unknown. We found that PPAR<U+03B3> was down-regulated in 
lung tissue and epithelial cells of COPD patients, via both reduced expression
and phosphorylation-mediated inhibition, whereas pro-inflammatory nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activity was increased. Cigarette smoking is the main risk
factor for COPD, and exposing airway epithelial cells to cigarette smoke extract 
(CSE) likewise down-regulated PPAR<U+03B3> and activated NF-<U+03BA>B. CSE also down-regulated 
and post-translationally inhibited the glucocorticoid receptor (GR-a) and histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), a corepressor important for glucocorticoid action and
whose down-regulation is thought to cause glucocorticoid insensitivity in COPD.
Treating epithelial cells with synthetic (rosiglitazone) or endogenous
(10-nitro-oleic acid) PPAR<U+03B3> agonists strongly up-regulated PPAR<U+03B3> expression and
activity, suppressed CSE-induced production and secretion of inflammatory
cytokines, and reversed its activation of NF-<U+03BA>B by inhibiting the I<U+03BA>B kinase
pathway and by promoting direct inhibitory binding of PPAR<U+03B3> to NF-<U+03BA>B. In
contrast, PPAR<U+03B3> knockdown via siRNA augmented CSE-induced chemokine release and
decreases in HDAC activity, suggesting a potential anti-inflammatory role of
endogenous PPAR<U+03B3>. The results imply that down-regulation of pulmonary epithelial 
PPAR<U+03B3> by cigarette smoke promotes inflammatory pathways and diminishes
glucocorticoid responsiveness, thereby contributing to COPD pathogenesis, and
further suggest that PPAR<U+03B3> agonists may be useful for COPD treatment.

PMCID: PMC3945305
PMID: 24368768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 18;8(12):e82200. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082200.
eCollection 2013.

Antenatal maternal long-term hypoxia: acclimatization responses with altered gene
expression in ovine fetal carotid arteries.

Goyal R(1), Van Wickle J(2), Goyal D(2), Matei N(2), Longo LD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Perinatal Biology, School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma 
Linda, California, United States of America ; Department of Basic Sciences,
School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, California, United States 
of America. (2)Center for Perinatal Biology, School of Medicine, Loma Linda
University, Loma Linda, California, United States of America.

In humans and other species, long-term hypoxia (LTH) during pregnancy can lead to
intrauterine growth restriction with reduced body/brain weight, dysregulation of 
cerebral blood flow (CBF), and other problems. To identify the signal
transduction pathways and critical molecules, which may be involved in
acclimatization to high altitude LTH, we conducted microarray with advanced
bioinformatic analysis on carotid arteries (CA) from the normoxic near-term ovine
fetus at sea-level and those acclimatized to high altitude for 110+ days during
gestation. In response to LTH acclimatization, in fetal CA we identified mRNA
from 38 genes upregulated >2 fold (P<0.05) and 9 genes downregulated >2-fold
(P<0.05). The major genes with upregulated mRNA were SLC1A3, Insulin-like growth 
factor (IGF) binding protein 3, IGF type 2 receptor, transforming growth factor
(TGF) Beta-3, and genes involved in the AKT and BCL2 signal transduction
networks. Most genes with upregulated mRNA have a common motif for Pbx/Knotted
homeobox in the promoter region, and Sox family binding sites in the 3' un
translated region (UTR). Genes with downregulated mRNA included those involved in
the P53 pathway and 5-lipoxygenase activating proteins. The promoter region of
all genes with downregulated mRNA, had a common 49 bp region with a binding site 
for DOT6 and TOD6, components of the RPD3 histone deacetylase complex RPD3C(L).
We also identified miRNA complementary to a number of the altered genes. Thus,
the present study identified molecules in the ovine fetus, which may play a role 
in the acclimatization response to high-altitude associated LTH.

PMCID: PMC3867347
PMID: 24367503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Mar;111(3):305-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.11.010. Epub
2013 Dec 1.

Holocarboxylase synthetase: a multitalented protein with roles in biotin
transfer, gene regulation and chromatin dynamics.

Gravel RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology and of Medical Genetics and
the Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute for Child and Maternal Health,
Faculties of Medicine and Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Room 250 Heritage
Medical Research Building, 3330 Hospital Drive N.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada
T3H-1C1. Electronic address: rgravel@ucalgary.ca.

Comment on
    Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Mar;111(3):321-30.

PMID: 24361214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(4):2268-78. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03278-13. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Primary macrophages rely on histone deacetylase 1 and 2 expression to induce type
I interferon in response to gammaherpesvirus infection.

Mounce BC(1), Mboko WP, Kanack AJ, Tarakanova VL.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Type I interferon is induced shortly following viral infection and represents a
first line of host defense against a majority of viral pathogens. Not
surprisingly, both replication and latency of gammaherpesviruses, ubiquitous
cancer-associated pathogens, are attenuated by type I interferon, although the
mechanism of attenuation remains poorly characterized. Gammaherpesviruses also
target histone deacetylases (HDACs), a family of pleiotropic enzymes that modify 
gene expression and several cell signaling pathways. Specifically, we have
previously shown that a conserved gammaherpesvirus protein kinase interacts with 
HDAC1 and -2 to promote gammaherpesvirus replication in primary macrophages. In
the current study, we have used genetic approaches to show that expression of
HDAC1 and -2 is critical for induction of a type I interferon response following 
gammaherpesvirus infection of primary macrophages. Specifically, expression of
HDAC1 and -2 was required for phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) and accumulation of IRF3 at the beta interferon promoter in
gammaherpesvirus-infected primary macrophages. To our knowledge, this is the
first demonstration of a specific role for HDAC1 and -2 in the induction of type 
I interferon responses in primary immune cells following virus infection.
Furthermore, because HDAC1 and -2 are overexpressed in several types of cancer,
our findings illuminate potential side effects of HDAC1- and -2-specific
inhibitors that are currently under development as cancer therapy agents.
IMPORTANCE Gammaherpesviruses establish chronic infection in a majority of the
adult population and are associated with several malignancies. Infected cells
counteract gammaherpesvirus infection via innate immune signaling mediated
primarily through type I interferon. The induction of type I interferon
expression proceeds through several stages using molecular mechanisms that are
still incompletely characterized. In this study, we show that expression of HDAC1
and -2 by macrophages is required to mount a type I interferon response to
incoming gammaherpesvirus. The involvement of HDAC1 and -2 in the type I
interferon response highlights the pleiotropic roles of these enzymes in cellular
signaling. Interestingly, HDAC1 and -2 are deregulated in cancer and are
attractive targets of new cancer therapies. Due to the ubiquitous and chronic
nature of gammaherpesvirus infection, the role of HDAC1 and -2 in the induction
of type I interferon responses should be considered during the clinical
development of HDAC1- and -2-specific inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3911555
PMID: 24335310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Horm Behav. 2014 Feb;65(2):106-13. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2013.12.004. Epub 2013
Dec 11.

Exposure to bisphenol-A affects fear memory and histone acetylation of the
hippocampus in adult mice.

Zhang Q(1), Xu X(2), Li T(1), Lu Y(1), Ruan Q(1), Lu Y(3), Wang Q(4), Dong F(1), 
Yang Y(1), Zhang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry and Life Sciences College, Zhejiang Normal University, China.
(2)Chemistry and Life Sciences College, Zhejiang Normal University, China;
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathophysiology, Ningbo University, China. 
Electronic address: xuxh63@zjnu.cn. (3)Kindergarten Teachers College, Zhejiang
Normal University, China. (4)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Pathophysiology, Ningbo University, China.

Bisphenol-A (BPA), an environmental endocrine disruptor, has been reported to
possess weak estrogenic, anti-estrogenic, and anti-androgen properties. Previous 
evidence indicates that perinatal exposure to low levels of BPA affects
anxiety-like and cognitive behaviors in adult rodents. The present study aims to 
investigate the effect of BPA on emotional memory using the contextual fear
conditioning of male mice in adulthood exposed to BPA for 90days. The results
indicated that exposure to BPA increased the freezing time 1h and 24h after fear 
conditioning training. Furthermore, western blot analyses showed that BPA
exposure decreased the level of N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor subunit 
NR1 and increased the expression of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) before fear
conditioning training in the hippocampus of male mice. One and twenty-four hours 
after fear conditioning training, BPA enhanced the changes of the expressions of 
NR1, phosphorylated extracellular regulated protein kinases (ERK1/2), and histone
acetylation induced by contextual fear conditioning in the hippocampus. These
results suggest that long term exposure to BPA enhanced fear memory by the
concomitant increased level of NMDA receptor and/or the enhanced histone
acetylation in the hippocampus, which may be associated with activation of ERK1/2
signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Environ Health Perspect. 2014 Mar;122(3):262-8. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1307351. Epub
2013 Dec 6.

Diethylstilbestrol (DES)-stimulated hormonal toxicity is mediated by ERa
alteration of target gene methylation patterns and epigenetic modifiers (DNMT3A, 
MBD2, and HDAC2) in the mouse seminal vesicle.

Li Y(1), Hamilton KJ, Lai AY, Burns KA, Li L, Wade PA, Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology.

BACKGROUND: Diethylstilbestrol (DES) is a synthetic estrogen associated with
adverse effects on reproductive organs. DES-induced toxicity of the mouse seminal
vesicle (SV) is mediated by estrogen receptor a (ERa), which alters expression of
seminal vesicle secretory protein IV (Svs4) and lactoferrin (Ltf) genes.
OBJECTIVES: We examined a role for nuclear receptor activity in association with 
DNA methylation and altered gene expression.
METHODS: We used the neonatal DES exposure mouse model to examine DNA methylation
patterns via bisulfite conversion sequencing in SVs of wild-type (WT) and
ERa-knockout (aERKO) mice.
RESULTS: The DNA methylation status at four specific CpGs (-160, -237, -306, and 
-367) in the Svs4 gene promoter changed during mouse development from methylated 
to unmethylated, and DES prevented this change at 10 weeks of age in WT SV. At
two specific CpGs (-449 and -459) of the Ltf gene promoter, DES altered the
methylation status from methylated to unmethylated. Alterations in DNA
methylation of Svs4 and Ltf were not observed in aERKO SVs, suggesting that
changes of methylation status at these CpGs are ERa dependent. The methylation
status was associated with the level of gene expression. In addition, gene
expression of three epigenetic modifiers-DNMT3A, MBD2, and HDAC2-increased in the
SV of DES-exposed WT mice.
CONCLUSION: DES-induced hormonal toxicity resulted from altered gene expression
of Svs4 and Ltf associated with changes in DNA methylation that were mediated by 
ERa. Alterations in gene expression of DNMT3A, MBD2, and HDAC2 in DES-exposed
male mice may be involved in mediating the changes in methylation status in the
SV.
CITATION: Li Y, Hamilton KJ, Lai AY, Burns KA, Li L, Wade PA, Korach KS. 2014.
Diethylstilbestrol (DES)-stimulated hormonal toxicity is mediated by ERa
alteration of target gene methylation patterns and epigenetic modifiers (DNMT3A, 
MBD2, and HDAC2) in the mouse seminal vesicle. Environ Health Perspect
122:262-268; http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307351.

PMCID: PMC3948038
PMID: 24316720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Korean J Intern Med. 2013 Nov;28(6):708-14. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2013.28.6.708. Epub
2013 Oct 29.

A polymorphism in the histone deacetylase 1 gene is associated with the response 
to corticosteroids in asthmatics.

Kim MH(1), Kim SH, Kim YK, Hong SJ, Min KU, Cho SH, Park HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ; Institute of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Seoul
National University Medical Research Center, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Recent investigations suggest that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and HDAC2 may be target molecules to predict therapeutic responses to
corticosteroids. We evaluated the effects of variation in HDAC1 and HDAC2 on the 
response to corticosteroids in asthmatics.
METHODS: Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected after
resequencing HDAC1 and HDAC2. For the first analysis, we evaluated the
association between those SNPs and asthma severity in 477 asthmatics. For the
second analysis, we evaluated the effects of these SNPs on lung function
improvements in response to corticosteroid treatment in 35 independent adult
asthmatics and 70 childhood asthmatics.
RESULTS: We found that one SNP in HDAC1 (rs1741981) was significantly related to 
asthma severity in a recessive model (corrected p = 0.036). Adult asthmatics who 
were homozygous for the minor allele of rs1741981 showed significantly lower %
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (%FEV1) increases in response to systemic
corticosteroids treatment compared with the heterozygotes or those homozygous for
the major allele (12.7% ± 7.2% vs. 37.4% ± 33.7%, p = 0.018). Similarly,
childhood asthmatics who were homozygous for the minor allele of rs1741981 showed
significantly lower %FEV1 increases in response to inhaled corticosteroid
treatment compared with the heterozygotes or those homozygous for the major
allele (14.1% ± 5.9% vs. 19.4% ± 8.9%, p = 0.035).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated that rs1741981 in HDAC1 was
significantly associated with the response to corticosteroid treatment in
asthmatics.

PMCID: PMC3846997
PMID: 24307847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Acta Virol. 2013;57(4):462-6.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress coxsackievirus B3 growth in vitro and
myocarditis induced in mice.

Shim SH, Park JH, Ye MB, Nam JH.

Clinical importance of myocarditis, predominantly caused by coxsackievirus B3
(CVB3), is recently rising. However, a detailed mechanism of pathogenesis of CVB3
myocarditis still needs to be clarified. Recently, it has been reported that
histone modifications including acetylation are involved in coxsackievirus
replication. To examine whether the CVB3 replication requires histone
acetylation, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors were employed. We found that
the HDAC2 activity increased in virus-infected cells at 12 hrs p.i. and that HDAC
inhibitors suppressed the virus replication in vitro. This suggests that the
HDAC2 activity may be required for the virus replication. Eventually, a HDAC
inhibitor trichostatin A protected against CVB3-induced myocardial injury in
vivo. Our results suggest that HDAC may be a novel therapeutic target for
treating viral myocarditis.KEYWORDS: coxsackievirus B3; histone
acetyltransferase; histone deacetylase; HDAC inhibitors, trichostatin A;
apicidin; valproic acid; shRNA; myocarditis; mouse.

PMID: 24294962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Surg Res. 2014 Apr;187(2):559-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2013.10.050. Epub 2013 Oct
29.

Inhibition of histone deacetylases protects septic mice from lung and splenic
apoptosis.

Takebe M(1), Oishi H(2), Taguchi K(3), Aoki Y(2), Takashina M(3), Tomita K(3),
Yokoo H(3), Takano Y(4), Yamazaki M(2), Hattori Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan; Department of
Anesthesiology, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Graduate
School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama,
Japan. (3)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Graduate School of
Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.
(4)Kanagawa Cancer Center Research Institute, Yokohama, Japan. (5)Department of
Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan. Electronic address:
yhattori@med.u-toyama.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic programming, dynamically regulated by histone acetylation,
may play a key role in the pathophysiology of sepsis. We examined whether histone
deacetylase (HDAC) can contribute to sepsis-associated inflammation and
apoptosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Polymicrobial sepsis was induced by cecal ligation and
puncture (CLP) in BALB/c mice. An intraperitoneal injection of CG200745
(10 mg/kg), a novel broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitor, or valproic acid (500 mg/kg), 
a predominant inhibitor of class I HDACs, was given 3 h before surgery.
RESULTS: HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 protein levels were decreased in lungs after
CLP. Furthermore, CLP-induced sepsis increased both histone H3 and H4 acetylation
levels in lungs. When CG200745 was given, apoptosis induction was strongly
suppressed in lungs and spleens of septic mice. This antiapoptotic effect of
CG200745 was not accompanied by upregulation of antiapoptotic and downregulation 
of proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member proteins. Treatment with CG200745 failed to
inhibit elevated levels of serum cytokines and prevent lung inflammation in
septic mice. Valproic acid also showed antiapoptotic but not anti-inflammatory
effects in septic mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings imply that HDAC inhibitors are a unique agent to
prevent cell apoptosis in sepsis at their doses that do not improve inflammatory 
features, indicating that septic inflammation and apoptosis may not necessarily
be essential for one another's existence. This study also represents the first
report that CLP-induced sepsis downregulates HDACs. Nevertheless, the data with
HDAC inhibitors suggest that imbalance in histone acetylation may play a
contributory role in expression or repression of genes involved in septic cell
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24290430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Pharmacopuncture. 2013 Dec;16(4):7-13. doi: 10.3831/KPI.2013.16.024.

Evidence of an Epigenetic Modification in Cell-cycle Arrest Caused by the Use of 
Ultra-highly-diluted Gonolobus Condurango Extract.

Bishayee K(1), Sikdar S(1), Khuda-Bukhsh AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology,
University of Kalyani, Kalyani, India.

OBJECTIVES: Whether the ultra-highly-diluted remedies used in homeopathy can
effectively bring about modulations of gene expressions through
acetylation/deacetylation of histones has not been explored. Therefore, in this
study, we pointedly checked if the homeopathically-diluted anti-cancer remedy
Condurango 30C (ethanolic extract of Gonolobus condurango diluted 10(-60) times) 
was capable of arresting the cell cycles in cervical cancer cells HeLa by
triggering an epigenetic modification through modulation of the activity of the
key enzyme histone deacetylase 2 vis-a-vis the succussed alcohol (placebo)
control.
METHODS: We checked the activity of different signal proteins (like p21(WAF),
p53, Akt, STAT3) related to deacetylation, cell growth and differentiation by
western blotting and analyzed cell-cycle arrest, if any, by fluorescence
activated cell sorting. After viability assays had been performed with Condurango
30C and with a placebo, the activities of histone de-acetylase (HDAC) enzymes 1
and 2 were measured colorimetrically.
RESULTS: While Condurango 30C induced cytotoxicity in HeLa cells in vitro and
reduced HDAC2 activity quite strikingly, it apparently did not alter the HDAC1
enzyme; the placebo had no or negligible cytotoxicity against HeLa cells and
could not alter either the HDAC 1 or 2 activity. Data on p21(WAF), p53, Akt, and 
STAT3 activities and a cell-cycle analysis revealed a reduction in DNA synthesis 
and G1-phase cell-cycle arrest when Condurango 30C was used at a 2% dose.
CONCLUSION: Condurango 30C appeared to trigger key epigenetic events of gene
modulation in effectively combating cancer cells, which the placebo was unable to
do.

PMCID: PMC4331975
PMID: 25780677  [PubMed]


354. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2014 Mar;387(3):271-80. doi:
10.1007/s00210-013-0942-4. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Histone acetylation and arachidonic acid cytotoxicity in HepG2 cells
overexpressing CYP2E1.

Holownia A(1), Mroz RM, Wielgat P, Jakubow P, Jablonski J, Sulek J, Braszko JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok,
Waszyngtona 15A, 15-274, Bialystok, Poland, Holow_sinai@hotmail.com.

The aim of this work was to assess the role of ethanol-derived acetate and
acetate-mediated histone acetylation in arachidonic acid-induced stress in HepG2 
cells and cells overexpressing CYP2E1. Cells were grown for 7 days with 1 mM
sodium acetate or 100 mM ethanol; their acetylated histone proteins and histone
deacetylase 2 expression was quantified using Western blot. Ethanol- or
acetate-pretreated cells were also treated for 24 h with 60 µM arachidonic acid
to induce oxidative stress. Cytotoxicity was estimated by lactate dehydrogenase
release, 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2] 2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide test, and by
DNA damage, while oxidative stress was quantified using dichlorofluorescein
diacetate. Cells grown with ethanol or acetate had increased acetylated histone
H3 levels in both cell types and elevated acetylated histone H4 levels in cells
overexpressing CYP2E1 but not in naïve cells. In cells overexpressing CYP2E1
grown with ethanol, expression of histone deacetylase 2 was reduced by about 40
%. Arachidonic acid altered cell proliferation and was cytotoxic mostly to cells 
engineered to overexpress CYP2E1 but both effects were significantly lower in
cells pretreated with ethanol or acetate. Cytotoxicity was also significantly
decreased by 4-methylpyrazole--a CYP2E1 inhibitor and by trichostatin--an
inhibitor of histone deacetylases. In cells pretreated with acetate or ethanol,
the oxidative stress induced by arachidonic acid was also significantly lower.
Our data indicate that histone hyperacetylation may in some extent protect the
cells against oxidative stress. It is possible that acetate may act as an
antioxidant at histone level. This mechanism may be relevant to alcohol-induced
liver injury.

PMCID: PMC3927057
PMID: 24287576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. RSC Adv. 2013 Nov 21;3(43). doi: 10.1039/C3RA43249A.

Discovery of a Pair of Diastereomers as Potent HDACs Inhibitors: Determination of
Absolute Configuration, Biological Activity Comparison and Computational Study.

Zhang Y(1), Inks ES, Zhu M, Chou CJ, Fang H, Li M, Shen Y, Yi F, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong
University, Ji'nan, Shandong, 250012, P. R. China.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are still the focus of epigenetic
modulator development due to their effective intervention in many pathological
processes. In our previous research, a potent HDACi was designed, synthesized and
validated as a promising antitumor candidate named ZYJ-34c. Enlarged scale
synthesis of ZYJ-34c for further detailed research was hindered by the occurrence
of a by-product, which was identified as an isomer of ZYJ-34c by HRMS and (1)H
NMR. Subsequent synthesis route modification and optimization revealed that these
two isomers were a pair of epimers and their absolute configurations could be
directly determined by our optimized synthesis routes, through which each
optically pure epimer could be stereoselectively synthesized, respectively. Based
on these results, we concluded that our previously reported absolute
configuration of ZYJ-34c was incorrect. It is worth noting that the epimer of
ZYJ-34c exhibited more potent HDACs inhibition and both in vitro and in vivo
antitumor activities, and moreover, their different HDACs inhibitory activities
could be rationalized by computational simulations of their binding modes in
HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC3836556
PMID: 24273644  [PubMed]


356. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 12;8(11):e79201. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079201.
eCollection 2013.

Wogonin has multiple anti-cancer effects by regulating c-Myc/SKP2/Fbw7a and
HDAC1/HDAC2 pathways and inducing apoptosis in human lung adenocarcinoma cell
line A549.

Chen XM(1), Bai Y, Zhong YJ, Xie XL, Long HW, Yang YY, Wu SG, Jia Q, Wang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, PR China.

Wogonin is a plant monoflavonoid which has been reported to inhibit cell growth
and/or induce apoptosis in various tumors. The present study examined the
apoptosis-inducing activity and underlying mechanism of action of wogonin in A549
cells. The results showed that wogonin was a potent inhibitor of the viability of
A549 cells. Apoptotic protein changes detected after exposure to wogonin included
decreased XIAP and Mcl-1 expression, increased cleaved-PARP expression and
increased release of AIF and cytochrome C. Western blot analysis showed that the 
activity of c-Myc/Skp2 and HDAC1/HDAC2 pathways, which play important roles in
tumor progress, was decreased. Quantitative PCR identified increased levels of
c-Myc mRNA and decreased levels of its protein. Protein levels of Fbw7a, GSK3ß
and Thr58-Myc, which are involved in c-Myc ubiquitin-dependent degradation, were 
also analyzed. After exposure to wogonin, Fbw7a and GSK3ß expression decreased
and Thr58-Myc expression increased. However, MG132 was unable to prevent c-Myc
degradation. The present results suggest that wogonin has multiple anti-cancer
effects associated with degradation of c-Myc, SKP2, HDAC1 and HDAC2. Its ability 
to induce apoptosis independently of Fbw7a suggests a possible use in
drug-resistance cancer related to Fbw7 deficiency. Further studies are needed to 
determine which pathways are related to c-Myc and Fbw7a reversal and whether
Thr58 phosphorylation of c-Myc is dependent on GSK3ß.

PMCID: PMC3827163
PMID: 24265759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. EMBO J. 2013 Dec 11;32(24):3176-91. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.243. Epub 2013 Nov
15.

Divergent roles of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the regulation of epidermal development and
tumorigenesis.

Winter M(1), Moser MA, Meunier D, Fischer C, Machat G, Mattes K, Lichtenberger
BM, Brunmeir R, Weissmann S, Murko C, Humer C, Meischel T, Brosch G, Matthias P, 
Sibilia M, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Vienna
Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 remove acetyl moieties from lysine
residues of histones and other proteins and are important regulators of gene
expression. By deleting different combinations of Hdac1 and Hdac2 alleles in the 
epidermis, we reveal a dosage-dependent effect of HDAC1/HDAC2 activity on
epidermal proliferation and differentiation. Conditional ablation of either HDAC1
or HDAC2 in the epidermis leads to no obvious phenotype due to compensation by
the upregulated paralogue. Strikingly, deletion of a single Hdac2 allele in HDAC1
knockout mice results in severe epidermal defects, including alopecia,
hyperkeratosis, hyperproliferation and spontaneous tumour formation. These mice
display impaired Sin3A co-repressor complex function, increased levels of c-Myc
protein, p53 expression and apoptosis in hair follicles (HFs) and misregulation
of HF bulge stem cells. Surprisingly, ablation of HDAC1 but not HDAC2 in a skin
tumour model leads to accelerated tumour development. Our data reveal a crucial
function of HDAC1/HDAC2 in the control of lineage specificity and a novel role of
HDAC1 as a tumour suppressor in the epidermis.

PMCID: PMC3981143
PMID: 24240174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Mar;111(3):321-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.10.016. Epub
2013 Nov 2.

Holocarboxylase synthetase acts as a biotin-independent transcriptional repressor
interacting with HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC7.

Trujillo-Gonzalez I(1), Cervantes-Roldan R(1), Gonzalez-Noriega A(2), Michalak
C(2), Reyes-Carmona S(1), Barrios-Garcia T(1), Meneses-Morales I(1), Leon-Del-Rio
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Investigación de Cáncer de Mama, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico;
Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones 
Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Biología Celular, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico. (3)Programa
de Investigación de Cáncer de Mama, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico; Departamento 
de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico. Electronic
address: leon@biomedicas.unam.mx.

Comment in
    Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Mar;111(3):305-6.

In human cells, HCS catalyzes the biotinylation of biotin-dependent carboxylases 
and mediates the transcriptional control of genes involved in biotin metabolism
through the activation of a cGMP-dependent signal transduction pathway. HCS also 
targets to the cell nucleus in association with lamin-B suggesting additional
gene regulatory functions. Studies from our laboratory in Drosophila melanogaster
showed that nuclear HCS is associated with heterochromatin bands enriched with
the transcriptionally repressive mark histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 9.
Further, HCS was shown to be recruited to the core promoter of the
transcriptionally inactive hsp70 gene suggesting that it may participate in the
repression of gene expression, although the mechanism involved remained elusive. 
In this work, we expressed HCS as a fusion protein with the DNA-binding domain of
GAL4 to evaluate its effect on the transcription of a luciferase reporter gene.
We show that HCS possesses transcriptional repressor activity in HepG2 cells. The
transcriptional function of HCS was shown by in vitro pull down and in vivo
co-immunoprecipitation assays to depend on its interaction with the histone
deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC7. We show further that HCS interaction with
HDACs and its function in transcriptional repression is not affected by mutations
impairing its biotin-ligase activity. We propose that nuclear HCS mediates events
of transcriptional repression through a biotin-independent mechanism that
involves its interaction with chromatin-modifying protein complexes that include 
histone deacetylases.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24239178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Jul 1;76(1):47-56. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.09.034.
Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Methamphetamine downregulates striatal glutamate receptors via diverse epigenetic
mechanisms.

Jayanthi S(1), McCoy MT(1), Chen B(2), Britt JP(2), Kourrich S(2), Yau HJ(2),
Ladenheim B(1), Krasnova IN(1), Bonci A(2), Cadet JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, US Department of Health and Human
Services/National Institutes of Health/National Institute on Drug
Abuse/Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD. (2)Synaptic Plasticity Section,
US Department of Health and Human Services/National Institutes of Health/National
Institute on Drug Abuse/Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD. (3)Molecular 
Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, US Department of Health and Human
Services/National Institutes of Health/National Institute on Drug
Abuse/Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD. Electronic address:
jcadet@intra.nida.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Chronic methamphetamine (METH) exposure causes neuroadaptations at
glutamatergic synapses.
METHODS: To identify the METH-induced epigenetic underpinnings of these
neuroadaptations, we injected increasing METH doses to rats for 2 weeks and
measured striatal glutamate receptor expression. We then quantified the effects
of METH exposure on histone acetylation. We also measured METH-induced changes in
DNA methylation and DNA hydroxymethylation.
RESULTS: Chronic METH decreased transcript and protein expression of GluA1 and
GluA2 alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor (AMPAR) 
and GluN1 N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunits. These changes were associated
with altered electrophysiological glutamatergic responses in striatal neurons.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation-polymerase chain reaction revealed that METH
decreased enrichment of acetylated histone H4 on GluA1, GluA2, and GluN1
promoters. Methamphetamine exposure also increased repressor element-1 silencing 
transcription factor (REST) corepressor 1, methylated CpG binding protein 2, and 
histone deacetylase 2 enrichment, but not of sirtuin 1 or sirtuin 2, onto GluA1
and GluA2 gene sequences. Moreover, METH caused interactions of REST corepressor 
1 and methylated CpG binding protein 2 with histone deacetylase 2 and of REST
with histone deacetylase 1. Surprisingly, methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and 
hydroxymethylated DNA immunoprecipitation-polymerase chain reaction revealed
METH-induced decreased enrichment of 5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
at GluA1 and GluA2 promoter sequences. Importantly, the histone deacetylase
inhibitor, valproic acid, blocked METH-induced decreased expression of AMPAR and 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunits. Finally, valproic acid also attenuated
METH-induced decrease H4K16Ac recruitment on AMPAR gene sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that histone H4 hypoacetylation may be
the main determinant of METH-induced decreased striatal glutamate receptor
expression.

Published by Society of Biological Psychiatry on behalf of Society of Biological 
Psychiatry.

PMCID: PMC3989474
PMID: 24239129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(3):1656-70. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1134. Epub 2013
Nov 14.

RNA-dependent dynamic histone acetylation regulates MCL1 alternative splicing.

Khan DH(1), Gonzalez C, Cooper C, Sun JM, Chen HY, Healy S, Xu W, Smith KT,
Workman JL, Leygue E, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba,
Manitoba Institute of Child Health, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 3P4, Canada,
Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba, Manitoba
Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E0V9, Canada and Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) and lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) catalyze
dynamic histone acetylation at regulatory and coding regions of transcribed
genes. Highly phosphorylated HDAC2 is recruited within corepressor complexes to
regulatory regions, while the nonphosphorylated form is associated with the gene 
body. In this study, we characterized the nonphosphorylated HDAC2 complexes
recruited to the transcribed gene body and explored the function of
HDAC-complex-mediated dynamic histone acetylation. HDAC1 and 2 were
coimmunoprecipitated with several splicing factors, including
serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1) which has roles in alternative
splicing. The co-chromatin immunoprecipitation of HDAC1/2 and SRSF1 to the gene
body was RNA-dependent. Inhibition of HDAC activity and knockdown of HDAC1, HDAC2
or SRSF1 showed that these proteins were involved in alternative splicing of
MCL1. HDAC1/2 and KAT2B were associated with nascent pre-mRNA in general and with
MCL1 pre-mRNA specifically. Inhibition of HDAC activity increased the occupancy
of KAT2B and acetylation of H3 and H4 of the H3K4 methylated alternative MCL1
exon 2 nucleosome. Thus, nonphosphorylated HDAC1/2 is recruited to pre-mRNA by
splicing factors to act at the RNA level with KAT2B and other KATs to catalyze
dynamic histone acetylation of the MCL1 alternative exon and alter the splicing
of MCL1 pre-mRNA.

PMCID: PMC3919583
PMID: 24234443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Development. 2013 Dec;140(24):4947-58. doi: 10.1242/dev.097642. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Insm1 controls development of pituitary endocrine cells and requires a SNAG
domain for function and for recruitment of histone-modifying factors.

Welcker JE(1), Hernandez-Miranda LR, Paul FE, Jia S, Ivanov A, Selbach M,
Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology/Signal Transduction Group, Max-Delbrück-Center for
Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany.

The Insm1 gene encodes a zinc finger factor expressed in many endocrine organs.
We show here that Insm1 is required for differentiation of all endocrine cells in
the pituitary. Thus, in Insm1 mutant mice, hormones characteristic of the
different pituitary cell types (thyroid-stimulating hormone, follicle-stimulating
hormone, melanocyte-stimulating hormone, adrenocorticotrope hormone, growth
hormone and prolactin) are absent or produced at markedly reduced levels. This
differentiation deficit is accompanied by upregulated expression of components of
the Notch signaling pathway, and by prolonged expression of progenitor markers,
such as Sox2. Furthermore, skeletal muscle-specific genes are ectopically
expressed in endocrine cells, indicating that Insm1 participates in the
repression of an inappropriate gene expression program. Because Insm1 is also
essential for differentiation of endocrine cells in the pancreas, intestine and
adrenal gland, it is emerging as a transcription factor that acts in a
pan-endocrine manner. The Insm1 factor contains a SNAG domain at its N-terminus, 
and we show here that the SNAG domain recruits histone-modifying factors (Kdm1a, 
Hdac1/2 and Rcor1-3) and other proteins implicated in transcriptional regulation 
(Hmg20a/b and Gse1). Deletion of sequences encoding the SNAG domain in mice
disrupted differentiation of pituitary endocrine cells, and resulted in an
upregulated expression of components of the Notch signaling pathway and ectopic
expression of skeletal muscle-specific genes. Our work demonstrates that Insm1
acts in the epigenetic and transcriptional network that controls differentiation 
of endocrine cells in the anterior pituitary gland, and that it requires the SNAG
domain to exert this function in vivo.

PMID: 24227653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Jan;348(1):59-68. doi: 10.1124/jpet.113.208645. Epub
2013 Nov 11.

Chemopreventive effects of an HDAC2-selective inhibitor on rat colon
carcinogenesis and APCmin/+ mouse intestinal tumorigenesis.

Ravillah D(1), Mohammed A, Qian L, Brewer M, Zhang Y, Biddick L, Steele VE, Rao
CV.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Oncology Section, Department of Medicine, Center for Cancer
Prevention and Drug Development, PCS Oklahoma Cancer Center, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (D.R., A.M., L.Q., M.B.,
Y.Z., L.B., C.V.R.); and Division of Cancer Prevention, Chemoprevention Agent
Development Research Group, National Institutes of Health National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland (V.E.S.).

Epigenetic modulators, particularly histone deacetylases (HDACs), are valid
targets for cancer prevention and therapy. Recent studies report that HDAC2
overexpression is associated with colon tumor progression and is a potential
target for colon cancer prevention. This study tested chemopreventive and
dose-response effects of Ohio State University HDAC42 (OSU-HDAC42), a selective
HDAC2 inhibitor, using a rat colon carcinogenesis model to assess aberrant crypt 
foci inhibition and a familial adenomatous polyposis model to assess intestinal
tumor inhibition. Colonic aberrant crypt foci were induced by azoxymethane (AOM) 
(15 mg/kg body weight, once-weekly subcutaneous injections at 8 and 9 weeks age).
One week after AOM treatment, groups of rats were fed an AIN-76A diet containing 
0, 75, 150, and 300 ppm OSU-HDAC42 for 8 weeks, and colonic aberrant crypt foci
were evaluated. To assess the inhibitory effect of OSU-HDAC42 on small-intestinal
polyps and colon tumor growth, 6-week-old male C57Bl/6J-APC(min/+)mice were fed
an AIN-76A diet containing 150 ppm OSU-HADC42 or 300 ppm pan-HDAC inhibitor
suberoylanilide hydroxyamic acid (SAHA) for 80 days. Our results demonstrate that
dietary OSU-HDAC42 produced dose-dependent inhibition of AOM-induced colonic
aberrant crypt foci formation (13-50%; P < 0.01 to < 0.0001) and reduced multiple
crypts with = 4 crypts per focus (25-57%; P < 0.01 to < 0.0001) in F344 rats. Our
findings show that 150 ppm OSU-HDAC42 significantly inhibited small-intestinal
polyps (>46%; P < 0.001), with polyp size measuring >1 mm (P < 0.001), and colon 
tumors (>26%) in APC(min/+)mice, whereas 300 ppm SAHA showed nonsignificant
inhibition. Mice fed 150 ppm OSU-HDAC42 had significantly decreased HDAC2,
proliferating cell nuclear antigen, B cell lymphoma 2, cyclin-dependent kinase 2,
and cell division cycle homolog 25C expression levels and increased p53
expression levels. These observations demonstrate the chemopreventive efficacy of
OSU-HDAC42 against chemically induced and polyposis models of intestinal
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3868878
PMID: 24218540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Jan 13;224(2):225-32. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.10.035. Epub 
2013 Nov 5.

Valproic acid, but not levetiracetam, selectively decreases HDAC7 and HDAC2
expression in human ovarian cancer cells.

Kwiecinska P(1), Wróbel A, Taubøll E, Gregoraszczuk EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Toxicology of Reproduction, Chair of Animal
Physiology, Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland.
Electronic address: patrycja.kwiecinska@uj.edu.pl.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are often overexpressed in cancer cells, leading to 
altered expression and activity of numerous proteins involved in carcinogenesis. 
Recent evidence suggests that expression of class I HDACs is increased in ovarian
carcinomas and plays a significant role in carcinogenesis and resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents. Two compounds, valproic acid (VPA) and levetiracetam
(LEV), exhibit HDAC inhibitor (HDACI) activity in various cell types, but data
concerning their activity in ovarian cancer are lacking. Here we compared the
effects of VPA and LEV as HDACIs, using a human ovarian cancer cell line,
OVCAR-3. Cells were cultured with VPA or LEV at concentrations between 1 and 10
mM for 1-24h. HDAC activity was determined by fluorometric assay and confirmed by
western blotting. Expression of HDAC genes was determined by real-time PCR and
HDAC proteins expression was evaluated by western blotting. Additionally, we used
high-performance liquid chromatography to determine whether OVCAR-3 cells can
metabolize LEV to its major metabolite, 2-pyrrolidinone-n-butyric acid (PBA),
which might exert HDACI activity. LEV, however, had no apparent effect on HDAC
activity, or gene and protein expression. The OVCAR-3 cell line was able to
metabolize LEV to PBA, but the effect was small. Our observations suggest that
VPA should be considered as a possible adjunctive drug in ovarian cancer
treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24200999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. AIDS. 2013 Nov 28;27(18):2853-62. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000000067.

Entinostat is a histone deacetylase inhibitor selective for class 1 histone
deacetylases and activates HIV production from latently infected primary T cells.

Wightman F(1), Lu HK, Solomon AE, Saleh S, Harman AN, Cunningham AL, Gray L,
Churchill M, Cameron PU, Dear AE, Lewin SR.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Infectious Diseases, Monash University bCentre for Virology,
Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Victoria cWestmead Millennium Research Institute,
Westmead, New South Wales dDepartment of Biochemistry, Monash University, Clayton
eInfectious Diseases Unit, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne fAustralian Centre for
Blood Diseases, Department of Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

OBJECTIVES: To compare the potency, toxicity and mechanism of action of multiple 
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) in activating HIV production from latency.
DESIGN: In-vitro analysis of HDACi in a primary T-cell model of HIV latency and
latently infected cell lines.
METHODS: Latently infected chemokine ligand 19 (CCL19)-treated CD4<U+207A> T cells and
the latently infected cell lines ACH2 and J-Lat were treated with a panel of
HDACi, including entinostat, vorinostat, panonbinostat and MCT3. Viral production
and cell viability were compared. Expression of cellular HDACs was measured by
western blot and PCR. Association of HDACs with the HIV long-terminal repeat
(LTR) using latently infected CCL19-treated primary CD4<U+207A> T cells in the presence 
and absence of specific HDACi was determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP).
RESULTS: We demonstrated considerable variation in the potency and toxicity of
HDACi in latently infected primary CD4<U+207A> T cells and cell lines. All HDACi tested 
activated HIV production in latently infected primary T cells with greatest
potency demonstrated with entinostat and vorinostat and greatest toxicity with
panobinostat. Following the addition of HDACi in vitro, there were no changes in 
markers of T-cell activation or expression of the HIV coreceptors chemokine
(C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4) or chemokine (C-C motif) receptor type 5 (CCR5).
ChIP analysis of latently infected CCL19-treated primary CD4<U+207A> T cells showed
binding by HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 to the LTR with removal of HDAC1 and HDAC2
following treatment with the HDACi vorinostat and HDAC1 only following treatment 
with entinostat.
CONCLUSION: The HDACi entinostat, selective for inhibition of class I HDACs,
induced virus expression in latently infected primary CD4<U+207A> T cells making this
compound an attractive novel option for future clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4079759
PMID: 24189584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 6;288(49):35534-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.510669. Epub 2013
Nov 4.

Protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) inhibition induces lymphoma cell
death through reactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor pathway and
polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) silencing.

Chung J(1), Karkhanis V, Tae S, Yan F, Smith P, Ayers LW, Agostinelli C, Pileri
S, Denis GV, Baiocchi RA, Sif S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and.

Epigenetic regulation mediated by lysine- and arginine-specific enzymes plays an 
essential role in tumorigenesis, and enhanced expression of the type II protein
arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 as well as the polycomb repressor complex PRC2
has been associated with increased cell proliferation and survival. Here, we show
that PRMT5 is overexpressed in three different types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell
lines and clinical samples as well as in mouse primary lymphoma cells and that it
up-regulates PRC2 expression through inactivation of the retinoblastoma proteins 
RB1 and RBL2. Although PRMT5 epigenetically controls RBL2 expression, it
indirectly promotes RB1 phosphorylation through enhanced cyclin D1 expression.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that PRMT5 knockdown in non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell
lines and mouse primary lymphoma cells leads to RBL2 derepression and RB1
reactivation, which in turn inhibit PRC2 expression and trigger derepression of
its CASP10, DAP1, HOXA5, and HRK pro-apoptotic target genes. We also show that
reduced PRMT5 expression leads to cyclin D1 transcriptional repression via loss
of TP53K372 methylation, which results in decreased BCL3 expression and enhanced 
recruitment of NF-<U+03BA>B p52-HDAC1 repressor complexes to the cyclin D1 promoter.
These findings indicate that PRMT5 is a master epigenetic regulator that governs 
expression of its own target genes and those regulated by PRC2 and that its
inhibition could offer a promising therapeutic strategy for lymphoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3853299
PMID: 24189068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Eur J Med Chem. 2013;70:477-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.10.045. Epub 2013 Oct 
23.

Novel isatin-based hydroxamic acids as histone deacetylase inhibitors and
antitumor agents.

Nam NH(1), Huong TL, Dung do TM, Dung PT, Oanh DT, Quyen D, Thao le T, Park SH,
Kim KR, Han BW, Yun J, Kang JS, Kim Y, Han SB.

Author information: 
(1)Hanoi University of Pharmacy, 13-15 Le Thanh Tong, Hanoi, Viet Nam. Electronic
address: namnh@hup.edu.vn.

Accumulated clinical studies have demonstrated that histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors show great potential for the treatment of cancer. SAHA (Vorinostat,
trade name Zolinza) was approved by the FDA in 2006 for the treatment of the
cutaneous manifestations of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. As a continuity of our
ongoing effort to identify novel small molecules targeting these important
enzymes, we designed and synthesized two series of isatin-3'-oxime- and
isatin-3'-methoxime-based hydroxamic acids (3a-g and 6a-g) as analogues of SAHA. 
Generally in both series it was found that, compounds bearing no substituent or
with 5'-F, 5'-Cl, 7'-Cl substitutents on the isatin moiety exhibited good
inhibition against histone-H3 and histone-H4 deacetylation at the concentrations 
of 1 µM, as evaluated by Western Blot assay. The compounds also displayed potent 
cytotoxicity against five cancer cell lines with IC50 values of as low as 0.08
µM, more than 45-fold lower than that of SAHA. Docking study performed with
selected compounds 3a and 6a revealed that these compounds bound to HDAC8 with
higher affinities compared to SAHA. Compounds 3a and 6a also bound to HDAC2 at
the binding site with high binding affinity. These findings should encourage
further elaboration with the isatin moiety to produce more potent HDAC inhibitors
with potential anticancer activity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24185378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cell Reprogram. 2013 Dec;15(6):531-42. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0018. Epub 2013 Nov
1.

Effect of histone deacetylase inhibitor valproic acid treatment on donor cell
growth characteristics, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and handmade cloned bovine 
embryo production efficiency.

Selokar NL(1), St John L, Revay T, King WA, Singla SK, Madan P.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College , Guelph
Canada, N1G 2W1.

In this study, we tested the effects of valproic acid (VPA), a known histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), on the growth characteristics, apoptosis, and cell
cycle stages distribution of donor cells, as well as cloning efficiency, embryo
development, and histone methylation. Our results showed that treatment of donor 
cells with VPA (2.5<U+2009>mM, 5.0<U+2009>mM, 7.5<U+2009>mM, or 10<U+2009>mM) for 24<U+2009>h resulted in altered
cell proliferation, extent of apoptosis and necrosis, and cell cycle stage
distribution, whereas no changes in cell viability and chromosomal complements
were observed. Measurement of relative gene expression using real-time PCR of a
few developmentally important genes in treated donor cells showed decreased
expression of HDAC1 and increased expression of BAX (p<0.05). No change in
relative expression of HDAC2 and Bcl2 was noticed. Treatment of donor cells with 
VPA for 24<U+2009>h before electrofusion significantly (p<0.05) increased the blastocyst
formation rate of somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) embryos compared to the
control embryos. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL)-positive nuclei in SCNT blastocysts derived from VPA-treated donor cells 
were significantly decreased compared to the control blastocysts (p<0.05).
Immunolocalization studies revealed that the levels of histone H3 at lysine 9
(H3K9me3) were lower in VPA-treated donor cells derived cloned blastocysts than
nontreated cloned embryos, and was at the level of in vitro fertilization (IVF)
counterparts, although no effects of treatments were found in donor cells. Our
study demonstrates that the use of VPA in SCNT has been beneficial for efficient 
reprogramming of donor cells. Its effect on histone methylation in cloned embryos
correlates with their developmental potential and may be a useful epigenetic
marker to predict the efficiency of SCNT.

PMID: 24180742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Chromosoma. 2014 Mar;123(1-2):67-78. doi: 10.1007/s00412-013-0441-x. Epub 2013
Oct 30.

Transcription and beyond: the role of mammalian class I lysine deacetylases.

Moser MA(1), Hagelkruys A, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/2, 1030, Vienna, Austria.

The Rpd3-like members of the class I lysine deacetylase family are important
regulators of chromatin structure and gene expression and have pivotal functions 
in the control of proliferation, differentiation and development. The highly
related class I deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 have partially overlapping but also 
isoform-specific roles in diverse biological processes, whereas HDAC3 and HDAC8
have unique functions. This review describes the role of class I KDACs in the
regulation of transcription as well as their non-transcriptional functions, in
particular their contributions to splicing, mitosis/meiosis, replication and DNA 
repair. During the past years, a number of mouse loss-of-function studies
provided new insights into the individual roles of class I deacetylases in cell
cycle control, differentiation and tumorigenesis. Simultaneous ablation of HDAC1 
and HDAC2 or single deletion of Hdac3 severely impairs cell cycle progression in 
all proliferating cell types indicating that these class I deacetylases are
promising targets for small molecule inhibitors as anti-tumor drugs.

PMCID: PMC3967066
PMID: 24170248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Oncogenesis. 2013 Oct 28;2:e77. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.40.

The histone variant MacroH2A regulates Ca(2+) influx through TRPC3 and TRPC6
channels.

Kim JM(1), Heo K, Choi J, Kim K, An W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The histone variant macroH2A replaces canonical H2A in the designated region of
chromatin where its incorporation has the potential to establish a functionally
distinct chromatin domain. The transient receptor potential canonical (TRPC)
channels are a family of Ca(2+)-permeable cationic channels controlling changes
in the cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration. The proper regulation of Trpc gene
expression requires chromatin remodeling, but little is known about the nature of
these regulatory processes. Here, we show that macroH2A1 represses two Trpc
family genes, Trpc3 and Trpc6, and attenuates Ca(2+)-dependent proliferative
responses in bladder cancer cells. MacroH2A1 recruits histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and HDAC2 to facilitate its persistent action, resulting in a compromise 
of histone acetylation across the Trpc3 and Trpc6 loci. Further, macroH2A1
depletion augments histone acetylation and Ca(2+) influx, leading to increased
cell growth and invasion. Our data provide new insights into TRPC3/TRPC6-mediated
Ca(2+) signaling and indicate a central role for macroH2A1 in regulating
transcriptional competence of Trpc3 and Trpc6 genes.

PMCID: PMC3816217
PMID: 24165580  [PubMed]


370. J Nat Prod. 2013 Nov 22;76(11):2026-33. doi: 10.1021/np400198r. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Santacruzamate A, a potent and selective histone deacetylase inhibitor from the
Panamanian marine cyanobacterium cf. Symploca sp.

Pavlik CM(1), Wong CY, Ononye S, Lopez DD, Engene N, McPhail KL, Gerwick WH,
Balunas MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicinal Chemistry, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Connecticut , Storrs, Connecticut 06269, United States.

A dark brown tuft-forming cyanobacterium, morphologically resembling the genus
Symploca, was collected during an expedition to the Coiba National Park, a UNESCO
World Heritage Site on the Pacific coast of Panama. Phylogenetic analysis of its 
16S rRNA gene sequence indicated that it is 4.5% divergent from the type strain
for Symploca and thus is likely a new genus. Fractionation of the crude extract
led to the isolation of a new cytotoxin, designated santacruzamate A (1), which
has several structural features in common with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
[(2), SAHA, trade name Vorinostat], a clinically approved histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor used to treat refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Recognition 
of the structural similarly of 1 and SAHA led to the characterization of
santacruzamate A as a picomolar level selective inhibitor of HDAC2, a Class I
HDAC, with relatively little inhibition of HDAC4 or HDAC6, both Class II HDACs.
As a result, chemical syntheses of santacruzamate A as well as a structurally
intriguing hybrid molecule, which blends aspects of both agents (1 and 2), were
achieved and evaluated for their HDAC activity and specificity.

PMCID: PMC3879121
PMID: 24164245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Dec;24(24):3805-18. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-08-0444. Epub 2013
Oct 23.

Estrogen regulates histone deacetylases to prevent cardiac hypertrophy.

Pedram A(1), Razandi M, Narayanan R, Dalton JT, McKinsey TA, Levin ER.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92717 Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long
Beach, CA 90822 GTx, Inc., Memphis, TN 38163 Division of Cardiology, Department
of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045.

The development and progression of cardiac hypertrophy often leads to heart
failure and death, and important modulators of hypertrophy include the histone
deacetylase proteins (HDACs). Estrogen inhibits cardiac hypertrophy and
progression in animal models and humans. We therefore investigated the influence 
of 17-ß-estradiol on the production, localization, and functions of
prohypertrophic (class I) and antihypertrophic (class II) HDACs in cultured
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. 17-ß-Estradiol or estrogen receptor ß agonists
dipropylnitrile and ß-LGND2 comparably suppressed angiotensin II-induced HDAC2
(class I) production, HDAC-activating phosphorylation, and the resulting
prohypertrophic mRNA expression. In contrast, estrogenic compounds derepressed
the opposite effects of angiotensin II on the same parameters for HDAC4 and 5
(class II), resulting in retention of these deacetylases in the nucleus to
inhibit hypertrophic gene expression. Key aspects were confirmed in vivo from the
hearts of wild-type but not estrogen receptor ß (ERß) gene-deleted mice
administered angiotensin II and estrogenic compounds. Our results identify a
novel dual regulation of cardiomyocyte HDACs, shown here for the antihypertrophic
sex steroid acting at ERß. This mechanism potentially supports using ERß agonists
as HDAC modulators to treat cardiac disease.

PMCID: PMC3861078
PMID: 24152730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Dec;6(12):1317-27. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0077. Epub 2013 Oct 15.

Black raspberries protectively regulate methylation of Wnt pathway genes in
precancerous colon tissue.

Wang LS(1), Kuo CT, Huang TH, Yearsley M, Oshima K, Stoner GD, Yu J, Lechner JF, 
Huang YW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Medical College
of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd, TBRC, Room C4930, Milwaukee, WI 53226.
liswang@mcw.edu.

Ulcerative colitis is frequently an intermediate step to colon cancer. The
interleukin-10 knockout mouse is a genetic model of this progression. We report
that knockout mice fed 5% black raspberries (BRB) had significantly less colonic 
ulceration as compared with knockout mice that consumed the control diet.
Dysfunction of the Wnt signaling pathway is a key event in ulcerative
colitis-associated colon carcinogenesis. Therefore, we investigated the effects
of BRBs on the Wnt pathway and found that the BRB-fed knockout mice exhibited a
significantly lower level of ß-catenin nuclear translocation. We followed-up this
observation by evaluating the effect of BRBs on selected Wnt pathway antagonists.
The mRNA expression levels of wif1, sox17, and qki were diminished in the
knockout mice, whereas they were expressed at normal levels in knockout mice that
were fed BRBs. The lower mRNA expression of these genes in the colon from the
knockout mice correlated with hypermethylation of their promoter regions; BRBs
decreased their promoter methylation and increased mRNA expression of these
genes. This hypomethylation was associated with elevated protein expression of
key proteins/enzymes that augment methylation, for example, dnmt3b, hdac1, hdac2,
and mbd2 in the knockout mice; in addition, BRBs decreased the protein expression
of these proteins/enzymes. The knockout mouse model recapitulates what occurs in 
human ulcerative colitis. Promoter methylation of CDH1 and SFRP1 was
significantly higher in human ulcerative colitis tissues compared with their
adjacent normal tissues. In conclusion, our results suggest that BRBs inhibit
colonic ulceration and, ultimately, colon cancer partly through inhibiting
aberrant epigenetic events that dysregulate Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3902171
PMID: 24129635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Immunity. 2013 Oct 17;39(4):661-75. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.08.032. Epub 2013 
Oct 10.

Epigenetic modifications induced by Blimp-1 Regulate CD8<U+207A> T cell memory
progression during acute virus infection.

Shin HM(1), Kapoor VN, Guan T, Kaech SM, Welsh RM, Berg LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

The transcription factor Blimp-1 regulates the overall accumulation of
virus-specific CD8<U+207A> T cells during acute viral infections. We found that
increased proliferation and survival of Blimp-1-deficient CD8<U+207A> T cells resulted
from sustained expression of CD25 and CD27 and persistent cytokine
responsiveness. Silencing of Il2ra and Cd27 reduced the Blimp-1-deficient CD8<U+207A> T 
cell response. Genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing
analysis identified Il2ra and Cd27 as direct targets of Blimp-1. At the peak of
the antiviral response, but not earlier, Blimp-1 recruited the histone-modifying 
enzymes G9a and HDAC2 to the Il2ra and Cd27 loci, thereby repressing expression
of these genes. In the absence of Blimp-1, Il2ra and Cd27 exhibited enhanced
histone H3 acetylation and reduced histone H3K9 trimethylation. These data
elucidate a central mechanism by which Blimp-1 acts as an epigenetic regulator
and enhances the numbers of short-lived effector cells while suppressing the
development of memory-precursor CD8<U+207A> T cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3808842
PMID: 24120360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Neurochem. 2014 Mar;128(5):603-16. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12457. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Phosphorylation of neuronal Lysine-Specific Demethylase 1LSD1/KDM1A impairs
transcriptional repression by regulating interaction with CoREST and histone
deacetylases HDAC1/2.

Toffolo E(1), Rusconi F, Paganini L, Tortorici M, Pilotto S, Heise C, Verpelli C,
Tedeschi G, Maffioli E, Sala C, Mattevi A, Battaglioli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy.

Epigenetic mechanisms play important roles in brain development, orchestrating
proliferation, differentiation, and morphogenesis. Lysine-Specific Demethylase 1 
(LSD1 also known as KDM1A and AOF2) is a histone modifier involved in
transcriptional repression, forming a stable core complex with the corepressors
corepressor of REST (CoREST) and histone deacetylases (HDAC1/2). Importantly, in 
the mammalian CNS, neuronal LSD1-8a, an alternative splicing isoform of LSD1
including the mini-exon E8a, sets alongside LSD1 and is capable of enhancing
neurite growth and morphogenesis. Here, we describe that the morphogenic
properties of neuronal LSD1-8a require switching off repressive activity and this
negative modulation is mediated in vivo by phosphorylation of the Thr369b residue
coded by exon E8a. Three-dimensional crystal structure analysis using a
phospho-mimetic mutant (Thr369bAsp), indicate that phosphorylation affects the
residues surrounding the exon E8a-coded amino acids, causing a local
conformational change. We suggest that phosphorylation, without affecting
demethylase activity, causes in neurons CoREST and HDAC1/2 corepressors
detachment from LSD1-8a and impairs neuronal LSD1-8a repressive activity. In
neurons, Thr369b phosphorylation is required for morphogenic activity, converting
neuronal LSD1-8a in a dominant-negative isoform, challenging LSD1-mediated
transcriptional repression on target genes.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 24111946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Stem Cells. 2014 Jan;32(1):279-89. doi: 10.1002/stem.1544.

Histone deacetylase inhibition with valproic acid downregulates osteocalcin gene 
expression in human dental pulp stem cells and osteoblasts: evidence for HDAC2
involvement.

Paino F(1), La Noce M, Tirino V, Naddeo P, Desiderio V, Pirozzi G, De Rosa A,
Laino L, Altucci L, Papaccio G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Sezione di Istologia (TERM Lab.), via
L. Armanni, 5, Secondo Ateneo di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.

Adult mesenchymal stem cells, such as dental pulp stem cells, are of great
interest for cell-based tissue engineering strategies because they can
differentiate into a variety of tissue-specific cells, above all, into
osteoblasts. In recent years, epigenetic studies on stem cells have indicated
that specific histone alterations and modifying enzymes play essential roles in
cell differentiation. However, although several studies have reported that
valproic acid (VPA)-a selective inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDAC)-enhances
osteoblast differentiation, data on osteocalcin expression-a late-stage marker of
differentiation-are limited. We therefore decided to study the effect of VPA on
dental pulp stem cell differentiation. A low concentration of VPA did not reduce 
cell viability, proliferation, or cell cycle profile. However, it was sufficient 
to significantly enhance matrix mineralization by increasing osteopontin and bone
sialoprotein expression. In contrast, osteocalcin levels were decreased, an
effect induced at the transcriptional level, and were strongly correlated with
inhibition of HDAC2. In fact, HDAC2 silencing with shRNA produced a similar
effect to that of VPA treatment on the expression of osteoblast-related markers. 
We conclude that VPA does not induce terminal differentiation of osteoblasts, but
stimulates the generation of less mature cells. Moreover, specific suppression of
an individual HDAC by RNA interference could enhance only a single aspect of
osteoblast differentiation, and thus produce selective effects.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3963447
PMID: 24105979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2013 Oct;10(8):868-76.

Histone deacetylase 2 in the mouse hippocampus: attenuation of age-related
increase by caloric restriction.

Chouliaras L(1), van den Hove DL, Kenis G, Draanen Mv, Hof PR, van Os J,
Steinbusch HW, Schmitz C, Rutten BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, School for Mental Health and
Neuroscience, Maastricht University Medical Centre, PO BOX 616 (VIJV), 6200 MD
Maastricht, The Netherlands. b.rutten@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

The aging process in the hippocampus is associated with aberrant epigenetic
marks, such as DNA methylation and histone tail alterations. Recent evidence
suggests that caloric restriction (CR) can potentially delay the aging process,
while upregulation of antioxidants may also have a beneficial effect in this
respect. We have recently observed that CR attenuates age-related changes in the 
levels of the epigenetic molecules DNA methyltransferase 3a, 5-methylcytidine (5-
mC) and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in the mouse hippocampus while overexpression of 
the antioxidant Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) does not. However, the impact
of aging on the levels of histone-modifying enzymes such as histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) in the hippocampus has not been studied in much detail. Here, we
investigated immunoreactivity (IR) of HDAC2 in three subregions of the
hippocampus (dentate gyrus, CA3 and CA1-2) of mice taken from large cohorts of
aging wild-type and transgenic mice overexpressing normal human SOD1, which were 
kept under normal diet or CR from weaning onwards. Independent from the genotype,
aging (between 12 and 24 months) increased levels of HDAC2 IR in the hippocampus.
Moreover, CR prevented this age-related increase, particularly in the CA3 and
CA1-2 subregions, while SOD1 overexpression did not. Quantitative image analyses 
showed that HDAC2 IR correlated positively with 5-mC IR while these markers were 
shown to colocalize in the nucleus of hippocampal cells. Together with recent
literature reports, these findings suggest that altered levels of epigenetic
regulatory proteins including HDAC2 regulate age-related changes in the mouse
hippocampus and that CR may prevent these age-related changes.

PMCID: PMC3966721
PMID: 24093534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Dec;12(12):2709-21. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0626.
Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Molecular and biologic analysis of histone deacetylase inhibitors with diverse
specificities.

Newbold A(1), Matthews GM, Bots M, Cluse LA, Clarke CJ, Banks KM, Cullinane C,
Bolden JE, Christiansen AJ, Dickins RA, Miccolo C, Chiocca S, Kral AM, Ozerova
ND, Miller TA, Methot JL, Richon VM, Secrist JP, Minucci S, Johnstone RW.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Ricky Johnstone, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia.
ricky.johnstone@petermac.org.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are anticancer agents that induce
hyperacetylation of histones, resulting in chromatin remodeling and
transcriptional changes. In addition, nonhistone proteins, such as the chaperone 
protein Hsp90, are functionally regulated through hyperacetylation mediated by
HDACis. Histone acetylation is thought to be primarily regulated by HDACs 1, 2,
and 3, whereas the acetylation of Hsp90 has been proposed to be specifically
regulated through HDAC6. We compared the molecular and biologic effects induced
by an HDACi with broad HDAC specificity (vorinostat) with agents that
predominantly inhibited selected class I HDACs (MRLB-223 and romidepsin).
MRLB-223, a potent inhibitor of HDACs 1 and 2, killed tumor cells using the same 
apoptotic pathways as the HDAC 1, 2, 3, 6, and 8 inhibitor vorinostat. However,
vorinostat induced histone hyperacetylation and killed tumor cells more rapidly
than MRLB-223 and had greater therapeutic efficacy in vivo. FDCP-1 cells
dependent on the Hsp90 client protein Bcr-Abl for survival, were killed by all
HDACis tested, concomitant with caspase-dependent degradation of Bcr-Abl. These
studies provide evidence that inhibition of HDAC6 and degradation of Bcr-Abl
following hyperacetylation of Hsp90 is likely not a major mechanism of action of 
HDACis as had been previously posited.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 24092806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Dis Model Mech. 2014 Jan;7(1):41-54. doi: 10.1242/dmm.013631. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Molecular mechanism of sphingosine-1-phosphate action in Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

Nguyen-Tran DH(1), Hait NC, Sperber H, Qi J, Fischer K, Ieronimakis N, Pantoja M,
Hays A, Allegood J, Reyes M, Spiegel S, Ruohola-Baker H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195-7350, USA.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal muscle-wasting disease. Studies in 
Drosophila showed that genetic increase of the levels of the bioactive
sphingolipid sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) or delivery of
2-acetyl-5-tetrahydroxybutyl imidazole (THI), an S1P lyase inhibitor, suppresses 
dystrophic muscle degeneration. In the dystrophic mouse (mdx), upregulation of
S1P by THI increases regeneration and muscle force. S1P can act as a ligand for
S1P receptors and as a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. Because Drosophila
has no identified S1P receptors and DMD correlates with increased HDAC2 levels,
we tested whether S1P action in muscle involves HDAC inhibition. Here we show
that beneficial effects of THI treatment in mdx mice correlate with significantly
increased nuclear S1P, decreased HDAC activity and increased acetylation of
specific histone residues. Importantly, the HDAC2 target microRNA genes miR-29
and miR-1 are significantly upregulated, correlating with the downregulation of
the miR-29 target Col1a1 in the diaphragm of THI-treated mdx mice. Further gene
expression analysis revealed a significant THI-dependent decrease in inflammatory
genes and increase in metabolic genes. Accordingly, S1P levels and functional
mitochondrial activity are increased after THI treatment of differentiating C2C12
cells. S1P increases the capacity of the muscle cell to use fatty acids as an
energy source, suggesting that THI treatment could be beneficial for the
maintenance of energy metabolism in mdx muscles.

PMCID: PMC3882047
PMID: 24077965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Med Chem. 2013 Oct 24;56(20):7997-8007. doi: 10.1021/jm401053m. Epub 2013 Oct
14.

Investigating the selectivity of metalloenzyme inhibitors.

Day JA(1), Cohen SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego 
, La Jolla, California 92093, United States.

The inhibitory activity of a broad group of known metalloenzyme inhibitors
against a panel of metalloenzymes was evaluated. Clinically approved inhibitors
were selected as well as several other reported metalloprotein inhibitors in
order to represent a broad range of metal binding groups (MBGs), including
hydroxamic acid, carboxylate, hydroxypyridinonate, thiol, and N-hydroxyurea
functional groups. A panel of metalloenzymes, including carbonic anhydrase
(hCAII), several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), angiotensin converting enzyme 
(ACE), histone deacetylase (HDAC-2), and tyrosinase (TY), was selected based on
their clinical importance for a range of pathologies. In addition, each inhibitor
was evaluated for its ability to remove Fe(3+) from holo-transferrin to gauge the
ability of the inhibitors to access Fe(3+) from a primary transport protein. The 
results show that the metalloenzyme inhibitors are quite selective for their
intended targets, suggesting that despite their ability to bind metal ions,
metalloprotein inhibitors are not prone to widespread off-target enzyme
inhibition activity.

PMCID: PMC3880651
PMID: 24074025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Dec;34(12):2842-50. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt310. Epub 2013
Sep 25.

Dietary black raspberries modulate DNA methylation in dextran sodium sulfate
(DSS)-induced ulcerative colitis.

Wang LS(1), Kuo CT, Stoner K, Yearsley M, Oshima K, Yu J, Huang TH, Rosenberg D, 
Peiffer D, Stoner G, Huang YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Medical College
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is characterized by chronic inflammation of the colon.
During inflammation, NF-<U+03BA>B is increased in colonic epithelial cells and in immune
cells, leading to increases in proinflammatory cytokines. These events then
increase DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), which silence a subset of tumor
suppressor genes by promoter methylation. Negative regulators of the Wnt pathway 
are frequently methylated in UC, leading to dysregulation of the pathway and,
potentially, to colorectal cancer. We determined if black raspberries (BRBs)
influence promoter methylation of suppressors in the Wnt pathway in dextran
sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced UC. C57BL/6J mice received 1% DSS and were fed
either control or 5% BRB diets. Mice were euthanized on days 7, 14 and 28, and
their colons, spleen and bone marrow were collected. Berries reduced ulceration
at day 28. This was accompanied by decreased staining of macrophages and
neutrophils and decreased NF-<U+03BA>B p65 nuclear localization in the colon at all time
points. At day 7, BRBs demethylated the promoter of dkk3, leading to its
increased messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in colon, spleen and bone marrow.
ß-Catenin nuclear localization, c-Myc staining as well as protein expression of
DNMT3B, histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) and methyl-binding domain 
2 (MBD2) were all decreased in colon; mRNA expression of these four proteins was 
decreased in bone marrow cells by BRBs. These results suggest that BRBs suppress 
colonic ulceration by correcting promoter hypermethylation of suppressor genes in
the colon, as well as in the spleen and bone marrow that systematically regulate 
inflammation.SUMMARY: Our results suggest that dietary BRBs suppress colonic
ulceration by correcting promoter hypermethylation of suppressor genes in the
colon, as well as in the spleen and bone marrow that systematically regulate
inflammation in DSS-induced UC.

PMCID: PMC3845896
PMID: 24067901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Inflamm Res. 2013 Aug 20;6:109-19. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S43736. eCollection 2013.

Anti-inflammatory effects of budesonide in human lung fibroblast are independent 
of histone deacetylase 2.

Wang X(1), Nelson A, Weiler ZM, Patil A, Sato T, Kanaji N, Nakanishi M, Michalski
J, Farid M, Basma H, Levan TD, Miller-Larsson A, Wieslander E, Muller KC, Holz O,
Magnussen H, Rabe KF, Liu X, Rennard SI.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Division, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA;

OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: Reduced expression of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in
alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells may account for reduced response of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients to glucocorticoids. HDAC2
expression and its role in mediating glucocorticoid effects on fibroblast
functions, however, has not been fully studied. This study was designed to
investigate whether HDAC2 mediates glucocorticoid effects on release of
inflammatory cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) from human lung
fibroblasts.
METHODS: Human lung fibroblasts (HFL-1 cells) were stimulated with interleukin
(IL)-1 ß plus tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a in the presence or absence of the
glucocorticoid budesonide. Cytokines (IL-6 and IL-8) were quantified by enzyme
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and MMPs (MMP-1 and MMP-3) by immunoblotting
in culture medium. The role of HDAC2 was investigated using a pharmacologic
inhibitor as well as a small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA) targeting
HDAC2.
RESULTS: We have demonstrated that budesonide concentration-dependently
(10(-10)-10(-7) M) inhibited IL-6, IL-8, MMP-1, and MMP-3 release by HFL-1 cells 
in response to IL-1ß plus TNF-a. While an HDAC inhibitor significantly blocked
the inhibitory effect of budesonide on human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs)
and monocytes (THP-1 cells), it did not block the inhibitory effect of budesonide
on release of cytokines and MMPs from HFL-1 cells. Similarly, an HDAC2-siRNA
blocked budesonide inhibition of cytokine release in HBECs, but it did not block 
the inhibitory effect of budesonide on HFL-1 cytokine and MMP release.
Furthermore, budesonide significantly blocked release of cytokines and MMPs to a 
similar degree in normal and COPD lung fibroblasts as well as in HFL-1 cells
exposed or not exposed to cigarette smoke extract.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that, in contrast to airway epithelial cells
and monocytes/macrophages, HDAC2 is not required for budesonide to inhibit MMP
and cytokine release by lung fibroblasts and this inhibitory pathway appears to
be intact in cultured fibroblasts from COPD patients. These results also suggest 
that budesonide has the potential to modulate fibroblast-mediated tissue
remodeling following airway inflammation in COPD, which is mediated via an HDAC2 
independent pathway.

PMCID: PMC3780291
PMID: 24062615  [PubMed]


382. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2014 Aug;29(4):582-9. doi: 10.3109/14756366.2013.827678.
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Discovery of a series of hydroximic acid derivatives as potent histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Zhang L(1), Wang X, Li X, Zhang L, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, School of Medicine, Qingdao University , Qingdao,
Shandong , China .

To develop potent histone deacetylase inhibitors as antitumor agents, structural 
modification was performed. The synthesized molecules were tested by enzymatic
inhibition assay and anti-proliferation assay. Several molecules show improved
activities in the enzymatic inhibition assay. However, in the MTT assays, all
these derived molecules have limited performance compared with SAHA. The IC50
values of molecule
((S)-N-(6-(hydroxyamino)-6-oxohexyl)-4-(3-(2-oxo-1-phenyl-2-((3-(trifluoromethyl)
phenyl)amino)ethyl)ureido)benzamide, L8) which has the best enzymatic inhibition 
activity (with an IC50 value of 11.7 nm and 967 nm against Hela nucleus extract
and HDAC8, respectively) were calculated compared with SAHA. Molecular docking
was performed to predict the binding mode of molecule L8 in the active site of
HDAC2 and HDAC8. Hydrophobic interaction, chelate binding, electrostatic
attraction and H-bond interaction in combination make contribution to the
ligand-receptor interactions.

PMID: 24059701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 11;440(1):184-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.061. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Mediator subunit MED1 is a T3-dependent and T3-independent coactivator on the
thyrotropin ß gene promoter.

Matsui K(1), Oda K, Mizuta S, Ishino R, Urahama N, Hasegawa N, Roeder RG, Ito M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematology, Division of Medical Biophysics, Kobe University
Graduate School of Health Sciences, 7-10-2 Tomogaoka, Suma-ku, Kobe 654-0142,
Japan.

The MED1 subunit of the Mediator transcriptional coregulator complex is a nuclear
receptor-specific coactivator. A negative feedback mechanism of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH, or thyrotropin) expression in the thyrotroph in
the presence of triiodothyronine (T3) is employed by liganded thyroid hormone
receptor ß (TRß) on the TSHß gene promoter, where conventional histone-modifying 
coactivators act as corepressors. We now provide evidence that MED1 is a
ligand-dependent positive cofactor on this promoter. TSHß gene transcription was 
attenuated in MED1 mutant mice in which the nuclear receptor-binding ability of
MED1 was specifically disrupted. MED1 stimulated GATA2- and Pit1-mediated TSHß
gene promoter activity in a ligand-independent manner in cultured cells. MED1
also stimulated transcription from the TSHß gene promoter in a T3-dependent
manner. The transcription was further enhanced when the T3-dependent corepressors
SRC1, SRC2, and HDAC2 were downregulated. Hence, MED1 is a T3-dependent and
-independent coactivator on the TSHß gene promoter.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4388257
PMID: 24055033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Clin Sci (Lond). 2014 Mar;126(6):425-40. doi: 10.1042/CS20130039.

A comprehensive analysis of oxidative stress in the ozone-induced lung
inflammation mouse model.

Wiegman CH(1), Li F, Clarke CJ, Jazrawi E, Kirkham P, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM, Chung
KF.

Author information: 
(1)*Airways Disease Section, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London SW3 6LY, U.K.

Ozone is an oxidizing environmental pollutant that contributes significantly to
respiratory health. Exposure to increased levels of ozone has been associated
with worsening of symptoms of patients with asthma and COPD (chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease). In the present study, we investigated the acute and chronic
effects of ozone exposure-induced oxidative stress-related inflammation mechanics
in mouse lung. In particular, we investigated the oxidative stress-induced
effects on HDAC2 (histone deacetylase 2) modification and activation of the Nrf2 
(nuclear factor erythroid-related factor 2) and HIF-1a (hypoxia-inducible
factor-1a) signalling pathways. Male C57BL/6 mice were exposed to ozone (3
p.p.m.) for 3 h a day, twice a week for a period of 1, 3 or 6 weeks. Control mice
were exposed to normal air. After the last exposure, mice were killed for BAL
(bronchoalveolar lavage) fluid and lung tissue collection. BAL total cell counts 
were elevated at all of the time points studied. This was associated with
increased levels of chemokines and cytokines in all ozone-exposed groups,
indicating the presence of a persistent inflammatory environment in the lung.
Increased inflammation and Lm (mean linear intercept) scores were observed in
chronic exposed mice, indicating emphysematous changes were present in lungs of
chronic exposed mice. The antioxidative stress response was active (indicated by 
increased Nrf2 activity and protein) after 1 week of ozone exposure, but this
ability was lost after 3 and 6 weeks of ozone exposure. The transcription factor 
HIF-1a was elevated in 3- and 6-week ozone-exposed mice and this was associated
with increased gene expression levels of several HIF-1a target genes including
Hdac2 (histone deacetylase 2), Vegf (vascular endothelial growth factor), Keap1
(kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1) and Mif (macrophage migration inhibitory
factor). HDAC2 protein was found to be phosphorylated and carbonylated in nuclear
and cytoplasm fractions, respectively, and was associated with a decrease in
DNA-binding activity and protein expression of HDAC2. Decreased HDAC2 activity,
most likely a direct result of protein modification, in combination with the loss
of the antioxidative stress response and activation of the HIF-1a pathway,
contribute to the inflammatory response and emphysema observed in ozone-exposed
mice.

PMID: 24040961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e73785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073785. eCollection 
2013.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 restrain the intestinal inflammatory response by regulating
intestinal epithelial cell differentiation.

Turgeon N(1), Blais M, Gagné JM, Tardif V, Boudreau F, Perreault N, Asselin C.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Acetylation and deacetylation of histones and other proteins depends on histone
acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases (HDACs) activities, leading to either
positive or negative gene expression. HDAC inhibitors have uncovered a role for
HDACs in proliferation, apoptosis and inflammation. However, little is known of
the roles of specific HDACs in intestinal epithelial cells (IEC). We investigated
the consequences of ablating both HDAC1 and HDAC2 in murine IECs. Floxed Hdac1
and Hdac2 homozygous mice were crossed with villin-Cre mice. Mice deficient in
both IEC HDAC1 and HDAC2 weighed less and survived more than a year. Colon and
small intestinal sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, or with Alcian
blue and Periodic Acid Schiff for goblet cell identification. Tissue sections
from mice injected with BrdU for 2 h, 14 h and 48 h were stained with anti-BrdU. 
To determine intestinal permeability, 4-kDa FITC-labeled dextran was given by
gavage for 3 h. Microarray analysis was performed on total colon RNAs.
Inflammatory and IEC-specific gene expression was assessed by Western blot or
semi-quantitative RT-PCR and qPCR with respectively total colon protein and total
colon RNAs. HDAC1 and HDAC2-deficient mice displayed: 1) increased migration and 
proliferation, with elevated cyclin D1 expression and phosphorylated S6 ribosomal
protein, a downstream mTOR target; 2) tissue architecture defects with cell
differentiation alterations, correlating with reduction of secretory Paneth and
goblet cells in jejunum and goblet cells in colon, increased expression of
enterocytic markers such as sucrase-isomaltase in the colon, increased expression
of cleaved Notch1 and augmented intestinal permeability; 3) loss of tissue
homeostasis, as evidenced by modifications of claudin 3 expression, caspase-3
cleavage and Stat3 phosphorylation; 4) chronic inflammation, as determined by
inflammatory molecular expression signatures and altered inflammatory gene
expression. Thus, epithelial HDAC1 and HDAC2 restrain the intestinal inflammatory
response, by regulating intestinal epithelial cell proliferation and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3764035
PMID: 24040068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Chest. 2014 Feb;145(2):305-12. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-0835.

Passive smoking impairs histone deacetylase-2 in children with severe asthma.

Kobayashi Y, Bossley C, Gupta A, Akashi K, Tsartsali L, Mercado N, Barnes PJ,
Bush A, Ito K.

BACKGROUND: Parental smoking is known to worsen asthma symptoms in children and
to make them refractory to asthma treatment, but the molecular mechanism is
unclear. Oxidative stress from tobacco smoke has been reported to impair histone 
deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) via phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt activation and,
thus, to reduce corticosteroid sensitivity. The aim of this study was to
investigate passive smoking-dependent molecular abnormalities in alveolar
macrophages (AMs) by comparing passive smoke-exposed children and non-passive
smoke-exposed children with uncontrolled severe asthma.
METHODS: BAL fluid (BALF) was obtained from 19 children with uncontrolled severe 
asthma (10 non-passive smoking-exposed subjects and nine passive smoking-exposed 
subjects), and HDAC2 expression/activity, Akt/HDAC2 phosphorylation levels, and
corticosteroid responsiveness in AMs were evaluated.
RESULTS: Parental smoking reduced HDAC2 protein expression by 54% and activity by
47%, with concomitant enhancement of phosphorylation of Akt1 and HDAC2. In
addition, phosphorylation levels of Akt1 correlated positively with HDAC2
phosphorylation levels and negatively with HDAC2 activity. Furthermore, passive
smoke exposure reduced the inhibitory effects of dexamethasone on tumor necrosis 
factor-a-induced CXCL8 release in AMs. There were relatively higher neutrophil
counts and CXCL8 concentrations in BALF and lower Asthma Control Test scores
compared with non-passive smoke-exposed children with uncontrolled severe asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: Passive smoking impairs HDAC2 function via PI3K signaling
activation, which could contribute to corticosteroid-insensitive inflammation in 
children with severe asthma. This novel mechanism will be a treatment target in
children with severe asthma and stresses the need for a smoke-free environment
for asthmatic children.

PMCID: PMC3913299
PMID: 24030221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2013 Aug;19(8):699-703.

[Expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in prostate cancer and their clinical
implications].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin CK(1), Fu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Hospital of Shandong Medical College,
Linyi, Shandong 276004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 proteins in prostate
cancer and to explore their clinical significance.
METHODS: We detected the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 proteins in the tissue
samples of prostate cancer from 82 patients with complete clinical data by
immunohistochemistry, and analyzed the correlation of the expressions of HDAC1
and HDAC2 with other clinicopathological parameters, such as Gleason scores,
preoperative PSA levels, and postoperative survival time.
RESULTS: HDAC1 and HDAC2 were expressed in 59.7 and 70.7% of the patients,
respectively, located in the nuclei of cancer cells, more highly in those with
higher than in those with lower Gleason scores (P < 0.05). No statistically
significant differences were found in the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 among
those with different preoperative PSA levels and those of different ages (P >
0.05). Univariate analysis demonstrated that the HDAC2 expression, pre-operative 
PSA levels, Gleason scores and clinical stages of prostate cancer were important 
factors affecting the patients'survival (P < 0.05). Cox analysis indicated that
the expression of HDAC2 was an independent index for the prognosis of prostate
cancer (P = 0.017, HR = 2.265, 95% CI: 1.145 - 4.775).
CONCLUSION: The increased expression of HDAC2 in prostate cancer can serve as an 
independent prognostic indicator, which has provided a theoretical base for the
clinical application of HDACs in the diagnosis and prognosis of prostate cancer.

PMID: 24010203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Oct;27(10):1666-77. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1211. Epub 2013 Sep
3.

Persistently altered epigenetic marks in the mouse uterus after neonatal estrogen
exposure.

Jefferson WN(1), Chevalier DM, Phelps JY, Cantor AM, Padilla-Banks E, Newbold RR,
Archer TK, Kinyamu HK, Williams CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, US Department of Health and Human Services, PO Box 12233, MD E4-05,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709. williamsc5@niehs.nih.gov.

Neonatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) causes permanent alterations in
female reproductive tract gene expression, infertility, and uterine cancer in
mice. To determine whether epigenetic mechanisms could explain these phenotypes, 
we first tested whether DES altered uterine expression of chromatin-modifying
proteins. DES treatment significantly reduced expression of methylcytosine
dioxygenase TET oncogene family, member 1 (TET1) on postnatal day 5; this
decrease was correlated with a subtle decrease in DNA 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in 
adults. There were also significant reductions in histone methyltransferase
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), histone lysine acetyltransferase 2A (KAT2A), 
and histone deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3. Uterine chromatin
immunoprecipitation was used to analyze the locus-specific association of
modified histones with 2 genes, lactoferrin (Ltf) and sine oculis homeobox 1
(Six1), which are permanently upregulated in adults after neonatal DES treatment.
Three histone modifications associated with active transcription, histone H3
lysine 9 acetylation (H3K9ac), H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), and H4
lysine 5 acetylation (H4K5ac) were enriched at specific Ltf promoter regions
after DES treatment, but this enrichment was not maintained in adults. H3K9ac,
H4K5ac, and H3K4me3 were enriched at Six1 exon 1 immediately after neonatal DES
treatment. As adults, DES-treated mice had greater differences in H4K5ac and
H3K4me3 occupancy at Six1 exon 1 and new differences in these histone marks at an
upstream region. These findings indicate that neonatal DES exposure temporarily
alters expression of multiple chromatin-modifying proteins and persistently
alters epigenetic marks in the adult uterus at the Six1 locus, suggesting a
mechanism for developmental exposures leading to altered reproductive function
and increased cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3787132
PMID: 24002655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Addict Biol. 2015 Jan;20(1):120-31. doi: 10.1111/adb.12084. Epub 2013 Aug 26.

Vulnerability to opiate intake in maternally deprived rats: implication of MeCP2 
and of histone acetylation.

Tesone-Coelho C(1), Morel LJ, Bhatt J, Estevez L, Naudon L, Giros B, Zwiller J,
Daugé V.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Université de Strasbourg,
France.

We previously showed that maternal deprivation predisposes male rats to anxiety, 
accompanied with an increase in their opiate consumption. In the present report, 
we searched for brain epigenetic mechanisms that possibly underlie this increase.
For that, we examined the expression of the methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2 and 
of the histone deacetylases HDAC2 and HDAC3, as well as the acetylation status of
histone H3 and H4 in mesolimbic structures of adult maternally deprived rats,
using immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. A long-lasting increase in 
MeCP2 expression was found throughout the striatum of deprived rats. Enhanced
HDAC2 expression and increased nuclear HDAC activity in the nucleus accumbens of 
deprived rats were associated with lower acetylation levels of histone H3 and H4.
Treatment for 3 weeks with the HDAC inhibitor sodium valproate abolished HDAC
activation together with the decrease in the acetylation levels of histone H4,
and was accompanied with normalized oral morphine consumption. The data indicate 
that epigenetic mechanisms induced by early adverse environment memorize life
experience to trigger greater opiate vulnerability during adult life. They
suggest that sodium valproate may lessen vulnerability to opiate intake,
particularly in subgroups of individuals subjected to adverse postnatal
environments.

© 2013 Society for the Study of Addiction.

PMID: 23980619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 20;8(8):e72822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072822. eCollection
2013.

Limited TCF7L2 expression in MS lesions.

Lürbke A(1), Hagemeier K, Cui QL, Metz I, Brück W, Antel J, Kuhlmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.

Multiple sclerosis is the most frequent demyelinating disease in the human CNS
characterized by inflammation, demyelination, relative axonal loss and gliosis.
Remyelination occurs, but is frequently absent or restricted to a small
remyelinated rim at the lesion border. Impaired differentiation of
oligodendroglial precursor cells is one factor contributing to limited
remyelination, especially in chronic MS. TCF7L2 is an oligodendroglial
transcription factor regulating myelin gene expression during developmental
myelination as well as remyelination. TCF7L2 binds to co-effectors such as
ß-catenin or histone deacetylases and thereby activates or inhibits the
transcription of downstream genes involved in oligodendroglial differentiation.
To determine whether TCF7L2 can be used as a marker for differentiating or
myelinating oligodendrocytes, we analyzed the expression patterns of TCF7L2
during myelination and remyelination in human and murine CNS tissue samples.
Here, we demonstrate that marked expression of TCF7L2 in oligodendrocytes is
restricted to a well defined time period during developmental myelination in
human and mouse CNS tissue samples. In demyelinating diseases, such as multiple
sclerosis, TCF7L2 is reexpressed in oligodendrocytes in a subset of MS patients, 
but is also present in tissue samples from patients with non-demyelinating,
inflammatory diseases. Furthermore, TCF7L2 expression was also detected in
astrocytes. HDAC2, a potential binding partner of TCF7L2 that promotes
oligodendroglial differentiation and myelination, is expressed in the majority of
oligodendrocytes in controls and MS tissue samples. In summary, our data
demonstrate that the expression of TCF7L2 in oligodendrocytes is limited to a
certain differentiation stage; however the expression of TCF7L2 is neither
restricted to the oligodendroglial lineage nor to (re-)myelinating conditions.

PMCID: PMC3748032
PMID: 23977356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Brief Bioinform. 2014 Nov;15(6):963-72. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbt060. Epub 2013 Aug
23.

Systematic identification of Class I HDAC substrates.

Li T, Song B, Wu Z, Lu M, Zhu WG.

Lysine acetylation is a common post-translational modification of histone and
non-histone proteins. This process has an important function in regulating
transcriptional activities and other biological processes. Although several
computer programs have been developed to predict protein acetylation sites,
deacetylases responsible for known or predicted acetylation sites remain unknown.
In this research, Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) substrates were manually
obtained, and sequence features of deacetylation sites were analyzed. We found
that three members of Class I HDACs (HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3) shared similar
sequence features. Therefore, a method was proposed to identify the substrates of
Class I HDACs. We evaluated the efficiency of the prediction based on P-value
distribution analysis and leave-one-out test. To validate the result of the
prediction, we overexpressed Class I HDACs in cells and detected the acetylation 
levels of potential substrates. In the experiment, five of the seven predicted
proteins were deacetylated by Class I HDACs. These results suggested that our
method could effectively predict protein deacetylation sites. The work has been
integrated to the website ASEB, which was freely available at
http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/huac.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 23975722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 10;33(28):3707-16. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.332. Epub 2013 Aug
26.

Significance of PELP1/HDAC2/miR-200 regulatory network in EMT and metastasis of
breast cancer.

Roy SS(1), Gonugunta VK(1), Bandyopadhyay A(2), Rao MK(3), Goodall GJ(4), Sun
LZ(3), Tekmal RR(5), Vadlamudi RK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, UT Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX, USA. (2)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, UT Health
Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (3)1] Department of Cellular and Structural
Biology, UT Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA [2] Cancer Therapy and
Research Center, UT Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (4)Center for
Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Department of Medicine, School of Molecular and
Biomedical science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(5)1] Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, UT Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX, USA [2] Cancer Therapy and Research Center, UT Health Science
Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Tumor metastasis is the leading cause of death among breast cancer patients.
PELP1 (proline, glutamic acid and leucine rich protein 1) is a nuclear receptor
coregulator that is upregulated during breast cancer progression to metastasis
and is an independent prognostic predictor of shorter survival of breast cancer
patients. Here, we show that PELP1 modulates expression of metastasis-influencing
microRNAs (miRs) to promote cancer metastasis. Whole genome miR array analysis
using PELP1-overexpressing and PELP1-underexpressing model cells revealed that
miR-200 and miR-141 levels inversely correlated with PELP1 expression. Consistent
with this, PELP1 knockdown resulted in lower expression of miR-200a target genes 
ZEB1 and ZEB2. PELP1 knockdown significantly reduced tumor growth and metastasis 
compared with parental cells in an orthotopic xenograft tumor model. Furthermore,
re-introduction of miR-200a and miR-141 mimetics into PELP1-overexpressing cells 
reversed PELP1 target gene expression, decreased PELP1-driven migration/invasion 
in vitro and significantly reduced in vivo metastatic potential in a preclinical 
model of experimental metastasis. Our results demonstrated that PELP1 binds to
miR-200a and miR-141 promoters and regulates their expression by recruiting
chromatin modifier histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) as revealed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation, small interfering RNA and HDAC inhibitor assays. Taken
together, our results suggest that PELP1 regulates tumor metastasis by
controlling the expression and functions of the tumor metastasis suppressors
miR-200a and miR-141.

PMCID: PMC3935988
PMID: 23975430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e71954. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071954. eCollection
2013.

Cigarette smoke modulates vascular smooth muscle phenotype: implications for
carotid and cerebrovascular disease.

Starke RM(1), Ali MS, Jabbour PM, Tjoumakaris SI, Gonzalez F, Hasan DM,
Rosenwasser RH, Owens GK, Koch WJ, Dumont AS.

Author information: 
(1)Joseph and Marie Field Cerebrovascular Research Laboratory, Division of
Neurovascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Neurological Surgery,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The role of smooth muscle cell (SMC) phenotypic modulation in the
cerebral circulation and pathogenesis of stroke has not been determined.
Cigarette smoke is a major risk factor for atherosclerosis, but potential
mechanisms are unclear, and its role in SMC phenotypic modulation has not been
established.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In cultured cerebral vascular SMCs, exposure to cigarette
smoke extract (CSE) resulted in decreased promoter activity and mRNA expression
of key SMC contractile genes (SM-a-actin, SM-22a, SM-MHC) and the transcription
factor myocardin in a dose-dependent manner. CSE also induced
pro-inflammatory/matrix remodeling genes (MCP-1, MMPs, TNF-a, IL-1ß, NF-<U+03BA>B). CSE 
increased expression of KLF4, a known regulator of SMC differentiation, and
siKLF4 inhibited CSE induced suppression of SMC contractile genes and myocardin
and activation of inflammatory genes. These mechanisms were confirmed in vivo
following exposure of rat carotid arteries to CSE. Chromatin immune-precipitation
assays in vivo and in vitro demonstrated that CSE promotes epigenetic changes
with binding of KLF4 to the promoter regions of myocardin and SMC marker genes
and alterations in promoter acetylation and methylation.
CONCLUSION: CSE exposure results in phenotypic modulation of cerebral SMC through
myocardin and KLF4 dependent mechanisms. These results provides a mechanism by
which cigarette smoke induces a pro-inflammatory/matrix remodeling phenotype in
SMC and an important pathway for cigarette smoke to contribute to atherosclerosis
and stroke.

PMCID: PMC3743809
PMID: 23967268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e71323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071323. eCollection
2013.

A selective HDAC 1/2 inhibitor modulates chromatin and gene expression in brain
and alters mouse behavior in two mood-related tests.

Schroeder FA(1), Lewis MC, Fass DM, Wagner FF, Zhang YL, Hennig KM, Gale J, Zhao 
WN, Reis S, Barker DD, Berry-Scott E, Kim SW, Clore EL, Hooker JM, Holson EB,
Haggarty SJ, Petryshen TL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Psychiatric diseases, including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major
depression, are projected to lead global disease burden within the next decade.
Pharmacotherapy, the primary--albeit often ineffective--treatment method, has
remained largely unchanged over the past 50 years, highlighting the need for
novel target discovery and improved mechanism-based treatments. Here, we examined
in wild type mice the impact of chronic, systemic treatment with Compound 60
(Cpd-60), a slow-binding, benzamide-based inhibitor of the class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) family members, HDAC1 and HDAC2, in mood-related behavioral
assays responsive to clinically effective drugs. Cpd-60 treatment for one week
was associated with attenuated locomotor activity following acute amphetamine
challenge. Further, treated mice demonstrated decreased immobility in the forced 
swim test. These changes are consistent with established effects of clinical mood
stabilizers and antidepressants, respectively. Whole-genome expression profiling 
of specific brain regions (prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens, hippocampus)
from mice treated with Cpd-60 identified gene expression changes, including a
small subset of transcripts that significantly overlapped those previously
reported in lithium-treated mice. HDAC inhibition in brain was confirmed by
increased histone acetylation both globally and, using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, at the promoter regions of upregulated transcripts, a
finding consistent with in vivo engagement of HDAC targets. In contrast,
treatment with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a non-selective
fast-binding, hydroxamic acid HDAC 1/2/3/6 inhibitor, was sufficient to increase 
histone acetylation in brain, but did not alter mood-related behaviors and had
dissimilar transcriptional regulatory effects compared to Cpd-60. These results
provide evidence that selective inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in brain may
provide an epigenetic-based target for developing improved treatments for mood
disorders and other brain disorders with altered chromatin-mediated
neuroplasticity.

PMCID: PMC3743770
PMID: 23967191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 9;8(8):e71455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071455. eCollection 
2013.

Sonic hedgehog-induced histone deacetylase activation is required for cerebellar 
granule precursor hyperplasia in medulloblastoma.

Lee SJ(1), Lindsey S, Graves B, Yoo S, Olson JM, Langhans SA.

Author information: 
(1)Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware, USA.

Medulloblastoma, the most common pediatric brain tumor, is thought to arise from 
deregulated proliferation of cerebellar granule precursor (CGP) cells. Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) is the primary mitogen that regulates proliferation of CGP cells
during the early stages of postnatal cerebellum development. Aberrant activation 
of Shh signaling during this time has been associated with hyperplasia of CGP
cells and eventually may lead to the development of medulloblastoma. The
molecular targets of Shh signaling involved in medulloblastoma formation are
still not well-understood. Here, we show that Shh regulates sustained activation 
of histone deacetylases (HDACs) and that this activity is required for continued 
proliferation of CGP cells. Suppression of HDAC activity not only blocked the
Shh-induced CGP proliferation in primary cell cultures, but also ameliorated
aberrant CGP proliferation at the external germinal layer (EGL) in a
medulloblastoma mouse model. Increased levels of mRNA and protein of several HDAC
family members were found in medulloblastoma compared to wild type cerebellum
suggesting that HDAC activity is required for the survival/progression of tumor
cells. The identification of a role of HDACs in the early steps of
medulloblastoma formation suggests there may be a therapeutic potential for HDAC 
inhibitors in this disease.

PMCID: PMC3739791
PMID: 23951168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Leuk Res. 2013 Oct;37(10):1200-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.07.016. Epub 2013
Aug 12.

The expression of histone deacetylase 4 is associated with prednisone
poor-response in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Gruhn B(1), Naumann T, Gruner D, Walther M, Wittig S, Becker S, Beck JF,
Sonnemann J.

Author information: 
(1)Jena University Hospital, Children's Clinic, Department of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Jena, Germany.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2013 Oct;37(10):1191-2.

This study aimed at the identification of histone deacetylase (HDAC) isoforms
relevant for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Expression of HDAC1-11
was determined in 93 primary ALL and eight healthy donor samples. HDAC1, HDAC2
and HDAC8 showed significantly higher expressions in ALL samples. Correlation
analysis of HDAC expression with clinicopathological parameters revealed that
high HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC4 and HDAC11 levels were significantly associated with
unfavorable prognostic factors. Particularly, high HDAC4 expression was
associated with high initial leukocyte count, T cell ALL and prednisone
poor-response. siRNA-mediated inhibition of HDAC4 sensitized a T-ALL cell line to
etoposide-induced cell death. In conclusion, our data point to HDAC4 as drug
target in childhood ALL, especially in prednisone poor-responders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 Aug 15;6(1):27. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-27.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 maintain S-phase chromatin and DNA replication fork 
progression.

Bhaskara S(1), Jacques V, Rusche JR, Olson EN, Cairns BR, Chandrasekharan MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City 84112, UT, USA. srividya.bhaskara@hci.utah.edu.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a critical role in the maintenance 
of genome stability. Class I HDACs, histone deacetylase 1 and 2 (Hdac1 and Hdac2)
are recruited to the replication fork by virtue of their interactions with the
replication machinery. However, functions for Hdac1 and Hdac2 (Hdacs1,2) in DNA
replication are not fully understood.
RESULTS: Using genetic knockdown systems and novel Hdacs1,2-selective inhibitors,
we found that loss of Hdacs1,2 leads to a reduction in the replication fork
velocity, and an increase in replication stress response culminating in DNA
damage. These observed defects are due to a direct role for Hdacs1,2 in DNA
replication, as transcription of genes involved in replication was not affected
in the absence of Hdacs1,2. We found that loss of Hdacs1,2 functions increases
histone acetylation (ac) on chromatin in S-phase cells and affects nascent
chromatin structure, as evidenced by the altered sensitivity of newly synthesized
DNA to nuclease digestion. Specifically, H4K16ac, a histone modification involved
in chromatin decompaction, is increased on nascent chromatin upon abolishing
Hdacs1,2 activities. It was previously shown that H4K16ac interferes with the
functions of SMARCA5, an ATP-dependent ISWI family chromatin remodeler. We found 
SMARCA5 also associates with nascent DNA and loss of SMARCA5 decreases
replication fork velocity similar to the loss or inhibition of Hdacs1,2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies reveal important roles for Hdacs1,2 in nascent chromatin
structure maintenance and regulation of SMARCA5 chromatin-remodeler function,
which together are required for proper replication fork progression and genome
stability in S-phase.

PMCID: PMC3765969
PMID: 23947532  [PubMed]


398. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):1022-36. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.07.002. Epub 2013 
Jul 18.

Karyotypically abnormal human ESCs are sensitive to HDAC inhibitors and show
altered regulation of genes linked to cancers and neurological diseases.

Lund RJ(1), Emani MR, Barbaric I, Kivinen V, Jones M, Baker D, Gokhale P, Nykter 
M, Lahesmaa R, Andrews PW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Biomedical Science, The University
of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK; Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University
of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku FI-20520, Finland. Electronic address:
riikka.lund@btk.fi.

Genomic abnormalities may accumulate in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) during
in vitro maintenance. Characterization of the mechanisms enabling survival and
expansion of abnormal hESCs is important due to consequences of genetic changes
for the therapeutic utilization of stem cells. Furthermore, these cells provide
an excellent model to study transformation in vitro. We report here that the
histone deacetylase proteins, HDAC1 and HDAC2, are increased in karyotypically
abnormal hESCs when compared to their normal counterparts. Importantly, similar
to many cancer cell lines, we found that HDAC inhibitors repress proliferation of
the karyotypically abnormal hESCs, whereas normal cells are more resistant to the
treatment. The decreased proliferation correlates with downregulation of HDAC1
and HDAC2 proteins, induction of the proliferation inhibitor, cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A), and altered regulation of tumor suppressor protein 
Retinoblastoma 1 (RB1). Through genome-wide transcriptome analysis we have
identified genes with altered expression and responsiveness to HDAC inhibition in
abnormal cells. Most of these genes are linked to severe developmental and
neurological diseases and cancers. Our results highlight the importance of
epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of genomic stability of hESCs, and
provide valuable candidates for targeted and selective growth inhibition of
karyotypically abnormal cells.

© 2013.

PMID: 23941963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 6;8(8):e71252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071252. Print 2013.

Requirement of retinoic acid receptor ß for genipin derivative-induced optic
nerve regeneration in adult rat retina.

Koriyama Y(1), Takagi Y, Chiba K, Yamazaki M, Sugitani K, Arai K, Suzuki H, Kato 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa, Japan. koriyama@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Like other CNS neurons, mature retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) are unable to
regenerate their axons after nerve injury due to a diminished intrinsic
regenerative capacity. One of the reasons why they lose the capacity for axon
regeneration seems to be associated with a dramatic shift in RGCs' program of
gene expression by epigenetic modulation. We recently reported that
(1R)-isoPropyloxygenipin (IPRG001), a genipin derivative, has both
neuroprotective and neurite outgrowth activities in murine RGC-5 retinal
precursor cells. These effects were both mediated by nitric oxide
(NO)/S-nitrosylation signaling. Neuritogenic activity was mediated by
S-nitrosylation of histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2), which subsequently induced
retinoic acid receptor ß (RARß) expression via chromatin remodeling in vitro.
RARß plays important roles of neural growth and differentiation in development.
However, the role of RARß expression during adult rat optic nerve regeneration is
not clear. In the present study, we extended this hypothesis to examine optic
nerve regeneration by IPRG001 in adult rat RGCs in vivo. We found a correlation
between RARß expression and neurite outgrowth with age in the developing rat
retina. Moreover, we found that IPRG001 significantly induced RARß expression in 
adult rat RGCs through the S-nitrosylation of HDAC2 processing mechanism.
Concomitant with RARß expression, adult rat RGCs displayed a regenerative
capacity for optic axons in vivo by IPRG001 treatment. These neuritogenic effects
of IPRG001 were specifically suppressed by siRNA for RARß. Thus, the dual
neuroprotective and neuritogenic actions of genipin via S-nitrosylation might
offer a powerful therapeutic tool for the treatment of RGC degenerative
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3735487
PMID: 23940731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Oct;12(10):2078-87. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-1242.
Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Histone deacetylase regulation of ATM-mediated DNA damage signaling.

Thurn KT(1), Thomas S, Raha P, Qureshi I, Munster PN.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Pamela N. Munster, Division of Hematology and Oncology, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, 1600 Divisadero, Room A719, Box
1711, San Francisco, CA 94143. pmunster@medicine.ucsf.edu.

Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is a major regulator of the DNA damage
response. ATM promotes the activation of BRCA1, CHK2, and p53 leading to the
induction of response genes such as CDKN1A (p21), GADD45A, and RRM2B that promote
cell-cycle arrest and DNA repair. The upregulation of these response genes may
contribute to resistance of cancer cells to genotoxic therapies. Here, we show
that histone deacetylases (HDAC) play a major role in mitigating the response of 
the ATM pathway to DNA damage. HDAC inhibition decreased ATM activation and
expression, and attenuated the activation of p53 in vitro and in vivo. Select
depletion of HDAC1 and HDAC2 was sufficient to modulate ATM activation, reduce
GADD45A and RRM2B induction, and increase sensitivity to DNA strand breaks. The
regulation of ATM by HDAC enzymes therefore suggests a vital role for HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in the DNA damage response, and the potential use of the ATM pathway as a
pharmacodynamic marker for combination therapies involving HDAC inhibitors.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3821775
PMID: 23939379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 Nov;57:130-43. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.07.012. Epub 2013 
Aug 8.

Ezh1 and Ezh2 differentially regulate PSD-95 gene transcription in developing
hippocampal neurons.

Henriquez B(1), Bustos FJ, Aguilar R, Becerra A, Simon F, Montecino M, van
Zundert B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Research, Universidad Andres Bello, Avenida Republica
239, Santiago, Chile; Faculty of Biological Sciences and Faculty of Medicine,
Universidad Andres Bello, Avenida Republica 239, Santiago, Chile.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) mediates transcriptional silencing by
catalyzing histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), but its role in the
maturation of postmitotic mammalian neurons remains largely unknown. We report
that the PRC2 paralogs Ezh1 and Ezh2 are differentially expressed during
hippocampal development. We show that depletion of Ezh2 leads to increased
expression of PSD-95, a critical plasticity gene, and that reduced PSD-95 gene
transcription is correlated with enrichment of Ezh2 at the PSD-95 gene promoter; 
however, the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark is not present at the PSD-95 gene promoter,
likely due to the antagonizing effects of the H3S28P and H3K27Ac marks and the
activity of the H3K27 demethylases JMJD3 and UTX. In contrast, increased PSD-95
gene transcription is accompanied by the presence of Ezh1 and elongation-engaged 
RNA Polymerase II complexes at the PSD-95 gene promoter, while knock-down of Ezh1
reduces PSD-95 transcription. These results indicate that Ezh1 and Ezh2 have
antagonistic roles in regulating PSD-95 transcription.

© 2013.

PMID: 23932971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 20;288(38):27232-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.481184. Epub
2013 Aug 6.

Loss of epigenetic Kruppel-like factor 4 histone deacetylase
(KLF-4-HDAC)-mediated transcriptional suppression is crucial in increasing
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in breast cancer.

Ray A(1), Alalem M, Ray BK.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri 65211.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is recognized as an important
angiogenic factor that promotes angiogenesis in a series of pathological
conditions, including cancer, inflammation, and ischemic disorders. We have
recently shown that the inflammatory transcription factor SAF-1 is, at least in
part, responsible for the marked increase of VEGF levels in breast cancer. Here, 
we show that SAF-1-mediated induction of VEGF is repressed by KLF-4 transcription
factor. KLF-4 is abundantly present in normal breast epithelial cells, but its
level is considerably reduced in breast cancer cells and clinical cancer tissues.
In the human VEGF promoter, SAF-1- and KLF-4-binding elements are overlapping,
whereas SAF-1 induces and KLF-4 suppresses VEGF expression. Ectopic
overexpression of KLF-4 and RNAi-mediated inhibition of endogenous KLF-4
supported the role of KLF-4 as a transcriptional repressor of VEGF and an
inhibitor of angiogenesis in breast cancer cells. We show that KLF-4 recruits
histone deacetylases (HDACs) -2 and -3 at the VEGF promoter. Chronological ChIP
assays demonstrated the occupancy of KLF-4, HDAC2, and HDAC3 in the VEGF promoter
in normal MCF-10A cells but not in MDA-MB-231 cancer cells. Co-transfection of
KLF-4 and HDAC expression plasmids in breast cancer cells results in synergistic 
repression of VEGF expression and inhibition of angiogenic potential of these
carcinoma cells. Together these results identify a new mechanism of VEGF
up-regulation in cancer that involves concomitant loss of KLF-4-HDAC-mediated
transcriptional repression and active recruitment of SAF-1-mediated
transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC3779720
PMID: 23926105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Hear Res. 2013 Oct;304:167-78. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2013.07.017. Epub 2013 Aug
2.

Epigenetic alterations by NuRD and PRC2 in the neonatal mouse cochlea.

Layman WS(1), Sauceda MA, Zuo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, MS323, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. Electronic
address: wanda.layman@stjude.org.

Mammalian cochlear supporting cells remain quiescent at postnatal ages and
age-dependent changes in supporting cell proliferative capacity are evident.
Ectopic Atoh1 expression in neonatal supporting cells converts only a small
percentage of these cells into hair cell-like cells. Despite tremendous potential
for therapeutics, cellular reprogramming in the mammalian inner ear remains a
slow inefficient process that requires weeks, with most cells failing to
reprogram. Cellular reprogramming studies in other tissues have shown that
epigenetic inhibitors can significantly improve reprogramming efficiency. Very
little is known about epigenetic regulation in the mammalian inner ear, and
almost nothing is known about the histone modifications. Histone modifications
are vital for proper transcriptional regulation, and aberrant histone
modifications can cause defects in the regulation of genes required for normal
tissue development and maintenance. Our data indicate that cofactors of
repressive complexes such as NuRD and PRC2 are present in the neonatal organ of
Corti. These NuRD cofactors are present throughout most of the organ of Corti
from E18.5 until P4. By P6, these NuRD cofactors are mostly undetectable by
immunofluorescence and completely lost by P7, but are detectable again at P8 and 
continue to be present through P21. The PRC2 enzymatic subunit, EZH2 is also
highly present from E18.5 to P0 in the organ of Corti, but lost between P2 and
P4. However, EZH2 staining is evident again throughout the organ of Corti by P6
and persists through P21. Our data provide evidence that HDACs, DNA
methyltransferases, histone methyltransferases, and histone demethylases are
expressed postnatally within the organ of Corti, and may be targets for drug
inhibition to increase the capacity, speed, and efficiency of reprogramming a
supporting cell into a hair cell.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3784354
PMID: 23911933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2013;133(8):843-8.

Role of protein S-nitrosylation in central nervous system survival and
regeneration.

Koriyama Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa
University, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.
koriyama@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The retina has been regarded as 'an approachable part of the brain' for
investigating central nervous system (CNS). The optic nerve injury is a
well-accepted model to study the mechanisms of neural degeneration and/or axonal 
regeneration after trauma in the CNS. Nitric oxide (NO) is a gaseous messenger
molecule biosynthesized from L-arginine and molecular oxygen by NO synthase. Many
reports suggest that excess production of NO plays a crucial role in neuronal
cell death including in death of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). In contrast,
several lines of evidence indicate that NO can prevent neuronal death. In
general, NO mediates neuroprotection through two main signaling pathways: the
NO/cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) pathway and the S-nitrosylation pathway.
Especially, whether S-nitrosylation of proteins promotes RGCs survival and its
axonal regeneration after injury is unclear. Thus, we focused on the
S-nitrosylation-dependent mechanism of RGCs survival and axonal regeneration by
NO after nerve injury.

PMID: 23903223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Comput Chem. 2013 Oct 5;34(26):2270-83. doi: 10.1002/jcc.23390. Epub 2013 Jul
27.

Ligand release mechanisms and channels in histone deacetylases.

Kalyaanamoorthy S(1), Chen YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Computer Engineering, La Trobe University, 
Melbourne, Australia; CSIRO Ecosystem Sciences, Canberra, Australia.

Exploring the molecular channels of class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) with
buried active sites are important to understand their structures and
functionalities. In this work, we perform hybrid classical molecular dynamics and
random acceleration molecular dynamics simulations to explore the B3N [i.e.,
(4-(dimethylamino)N-[7(hydroxyamino)-7-oxoheptyle] benzamide)] exit channels in
the x-ray crystal structures of HDAC3 and HDAC8 enzymes. Our simulations identify
B3N release through four different channels in HDAC3 (denoted as A1, A2, B1, and 
B2) and HDAC8 (referred as A1, B1, B2, and B3) enzymes, among which egression
through channel A1 is more predominant in both the enzymes. This mechanism is
similar to ligand release in HDAC1 and HDAC2 described in our previous study and 
can be the fingerprint ligand release mechanisms in class I HDACs. Ligand release
events through B channels, on the other hand, are different among HDAC3 and
HDAC8, highlighting the significances of substituted residues in controlling the 
access to these channels This study reveals a novel aromatic gating mechanism
elicited by TYR154-TRP141-TYR111 that controls the B3N access to all the B
channels in HDAC8. The TRP141 in HDAC8 is substituted by LEU133 in HDAC3, which
do not hinder the access to B channels in HDAC3. However, two hydrogen bonded
barricades formed as ARG28-GLY297-GLY295-GLY131 and
TRP129-ARG28-ALA130-LEU29-TRP129 obstruct the B3N from exploring the B channels
in HDAC3. The structural and dynamical characterizations of molecular channels
and ligand unbinding mechanisms reported in this study provide novel structural
insights and atomic level perspectives on HDAC3 and HDAC8 enzymes, thereby
potentially aiding in the design of more specific HDAC inhibitors.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23893931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Orthop Res. 2013 Dec;31(12):1999-2005. doi: 10.1002/jor.22447. Epub 2013 Jul
24.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors as potential therapeutic approaches for chordoma: 
an immunohistochemical and functional analysis.

Scheipl S(1), Lohberger B, Rinner B, Froehlich EV, Beham A, Quehenberger F,
Lazáry A, Pal Varga P, Haybaeck J, Leithner A, Liegl B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical University of
Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 5, 8036, Graz, Austria.

Chordomas are rare malignancies of the axial skeleton. Therapy is mainly
restricted to surgery. This study investigates histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors as potential therapeutics for chordomas. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
was performed using the HDAC 1-6 antibodies on 50 chordoma samples (34 primary
tumors, 16 recurrences) from 44 patients (27 male, 17 female).
Pan-HDAC-inhibitors Vorinostat (SAHA), Panobinostat (LBH-589), and Belinostat
(PXD101) were tested for their efficacy in the chordoma cell line MUG-Chor1 via
Western blot, cell cycle analysis, caspase 3/7 activity (MUG-Chor1, UCh-1),
cleaved caspase-3, and PARP cleavage. p-Values below 0.05 were considered
significant. IHC was negative for HDAC1, positive for HDAC2 in most (n = 36;
72%), and for HDACs 3-6 in all specimens available (n = 43; 86%). HDAC6
expression was strongest. SAHA and LBH-589, but not PXD101 caused a significant
increase of G2/M phase cells and of cleaved caspase-3 (p = 0.0003, and p = 0.0014
after 72 h, respectively), and a peak of caspase 3/7 activity. PARP cleavage
confirmed apoptosis. The presented chordoma series expressed HDACs 2-6 with
strongest expression of HDAC6. SAHA and LBH-589 significantly increased apoptosis
and changed cell cycle distribution in vitro. HDAC-inhibitors should be further
evaluated as therapeutic options for chordoma.

© 2013 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 23893747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Clin Immunol. 2013 Oct;149(1):46-54. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2013.06.006. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Aberrant histone modification in peripheral blood B cells from patients with
systemic sclerosis.

Wang Y(1), Yang Y, Luo Y, Yin Y, Wang Q, Li Y, Kanekura T, Wang J, Liang G, Zhao 
M, Lu Q, Xiao R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
139 Ren-Min Road, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate alterations in histone modifications in B cells and
their role in the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis (SSc).
METHODS: Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K9 methylation in B cells of
SSc were tested by EpiQuik assay kits. Related histone modifier enzymes were
measured by RT-PCR and Western blot.
RESULTS: Global histone H4 hyperacetylation and global histone H3K9
hypomethylation were observed in SSc B cells compared with controls. Expression
of JHDM2A was significantly increased but HDAC2, HDAC7, and, SUV39H2 were
significantly down-regulated in SSc B cells relative to controls. Global histone 
H4 acetylation and the expression of HDAC2 were negatively correlated. Global
histone H3K9 methylation and the expression of SUV39H2 protein were positively
correlated. Global H4 acetylation was positively correlated with disease activity
and expression of HDAC2 protein was negatively correlated with skin thickness.
CONCLUSIONS: Histone modifications were altered in B cells in SSc correlating
with skin thickness and disease activity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23891737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Genet Genomics. 2013 Jul 20;40(7):339-46. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2013.04.007. Epub 
2013 May 9.

The epigenetic switches for neural development and psychiatric disorders.

Lv J(1), Xin Y, Zhou W, Qiu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China.

The most remarkable feature of the nervous system is that the development and
functions of the brain are largely reshaped by postnatal experiences, in joint
with genetic landscapes. The nature vs. nurture argument reminds us that both
genetic and epigenetic information is indispensable for the normal function of
the brain. The epigenetic regulatory mechanisms in the central nervous system
have been revealed over last a decade. Moreover, the mutations of epigenetic
modulator genes have been shown to be implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders,
such as autism spectrum disorders. The epigenetic study has initiated in the
neuroscience field for a relative short period of time. In this review, we will
summarize recent discoveries about epigenetic regulation on neural development,
synaptic plasticity, learning and memory, as well as neuropsychiatric disorders. 
Although the comprehensive view of how epigenetic regulation contributes to the
function of the brain is still not completed, the notion that brain, the most
complicated organ of organisms, is profoundly shaped by epigenetic switches is
widely accepted.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23876774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 10;8(7):e66710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066710. Print 2013.

TdIF1 recognizes a specific DNA sequence through its Helix-Turn-Helix and AT-hook
motifs to regulate gene transcription.

Kubota T(1), Koiwai O, Hori K, Watanabe N, Koiwai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Science, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba, Japan.

TdIF1 was originally identified as a protein that directly binds to DNA
polymerase TdT. TdIF1 is also thought to function in transcription regulation,
because it binds directly to the transcriptional factor TReP-132, and to histone 
deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. Here we show that TdIF1 recognizes a specific DNA
sequence and regulates gene transcription. By constructing TdIF1 mutants, we
identify amino acid residues essential for its interaction with DNA. An in vitro 
DNA selection assay, SELEX, reveals that TdIF1 preferentially binds to the
sequence 5'-GNTGCATG-3' following an AT-tract, through its Helix-Turn-Helix and
AT-hook motifs. We show that four repeats of this recognition sequence allow
TdIF1 to regulate gene transcription in a plasmid-based luciferase reporter
assay. We demonstrate that TdIF1 associates with the RAB20 promoter, and RAB20
gene transcription is reduced in TdIF1-knocked-down cells, suggesting that TdIF1 
stimulates RAB20 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3707907
PMID: 23874396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jan;35(1):61-71. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1007-5. Epub 2013 Jul 
20.

Clinical significance of histone deacetylase (HDAC)-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6
expression in human malignant and benign thyroid lesions.

Giaginis C(1), Alexandrou P, Delladetsima I, Giannopoulou I, Patsouris E,
Theocharis S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Athens, 75 M.
Asias str., Goudi, Athens, GR11527, Greece.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been associated with human malignant tumor
development and progression, and HDAC inhibitors are currently being explored as 
anticancer agents in clinical trials. The present study aimed to evaluate the
clinical significance of HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 proteins' expression 
in human malignant and benign thyroid lesions. HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6
proteins' expression was assessed immunohistochemically on paraffin-embedded
thyroid tissues obtained from 74 patients with benign and malignant thyroid
lesions. Enhanced HDAC-2 and HDAC-6 expression was significantly more frequently 
observed in malignant, compared to benign, thyroid lesions (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0042 and
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0069, respectively). Enhanced HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 expression was
significantly more frequently observed in cases with papillary carcinoma compared
to hyperplastic nodules (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0065, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0394, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0061, respectively).
In malignant thyroid lesions, HDAC-1, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 expression was
significantly associated with tumor size (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0169, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0056, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0234,
respectively); HDAC-2 expression with lymphatic and vascular invasion (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0299
and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0391, respectively); and HDAC-4 expression with capsular invasion
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0464). The cellular pattern of HDAC-1 and HDAC-2 distribution (nuclear vs.
nuclear and cytoplasmic) presented a distinct discrimination between malignant
and benign thyroid lesions (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0030 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0028, respectively) as well as
between papillary carcinoma and hyperplastic nodules (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0036 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0028, 
respectively). HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 may be associated with the
malignant thyroid transformation and could be considered as useful biomarkers and
possible therapeutic targets in this neoplasia.

PMID: 23873102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Transcription. 2013 Jul-Aug;4(4):167-71. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

A new role for an old player: steroid receptor RNA Activator (SRA) represses
hormone inducible genes.

Beato M, Vicent GP.

In breast cancer cells the Steroid Receptor ¬RNA Activator (SRA) acts as scaffold
of a complex containing HP1<U+03B3>, LSD1, HDAC1/2 and CoREST, which contributes to
repression of key hormone-inducible genes that must be kept silent in the absence
of hormone.

PMCID: PMC3977916
PMID: 23863201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Asia Pac Psychiatry. 2013 Mar;5(1):11-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1758-5872.2012.00205.x.
Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Associations of histone deacetylase-2 and histone deacetylase-3 genes with
schizophrenia in a Chinese population.

Han H(1), Yu Y, Shi J, Yao Y, Li W, Kong N, Wu Y, Wang C, Wang S, Meng X, Kou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Jilin
University, Changchun, China.

INTRODUCTION: To explore the association between histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2)
and histone deacetylase-3 (HDAC3) gene polymorphisms and schizophrenia.
METHODS: A total of 208 family trios consisting of fathers, mothers and affected 
offspring with schizophrenia were recruited as our subjects. Four tag SNPs on
HDAC2 (rs10499080, rs6568819, rs2499618 and rs13204445) and two tag SNPs on HDAC3
(rs11741808, rs2530223) genes were selected. The Mass ARRAY Assay Design software
(Sequenom) was used to design amplification and allele specific extension
primers. The Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) for genotypic distributions was
tested using the chi-square goodness-of-fit test. Allelic association for a
single tag SNP was analyzed by using family-based association tests including the
haplotype-based haplotype relative risk (HHRR) test and the transmission
disequilibrium test (TDT).
RESULTS: The genotypic distributions of HDAC2 SNPs rs6568819, rs2499618 and
rs13204445 and HDAC3 SNPs rs11741808 and rs2530223 were all in Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium (P > 0.05). HHRR analysis revealed no associations between the SNPs
and schizophrenia (P > 0.05). In addition, the TDT did not show any significant
associations between HDAC2 and HDAC3 SNPs and schizophrenia (P > 0.05).
DISCUSSION: HDAC2 and HDAC3 might not be associated with schizophrenia in the
Chinese population.

Copyright © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23857786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 23;110(30):12331-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222684110. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Loss of corepressor PER2 under hypoxia up-regulates OCT1-mediated EMT gene
expression and enhances tumor malignancy.

Hwang-Verslues WW(1), Chang PH, Jeng YM, Kuo WH, Chiang PH, Chang YC, Hsieh TH,
Su FY, Lin LC, Abbondante S, Yang CY, Hsu HM, Yu JC, Chang KJ, Shew JY, Lee EY,
Lee WH.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

The circadian clock gene Period2 (PER2) has been suggested to be a tumor
suppressor. However, detailed mechanistic evidence has not been provided to
support this hypothesis. We found that loss of PER2 enhanced invasion and
activated expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes including
TWIST1, SLUG, and SNAIL. This finding was corroborated by clinical observation
that PER2 down-regulation was associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer
patients. We further demonstrated that PER2 served as a transcriptional
corepressor, which recruited polycomb proteins EZH2 and SUZ12 as well as HDAC2 to
octamer transcription factor 1 (OCT1) (POU2F1) binding sites of the TWIST1 and
SLUG promoters to repress expression of these EMT genes. Hypoxia, a condition
commonly observed in tumors, caused PER2 degradation and disrupted the PER2
repressor complex, leading to activation of EMT gene expression. This result was 
further supported by clinical data showing a significant negative correlation
between hypoxia and PER2. Thus, our findings clearly demonstrate the tumor
suppression function of PER2 and elucidate a pathway by which hypoxia promotes
EMT via degradation of PER2.

PMCID: PMC3725072
PMID: 23836662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2013 Jul 9;12:101. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-12-101.

Exercise and diabetes have opposite effects on the assembly and O-GlcNAc
modification of the mSin3A/HDAC1/2 complex in the heart.

Cox EJ, Marsh SA.

BACKGROUND: Exercise causes physiological cardiac hypertrophy and benefits the
diabetic heart. Mammalian switch-independent 3A (mSin3A) and histone deacetylases
(HDACs) 1 and 2 regulate hypertrophic genes through associations with the DNA
binding proteins repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) and
O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine transferase (OGT). O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine 
(O-GlcNAc) is a glucose derivative that is chronically elevated in diabetic
hearts, and a previous study showed that exercise reduces cardiac O-GlcNAc. We
hypothesized that O-GlcNAc and OGT would physically associate with mSin3A/HDAC1/2
in the heart, and that this interaction would be altered by diabetes and
exercise.
METHODS: 8-week-old type 2 diabetic db/db (db) and non-diabetic C57 mice were
randomized to treadmill exercise or sedentary groups for 1 or 4 weeks.
RESULTS: O-GlcNAc was significantly higher in db hearts and increased with
exercise. Db hearts showed lower levels of mSin3A, HDAC1, and HDAC2 protein, but 
higher levels of HDAC2 mRNA and HDAC1/2 deacetylase activity. Elevated HDAC
activity was associated with significantly blunted expression of a-actin and
brain natriuretic peptide in db hearts. In sedentary db hearts,
co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that mSin3A and OGT were less associated
with HDAC1 and HDAC2, respectively, compared to sedentary C57 controls; however, 
exercise removed these differences.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that diabetes and exercise oppositely affect
interactions between pro-hypertrophic transcription factors, and suggest that an 
increase in total cardiac O-GlcNAc is a mechanism by which exercise benefits type
2 diabetic hearts.

PMCID: PMC3708830
PMID: 23835259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Curr Med Chem. 2014;21(14):1583-94.

Targeting proteasomal pathways by dietary curcumin for cancer prevention and
treatment.

Hasima N, Aggarwal BB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cytokine Research Laboratory, Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, 77030, United
States. aggarwal@mdanderson.org.

Curcumin, a major component of the golden spice turmeric (Curcuma longa), has
been linked with the prevention and treatment of a wide variety of cancers
through modulation of multiple cell signaling pathways. Since the first report
from our laboratory in 1995 that curcumin can inhibit activation of the
proinflammatory transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B by inhibiting the 26S proteasomal
degradation of I<U+03BA>Ba, an inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B, this yellow pigment has been shown to
inhibit the protease activities of the proteasome. The carbonyl carbons of the
curcumin molecule directly interact with the hydroxyl group of the amino-terminal
threonine residue of the proteasomal CT-L subunit of 20S proteasome and cellular 
26S proteasome. Curcumin is also a potent inhibitor of COP9 signalosome and
associated kinases, casein kinase 2 and protein kinase D, all linked to the
ubiquitin-proteasomal system (UPS). Curcumin can also directly inhibit ubiquitin 
isopeptidases, a family of deubiquitinases (DUBs) that salvage ubiquitin for
reuse by the 26S proteasome system. The inhibition of this enzyme by curcumin is 
mediated through a,ß-unsaturated ketone and two sterically accessible ß-carbons. 
Regulation of the UPS pathway by curcumin has been linked to regulation of
cancer-linked inflammatory proteins (such as COX-2 and iNOS), transcription
factors (NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT3, Sp, AP-1, GADD153/CHOP, HIF-1a), growth factors (VEGF,
HER2), apoptotic proteins (p53, Bcl-2, survivin, DNA topoisomerase II, HDAC2,
p300, hTERT) and cell cycle proteins (cyclin D1, cyclin E, cyclin B, p21, p27)
associated with the prevention and therapy of cancer. Interestingly, the effect
of curcumin on 26S proteasome appears to be dose-dependent, as low doses (=1 µM) 
increase proteasome activity whereas high doses (=10 µM) inhibit the proteasome
activity. In this review, we discuss in detail how modulation of these targets by
curcumin is linked to prevention and treatment of cancer.

PMID: 23834173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. FEBS Lett. 2013 Aug 19;587(16):2542-51. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.06.029. Epub 
2013 Jul 2.

Repression of NR4A1 by a chromatin modifier promotes docetaxel resistance in PC-3
human prostate cancer cells.

Yu L(1), Su YS, Zhao J, Wang H, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
No. 127 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China.

Epigenetic silencing mechanisms play an important role in chemoresistance of
human cancer. Here we report the upregulated expression of metastasis-associated 
protein 1 (MTA1), a component of the nucleosome remodeling deacetylation (NuRD)
complex, in chemoresistant prostate cancer (PCa). MTA1 knockdown in PC-3 cells
inhibited cell proliferation and enhanced docetaxel (DTX)-induced cell death.
Conversely, overexpression of MTA1 promotes DTX chemoresistance in PC-3 cells.
MTA1 acted as a potent corepressor of the nuclear receptor NR4A1 transcription by
interacting with histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2). These findings suggest that MTA1 
may serve as a novel DTX-resistance promoter in PC-3 cells.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Med Chem. 2013 Aug 8;56(15):6156-74. doi: 10.1021/jm400634n. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Discovery of potent, isoform-selective inhibitors of histone deacetylase
containing chiral heterocyclic capping groups and a N-(2-aminophenyl)benzamide
binding unit.

Marson CM(1), Matthews CJ, Yiannaki E, Atkinson SJ, Soden PE, Shukla L, Lamadema 
N, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University College London, Christopher Ingold
Laboratories, 20 Gordon Street, London WC1H OAJ, UK. c.m.marson@ucl.ac.uk

The synthesis of a novel series of potent chiral inhibitors of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) is described that contain a heterocyclic capping group and a
N-(2-aminophenyl)benzamide unit that binds in the active site. In vitro assays
for the inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3-NCoR1, and HDAC8 by the
N-(2-aminophenyl)benzamide 24a gave respective IC50 values of 930, 85, 12, and
4100 nM, exhibiting class I selectivity and potent inhibition of HDAC3-NCoR1.
Both imidazolinone and thiazoline rings are shown to be effective replacements
for the pyrimidine ring present in many other 2-(aminophenyl)benzamides
previously reported, an example of each ring system at 1 µM causing an increase
in histone H3K9 acetylation in the human cell lines Jurkat and HeLa and an
increase in cell death consistent with induction of apoptosis. Inhibition of the 
growth of MCF-7, A549, DU145, and HCT116 cell lines by 24a was observed, with
respective IC50 values of 5.4, 5.8, 6.4, and 2.2 mM.

PMID: 23829483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Sep 15;305(6):C601-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00042.2013. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

O-GlcNAc transferase inhibits LPS-mediated expression of inducible nitric oxide
synthase through an increased interaction with mSin3A in RAW264.7 cells.

Hwang SY(1), Hwang JS, Kim SY, Han IO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, Inha University,
Incheon, Korea.

O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) transferase (OGT), which catalyzes the
addition of a single ß-N-GlcNAc unit to target proteins, has been shown to act as
a transcriptional regulator. In the current study, we discovered that OGT exerted
inhibitory effects on the LPS-driven activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS). In response to LPS, OGT exhibited an increased interaction
with the transcriptional corepressor mammalian Sin3A (mSin3A). Furthermore,
mSin3A, histone deacetylase (HDAC)1, and HDAC2 displayed increased binding to the
iNOS promoter in response to LPS. Treatment with GlcN, in contrast, inhibits
LPS-induced inflammation and decreased LPS-mediated recruitment of OGT, mSin3A,
and HDACs. LPS treatment also resulted in the hypo-O-GlcNAcylation of mSin3A,
which was reversed by GlcN. When the effect of the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A 
(TSA) on LPS- and/or GlcN-mediated iNOS protein/mRNA induction was investigated, 
the results revealed that TSA dose dependently enhanced iNOS expression in
response to LPS and/or GlcN. In addition, histone acetyltransferases, p300, and
cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP) enhanced LPS- and/or 
GlcN-induced iNOS protein expression. These results collectively suggest that OGT
inhibits LPS-driven NF-<U+03BA>B activation and subsequent iNOS transcription by
modulating histone acetylation either directly or indirectly.

PMID: 23824843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Epigenetics. 2013 Jul;8(7):756-64. doi: 10.4161/epi.25202. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

Class I HDAC imaging using [ (3)H]CI-994 autoradiography.

Wang Y(1), Zhang YL, Hennig K, Gale JP, Hong Y, Cha A, Riley M, Wagner F,
Haggarty SJ, Holson E, Hooker J.

Author information: 
(1)Athinoula A. Martinos Center, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.

[ (3)H]CI-994, a radioactive isotopologue of the benzamide CI-994, a class I
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), was evaluated as an autoradiography probe 
for ex vivo labeling and localizing of class I HDAC (isoforms 1-3) in the rodent 
brain. After protocol optimization, up to 80% of total binding was attributed to 
specific binding. Notably, like other benzamide HDACi, [ (3)H]CI-994 exhibits
slow binding kinetics when measured in vitro with isolated enzymes and ex vivo
when used for autoradiographic mapping of HDAC1-3 density. The regional
distribution and density of HDAC1-3 was determined through a series of saturation
and kinetics experiments. The binding properties of [ (3)H]CI-994 to HDAC1-3 were
characterized and the data were used to determine the regional Bmax of the target
proteins. Kd values, determined from slice autoradiography, were between 9.17 and
15.6 nM. The HDAC1-3 density (Bmax), averaged over whole brain sections, was of
12.9 picomol · mg(-1) protein. The highest HDAC1-3 density was found in the
cerebellum, followed by hippocampus and cortex. Moderate to low receptor density 
was found in striatum, hypothalamus and thalamus. These data were correlated with
semi-quantitative measures of each HDAC isoform using western blot analysis and
it was determined that autoradiographic images most likely represent the sum of
HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 protein density. In competition experiments, [
(3)H]CI-994 binding can be dose-dependently blocked with other HDAC inhibitors,
including suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA). In summary, we have developed
the first known autoradiography tool for imaging class I HDAC enzymes. Although
validated in the CNS, [ (3)H]CI-994 will be applicable and beneficial to other
target tissues and can be used to evaluate HDAC inhibition in tissues for novel
therapies being developed. [ (3)H]CI-994 is now an enabling imaging tool to study
the relationship between diseases and epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC3781195
PMID: 23803584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Jan;134(1):24-32. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.283. Epub 2013
Jun 21.

Disrupted ectodermal organ morphogenesis in mice with a conditional histone
deacetylase 1, 2 deletion in the epidermis.

Hughes MW(1), Jiang TX(1), Lin SJ(1), Leung Y(1), Kobielak K(1), Widelitz RB(1), 
Chuong CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are present in the epidermal layer of the skin,
outer root sheath, and hair matrix. To investigate how histone acetylation
affects skin morphogenesis and homeostasis, mice were generated with a K14
promoter-mediated reduction of Hdac1 or Hdac2. The skin of HDAC1 null (K14-Cre
Hdac1(cKO/cKO)) mice exhibited a spectrum of lesions, including irregularly
thickened interfollicular epidermis, alopecia, hair follicle dystrophy, claw
dystrophy, and abnormal pigmentation. Hairs are sparse, short, and intermittently
coiled. The distinct pelage hair types are lost. During the first hair cycle,
hairs are lost and replaced by dystrophic hair follicles with dilated
infundibulae. The dystrophic hair follicle epithelium is stratified and is
positive for K14, involucrin, and TRP63, but negative for keratin 10. Some
dystrophic follicles are K15 positive, but mature hair fiber keratins are absent.
The digits form extra hyperpigmented claws on the lateral sides.
Hyperpigmentation is observed in the interfollicular epithelium, the tail, and
the feet. Hdac1 and Hdac2 dual transgenic mice (K14-Cre Hdac1(cKO/cKO)
Hdac2(+/cKO)) have similar but more obvious abnormalities. These results show
that suppression of epidermal HDAC activity leads to improper ectodermal organ
morphogenesis and disrupted hair follicle regeneration and homeostasis, as well
as indirect effects on pigmentation.

PMCID: PMC3843967
PMID: 23792463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Cell. 2013 Jul 11;51(1):57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.05.020. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Class I HDACs share a common mechanism of regulation by inositol phosphates.

Millard CJ(1), Watson PJ, Celardo I, Gordiyenko Y, Cowley SM, Robinson CV,
Fairall L, Schwabe JW.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Structural Biology, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Leicester, UK.

Class I histone deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3) are recruited by cognate
corepressor proteins into specific transcriptional repression complexes that
target HDAC activity to chromatin resulting in chromatin condensation and
transcriptional silencing. We previously reported the structure of HDAC3 in
complex with the SMRT corepressor. This structure revealed the presence of
inositol-tetraphosphate [Ins(1,4,5,6)P4] at the interface of the two proteins. It
was previously unclear whether the role of Ins(1,4,5,6)P4 is to act as a
structural cofactor or a regulator of HDAC3 activity. Here we report the
structure of HDAC1 in complex with MTA1 from the NuRD complex. The ELM2-SANT
domains from MTA1 wrap completely around HDAC1 occupying both sides of the active
site such that the adjacent BAH domain is ideally positioned to recruit
nucleosomes to the active site of the enzyme. Functional assays of both the HDAC1
and HDAC3 complexes reveal that Ins(1,4,5,6)P4 is a bona fide conserved regulator
of class I HDAC complexes.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3710971
PMID: 23791785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Sep;47(9):1204-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.05.028.
Epub 2013 Jun 15.

Antidepressants and mood stabilizers effects on histone deacetylase expression in
C57BL/6 mice: Brain region specific changes.

Ookubo M(1), Kanai H, Aoki H, Yamada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Shiga University of Medical Science, Japan;
Department of Psychiatry, Minakuchi Hospital, Koka City, Japan.
mookubo@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp

To determine whether treatment with various antidepressants or mood stabilizers
leads to region-specific changes, we investigated the effects of their subchronic
(14 days of intraperitoneal injection) administration on the tissue concentration
of monoamines, dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine, and the protein
expression of acetylated histone H3 (AcH3) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) in
the mouse striatum (ST), nucleus accumbens (Acb), hippocampus (Hip), cingulate
cortex (Cg), and amygdala (Amy). Subchronic administration with the
antidepressants (S)-citalopram oxalate (ECM), duloxetine hydrochloride (DLX), and
mirtazapine (MIR) commonly induced significant increases in dopamine and
serotonin levels in the ST and Cg. By contrast, no common profiles for dopamine, 
serotonin, or norepinephrine were identified in the Acb, Hip, or Amy. Treatment
with sodium valproate (VPA), lithium chloride (Li), lamotrigine (LTG),
levetiracetam (LTM), olanzapine (OLZ), clozapine (CLZ), clomipramine (CLM), ECM, 
and DLX induced significant increases in AcH3 expression in the Acb, while
treatment with CLM, ECM, DLX, MIR, carbamazepine (CBZ), LTG, LTM, OLZ, or CLZ
induced significant increases in HDAC2 and HDAC3 in the ST. CLM, MIR, VPA, CBZ,
LTG, LTM, OLZ, or CLZ induced significant increases in HDAC3 in the Cg, and ECM, 
DLX, MIR, VPA, CBZ, LTG, LTM, or OLZ resulted in significant increases in HDAC5
in the Amy. Collectively, the changes of monoamine content were restricted for
mood stabilizer effects, but increased expression of HDAC2, HDAC3, or HDAC5 in
the ST, Cg, or Amy was often found, supporting the possibility that
antidepressant-like effects involve epigenetic modifications associated with
changes in HDAC expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23777937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Asian J Androl. 2013 Sep;15(5):640-5. doi: 10.1038/aja.2013.61. Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 mitigates profibrotic TGF-ß1 responses in
fibroblasts derived from Peyronie's plaque.

Ryu JK(1), Kim WJ, Choi MJ, Park JM, Song KM, Kwon MH, Das ND, Kwon KD, Batbold
D, Yin GN, Suh JK.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Sexual Medicine and Department of Urology, Inha
University School of Medicine, Incheon, Korea.

Epigenetic modifications, such as histone acetylation/deacetylation, have been
shown to play a role in the pathogenesis of fibrotic disease. Peyronie's disease 
(PD) is a localized fibrotic process of the tunica albuginea, which leads to
penile deformity. This study was undertaken to determine the anti-fibrotic effect
of small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated silencing of histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) in primary fibroblasts derived from human PD plaque. PD fibroblasts were 
pre-treated with HDAC2 siRNA and then stimulated with transforming growth
factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1). Protein was extracted from treated fibroblasts for Western
blotting and the membranes were probed with antibody to phospho-Smad2/Smad2,
phospho-Smad3/Smad3, smooth muscle a-actin and extracellular matrix proteins,
including plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, fibronectin, collagen I and collagen
IV. We also performed immunocytochemistry to detect the expression of
extracellular matrix proteins and to examine the effect of HDAC2 siRNA on the
TGF-ß1-induced nuclear translocation of Smad2/3 in fibroblasts. Knockdown of
HDAC2 in PD fibroblasts abrogated TGF-ß1-induced extracellular matrix production 
by blocking TGF-ß1-induced phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Smad2 and
Smad3, and by inhibiting TGF-ß1-induced transdifferentiation of fibroblasts into 
myofibroblasts. Decoding the individual function of the HDAC isoforms by use of
siRNA technology, preferably siRNA for HDAC2, may lead to the development of
specific and safe epigenetic therapies for PD.

PMCID: PMC3881653
PMID: 23770939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jun 13;13:286. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-286.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor SAHA acts in synergism with fenretinide and
doxorubicin to control growth of rhabdoid tumor cells.

Kerl K(1), Ries D, Unland R, Borchert C, Moreno N, Hasselblatt M, Jürgens H, Kool
M, Görlich D, Eveslage M, Jung M, Meisterernst M, Frühwald M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Childrens'
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdoid tumors are highly aggressive malignancies affecting infants 
and very young children. In many instances these tumors are resistant to
conventional type chemotherapy necessitating alternative approaches.
METHODS: Proliferation assays (MTT), apoptosis (propidium iodide/annexin V) and
cell cycle analysis (DAPI), RNA expression microarrays and western blots were
used to identify synergism of the HDAC (histone deacetylase) inhibitor SAHA with 
fenretinide, tamoxifen and doxorubicin in rhabdoidtumor cell lines.
RESULTS: HDAC1 and HDAC2 are overexpressed in primary rhabdoid tumors and
rhabdoid tumor cell lines. Targeting HDACs in rhabdoid tumors induces cell cycle 
arrest and apoptosis. On the other hand HDAC inhibition induces deregulated gene 
programs (MYCC-, RB program and the stem cell program) in rhabdoid tumors. These 
programs are in general associated with cell cycle progression. Targeting these
activated pro-proliferative genes by combined approaches of HDAC-inhibitors plus 
fenretinide, which inhibits cyclinD1, exhibit strong synergistic effects on
induction of apoptosis. Furthermore, HDAC inhibition sensitizes rhabdoid tumor
cell lines to cell death induced by chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that HDAC inhibitor treatment in combination
with fenretinide or conventional chemotherapy is a promising tool for the
treatment of chemoresistant rhabdoid tumors.

PMCID: PMC3693872
PMID: 23764045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Zygote. 2015 Feb;23(1):19-26. doi: 10.1017/S0967199413000245. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Sodium butyrate improves the cloned yak embryo viability and corrects gene
expression patterns.

Xiong XR(1), Lan DL(1), Li J(2), Wang Y(1), Zhong JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Technology,Southwest University for
Nationalities,Chengdu,Sichuan 610041,China. (2)College of Life Science and
Technology,Southwest University for Nationalities,Chengdu,Sichuan 610041,PR
China.

Interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer (iSCNT), a powerful tool in basic
scientific research, has been used widely to increase and preserve the population
of endangered species. Yak (Bos grunniens) is one of these species. Development
to term of interspecies cloned yak embryos has not been achieved, possibly due to
abnormal epigenetic reprogramming. Previous studies have demonstrated that
treatment of intraspecies cloned embryos with (NaBu) significantly improves
nuclear-cytoplasmic reprogramming and viability in vitro. Therefore, in this
study, we evaluated the effect of optimal NaBu concentration and exposure time on
preimplantation development of yak iSCNT embryos and on the expression patterns
of developmentally important genes. The results showed that 8-cell rate,
blastocyst formation rate and total cell number increased significantly compared 
with their untreated counterparts when yak iSCNT embryos were treated with 5 nM
NaBu for 12 h after activation, but that the 2-cell stage embryo rate was not
significantly different. The treatment of NaBu also increased significantly the
expression levels of Oct-4 and decreased the expression levels of HDAC-2, Dnmt-1 
and IGF-1; the expression patterns of these genes were more similar to that of
their bovine-yak in vitro fertilization (BY-IVF) counterparts. The results
described above indicated that NaBu treatment improved developmental competence
in vitro and 'corrected' the gene expression patterns of yak iSCNT embryos.

PMID: 23759515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Jul;169(5):1024-34. doi: 10.1111/bph.12187.

A novel macrolide/fluoroketolide, solithromycin (CEM-101), reverses
corticosteroid insensitivity via phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway inhibition.

Kobayashi Y(1), Wada H, Rossios C, Takagi D, Charron C, Barnes PJ, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Corticosteroid insensitivity is a major therapeutic
problem for some inflammatory diseases including chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), and it is known to be induced by reduced histone deacetylase
(HDAC)-2 activities via activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
pathway. The aim of this study is to evaluate effects of a novel
macrolide/fluoroketolide, solithromycin (SOL, CEM-101), on corticosteroid
sensitivity induced by oxidative stress.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Corticosteroid sensitivity was determined by IC50/EC50 of 
dexamethasone (Dex) on TNF-a-induced CXCL8 production in U937 monocytic cell line
and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from COPD patients. Activities of
HDAC and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) were measured by fluorescence-based assay 
in cells exposed to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). We also investigated steroid
insensitive airway neutrophilia in cigarette smoke exposed mice in vivo.
KEY RESULTS: SOL (10 µM) restored Dex sensitivity in PBMC from COPD patients,
H2O2-treated U937 cells and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-differentiated U937
cells. In addition, SOL restored HDAC activity with concomitant inhibition of Akt
phosphorylation as surrogate marker of PI3K activation. The inhibition of Akt
phosphorylation by SOL was due to increased PP2A phosphatase activity, which was 
reduced in COPD and oxidative stress model. Other known macrolides, such as
eryhthromycin, clarithromycin and azithromycin, were significantly less effective
in these responses. In cigarette smoke-exposed mice, SOL (100 mg kg(-1), po)
showed significant but weak inhibition of neutrophilia, whereas Dex (10 mg
kg(-1), p.o.) showed no such effect. However, a combination of SOL and Dex
inhibited neutrophilia by over 50%.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: SOL has potential as novel therapy for
corticosteroid-insensitive diseases such as COPD.

© 2013 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2013 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3696326
PMID: 23758162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2013 Apr-Jun;26(2):371-81.

Histone modifications of Notch1 promoter affect lung CD4+ T cell differentiation 
in asthmatic rats.

Cui ZL(1), Gu W, Ding T, Peng XH, Chen X, Luan CY, Han RC, Xu WG, Guo XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, XinHua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Asthma is an inflammatory disease of the airways, and the current treatment in
managing asthma is the control of inflammation. Notch signaling pathway has been 
linked to T-cell imbalance. The present study aimed to explore the histone
modifications of Notch1 promoter in normal and asthmatic lung CD4+ T cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the acetylation levels of
total H3, H4, site-specific H3K9, H3K14, H3K27, H3K18, H4K16, and the
trimethylation levels of H3K4, H3K79 of Notch1 gene promoter were increased
significantly in asthmatic lung CD4+ T cells compared to the control group, which
correlated with increased P300, PCAF activity and decreased HDAC1, HDAC2
activity. After intervention of garcinol, a potent inhibitor of histone
acetyltransferases, in asthmatic lung CD4+ T cells, HAT activity decreased
significantly and the increased Notch1 and hes-1 expression was reversed. The
total H3ac, H4ac, site-specific H3K9ac, H3K14ac, H3K27ac, H3K18ac, H4K16ac and
H3K79me3 levels of Notch1 gene promoter decreased significantly, and the H3K4me3,
H3K9me3, H4K20me3 levels had no significant difference. We further investigated
the suppressive effects of GAR on asthmatic parameters. Results showed that the
levels of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 were significantly reduced and a small reverse
trend was found in the level of IFN-g after GAR treatment. Furthermore, the
expression of NF-&#954;B and AP-1 reduced significantly. These results suggest
that asthma is associated with changes in the epigenetic status of Notch1
promoter, including abnormal histone acetylation and methylation, and GAR may
have applications in the treatment of asthma.

PMID: 23755752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Hepatology. 2013 Dec;58(6):2089-98. doi: 10.1002/hep.26542. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Loss of histone deacetylases 1 and 2 in hepatocytes impairs murine liver
regeneration through Ki67 depletion.

Xia J(1), Zhou Y, Ji H, Wang Y, Wu Q, Bao J, Ye F, Shi Y, Bu H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Transplant Engineering and Immunology, Ministry of Health,
Chengdu, China; State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Chengdu, China.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) are ubiquitously expressed in
tissues, including the liver, and play critical roles in numerous
physiopathological processes. Little is known regarding the role of HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in liver regeneration. In this study we generated mice in which Hdac1,
Hdac2 or both genes were selectively knocked out in hepatocytes to investigate
the role of these genes in liver regeneration following hepatic injury induced by
partial hepatectomy or carbon tetrachloride administration. The loss of HDAC1
and/or HDAC2 (HDAC1/2) protein resulted in impaired liver regeneration. HDAC1/2
inactivation did not decrease hepatocytic 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine uptake or the
expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen, cyclins, or cyclin-dependent
kinases. However, the levels of Ki67, a mitotic marker that is expressed from the
mid-G1 phase to the end of mitosis and is closely involved in the regulation of
mitotic progression, were greatly decreased, and abnormal mitosis lacking Ki67
expression was frequently observed in HDAC1/2-deficient livers. The
down-regulation of either HDAC1/2 or Ki67 in the mouse liver cancer cell line
Hepa1-6 resulted in similar mitotic defects. Finally, both HDAC1 and HDAC2
proteins were associated with the Ki67 gene mediated by CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein ß.CONCLUSION: Both HDAC1 and HDAC2 play crucial roles in the regulation
of liver regeneration. The loss of HDAC1/2 inhibits Ki67 expression and results
in defective hepatocyte mitosis and impaired liver regeneration.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23744762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. PLoS One. 2013 May 28;8(5):e64600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064600. Print 2013.

HDAC up-regulation in early colon field carcinogenesis is involved in cell
tumorigenicity through regulation of chromatin structure.

Stypula-Cyrus Y(1), Damania D, Kunte DP, Cruz MD, Subramanian H, Roy HK, Backman 
V.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Department, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, United States of America.

Normal cell function is dependent on the proper maintenance of chromatin
structure. Regulation of chromatin structure is controlled by histone
modifications that directly influence chromatin architecture and genome function.
Specifically, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) family of proteins modulate
chromatin compaction and are commonly dysregulated in many tumors, including
colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the role of HDAC proteins in early colorectal
carcinogenesis has not been previously reported. We found HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3,
HDAC5, and HDAC7 all to be up-regulated in the field of human CRC. Furthermore,
we observed that HDAC2 up-regulation is one of the earliest events in CRC
carcinogenesis and observed this in human field carcinogenesis, the
azoxymethane-treated rat model, and in more aggressive colon cancer cell lines.
The universality of HDAC2 up-regulation suggests that HDAC2 up-regulation is a
novel and important early event in CRC, which may serve as a biomarker. HDAC
inhibitors (HDACIs) interfere with tumorigenic HDAC activity; however, the
precise mechanisms involved in this process remain to be elucidated. We confirmed
that HDAC inhibition by valproic acid (VPA) targeted the more aggressive cell
line. Using nuclease digestion assays and transmission electron microscopy
imaging, we observed that VPA treatment induced greater changes in chromatin
structure in the more aggressive cell line. Furthermore, we used the novel
imaging technique partial wave spectroscopy (PWS) to quantify nanoscale
alterations in chromatin. We noted that the PWS results are consistent with the
biological assays, indicating a greater effect of VPA treatment in the more
aggressive cell type. Together, these results demonstrate the importance of HDAC 
activity in early carcinogenic events and the unique role of higher-order
chromatin structure in determining cell tumorigenicity.

PMCID: PMC3665824
PMID: 23724067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. PLoS One. 2013 May 22;8(5):e64833. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064833. Print 2013.

Changes in airway histone deacetylase2 in smokers and COPD with inhaled
corticosteroids: a randomized controlled trial.

Sohal SS(1), Reid D, Soltani A, Weston S, Muller HK, Wood-Baker R, Walters EH.

Author information: 
(1)Breathe Well Centre for Research Excellence in Chronic Respiratory Disease,
University of Tasmania School of Medicine, Hobart, Australia. sssohal@utas.edu.au

The expression of HDAC2 is reported as reduced in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). We assessed HDAC2 expression within the airways of smokers and
subjects with COPD and effects of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), using
immuno-histology to contrast with previous molecular methodology. Endobronchial
biopsies (ebb) from current smokers with COPD (COPD-CS; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>15), ex-smokers with 
COPD (COPD-ES; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>17), smokers with normal lung function (NS; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>16) and normal
controls (NC; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>9) were immunostained for HDAC2. A double-blinded, randomized, 
placebo-controlled 6 months intervention study assessed effects of ICS on HDAC2
in 34 COPD subjects. There was no difference in epithelial HDAC2 staining in all 
groups. There was a significant reduction in total cell numbers in the lamina
propria (LP) in COPD-CS and NS (p<0.05). LP cellularity correlated inversely with
smoking history in COPD-CS (R<U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.8, p<0.003). HDAC2 expression increased
markedly in NS (p<0.001); in contrast COPD-CS was associated with suppressed
signal (p<0.03), while normal in COPD-ES. ICS did not affect HDAC2 cell staining.
Our findings suggest that airway HDAC2 expression is increased in the LP by
smoking itself, but is reduced in COPD. Ex-smokers have normalised HDAC2 cell
expression, but ICS had no effect. The paper emphasise the pit-falls of relying
on molecular data alone to define airway changes.CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION
INFORMATION:
NAME OF REGISTRY: The Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ANZCTR).
REGISTRY NUMBER: ACTRN12612001111864.

PMCID: PMC3661479
PMID: 23717666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Hepatol. 2013 Oct;59(4):797-804. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.05.028. Epub 2013 May
25.

Gender matters: estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1
and 2 control the gender-specific transcriptional regulation of human uridine
diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases genes (UGT1A).

Kalthoff S(1), Winkler A, Freiberg N, Manns MP, Strassburg CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gender influences incidence, progression, and therapy of
hepatogastrointestinal diseases. The aim of this study was to elucidate the
molecular mechanism of gender-specific UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT1A)
regulation, representing important hepatogastrointestinal detoxification enzymes 
for xenobiotics, drugs, and endobiotics.
METHODS: UGT1A-gene activation was studied by reporter gene experiments and
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1/ERa) co-transfection using KYSE70- and HepG2 cells 
(male origin), and SW403 cells (female origin). Cell lines, and humanized
transgenic UGT1A (htgUGT1A) mice (female/male) were treated with the ERa
inhibitor tamoxifen. UGT1A mRNA expression was analyzed by TaqMan PCR, the
recruitment of ERa, histone deacetylases (HDAC), and the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and ERa expression in
gastrointestinal mouse tissues by Western blot and immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: In KYSE70 cells (male), UGT1A gene expression was induced 5-10 fold, and
inhibited in the presence of ERa by 55-77%. In SW403 (female) cells, absent
inducibility was restored after tamoxifen treatment. In the jejunum and colon of 
tgUGT1A mice, UGT1A induction that was exclusively detected in male mice could be
restored in female mice after tamoxifen pre-treatment. ChIP assays demonstrated
the recruitment of ERa and HDACs to the xenobiotic response elements of UGT1A
promoters during gene repression. Western blot showed higher ERa expression in
the female jejunum and colon.
CONCLUSIONS: We show gender-specific transcriptional control of UGT1A genes in
jejunum and colon, which is repressed by ERa and the recruitment of HDCAs to the 
UGT1A promoter sequence in females. A molecular mechanism controlling
gender-specific drug metabolism and its therapeutic reversal is demonstrated.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23714156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Oncogene. 2014 Apr 24;33(17):2157-68. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.178. Epub 2013 May
27.

The NuRD complex cooperates with DNMTs to maintain silencing of key colorectal
tumor suppressor genes.

Cai Y(1), Geutjes EJ(2), de Lint K(2), Roepman P(3), Bruurs L(2), Yu LR(4), Wang 
W(1), van Blijswijk J(2), Mohammad H(1), de Rink I(5), Bernards R(2), Baylin
SB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Division of Molecular
Carcinogenesis, Center for Biomedical Genetics and Cancer Genomics Centre, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Research and Development, Agendia NV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Division of 
Systems Biology, Center of Excellence for Proteomics, National Center for
Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, AR, USA.
(5)Central Microarray and Deep Sequencing Core Facility, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Many tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are silenced through synergistic layers of
epigenetic regulation including abnormal DNA hypermethylation of promoter CpG
islands, repressive chromatin modifications and enhanced nucleosome deposition
over transcription start sites. The protein complexes responsible for silencing
of many of such TSGs remain to be identified. Our previous work demonstrated that
multiple silenced TSGs in colorectal cancer cells can be partially reactivated by
DNA demethylation in cells disrupted for the DNA methyltransferases 1 and 3B
(DNMT1 and 3B) or by DNMT inhibitors (DNMTi). Herein, we used proteomic and
functional genetic approaches to identify additional proteins that cooperate with
DNMTs in silencing these key silenced TSGs in colon cancer cells. We discovered
that DNMTs and the core components of the NuRD (Mi-2/nucleosome remodeling and
deacetylase) nucleosome remodeling complex, chromo domain helicase DNA-binding
protein 4 (CHD4) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) occupy the promoters of
several of these hypermethylated TSGs and physically and functionally interact to
maintain their silencing. Consistent with this, we find an inverse relationship
between expression of HDAC1 and 2 and these TSGs in a large panel of primary
colorectal tumors. We demonstrate that DNMTs and NuRD cooperate to maintain the
silencing of several negative regulators of the WNT and other signaling pathways.
We find that depletion of CHD4 is synergistic with DNMT inhibition in reducing
the viability of colon cancer cells in correlation with reactivation of TSGs,
suggesting that their combined inhibition may be beneficial for the treatment of 
colon cancer. Since CHD4 has ATPase activity, our data identify CHD4 as a
potentially novel drug target in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3883927
PMID: 23708667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Chem Biol. 2013 May 23;20(5):713-25. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2013.03.020.

Selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibitors induce neuroblastoma differentiation.

Frumm SM(1), Fan ZP, Ross KN, Duvall JR, Gupta S, VerPlank L, Suh BC, Holson E,
Wagner FF, Smith WB, Paranal RM, Bassil CF, Qi J, Roti G, Kung AL, Bradner JE,
Tolliday N, Stegmaier K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

While cytotoxic chemotherapy remains the hallmark of cancer treatment, intensive 
regimens fall short in many malignancies, including high-risk neuroblastoma. One 
alternative strategy is to therapeutically promote tumor differentiation. We
created a gene expression signature to measure neuroblast maturation, adapted it 
to a high-throughput platform, and screened a diversity oriented
synthesis-generated small-molecule library for differentiation inducers. We
identified BRD8430, containing a nine-membered lactam, an ortho-amino anilide
functionality, and three chiral centers, as a selective class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor (HDAC1 > 2 > 3). Further investigation demonstrated 
that selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibition using compounds or RNA interference induced
differentiation and decreased viability in neuroblastoma cell lines. Combined
treatment with 13-cis retinoic acid augmented these effects and enhanced
activation of retinoic acid signaling. Therefore, by applying a chemical genomic 
screening approach, we identified selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibition as a strategy 
to induce neuroblastoma differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3919449
PMID: 23706636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013 Aug 1;305(3):F244-54. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00126.2013. Epub 2013 May 22.

Class I histone deacetylase activity is required for proliferation of renal
epithelial cells.

Tang J(1), Yan Y, Zhao TC, Bayliss G, Yan H, Zhuang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The process of renal regeneration after acute kidney injury is thought to
recapitulate renal development, and proliferation of renal proximal tubular cells
(RPTCs) is a critical step in the regenerative response. Recent studies indicate 
that class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are required for embryonic kidney gene 
expression, growth, and differentiation. The role and underlying mechanisms of
class I HDAC activation in RPTC proliferation, however, remain unclear. In this
study, we used cultured RPTCs to examine this issue since four class I HDAC
isoforms (1, 2, 3, and 8) are abundantly expressed in this cell type. Blocking
class I HDAC activity with a highly selective inhibitor, MS-275, induced global
histone H3 hyperacetylation, reduced RPTC proliferation, and diminished
expression of cyclin D1 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen. Silencing HDAC1, 
3, or 8 with small interfering RNA resulted in similar biological effects.
Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and signal transducers and 
activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) was required for RPTC proliferation, and
STAT3 functioned downstream of EGFR. Treatment with MS-275 or knockdown of HDAC1,
3, or 8 suppressed EGFR expression and phosphorylation, and silencing HDAC1 and 3
also reduced STAT3 phosphorylation. However, HDAC2 downregulation did not affect 
RPTC proliferation and phosphorylation of EGFR and STAT3. Collectively, these
data reveal a critical role of class I HDACs in mediating proliferation of renal 
epithelial cells through activation of the EGFR/STAT3 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3742866
PMID: 23698124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Biochem Soc Trans. 2013 Jun;41(3):741-9. doi: 10.1042/BST20130010.

The physiological roles of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2: complex co-stars
with multiple leading parts.

Kelly RD(1), Cowley SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Henry Welcome Building,
Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, U.K.

HDACs (histone deacetylases) 1 and 2 are ubiquitous long-lived proteins, which
are often found together in three major multiprotein co-repressor complexes:
Sin3, NuRD (nucleosome remodelling and deacetylation) and CoREST (co-repressor
for element-1-silencing transcription factor). Although there is a burgeoning
number of non-histone proteins within the acetylome, these complexes contain
multiple DNA/chromatin-recognition motifs, which, in combination with
transcription factors, target HDAC1/2 to chromatin. Their physiological roles
should therefore be viewed within the framework of chromatin manipulation.
Classically, HDACs were thought to be recruited predominantly by transcriptional 
repressors to facilitate local histone deacetylation and transcriptional
repression. More recently, genome-wide assays have mapped HDAC1/2 and their
associated proteins to transcriptionally active loci and have provided
alternative context-specific functions, whereby their repressive functions are
subtly exerted to balance transcriptional activation and repression. With a few
significant exceptions (early embryogenesis, brain development), HDAC1 and HDAC2 
are functionally redundant. In most mouse knockout studies, deletion of both
enzymes is required in order to produce a substantial phenotype. HDAC1/2 activity
has been implicated in the development of numerous tissue and cell types,
including heart, skin, brain, B-cells and T-cells. A common feature in all
HDAC1/2-knockout, -knockdown and small-molecule inhibitor studies is a reduction 
in cell proliferation. A generic role in cell cycle progression could be
exploited in cancer cells, by blocking HDAC1/2 activity with small-molecule
inhibitors, making them potentially useful drug targets.

PMID: 23697933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Jun 12;54(6):4072-80. doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-11529.

Inhibition of HDAC2 protects the retina from ischemic injury.

Fan J(1), Alsarraf O, Dahrouj M, Platt KA, Chou CJ, Rice DS, Crosson CE.

Author information: 
(1)Storm Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA. fan@musc.edu

PURPOSE: Protein acetylation is an essential mechanism in regulating
transcriptional and inflammatory events. Studies have shown that nonselective
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors can protect the retina from ischemic injury
in rats. However, the role of specific HDAC isoforms in retinal degenerative
processes remains obscure. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role 
of HDAC2 isoform in a mouse model of ischemic retinal injury.
METHODS: Localization of HDAC2 in mice retinas was evaluated by
immunohistochemical analyses. To investigate whether selective reduction in HDAC2
activity can protect the retina from ischemic injury, Hdac2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice were
utilized. Electroretinographic (ERG) and morphometric analyses were used to
assess retinal function and morphology.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that HDAC2 is primarily localized in nuclei in 
inner nuclear and retinal ganglion cell layers, and HDAC2 activity accounted for 
approximately 35% of the total activities of HDAC1, 2, 3, and 6 in the retina. In
wild-type mice, ERG a- and b-waves from ischemic eyes were significantly reduced 
when compared to pre-ischemia baseline values. Morphometric examination of these 
eyes revealed significant degeneration of inner retinal layers. In Hdac2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice,
ERG a- and b-waves from ischemic eyes were significantly greater than those
measured in ischemic eyes from wild-type mice. Morphologic measurements
demonstrated that Hdac2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice exhibit significantly less retinal degeneration
than wild-type mice.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that suppressing HDAC2 expression can
effectively reduce ischemic retinal injury. Our results support the idea that the
development of selective HDAC2 inhibitors may provide an efficacious treatment
for ischemic retinal injury.

PMCID: PMC3681476
PMID: 23696608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Reprod Sci. 2013 Dec;20(12):1416-22. doi: 10.1177/1933719113488450. Epub 2013 May
20.

The expression of histone deacetylase 1, but not other class I histone
deacetylases, is significantly increased in endometriosis.

Samartzis EP(1), Noske A, Samartzis N, Fink D, Imesch P.

Author information: 
(1)1Division of Gynecology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs-1-3) play an important role in steroid
hormone-dependent gene expression and in modulating cell survival and
proliferation. We analyzed their expression in a tissue microarray including 74
endometriosis samples and 30 normal endometrium controls. The mean HDAC-1
immunoreactivity score (IRS ± standard deviation) was 7.6 ± 2.5 in endometriosis 
and 5.3 ± 2.3 in normal endometrium (P < .001). In contrast, the IRSs of HDAC-2
and -3 were 11.7 ± 0.7 and 11.8 ± 1.1 in endometriosis and 11.6 ± 1.0 and 11.9 ± 
0.4 in normal endometrium (P = .7 and P = .2), respectively. Significant
correlations were found between HDAC-1 and estrogen (-alpha/-beta) and
progesterone receptor expression. In conclusion, HDAC-1, but not HDAC-2/-3, was
significantly increased in endometriosis and associated with steroid hormone
receptor expression that may reflect interdependence. In context with the
literature, specific inhibitors of HDAC-1 may have inhibitory activities similar 
to those of broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitors and may be clinically tolerated, which
would increase their chance as an option in the treatment of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3817669
PMID: 23690335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Oct 15;188(8):901-6. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201302-0388PP.

Theophylline.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

Theophylline (dimethylxanthine) has been used to treat airway diseases for more
than 80 years. It was originally used as a bronchodilator, but the relatively
high doses required are associated with frequent side effects, so its use
declined as inhaled ß2-agonists became more widely used. More recently it has
been shown to have antiinflammatory effects in asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) at lower concentrations. The molecular mechanism of
bronchodilatation is inhibition of phosphodiesterase (PDE)3, but the
antiinflammatory effect may be due to inhibition of PDE4 and histone
deacetylase-2 activation, resulting in switching off of activated inflammatory
genes. Through this mechanism, theophylline also reverses corticosteroid
resistance, and this may be of particular value in severe asthma and COPD,
wherein histone deacetylase-2 activity is reduced. Theophylline is given
systemically (orally as slow-release preparations for chronic treatment and
intravenously for acute exacerbations of asthma). Efficacy is related to blood
concentrations, which are determined mainly by hepatic metabolism, which may be
increased or decreased in several diseases and by concomitant drug therapy.
Theophylline is now usually used as an add-on therapy in patients with asthma not
well controlled on inhaled corticosteroids with or without long-acting
ß2-agonists and in patients with COPD with severe disease not controlled by
bronchodilator therapy. Side effects are related to plasma concentrations and
include nausea, vomiting, and headaches due to PDE inhibition and at higher
concentrations to cardiac arrhythmias and seizures due to adenosine A1-receptor
antagonism. In the future, low-dose theophylline may be useful in reversing
corticosteroid resistance in COPD and severe asthma.

PMID: 23672674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cell Death Dis. 2013 May 2;4:e621. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.146.

Histone modifications are responsible for decreased Fas expression and apoptosis 
resistance in fibrotic lung fibroblasts.

Huang SK(1), Scruggs AM, Donaghy J, Horowitz JC, Zaslona Z, Przybranowski S,
White ES, Peters-Golden M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. stehuang@umich.edu

Although the recruitment of fibroblasts to areas of injury is critical for wound 
healing, their subsequent apoptosis is necessary in order to prevent excessive
scarring. Fibroproliferative diseases, such as pulmonary fibrosis, are often
characterized by fibroblast resistance to apoptosis, but the mechanism(s) for
this resistance remains elusive. Here, we employed a murine model of pulmonary
fibrosis and cells from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) to
explore epigenetic mechanisms that may be responsible for the decreased
expression of Fas, a cell surface death receptor whose expression has been
observed to be decreased in pulmonary fibrosis. Murine pulmonary fibrosis was
elicited by intratracheal injection of bleomycin. Fibroblasts cultured from
bleomycin-treated mice exhibited decreased Fas expression and resistance to
Fas-mediated apoptosis compared with cells from saline-treated control mice.
Although there were no differences in DNA methylation, the Fas promoter in
fibroblasts from bleomycin-treated mice exhibited decreased histone acetylation
and increased histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9Me3). This was associated
with increased histone deacetylase (HDAC)-2 and HDAC4 expression. Treatment with 
HDAC inhibitors increased Fas expression and restored susceptibility to
Fas-mediated apoptosis. Fibroblasts from patients with IPF likewise exhibited
decreased histone acetylation and increased H3K9Me3 at the Fas promoter and
increased their expression of Fas in the presence of an HDAC inhibitor. These
findings demonstrate the critical role of histone modifications in the
development of fibroblast resistance to apoptosis in both a murine model and in
patients with pulmonary fibrosis and suggest novel approaches to therapy for
progressive fibroproliferative disorders.

PMCID: PMC3674355
PMID: 23640463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Genes Dev. 2013 Apr 15;27(8):916-27. doi: 10.1101/gad.214049.113.

Survival factor NFIL3 restricts FOXO-induced gene expression in cancer.

Keniry M(1), Pires MM, Mense S, Lefebvre C, Gan B, Justiano K, Lau YK, Hopkins B,
Hodakoski C, Koujak S, Toole J, Fenton F, Calahan A, Califano A, DePinho RA,
Maurer M, Parsons R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, 
USA.

Depending on the circumstance, FOXO (Forkhead O) (FOXO1, FOXO3, and FOXO4)
transcription factors activate the expression of markedly different sets of genes
to produce different phenotypic effects. For example, distinct FOXO-regulated
transcriptional programs stimulate cell death or enhance organism life span. To
gain insight into how FOXOs select specific genes for regulation, we performed a 
screen for genes that modify FOXO activation of TRAIL, a death receptor ligand
capable of inducing extrinsic apoptosis. We discovered that the bZIP
transcriptional repressor NFIL3 (nuclear factor interleukin 3-regulated) hindered
FOXO transcription factor access to chromatin at the TRAIL promoter by binding to
nearby DNA and recruiting histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) to reduce histone
acetylation. In the same manner, NFIL3 repressed expression of certain FOXO
targets--e.g., FAS, GADD45a (growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible, a), and
GADD45ß--but not others. NFIL3, which we found to be overexpressed in different
cancers, supported tumor cell survival largely through repression of TRAIL and
antagonized hydrogen peroxide-induced cell death. Moreover, its expression in
cancer was associated with lower patient survival. Therefore, NFIL3 alters cancer
cell behavior and FOXO function by acting on chromatin to restrict the menu of
FOXO target genes. Targeting of NFIL3 could be of therapeutic benefit for cancer 
patients.

PMCID: PMC3650228
PMID: 23630076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. BMC Cancer. 2013 Apr 30;13:215. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-215.

Differential expression of histone deacetylases HDAC1, 2 and 3 in human breast
cancer--overexpression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 is associated with clinicopathological 
indicators of disease progression.

Müller BM(1), Jana L, Kasajima A, Lehmann A, Prinzler J, Budczies J, Winzer KJ,
Dietel M, Weichert W, Denkert C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité University Hospital, Campus Mitte,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany. berit.mueller@charite.de

BACKGROUND: In breast cancer, the role of epigenetic alterations including
modifications of the acetylation status of histones in carcinogenesis has been an
important research focus during the last years. An increased deacetylation of
histones leads to increased cell proliferation, cell migration, angiogenesis and 
invasion. Class 1 histone deacetylases (HDAC) seem to be most important during
carcinogenesis.
METHODS: The immunhistochemical expression of HDAC1, 2 and 3 was analyzed on
tissue microarrays (TMAs) from 238 patients with primary breast cancer. We
analyzed the nuclear staining intensity (negative, weak, moderate, strong) as
well as the percentage of positive tumor cells and calculated the
immunoreactivity score (0-12). Expression was correlated with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival.
RESULTS: In this cohort, we found a differential positive expression of HDAC1,
HDAC2 and HDAC3. HDAC2 and HDAC3 expression was significantly higher in less
differentiated tumors: HDAC2 (n=207), p<0.001 and HDAC3 (n=220), p<0.001 and
correlated with negative hormone receptor status: HDAC2 (n=206), p=0.02 and HDAC3
(n=219), p=0.04. Additionally, a high HDAC2 expression was significantly
associated with an overexpression of HER2 (n=203, p=0.005) and the presence of
nodal metastasis (n=200, p=0.04).HDAC1 was highly expressed in hormone receptor
positive tumors (n=203; p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: As a conclusion, our results show that the class-1 HDAC isoenzymes 1,
2 and 3 are differentially expressed in breast cancer. HDAC2 and HDAC3 are
strongly expressed in subgroups of tumor with features of a more aggressive tumor
type.

PMCID: PMC3646665
PMID: 23627572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e62192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062192. Print 2013.

Prox1 directly interacts with LSD1 and recruits the LSD1/NuRD complex to
epigenetically co-repress CYP7A1 transcription.

Ouyang H(1), Qin Y, Liu Y, Xie Y, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) catalyzes the first and rate-limiting step in
the classical pathway of bile acids synthesis in liver and is crucial for
maintaining lipid homeostasis. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and
a1-fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) are two major transcription factors
driving CYP7A1 promoter activity in hepatocytes. Previous researches have shown
that Prospero-related homeobox (Prox1) directly interacts with both HNF4a and FTF
and potently co-represses CYP7A1 transcription and bile acid synthesis through
unidentified mechanisms. In this work, mechanisms involved in Prox1-mediated
co-repression were explored by identifying Prox1-associated proteins using
immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry (IP-MS) methodology. Multiple
components of the epigenetically repressive lysine-specific demethylase 1
(LSD1)/nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase (NuRD) complex, most notably
LSD1 and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), were found to be associated with Prox1
and GST pulldown assay demonstrated that Prox1 directly interacts with LSD1.
Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed that Prox1
co-localizes with HNF4a, LSD1 and HDAC2 on CYP7A1 promoter in HepG2 cells.
Furthermore, by using ChIP assay on HepG2 cells with endogenous Prox1 knocked
down by RNA interference, Prox1 was shown to recruit LSD1 and HDAC2 onto CYP7A1
promoter and cause increased H3K4 demethylation. Finally, bile acids treatment of
HepG2 cells, which significantly repressed CYP7A1 transcription, resulted in
increased Prox1 and LSD1/NuRD complex occupancy on CYP7A1 promoter with a
concurrent increase in H3K4 demethylation and H3/H4 deacetylation. These results 
showed that Prox1 interacts with LSD1 to recruit the repressive LSD1/NuRD complex
to CYP7A1 promoter and co-represses transcription through epigenetic mechanisms. 
In addition, such Prox1-mediated epigenetic repression is involved in the
physiologically essential negative feedback inhibition of CYP7A1 transcription by
bile acids.

PMCID: PMC3633876
PMID: 23626788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jul;41(12):6018-33. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt346. Epub 2013
Apr 26.

MYCN and HDAC2 cooperate to repress miR-183 signaling in neuroblastoma.

Lodrini M(1), Oehme I, Schroeder C, Milde T, Schier MC, Kopp-Schneider A, Schulte
JH, Fischer M, De Preter K, Pattyn F, Castoldi M, Muckenthaler MU, Kulozik AE,
Westermann F, Witt O, Deubzer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology (G340), German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. m.lodrini@dkfz.de

MYCN is a master regulator controlling many processes necessary for tumor cell
survival. Here, we unravel a microRNA network that causes tumor suppressive
effects in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cells. In profiling studies, histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor treatment most strongly induced miR-183. Enforced
miR-183 expression triggered apoptosis, and inhibited anchorage-independent
colony formation in vitro and xenograft growth in mice. Furthermore, the
mechanism of miR-183 induction was found to contribute to the cell death
phenotype induced by HDAC inhibitors. Experiments to identify the HDAC(s)
involved in miR-183 transcriptional regulation showed that HDAC2 depletion
induced miR-183. HDAC2 overexpression reduced miR-183 levels and counteracted the
induction caused by HDAC2 depletion or HDAC inhibitor treatment. MYCN was found
to recruit HDAC2 in the same complexes to the miR-183 promoter, and HDAC2
depletion enhanced promoter-associated histone H4 pan-acetylation, suggesting
epigenetic changes preceded transcriptional activation. These data reveal miR-183
tumor suppressive properties in neuroblastoma that are jointly repressed by MYCN 
and HDAC2, and suggest a novel way to bypass MYCN function.

PMCID: PMC3695529
PMID: 23625969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Genes Immun. 2013 Jul-Aug;14(5):317-24. doi: 10.1038/gene.2013.24. Epub 2013 Apr 
25.

Polymorphisms in histone deacetylases improve the predictive value of IL-28B for 
chronic hepatitis C therapy.

López-Rodríguez R(1), Hernández-Bartolomé Á, Borque MJ, Rodríguez-Muñoz Y,
Martín-Vílchez S, Trapero-Marugán M, García-Buey L, Muñoz de Rueda P, Rodrigo L, 
Vidal-Castiñeira JR, Salmerón J, Moreno-Otero R, Sanz-Cameno P.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Gastroenterology Service, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa,
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa (IIS-IP), Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid and CIBERehd, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) influence many cellular processes, including the
modulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription activity (STAT) in
response to interferon (IFN). To identify genetic markers that help optimize the 
IL-28B prediction of chronic hepatitis C (CHC) sustained virological response
(SVR), we evaluated 27 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HDAC1-11. Three 
SNPs, rs3778216, rs976552 and rs368328 in HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC5, respectively,
were independently associated with SVR (P<0.05). The addition of these three
HDAC's SNPs to the IL-28B predictive model (area under the curve (AUC)=0.630)
rendered an important improvement of AUC-receiver operating characteristic value 
(AUC=0.747, P=0.021). Chi-squared Automatic Interaction Detector (CHAID) analysis
denoted the significance of the rs3778216 C/C genotype in identifying a group of 
good responders despite carrying IL-28B T allele (79.2% of SVR), whereas HDAC5 G 
allele characterized a subgroup with poor response rate (25.5%). However, HDAC3
rs976552 did not display a relevant role for the hierarchical classification of
patients. Variables related to SVR in hepatitis C virus genotype 1 (HCV-1) cohort
were the same of those obtained for the overall population. Interestingly, in
non-HCV-1 patients (n=56) the HDAC2 C/C genotype was the unique predictive
variable related to SVR (AUC=0.733, P<0.007). Thus, these preliminary results
suggest the potential usefulness of combined IL-28B and HDAC genotyping for the
CHC patients' classification by likelihood of an SVR.

PMID: 23615070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 7;288(23):16518-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.440446. Epub 2013
Apr 23.

Protein kinase CK2 regulates the dimerization of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and HDAC2 during mitosis.

Khan DH(1), He S, Yu J, Winter S, Cao W, Seiser C, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 3P4, Canada.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 are components of corepressor complexes
that are involved in chromatin remodeling and regulation of gene expression by
regulating dynamic protein acetylation. HDAC1 and -2 form homo- and heterodimers,
and their activity is dependent upon dimer formation. Phosphorylation of HDAC1
and/or HDAC2 in interphase cells is required for the formation of HDAC
corepressor complexes. In this study, we show that during mitosis, HDAC2 and, to 
a lesser extent, HDAC1 phosphorylation levels dramatically increase. When HDAC1
and -2 are displaced from the chromosome during metaphase, they dissociate from
each other, but each enzyme remains in association with components of the HDAC
corepressor complexes Sin3, NuRD, and CoREST as homodimers. Enzyme inhibition
studies and mutational analyses demonstrated that protein kinase CK2-catalyzed
phosphorylation of HDAC1 and -2 is crucial for the dissociation of these two
enzymes. These results suggest that corepressor complexes, including HDAC1 or
HDAC2 homodimers, might target different cellular proteins during mitosis.

PMCID: PMC3675587
PMID: 23612983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Int Immunopharmacol. 2013 Jun;16(2):184-90. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.04.006.
Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Patchouli alcohol, an essential oil of Pogostemon cablin, exhibits
anti-tumorigenic activity in human colorectal cancer cells.

Jeong JB(1), Choi J, Lou Z, Jiang X, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA.

Patchouli alcohol (PA) is one of the important compounds isolated from the
essential oil of Pogostemon cablin (patchouli). PA has neuroprotective,
anti-influenza and anti-inflammatory activities. However, anti-cancer activity of
PA has not been studied so far. We performed in vitro study to investigate
whether PA affects proliferation and apoptosis of human colorectal cancer cells, 
and to define potential molecular mechanisms. PA suppressed cell growth and
induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner in human colorectal cancer cells
(HCT116, SW480). In addition, PA decreased cell growth in MCF7, BxPC3, PC3, and
HUVEC cells. Exposure of PA to HCT116 and SW480 cells activated p21 expression
and suppressed the expressions of cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) 
in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, PA attenuated the expressions of HDAC2
(histone deacetylase 2) and c-myc, and HDAC enzyme activity. We also observed
that PA induced the transcriptional activity of NF-<U+03BA>B through an increase of
nuclear translocation of p65. These findings suggest that PA exerts an
anti-cancer activity by decreasing cell growth and increasing apoptosis in human 
colorectal cancer cells. The proposed mechanisms include the inhibition of HDAC2 
expression and HDAC enzyme activity, and subsequent downregulation of c-myc and
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23602914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cell Cycle. 2013 May 1;12(9):1329-30. doi: 10.4161/cc.24577. Epub 2013 Apr 11.

New roles of Rb1 in expansion of MDSCs in cancer.

Youn JI, Gabrilovich DI.

PMCID: PMC3674055
PMID: 23588070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Nov;18(6):733-43. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0424-0.
Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Comparative cytoprotective effects of carbocysteine and fluticasone propionate in
cigarette smoke extract-stimulated bronchial epithelial cells.

Pace E(1), Ferraro M, Di Vincenzo S, Cipollina C, Gerbino S, Cigna D, Caputo V,
Balsamo R, Lanata L, Gjomarkaj M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology, National Research
Council-Palermo, Palermo, Italy, pace@ibim.cnr.it.

Cigarette smoke extracts (CSE) induce oxidative stress, an important feature in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and oxidative stress contributes to
the poor clinical efficacy of corticosteroids in COPD patients. Carbocysteine, an
antioxidant and mucolytic agent, is effective in reducing the severity and the
rate of exacerbations in COPD patients. The effects of carbocysteine on
CSE-induced oxidative stress in bronchial epithelial cells as well as the
comparison of these antioxidant effects of carbocysteine with those of
fluticasone propionate are unknown. The present study was aimed to assess the
effects of carbocysteine (10(-4) M) in cell survival and intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production (by flow cytometry) as well as total glutathione 
(GSH), heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), nuclear-related factor 2 (Nrf2) expression and
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC-2) expression/activation in CSE-stimulated bronchial 
epithelial cells (16-HBE) and to compare these effects with those of fluticasone 
propionate (10(-8) M). CSE, carbocysteine or fluticasone propionate did not
induce cell necrosis (propidium positive cells) or cell apoptosis (annexin
V-positive/propidium-negative cells) in 16-HBE. CSE increased ROS production,
nuclear Nrf2 and HO-1 in 16-HBE. Fluticasone propionate did not modify
intracellular ROS production, GSH and HDCA-2 but reduced Nrf2 and HO-1 in
CSE-stimulated 16-HBE. Carbocysteine reduced ROS production and increased GSH,
HO-1, Nrf2 and HDAC-2 nuclear expression/activity in CSE-stimulated cells and was
more effective than fluticasone propionate in modulating the CSE-mediated
effects. In conclusion, the present study provides compelling evidences that the 
use of carbocysteine may be considered a promising strategy in diseases
associated with corticosteroid resistance.

PMCID: PMC3789875
PMID: 23580157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Neurosci. 2013 Apr 10;33(15):6401-11. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1001-12.2013.

Loss of histone deacetylase 2 improves working memory and accelerates extinction 
learning.

Morris MJ(1), Mahgoub M, Na ES, Pranav H, Monteggia LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9070, USA.

Histone acetylation and deacetylation can be dynamically regulated in response to
environmental stimuli and play important roles in learning and memory.
Pharmacological inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) improves performance
in learning tasks; however, many of these classical agents are "pan-HDAC"
inhibitors, and their use makes it difficult to determine the roles of specific
HDACs in cognitive function. We took a genetic approach using mice lacking the
class I HDACs, HDAC1 or HDAC2, in postmitotic forebrain neurons to investigate
the specificity or functional redundancy of these HDACs in learning and synaptic 
plasticity. We show that selective knock-out of Hdac2 led to a robust
acceleration of the extinction rate of conditioned fear responses and a
conditioned taste aversion as well as enhanced performance in an attentional
set-shifting task. Hdac2 knock-out had no impact on episodic memory or motor
learning, suggesting that the effects are task-dependent, with the predominant
impact of HDAC2 inhibition being an enhancement in an animal's ability to rapidly
adapt its behavioral strategy as a result of changes in associative
contingencies. Our results demonstrate that the loss of HDAC2 improves
associative learning, with no effect in nonassociative learning tasks, suggesting
a specific role for HDAC2 in particular types of learning. HDAC2 may be an
intriguing target for cognitive and psychiatric disorders that are characterized 
by an inability to inhibit behavioral responsiveness to maladaptive or no longer 
relevant associations.

PMCID: PMC3773986
PMID: 23575838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Reprod Domest Anim. 2013 Oct;48(5):781-9. doi: 10.1111/rda.12162. Epub 2013 Apr
11.

Transcription profile of candidate genes for the acquisition of competence during
oocyte growth in cattle.

Bessa IR(1), Nishimura RC, Franco MM, Dode MA.

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture and Veterinary, University of Brasília, Campus
Universitário Darcy Ribeiro, Asa Norte, Instituto Central de Ciências Ala Sul,
Brasília, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to investigate the expression profile of candidate
genes involved in competence during oocyte growth. The candidate genes (BMP15,
OOSP1, H1FOO, H2A, H3A, H4, SLBP, DNMT1, DNMT3B, HAT1, HDAC2 and SUV39H1) were
selected because of their possible involvement in determining oocyte
developmental competence. Pre-antral and antral follicles were isolated from the 
ovaries of Zebu (Bos indicus) cows, measured and classified into the following
categories according to their diameter: (i) oocytes from primordial follicles:
diameter <20 µm, (ii) oocytes from primary follicles: 25-35 µm, (iii) oocytes
from small secondary follicles: 40-60 µm, (iv) oocytes from large secondary
follicles: 65-85 µm, (v) oocytes from small antral follicles: 100-120 µm, and
(vi) oocytes from large antral follicles: >128 µm. Total RNA was extracted from
four pools of 25 oocytes for each category of follicles, and the genes were
quantified by qPCR. Target gene expression was normalized using the gene PPIA.
The results suggest that stocks of the studied transcript genes accumulate before
the final phase of folliculogenesis. The HDAC2 gene was the only gene in which a 
differential expression was observed at stage associated with competence
acquisition.

© 2013 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 23574109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Chest. 2013 Aug;144(2):515-21. doi: 10.1378/chest.12-2381.

Sputum plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 elevation by oxidative stress-dependent 
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B activation in COPD.

To M, Takagi D, Akashi K, Kano I, Haruki K, Barnes PJ, Ito K.

Erratum in
    Chest. 2015 May;147(5):1445.

BACKGROUND: Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is an important regulator
of fibrinolysis at sites of vascular injury and thrombus formation. Recently,
sputum PAI-1 was reported to be elevated in COPD. However, the mechanism of PAI-1
elevation in COPD has yet to be clarified. Here, we show that PAI-1 elevation in 
COPD is closely associated with oxidative stress-induced nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B) activation.
METHODS: Patients and control subjects were recruited from the outpatient
department of Royal Brompton Hospital, local general practice, and the National
Heart and Lung Institute. Sputum samples were obtained, and sputum sample
processing was performed to obtain sputum supernatants and sputum macrophages.
RESULTS: The mean PAI-1 level in COPD sputum (1.92 ± 3.11 ng/mL, n = 32) was
higher than that of both age-matched smokers without COPD (0.48 ± 0.63 ng/mL, n =
11) and healthy nonsmokers (0.55 ± 1.11 ng/mL, n = 9). Sputum PAI-1 significantly
correlated with sputum malondialdehyde (MDA) in COPD (r = 0.59, P &lt; .001). In 
addition, NF-<U+03BA>B activity in sputum macrophages (three control and seven COPD
subjects) significantly correlated with both sputum PAI-1 (r = 0.72, P &lt; .05) 
and sputum MDA (r = 0.78, P &lt; .01). An in vitro study showed that both
hydrogen peroxide and cigarette smoke-conditioned medium induced PAI-1 production
in A549 cells, and the production was inhibited by an inhibitor of I <U+03BA>B kinase-ß 
in a concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)
knockdown by RNA interference, a mimic of oxidative-stress-dependent HDAC2
reduction, enhanced tumor necrosis factor-a-induced PAI-1 induction (half maximal
effective concentration [EC50], 0.64 ± 0.19 ng/mL in HDAC2-KD, 7.64 ± 3.70 ng/mL 
in control) concomitant with enhancement of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 acetylation and NF-<U+03BA>B
DNA-binding activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Oxidative stress, directly or indirectly via HDAC reduction, plays a
role in PAI-1 expression in COPD via activation of NF- <U+03BA> B.

PMID: 23558707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Neurosci. 2013 Apr 3;33(14):5924-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3162-12.2013.

Histone deacetylase 2 cell autonomously suppresses excitatory and enhances
inhibitory synaptic function in CA1 pyramidal neurons.

Hanson JE(1), Deng L, Hackos DH, Lo SC, Lauffer BE, Steiner P, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech, South San Francisco, California 94080, 
USA.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) negatively regulates excitatory synapse number and 
memory performance. However, whether HDAC2 regulation of excitatory synapses
occurs in a cell-autonomous manner and whether HDAC2 regulates inhibitory
synaptic functions are not well understood. To examine these aspects of HDAC2
function, we used sparse transfection of rat hippocampal slice cultures and
whole-cell recordings in pyramidal neurons. HDAC2 knockdown (KD) in single
postsynaptic pyramidal neurons enhanced, whereas HDAC2 overexpression (OE)
reduced, excitatory synaptic transmission. Postsynaptic KD of HDAC2 also
facilitated expression of long-term potentiation induced by subthreshold
induction stimuli, without altering long-term depression. In contrast, HDAC2 KD
reduced, whereas HDAC2 OE enhanced, inhibitory synaptic transmission. Alterations
of postsynaptic GABA(A) receptors (GABA(A)Rs) likely underlie the impact of HDAC2
on inhibitory transmission. Consistent with this, we observed reduced transcript 
and protein levels of the GABA(A)R <U+03B3>2 subunit and reduced surface expression of
the a2 subunit after HDAC2 KD. Furthermore, we observed a reduction in synaptic
but not tonic GABA(A)R currents by HDAC2 KD, suggesting that HDAC2 selectively
affects synaptic abundance of functional GABA(A)Rs. Immunostaining for
postsynaptic GABA(A)Rs confirmed that HDAC2 KD and OE can regulate the synaptic
abundance of these receptors. Together, these results highlight a role for HDAC2 
in suppressing synaptic excitation and enhancing synaptic inhibition of
hippocampal neurons. Therefore, a shift in the balance of synaptic excitation
versus inhibition favoring excitation could contribute to the beneficial effects 
of reducing HDAC2 function in wild-type mice or of inhibiting HDACs in models of 
cognitive impairment.

PMID: 23554474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Jun 1;304(11):C1080-90. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00359.2012. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Distinct patterns of histone modifications at cardiac-specific gene promoters
between cardiac stem cells and mesenchymal stem cells.

Wang M(1), Yu Q, Wang L, Gu H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. meiwang@iupui.edu

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and cardiac stem cells (CSCs) possess different
potential to develop into cardiomyocytes. The mechanism underlying cardiomyogenic
capacity of MSCs and CSCs remains elusive. It is well established that histone
modifications correlate with gene expression and contribute to cell fate
commitment. Here we hypothesize that specific histone modifications accompany
cardiac-specific gene expression, thus determining the differentiation capacity
of MSCs and CSCs toward heart cells. Our results indicate that, at the promoter
regions of cardiac-specific genes (Myh6, Myl2, Actc1, Tnni3, and Tnnt2), the
levels of histone acetylation of H3 (acH3) and H4 (acH4), as a mark indicative of
gene activation, were higher in CSCs (Sca-1(+)CD29(+)) than MSCs. Additionally,
lower binding levels of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC2 at promoter
regions of cardiac-specific genes were noticed in CSCs than MSCs. Treatment with 
trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor, upregulated cardiac-specific gene expression
in MSCs. Suppression of HDAC1 or HDAC2 expression by small interfering RNAs led
to increased cardiac gene expression and was accompanied by enhanced acH3 and
acH4 levels at gene loci. We conclude that greater levels of histone acetylation 
at cardiac-specific gene loci in CSCs than MSCs reflect a stronger potential for 
CSCs to develop into cardiomyocytes. These lineage-differential histone
modifications are likely due to less HDAC recruitment at cardiac-specific gene
promoters in CSCs than MSCs.

PMID: 23552285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Clin Invest Med. 2013 Apr 1;36(2):E87-94.

HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A suppresses esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
metastasis through HADC2 reduced MMP-2/9.

Wang F(1), Qi Y, Li X, He W, Fan QX, Zong H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, PR China.

PURPOSE: The histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) has been
shown to act as an anti-tumor agent; however, the effect and mechanism of TSA on 
the invasion of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unknown.
METHODS: To determine whether TSA suppresses the invasiveness of ESCC cell via
HDAC2, the expression of HDAC2 in ESCC tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues
were compared using Western blot and immunohistochemistry. Cells were transfected
with HDAC2 siRNAs and non-targeting control siRNA using Lipofectamine TM 2000.
Cell invasion was investigated using a transwell assay. The protein levels of
matrix metalloproteinase-2/9 (MMP-2/9) were examined by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Expression of HDAC2 was significantly higher in ESCC than in adjacent
non-tumor tissues. Additionally, the in vitro invasion assay found that both
downregulation of HDAC2 expression and TSA treatment inhibited ESCC cell invasion
by approximately 75%. Also, an MMP2/9-specific inhibitor sharply suppressed ESCC 
cell invasion. Furthermore, both downregulation of HDAC2 and treatment with TSA
decreased MMP-2 and MMP-9 protein levels in ESCC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the inhibitory effect of TSA on cancer
invasion is mediated through the suppression of HDAC2 expression, and that the
reduction of MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression induced by HDAC2 may be involved in the
anti-invasive effect of TSA.

PMID: 23544610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. FEBS Lett. 2013 May 21;587(10):1510-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.029. Epub
2013 Mar 29.

HDAC inhibitors prevent the induction of the immediate-early gene FOSL1, but do
not alter the nucleosome response.

Khan DH(1), Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.

Dynamic histone acetylation, catalyzed by lysine acetyltransferases and HDACs, is
critical to IEG expression. Expression of IEGs, such as FOSL1, is induced by
several signal transduction pathways resulting in activation of the protein
kinase MSK and phosphorylation of histone H3 at serine 10 of nucleosomes (the
nucleosome response) at the upstream promoter and regulatory region of target
genes. HDAC inhibitors prevent FOSL1 gene induction and the association of HDAC1,
2 and 3 with the gene body. However, HDAC inhibitors did not prevent the
nucleosome response. Thus HDAC inhibitors perturb events downstream of the
nucleosome response required for FOSL1 transcription initiation.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):434-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.03.008.
Epub 2013 Mar 27.

HDAC inhibitors dysregulate neural stem cell activity in the postnatal mouse
brain.

Foti SB(1), Chou A, Moll AD, Roskams AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Life Sciences Institute and Brain Research Centre,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada.

The mammalian central nervous system (CNS) undergoes significant expansion
postnatally, producing astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and inhibitory neurons to
modulate the activity of neural circuits. This is coincident in humans with the
emergence of pediatric epilepsy, a condition commonly treated with
valproate/valproic acid (VPA), a potent inhibitor of histone deacetylases
(HDACs). The sequential activity of specific HDACs, however, may be essential for
the differentiation of distinct subpopulations of neurons and glia. Here, we show
that different subsets of CNS neural stem cells (NSCs) and progenitors switch
expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 as they commit to a neurogenic lineage in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) and dentate gyrus (DG). The administration of VPA for
only one week from P7-P14, combined with sequential injections of thymidine
analogs reveals that VPA stimulates a significant and differential decrease in
the production and differentiation of progeny of NSCs in the DG, rostral
migratory stream (RMS), and olfactory bulb (OB). Cross-fostering VPA-treated mice
revealed, however, that a postnatal failure to thrive induced by VPA treatment
had a greater effect on DG neurogenesis than VPA action directly. By one month
after VPA, OB interneuron genesis was significantly and differentially reduced in
both periglomerular and granule neurons. Using neurosphere assays to test if VPA 
directly regulates NSC activity, we found that short term treatment with VPA in
vivo reduced neurosphere numbers and size, a phenotype that was also obtained in 
neurospheres from control mice treated with VPA and an alternative HDAC
inhibitor, Trichostatin A (TSA) at 0 and 3 days in vitro (DIV). Collectively,
these data show that clinically used HDAC inhibitors like VPA and TSA can perturb
postnatal neurogenesis; and their use should be carefully considered, especially 
in individuals whose brains are actively undergoing key postnatal time windows of
development.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 3;288(18):12852-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.410357. Epub 2013
Mar 22.

Nuclear factor <U+03BA>B mediates suppression of canonical transient receptor potential 
6 expression by reactive oxygen species and protein kinase C in kidney cells.

Wang Y(1), Ding M, Chaudhari S, Ding Y, Yuan J, Stankowska D, He S,
Krishnamoorthy R, Cunningham JT, Ma R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Physiology and Cardiovascular Research Institute,
University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas 76107, USA.

This study was carried out to explore the molecular mechanism for down-regulation
of TRPC6 expression in the reactive oxygen species (ROS)/PKC signaling in kidney 
cells. In cultured human mesangial cells, H2O2 and TNF-a inhibited TRPC6 mRNA
expression in a time-dependent manner. Inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B reversed both H2O2-
and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-induced decrease in TRPC6 protein
expression. Activation of NF-<U+03BA>B by knocking down I<U+03BA>Ba using siRNA could mimic the
suppressive effect of ROS/PKC on TRPC6. a Ca(2+) imaging study showed that
activation and inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B significantly decreased and increased the
TRPC6-mediated Ca(2+) entry, respectively. Further experiments showed that PMA,
but not its inactive analog 4a-phorbol 12, 13-didecanoate (4a-PDD), caused
phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>Ba and stimulated the nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B p50 and
p65 subunits. The PMA-dependent I<U+03BA>Ba phosphorylation was significantly inhibited 
by Gö6976. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed that PMA stimulated DNA 
binding activity of NF-<U+03BA>B. Furthermore, specific knockdown of p65, but not p50,
prevented an H2O2 inhibitory effect on TRPC6 protein expression, suggesting p65
as a predominant NF-<U+03BA>B subunit repressing TRPC6. In agreement with a major role
of p65, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that PMA treatment induced
p65 binding to the TRPC6 promoter. Moreover, PMA treatment increased the
association of p65 with histone deacetylase (HDAC) and decreased histone
acetylation at the TRPC6 promoter. Consistently, knockdown of HDAC2 by siRNA or
inhibition of HDAC with trichostatin A prevented a H2O2-induced decrease in TRPC6
mRNA and protein expressions, respectively. Taken together, our findings imply an
important role of NF-<U+03BA>B in a negative regulation of TRPC6 expression at the gene 
transcription level in kidney cells.

PMCID: PMC3642329
PMID: 23525112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 30;33(5):653-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.613. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Identifying targets for the restoration and reactivation of BRM.

Kahali B(1), Gramling SJ(1), Marquez SB(1), Thompson K(1), Lu L(2), Reisman D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.

Brahma (BRM) is a novel anticancer gene, which is frequently inactivated in a
variety of tumor types. Unlike many anticancer genes, BRM is not mutated, but
rather epigenetically silenced. In addition, histone deacetylase complex (HDAC)
inhibitors are known to reverse BRM silencing, but they also inactivate it via
acetylation of its C-terminus. High-throughput screening has uncovered many
compounds that are effective at pharmacologically restoring BRM and thereby
inhibit cancer cell growth. As we do not know which specific proteins, if any,
regulate BRM, we sought to identify the proteins, which underlie the epigenetic
suppression of BRM. By selectively knocking down each HDAC, we found that HDAC3
and HDAC9 regulate BRM expression, whereas HDAC2 controls its acetylation.
Similarly, we ectopically overexpressed 21 different histone acetyltransferases
and found that KAT6A, KAT6B and KAT7 induce BRM expression, whereas KAT2B and
KAT8 induce its acetylation. We also investigated the role of two transcription
factors (TFs) linked to either BRM (GATA3) or HDAC9 (MEF2D) expression. Knockdown
of either GATA3 and/or MEF2D downregulated HDAC9 and induced BRM. As targets for 
molecular biotherapy are typically uniquely, or simply differentially expressed
in cancer cells, we also determined if any of these proteins are dysregulated.
However, by sequencing, no mutations were found in any of these BRM-regulating
HDACs, HATs or TFs. We selectively knocked down GATA3, MEF2D, HDAC3 and HDAC9,
and found that each gene-specific knockdown induced growth inhibition. We
observed that both GATA3 and HDAC9 were greatly overexpressed only in
BRM-negative cell lines indicating that HDAC9 may be a good target for therapy.
We also found that the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway regulates
both BRM acetylation and BRM silencing as MAP kinase pathway inhibitors both
induced BRM as well as caused BRM deacetylation. Together, these data identify a 
cadre of key proteins, which underlie the epigenetic regulation of BRM.

PMID: 23524580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(3):e1003377. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003377. Epub 2013 Mar 
14.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) regulates chromosome segregation and kinetochore
function via H4K16 deacetylation during oocyte maturation in mouse.

Ma P(1), Schultz RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

Changes in histone acetylation occur during oocyte development and maturation,
but the role of specific histone deacetylases in these processes is poorly
defined. We report here that mice harboring Hdac1(-/+)/Hdac2(-/-) or Hdac2(-/-)
oocytes are infertile or sub-fertile, respectively. Depleting maternal HDAC2
results in hyperacetylation of H4K16 as determined by immunocytochemistry--normal
deacetylation of other lysine residues of histone H3 or H4 is observed--and
defective chromosome condensation and segregation during oocyte maturation occurs
in a sub-population of oocytes. The resulting increased incidence of aneuploidy
likely accounts for the observed sub-fertility of mice harboring Hdac2(-/-)
oocytes. The infertility of mice harboring Hdac1(-/+)/Hdac2(-/-)oocytes is
attributed to failure of those few eggs that properly mature to metaphase II to
initiate DNA replication following fertilization. The increased amount of
acetylated H4K16 likely impairs kinetochore function in oocytes lacking HDAC2
because kinetochores in mutant oocytes are less able to form cold-stable
microtubule attachments and less CENP-A is located at the centromere. These
results implicate HDAC2 as the major HDAC that regulates global histone
acetylation during oocyte development and, furthermore, suggest HDAC2 is largely 
responsible for the deacetylation of H4K16 during maturation. In addition, the
results provide additional support that histone deacetylation that occurs during 
oocyte maturation is critical for proper chromosome segregation.

PMCID: PMC3597510
PMID: 23516383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jul 28;335(2):455-62. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.03.003. Epub
2013 Mar 14.

MiR-145 functions as a tumor suppressor by directly targeting histone deacetylase
2 in liver cancer.

Noh JH(1), Chang YG, Kim MG, Jung KH, Kim JK, Bae HJ, Eun JW, Shen Q, Kim SJ,
Kwon SH, Park WS, Lee JY, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Oncogenomics, Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Aberrant regulation of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) plays a pivotal role in the 
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but, the underlying mechanism
leading to HDAC2 overexpression is not well understood. We performed microRNA
(miRNA) profiling analysis in a subset of HCCs, and identified four
down-regulated miRNAs that may target HDAC2 in HCC. Ectopic expression of miRNA
mimics evidenced that miR-145 suppresses HDAC2 expression in HCC cells. This
treatment repressed cancer cell growth and recapitulated HDAC2 knockdown effects 
on HCC cells. In conclusion, we suggest that loss or suppression of miR-145 may
cause aberrant overexpression of HDAC2 and promote HCC tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23499894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Transplant Proc. 2013 Mar;45(2):463-73. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.06.063.

Gender-dependent histone deacetylases injury may contribute to differences in
liver recovery rates of male and female mice.

Wang Y(1), Ye F, Ke Q, Wu Q, Yang R, Bu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ministry of Health, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocytes undergo DNA synthesis shortly after liver damage
triggered by partial hepatectomy (PH). This study revealed that the rate of liver
damage recovery is gender-dependent. Furthermore, histone deacetylase (HDAC)
epigenetic factors were discovered, at least in part, to govern the different
liver recovery rates that were observed for male and female mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Experimental mice were divided into the following three
groups: wild-type male mice, wild-type female mice, and HDAC1(flox/flox)
HDAC2(flox/flox) Alb-Cre male mice. The different groups underwent a 2/3 PH
surgery and were sacrificed after the PH.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the peak of
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine and the number of proliferating cell nuclear
antigen-positive cells is delayed in female livers relative to male livers.
Consistent with these results, the expression of cyclin D1, cyclin-dependent
kinase 2 (CDK2) and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) in females is lower than
that in males. Western blot analysis examining HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression in the 
male and female liver showed the same trend as the cyclin products listed above
or decreased protein expression in females relative to males. The results of
immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis of the HDAC1(flox/flox)
HDAC2(flox/flox) Alb-Cre liver are consistent with the interesting phenomenon
observed in the female mouse liver. Additionally, the hepatocyte proliferation
inhibitor B-myc was evaluated as an HDAC1 and HDAC2 target gene. The mRNA levels 
of B-myc were increased in the female liver compared with the male liver. A
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed the HDACs directly occupied the B-myc 
promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: The processes of hepatocyte replication and liver mass
reconstruction differed in male and female mice. Female subjects show a
significantly delayed or decreased rate in these processes, which could be
explained by differences in HDAC regulation.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23498780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Blood. 2013 Mar 14;121(11):1930-1. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-480400.

Too much or too little, how much HDAC activity is good for you?

Matthias P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute For Biomedical Research, Switzerland.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Mar 14;121(11):2038-50.

In this issue of Blood, Heideman and colleagues show that the major class I
histone deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2 can act to suppress tumors in mouse 
thymocytes.

PMID: 23493769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Apr 15;73(8):763-73. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.01.012.
Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Aberrant histone deacetylase2-mediated histone modifications and synaptic
plasticity in the amygdala predisposes to anxiety and alcoholism.

Moonat S(1), Sakharkar AJ, Zhang H, Tang L, Pandey SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic mechanisms have been implicated in psychiatric disorders, 
including alcohol dependence. However, the epigenetic basis and role of specific 
histone deacetylase (HDAC) isoforms in the genetic predisposition to anxiety and 
alcoholism is unknown.
METHODS: We measured amygdaloid HDAC activity, levels of HDAC isoforms, and
histone H3 acetylation in selectively bred alcohol-preferring (P) and
-nonpreferring (NP) rats. We employed HDAC2 small interfering RNA infusion into
the central nucleus of amygdala (CeA) of P rats to determine the causal role of
HDAC2 in anxiety-like and alcohol-drinking behaviors. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis was performed to examine the histone acetylation
status of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) and activity-regulated
cytoskeleton associated protein (Arc) genes. Golgi-Cox staining was performed to 
measure dendritic spine density.
RESULTS: We found that P rats innately display higher nuclear HDAC activity and
HDAC2 but not HDAC 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 protein levels and lower acetylation of
H3-K9 but not H3-K14, in the CeA and medial nucleus of amygdala compared with NP 
rats. Acute ethanol exposure decreased amygdaloid HDAC activity and HDAC2 protein
levels, increased global and gene (Bdnf and Arc)-specific histone acetylation,
and attenuated anxiety-like behaviors in P rats but had no effects in NP rats.
The HDAC2 knockdown in the CeA attenuated anxiety-like behaviors and voluntary
alcohol but not sucrose consumption in P rats and increased histone acetylation
of Bdnf and Arc with a resultant increase in protein levels that correlated with 
increased dendritic spine density.
CONCLUSIONS: These novel data demonstrate the role of HDAC2-mediated epigenetic
mechanisms in anxiety and alcoholism.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3718567
PMID: 23485013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013 Aug;38(9):1674-84. doi: 10.1038/npp.2013.65. Epub
2013 Mar 8.

Hyposensitivity to gamma-aminobutyric acid in the ventral tegmental area during
alcohol withdrawal: reversal by histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Arora DS(1), Nimitvilai S, Teppen TL, McElvain MA, Sakharkar AJ, You C, Pandey
SC, Brodie MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL
60612-7342, USA.

Putative dopaminergic (pDAergic) ventral tegmental area (VTA) neurons have an
important role in alcohol addiction. Acute ethanol increases the activity of
pDAergic neurons, and withdrawal from repeated ethanol administration produces a 
decreased sensitivity of pDAergic VTA neurons to GABA. Recent studies show that
behavioral changes induced by chronic alcohol are reversed by inhibitors of
histone deacetylases (HDACs). Whether HDAC-induced histone modifications regulate
changes in GABA sensitivity of VTA pDAergic neurons during withdrawal is unknown.
Here, we investigated modulation of withdrawal-induced changes in GABA
sensitivity of pDAergic VTA neurons by HDAC inhibitors (HDACi), and also measured
the levels of HDAC2, histone (H3-K9) acetylation, and GABA-Aa1 receptor (GABA
(A-a1) R) subunit in VTA during ethanol withdrawal. Mice were injected
intraperitoneally (ip) with either ethanol (3.5 g/kg) or saline twice daily for 3
weeks. In recordings from pDAergic VTA neurons in brain slices from
ethanol-withdrawn mice, sensitivity to GABA (50-500 µM) was reduced. In brain
slices from ethanol-withdrawn mice incubated with the HDACi SAHA (vorinostat) or 
trichostatin A (TSA) for 2 h, the hyposensitivity of pDAergic VTA neurons to GABA
was significantly attenuated. There was no effect of TSA or SAHA on GABA
sensitivity of pDAergic VTA neurons from saline-treated mice. In addition,
ethanol withdrawal was associated with an increase in levels of HDAC2 and a
decrease in histone (H3-K9) acetylation and levels of GABA (A-a1) R subunits in
the VTA. Therefore, blockade of upregulation of HDAC2 by HDACi normalizes GABA
hyposensitivity of pDAergic neurons developed during withdrawal after chronic
ethanol treatment, which suggests the possibility that inhibition of HDACs can
reverse ethanol-induced neuroadaptational changes in reward circuitry.

PMCID: PMC3717553
PMID: 23474591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 19;288(16):11004-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441816. Epub
2013 Mar 5.

A nitric oxide-dependent cross-talk between class I and III histone deacetylases 
accelerates skin repair.

Spallotta F(1), Cencioni C, Straino S, Nanni S, Rosati J, Artuso S, Manni I,
Colussi C, Piaggio G, Martelli F, Valente S, Mai A, Capogrossi MC, Farsetti A,
Gaetano C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia Vascolare e Medicina Rigenerativa, Centro Cardiologico
Monzino, Istituto di Ricerca e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, 20138 Milan, Italy.

In a mouse model of skin repair we found that the class I-IIa histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A accelerated tissue regeneration. Unexpectedly, this
effect was suppressed by Sirtinol, a class III histone deacetylase (HDAC)
(sirtuin)-selective inhibitor. The role of sirtuins (SIRTs) was then investigated
by using resveratrol and a novel SIRT1-2-3 activator, the MC2562 compound we
synthesized recently. Both resveratrol and MC2562 were effective in accelerating 
wound repair. The local administration of natural or synthetic SIRT activators,
in fact, significantly accelerated skin regeneration by increasing keratinocyte
proliferation. In vitro experiments revealed that the activation of SIRTs
stimulated keratinocyte proliferation via endothelial NO synthase phosphorylation
and NO production. In this condition, the class I member HDAC2 was found
S-nitrosylated on cysteine, a post-transduction modification associated with loss
of activity and DNA binding capacity. After deacetylase inhibitor or SIRT
activator treatment, ChIP showed, in fact, a significant HDAC2 detachment from
the promoter region of insulin growth factor I (IGF-I), fibroblast growth factor 
10 (FGF-10), and Epithelial Growth Factor (EGF), which may be the final
recipients and effectors of the SIRT-NO-HDAC signaling cascade. Consistently, the
effect of SIRT activators was reduced in the presence of NG-nitro-L-arginine
methyl ester (L-NAME), a general inhibitor of NO synthesis. In conclusion, the
NO-dependent cross-talk among class III and I histone deacetylases suggests an
unprecedented signaling pathway important for skin repair.

PMCID: PMC3630901
PMID: 23463510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Dev Cell. 2013 Feb 25;24(4):345-58. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.01.012.

Development and regeneration of Sox2+ endoderm progenitors are regulated by a
Hdac1/2-Bmp4/Rb1 regulatory pathway.

Wang Y(1), Tian Y, Morley MP, Lu MM, Demayo FJ, Olson EN, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The mechanisms that govern the maintenance and differentiation of tissue-specific
progenitors in development and tissue regeneration are poorly understood. We show
that development of Sox2+ progenitors in the lung endoderm is regulated by
histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (Hdac1/2). Hdac1/2 deficiency leads to a loss of
Sox2 expression and a block in proximal airway development. This is mediated in
part by derepression of Bmp4 and the tumor suppressor Rb1, which are direct
transcriptional targets of Hdac1/2. In contrast to development, postnatal loss of
Hdac1/2 in airway epithelium does not affect the expression of Sox2 or Bmp4.
However, postnatal loss of Hdac1/2 leads to increased expression of the
cell-cycle regulators Rb1, p21/Cdkn1a, and p16/Ink4a, resulting in a loss of
cell-cycle progression and defective regeneration of Sox2+ lung epithelium. Thus,
Hdac1/2 have both common and unique targets that differentially regulate
tissue-specific progenitor activity during development and regeneration.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586315
PMID: 23449471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1508. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2489.

PI(4,5)P2 5-phosphatase A regulates PI3K/Akt signalling and has a tumour
suppressive role in human melanoma.

Ye Y(1), Jin L, Wilmott JS, Hu WL, Yosufi B, Thorne RF, Liu T, Rizos H, Yan XG,
Dong L, Tay KH, Tseng HY, Guo ST, de Bock CE, Jiang CC, Wang CY, Wu M, Zhang LJ, 
Hersey P, Scolyer RA, Zhang XD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New 
South Wales 2308, Australia.

Inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatases can terminate downstream signalling of
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase; however, their biological role in the pathogenesis
of cancer is controversial. Here we report that the inositol polyphosphate
5-phosphatase, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase, has a tumour 
suppressive role in melanoma. Although it is commonly downregulated in melanoma, 
overexpression of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase blocks Akt 
activation, inhibits proliferation and undermines survival of melanoma cells in
vitro, and retards melanoma growth in a xenograft model. In contrast, knockdown
of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase results in increased
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth of melanocytes. Although DNA copy 
number loss is responsible for downregulation of phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase in a proportion of melanomas, histone
hypoacetylation mediated by histone deacetylases HDAC2 and HDAC3 through binding 
to the transcription factor Sp1 at the PIB5PA gene promoter appears to be another
commonly involved mechanism. Collectively, these results establish the tumour
suppressive role of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 5-phosphatase and
reveal mechanisms involved in its downregulation in melanoma.

PMCID: PMC3586716
PMID: 23443536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Blood. 2013 Apr 25;121(17):3459-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-10-461988. Epub 2013 
Feb 25.

A dual role for Hdac1: oncosuppressor in tumorigenesis, oncogene in tumor
maintenance.

Santoro F(1), Botrugno OA, Dal Zuffo R, Pallavicini I, Matthews GM, Cluse L,
Barozzi I, Senese S, Fornasari L, Moretti S, Altucci L, Pelicci PG, Chiocca S,
Johnstone RW, Minucci S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology at the IFOM-IEO Campus, European Institute
of Oncology, via Adamello 16, Milan, Italy.

Aberrant recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by the oncogenic fusion
protein PML-RAR is involved in the pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL). PML-RAR, however, is not sufficient to induce disease in mice but requires
additional oncogenic lesions during the preleukemic phase. Here, we show that
knock-down of Hdac1 and Hdac2 dramatically accelerates leukemogenesis in
transgenic preleukemic mice. These events are not restricted to APL because
lymphomagenesis driven by deletion of p53 or, to a lesser extent, by c-myc
overexpression, was also accelerated by Hdac1 knock-down. In the preleukemic
phase of APL, Hdac1 counteracts the activity of PML-RAR in (1) blocking
differentiation; (2) impairing genomic stability; and (3) increasing self-renewal
in hematopoietic progenitors, as all of these events are affected by the
reduction in Hdac1 levels. This led to an expansion of a subpopulation of
PML-RAR-expressing cells that is the major source of leukemic stem cells in the
full leukemic stage. Remarkably, short-term treatment of preleukemic mice with an
HDAC inhibitor accelerated leukemogenesis. In contrast, knock-down of Hdac1 in
APL mice led to enhanced survival duration of the leukemic animals. Thus, Hdac1
has a dual role in tumorigenesis: oncosuppressive in the early stages, and
oncogenic in established tumor cells.

PMID: 23440245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 Sep;56:447-55. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.02.003. Epub 2013 
Feb 22.

ELAV proteins along evolution: back to the nucleus?

Colombrita C(1), Silani V, Ratti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Laboratory of Neuroscience, IRCCS Istituto
Auxologico Italiano, Via Zucchi, 18, 20095 Cusano Milanino (Milan), Italy;
Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, "Dino Ferrari" 
Center, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Sforza, 35, 20122 Milan, Italy.

The complex interplay of post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms mediated by
RNA-binding proteins (RBP) at different steps of RNA metabolism is pivotal for
the development of the nervous system and the maintenance of adult brain
activities. In this review, we will focus on the highly conserved ELAV gene
family encoding for neuronal-specific RBPs which are necessary for proper
neuronal differentiation and important for synaptic plasticity process. In the
evolution from Drosophila to man, ELAV proteins seem to have changed their
biological functions in relation to their different subcellular localization.
While in Drosophila, they are localized in the nuclear compartment of neuronal
cells and regulate splicing and polyadenylation, in mammals, the neuronal ELAV
proteins are mainly present in the cytoplasm where they participate in regulating
mRNA target stability, translation and transport into neurites. However, recent
data indicate that the mammalian ELAV RBPs also have nuclear activities,
similarly to their fly counterpart, being them able to continuously shuttle
between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Here, we will review and comment on all
the biological functions associated with neuronal ELAV proteins along evolution
and will show that the post-transcriptional regulatory network mediated by these 
RBPs in the brain is highly complex and only at an initial stage of being fully
understood. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'RNA and splicing
regulation in neurodegeneration'.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23439364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Cerebellum. 2013 Aug;12(4):534-46. doi: 10.1007/s12311-013-0459-x.

The expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 during cerebellar cortical development.

Yoo JY(1), Larouche M, Goldowitz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for Molecular Medicine and
Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, 950 W. 28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are epigenetic regulatory proteins that repress gene
transcription by changing DNA conformation. The regulation of gene expression
through histone deacetylation is an important mechanism for the development of
the central nervous system. Although the disruption of the balance in epigenetic 
gene regulation has been implicated in many CNS developmental abnormalities and
diseases, the expression pattern of HDACs in various cell types in the brain
during its maturation process has had limited exploration. Therefore, in this
study, we investigate the cell type-specific and developmental stage-specific
expression pattern of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the mouse cerebellum. Our experimental
results show that the cerebellar progenitors and glial cells express high levels 
of HDAC1 and low levels of HDAC2. On the other hand, the post-mitotic migrating
neuronal cells of the cerebellar cortex show strong HDAC2 and weak HDAC1
expressions. In more differentiated neuronal cells, including Purkinje cells,
granule cells, unipolar brush cells, and GABAergic interneurons, we found a
consistent expression pattern, high levels of HDAC2 and low levels of HDAC1.
Therefore, our data provide support for the potential important roles of HDAC1 in
cell proliferation and HDAC2 in migration and differentiation.

PMID: 23436026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jul;34(7):1442-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt070. Epub 2013 Feb 
21.

Pure curcumin increases the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 in myeloproliferative
neoplasms through suppressing class I histone deacetylases.

Chen CQ(1), Yu K, Yan QX, Xing CY, Chen Y, Yan Z, Shi YF, Zhao KW, Gao SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Internal Medicine and 2Department of Hematology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical College, 2 FuXue Road, Wenzhou 325000,
China.

Suppressors of cytokine signaling, SOCS1 and SOCS3, are important negative
regulators of Janus kinase 2/signal transducers and activators of transcription
signaling, which is constitutively activated in myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPNs) and leukemia. Curcumin has been shown to possess anticancer activity
through different mechanisms. However, whether curcumin can regulate the
expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 is still unknown. Here, we found that curcumin
elevated the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 via triggering acetylation of histone 
in the regions of SOCS1 and SOCS3 promoter in K562 and HEL cells. As a novel
histone deacetylases (HDACs) inhibitor, curcumin inhibited HDAC enzyme activities
and decreased the levels of HDAC1, 3 and 8 but not HDAC2. Knockdown of HDAC8 by
small interfering RNA markedly elevated the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3.
Moreover, ectopic expression of HDAC8 decreased the levels of SOCS1 and SOCS3.
Thus, HDAC8 plays an important role in the modulation of SOCS1 and SOCS3 by
curcumin. Also, trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of HDACs, increased the levels
of SOCS1 and SOCS3. Furthermore, curcumin increased the transcript levels of
SOCS1 and SOCS3 and significantly inhibited the clonogenic activity of
hematopoietic progenitors from patients with MPNs. Finally, curcumin markedly
inhibited HDAC activities and decreased HDAC8 levels in primary MPN cells. Taken 
together, our data uncover a regulatory mechanism of SOCS1 and SOCS3 through
inhibition of HDAC activity (especially HDAC8) by curcumin. Thus, being a
relative non-toxic agent, curcumin may offer a therapeutic advantage in the
clinical treatment for MPNs.

PMID: 23430957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Oncol Lett. 2013 Feb;5(2):452-458. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Investigation of the expression patterns and correlation of DNA
methyltransferases and class I histone deacetylases in ovarian cancer tissues.

Gu Y(1), Yang P, Shao Q, Liu X, Xia S, Zhang M, Xu H, Shao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine,
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013;

Recent studies have reported that DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the epigenetic regulation of cancer, as well
as promoting cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. These mechanisms also play
important roles in ovarian cancer, but little is known concerning the correlation
of DNMTs and HDACs in ovarian cancer. In the present study, we used quantitative 
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and
immunohistochemical staining to examine the mRNA and protein expression of DNMTs 
and class I HDACs of tissues from 22 cases of ovarian cancer and 8 normal ovaries
as a control. Furthermore, we assessed the correlation with clinicopathological
stages and the mRNA expression of these genes. The results indicated that the
mRNA expression of DNMT1, DNMT3b and class I HDACs was increased in ovarian
cancers, while the expression of DNMT3a was not different between cancer tissues 
and normal ovaries. Additionally, the results of immunohistochemical staining
demonstrated that DNMT1 and DNMT3b were significantly increased in ovarian cancer
samples. Furthermore, the expression of DNMT1, DNMT3b, HDAC1 and HDAC2 was
significantly higher in stage III/IV compared with stage I/II ovarian carcinomas.
The expression of HDAC2 was positively correlated with HDCA1, HDAC3 and HDAC8,
and DNMT1 was positively correlated with DNMT3b. Simultaneously, DNMT3b was
correlated with HDAC1 and HDAC2. HDAC1 may upregulate the expression of DNMTs,
but this requires confirmation by in vitro and in vivo experiments. The overall
high rate of expression for class I HDACs, DNMT1 and DNMT3b suggested that these 
mRNAs should be explored as predictive factors in ovarian cancer. In addition,
HDAC1, HDAC2 and DNMT3b cooperated in controlling ovarian cancer progression.
Determining the correlations between HDACs and DNMTs in ovarian cancer will not
only further clarify the mechanisms of genesis and development, but also guide
clinical therapy using the inhibitors of HDACs and DNMTs.

PMCID: PMC3573157
PMID: 23420051  [PubMed]


473. Brain Res. 2013 Apr 4;1504:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.02.012. Epub 2013 
Feb 16.

Histone deacetylase class II and acetylated core histone immunohistochemistry in 
human brains with Huntington's disease.

Yeh HH(1), Young D, Gelovani JG, Robinson A, Davidson Y, Herholz K, Mann DM.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, School of Cancer and Enabling Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant
neurodegenerative disorder, caused by a CAG/polyglutamine repeat expansion, which
is associated with a dysregulation of histone function and an impairment of
protein transcription. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, such as vorinostat 
(SAHA), have shown promise as therapeutic agents. However, there have been few
studies on the expression of HDACs and acetylated core histones (AcHs) in either 
normal animals or humans, or in HD patients or HD animal models. Therefore, we
investigated the expression of HDACs and AcHs in HD brain by
immunohistochemistry, and have compared findings with elderly control subjects
and patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) to determine whether
any observed changes were specific for HD.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: we show specific and significant losses of AcH2A, AcH2B, 
AcH3 and AcH4 expression from cells in the caudate nucleus and Purkinje cells of 
the cerebellum in HD compared to patients with FTLD and control subjects, while
the level of HDAC 5 was increased in these cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23419892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2013 Jan;27(1):18-23. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3827.

Effects of histone deacetylase inhibitor on extracellular matrix production in
human nasal polyp organ cultures.

Cho JS(1), Moon YM, Park IH, Um JY, Kang JH, Kim TH, Lee SH, Kang HJ, Lee HM.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Biomedical Science, Guro Hospital, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Nasal polyposis is associated with a chronic inflammatory condition
of the sinonasal mucosa and involves myofibroblast differentiation and
extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation. Epigenetic modulation by histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors including trichostatin A (TSA) has been reported to
have inhibitory effects on myofibroblast differentiation in lung and renal
fibroblasts. The purpose of this study was to investigate the inhibitory effect
of TSA on myofibroblast differentiation and ECM production in nasal polyp organ
cultures.
METHODS: Nasal polyp tissues from 18 patients were acquired during endoscopic
sinus surgery. After organ culture, nasal polyps were stimulated with TGF-beta1
and then treated with TSA. Alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), fibronectin, and
collagen type I expression levels were examined by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR), real-time PCR, Western blot, and
immunofluorescent staining. HDAC2, HDAC4, and acetylated H4 expression levels
were assayed by Western blot. Cytotoxicity was analyzed by the terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase biotin-dUTP nick end labeling assay.
RESULTS: The expression levels of a-SMA, fibronectin, and collagen type 1 were
increased in nasal polyp after transforming growth factor (TGF) beta1 treatment. 
TSA-inhibited TGF-beta1 induced these gene and protein expression levels.
Furthermore, TSA suppressed protein expression levels of HDAC2 and HDAC4.
However, TSA induced hyperacetylation of histones H4. Treatment with TGF-beta1
with or without TSA did not have cytotoxic effect.
CONCLUSION: These findings provide novel insights into the epigenetic regulation 
in myofibroblast differentiation and ECM production of nasal polyp. TSA could be 
a candidate of a therapeutic agent for reversing the TGF-beta1-induced ECM
synthesis that leads to nasal polyp development.

PMID: 23406592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Feb 6;14(2):3376-94. doi: 10.3390/ijms14023376.

Differential mRNA expression levels of human histone-modifying enzymes in normal 
karyotype B cell pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Tao YF(1), Pang L, Du XJ, Sun LC, Hu SY, Lu J, Cao L, Zhao WL, Feng X, Wang J, Wu
D, Wang N, Ni J, Pan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215003, Jiangsu, China. panjian2008@163.com.

Histone modification enzymes regulate gene expression by altering the
accessibility of promoters to transcription factors. We sought to determine
whether the genes encoding histone modification enzymes are dysregulated in
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). A real-time PCR array was designed,
tested and used to profile the expression of 85 genes encoding histone
modification enzymes in bone marrow mononuclear cells from 30 pediatric ALL
patients and 20 normal controls. The expression profile of histone-modifying
genes was significantly different between normal karyotype B cell pediatric ALL
and normal controls. Eleven genes were upregulated in pediatric ALL, including
the histone deacetylases HDAC2 and PAK1, and seven genes were downregulated,
including PRMT2 and the putative tumor suppressor EP300. Future studies will seek
to determine whether these genes serve as biomarkers of pediatric ALL. Ingenuity 
Pathway Analysis revealed that Gene Expression and Organ Morphology was the
highest rated network, with 13 focus molecules (significance score = 35).
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis also indicated that curcumin and miR-34 are upstream
regulators of histone-modifying enzymes; future studies will seek to validate
these results and examine the role of curcumin and miR-34 in leukemia. This study
provides new clues into the molecular mechanisms of pediatric ALL.

PMCID: PMC3588049
PMID: 23389039  [PubMed]


476. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2012;72(4):365-76.

Inhibition of class II histone deacetylase blocks proliferation and promotes
neuronal differentiation of the embryonic rat neural progenitor cells.

Liu H(1), Wu H, Wang Y, Wang Y, Wu X, Ju S, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicine Center, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, Jiangsu, P.R. China.

Neural precursor cells (NPCs), which are capable of self-renewing, migrating to
specific sites, and differentiating into the three main CNS lineages, neurons,
astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, have been used experimentally to repair the
damaged nervous system, either by grafting of cells grown in vitro or by
activating endogenous NPCs. The grafting of NPCs, however, is limited by its
lower viability and undesired glial differentiation. Understanding the mechanism 
underlying these events, therefore, is essential for the potential future use of 
NPCs. In the present study, we investigated the role of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibition on survival, proliferation, differentiation and migration of
the rat NPCs. We observed that NPCs derived from the E14.5 rat brain
constitutively expressed both class I and class II HDAC mRNA. Inhibition of HDAC 
by trichostatin A (TSA) blocked the proliferation, increased neuronal
differentiation and decreased astrocyte differentiation of the NPCs. Meanwhile,
TSA had no significant effects on survival and migration of the NPCs. Finally, we
found that HDAC inhibition regulated proliferation and neuronal differentiation
of the NPCs was associated with a reduction of class II and but not class I HDAC 
transcription. These findings collectively demonstrate that in the situation of
not affecting survival and migration, HDAC inhibition may induce more neuronal
differentiation.

PMID: 23377267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Aug;16(7):1587-97. doi:
10.1017/S1461145712001630. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Cocaine self-administration by rats is inhibited by cyclic GMP-elevating agents: 
involvement of epigenetic markers.

Deschatrettes E(1), Romieu P, Zwiller J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives et Adaptatives, Université de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

The C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) exerts its action via stimulation of the
cyclic GMP (cGMP) signalling pathway, which includes the activation of
cGMP-dependent protein kinases. The pathway can also be activated by inhibitors
of phosphodiesterases (PDE) that hydrolyse cGMP. The present report shows that
activation of the cGMP pathway by CNP, by bromo-cGMP, a cell-permeant cGMP
analogue, or by the PDE inhibitor zaprinast dose dependently reduces intravenous 
cocaine self-administration by rats. The effect was found when the compounds were
injected in situ into the prefrontal cortex, but not when they were injected into
the nucleus accumbens. A decrease in the number of cocaine infusions performed by
rats was obtained under the fixed ratio-1 schedule of reinforcement as well as
under a progressive ratio schedule, which evaluates the motivation of the animals
for the drug. Decrease in cocaine self-administration was accompanied with
reduced expression of the epigenetic markers methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2)
and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in dopaminergic projection areas. An increase
in the acetylation level of histone H3, but not of histone H4, was also noticed. 
Since MeCP2 and HDAC2 are known to modulate dynamic functions in the adult brain,
such as synaptic plasticity, our results showing that activation of the cGMP
signal transduction pathway decreased both cocaine intake and expression of the
epigenetic markers strongly suggest that the MeCP2/HDAC2 complex is involved in
the analysis of the reinforcing properties of cocaine in the prefrontal cortex.

PMID: 23375146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Mar;131(3):636-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.12.1564.
Epub 2013 Jan 26.

Corticosteroid resistance in patients with asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Reduced responsiveness to the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids is a
major barrier to effective management of asthma in smokers and patients with
severe asthma and in the majority of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). The molecular mechanisms leading to steroid resistance are now
better understood, and this has identified new targets for therapy. In patients
with severe asthma, several molecular mechanisms have been identified that might 
account for reduced steroid responsiveness, including reduced nuclear
translocation of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) a after binding corticosteroids.
This might be due to modification of the GR by means of phosphorylation as a
result of activation of several kinases (p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase a, 
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase <U+03B3>, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1), which in 
turn might be due to reduced activity and expression of phosphatases, such as
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 1 and protein phosphatase A2. Other 
mechanisms proposed include increased expression of GRß, which competes with and 
thus inhibits activated GRa; increased secretion of macrophage migration
inhibitory factor; competition with the transcription factor activator protein 1;
and reduced expression of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2. HDAC2 appears to mediate 
the action of steroids to switch off activated inflammatory genes, but in
patients with COPD, patients with severe asthma, and smokers with asthma, HDAC2
activity and expression are reduced by oxidative stress through activation of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase d. Strategies for managing steroid resistance include
alternative anti-inflammatory drugs, but a novel approach is to reverse steroid
resistance by increasing HDAC2 expression, which can be achieved with
theophylline and phosphoinositide 3-kinase d inhibitors. Long-acting ß2-agonists 
can also increase steroid responsiveness by reversing GRa phosphorylation.
Identifying the molecular mechanisms of steroid resistance in asthmatic patients 
and patients with COPD can thus lead to more effective anti-inflammatory
treatments.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23360759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 19;110(8):3113-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1218126110. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

S-nitrosylation of HDAC2 regulates the expression of the chromatin-remodeling
factor Brm during radial neuron migration.

Nott A(1), Nitarska J, Veenvliet JV, Schacke S, Derijck AA, Sirko P, Muchardt C, 
Pasterkamp RJ, Smidt MP, Riccio A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University
College London, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.

Dynamic epigenetic modifications play a key role in mediating the expression of
genes required for neuronal development. We previously identified nitric oxide
(NO) as a signaling molecule that mediates S-nitrosylation of histone deacetylase
2 (HDAC2) and epigenetic changes in neurons. Here, we show that HDAC2
nitrosylation regulates neuronal radial migration during cortical development.
Bead-array analysis performed in the developing cortex revealed that brahma
(Brm), a subunit of the ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling complex
BRG/brahma-associated factor, is one of the genes regulated by S-nitrosylation of
HDAC2. In the cortex, expression of a mutant form of HDAC2 that cannot be
nitrosylated dramatically inhibits Brm expression. Our study identifies NO and
HDAC2 nitrosylation as part of a signaling pathway that regulates cortical
development and the expression of Brm in neurons.

PMCID: PMC3581896
PMID: 23359715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Nat Immunol. 2013 Mar;14(3):211-20. doi: 10.1038/ni.2526. Epub 2013 Jan 27.

Epigenetic silencing of retinoblastoma gene regulates pathologic differentiation 
of myeloid cells in cancer.

Youn JI(1), Kumar V, Collazo M, Nefedova Y, Condamine T, Cheng P, Villagra A,
Antonia S, McCaffrey JC, Fishman M, Sarnaik A, Horna P, Sotomayor E, Gabrilovich 
DI.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Mar;14(3):197-9.

Two major populations of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), monocytic
MDSCs (M-MDSCs) and polymorphonuclear MDSCs (PMN-MDSCs) regulate immune responses
in cancer and other pathologic conditions. Under physiologic conditions,
Ly6C(hi)Ly6G(-) inflammatory monocytes, which are the normal counterpart of
M-MDSCs, differentiate into macrophages and dendritic cells. PMN-MDSCs are the
predominant group of MDSCs that accumulates in cancer. Here we show that a large 
proportion of M-MDSCs in tumor-bearing mice acquired phenotypic, morphological
and functional features of PMN-MDSCs. Acquisition of this phenotype, but not the 
functional attributes of PMN-MDSCs, was mediated by transcriptional silencing of 
the retinoblastoma gene through epigenetic modifications mediated by histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC-2). These data demonstrate a new regulatory mechanism of
myeloid cells in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3578019
PMID: 23354483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2012 Dec;121(12):816-20.

Dysregulation of histone deacetylase and histone acetyltransferase in development
of Wegener's granulomatosis.

Takagi D(1), Nakamaru Y, Suzuki M, Fukuda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Hokkaido University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: We investigated the function of the decreases in histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) in Wegener's granulomatosis (WG)
patients compared with healthy subjects.
METHODS: Seven patients with WG, diagnosed according to the American College of
Rheumatology criteria, were examined. Fresh peripheral blood mononuclear cells
were isolated from the WG patients and healthy subjects, and then whole-cell
proteins were prepared. We measured the total HDAC and HAT activity in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from WG patients. The HDAC2 expression was analyzed by
Western blot.
RESULTS: We found that total HDAC activity was significantly decreased in WG
patients compared to that in healthy subjects (p < 0.05). Furthermore, we found a
negative correlation between total HDAC activity and C-reactive protein titer.
Total HAT activity was significantly increased in WG patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrated reduced HDAC activity and an increase in 
HAT activity in WG. These were associated with concomitant induction of
WG-related inflammation. Thus, dysregulation of HDAC and HAT may contribute to
the disease pathogenesis of WG.

PMID: 23342555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Blood. 2013 Mar 14;121(11):2038-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-450916. Epub 2013 
Jan 17.

Dosage-dependent tumor suppression by histone deacetylases 1 and 2 through
regulation of c-Myc collaborating genes and p53 function.

Heideman MR(1), Wilting RH, Yanover E, Velds A, de Jong J, Kerkhoven RM, Jacobs
H, Wessels LF, Dannenberg JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Mar 14;121(11):1930-1.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are epigenetic erasers of lysine-acetyl marks.
Inhibition of HDACs using small molecule inhibitors (HDACi) is a potential
strategy in the treatment of various diseases and is approved for treating
hematological malignancies. Harnessing the therapeutic potential of HDACi
requires knowledge of HDAC-function in vivo. Here, we generated a
thymocyte-specific gradient of HDAC-activity using compound conditional knockout 
mice for Hdac1 and Hdac2. Unexpectedly, gradual loss of HDAC-activity engendered 
a dosage-dependent accumulation of immature thymocytes and correlated with the
incidence and latency of monoclonal lymphoblastic thymic lymphomas. Strikingly,
complete ablation of Hdac1 and Hdac2 abrogated lymphomagenesis due to a block in 
early thymic development. Genomic, biochemical and functional analyses of
pre-leukemic thymocytes and tumors revealed a critical role for
Hdac1/Hdac2-governed HDAC-activity in regulating a p53-dependent barrier to
constrain Myc-overexpressing thymocytes from progressing into lymphomas by
regulating Myc-collaborating genes. One Myc-collaborating and p53-suppressing
gene, Jdp2, was derepressed in an Hdac1/2-dependent manner and critical for the
survival of Jdp2-overexpressing lymphoma cells. Although reduced HDAC-activity
facilitates oncogenic transformation in normal cells, resulting tumor cells
remain highly dependent on HDAC-activity, indicating that a critical level of
Hdac1 and Hdac2 governed HDAC-activity is required for tumor maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3596963
PMID: 23327920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053927. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Fenretinide causes emphysema, which is prevented by sphingosine 1-phoshate.

Yasuo M(1), Mizuno S, Allegood J, Kraskauskas D, Bogaard HJ, Spiegel S, Voelkel
NF.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Division and Victoria Johnson Center for 
Obstructive Lung Diseases, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, 
United States of America.

Sphingolipids play a role in the development of emphysema and ceramide levels are
increased in experimental models of emphysema; however, the mechanisms of
ceramide-related pulmonary emphysema are not fully understood. Here we examine
mechanisms of ceramide-induced pulmonary emphysema. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were
treated with fenretinide (20 mg/kg BW), a synthetic derivative of retinoic acid
that causes the formation of ceramide, and we postulated that the effects of
fenretinide could be offset by administering sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) (100
µg/kg BW). Lung tissues were analyzed and mean alveolar airspace area, total
length of the alveolar perimeter and the number of caspase-3 positive cells were 
measured. Hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIF-1a), vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and other related proteins were analyzed by Western blot analysis. 
Immunohistochemical analysis of HIF-1a was also performed. Ceramide,
dihydroceramide, S1P, and dihydro-S1P were measured by mass spectrometer. Chronic
intraperitoneal injection of fenretinide increased the alveolar airspace surface 
area and increased the number of caspase-3 positive cells in rat lungs.
Fenretinide also suppressed HIF-1a and VEGF protein expression in rat lungs.
Concomitant injection of S1P prevented the decrease in the expression of HIF-1a, 
VEGF, histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), and nuclear factor (erythroid-derived
2)-like 2 (Nrf2) protein expression in the lungs. S1P injection also increased
phosphorylated sphingosine kinase 1. Dihydroceramide was significantly increased 
by fenretinide injection and S1P treatment prevented the increase in
dihydroceramide levels in rat lungs. These data support the concept that
increased de novo ceramide production causes alveolar septal cell apoptosis and
causes emphysema via suppressing HIF-1a. Concomitant treatment with S1P
normalizes the ceramide-S1P balance in the rat lungs and increases HIF-1a protein
expression via activation of sphingosine kinase 1; as a consequence, S1P salvages
fenretinide induced emphysema in rat lungs.

PMCID: PMC3543313
PMID: 23326540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013 Feb;14(2):97-111. doi: 10.1038/nrn3427. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Histone acetylation: molecular mnemonics on the chromatin.

Gräff J(1), Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Long-lasting memories require specific gene expression programmes that are, in
part, orchestrated by epigenetic mechanisms. Of the epigenetic modifications
identified in cognitive processes, histone acetylation has spurred considerable
interest. Whereas increments in histone acetylation have consistently been shown 
to favour learning and memory, a lack thereof has been causally implicated in
cognitive impairments in neurodevelopmental disorders, neurodegeneration and
ageing. As histone acetylation and cognitive functions can be pharmacologically
restored by histone deacetylase inhibitors, this epigenetic modification might
constitute a molecular memory aid on the chromatin and, by extension, a new
template for therapeutic interventions against cognitive frailty.

PMID: 23324667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Dec;28(12):1060-3. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20122812014. Epub
2012 Dec 21.

[Cognitive functions blocked in Alzheimer's disease, an epigenetic mechanism
revealed?].

[Article in French]

Rei D.

PMID: 23290404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):1335-44. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-441949. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 are essential for normal T-cell development and
genomic stability in mice.

Dovey OM(1), Foster CT, Conte N, Edwards SA, Edwards JM, Singh R, Vassiliou G,
Bradley A, Cowley SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) regulate chromatin structure as the
catalytic core of the Sin3A, NuRD and CoREST co-repressor complexes. To better
understand the key pathways regulated by HDAC1/2 in the adaptive immune system
and inform their exploitation as drug targets, we have generated mice with a
T-cell specific deletion. Loss of either HDAC1 or HDAC2 alone has little effect, 
while dual inactivation results in a 5-fold reduction in thymocyte cellularity,
accompanied by developmental arrest at the double-negative to double-positive
transition. Transcriptome analysis revealed 892 misregulated genes in Hdac1/2
knock-out thymocytes, including down-regulation of LAT, Themis and Itk, key
components of the T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling pathway. Down-regulation of
these genes suggests a model in which HDAC1/2 deficiency results in defective
propagation of TCR signaling, thus blocking development. Furthermore, mice with
reduced HDAC1/2 activity (Hdac1 deleted and a single Hdac2 allele) develop a
lethal pathology by 3-months of age, caused by neoplastic transformation of
immature T cells in the thymus. Tumor cells become aneuploid, express increased
levels of c-Myc and show elevated levels of the DNA damage marker, <U+03B3>H2AX. These
data demonstrate a crucial role for HDAC1/2 in T-cell development and the
maintenance of genomic stability.

PMCID: PMC3836254
PMID: 23287868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):1413-21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-04-424275. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

Targeting transcription factor SALL4 in acute myeloid leukemia by interrupting
its interaction with an epigenetic complex.

Gao C(1), Dimitrov T, Yong KJ, Tatetsu H, Jeong HW, Luo HR, Bradner JE, Tenen DG,
Chai L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Joint Program in Transfusion Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

An exciting recent approach to targeting transcription factors in cancer is to
block formation of oncogenic complexes. We investigated whether interfering with 
the interaction of the transcription factor SALL4, which is critical for leukemic
cell survival, and its epigenetic partner complex represents a novel therapeutic 
approach. The mechanism of SALL4 in promoting leukemogenesis is at least in part 
mediated by its repression of the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog
deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) through its interaction with a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) complex. In this study, we demonstrate that a peptide can
compete with SALL4 in interacting with the HDAC complex and reverse its effect on
PTEN repression. Treating SALL4-expressing malignant cells with this peptide
leads to cell death that can be rescued by a PTEN inhibitor. The antileukemic
effect of this peptide can be confirmed on primary human leukemia cells in
culture and in vivo, and is identical to that of down-regulation of SALL4 in
these cells using an RNAi approach. In summary, our results demonstrate a novel
peptide that can block the specific interaction between SALL4 and its epigenetic 
HDAC complex in regulating its target gene, PTEN. Furthermore, targeting SALL4
with this approach could be an innovative approach in treating leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3578956
PMID: 23287862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Jul;228(7):1525-35. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24311.

Dynamic distribution of HDAC1 and HDAC2 during mitosis: association with F-actin.

He S(1), Khan DH, Winter S, Seiser C, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.

During mitosis, histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) becomes highly phosphorylated
through the action of CK2, and HDAC1 and 2 are displaced from mitotic
chromosomes. HDAC1 and 2 are components of corepressor complexes, which function 
with lysine acetyltransferases to catalyze dynamic protein acetylation and
regulate gene expression. In this study, we show that HDAC1 and 2 associate with 
F-actin in mitotic cells. Inhibition of Aurora B or protein kinase CK2 did not
prevent the displacement of HDAC1 and 2 from mitotic chromosomes in HeLa cells.
Further, proteins of the HDAC1 and 2 corepressor complexes and transcription
factors recruiting these corepressors to chromatin were dissociated from mitotic 
chromosomes independent of Aurora B activity. HDAC1 and 2 returned to the nuclei 
of daughter cells during lamin A/C reassembly and before Sp1, Sp3, and RNA
polymerase II. Our results show that HDAC1 and 2 corepressor complexes are
removed from the mitotic chromosomes and are available early in the events
leading to the re-establishment of the gene expression program in daughter cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23280436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Liver Int. 2013 Apr;33(4):504-15. doi: 10.1111/liv.12034. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

A histone deacetylase inhibitor, largazole, decreases liver fibrosis and
angiogenesis by inhibiting transforming growth factor-ß and vascular endothelial 
growth factor signalling.

Liu Y(1), Wang Z, Wang J, Lam W, Kwong S, Li F, Friedman SL, Zhou S, Ren Q, Xu Z,
Wang X, Ji L, Tang S, Zhang H, Lui EL, Ye T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology & Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Largazole is a novel histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor.
This study investigated the effects of largazole against liver fibrosis.
METHODS: The in vitro effects of largazole were examined using hepatic stellate
cells (HSCs). In vivo effects of largazole were studied using a mouse liver
fibrotic model induced by CCl4 .
RESULTS: Largazole augmented acetylation of histone H3 (H3) and histone H4 (H4)
in HSCs. It directly inhibited the activation of HSCs owing to HDAC inhibitory
activity as the antifibrotic effect of largazole was significantly decreased in
cells with HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 knockdown. Largazole also induced apoptosis of 
HSCs. Largazole not only inhibited the expression of TGFßR2, but also reduced
phosphorylation of Smad2 and Akt induced by TGF-ß1. Largazole also inhibited the 
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptor.
VEGF-induced proliferation of HSCs and activation of Akt and p38MAPK were also
suppressed by largazole. In vivo, largazole reduced the expression of collagen I,
a-smooth muscle actin and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 in CCl4
-induced fibrosis, and these antifibrotic effects were associated with increased 
acetylation of H3 and H4. Largazole also induced HSCs to undergo apoptosis in
vivo, which was correlated with downregulation of bcl-2 and bcl-xL. Furthermore, 
largazole inhibited angiogenesis in vivo as evidenced by reduced expression of
CD34, VEGF and VEGFR. In addition to its antifibrotic activity, the drug reduced 
inflammatory activity in CCl4 -induced liver fibrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed a novel role of largazole in the treatment of 
liver fibrosis. Through multiple mechanisms, largazole could be a potentially
effective antifibrotic agent.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23279742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Jun;40(6):3995-4000. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2477-z. Epub 2012
Dec 29.

Expression level of histone deacetylase 2 correlates with occurring of chronic
obstructive pulmonary diseases.

Qu Y(1), Yang Y, Ma D, He L, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
250012, China. quyiqing@qiluhospital.com

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with chronic severe
airway inflammation and causes increasing global health problems. New biological 
markers for COPD prediction and prognosis are urgently necessary. Previous
studies indicate that histone deacetylases (HDACs) play essential roles in COPD. 
This study is to investigate if HDAC2 levels can be used as a promising, easily
detected biomarker of COPD. In this paper, 49 COPD patients were enrolled and 42 
healthy individuals (smokers or non-smokers) were used as healthy controls. Human
bronchial epithelial cells derived from non-smokers, smokers, or COPD patients
were grown in primary cultures. Total proteins were harvested from lung tissues
or bronchial epithelial cells and then subjected to immunoblot analyses of HDAC2,
HDAC3, and HDAC5. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC5 mRNA
levels in tissues or cells were also preformed. We found that among the three
HDAC proteins, the mRNA and protein levels of HDAC2, but not HDAC3 and HDAC5, in 
the tissues or cultured cells from patients have a significant correlation with
development and prognosis of COPD. These results suggested that HDAC2 levels may 
serve as a promising, easily detected biomarker of COPD.

PMID: 23275209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Expert Rev Neurother. 2013 Jan;13(1):1-3. doi: 10.1586/ern.12.141.

HDAC2 as a new target to improve schizophrenia treatment.

Kurita M, Holloway T, González-Maeso J.

PMCID: PMC3552246
PMID: 23253383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Pathol Oncol Res. 2013 Jul;19(3):397-403. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9592-y. Epub
2012 Dec 16.

Overexpression of histone deacetylase 2 predicts unfavorable prognosis in human
gallbladder carcinoma.

Du X(1), Zhao H, Zang L, Song N, Yang T, Dong R, Yin J, Wang C, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710038, People's Republic of China. du.xilintd@gmail.com

As important regulators of chromatin, histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved
in silencing tumor suppressor genes. HDAC2, a member of HDACs, has been
demonstrated to be implicated in the development and progression of various human
malignancies; however, its expression and role in human primary gallbladder
carcinoma (PGC) are not fully understood. Therefore, we conducted this study to
address this problem. The subjects were 136 patients underwent resection for PGC.
Immunostainings for HDAC2 were performed on these archival tissues. The
correlation of HDAC2 expression with clinicopathological characteristics
including survival was analyzed. HDAC2 was positively expressed in the nucleus of
tumor cells in 86.0 % (117/136) of PGC but not in the normal epithelium of the
gallbladder. Additionally, there was a significant difference in the incidence of
positive nodal metastasis between high and low HDAC2 expression groups
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). The incidences of advanced clinical stage (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005) and pathologic
T stage (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and higher histologic grade (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) were respectively
higher in the high HDAC2 expression group than in the low group. Moreover,
univariate and multivariate analyses revealed the high HDAC2 expression to be an 
independent prognostic factor for both overall and disease-free survival of
patients with PGC. High HDAC2 expression was correlated with a high incidence of 
lymph node metastasis and aggressive tumor progression of PGC. It also was an
independent prognostic factor for poorer overall and disease-free survival in
patients. Therefore, detection of HDAC2 expression may help us screen patients at
increased risk of malignant behavior for PGC.

PMID: 23242568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Science. 2013 Jan 11;339(6116):211-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1227166. Epub 2012 Dec
6.

Suppression of oxidative stress by ß-hydroxybutyrate, an endogenous histone
deacetylase inhibitor.

Shimazu T(1), Hirschey MD, Newman J, He W, Shirakawa K, Le Moan N, Grueter CA,
Lim H, Saunders LR, Stevens RD, Newgard CB, Farese RV Jr, de Cabo R, Ulrich S,
Akassoglou K, Verdin E.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Jan 11;339(6116):148-50.

Concentrations of acetyl-coenzyme A and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD(+)) affect histone acetylation and thereby couple cellular metabolic status 
and transcriptional regulation. We report that the ketone body
d-ß-hydroxybutyrate (ßOHB) is an endogenous and specific inhibitor of class I
histone deacetylases (HDACs). Administration of exogenous ßOHB, or fasting or
calorie restriction, two conditions associated with increased ßOHB abundance, all
increased global histone acetylation in mouse tissues. Inhibition of HDAC by ßOHB
was correlated with global changes in transcription, including that of the genes 
encoding oxidative stress resistance factors FOXO3A and MT2. Treatment of cells
with ßOHB increased histone acetylation at the Foxo3a and Mt2 promoters, and both
genes were activated by selective depletion of HDAC1 and HDAC2. Consistent with
increased FOXO3A and MT2 activity, treatment of mice with ßOHB conferred
substantial protection against oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC3735349
PMID: 23223453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):415-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2012.11.009.
Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Epigenetic control of neurotransmitter expression in olfactory bulb interneurons.

Banerjee K(1), Akiba Y, Baker H, Cave JW.

Author information: 
(1)Burke Medical Research Institute, 785 Mamaroneck Avenue, White Plains, NY
10605, United States.

Defining the molecular mechanisms that underlie development and maintenance of
neuronal phenotypic diversity in the CNS is a fundamental challenge in
developmental neurobiology. The vast majority of olfactory bulb (OB) interneurons
are GABAergic and this neurotransmitter phenotype is specified in migrating
neuroblasts by transcription of either or both glutamic acid decarboxylase 1
(Gad1) and Gad2. A subset of OB interneurons also co-express dopamine, but
transcriptional repression of tyrosine hydroxylase (Th) suppresses the
dopaminergic phenotype until these neurons terminally differentiate. In mature OB
interneurons, GABA and dopamine levels are modulated by odorant-induced synaptic 
activity-dependent regulation of Gad1 and Th transcription. The molecular
mechanisms that specify and maintain the GABAergic and dopaminergic phenotypes in
the OB are not clearly delineated. In this report, we review previous studies and
present novel findings that provide insight into the contribution of epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms for controlling expression of these neurotransmitter
phenotypes in the OB. We show that HDAC enzymes suppress the dopaminergic
phenotype in migrating neuroblasts by repressing Th transcription. In the mature 
interneurons, both Th and Gad1 transcription levels are modulated by synaptic
activity-dependent recruitment of acetylated Histone H3 on both the Th and Gad1
proximal promoters. We also show that HDAC2 has the opposite transcriptional
response to odorant-induced synaptic activity when compared to Th and Gad1. These
findings suggest that HDAC2 mediates, in part, the activity-dependent chromatin
remodeling of the Th and Gad1 proximal promoters in mature OB interneurons.

Copyright © 2012 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3622794
PMID: 23220178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Feb 15;304(4):C334-41. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00361.2012. Epub 2012 Nov 28.

Regulation of intestinal serotonin transporter expression via epigenetic
mechanisms: role of HDAC2.

Gill RK(1), Kumar A, Malhotra P, Maher D, Singh V, Dudeja PK, Alrefai W, Saksena 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. rgill@uic.edu

The serotonin (5-HT) transporter (SERT) facilitates clearance of extracellular
5-HT by its uptake and internalization. Decreased expression of SERT and
consequent high 5-HT levels have been implicated in various diarrheal disorders. 
Thus, appropriate regulation of SERT is critical for maintenance of 5-HT
homeostasis in health and disease. Previous studies demonstrated that SERT is
regulated via posttranslational and transcriptional mechanisms. However, the role
of epigenetic mechanisms in SERT regulation is not known. Current studies
investigated the effects of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition on SERT
expression and delineated the mechanisms. Treatment of Caco-2 cells with the
pan-HDAC inhibitors butyrate (5 mM) and trichostatin (TSA, 1 µM) decreased SERT
mRNA and protein levels. Butyrate- or TSA-induced decrease in SERT was associated
with decreased activity of human SERT (hSERT) promoter 1 (upstream of exon 1a),
but not hSERT promoter 2 (upstream of exon 2). Butyrate + TSA did not show an
additive effect on SERT expression, indicating that mechanisms involving histone 
hyperacetylation may be involved. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated enrichment of the hSERT promoter 1 (flanking nt -250/+2) with
tetra-acetylated histone H3 or H4, which was increased (~3-fold) by butyrate.
Interestingly, specific inhibition of HDAC2 (but not HDAC1) utilizing small
interfering RNA decreased SERT mRNA and protein levels. The decrease in SERT
expression by HDAC inhibition was recapitulated in an in vivo model. SERT mRNA
levels were decreased in the ileum and colon of mice fed pectin (increased
availability of butyrate) compared with controls fed a fiber-free diet (~50-60%).
Our results identify a novel role of HDAC2 as a regulator of SERT gene expression
in intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3566538
PMID: 23195070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Jan;11(1):62-73. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0332. Epub
2012 Nov 21.

Targeted inactivation of HDAC2 restores p16INK4a activity and exerts antitumor
effects on human gastric cancer.

Kim JK(1), Noh JH, Eun JW, Jung KH, Bae HJ, Shen Q, Kim MG, Chang YG, Kim SJ,
Park WS, Lee JY, Borlak J, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Aberrant regulation of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) was reported for gastric
cancers. However, responsive cancer genes in disease onset and progression are
less understood. HDAC2 expression was studied by quantitative RT-PCR and Western 
blotting. The functional consequences of HDAC2 knockdown on cell-cycle
regulation, programmed cell death, and gene target identification was
investigated by flow cytometry, Western blotting, electron microscopy,
anchorage-independent colony formation, and cell migration assay and by
whole-genome microarray. Therapeutic efficacy of HDAC2 knockdown was determined
in nude mice with small hairpin expressing human gastric cancer cells. Epigenetic
regulation of p16(INK4a) was studied by methylation-specific PCR and chromatin-IP
to evidence HDAC2 or acetylated-histone-H4 binding at gene specific promoter
sequences. HDAC2 gene and protein expression was significantly upregulated in
different histopathologic grades of human gastric cancers and cancer cell lines. 
HDAC2 inactivation significantly reduced cell motility, cell invasion, clonal
expansion, and tumor growth. HDAC2 knockdown-induced G(1)-S cell cycle arrest and
restored activity of p16(INK4a) and the proapoptotic factors. This treatment
caused PARP cleavage and hypophosphorylation of the Rb-protein, repressed
cyclinD1, CDK4, and Bcl-2 expression and induced autophagic phenotype, that is,
LC3B-II conversion. Some gastric tumors and cancer cells displayed p16(INK4a)
promoter hypermethylation but treatment with 5-aza-deoxycitidine restored
activity. With others the methylation status was unchanged. Here, chromatin-IP
evidenced HDAC2 binding. Nonetheless, expression of p16(INK4a) was restored by
HDAC2 knockdown with notable histone-H4-acetylation, as determined by
chromatin-IP. Thus, p16(INK4a) is regulated by HDAC2. HDAC2 is a bona fide target
for novel molecular therapies in gastric cancers.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 23175521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Brain Behav. 2012 Nov;2(6):732-40. doi: 10.1002/brb3.92. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Overexpression of cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase reduces MeCP2 and HDAC2
expression.

Deschatrettes E(1), Jouvert P, Zwiller J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Imagerie et de Neurosciences Cognitives, UMR 7237 CNRS,
Université de Strasbourg Strasbourg, France.

Nitric oxide (NO) and the C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) exert their action via
stimulation of the cyclic GMP (cGMP)-signaling pathway, which includes the
activation of cGMP-dependent protein kinases (PKG). The present report shows that
the activation of PKG by local application of 8-bromo-cGMP in the caudate-putamen
reduced the expression of the epigenetic markers, methyl-CpG-binding protein 2
(MeCP2) and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), in dopaminergic projection areas of
cocaine-treated rats. An effect of lesser amplitude was observed when rats were
not injected with cocaine. We also studied the effect of PKG overexpression by
injecting a plasmid vector containing the human PKG-Ia cDNA in either the
caudate-putamen or the ventral tegmental area. Injection in the caudate-putamen
reduced the epigenetic parameters with higher amplitude than the cGMP analog. The
effect was abolished by the injection of a selective PKG inhibitor, confirming
that it was due to PKG-dependent phosphorylation. As MeCP2 and HDAC2 modulate
dynamic functions in the adult brain such as memory formation and synaptic
plasticity, the downregulation of expression by PKG suggests that the cGMP
pathway affects cognitive processes through a mechanism that comprises the
MeCP2/HDAC2 complex and the subsequent control of gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC3500460
PMID: 23170236  [PubMed]


498. Hum Reprod. 2013 Feb;28(2):298-305. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des397. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Post-implantation mortality of in vitro produced embryos is associated with DNA
methyltransferase 1 dysfunction in sheep placenta.

Ptak GE(1), D'Agostino A, Toschi P, Fidanza A, Zacchini F, Czernik M, Monaco F,
Loi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, University of Teramo, Teramo,
Italy. gptak@unite.it

STUDY QUESTION: Is DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) dysfunction involved in
epigenetic deregulation of placentae from embryos obtained by assisted
reproduction technologies (ARTs)?
SUMMARY ANSWER: DNMT1 expression in growing placentae of in vitro produced (IVP) 
embryos is compromised and associated with pregnancy loss.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: DNMT1 maintains the methylation profile of genes during
cell division. The methylation status of genes involved in placenta development
is altered in embryos obtained in vitro. Disturbances in the epigenetic
regulation of gene expression during placentogenesis could be involved in the
frequent developmental arrest and loss of IVP embryos.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Forty sheep were naturally mated (Group 1, CTR).
IVP blastocysts (2-4 per ewe) were surgically transferred to the remaining 46
recipient sheep 6 days after oestrus (Group 2). Twenty-one recipients from Group 
1 and 27 recipients from Group 2 were allowed to deliver in order to compare
embryo survival in both groups at term (150 days). From the remaining recipients 
(n = 38), fetuses and placentae of both groups were recovered by paramedian
laparotomy at Days 20, 22, 24, 26 and 28 of gestation.
MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Immediately after collection, early placental
tissues (chorion-allantois) were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and DNMT1
expression and activity was evaluated. mRNA levels (for DNMT1, HDAC2, PCNA,
DMAP1, MEST, IGF2, CDKN1C, H19) and the methylation status of H19 were also
analyzed. Furthermore, embryo size and survival rate were measured.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Our study shows that DNMT1 expression was
reduced in early placentae from sheep IVP embryos. This reduction was associated 
with growth arrest and subsequent death of the sheep embryos. Conversely, normal 
levels of DNMT1 and its cofactors were observed in placentae from IVP embryos
that survived this developmental bottleneck. Although DNA methylation machinery
was severely compromised in IVP placentae only up to Day 24, the low DNMT1
enzymatic activity that persisted after this stage in IVP placentae was not
lethal for the developing embryos.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The studied genes represent only a small
fraction of genes regulating DNA methylation. Further studies are needed to
evaluate changes in the expression and methylation status of other genes that may
lead to developmental arrest of IVP embryos. As this is the only study evaluating
the functionality of DNMT1 machinery in placentae from ART embryos, studies on
other species are needed to confirm if our observation may be applicable to all
mammalian embryos produced in vitro.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The knowledge about compromised activity of
DNMT1 in placentae obtained from IVP embryos should stimulate detailed studies on
the metabolic requirements of oocytes and embryos in order to adequately enrich
the culture media.

PMID: 23169866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 4;430(1):381-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.018. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Protocatechualdehyde possesses anti-cancer activity through downregulating cyclin
D1 and HDAC2 in human colorectal cancer cells.

Jeong JB(1), Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA.

Protocatechualdehyde (PCA) is a naturally occurring polyphenol found in barley,
green cavendish bananas, and grapevine leaves. Although a few studies reported
growth-inhibitory activity of PCA in breast and leukemia cancer cells, the
underlying mechanisms are still poorly understood. Thus, we performed in vitro
study to investigate if treatment of PCA affects cell proliferation and apoptosis
in human colorectal cancer cells and define potential mechanisms by which PCA
mediates growth arrest and apoptosis of cancer cells. Exposure of PCA to human
colorectal cancer cells (HCT116 and SW480 cells) suppressed cell growth and
induced apoptosis in dose-dependent manner. PCA decreased cyclin D1 expression in
protein and mRNA level and suppressed luciferase activity of cyclin D1 promoter, 
indicating transcriptional downregulation of cyclin D1 gene by PCA. We also
observed that PCA treatment attenuated enzyme activity of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) and reduced expression of HDAC2, but not HDAC1. These findings suggest
that cell growth inhibition and apoptosis by PCA may be a result of
HDAC2-mediated cyclin D1 suppression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Jun;24(6):977-85. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.07.001. Epub
2012 Nov 14.

Kaempferol, a new nutrition-derived pan-inhibitor of human histone deacetylases.

Berger A(1), Venturelli S, Kallnischkies M, Böcker A, Busch C, Weiland T, Noor S,
Leischner C, Weiss TS, Lauer UM, Bischoff SC, Bitzer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University Hospital, Tuebingen,
Germany.

Kaempferol is a natural polyphenol belonging to the group of flavonoids.
Different biological functions like inhibition of oxidative stress in plants or
animal cells and apoptosis induction have been directly associated with
kaempferol. The underlying mechanisms are only partially understood. Here we
report for the first time that kaempferol has a distinct epigenetic activity by
inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs). In silico docking analysis revealed
that it fits into the binding pocket of HDAC2, 4, 7 or 8 and thereby binds to the
zinc ion of the catalytic center. Further in vitro profiling of all conserved
human HDACs of class I, II and IV showed that kaempferol inhibited all tested
HDACs. In clinical oncology, HDAC inhibitors are currently under investigation as
new anticancer compounds. Therefore, we studied the effect of kaempferol on
human-derived hepatoma cell lines HepG2 and Hep3B as well as on HCT-116 colon
cancer cells and found that it induces hyperacetylation of histone complex H3.
Furthermore, kaempferol mediated a prominent reduction of cell viability and
proliferation rate. Interestingly, toxicity assays revealed signs of relevant
cellular toxicity in primary human hepatocytes only starting at 50 µM as well as 
in an in vivo chicken embryotoxicity assay at 200 µM. In conclusion, the
identification of a novel broad inhibitory capacity of the natural compound
kaempferol for human-derived HDAC enzymes opens up the perspective for clinical
application in both tumor prevention and therapy. Moreover, kaempferol may serve 
as a novel lead structure for chemical optimization of pharmacokinetics,
pharmacology or inhibitory activities.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Radiat Oncol. 2012 Oct 31;7:183. doi: 10.1186/1748-717X-7-183.

X-radiation inhibits histone deacetylase 1 and 2, upregulates Axin expression and
induces apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Han Y(1), Zhang Y, Yang LH, Mi XY, Dai SD, Li QC, Xu HT, Yu JH, Li G, Zhao J, Han
C, Yuan XM, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University, North 2nd Road 92, Heping Ward, Shenyang,
110001, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) plays an important role in the
deacetylation of histone, which can alter gene expression patterns and affect
cell behavior associated with malignant transformation. The aims of this study
were to investigate the relationships between HDAC1, HDAC2, clinicopathologic
characteristics, patient prognosis and apoptosis, to clarify the mechanism of
upregulation of the Axis inhibitor Axin (an important regulator of the Wnt
pathway) by X-radiation and to elucidate the effect of siRNA on radiation therapy
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression levels were measured by immunohistochemistry 
and reverse transcription PCR. Apoptosis was determined by terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-nick end labeling and fluorescence
activated cell sorting. BE1 cells expressing Axin were exposed to 2 Gy of
X-radiation.
RESULTS: Expression of HDAC1 and that of HDAC2 were correlated, and significantly
higher in NSCLC tissues than in normal lung tissues (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). HDAC1 and HDAC2
expression was correlated with pTNM stage and negatively correlated with
differentiation of NSCLC and apoptotic index (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The prognosis of
patients with low expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 was better than that of those
with high expression. X-radiation and siRNA inhibited HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression 
in NSCLC cells and Axin levels were significantly higher in BE1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: X-radiation and siRNA inhibit expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2, weaken 
the inhibitory effect of HDAC on Axin, upregulate Axin expression and induce
apoptosis of lung cancer cells. Inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 is a means of
enhancing the radiosensitivity of NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3542190
PMID: 23110995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Korean J Pathol. 2012 Apr;46(2):142-50. doi: 10.4132/KoreanJPathol.2012.46.2.142.
Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Expression of HAT1 and HDAC1, 2, 3 in Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas, Peripheral 
T-Cell Lymphomas, and NK/T-Cell Lymphomas.

Min SK(1), Koh YH, Park Y, Kim HJ, Seo J, Park HR, Cho SJ, Kim IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym
University College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea.

BACKGROUND: It has generally been proven that histone acetylation and
deacetylation are involved in the malignant transformation. To date, however,
this has rarely been studied in cases of malignant lymphoma.
METHODS: We studied nine cases of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, 78 cases of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), 13 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS), and 13 cases of extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type (NKTCL). Thus, we attempted to elucidate the associations of
the degree of the expression of histone acetyltransferase 1 (HAT1), histone
deacetylase (HDAC) 1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 with the clinical behaviors of above
malignant lymphomas using the immunohistochemistry and a western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The degree of the expression of HAT1 was higher in cases of DLBCL,
PTCL-NOS or NKTCL as compared with reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (p<0.05). The
degree of the expression of HAT1 was correlated with that of HDAC1 in cases of
DLBCL or NKTCL (p<0.05). The degree of the expression of HAT1 and HDAC1 was
correlated with a poor survival in cases of DLBCL or PTCL-NOS (p>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: HAT1, HDAC1, and HDAC2 play a critical role in the development of
malignant lymphomas. Both HAT1 and HDAC1 might be indicators for a poor prognosis
in cases of DLBCL as cooperating factors.

PMCID: PMC3479788
PMID: 23109994  [PubMed]


3. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2013 Mar;287(3):487-94. doi: 10.1007/s00404-012-2591-0. Epub
2012 Oct 19.

Aberrant histone acetylation and methylation levels in woman with endometriosis.

Xiaomeng X(1), Ming Z, Jiezhi M, Xiaoling F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, #139 Renmin Middle Rd, Changsha 410011, Hunan, People's
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the alterations in histone modifications in woman with 
endometriosis.
METHODS: Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K9 methylation in eutopic
and ectopic endometrium from 15 endometriosis patients were assayed using the
EpiQuik global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K9 methylation assay kits.
Quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was
applied to measure mRNA levels of 12 members of histone-related chromatin
modifier genes.
RESULTS: Histone H4 hypoacetylation was detected both in eutopic and ectopic
endometrium. There were no difference between patients with endometriosis and
controls on global levels of H3 acetylation. Furthermore, global histone H3K4
hypomethylation and H3K9 hypomethylation were detected both in ectopic and
eutopic endometrium (p < 0.001), and in ectopic endometrium (p < 0.001),
respectively. SIRT1 mRNA level was significantly decreased in eutopic
endometrium, while mRNA levels of HDAC1, SUV39H1, SUV39H2 and G9a were
significantly downregulated in ectopic endometrium. HDAC2 mRNA level was
significantly increased in eutopic endometrium. PCAF mRNA level was significantly
increased in ectopic endometrium.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant histone modification may play an important role in the
pathogenesis of endometriosis.

PMID: 23080547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):732-42. doi: 10.2337/db12-0548. Epub 2012 Oct 15.

Inhibition of class I histone deacetylases unveils a mitochondrial signature and 
enhances oxidative metabolism in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue.

Galmozzi A(1), Mitro N, Ferrari A, Gers E, Gilardi F, Godio C, Cermenati G,
Gualerzi A, Donetti E, Rotili D, Valente S, Guerrini U, Caruso D, Mai A, Saez E, 
De Fabiani E, Crestani M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Giovanni Galli di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare del Metabolismo
e Spettrometria di Massa, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):685-7.

Chromatin modifications are sensitive to environmental and nutritional stimuli.
Abnormalities in epigenetic regulation are associated with metabolic disorders
such as obesity and diabetes that are often linked with defects in oxidative
metabolism. Here, we evaluated the potential of class-specific synthetic
inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs), central chromatin-remodeling enzymes,
to ameliorate metabolic dysfunction. Cultured myotubes and primary brown
adipocytes treated with a class I-specific HDAC inhibitor showed higher
expression of Pgc-1a, increased mitochondrial biogenesis, and augmented oxygen
consumption. Treatment of obese diabetic mice with a class I- but not a class
II-selective HDAC inhibitor enhanced oxidative metabolism in skeletal muscle and 
adipose tissue and promoted energy expenditure, thus reducing body weight and
glucose and insulin levels. These effects can be ascribed to increased Pgc-1a
action in skeletal muscle and enhanced PPAR<U+03B3>/PGC-1a signaling in adipose tissue. 
In vivo ChIP experiments indicated that inhibition of HDAC3 may account for the
beneficial effect of the class I-selective HDAC inhibitor. These results suggest 
that class I HDAC inhibitors may provide a pharmacologic approach to treating
type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3581211
PMID: 23069623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Vet Res Commun. 2013 Mar;37(1):19-28. doi: 10.1007/s11259-012-9542-x. Epub 2012
Oct 13.

Epigenetic modification of fetal fibroblasts improves developmental competency
and gene expression in porcine cloned embryos.

Kumar BM(1), Maeng GH, Lee YM, Lee JH, Jeon BG, Ock SA, Kang T, Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, 501, Jinju-daero, Jinju, 660-701,
Republic of Korea.

Treatment of somatic cells with DNA methylation and histone deacetylation
inhibitors has been hypothesized to improve the potential reprogramming after
nuclear transfer (NT). The objective of this study was to investigate the
developmental competence and gene expression during the porcine preimplantation
development of in vitro fertilized (IVF) and embryos cloned with porcine fetal
fibroblasts (pFF) (pFF-NT), and pFF treated by 0.5 µM 5-azacytidine (5-azaC)
(pFF+5-azaC-NT) or 1.0 mM sodium butyrate (NaB) (pFF+NaB-NT). IVF embryos had
significantly (P < 0.05) higher blastocyst rates (27.7 ± 2.6 %) and total cell
numbers (46.7 ± 3.9). However, NT embryos from pFF+5-azaC and pFF+NaB showed
enhanced developmental potential with significantly (P < 0.05) higher rates of
blastocysts (21.3 ± 2.9 % and 22.4 ± 1.7 %, respectively) than those from pFF
(15.1 ± 2.5 %). Further, NT embryos from pFF+5-azaC and pFF+NaB (33.8 ± 4.1 and
35.7 ± 5.2, respectively) had significantly (P < 0.05) higher total cell numbers 
than those from pFF (24.6 ± 3.5). Differential expression pattern of genes
involved in DNA methylation (DNA methyltransferases- DNMT1, DNMT2, DNMT3A and
DNMT3B), histone acetylation (histone acetyltransferase 1- HAT1) and histone
deacetylation (histone deacetylases- HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3) were observed in NT 
embryos when compared to IVF counterparts. However, the relative expressions of
genes in pFF+5-azaC-NT and pFF+NaB-NT groups were largely comparable to those of 
IVF embryos than pFF-NT embryos. In conclusion, modification of the epigenetic
status by reducing DNA methylation or enhancing histone acetylation levels in pFF
improved the developmental rates, total cell number and the transcription profile
of porcine NT embryos. Thus, somatic cells with relatively hypomethylated or
hyperacetylated genome may enhance reprogramming efficiency in porcine NT.

PMID: 23065456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Exp Neurol. 2013 Jan;239:192-201. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.10.005. Epub 2012
Oct 11.

Mercaptoacetamide-based class II HDAC inhibitor lowers Aß levels and improves
learning and memory in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Sung YM(1), Lee T, Yoon H, DiBattista AM, Song JM, Sohn Y, Moffat EI, Turner RS, 
Jung M, Kim J, Hoe HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Medical Center, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20057-1464,
USA.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) alter gene expression epigenetically by
interfering with the normal functions of HDAC. Given their ability to decrease Aß
levels, HDACIs are a potential treatment for Alzheimer's disease (AD). However,
it is unclear how HDACIs alter Aß levels. We developed two novel HDAC inhibitors 
with improved pharmacological properties, such as a longer half-life and greater 
penetration of the blood-brain barrier: mercaptoacetamide-based class II HDACI
(coded as W2) and hydroxamide-based class I and IIHDACI (coded as I2) and
investigated how they affect Aß levels and cognition. HDACI W2 decreased Aß40 and
Aß42 in vitro. HDACI I2 also decreased Aß40, but not Aß42. We systematically
examined the molecular mechanisms by which HDACIs W2 and I2 can decrease Aß
levels. HDACI W2 decreased gene expression of <U+03B3>-secretase components and
increased the Aß degradation enzyme Mmp2. Similarly, HDACI I2 decreased
expression of ß- and <U+03B3>-secretase components and increased mRNA levels of Aß
degradation enzymes. HDACI W2 also significantly decreased Aß levels and rescued 
learning and memory deficits in aged hAPP 3xTg AD mice. Furthermore, we found
that the novel HDACI W2 decreased tau phosphorylation at Thr181, an effect
previously unknown for HDACIs. Collectively, these data suggest that class II
HDACls may serve as a novel therapeutic strategy for AD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3780389
PMID: 23063601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Epigenetics. 2012 Nov;7(11):1315-30. doi: 10.4161/epi.22446. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

PGE2 induces interleukin-8 derepression in human astrocytoma through coordinated 
DNA demethylation and histone hyperacetylation.

Venza I(1), Visalli M, Fortunato C, Ruggeri M, Ratone S, Caffo M, Caruso G,
Alafaci C, Tomasello F, Teti D, Venza M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Specialities, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

We have recently reported that in astrocytoma cells the expression of
interleukin-8 (IL-8) is upregulated by prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Unfortunately,
the exact mechanism by which this happens has not been clarified yet. Here, we
have investigated whether IL-8 activation by PGE2 involves changes in DNA
methylation and/or histone modifications in 46 astrocytoma specimens, two
astrocytoma cell lines and normal astrocytic cells. The DNA methylation status of
the IL-8 promoter was analyzed by bisulphite sequencing and by methylation DNA
immunoprecipitation analysis. The involvement of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs)
and histone deacetylases (HDACs), as well as histone acetylation levels, was
assayed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. IL-8 expression at promoter, mRNA and
protein level was explored by transfection, real-time PCR and enzyme immunoassay 
experiments in cells untreated or treated with PGE2, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-aza-dC) and HDAC inhibitors, alone or in combination. EMSA was performed with 
crude cell extracts or recombinant protein. We observed that PGE2 induced IL-8
activation through: (1) demethylation of the single CpG site 5 located at
position -83 within the binding region for CEBP-ß in the IL-8 promoter; (2)
C/EBP-ß and p300 co-activator recruitment; (3) H3 acetylation enhancement and (4)
reduction in DNMT1, DNMT3a, HDAC2 and HDAC3 association to CpG site 5 region.
Treatment with 5-aza-dC or HDAC inhibitors of class I HDACs strengthened either
basal or PGE2-mediated IL-8 expression. These findings have elucidated an
orchestrated mechanism triggered by PGE2 whereby concurrent association of
site-specific demethylation and histone H3 hyperacetylation resulted in
derepression of IL-8 gene expression in human astrocytoma.

PMCID: PMC3499332
PMID: 23051921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMC Biotechnol. 2012 Oct 9;12:71. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-12-71.

A one-step cloning method for the construction of somatic cell gene targeting
vectors: application to production of human knockout cell lines.

Liu Y(1), Li S, Zhang H, Wan Z, Zhang X, Du R.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Gene targeting is a powerful method that can be used for examining
the functions of genes. Traditionally, the construction of knockout (KO) vectors 
requires an amplification step to obtain two homologous, large fragments of
genomic DNA. Restriction enzymes that cut at unique recognitions sites and
numerous cloning steps are then carried out; this is often a time-consuming and
frustrating process.
RESULTS: We have developed a one-step cloning method for the insertion of two
arms into a KO vector using exonuclease III. We modified an adeno-associated
virus KO shuttle vector (pTK-LoxP-NEO-AAV) to yield pAAV-LIC, which contained two
cassettes at the two multiple-cloning sites. The vector was digested with EcoRV
to give two fragments. The two homologous arms, which had an overlap of 16 bases 
with the ends of the vector fragments, were amplified by polymerase chain
reaction. After purification, the four fragments were mixed and treated with
exonuclease III, then transformed into Escherichia coli to obtain the desired
clones. Using this method, we constructed SirT1 and HDAC2 KO vectors, which were 
used to establish SirT1 KO cells from the colorectal cancer cell line (HCT116)
and HDAC2 KO cells from the colorectal cancer cell line (DLD1).
CONCLUSIONS: Our method is a fast, simple, and efficient technique for cloning,
and has great potential for high-throughput construction of KO vectors.

PMCID: PMC3505732
PMID: 23046873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2012 Aug;32(4):181-6.

[Epigenetic regulation in depression].

[Article in Japanese]

Otsuki K(1), Uchida S, Hobara T, Yamagata H, Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of
Medicine, 1-1-1, Minamikogushi, Ube, 755-8505 Japan. otsuki@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

Recent research has raised the notion that epigenetic mechanisms (e.g., DNA
methylation and histone modifications), which exert lasting control over gene
expression without altering the genetic code, could mediate stable changes in
brain function. However, the role of environmental factors along with genetic
factors in the epigenetic regulation of the pathogenesis of depression is largely
unknown. Two genetically distinct mice strains, BALB/c (BALB) and C57BL/6 (B6),
exhibit different behavioral responses to chronic stress. With chronic stress,
BALB mice showed depressive-like behaviors, but not B6 mice, and glial
cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) expression level was decreased in the
ventral striatum of BALB mice but increased in B6 mice. In BALB mice,
depressive-like behaviors and decreased GDNF expression were recovered by chronic
antidepressant treatment. Therefore, we used these two mice strains to
investigate how the epigenetic status of the GDNF gene in the ventral striatum
modulates stress vulnerability. Both mice strains showed increased DNA
methylation levels and MeCP2 recruitment in the GDNF promoter region. However,
histone H3 acetylation level was decreased in BALB mice, but increased in B6
mice. Furthermore, BALB mice showed increased histone deacetylase2 (HDAC2)
expression level and Re-ChIP assay revealed HDAC2-MeCP2 complex in BALB mice. Our
results indicate the crucial role of histone modification by HDAC2 and MeCP2
complex for the control of GDNF expression and subsequent behavioral responses to
chronic stress, in other words, the susceptibility to stress. In addition, we
investigated the effect of antidepressants on the epigenetic regulation of GDNF
expression. We found a reduced level of HDAC4 recruitment at the GDNF promoter
region with antidepressants. Thus, our data suggest that antidepressants increase
transcriptional activity of the GDNF gene through the modulation of histone
acetylation by HDAC4. Finally, we examined the expressions of GDNF and
epigenetic-related molecules mRNAs with major depressive and bipolar disorder
patients by using quantitative real-time PCR. We found the aberrant expression of
GDNF and epigenetic-related genes including HDAC2 and HDAC4 in mood disorder
patients. Thus, our data provide novel insights suggesting that epigenetic
mechanisms of GDNF expression are involved in the pathogenesis or pathophysiology
of depression.

PMID: 23012885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2013 May 20;18(15):1956-71. doi: 10.1089/ars.2012.4863.
Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Oxidative stress and chromatin remodeling in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and smoking-related diseases.

Sundar IK(1), Yao H, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, Lung Biology and Disease Program,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

SIGNIFICANCE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is predominantly a
tobacco smoke-triggered disease with features of chronic low-grade systemic
inflammation and aging (inflammaging) of the lung associated with steroid
resistance induced by cigarette smoke (CS)-mediated oxidative stress. Oxidative
stress induces various kinase signaling pathways leading to chromatin
modifications (histone acetylation/deacetylation and histone
methylation/demethylation) in inflammation, senescence, and steroid resistance.
RECENT ADVANCES: Histone mono-, di-, or tri-methylation at lysine residues result
in either gene activation (H3K4, H3K36, and H3K79) or repression (H3K9, H3K27,
and H3K20). Cross-talk occurs between various epigenetic marks on histones and
DNA methylation. Both CS and oxidants alter histone acetylation/deacetylation and
methylation/demethylation leading to enhanced proinflammatory gene expression.
Chromatin modifications occur in lungs of patients with COPD. Histone deacetylase
2 (HDAC2) reduction (levels and activity) is associated with steroid resistance
in response to oxidative stress.
CRITICAL ISSUES: Histone modifications are associated with DNA damage/repair and 
epigenomic instability as well as premature lung aging, which have implications
in the pathogenesis of COPD. HDAC2/SIRTUIN1 (SIRT1)-dependent chromatin
modifications are associated with DNA damage-induced inflammation and senescence 
in response to CS-mediated oxidative stress.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: Understanding CS/oxidative stress-mediated chromatin
modifications and the cross-talk between histone acetylation and methylation will
demonstrate the involvement of epigenetic regulation of chromatin remodeling in
inflammaging. This will lead to identification of novel epigenetic-based
therapies against COPD and other smoking-related lung diseases. Pharmacological
activation of HDAC2/SIRT1 or reversal of their oxidative post-translational
modifications may offer therapies for treatment of COPD and CS-related diseases
based on epigenetic histone modifications.

PMCID: PMC3624634
PMID: 22978694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Ther. 2012 Nov;20(11):2134-42. doi: 10.1038/mt.2012.178. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

Exon 45 skipping through U1-snRNA antisense molecules recovers the Dys-nNOS
pathway and muscle differentiation in human DMD myoblasts.

Cazzella V(1), Martone J, Pinnarò C, Santini T, Twayana SS, Sthandier O, D'Amico 
A, Ricotti V, Bertini E, Muntoni F, Bozzoni I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Charles Darwin," Institut Pasteur
Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti and IBPM, Rome, Italy.

Exon skipping has been demonstrated to be a successful strategy for the gene
therapy of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD): the rational being to convert
severe Duchenne forms into milder Becker ones. Here, we show the selection of U1 
snRNA-antisense constructs able to confer effective rescue of dystrophin
synthesis in a <U+0394>44 Duchenne genetic background, through skipping of exon 45;
moreover, we demonstrate that the resulting dystrophin is able to recover timing 
of myogenic marker expression, to relocalize neuronal nitric oxide synthase
(nNOS) and to rescue expression of miRNAs previously shown to be sensitive to the
Dystrophin-nNOS-HDAC2 pathway. Becker mutations display different phenotypes,
likely depending on whether the shorter protein is able to reconstitute the wide 
range of wild-type functions. Among them, efficient assembly of the
dystrophin-associated protein complex (DAPC) and nNOS localization are important.
Comparing different Becker deletions we demonstrate the correlation between the
ability of the mutant dystrophin to relocalize nNOS and the expression levels of 
two miRNAs, miR-1 and miR29c, known to be involved in muscle homeostasis and to
be controlled by the Dys-nNOS-HDAC2 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3498801
PMID: 22968481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Agric Food Chem. 2012 Oct 3;60(39):9882-9. doi: 10.1021/jf302527p. Epub 2012
Sep 21.

Brazilin induces apoptosis and G2/M arrest via inactivation of histone
deacetylase in multiple myeloma U266 cells.

Kim B(1), Kim SH, Jeong SJ, Sohn EJ, Jung JH, Lee MH, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University , Seoul 130-701, South
Korea.

Although brazilin [7,11b-dihydrobenz(b)indeno[1,2-d]pyran-3,6a,9,10(6H)-tetrol]
isolated from Caesalpinia sappan was known to have various biological activities,
including anti-inflammation, antibacteria, and antiplatelet aggregation, there is
no report yet on its anticancer activity. In the present study, the anticancer
mechanism of brazilin was elucidated in human multiple myeloma U266 cells. We
found that brazilin significantly inhibited the activity of histone deacetylases 
(HDACs), transcription factors involved in the regulation of apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest in U266 cells. Consistently, brazilin enhanced acetylation of
histone H3 at Lys 23, indicating activation of histone acetyltransferase (HAT),
and also suppressed the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 at both protein and mRNA
levels. Additionally, brazilin significantly increased the number of sub-G1 cell 
population and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL)-positive cells undergoing apoptosis and also activated caspase-3 and
regulated the expression of Bcl-2 family proteins, including Bax, Bcl-x(L), and
Bcl-2 in U266 cells, indicating that brazilin induces apoptosis through the
mitochondria-dependent pathway. Interestingly, cell cycle analysis revealed that 
brazilin induced G2/M phase arrest along with apoptosis induction. Consistently, 
brazilin attenuated the expression of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), such as
cyclin D1, cyclin B1, and cyclin E, and also activated p21 and p27 in U266 cells.
Furthermore, HAT inhibitor anacardic acid reversed activation of acetyl-histone
H3 and cleavage of PARP induced by brazilin, while pan-caspase inhibitor
Z-VAD-FMK001 did not affect the expression of HDAC induced by brazilin that
brazilin mediates apoptosis via inactivation of HDAC in U266 cells. Notably,
brazilin significantly potentiated the cytotoxic effect of standard
chemotherapeutic agents, such as bortezomib or doxorubicin, in U266 cells. When
our findings are taken together, they suggest that brazilin has potential as a
chemotherapeutic agent alone or in combination with an anticancer agent for
multiple myeloma treatment.

PMID: 22967175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2012 Summer;42(3):338-45.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors: can we consider potent anti-neoplastic agents for
the treatment of asthma?

Royce SG(1), Ververis K, Karagiannis TC.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Immune Disorders, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors have emerged as a new class of anti-cancer
therapeutics due to their potent anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects in
malignant cells. Accumulating evidence is indicating that histone deacetylase
inhibitors may also have potential clinical utility in non-oncological
applications, including asthma. However, the potential of histone deacetylase
inhibitors in asthma remains controversial. For example, the mechanisms of action
of the broad-spectrum histone deacetylase inhibitor, Trichostatin A, in animal
models of allergic airways disease are conflicting. Further, there is evidence
suggesting potential problems associated with histone deacetylase 2 inhibition
and conventional glucocorticosteroid therapy. Similarly, disparate findings are
emerging following modulation of the class III, sirtuin 1 enzyme. Indeed, it is
becoming apparent that the mechanism of action may not be related to histone
deacetylase inhibition activity per se. Further, there is only limited evidence
that these compounds possess anti-inflammatory effects in models of asthma. In
this review, we provide an overview of the biology of the metal-dependent and
sirtuin deacetylases in the context of asthma. The controversies surrounding the 
potential use of histone deacetylase inhibitors in asthma are discussed and
future directions involving the investigation of more specific analogues are
explored.

PMID: 22964624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Curr Med Chem. 2013;20(12):1531-40.

Development of new drugs for COPD.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, UK.
p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an increasing global health
problem and cause of death. COPD is a chronic inflammatory disease predominantly 
affecting small airways and lung parenchyma that leads to progressive airway
obstruction. However, current therapies fail to prevent either disease
progression or mortality. The mainstay of current drug therapy is long-acting
bronchodilators. Several once daily inhaled ß(2)-agonists and muscarinic
antagonists (and combinations) are now in development. No treatments effectively 
suppress chronic inflammation in COPD lungs. With better understanding of the
inflammatory and destructive process in the pathophysiology of COPD, several new 
therapeutic targets have been identified. Several mediator antagonists or
inhibitors tested in COPD have so far been disappointing, but CXCR2 antagonists
that block pulmonary neutrophil and monocyte recruitment are more promising.
Broad spectrum anti-inflammatory drugs may be more effective, and include
inhibitors of the proinflammatory enzymes phosphodiesterase-4, p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase, Janus kinases, NF-<U+03BA>B kinase and PI3 kinase-<U+03B3>
and -d, but side effects after oral administration are a major limitation so that
in future inhaled delivery may be necessary. A new promising approach is reversal
of corticosteroid resistance through increasing histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2)
activity. This might be achieved by existing treatments such as theophylline,
nortriptyline and macrolides, or more selectively by PI3 kinase-d inhibitors.
Thus although there have been major advances in the development of long-acting
bronchodilators for COPD, it has proved difficult to find anti-inflammatory
treatments that are safe and effective.

PMID: 22963554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Genome Res. 2012 Sep;22(9):1798-812. doi: 10.1101/gr.139105.112.

Sequence features and chromatin structure around the genomic regions bound by 119
human transcription factors.

Wang J(1), Zhuang J, Iyer S, Lin X, Whitfield TW, Greven MC, Pierce BG, Dong X,
Kundaje A, Cheng Y, Rando OJ, Birney E, Myers RM, Noble WS, Snyder M, Weng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) 
has become the dominant technique for mapping transcription factor (TF) binding
regions genome-wide. We performed an integrative analysis centered around 457
ChIP-seq data sets on 119 human TFs generated by the ENCODE Consortium. We
identified highly enriched sequence motifs in most data sets, revealing new
motifs and validating known ones. The motif sites (TF binding sites) are highly
conserved evolutionarily and show distinct footprints upon DNase I digestion. We 
frequently detected secondary motifs in addition to the canonical motifs of the
TFs, indicating tethered binding and cobinding between multiple TFs. We observed 
significant position and orientation preferences between many cobinding TFs.
Genes specifically expressed in a cell line are often associated with a greater
occurrence of nearby TF binding in that cell line. We observed cell-line-specific
secondary motifs that mediate the binding of the histone deacetylase HDAC2 and
the enhancer-binding protein EP300. TF binding sites are located in GC-rich,
nucleosome-depleted, and DNase I sensitive regions, flanked by well-positioned
nucleosomes, and many of these features show cell type specificity. The
GC-richness may be beneficial for regulating TF binding because, when unoccupied 
by a TF, these regions are occupied by nucleosomes in vivo. We present the
results of our analysis in a TF-centric web repository Factorbook
(http://factorbook.org) and will continually update this repository as more
ENCODE data are generated.

PMCID: PMC3431495
PMID: 22955990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Urol Oncol. 2013 Nov;31(8):1770-9. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2012.06.015. Epub 2012 
Sep 1.

Changes in histone deacetylase (HDAC) expression patterns and activity of HDAC
inhibitors in urothelial cancers.

Niegisch G(1), Knievel J, Koch A, Hader C, Fischer U, Albers P, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Medical Faculty, Düsseldorf,
Germany. Electronic address: guenter.niegisch@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

OBJECTIVE: To determine histone deacetylase (HDAC) isoenzyme expression patterns 
in urothelial cancer tissues and cell lines and investigate their potential to
predict the efficacy of the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of HDAC mRNAs was determined by quantitative
RT-PCR in 18 urothelial cancer cell lines (UCC), normal uroepithelial controls
(NUC), 24 urothelial cancer tissues, and 12 benign controls. Results were
compared with published microarray data. Effects of pan-HDAC inhibitor vorinostat
and on UCCs were determined by viability and apoptosis assays, cell cycle
analysis, and measurements of p21(CIP1), thymidylate synthase (TS), and EZH2. In 
addition, protein expression levels of HDACs were investigated in UCCs.
RESULTS: Prominent changes in UCCs were HDAC2 and/or HDAC8 up-regulation in 11 of
18 cell lines and decreased expression of HDAC4, HDAC5, and/or HDAC7 mRNA in 15
of 18 cell lines. In cancer tissues, HDAC8 was likewise significantly
up-regulated (P = 0.002), whereas HDAC2 up-regulation was detected only in a
subset of tumors (9/24, P = 0.085). Overexpression of HDAC2 and HDAC8 mRNA did
not correspond with the protein level. Vorinostat induced G2/M arrest, an
increase in the sub-G1 fraction, up-regulation of p21, and down-regulation of TS 
in all UCC. Effects on EZH2 and PARP cleavage as well as activation of caspase
3/7 differed between cell lines. Associations between the overall sensitivity to 
the pan-HDACi vorinostat and overexpression of HDAC2 and HDAC8 mRNA were not
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In urothelial cancer, up-regulation of HDAC2 and HDAC8 and
down-regulation of HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7 mRNA are common findings. The
treatment effect of the pan-HDAC inhibitor vorinostat was variable in UCCs and
up-regulation of HDAC2 and HDAC8 was not predictive for treatment response.
Whether selective targeting of HDAC2, HDAC8, or other HDACs deregulated in
urothelial cancer (e.g., HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7) result in a more consistent
treatment response needs further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22944197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Circ Res. 2012 Aug 31;111(6):659-61. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.277368.

Modulation of smooth muscle cell phenotype: the other side of the story.

Huang J, Parmacek MS.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2012 Aug 31;111(6):685-96.

PMCID: PMC3439141
PMID: 22935528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 Nov 15;303(10):F1443-53. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00143.2012. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

a2-Adrenoceptor agonist dexmedetomidine protects septic acute kidney injury
through increasing BMP-7 and inhibiting HDAC2 and HDAC5.

Hsing CH(1), Lin CF, So E, Sun DP, Chen TC, Li CF, Yeh CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-7 protects sepsis-induced acute kidney injury
(AKI). Dexmedetomidine (DEX), an a(2)-adrenoceptor (a(2)-AR) agonist, has
anti-inflammatory effects. We investigated the protective effects of DEX on
sepsis-induced AKI and the expression of BMP-7 and histone deacetylases (HDACs). 
In vitro, the effects of DEX or trichostatin A (TSA, an HDAC inhibitor) on TNF-a,
monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP-1), BMP-7, and HDAC mRNA expression in
LPS-stimulated rat renal tubular epithelial NRK52E cells, was determined using
real-time PCR. In vivo, mice were intraperitoneally injected with DEX (25 µg/kg) 
or saline immediately and 12 h after cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery.
Twenty-four hours after CLP, we examined kidney injury and renal TNF-a, MCP-1,
BMP-7, and HDAC expression. Survival was monitored for 120 h. LPS increased
HDAC2, HDAC5, TNF-a, and MCP-1 expression, but decreased BMP-7 expression in
NRK52E cells. DEX treatment decreased the HDAC2, HDAC5, TNF-a, and MCP-1
expression, but increased BMP-7 and acetyl histone H3 expression, whose effects
were blocked by yohimbine, an a(2)-AR antagonist. With DEX treatment, the
LPS-induced TNF-a expression and cell death were attenuated in scRNAi-NRK52E but 
not BMP-7 RNAi-NRK52E cells. In CLP mice, DEX treatment increased survival and
attenuated AKI. The expression of HDAC2, HDAC5, TNF-a, and MCP-1 mRNA in the
kidneys of CLP mice was increased, but BMP-7 was decreased. However, DEX
treatment reduced those changes. DEX reduces sepsis-induced AKI by decreasing
TNF-a and MCP-1 and increasing BMP-7, which is associated with decreasing HDAC2
and HDAC5, as well as increasing acetyl histone H3.

PMID: 22933299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jul;41(7):466-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.07.008.

[Effect of down-regulation of histone deacetylase 2 protein expression on cell
proliferation and cell cycle in cervical carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Hua FF(1), Xia YH, Wu DP, Chen RX, Wang YH, Pan Y, Yang J, Liang WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Xinxiang Medical University, Weihui, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of down-regulation of histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) expression on cell proliferation and cell cycle in cervical carcinoma
cell lines HeLa.
METHODS: HDAC2 siRNA and control siRNA were transfected to HeLa cells. CCK-8 and 
flow cytometry were used to analyze the changes of cell proliferation and cell
cycle, respectively. Western blot was employed to detect the changes of cell
proliferation and cell cycle-related proteins.
RESULTS: HDAC2 siRNA significantly down-regulated the expression of HDAC2 protein
in HeLa cells, resulting in marked inhibition of cell proliferation. In addition,
the percentage of cells in G(0)/G(1) phase in HDAC2 siRNA group (63.3% ± 2.0%)
was significantly higher than that in untreated group (29.3% ± 1.7%) or control
siRNA group (29.4% ± 1.7%), F = 354.181, P = 0.000. Furthermore, Western blot
demonstrated that down-regulation of HDAC2 expression decreased the expression of
cyclin D1, cyclin E and CDK2 proteins but increased the expression of p21
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Down-regulation of HDAC2 expression mediates proliferation
inhibition and cell cycle arrest. It is associated with decrease in cyclin D1,
cyclin E and CDK2 protein expression and increase in p21 protein expression.

PMID: 22932458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;41(6):396-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.06.008.

[Down-regulation of histone deacetylase 2 induces cell apoptosis and inhibits
cell proliferation and migration of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan LL(1), Lou WH, Sang JZ, Li SL, Li WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) expression
on cell proliferation, apoptosis and migration of laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (LSCC) Hep-2 cells.
METHODS: HDAC2 siRNA and control siRNA were transfected into LSCC Hep-2 cells by 
lipofectamine 2000, and cells were divided into three experimental groups:
untreated group, control siRNA group and HDAC2 siRNA transfection group. Western 
blotting was utilized to detect the expression of HDAC2 protein in Hep-2 cells.
Cell proliferation and apoptosis were investigated by CCK-8 kit and flow
cytometry, respectively. Boyden chamber was used to study cell migration.
Expressions of cell apoptosis and cell migration related proteins were detected
by Western blotting.
RESULTS: HDAC2 siRNA significantly down-regulated the expression of HDAC2 protein
in LSCC Hep-2 cells. Down-regulation of HDAC2 expression coincided with an
inhibition of cell proliferation and migration along with an induced cell
apoptosis of Hep-2 cells. Moreover, down-regulation of HDAC2 expression
significantly increased the expressions of caspase-3 and caspase-9 proteins but
decreased the expressions of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-2 and MMP-9
proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC2 may play a pivotal role in the initiation and development of
LSCC. Down-regulation of HDAC2 expression mediates cell apoptosis. Cell migration
inhibition may be tightly associated with overexpression of caspase-3 and
caspase-9 along with down-regulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 expressions.

PMID: 22932408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nat Neurosci. 2012 Sep;15(9):1180-1. doi: 10.1038/nn.3200.

Target practice: HDAC inhibitors for schizophrenia.

Hyman SE.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2012 Sep;15(9):1245-54.

PMID: 22929911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Apoptosis. 2012 Dec;17(12):1340-58. doi: 10.1007/s10495-012-0755-9.

Apicidin induces endoplasmic reticulum stress- and mitochondrial
dysfunction-associated apoptosis via phospholipase C<U+03B3>1- and Ca(2+)-dependent
pathway in mouse Neuro-2a neuroblastoma cells.

Choi JH(1), Lee JY, Choi AY, Hwang KY, Choe W, Yoon KS, Ha J, Yeo EJ, Kang I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Medical 
Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species, Biomedical Science
Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Apicidin, a fungal metabolite that functions as a histone deacetylase inhibitor, 
induces apoptosis in cancer cells. We investigated the molecular mechanisms of
the anti-cancer effects of apicidin in mouse Neuro-2a neuroblastoma cells.
Apicidin induced apoptotic cell death and activation of caspase-12, -9, and -3.
Apicidin induced expression of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-associated
proteins, including CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein (CHOP),
cleavage of activating transcription factor 6a, and phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a. Inhibition of ER stress by CHOP knockdown or using the ER
stress inhibitors, salubrinal and 4-phenylbutyric acid, reduced apicidin-induced 
cell death. Apicidin induced reactive oxygen species accumulation and
mitochondrial membrane potential loss. An antioxidant, N-acetyl cysteine, reduced
apicidin-induced cell death, CHOP expression, and mitochondrial dysfunction. In
addition, apicidin increased cytosolic Ca(2+), which was blocked by
2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate, an antagonist of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
receptor, and BAPTA-AM, an intracellular Ca(2+) chelator. 2-Aminoethoxydiphenyl
borate and BAPTA-AM inhibited apicidin-induced cell death and ER stress.
Interestingly, apicidin induced phosphorylation of phospholipase C<U+03B3>1 (PLC<U+03B3>1) and 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and inhibition of PLC<U+03B3>1 and EGFR reduced
cell death and ER stress. Finally, apicidin-induced histone H3 hyperacetylation
and reduction of histone deacetylase 2 mRNA expression were not affected by
either a PLC<U+03B3>1 inhibitor, U73122, or the antioxidant, N-acetyl cysteine. Taken
together, the results suggest that apicidin induces apoptosis by ER stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction via PLC<U+03B3>1 activation, Ca(2+) release, and reactive
oxygen species accumulation in Neuro-2a neuroblastoma cells.

PMID: 22926926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genome Integr. 2012 Aug 22;3(1):4. doi: 10.1186/2041-9414-3-4.

Processing of DNA double strand breaks by alternative non-homologous end-joining 
in hyperacetylated chromatin.

Manova V(1), Singh SK, Iliakis G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Radiation Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen Medical
School, Hufelandstr, 55, 45122, Essen, Germany. Georg.Iliakis@uk-essen.de.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian cells employ at least two subpathways of non-homologous
end-joining for the repair of ionizing radiation induced DNA double strand
breaks: The canonical DNA-PK-dependent form of non-homologous end-joining
(D-NHEJ) and an alternative, slowly operating, error-prone backup pathway
(B-NHEJ). In contrast to D-NHEJ, which operates with similar efficiency
throughout the cell cycle, B-NHEJ operates more efficiently in G2-phase. Notably,
B-NHEJ also shows strong and as of yet unexplained dependency on growth activity 
and is markedly compromised in serum-deprived cells, or in cells that enter the
plateau-phase of growth. The molecular mechanisms underpinning this response
remain unknown. Since chromatin structure or changes in chromatin structure are
prime candidate-B-NHEJ-modulators, we study here the role of chromatin
hyperacetylation, either by HDAC2 knockdown or treatment with the HDAC inhibitor 
TSA, on the repair by B-NHEJ of IR-induced DSBs.
RESULTS: siRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC2 fails to provoke histone
hyperacetylation in Lig4-/- MEFs and has no detectable effect on B-NHEJ function.
Treatment with TSA that inhibits multiple HDACs causes efficient, reversible
chromatin hyperacetylation in Lig4-/- MEFs, as well as in human HCT116 Lig4-/-
cells and the human glioma cell line M059K. The IR yield of DSBs in TSA-treated
cells remains similar to that of untreated cells despite the expected chromatin
relaxation. In addition, chromatin hyperacetylation leaves unchanged repair of
DSBs by B-NHEJ in irradiated exponentially growing, or plateau-phase cells.
Notably, under the experimental conditions employed here, chromatin
hyperacetylation fails to detectably modulate B-NHEJ in M059K cells as well.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, the results show that chromatin acetylation or
deacetylation does not affect the kinetics of alternative NHEJ in all types of
cells examined both in exponentially growing and serum deprived cultures. We
conclude that parameters beyond chromatin acetylation determine B-NHEJ efficiency
in the plateau-phase of growth.

PMCID: PMC3471266
PMID: 22908892  [PubMed]


24. Biochem J. 2012 Nov 1;447(3):457-64. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120811.

Evidence for a link between histone deacetylation and Ca²+ homoeostasis in
sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase-deficient fibroblasts.

Ihlefeld K(1), Claas RF, Koch A, Pfeilschifter JM, Meyer Zu Heringdorf D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Allgemeine Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Klinikum der
Goethe-Universität, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Embryonic fibroblasts from S1P (sphingosine-1-phosphate) lyase-deficient mice
[Sgpl1-/- MEFs (mouse embryonic fibroblasts)] are characterized by intracellular 
accumulation of S1P, elevated cytosolic [Ca2+]i and enhanced Ca2+ storage. Since 
S1P, produced by sphingosine kinase 2 in the nucleus of MCF-7 cells, inhibited
HDACs (histone deacetylases) [Hait, Allegood, Maceyka, Strub, Harikumar, Singh,
Luo, Marmorstein, Kordula, Milstein et al. (2009) Science 325, 1254-1257], in the
present study we analysed whether S1P accumulated in the nuclei of S1P
lyase-deficient MEFs and caused HDAC inhibition. Interestingly, nuclear
concentrations of S1P were disproportionally elevated in Sgpl1-/- MEFs. HDAC
activity was reduced, acetylation of histone 3-Lys9 was increased and the
HDAC-regulated gene p21 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor was up-regulated in
these cells. Furthermore, the expression of HDAC1 and HDAC3 was reduced in
Sgpl1-/- MEFs. In wild-type MEFs, acetylation of histone 3-Lys9 was increased by 
the S1P lyase inhibitor 4-deoxypyridoxine. The non-specific HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A elevated basal [Ca2+]i and enhanced Ca2+ storage, whereas the
HDAC1/2/3 inhibitor MGCD0103 elevated basal [Ca2+]i without influence on Ca2+
storage in wild-type MEFs. Overexpression of HDAC1 or HDAC2 reduced the elevated 
basal [Ca2+]i in Sgpl1-/- MEFs. Taken together, S1P lyase-deficiency was
associated with elevated nuclear S1P levels, reduced HDAC activity and
down-regulation of HDAC isoenzymes. The decreased HDAC activity in turn
contributed to the dysregulation of Ca2+ homoeostasis, particularly to the
elevated basal [Ca2+]i, in Sgpl1-/- MEFs.

PMID: 22908849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2012 Oct;22(8):648-55. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2012.716091.

Sodium butyrate potentiates carbon tetrachloride-induced acute liver injury in
mice.

Lu H(1), Wan J, Jiang R, Xie J, Peng X, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), a prominent member of the class I HDAC family,
plays crucial roles in inflammation and other pathological processes. Recent
studies have found that the activity and expression of HDAC2 were altered under
oxidative stress conditions. The aim of the current study was to elucidate the
expression and the possible pathophysiological significance of HDAC2 in
CCl(4)-induced oxidative hepatitis. Our resultant data indicated that the
expression of HDAC2 in liver increased after CCl(4) exposure, which was
attenuated by antioxidants N-acetyl-L-cysteine or a-lipoic acid. Administration
of sodium butyrate (NaB), a representative HDAC inhibitor resulted in further
elevation of serum aminotransferase levels, enhanced oxidative stress, reduced
antioxidant enzyme activities, increased production of proinflammatory cytokines 
and aggravated hepatocellular necrosis as well as leukocyte infiltration in
liver. The results suggested that oxidative stress in CCl(4)-exposed mice induce 
the expression of HDAC2, while inhibition of HDAC result in exacerbated liver
injury. Therefore, HDAC might be involved in the pathogenesis of CCl(4)-induced
liver injury and provide protective benefit.

PMID: 22871220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2013 Feb;29(2):289-98. doi: 10.1089/AID.2012.0227.
Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Selective targeting of the repressive transcription factors YY1 and cMyc to
disrupt quiescent human immunodeficiency viruses.

Barton K(1), Margolis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599-7042, USA.

Quiescent HIV-1 infection of resting CD4(+) T cells is an obstacle to eradication
of HIV-1 infection. These reservoirs are maintained, in part, by repressive
complexes that bind to the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) and recruit histone
deacetylases (HDACs). cMyc and YY1 are two transcription factors that are
recruited as part of well-described, distinct complexes to the HIV-1 LTR and in
turn recruit HDACs. In prior studies, depletion of single factors that recruit
HDAC1 in various cell lines was sufficient to upregulate LTR activity. We used
short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) to test the effect of targeted disruption of a single
transcription factor on quiescent proviruses in T cell lines. In this study, we
found that depletion of YY1 significantly increases mRNA and protein expression
from the HIV-1 promoter in some contexts, but does not affect HDAC1, HDAC2,
HDAC3, or acetylated histone 3 occupancy of the HIV-1 LTR. Conversely, depletion 
of cMyc or cMyc and YY1 does not significantly alter the level of transcription
from the LTR or affect recruitment of HDACs to the HIV-1 LTR. Furthermore, global
inhibition of HDACs with the HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA) enhanced the increase in LTR transcription in cells that were depleted of 
YY1.These findings show that despite prior isolated findings, redundancy in
repressors of HIV-1 LTR expression will require selective targeting of multiple
restrictive mechanisms to comprehensively induce the escape of quiescent
proviruses from latency.

PMCID: PMC3552162
PMID: 22866663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Nat Neurosci. 2012 Sep;15(9):1245-54. doi: 10.1038/nn.3181. Epub 2012 Aug 5.

HDAC2 regulates atypical antipsychotic responses through the modulation of mGlu2 
promoter activity.

Kurita M(1), Holloway T, García-Bea A, Kozlenkov A, Friedman AK, Moreno JL,
Heshmati M, Golden SA, Kennedy PJ, Takahashi N, Dietz DM, Mocci G, Gabilondo AM, 
Hanks J, Umali A, Callado LF, Gallitano AL, Neve RL, Shen L, Buxbaum JD, Han MH, 
Nestler EJ, Meana JJ, Russo SJ, González-Maeso J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2012 Sep;15(9):1180-1.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) compact chromatin structure and repress gene
transcription. In schizophrenia, clinical studies demonstrate that HDAC
inhibitors are efficacious when given in combination with atypical
antipsychotics. However, the molecular mechanism that integrates a better
response to antipsychotics with changes in chromatin structure remains unknown.
Here we found that chronic atypical antipsychotics downregulated the
transcription of metabotropic glutamate 2 receptor (mGlu2, also known as Grm2),
an effect that was associated with decreased histone acetylation at its promoter 
in mouse and human frontal cortex. This epigenetic change occurred in concert
with a serotonin 5-HT(2A) receptor-dependent upregulation and increased binding
of HDAC2 to the mGlu2 promoter. Virally mediated overexpression of HDAC2 in
frontal cortex decreased mGlu2 transcription and its electrophysiological
properties, thereby increasing psychosis-like behavior. Conversely, HDAC
inhibitors prevented the repressive histone modifications induced at the mGlu2
promoter by atypical antipsychotics, and augmented their therapeutic-like
effects. These observations support the view of HDAC2 as a promising new target
for schizophrenia treatment.

PMCID: PMC3431440
PMID: 22864611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Oct 1;303(7):L557-66. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00175.2012. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Role of histone deacetylase 2 in epigenetics and cellular senescence:
implications in lung inflammaging and COPD.

Yao H(1), Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Environmental Medicine, Lung Biology and Disease Program, Univ. of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is a class I histone deacetylase that regulates
various cellular processes, such as cell cycle, senescence, proliferation,
differentiation, development, apoptosis, and glucocorticoid function in
inhibiting inflammatory response. HDAC2 has been shown to protect against DNA
damage response and cellular senescence/premature aging via an epigenetic
mechanism in response to oxidative stress. These phenomena are observed in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). HDAC2 is
posttranslationally modified by oxidative/carbonyl stress imposed by cigarette
smoke and oxidants, leading to its reduction via an ubiquitination-proteasome
dependent degradation in lungs of patients with COPD. In this perspective, we
have discussed the role of HDAC2 posttranslational modifications and its role in 
regulation of inflammation, histone/DNA epigenetic modifications, DNA damage
response, and cellular senescence, particularly in inflammaging, and during the
development of COPD. We have also discussed the potential directions for future
translational research avenues in modulating lung inflammaging and cellular
senescence based on epigenetic chromatin modifications in diseases associated
with increased oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC3469586
PMID: 22842217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 14;287(38):32006-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.362467. Epub
2012 Jul 20.

Stimulation of histone deacetylase activity by metabolites of intermediary
metabolism.

Vogelauer M(1), Krall AS, McBrian MA, Li JY, Kurdistani SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry,UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) function in a wide range of molecular processes,
including gene expression, and are of significant interest as therapeutic
targets. Although their native complexes, subcellular localization, and
recruitment mechanisms to chromatin have been extensively studied, much less is
known about whether the enzymatic activity of non-sirtuin HDACs can be regulated 
by natural metabolites. Here, we show that several coenzyme A (CoA) derivatives, 
such as acetyl-CoA, butyryl-CoA, HMG-CoA, and malonyl-CoA, as well as NADPH but
not NADP(+), NADH, or NAD(+), act as allosteric activators of recombinant HDAC1
and HDAC2 in vitro following a mixed activation kinetic. In contrast, free CoA,
like unconjugated butyrate, inhibits HDAC activity in vitro. Analysis of a large 
number of engineered HDAC1 mutants suggests that the HDAC activity can
potentially be decoupled from "activatability" by the CoA derivatives. In vivo,
pharmacological inhibition of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) to
decrease NADPH levels led to significant increases in global levels of histone H3
and H4 acetylation. The similarity in structures of the identified metabolites
and the exquisite selectivity of NADPH over NADP(+), NADH, and NAD(+) as an HDAC 
activator reveal a previously unrecognized biochemical feature of the HDAC
proteins with important consequences for regulation of histone acetylation as
well as the development of more specific and potent HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3442532
PMID: 22822071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Leuk Res. 2012 Oct;36(10):1304-10. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.07.002. Epub 2012 
Jul 20.

Induction of differentiation and apoptosis in leukaemic cell lines by the novel
benzamide family histone deacetylase 2 and 3 inhibitor MI-192.

Boissinot M(1), Inman M, Hempshall A, James SR, Gill JH, Selby P, Bowen DT, Grigg
R, Cockerill PN.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Leeds, UK.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are in advanced clinical development as
cancer therapeutic agents. However, first generation HDACIs such as butyrate and 
valproate are simple short chain aliphatic compounds with moieties resembling
acetyl groups, and have a broad spectrum of activity against HDACs. More complex 
second generation HDACIs undergoing clinical trials, such as the benzamide group 
compounds MS-275 and MGCD0103, are specific primarily for HDAC1 and HDAC2. To
expand the repertoire of available HDACIs and HDAC specificities we created a
novel benzamide-based compound named MI-192. When tested against purified
recombinant HDACs, MI-192 had marked selectivity for the class I enzymes, HDAC2
and HDAC3. Screening in the NCI60 screen demonstrated that MI-192 had greatly
enhanced efficacy against cells of leukaemic origin. When tested in culture
against the acute myeloid leukaemic cell lines U937, HL60 and Kasumi-1, MI-192
induced differentiation and was cytotoxic through promotion of apoptosis. MI-192 
therefore justifies further investigation and development as a potential
therapeutic agent for use in leukaemia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22818799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;1821(10):1334-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2012.07.007. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Mechanism and stereoselectivity of HDAC I inhibition by (R)-9-hydroxystearic acid
in colon cancer.

Parolin C(1), Calonghi N, Presta E, Boga C, Caruana P, Naldi M, Andrisano V,
Masotti L, Sartor G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry "G. Moruzzi", Alma Mater Studiorum, University of
Bologna, Via Irnerio 48, 40126, Bologna, Italy.

9-Hydroxystearic acid (9-HSA) belongs to the endogenous lipid peroxidation
by-products that decrease in tumors, causing as a consequence the loss of one of 
the control mechanisms on cell division. It acts as a histone deacetylase (HDAC, 
E.C 3.5.1.98) inhibitor, and the interaction of the two enantiomers of 9-HSA with
the catalytic site of the enzyme, investigated by using a molecular modelling
approach, has been reported to be different. In this work we tested out this
prediction by synthesizing the two enantiomers (R)-9-HSA (R-9) and (S)-9-HSA
(S-9) starting from the natural source methyl dimorphecolate obtained from
Dimorphotheca sinuata seeds and investigating their biological activity in HT29
cells. Both enantiomers inhibit the enzymatic activity of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3,
R-9 being more active; R-9 and S-9 inhibitory effect induces an increase in
histone H4 acetylation. We also demonstrate that the antiproliferative effect
brought about by R-9 is more pronounced as well as we observe increase of p21
transcription and protein content, while the expression of cyclin D1 is
decreased. Starting from these observations it can be hypothesized that the
interaction of R-9 with HDAC1 induce conformational changes in the enzyme causing
loss of its interaction with other proteins, like cyclin D1 itself.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22814230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Circ Res. 2012 Aug 31;111(6):685-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.269811. Epub
2012 Jul 18.

Cooperative binding of KLF4, pELK-1, and HDAC2 to a G/C repressor element in the 
SM22a promoter mediates transcriptional silencing during SMC phenotypic switching
in vivo.

Salmon M(1), Gomez D, Greene E, Shankman L, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia, School of Medicine, Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular
Research Center, PO Box 801394, Charlottesville, VA 22908-1394, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Aug 31;111(6):659-61.

RATIONALE: We previously identified conserved G/C Repressor elements in the
promoters of most smooth muscle cell (SMC) marker genes and demonstrated that
mutation of this element within the SM22a promoter nearly abrogated repression of
this transgene after vascular wire injury or within lesions of ApoE-/- mice.
However, the mechanisms regulating the activity of the G/C Repressor are unknown,
although we have previously shown that phenotypic switching of cultured SMC is
dependent on Krupple-like factor (KLF)4.
OBJECTIVE: The goals of the present studies were to ascertain if (1)
injury-induced repression of SM22a gene after vascular injury is mediated through
KLF4 binding to the G/C Repressor element and (2) the transcriptional repressor
activity of KLF4 on SMC marker genes is dependent on cooperative binding with
pELK-1 (downstream activator of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway) and
subsequent recruitment of histone de-acetylase 2 (HDAC2), which mediates
epigenetic gene silencing.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were performed
on chromatin derived from carotid arteries of mice having either a wild-type or
G/C Repressor mutant SM22a promoter-LacZ transgene. KLF4 and pELK-1 binding to
the SM22a promoter was markedly increased after vascular injury and was G/C
Repressor dependent. Sequential ChIP assays and proximity ligation analyses in
cultured SMC treated with platelet-derived growth factor BB or oxidized
phospholipids showed formation of a KLF4, pELK-1, and HDAC2 multiprotein complex 
dependent on the SM22a G/C Repressor element.
CONCLUSIONS: Silencing of SMC marker genes during phenotypic switching is
partially mediated by sequential binding of pELK-1 and KLF4 to G/C Repressor
elements. The pELK-1-KLF4 complex in turn recruits HDAC2, leading to reduced
histone acetylation and epigenetic silencing.

PMCID: PMC3517884
PMID: 22811558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Sep 15;263(3):345-51. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.07.007. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane, but not indole-3-carbinol, inhibits histone deacetylase
activity in prostate cancer cells.

Beaver LM(1), Yu TW, Sokolowski EI, Williams DE, Dashwood RH, Ho E.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, 307 Linus Pauling Science
Center, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. beaverl@onid.orst.edu

Increased consumption of cruciferous vegetables is associated with a reduced risk
of developing prostate cancer. Indole-3-carbinol (I3C) and 3,3'-diindolylmethane 
(DIM) are phytochemicals derived from cruciferous vegetables that have shown
promise in inhibiting prostate cancer in experimental models. Histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibition is an emerging target for cancer prevention and therapy. We
sought to examine the effects of I3C and DIM on HDACs in human prostate cancer
cell lines: androgen insensitive PC-3 cells and androgen sensitive LNCaP cells.
I3C modestly inhibited HDAC activity in LNCaP cells by 25% but no inhibition of
HDAC activity was detected in PC-3 cells. In contrast, DIM significantly
inhibited HDAC activity in both cell lines by as much as 66%. Decreases in HDAC
activity correlated with increased expression of p21, a known target of HDAC
inhibitors. DIM treatment caused a significant decrease in the expression of
HDAC2 protein in both cancer cell lines but no significant change in the protein 
levels of HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC6 or HDAC8 was detected. Taken together, these
results show that inhibition of HDAC activity by DIM may contribute to the
phytochemicals' anti-proliferative effects in the prostate. The ability of DIM to
target aberrant epigenetic patterns, in addition to its effects on detoxification
of carcinogens, may make it an effective chemopreventive agent by targeting
multiple stages of prostate carcinogenesis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3428467
PMID: 22800507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012 Nov;47(5):637-44. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0009OC. 
Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Glucocorticoid receptor and histone deacetylase-2 mediate dexamethasone-induced
repression of MUC5AC gene expression.

Chen Y(1), Watson AM, Williamson CD, Rahimi M, Liang C, Colberg-Poley AM, Rose
MC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Childrens National Medical Center,
Washington, DC, USA.

Airway occlusion in obstructive airway diseases is caused in part by the
overproduction of secretory mucin glycoproteins through the up-regulation of
mucin (MUC) genes by inflammatory mediators. Some pharmacological agents,
including the glucocorticoid dexamethasone (Dex), repress mucin concentrations in
lung epithelial cancer cells. Here, we show that Dex reduces the expression of
MUC5AC, a major airway mucin gene, in primary differentiated normal human
bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells in a dose-dependent and time-dependent manner, 
and that the Dex-induced repression is mediated by the glucocorticoid receptor
(GR) and two glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) in the MUC5AC promoter. The 
pre-exposure of cells to RU486, a GR antagonist, and mutations in either the GRE3
or GRE5 cis-sites abolished the Dex-induced repression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed a rapid temporal recruitment of GR to
the GRE3 and GRE5 cis-elements in the MUC5AC promoter in NHBE and in A549 cells. 
Immunofluorescence showed nuclear colocalization of GR and histone deacetylase-2 
(HDAC2) in MUC5AC-expressing NHBE cells. ChIP also showed a rapid temporal
recruitment of HDAC2 to the GRE3 and GRE5 cis-elements in the MUC5AC promoter in 
both cell types. The knockdown of HDAC2 by HDAC2-specific short interfering RNA
prevented the Dex-induced repression of MUC5AC in NHBE and A549 cells. These data
demonstrate that GR and HDAC2 are recruited to the GRE3 and GRE5 cis-sites in the
MUC5AC promoter and mediate the Dex-induced cis repression of MUC5AC gene
expression. A better understanding of the mechanisms whereby glucocorticoids
repress MUC5AC gene expression may be useful in formulating therapeutic
interventions in chronic lung diseases.

PMCID: PMC3547101
PMID: 22798432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 21;287(39):32367-80. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Protein kinase D1 mediates anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of tumor
cells via the zinc finger transcription factor Snail1.

Eiseler T(1), Köhler C, Nimmagadda SC, Jamali A, Funk N, Joodi G, Storz P,
Seufferlein T.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Internal Medicine I, University Clinic Halle, Martin Luther
University Halle-Wittenberg, Ernst-Grube Strasse 40, 06120 Halle (Saale),
Germany.

We here identify protein kinase D1 (PKD1) as a major regulator of
anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of cancer cells controlled via the
transcription factor Snail1. Using FRET, we demonstrate that PKD1, but not PKD2, 
efficiently interacts with Snail1 in nuclei. PKD1 phosphorylates Snail1 at
Ser-11. There was no change in the nucleocytoplasmic distribution of Snail1 using
wild type Snail1 and Ser-11 phosphosite mutants in different tumor cells.
Regardless of its phosphorylation status or following co-expression of
constitutively active PKD, Snail1 was predominantly localized to cell nuclei. We 
also identify a novel mechanism of PKD1-mediated regulation of Snail1
transcriptional activity in tumor cells. The interaction of the co-repressors
histone deacetylases 1 and 2 as well as lysyl oxidase-like protein 3 with Snail1 
was impaired when Snail1 was not phosphorylated at Ser-11, which led to reduced
Snail1-associated histone deacetylase activity. Additionally, lysyl oxidase-like 
protein 3 expression was up-regulated by ectopic PKD1 expression, implying a
synergistic regulation of Snail1-driven transcription. Ectopic expression of PKD1
also up-regulated proliferation markers such as Cyclin D1 and Ajuba. Accordingly,
Snail1 and its phosphorylation at Ser-11 were required and sufficient to control 
PKD1-mediated anchorage-independent growth and anchorage-dependent proliferation 
of different tumor cells. In conclusion, our data show that PKD1 is crucial to
support growth of tumor cells via Snail1.

PMCID: PMC3463335
PMID: 22791710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Oct;27(5):557-69. doi:
10.1111/j.1472-8206.2012.01056.x. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Thymoquinone as an anticancer agent: evidence from inhibition of cancer cells
viability and invasion in vitro and tumor growth in vivo.

Attoub S(1), Sperandio O, Raza H, Arafat K, Al-Salam S, Al Sultan MA, Al Safi M, 
Takahashi T, Adem A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine & Health
Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, PO Box: 17666, Al Ain, United Arab
Emirates. samir.attoub@uaeu.ac.ae

Phytochemical compounds are emerging as a new generation of anticancer agents
with limited toxicity in cancer patients. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the potential impact of thymoquinone (TQ), the major constituent of
black seed, on survival, invasion of cancer cells in vitro, and tumor growth in
vivo. Exposure of cells derived from lung (LNM35), liver (HepG2), colon (HT29),
melanoma (MDA-MB-435), and breast (MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7) tumors to increasing TQ 
concentrations resulted in a significant inhibition of viability through the
inhibition of Akt phosphorylation leading to DNA damage and activation of the
mitochondrial-signaling proapoptotic pathway. We provide evidence that TQ at
non-toxic concentrations inhibited the invasive potential of LNM35, MDA-MB-231,
and MDA-MB231-1833 cancer cells. Moreover, we demonstrate that TQ synergizes with
DNA-damaging agent cisplatin to inhibit cellular viability. The anticancer
activity of thymoquinone was also investigated in athymic mice inoculated with
the LNM35 lung cells. Administration of TQ (10 mg/kg/i.p.) for 18 days inhibited 
the LNM35 tumor growth by 39% (P < 0.05). Tumor growth inhibition was associated 
with significant increase in the activated caspase-3. The in silico target
identification suggests several potential targets of TQ mainly HDAC2 proteins and
the 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase. In this context, we demonstrated that 
TQ treatment resulted in a significant inhibition of HDAC2 proteins. In view of
the available experimental findings, we contend that thymoquinone and/or its
analogues may have clinical potential as an anticancer agent alone or in
combination with chemotherapeutic drugs such as cisplatin.

© 2012 The Authors Fundamental and Clinical Pharmacology © 2012 Société Française
de Pharmacologie et de Thérapeutique.

PMID: 22788741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Diabetologia. 2012 Sep;55(9):2421-31. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2615-0. Epub 2012
Jul 7.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 3 but not 2 mediate cytokine-induced beta cell
apoptosis in INS-1 cells and dispersed primary islets from rats and are
differentially regulated in the islets of type 1 diabetic children.

Lundh M(1), Christensen DP, Damgaard Nielsen M, Richardson SJ, Dahllöf MS,
Skovgaard T, Berthelsen J, Dinarello CA, Stevenazzi A, Mascagni P, Grunnet LG,
Morgan NG, Mandrup-Poulsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Research Methodology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 
2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. morlun@sund.ku.dk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are promising pharmacological
targets in cancer and autoimmune diseases. All 11 classical HDACs (HDAC1-11) are 
found in the pancreatic beta cell, and HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) protect beta cells
from inflammatory insults. We investigated which HDACs mediate inflammatory beta 
cell damage and how the islet content of these HDACs is regulated in recent-onset
type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: The rat beta cell line INS-1 and dispersed primary islets from rats,
either wild type or HDAC1-3 deficient, were exposed to cytokines and HDACi.
Molecular mechanisms were investigated using real-time PCR, chromatin
immunoprecipitation and ELISA assays. Pancreases from healthy children and
children with type 1 diabetes were assessed using immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Screening of 19 compounds with different HDAC selectivity revealed that 
inhibitors of HDAC1, -2 and -3 rescued INS-1 cells from inflammatory damage.
Small hairpin RNAs against HDAC1 and -3, but not HDAC2, reduced pro-inflammatory 
cytokine-induced beta cell apoptosis in INS-1 and primary rat islets. The
protective properties of specific HDAC knock-down correlated with attenuated
cytokine-induced iNos expression but not with altered expression of the
pro-inflammatory mediators Il1a, Il1ß, Tnfa or Cxcl2. HDAC3 knock-down reduced
nuclear factor <U+03BA>B binding to the iNos promoter and HDAC1 knock-down restored
insulin secretion. In pancreatic sections from children with type 1 diabetes of
recent onset, HDAC1 was upregulated in beta cells whereas HDAC2 and -3 were
downregulated in comparison with five paediatric controls.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These data demonstrate non-redundant functions of
islet class I HDACs and suggest that targeting HDAC1 and HDAC3 would provide
optimal protection of beta cell mass and function in clinical islet
transplantation and recent-onset type 1 diabetic patients.

PMID: 22772764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Epigenetics. 2012 Aug;7(8):914-29. doi: 10.4161/epi.21113. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Hepatic ontogeny and tissue distribution of mRNAs of epigenetic modifiers in mice
using RNA-sequencing.

Lu H(1), Cui JY, Gunewardena S, Yoo B, Zhong XB, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY,
USA. luh@upstate.edu

Developmental regulation of gene expression is controlled by distinct epigenetic 
signatures catalyzed by various epigenetic modifiers. Little is known about the
ontogeny and tissue distribution of these epigenetic modifiers. In the present
study, we used a novel approach of RNA-sequencing to elucidate hepatic ontogeny
and tissue distribution of mRNA expression of 142 epigenetic modifiers, including
enzymes involved in DNA methylation/demethylation, histone
acetylation/deacetylation, histone methylation/demethylation, histone
phosphorylation and chromosome remodeling factors in male C57BL/6 mice. Livers
from male C57BL/6 mice were collected at 12 ages from prenatal to adulthood. Many
of these epigenetic modifiers were expressed at much higher levels in perinatal
livers than adult livers, such as Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, Apobec3, Kat1, Ncoa4,
Setd8, Ash2l, Dot1l, Cbx1, Cbx3, Cbx5, Cbx6, Ezh2, Suz12, Eed, Suv39h1, Suv420h2,
Dek, Hdac1, Hdac2, Hdac7, Kdm2b, Kdm5c, Kdm7, Prmt1-5, Prmt7, Smarca4, Smarcb1,
Chd4 and Ino80e. In contrast, hepatic mRNA expression of a few epigenetic
modifiers increased during postnatal liver development, such as Smarca2, Kdm1b,
Cbx7 and Chd3. In adult mice (60 d of age), most epigenetic modifiers were
expressed at moderately (1-3-fold) higher levels in kidney and/or small intestine
than liver. In conclusion, this study, for the first time, unveils developmental 
changes in mRNA abundance of all major known epigenetic modifiers in mouse liver.
These data suggest that ontogenic changes in mRNA expression of epigenetic
modifiers may play important roles in determining the addition and/or removal of 
corresponding epigenetic signatures during liver development.

PMCID: PMC3427287
PMID: 22772165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Aug 1;22(15):5025-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.06.017.
Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Design, synthesis, modeling, biological evaluation and photoaffinity labeling
studies of novel series of photoreactive benzamide probes for histone deacetylase
2.

Vaidya AS(1), Karumudi B, Mendonca E, Madriaga A, Abdelkarim H, van Breemen RB,
Petukhov PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The design, modeling, synthesis, biological evaluation of a novel series of
photoreactive benzamide probes for class I HDAC isoforms is reported. The probes 
are potent and selective for HDAC1 and 2 and are efficient in crosslinking to
HDAC2 as demonstrated by photolabeling experiments. The probes exhibit a
time-dependent inhibition of class I HDACs. The inhibitory activities of the
probes were influenced by the positioning of the aryl and alkyl azido groups
necessary for photocrosslinking and attachment of the biotin tag. The probes
inhibited the deacetylation of H4 in MDA-MB-231 cell line, indicating that they
are cell permeable and target the nuclear HDACs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3401313
PMID: 22771007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2012 Nov;32(8):1337-42. doi: 10.1007/s10571-012-9859-6. Epub 
2012 Jun 26.

Co-location of HDAC2 and insulin signaling components in the adult mouse
hippocampus.

Yao ZG(1), Liu Y, Zhang L, Huang L, Ma CM, Xu YF, Zhu H, Qin C.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Medical Center, Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, Peking
Union Medical College (PUMC), Panjiayuan Nanli No. 5, Chaoyang District, Beijing,
100021, China.

As one part of epigenetics, histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been demonstrated
to get into the neural events, including neurogenesis, synaptic plasticity, and
neurodegeneration through regulating acetylation status of target proteins to
influence protein function and gene expression. However, the recent studies
indicated that HDAC2, a member of HDACs family, played a role in insulin
signaling pathway and synaptic plasticity. Here, we are concerned about whether
HDAC2 was co-located with insulin signaling components in postsynaptic
glutamatergic neurons (PSGNs) of the adult mouse hippocampus using double
immunofluorescence staining. The results displayed that HDAC2 was present in
PSGNs marked by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit 2B, in which major
components of insulin signaling pathway such as insulin receptor alpha and beta
and insulin receptor substrate-1 were also involved. Accordingly, we speculate
that the interaction of HDAC2 and insulin signaling system in PSGNs observed in
the present study may serve as a potential mechanism in memory formation. We hope
this could provide a valuable basis for understanding the roles of HDAC2 and
insulin on cognitive impairment of diabetes mellitus, involved Alzheimer's
disease, which is also called type 3 diabetes recently. And this will also
benefit to the treatment of insulin-related diseases in the central nervous
system.

PMID: 22733364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Oct;25(5):349-56. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.06.004. Epub
2012 Jun 23.

Characteristic comparison of three rat models induced by cigarette smoke or
combined with LPS: to establish a suitable model for study of airway mucus
hypersecretion in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nie YC(1), Wu H, Li PB, Luo YL, Zhang CC, Shen JG, Su WW.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, Guangdong Key
Laboratory of Plant Resources, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University,
No. 135, Xingangxi Street, Guangzhou 510275, PR China.

There is a need of in vivo COPD models for mucus hypersecretion study. The
current study compared three rat models induced by cigarette smoke (CS) exposure 
alone or combined with pre- or post-treatment with lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
Forty rats were randomly divided into the four following groups: control group,
LPS + CS group (CS exposure for 4-wk combined with LPS pretreatment), CS group
(CS exposure for 6-wk), CS + LPS group (CS exposure for 6-wk combined with LPS
post-treatment). The results showed that both CS and CS + LPS groups had more
severe pro-inflammatory cytokines secretion, inflammatory cells infiltration, and
emphysema as compared to that in LPS + CS group animals. From the PAS staining
sections, we found a remarkable hyperplasia of goblet-cell in epitheliums of
trachea, bronchi, and bronchiole of all of three modeling groups, especially in
CS and CS + LPS groups. From the western-blotting results, there were significant
increase in the activities of NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1, EGFR, TLR4, and MAPKs in all of three 
modeling groups, while HDAC2 activity was remarkably repressed in CS group only. 
Moreover, the expression and secretion of MUC5AC were exhibited significant
increase in all of three modeling groups, which correlated well with the total
transcription activity integration of NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1, and HDAC2 (r = 0.946, p <
0.01). These results indicated that MUC5AC hypersecretion is consistent with
activation of EGFR-AP-1/NF-<U+03BA>B and TLR4-AP-1/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathways, as well as 
repression of HDAC2 activity. Based on these results, we speculated that the 6-wk
CS exposure rat model is a reliable COPD rat model, while the 6-wk CS exposure
combined with LPS post-treatment rat model is a suitable COPD exacerbation model 
for mucus hypersecretion study.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22732689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Drugs. 2012 Jul 9;72(10):1299-312. doi: 10.2165/11634350-000000000-00000.

Corticosteroid resistance and novel anti-inflammatory therapies in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: current evidence and future direction.

Hakim A(1), Adcock IM, Usmani OS.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London and Royal Brompton 
Hospital, London, UK.

Corticosteroids are widely used in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). However, in contrast to their use in mild-to-moderate asthma,
they are much less effective in enhancing lung function and have little or no
effect on controlling the underlying chronic inflammation. In most clinical
trials in COPD patients, corticosteroids have shown little benefit as
monotherapy, but have shown a greater clinical effect in combination with
long-acting bronchodilators. Several mechanisms of corticosteroid resistance have
been postulated, including a reduction in histone deacetylase (HDAC)-2 activity
and expression, impaired corticosteroid activation of the glucocorticoid receptor
(GR) and increased pro-inflammatory signalling pathways. Reversal of
corticosteroid resistance in COPD patients by restoring HDAC2 levels has proved
effective in a small study, and long-term studies are needed to determine whether
novel HDAC2 activators or theophylline improve disease progression, exacerbations
or mortality. Advances in the understanding of the cellular and molecular
mechanisms of corticosteroid resistance in COPD pathophysiology have supported
the development of new emerging classes of anti-inflammatory drugs in COPD
treatment. These include treatments such as inhibitors of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase-delta (PI3Kd), phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4), p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B), and
therapeutic agents such as chemokine receptor antagonists. Of these, PI3Kd, PDE4,
p38 MAPK inhibitors and chemokine receptor antagonists are in clinical patient
trials. Of importance, patient adverse effects associated with oral
administration of these novel agents needs to be addressed in order to optimize
therapy and patient compliance. Combinations of these drugs with corticosteroids 
may have additional benefits.

PMID: 22731962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Feb;9(1):59-64. doi: 10.1007/s12015-012-9392-5.

Transcriptional analysis of histone deacetylase family members reveal
similarities between differentiating and aging spermatogonial stem cells.

Kofman AE(1), Huszar JM, Payne CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

The differentiation of adult stem cells involves extensive chromatin remodeling, 
mediated in part by the gene products of histone deacetylase (HDAC) family
members. While the transcriptional downregulation of HDACs can impede stem cell
self-renewal in certain contexts, it may also promote stem cell maintenance under
other circumstances. In self-renewing, differentiating, and aging spermatogonial 
stem cells (SSCs), the gene expression dynamics of HDACs have not yet been
characterized. To gain further insight with these studies, we analyzed the
transcriptional profiles of six HDAC family members, previously identified to be 
the most highly expressed in self-renewing SSCs, during stem cell differentiation
and aging. Here we discovered that in both differentiating and aging SSCs the
expression of Sirt4 increases, while the expression of Hdac2, Hdac6, and Sirt1
decreases. When SSCs are exposed to the lifespan-enhancing drug rapamycin in
vivo, the resultant HDAC gene expression patterns are opposite of those seen in
the differentiating and aging SSCs, with increased Hdac2, Hdac6, and Sirt1 and
decreased Hdac8, Hdac9, and Sirt4. Our findings suggest that HDACs important for 
stem cell maintenance and oxidative capacity are downregulated as adult stem
cells differentiate or age. These results provide important insights into the
epigenetic regulation of stem cell differentiation and aging in mammals.

PMCID: PMC3605728
PMID: 22729928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Mol Biol. 2012 Sep 28;422(4):519-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.06.013. Epub 2012 
Jun 21.

Sequence requirements for combinatorial recognition of histone H3 by the MRG15
and Pf1 subunits of the Rpd3S/Sin3S corepressor complex.

Kumar GS(1), Chang W, Xie T, Patel A, Zhang Y, Wang GG, David G, Radhakrishnan I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208, USA.

The transcriptional output at a genomic locus in eukaryotes is determined, in
part, by the pattern of histone modifications that are read and interpreted by
key effector proteins. The histone deacetylase activity of the evolutionarily
conserved Rpd3S/Sin3S complex is crucial for suppressing aberrant transcription
from cryptic start sites within intragenic regions of actively transcribed genes.
Precise targeting of the complex relies on the chromatin binding activities of
the MRG15 (MRG stands for mortality factor on chromosome 4 related gene) and Pf1 
subunits. Whereas the molecular target of the MRG15 chromodomain (CD) has been
suggested to be H3K36me(2/3), the precise molecular target of the Pf1 plant
homeodomain 1 (PHD1) has remained elusive. Here, we show that Pf1 PHD1 binds
preferentially to the unmodified extreme N-terminus of histone H3 (H3K4me(0)) but
not to H3K4me(2/3), which are enriched in the promoter and 5' regions of genes.
Unlike previously characterized CD and PHD domains that bind to their targets
with micromolar affinity, both MRG15 CD and Pf1 PHD1 bind to their targets with
>100 µM affinity, offering an explanation for why both MRG15 CD and Pf1 PHD1
domains are required to target the Rpd3S/Sin3S complex to chromatin. Our results 
also suggest that bivalency, rather than cooperativity, is the operative
mechanism by which Pf1 and MRG15 combine to engage H3 in a biologically
significant manner. Finally, the studies reveal an unanticipated role of Pf1 PHD1
in engaging the MRG15 MRG domain, albeit in a Pf1 MRG-binding-domain-dependent
manner, implying a key role for the MRG15 MRG-Pf1 MBD interaction in chromatin
targeting of the Rpd3S/Sin3S complex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3428507
PMID: 22728643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Jun 14;18(22):2745-55. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i22.2745.

Interrelationship between microsatellite instability and microRNA in
gastrointestinal cancer.

Yamamoto H(1), Adachi Y, Taniguchi H, Kunimoto H, Nosho K, Suzuki H, Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan. h-yama@sapmed.ac.jp

There is an increasing understanding of the roles that microsatellite instability
(MSI) plays in Lynch syndrome (by mutations) and sporadic (by mainly epigenetic
changes) gastrointestinal (GI) and other cancers. Deficient DNA mismatch repair
(MMR) results in the strong mutator phenotype known as MSI, which is the hallmark
of cancers arising within Lynch syndrome. MSI is characterized by length
alterations within simple repeated sequences called microsatellites. Lynch
syndrome occurs primarily because of germline mutations in one of the MMR genes, 
mainly MLH1 or MSH2, less frequently MSH6, and rarely PMS2. MSI is also observed 
in about 15% of sporadic colorectal, gastric, and endometrial cancers and in
lower frequencies in a minority of other cancers where it is often associated
with the hypermethylation of the MLH1 gene. miRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that 
regulate gene expression at the posttranscriptional level and are critical in
many biological processes and cellular pathways. There is accumulating evidence
to support the notion that the interrelationship between MSI and miRNA plays a
key role in the pathogenesis of GI cancer. As a possible new mechanism underlying
MSI, overexpression of miR-155 has been shown to downregulate expression of MLH1,
MSH2, and MSH6. Thus, a subset of MSI-positive (MSI+) cancers without known MMR
defects may result from miR-155 overexpression. Target genes of frameshift
mutation for MSI are involved in various cellular functions, such as DNA repair, 
cell signaling, and apoptosis. A novel class of target genes that included not
only epigenetic modifier genes, such as HDAC2, but also miRNA processing
machinery genes, including TARBP2 and XPO5, were found to be mutated in MSI+ GI
cancers. Thus, a subset of MSI+ colorectal cancers (CRCs) has been proposed to
exhibit a mutated miRNA machinery phenotype. Genetic, epigenetic, and
transcriptomic differences exist between MSI+ and MSI- cancers. Molecular
signatures of miRNA expression apparently have the potential to distinguish
between MSI+ and MSI- CRCs. In this review, we summarize recent advances in the
MSI pathogenesis of GI cancer, with the focus on its relationship with miRNA as
well as on the potential to use MSI and related alterations as biomarkers and
novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3374977
PMID: 22719182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2012 Jul;90(7):895-902. doi: 10.1139/y2012-079. Epub
2012 Jun 18.

Low-dose theophylline restores corticosteroid responsiveness in rats with
smoke-induced airway inflammation.

Sun X(1), Li Q, Gong Y, Ren L, Wan H, Deng W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, PR China.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) respond poorly to
corticosteroids. Histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC-2) plays a pivotal role in many
cases of steroid insensitivity. The main aim of this study was to restore the
smoking-induced reduction in corticosteroid sensitivity by increasing HDAC-2
activity using low-dose theophylline. Rats were exposed to cigarette smoke (CS)
and treated with budesonide and two doses of theophylline. Besides the pathologic
examination and cell counting in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), the
expression of HDAC-2 and CXC chemokine ligand-8 (CXCL-8) were measured. Airway
inflammation induced by CS was demonstrated by pathologic changes of lung tissue 
and increased level of CXCL-8. CS exposure also markedly decreased HDAC-2
expression. Moreover, a negative correlation was found between HDAC-2 activity
and a lung destruction index. The index was restored to control levels with
inhaled corticosteroid treatment in combination with a low, not a high, dose of
theophylline. These results indicate that low-dose theophylline might provide
protection from smoke damage and improve the anti-inflammatory effects of
steroids by increasing HDAC-2 activity.

PMID: 22708526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Aug;8(8):2174-82. doi: 10.1039/c2mb25151e. Epub 2012 Jun 14.

Large scale phosphoproteome analysis of LNCaP human prostate cancer cells.

Myung JK(1), Sadar MD.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, 675 W 10th Ave, Vancouver, BC V5Z
1L3, Canada.

Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer among men in the western 
world. The androgen receptor, a phosphoprotein, is suspected to be involved in
all stages of the prostate cancer. Androgen receptor activity can be modulated by
various kinases such as PKA, MAPK, AKT, and Src. Phosphorylation is an important 
post-translational modification and serves as a molecular on-off switch to
regulate signaling. Disruptions of cellular phosphorylation are associated with
various diseases such as cancer and kinases provide important drug targets. Here 
we present an analysis of the phosphoproteome in LNCaP human prostate cancer
cells. The analytical strategy employed here used proteomics based methodologies 
with a combination of detergents and chaotropic reagents during trypsin digestion
followed by titanium dioxide enrichment of phosphopeptides. Over the course of
multiple analyses by mass spectrometry we identified a total of 746
phosphorylation sites in 540 phosphopeptides corresponding to 116
phosphoproteins, of which 56 had not been previously reported. Phosphoproteins
identified included transcription factors, co-regulators of the androgen
receptor, and cancer-related proteins that include ß-catenin, USP10, and histone 
deacetylase-2. The information of signaling pathways, motifs of phosphorylated
peptides, biological processes, molecular functions, cellular components, and
protein interactions from the identified phosphoproteins established a map of
phosphoproteome and signaling pathways in LNCaP cells.

PMCID: PMC3433406
PMID: 22699815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 27;287(31):25844-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.348284. Epub
2012 Jun 7.

Histone deacetylase 3 mediates allergic skin inflammation by regulating
expression of MCP1 protein.

Kim Y(1), Kim K, Park D, Lee E, Lee H, Lee YS, Choe J, Jeoung D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kangwon National University, Chunchon 200-701,
Korea.

We have shown the induction of histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) in
antigen-stimulated rat basophilic leukemia cells via NF-<U+03BA>B. We investigated the
role of HDAC3 in allergic skin inflammation. We used a BALB/c mouse model of
triphasic cutaneous anaphylaxis (triphasic cutaneous reaction; TpCR) and passive 
cutaneous anaphylaxis (PCA) to examine the role of HDAC3 in allergic skin
inflammation. Triphasic cutaneous reaction involved induction of HDAC3 and was
mediated by HDAC3. HDAC3 showed an interaction with FceRIß. Trichostatin A (TSA),
an inhibitor of HDAC(s), disrupted this interaction. Cytokine array analysis
showed that the down-regulation of HDAC3 led to the decreased secretion of
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP1). FceRI was necessary for induction of
HDAC3 and MCP1. ChIP assays showed that HDAC3, in association with Sp1 and c-Jun,
was responsible for induction of MCP1 expression. TSA exerted a negative effect
on induction of MCP1. HDAC3 exerted a negative regulation on expression of HDAC2 
via interaction with Rac1. The down-regulation of HDAC3 or inactivation of Rac1
induced binding of HDAC2 to MCP1 promoter sequences. TSA exerted a negative
effect on HDAC3-mediated TpCR. The BALB/c mouse model of PCA involved induction
of HDAC3 and MCP1. HDAC3 and MCP1 were necessary for PCA that involved ear
swelling, enhanced vascular permeability, and angiogenesis. Recombinant MCP1
enhanced ß-hexosaminidase activity and histamine release and also showed
angiogenic potential. TSA exerted a negative effect on PCA. Our data show HDAC3
as a valuable target for the development of allergic skin inflammation
therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3406670
PMID: 22679019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biofactors. 2012 Sep-Oct;38(5):329-37. doi: 10.1002/biof.1030. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate signaling in physiology and diseases.

Takuwa Y(1), Okamoto Y, Yoshioka K, Takuwa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa, Japan. ytakuwa@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), which acts as both the extracellular and
intracellular messenger, exerts pleiotropic biological activities including
regulation of formation of the vasculature, vascular barrier integrity, and
lymphocyte trafficking. Many of these S1P actions are mediated by five members of
the G protein-coupled S1P receptors (S1P(1) -S1P(5) ) with overlapping but
distinct coupling to heterotrimeric G proteins. The biological activities of S1P 
are based largely on the cellular actions of S1P on migration, adhesion, and
proliferation. Notably, S1P often exhibits receptor subtype-specific, bimodal
effects in these cellular actions. For example, S1P(1) mediates cell migration
toward S1P, that is, chemotaxis, via G(i) /Rac pathway whereas S1P(2) mediates
inhibition of migration toward a chemoattractant, that is, chemorepulsion, via
G(12/13) /Rho pathway, which induces Rac inhibition. In addition, S1P(1) mediates
stimulation of cell proliferation through the G(i) -mediated signaling pathways
including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and ERK whereas S1P(2)
mediates inhibition of cell proliferation through mechanisms involving G(12/13)
/Rho/Rho kinase/PTEN-dependent Akt inhibition. These differential effects of S1P 
receptor subtypes on migration and proliferation lead to bimodal regulation of
various biological responses. An observed biological response is likely
determined by an integrated outcome of the counteracting signals input by S1P
receptor subtypes. More recent studies identified the new intracellular targets
of S1P including the inflammatory signaling molecule TRAF2 and histone
deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. These interactions of S1P regulate NF-<U+03BA>B activity
and gene expression, respectively. Development of S1P receptor agonists and
antagonists with improved receptor subtype-selectivity, inhibitors, or modulators
of sphingolipid-metabolizing enzymes, and their optimal drug delivery system
provide novel therapeutic tactics.

Copyright © 2012 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 22674845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2013 Jan 20;18(3):239-49. doi: 10.1089/ars.2012.4703. Epub
2012 Jul 9.

Emerging role of protein-protein transnitrosylation in cell signaling pathways.

Nakamura T(1), Lipton SA.

Author information: 
(1)Del E. Webb Center for Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Research,
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.
tnakamura@sanfordburnham.org

SIGNIFICANCE: Protein S-nitrosylation, a covalent reaction of a nitric oxide (NO)
group with a critical protein thiol (or more properly thiolate anion), mediates
an important form of redox-related signaling as well as aberrant signaling in
disease states.
RECENT ADVANCES: A growing literature suggests that over 3000 proteins are
S-nitrosylated in cell systems. Our laboratory and several others have
demonstrated that protein S-nitrosylation can regulate protein function by
directly inhibiting catalytically active cysteines, by reacting with allosteric
sites, or via influencing protein-protein interaction. For example,
S-nitrosylation of critical cysteine thiols in protein-disulfide isomerase and in
parkin alters their activity, thus contributing to protein misfolding in
Parkinson's disease.
CRITICAL ISSUES: However, the mechanism by which specific protein S-nitrosylation
occurs in cell signaling pathways is less well investigated. Interestingly, the
recent discovery of protein-protein transnitrosylation reactions (transfer of an 
NO group from one protein to another) has revealed a unique mechanism whereby NO 
can S-nitrosylate a particular set of protein thiols, and represents a major
class of nitrosylating/denitrosylating enzymes in mammalian systems. In this
review, we will discuss recent evidence for transnitrosylation reactions between 
(i) hemoglobin/anion exchanger 1, (ii) thioredoxin/caspase-3, (iii) X-linked
inhibitor of apoptosis/caspase-3, (iv) GAPDH-HDAC2/SIRT1/DNA-PK, and (v)
Cdk5/dynamin related protein 1 (Drp1). This review also discusses experimental
techniques useful in characterizing protein-protein transnitrosylations.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: Elucidation of additional transnitrosylation cascades will
further our understanding of the enzymes that catalyze nitrosation, thereby
contributing to NO-mediated signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3518546
PMID: 22657837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Gastroenterology. 2012 Sep;143(3):811-20.e1-15. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2012.05.033. Epub 2012 May 26.

Histone deacetylases activate hepatocyte growth factor signaling by repressing
microRNA-449 in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Buurman R(1), Gürlevik E, Schäffer V, Eilers M, Sandbothe M, Kreipe H, Wilkens L,
Schlegelberger B, Kühnel F, Skawran B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Histone deacetylation regulates chromatin remodeling and
transcriptional down-regulation of specific genomic regions; it is altered in
many types of cancer cells. We searched for microRNAs (miRs) that are affected by
histone deacetylation and investigated the effects in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells.
METHODS: HCC cell lines (HepG2, HLE, HLF, and Huh7) and immortalized liver cell
lines (THLE-2 and THLE-3) were incubated with the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A. Differentially expressed messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and miRs were
identified by expression profiling. Small interfering RNAs were used to reduce
levels of histone deacetylases (HDAC)1-3, and HCC cell lines were transfected
with miR-449. We evaluated growth of xenograft tumors from modified cells in nude
mice. Cells were analyzed by immunoblot and luciferase reporter assays. We
analyzed HCC samples from 23 patients.
RESULTS: HDAC1-3 were up-regulated in HCC samples from patients. In cell lines,
inhibition of HDAC significantly increased levels of hsa-miR-449a. c-MET mRNA,
which encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase for hepatocyte growth factor, is a
target of miR-449. Incubation of HCC cells with trichostatin A or transfection
with miR-449 reduced expression of c-MET and phosphorylation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (downstream effectors of c-MET), increased
apoptosis, and reduced proliferation. Huh-7 cells transfected with miR-449 formed
tumors more slowly in mice than cells expressing control miRs. HCC samples from
patients had lower levels of miR-449 and higher levels of c-MET than human
reference.
CONCLUSIONS: In HCC cells, up-regulation of HDAC1-3 reduces expression of
miR-449. miR-449 binds c-MET mRNA to reduce its levels, promoting apoptosis and
reducing proliferation of liver cells. Expression of miR-449 slows growth of HCC 
xenograft tumors in mice; this miR might function as a tumor suppressor.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22641068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Aug;40(15):7291-302. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks452. Epub 2012
May 25.

Glucose depletion activates mmu-miR-466h-5p expression through oxidative stress
and inhibition of histone deacetylation.

Druz A(1), Betenbaugh M, Shiloach J.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Core Laboratory National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institute of Health Bldg 14A Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in the regulation of multiple cellular processes.
Changes of miRNA expression have been linked to the development of various
diseases including cancer, but the molecular events leading to these changes at
different physiological conditions are not well characterized. Here we examined
the intracellular events responsible for the miR-466h-5p activation in mouse
cells exposed to glucose deprivation. MiR-466h-5p is a member of the miR-297-669 
cluster located in intron 10 of Sfmbt2 gene on mouse chromosome 2 and has a
pro-apoptotic role. We showed that the time-dependant activation of miR-466h-5p, 
miR-669c and the Sfmbt2 gene followed the inhibition of histone deacetylation
caused by glucose deprivation-induced oxidative stress. This oxidative stress
causes the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and depletion of reduced
glutathione (GSH) that together inhibited histone deacetylases (HDACs) activity, 
reduced protein levels of HDAC2 and increased acetylation in miR-466h-5p promoter
region, which led to the activation of this miRNA. Based on this study and
previous work, we suggest a possible role of miR-466h-5p (and miR 297-669
cluster) in the cells during toxic metabolites accumulation. Improved
characterization of the molecular events that lead to the activation of
miR-466h-5p may provide a better understanding of the relation between cellular
environment and miRNA activation.

PMCID: PMC3424575
PMID: 22638581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Aug;25(4):286-92. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.05.003. Epub
2012 May 18.

Smoke exposure of human macrophages reduces HDAC3 activity, resulting in enhanced
inflammatory cytokine production.

Winkler AR(1), Nocka KN, Williams CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inflammation and Remodeling, BioTherapeutics Research and
Development, Pfizer, Inc., 200 Cambridge Park Dr., Cambridge, MA 02474, USA.
aaron.winkler@pfizer.com

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a debilitating condition
resulting from exposure to pollutants such as cigarette smoke. Pulmonary
macrophages secrete a plethora of inflammatory mediators that are increased in
the lungs of COPD patients, but whether this phenotype results directly from
smoke exposure remains unknown. Using an in vitro model for alveolar macrophages 
(AM) derived from human peripheral blood monocytes with granulocyte-macrophage
stimulating factor (GM-MØ), we analyzed the mechanistic connection between
cigarette smoke exposure and histone deacetylase (HDAC) regulation, hypothesized 
to be a contributing factor in COPD pathophysiology. Here we show that acute
smoke exposure inhibits HDAC enzymatic activity in GM-MØ. Analysis of mRNA and
total cellular proteins for expression of class I (1, 2, 3 and 8), class II (4,
5, 6, 7, 9, 10), and class IV (11) HDAC revealed no effect of smoke exposure,
whereas nuclear HDAC3 protein content was reduced. To better understand the
physiological significance of reduced HDAC3 activity, we utilized siRNA to
knockdown HDAC1, 2 and 3 individually. Interestingly, siRNA-mediated reduction of
HDAC3 resulted in increased production of IL8 and IL1ß in response to LPS
stimulation, while HDAC2 knockdown had no effect on either cytokine. Lower
nuclear content of HDAC3 in the context of equivalent total HDAC protein levels
following smoke exposure may reflect increased nuclear export of HDAC3, allowing 
increased nuclear factor kappa b (NF-<U+03BA>B ) driven cytokine expression that can
contribute to inflammation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22613758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 May;46(2):351-61.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors targeting HDAC3 and HDAC1 ameliorate
polyglutamine-elicited phenotypes in model systems of Huntington's disease.

Jia H(1), Pallos J, Jacques V, Lau A, Tang B, Cooper A, Syed A, Purcell J, Chen
Y, Sharma S, Sangrey GR, Darnell SB, Plasterer H, Sadri-Vakili G, Gottesfeld JM, 
Thompson LM, Rusche JR, Marsh JL, Thomas EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

We have previously demonstrated amelioration of Huntington's disease (HD)-related
phenotypes in R6/2 transgenic mice in response to treatment with the novel
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor 4b. Here we have measured the selectivity
profiles of 4b and related compounds against class I and class II HDACs and have 
tested their ability to restore altered expression of genes related to HD
pathology in mice and to rescue disease effects in cell culture and Drosophila
models of HD. R6/2 transgenic and wild-type (wt) mice received daily injections
of HDAC inhibitors for 3 days followed by real-time PCR analysis to detect
expression differences for 13 HD-related genes. We find that HDACi 4b and 136,
two compounds showing high potency for inhibiting HDAC3 were most effective in
reversing the expression of genes relevant to HD, including Ppp1r1b, which
encodes DARPP-32, a marker for medium spiny striatal neurons. In contrast,
compounds targeting HDAC1 were less effective at correcting gene expression
abnormalities in R6/2 transgenic mice, but did cause significant increases in the
expression of selected genes. An additional panel of 4b-related compounds was
tested in a Drosophila model of HD and in STHdhQ111 striatal cells to further
distinguish HDAC selectivity. Significant improvement in huntingtin-elicited
Drosophila eye neurodegeneration in the fly was observed in response to treatment
with compounds targeting human HDAC1 and/or HDAC3. In STHdhQ111 striatal cells,
the ability of HDAC inhibitors to improve huntingtin-elicited metabolic deficits 
correlated with the potency at inhibiting HDAC1 and HDAC3, although the IC50
values for HDAC1 inhibition were typically 10-fold higher than for inhibition of 
HDAC3. Assessment of HDAC protein localization in brain tissue by Western blot
analysis revealed accumulation of HDAC1 and HDAC3 in the nucleus of HD transgenic
mice compared to wt mice, with a concurrent decrease in cytoplasmic localization,
suggesting that these HDACs contribute to a repressive chromatin environment in
HD. No differences were detected in the localization of HDAC2, HDAC4 or HDAC7.
These results suggest that inhibition of HDACs 1 and 3 can relieve HD-like
phenotypes in model systems and that HDAC inhibitors targeting these isotypes
might show therapeutic benefit in human HD.

PMCID: PMC3528106
PMID: 22590724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Neurosci. 2012 May 9;32(19):6651-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4876-11.2012.

Differential modulation of the oligodendrocyte transcriptome by sonic hedgehog
and bone morphogenetic protein 4 via opposing effects on histone acetylation.

Wu M(1), Hernandez M, Shen S, Sabo JK, Kelkar D, Wang J, O'Leary R, Phillips GR, 
Cate HS, Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) into mature
oligodendrocytes is regulated by the interplay between extrinsic signals and
intrinsic epigenetic determinants. In this study, we analyze the effect that the 
extracellular ligands sonic hedgehog (Shh) and bone morphogenetic protein 4
(BMP4), have on histone acetylation and gene expression in cultured OPCs. Shh
treatment favored the progression toward oligodendrocytes by decreasing histone
acetylation and inducing peripheral chromatin condensation. BMP4 treatment, in
contrast, inhibited the progression toward oligodendrocytes and favored
astrogliogenesis by favoring global histone acetylation and retaining
euchromatin. Pharmacological treatment or silencing of histone deacetylase 1
(Hdac1) or histone deacetylase 2 (Hdac2) in OPCs did not affect BMP4-dependent
astrogliogenesis, while it prevented Shh-induced oligodendrocyte differentiation 
and favored the expression of astrocytic genes. Transcriptional profiling of
treated OPCs, revealed that BMP4-inhibition of oligodendrocyte differentiation
was accompanied by increased levels of Wnt (Tbx3) and Notch-target genes (Jag1,
Hes1, Hes5, Hey1, and Hey2), decreased recruitment of Hdac and increased histone 
acetylation at these loci. Similar upregulation of Notch-target genes and
increased histone acetylation were observed in the corpus callosum of mice
infused with BMP4 during cuprizone-induced demyelination. We conclude that Shh
and Bmp4 differentially regulate histone acetylation and chromatin structure in
OPCs and that BMP4 acts as a potent inducer of gene expression, including Notch
and Wnt target genes, thereby enhancing the crosstalk among signaling pathways
that are known to inhibit myelination and repair.

PMCID: PMC3412138
PMID: 22573687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Androl. 2012 Nov-Dec;33(6):1379-86. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.112.016584. Epub 2012 
May 3.

Hypoxia-induced deacetylation is required for tetraploid differentiation in
response to testicular ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury.

Hou W(1), Dong Y, Zhang J, Yin Z, Wen H, Xiong L, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xian, China.

Accumulated understanding of epigenetic modifications during ischemia-reperfusion
(IR) injury suggests that additional targeted approaches and novel mechanisms
that have not been explored in the reproductive system underlie the pathogenesis.
Here we show, with a standard murine model of testicular IR, ischemia-induced
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in the testis with concomitant reduction in
histone acetyl transferase activity in vivo. Pretreatment with chemical HDAC
inhibitors significantly induced apoptosis in tetraploid pachytene spermatocytes 
during ischemic insult and thereafter resulted in attenuated meiotic
differentiation. We also identified the distinct HDACs involved in primary
spermatocytes upon hypoxic stress. In vitro, elevated expression of HDAC2 was
physiologically associated with p53, a master regulator believed to be a guardian
of genome integrity during spermatogenesis. p53-mediated apoptosis was inhibited 
by deacetylation of p53 in differentiating pachytene spermatocytes in response to
ischemic stress. Overall, the current data suggest that hypoxia-induced
deacetylation may operate as an indispensible defensive mechanism for meiotic
differentiation during the ischemic period of IR testis, thus pointing to a novel
therapeutic target for future medical intervention.

PMID: 22556385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. EMBO Rep. 2012 Jun 29;13(7):631-7. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.60.

SUMOylation of Blimp-1 is critical for plasma cell differentiation.

Ying HY(1), Su ST, Hsu PH, Chang CC, Lin IY, Tseng YH, Tsai MD, Shih HM, Lin KI.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Transcriptional repressor B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1) is 
a master regulator of plasma cell differentiation. Here we show that Blimp-1 is
covalently modified by SUMO1 at lysine 816, a modification mediated by SUMO E3
ligase PIAS1. Mutation of Blimp-1 lysine 816 reduces transcriptional
repression--correlating with a reduced interaction with a histone deacetylase,
HDAC2--and impairs differentiation of antibody-secreting cells. Thus, the SUMO
pathway critically regulates Blimp-1 function during plasma cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3388782
PMID: 22555612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2012 May;9(2):47-51. doi: 10.1513/pats.201201-009MS.

Experimental therapeutics of Nrf2 as a target for prevention of bacterial
exacerbations in COPD.

Biswal S(1), Thimmulappa RK, Harvey CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. sbiswal@jhsph.edu

A growing body of evidence indicates that oxidative stress plays a central role
in the progression of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Chronic
oxidative stress caused by cigarette smoke generates damage-associated molecular 
patterns (DAMPs), such as oxidatively or nitrosatively modified proteins and
extracellular matrix fragments, which induce abnormal airway inflammation by
activating innate and adaptive immune responses. Furthermore, oxidative
stress-induced histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) inactivity is implicated in
amplifying inflammatory responses and corticosteroid resistance in COPD.
Oxidative stress also mediates disruption of innate immune defenses, which is
associated with acute exacerbation of COPD. Host defense transcription factor
Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) regulates a multifaceted
cytoprotective response to counteract oxidative stress-induced pathological
injuries. A decrease in Nrf2 signaling is associated with the progression of
diseases. Recent evidence indicates that targeting Nrf2 can be a novel therapy to
mitigate inflammation, improve innate antibacterial defenses, and restore
corticosteroid responses in patients with COPD.

PMCID: PMC3359107
PMID: 22550241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Aug;25(4):312-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.04.001. Epub 
2012 Apr 21.

Long-acting ß2 agonists and corticosteroids restore the reduction of histone
deacetylase activity and inhibit H2O2-induced mediator release from alveolar
macrophages.

Perng DW(1), Su KC, Chou KT, Wu YC, Chen CS, Hsiao YH, Tseng CM, Chen YH, Hsueh
TY, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC. dwperng@vghtpe.gov.tw

BACKGROUND: Treatment of COPD with a combination of long-acting ß(2) agonists and
corticosteroids is currently used worldwide. The mechanisms of the
anti-inflammatory effects and their associations with histone deacetylase (HDAC) 
activity remain unclear.
METHODS: Human alveolar macrophages were isolated and stimulated with H(2)O(2) in
the presence of varying concentrations of long-acting ß(2) agonists and
corticosteroids. Supernatants were collected for IL-8 and MMP-9 measurements.
Cell lysates were analyzed for HDAC (mainly HDAC1/HDAC2) activity. Quantitative
real-time PCR was performed to determine the levels of IL-8 and MMP-9 mRNA.
RESULTS: Both long-acting ß(2) agonists, salmeterol and formoterol, and
corticosteroids, fluticasone and budesonide, showed anti-inflammatory effects to 
a certain extent on H(2)O(2)-induced IL-8 and MMP-9 release in alveolar
macrophages. Combinations of long-acting ß(2) agonists and corticosteroids
exerted greater effects to suppress mediator release, and both transcription and 
translation of IL-8 and MMP-9 were inhibited. It seemed that the levels of IL-8
and MMP-9 after H(2)O(2) stimulation were inversely associated with the activity 
of HDAC. H(2)O(2) stimulation resulted in a significant decrease in HDAC activity
and was associated with an increase in mediator release. In contrast, treatment
with long-acting ß(2) agonists, corticosteroids or theophylline restored the
H(2)O(2)-induced decrease in HDAC activity and inhibited mediator release.
CONCLUSION: Combinations of long-acting ß(2) agonists and corticosteroids exerted
greater effects on the suppression of mediator release in relation to the
enhancement of HDAC activity. This supports at least in part the likely
contribution of anti-inflammatory effects of long-acting ß(2) agonists and
corticosteroids to the clinical benefits seen in COPD patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22546485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Theriogenology. 2012 Sep 1;78(4):784-92. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.03.026. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Changes in histone acetylation during oocyte meiotic maturation in the diabetic
mouse.

Ding L(1), Pan R, Huang X, Wang JX, Shen YT, Xu L, Zhang Y, Liu Y, He XQ, Yang
XJ, Qi ZQ, Wang HL.

Author information: 
(1)Organ Transplantation Institute, Xiamen University, Xiamen City, Fujian
Province, China.

Although there is considerable evidence that diabetes can adversely affect
meiosis in mammalian oocytes, acetylation status of oocytes in a diabetic
environment remains unclear. The objective was to determine acetylation or
deacetylation patterns (based on immunostaining) of H3K9, H3K14, H4K5, H4K8,
H4K12, and H4K16 sites at various stages during meiosis in murine oocytes from
control and diabetic mice. According to quantitative real time polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR), mean ± SEM relative expression of Gcn5 (1.70 ± 0.14 at metaphase
[M]I and 1.27 ± 0.01 at MII, respectively), Ep300 (1.74 ± 0.04 at MI and 1.80 ±
0.001 at MII), and Pcaf (2.01 ± 0.03 at MI and 1.41 ± 0.18 at MII) mRNA in
oocytes from diabetic mice were higher than those from controls (P < 0.05),
whereas there was no difference (P > 0.05) during the germinal vesicle (GV) stage
between the two groups (1.23 ± 0.04 for Gcn5, 0.82 ± 0.06 for Ep300, and 0.80 ±
0.07 for Pcaf). Conversely, relative mRNA expression concentrations of Hdac1,
Hdac2, Hdac3, Sirt1 and Sirt2 during the germinal vesicle stage were lower in
oocytes of diabetic mice (0.24 ± 0.03 for Hdac1, 0.11 ± 0.001 for Hdac2, 0.31 ±
0.03 for Hdac3, 0.28 ± 0.02 for Sirt1, and 0.55 ± 0.02 for Sirt2; P < 0.05).
Similarly, the expression concentrations of these genes at the MI stage were
lower in oocytes from diabetic mice (0.79 ± 0.12 for Hdac1, 0.72 ± 0.001 for
Hdac2, 0.02 ± 0.001 for Sirt1, and 0.84 ± 0.08 for Sirt2; P < 0.05). Their
expression concentrations at the MII stage were also lower in oocytes from
diabetic mice (0.46 ± 0.03 for Hdac1, 0.93 ± 0.01 for Hdac2, 0.56 ± 0.01 for
Hdac3, 0.01 ± 0.002 for Sirt1, and 0.84 ± 0.04 for Sirt2; P < 0.05). At the MI
stage, however, there was no difference in the expression of Hdac3 between the
two groups of oocytes (0.96 ± 0.03; P > 0.05). Taken together, diabetes altered
the intracellular histone modification system, which may have contributed to
changes in histone acetylation, and may be involved in the compromised maturation
rate of oocytes in diabetic humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22541329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2012;74(1):50-5. doi: 10.1159/000336409. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Elevated immunoreactivity against class I histone deacetylases in adenomyosis.

Liu X(1), Nie J, Guo SW.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University Shanghai College
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Adenomyosis is a common condition with a poorly understood
pathogenesis. Recent data suggest that it may be an epigenetic disease. This
study investigated the expression and localization of class I histone
deacetylases (HDACs) in women with and without adenomyosis.
METHODS: The ectopic and homologous eutopic endometrium of 50 women with
adenomyosis and the endometrium of 18 age- and menstrual phase-matched women
without adenomyosis were used for immunohistochemical analysis. Tissue sections
were immunostained with HDAC1, -2, and -3. Microscopic evaluation to assess the
presence and localization of HDAC1-3 throughout the menstrual cycle in both
eutopic endometrial and endometriotic tissues of women with adenomyosis was
performed and compared with the normal endometrium.
RESULTS: We found that, compared with the normal endometrium, immunoreactivity
against HDAC1 and HDAC3 was higher in both the eutopic and the ectopic
endometrium. Increased HDAC2 in the eutopic endometrium was found to be
associated with the severity of dysmenorrhea.
CONCLUSION: Given the potential wide-ranging effect of histone deacetylation on
gene expression, these findings suggest that HDACs may be involved in
adenomyosis. They also suggest the possibility that HDAC2 may be involved in
dysmenorrhea and its severity and that HDACs may be potential therapeutic targets
in adenomyosis.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22539030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Brain Struct Funct. 2013 Mar;218(2):563-73. doi: 10.1007/s00429-012-0416-3. Epub 
2012 Apr 25.

Regional and cell-type specific distribution of HDAC2 in the adult mouse brain.

Yao ZG(1), Zhang L, Huang L, Zhu H, Liu Y, Ma CM, Sheng SL, Qin C.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Medical Center, Peking Union Medical College (PUMC) and Institute 
of Laboratory Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Science (CAMS),
Panjiayuan Nanli NO. 5, Beijing, 100021, China.

The effects of epigenetics on brain functions are not completely understood, but 
histone deacetylases (HDACs) are known to affect brain function and dysfunction
by mediating the acetylation status of target proteins, thereby affecting gene
expression. The current study used immunochemistry to illuminate the regional
distribution of one member of the HDAC family, HDAC2, in the C57BL/6J mouse
brain. Our data show that HDAC2 is ubiquitously expressed throughout the mouse
brain and is localized primarily within the cell nucleus. Using
double-immunofluorescence, we demonstrated HDAC2 expression in neuronal cells,
including cholinergic, serotonergic and catecholaminergic neurons, as well as
postsynaptic glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons. HDAC2 was also observed in
oligodendrocytes, but not in astrocytes or microglia. These detailed
immunological studies illuminate the distribution of HDAC2 throughout the mouse
brain and will facilitate investigation of the roles of HDAC2 in brain function
and neurological disorders.

PMID: 22532304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. EMBO J. 2012 Jun 13;31(12):2810-23. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.112. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

A transcriptional repressor co-regulatory network governing androgen response in 
prostate cancers.

Chng KR(1), Chang CW, Tan SK, Yang C, Hong SZ, Sng NY, Cheung E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR,
Singapore.

Transcriptional corepressors are frequently aberrantly over-expressed in prostate
cancers. However, their crosstalk with the Androgen receptor (AR), a key player
in prostate cancer development, is unclear. Using ChIP-Seq, we generated
extensive global binding maps of AR, ERG, and commonly over-expressed
transcriptional corepressors including HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and EZH2 in prostate 
cancer cells. Surprisingly, our results revealed that ERG, HDACs, and EZH2 are
directly involved in androgen-regulated transcription and wired into an AR
centric transcriptional network via a spectrum of distal enhancers and/or
proximal promoters. Moreover, we showed that similar to ERG, these corepressors
function to mediate repression of AR-induced transcription including cytoskeletal
genes that promote epithelial differentiation and inhibit metastasis.
Specifically, we demonstrated that the direct suppression of Vinculin expression 
by ERG, EZH2, and HDACs leads to enhanced invasiveness of prostate cancer cells. 
Taken together, our results highlight a novel mechanism by which, ERG working
together with oncogenic corepressors including HDACs and the polycomb protein,
EZH2, could impede epithelial differentiation and contribute to prostate cancer
progression, through directly modulating the transcriptional output of AR.

PMCID: PMC3380210
PMID: 22531786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2012 Jun;67(7):741-6. doi: 10.1093/gerona/gls110. 
Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Mechanisms of age-related cognitive change and targets for intervention:
epigenetics.

Kosik KS(1), Rapp PR, Raz N, Small SA, Sweatt JD, Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute and Department of Molecular, Cellular and
Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression plays an important role in learning and 
memory, mediating the influence of experience on critical mechanisms of
plasticity. Speakers in the opening session of the Summit reviewed research on
epigenetic contributions to age-related cognitive decline and discussed
strategies for the development of interventions targeting epigenetic mechanisms. 
The presentations focused on experience-dependent DNA methylation, the regulatory
role of microRNAs, histone deacetylases as potential therapeutic targets, and
strategies for exploring epigenetic contributions to the aging of brain and
cognition. This session established useful mileposts for gaging progress in this 
rapidly advancing area of research.

PMCID: PMC4009730
PMID: 22522509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Comput Biol Med. 2012 Jun;42(6):697-705. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2012.04.001.
Epub 2012 Apr 21.

Computational identification of novel histone deacetylase inhibitors by docking
based QSAR.

Nair SB(1), Teli MK, Pradeep H, Rajanikant GK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, National Institute of Technology Calicut, Calicut
673601, Kerala, India.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that modify chromatin structure and
contribute to aberrant gene expression in cancer. A series compounds with
well-assigned HDAC inhibitory activity was used for docking based 3D-QSAR
analysis. The 3D-QSAR acquired had excellent correlation coefficient value
(q2=0.753) and high Fisher ratio (F=300.2). A validated pharmacophore model
(AAAPR) was employed for virtual screening. After manual selection, molecular
docking and further refinement, six compounds with good absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion (ADME) properties were selected as potential HDAC
inhibitors. Further, the molecular interactions of these inhibitors with the HDAC
active site residues were discussed in detail.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22521374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Sep;167(3):523-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11007.x.
Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Aberrant epigenetic modifications in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
patients with pemphigus vulgaris.

Zhao M(1), Huang W, Zhang Q, Gao F, Wang L, Zhang G, Su Y, Xiao R, Zhang J, Tang 
M, Cheng W, Tan Y, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Department of Dermatology, Second
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 139 Renmin Middle Road, Changsha,
Hunan 410011, China.

BACKGROUND: Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is an autoimmune blistering disorder with a
complex aetiology involving genetic and environmental factors, most of which
remain unknown. It has become increasingly evident that aberrant epigenetic
modifications are associated with the occurrence and development of autoimmune
skin disorders. However, it is not known whether epigenetic modifications play a 
role in the development of PV.
OBJECTIVES: To analyse DNA methylation and histone modification patterns in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with PV.
METHODS: PBMC samples were isolated from 24 patients with PV and 20 healthy
controls. Skin lesion biopsies and control skin specimens were obtained from 25
patients with PV and 15 healthy controls. Global DNA methylcytosine levels, as
well as histone acetylation and methylation levels, were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. mRNA expression levels were determined using
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Genomic DNA methylation in PBMCs of patients with PV was increased
relative to controls. DNMT1 expression levels were significantly higher in PV
PBMCs than in controls. MBD3 expression was repressed in PV PBMCs compared with
healthy controls. Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K27 methylation
levels were significantly decreased in patient PBMCs compared with healthy
controls. These changes were accompanied by increased HDAC1, HDAC2 and SUV39H2
and decreased SUV39H1 and EZH2 in PV PBMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant DNA methylation and histone modifications occur in PBMCs of
patients with PV, possibly due to the deregulation of epigenetic modifier genes. 
These changes may contribute to the pathological immune responses in PV.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 22512277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jul 15;125(Pt 14):3320-32. doi: 10.1242/jcs.095125. Epub 2012
Apr 14.

ARNT controls the expression of epidermal differentiation genes through HDAC- and
EGFR-dependent pathways.

Robertson ED(1), Weir L, Romanowska M, Leigh IM, Panteleyev AA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Division of Medical Sciences,
College of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing, Ninewells Hospital, University of
Dundee, UK.

Previously we showed that spatial and developmental modulation of ARNT (HIF1ß)
expression in mouse epidermis is essential for maintenance of keratinocyte
differentiation, proper formation of the barrier and normal desquamation. Here,
using lentiviral suppression or induction of ARNT in TERT-immortalized (N-TERT)
and HaCaT cells we assessed the nature and mechanisms of ARNT involvement in
control of differentiation in human epidermal keratinocytes. ARNT depletion did
not affect the levels of basal keratins K5 and K14, but significantly induced
expression of several key differentiation markers (an effect abolished by EGF
supplementation). Furthermore, ARNT deficiency resulted in the downregulation of 
amphiregulin (AREG) - the most highly expressed EGFR ligand in human
keratinocytes - whereas upregulation of ARNT showed the opposite. In
ARNT-deficient monolayer cultures and 3D epidermal equivalents, the
downregulation of AREG was concurrent with a decline of EGFR and ERK1/2
phosphorylation. TSA, a potent suppressor of HDAC activity, abolished the effects
of ARNT deficiency, implying a role for HDACs in ARNT-dependent modulation of the
AREG-EGFR pathway and downstream epidermal genes. Total HDAC activity was
significantly increased in ARNT-depleted cells and decreased with ARNT
overexpression. ARNT-dependent shifts in HDAC activity were specifically
attributed to significant changes in the levels of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3
proteins (but not mRNA) in both monolayer and 3D cultures. Collectively, our
results suggest that ARNT controls AREG expression and the downstream EGFR-ERK
pathway in keratinocytes, at least in part, by modulating HDAC activity. This
novel regulatory pathway targeting advanced stages of epidermal differentiation
might have important implications for skin pathology such as psoriasis, atopic
dermatitis and cancer.

PMID: 22505606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;4(5):284-93. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjs013. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

Dynamically regulated sumoylation of HDAC2 controls p53 deacetylation and
restricts apoptosis following genotoxic stress.

Brandl A(1), Wagner T, Uhlig KM, Knauer SK, Stauber RH, Melchior F, Schneider G, 
Heinzel T, Krämer OH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Institute for Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Department of Biochemistry, Friedrich Schiller University of Jena,
Hans-Knöll-Straße 2, 07745 Jena, Germany.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is relevant for homeostasis and plays a critical
role in gastrointestinal cancers. Here, we report that post-translational
modification of endogenous HDAC2 with small ubiquitin-related modifier 1 (SUMO1) 
is a new regulatory switch for the tumor suppressor p53. Sumoylation of HDAC2 at 
lysine 462 allows binding of HDAC2 to p53. Moreover, sumoylated HDAC2 is a
previously not recognized biologically relevant site-specific deacetylase for
p53. Deacetylation of p53 at lysine 320 by sumoylated HDAC2 blocks recruitment of
p53 into promoter-associated complexes and p53-dependent expression of genes for 
cell cycle control and apoptosis. Thereby, catalytically active sumoylated HDAC2 
restricts p53 functions and attenuates DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Genotoxic
stress evokes desumoylation of HDAC2, enabling p53-dependent gene expression. Our
data show a new molecular mechanism involving a dynamically controlled
HDAC2-sumoylation/p53-acetylation switch that regulates cell fate decisions
following genotoxic stress.

PMID: 22493095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jun;113(6):2167-77. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24090.

HDAC2 overexpression confers oncogenic potential to human lung cancer cells by
deregulating expression of apoptosis and cell cycle proteins.

Jung KH(1), Noh JH, Kim JK, Eun JW, Bae HJ, Xie HJ, Chang YG, Kim MG, Park H, Lee
JY, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Functional RNomics Research
Center, The Catholic University of Korea, Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is crucial for embryonic development, affects
cytokine signaling relevant for immune responses, and is often significantly
overexpressed in solid tumors, but little is known of its role in human lung
cancer. In this study, we demonstrated the aberrant expression of HDAC2 in lung
cancer tissues and investigated oncogenic properties of HDAC2 in human lung
cancer cell lines. HDAC2 inactivation resulted in regression of tumor cell growth
and activation of cellular apoptosis via p53 and Bax activation and Bcl2
suppression. In cell cycle regulation, HDAC2 inactivation caused induction of
p21WAF1/CIP1 expression, and simultaneously suppressed the expressions of cyclin 
E2, cyclin D1, and CDK2, respectively. Consequently, this led to the
hypophosphorylation of pRb protein in G1/S transition and thereby inactivated
E2F/DP1 target gene transcriptions of A549 cells. In addition, we demonstrated
that HDAC2 directly regulated p21WAF1/CIP1 expression in a p53-independent
manner. However, HDAC1 was not related to p21WAF1/CIP1 expression and
tumorigenesis of lung cancer. Lastly, we observed that sustained-suppression of
HDAC2 in A549 lung cancer cells attenuated in vitro tumorigenic properties and in
vivo tumor growth of the mouse xenograft model. Taken together, we suggest that
the aberrant regulation of HDAC2 and its epigenetic regulation of gene
transcription in apoptosis and cell cycle components play an important role in
the development of lung cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22492270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Pancreatology. 2012 Mar-Apr;12(2):146-55. doi: 10.1016/j.pan.2012.02.013. Epub
2012 Feb 25.

HDAC gene expression in pancreatic tumor cell lines following treatment with the 
HDAC inhibitors panobinostat (LBH589) and trichostatine (TSA).

Mehdi O(1), Françoise S, Sofia CL, Urs G, Kevin Z, Bernard S, Igor S, Anabela CD,
Dominique L, Eric M, Ali O.

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, UMR 911, Campus Santé Timone, Marseille F-13005, France.
mehdi.ouaissi@mail.ap-hm.fr

BACKGROUND: In this study, the effect of LBH589 and trichostatin (TSA), a
standard histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) toward the growth of pancreatic
cancer cell lines was studied. Thus, we examined for the first time, the HDAC
family gene expression levels before and after drug treatment.
METHODS: Several human pancreatic cancer cell lines (Panc-1, BxPC-3, SOJ-6) and a
normal human pancreatic duct immortalized epithelial cell line (HPDE/E6E7) were
used as target cells. The cell growth was measured by MTT assay, cell cycle
alteration, membrane phosphatidylserine exposure, DNA fragmentation,
mitochondrial membrane potential loss, RT-PCR and Western blots were done using
standard methods. The effect of drugs on tumor growth in vivo was studied using
subcutaneous xenograft model.
RESULTS: Except in the case of certain HDAC gene/tumor cell line couples:
(SIRT1/HPDE-SOJ6/TSA- or LBH589-treated cells; LBH589-treated Panc-1 Cells;
HDAC2/BxPC-3/LBH589-treated cells or TSA-treated SOJ-6-1 cells), there were no
major significant changes of HDACs genes transcription in cells upon drug
treatment. However, significant variation in HDACs and SIRTs protein expression
levels could be seen among individual cell samples. The in vivo results showed
that LBH589 formulation exhibited similar tumor reduction efficacy as the
commercial drug gemcitabine.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that LBH589 induced the death of pancreatic
tumor cell by apoptosis. In line with its in vitro activity, LBH589 achieved a
significant reduction in tumor growth in BxPC-3 pancreatic tumor cell line
subcutaneous xenograft mouse model. Furthermore, exploring the impact of LBH589
on HDACs encoding genes expression revealed for the first time that some of them,
depending on the cell line considered, seem to be regulated during translation.

Copyright © 2012 IAP and EPC. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22487525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034236. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Methamphetamine causes differential alterations in gene expression and patterns
of histone acetylation/hypoacetylation in the rat nucleus accumbens.

Martin TA(1), Jayanthi S, McCoy MT, Brannock C, Ladenheim B, Garrett T, Lehrmann 
E, Becker KG, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Methamphetamine (METH) addiction is associated with several neuropsychiatric
symptoms. Little is known about the effects of METH on gene expression and
epigenetic modifications in the rat nucleus accumbens (NAC). Our study
investigated the effects of a non-toxic METH injection (20 mg/kg) on gene
expression, histone acetylation, and the expression of the histone
acetyltransferase (HAT), ATF2, and of the histone deacetylases (HDACs), HDAC1 and
HDAC2, in that structure. Microarray analyses done at 1, 8, 16 and 24 hrs after
the METH injection identified METH-induced changes in the expression of genes
previously implicated in the acute and longterm effects of psychostimulants,
including immediate early genes and corticotropin-releasing factor (Crf). In
contrast, the METH injection caused time-dependent decreases in the expression of
other genes including Npas4 and cholecystokinin (Cck). Pathway analyses showed
that genes with altered expression participated in behavioral performance,
cell-to-cell signaling, and regulation of gene expression. PCR analyses confirmed
the changes in the expression of c-fos, fosB, Crf, Cck, and Npas4 transcripts. To
determine if the METH injection caused post-translational changes in histone
markers, we used western blot analyses and identified METH-mediated decreases in 
histone H3 acetylated at lysine 9 (H3K9ac) and lysine 18 (H3K18ac) in nuclear
sub-fractions. In contrast, the METH injection caused time-dependent increases in
acetylated H4K5 and H4K8. The changes in histone acetylation were accompanied by 
decreased expression of HDAC1 but increased expression of HDAC2 protein levels.
The histone acetyltransferase, ATF2, showed significant METH-induced increased in
protein expression. These results suggest that METH-induced alterations in global
gene expression seen in rat NAC might be related, in part, to METH-induced
changes in histone acetylation secondary to changes in HAT and HDAC expression.
The causal role that HATs and HDACs might play in METH-induced gene expression
needs to be investigated further.

PMCID: PMC3314616
PMID: 22470541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Gastroenterology. 2012 Jul;143(1):99-109.e10. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.03.035. 
Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat sensitizes gastric cancer cells to
anthracyclines via induction of CITED2.

Regel I(1), Merkl L, Friedrich T, Burgermeister E, Zimmermann W, Einwächter H,
Herrmann K, Langer R, Röcken C, Hofheinz R, Schmid R, Ebert MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Universität München, München, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Chemotherapy modestly prolongs survival of patients with
advanced gastric cancer, but strategies are needed to increase its efficacy.
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors modify chromatin and can block cancer cell 
proliferation and promote apoptosis.
METHODS: Gastric cancer cell lines were incubated with the HDAC inhibitor LBH589 
(Panobinostat, Novartis, Germany); levels of proliferation, apoptosis, histone
acetylation, and gene expression were determined. We identified factors
downstream of HDAC that regulated chemoresistance. The effects of combination
chemotherapy of HDAC inhibitors and anthracyclines were studied in CEA424/SV40
T-antigen (CEA/Tag) transgenic mice, which develop gastric tumors. We analyzed
gastric tumor samples from patients using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: HDAC2 was expressed in human gastric cancer cell lines and tumor
samples, as well as in gastric tumors from CEA/Tag mice, compared with
non-neoplastic gastric tissue. LBH589 inhibited proliferation of cancer cells in 
vitro. LBH589 down-regulated expression of genes that mediate anthracycline
resistance by activating expression of Cbp/p300-interacting transactivator, with 
Glu/Asp-rich carboxy-terminal domain 2 (CITED2), a gene that mediates sensitivity
to chemotherapeutics. Pre-incubation of cells with an HDAC inhibitor and
overexpression of CITED2-sensitized gastric cell lines to anthracycline-mediated 
cell death. In CEA/Tag mice, LBH589 induced tumor-cell expression of CITED2 and
increased the efficacy of anthracycline to reduce tumor growth. Levels of CITED2 
were increased in gastric tumor samples from patients who had complete responses 
to epirubicin.
CONCLUSIONS: The HDAC inhibitor LBH589 can overcome the resistance of mouse
gastric cancer cells to anthracyclines by inducing expression of CITED2. Levels
of CITED2 in gastric tumors correlate with patients' response to epirubicin.
LBH589 might be used to increase the response of patients to anthracyclines.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22465428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Eur J Med Chem. 2012 Jun;52:111-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2012.03.009. Epub 2012 
Mar 15.

A novel series of l-2-benzyloxycarbonylamino-8-(2-pyridyl)-disulfidyloctanoic
acid derivatives as histone deacetylase inhibitors: design, synthesis and
molecular modeling study.

Huang D(1), Li X, Wei Y, Xiu Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian University of Technology,
No.2 Linggong Road, Dalian 116024, China.

Histone deacetylases inhibitors (HDACIs) have become an attractive class of
anticancer agents. In order to find some novel potent HDACIs, we designed and
synthesized a series of
l-2-benzyloxycarbonylamino-8-(2-pyridyl)-disulfidyloctanoic acid derivatives. All
compounds exhibited potent HDAC-inhibitory activity, and two of them had similar 
potency to TSA. The introduction of 2-amino-4-phenylthiazole or
9-methyleneoxy-fluorenyl group at the surface recognize domain of these HDACIs
could greatly increase their HDAC-inhibitory activity. Molecular modeling studies
indicated that coordination of the zinc ion by these inhibitors, and formation of
hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interaction between inhibitors and HDACs were
essential for the HDAC-inhibitory activities of these inhibitors. Asp181, Asp269,
Leu276 and Tyr308 in the active site of HDAC2 gave favorable contributions for
binding with all compounds.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22465091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Med Chem. 2012 Apr 12;55(7):3066-75. doi: 10.1021/jm201496g. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Discovery and extensive in vitro evaluations of NK-HDAC-1: a chiral histone
deacetylase inhibitor as a promising lead.

Hou J(1), Li Z, Fang Q, Feng C, Zhang H, Guo W, Wang H, Gu G, Tian Y, Liu P, Liu 
R, Lin J, Shi YK, Yin Z, Shen J, Wang PG.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin,China.

Herein, further SAR studies of lead compound NSC746457 (Shen, J.; Woodward, R.;
Kedenburg, J. P.; Liu, X. W.; Chen, M.; Fang, L. Y.; Sun; D. X.; Wang. P. G. J.
Med. Chem. 2008, 51, 7417-7427) were performed, including the replacement of the 
trans-styryl moiety with a 2-substituted benzo-hetero aromatic ring and the
introduction of a substituent onto the central methylene carbon. A promising
chiral lead,
S-(E)-3-(1-(1-(benzo[d]oxazol-2-yl)-2-methylpropyl)-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)-N-hydr
oxyacrylamide (12, NK-HDAC-1), was discovered and showed about 1 order of
magnitude more potency than SAHA in both enzymatic and cellular assays. For the
in vitro safety tests, NK-HDAC-1 was far less toxic to nontransformed cells than 
tumor cells and showed no significant inhibition activity against CYP-3A4. The
pharmaceutical properties (LogD, solubility, liver micrsomal stability (t1/2),
plasma stability (t1/2), and apparent permeability) strongly suggested that
NK-HDAC-1 might be superior to SAHA in bioavailability and in vivo half-life.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22435669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 May;13(1):15-22. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2012.03.001.
Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Baicalin is anti-inflammatory in cigarette smoke-induced inflammatory models in
vivo and in vitro: A possible role for HDAC2 activity.

Li L(1), Bao H, Wu J, Duan X, Liu B, Sun J, Gong W, Lv Y, Zhang H, Luo Q, Wu X,
Dong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 12
Middle Urumqi Road, Shanghai, China.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic inflammatory disease
characterized by airway obstruction and progressive lung inflammation, which is
insensitive to corticosteroids therapies. In this study, we investigated the
mechanism underlying the attenuation of cigarette smoke (CS)-induced respiratory 
inflammation by baicalin, a flavonoid compound isolated from the root of
Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi, in vivo and in vitro. In vivo, mice were exposed 
to smoke of 15 cigarettes for 1 h/day, 6 days/week for 3 months and dosed with
baicalin (25, 50 and 100mg/kg) or dexamethasone (1mg/kg). In vitro, A549 cells
were incubated with baicalin (10, 50 and 100 µM) or dexamethasone (10(-12),
10(-10), 10(-8) and 10(-6)M) followed by treatments with cigarette smoke extract 
(CSE, 2.5 and 5%), or TNF-a (10 ng/ml), or trichostatin A (TSA, 100 ng/ml). We
found that baicalin significantly protected pulmonary function and attenuated
CS-induced inflammatory response by decreasing inflammatory cells and production 
of TNF-a, IL-8 and MMP-9. This result was not found in the group treated with
dexamethasone. Baicalin also showed efficacy in enhancing histone deacetylase
(HDAC)2 activity and protein expression, however, it did not affect HDAC2 mRNA.
Further studies revealed that baicalin inhibited HDAC2 phosphorylation,
suggesting that it may directly affect the protein structure and effect by
modification at post-translational level. Together these results suggest that
baicalin has anti-inflammatory effects in cigarette smoke induced inflammatory
models in mice and A549 cells, possibly achieved by modulating HDAC2.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22421405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Epigenetics. 2012 Apr;7(4):390-9. doi: 10.4161/epi.19373. Epub 2012 Apr 1.

CD1d induction in solid tumor cells by histone deacetylase inhibitors through
inhibition of HDAC1/2 and activation of Sp1.

Yang PM(1), Lin PJ, Chen CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

CD1d is a MHC class-like molecule that presents glycolipids to natural killer T
(NKT) cells, then regulates innate and adaptive immunity. The regulation of CD1d 
gene expression in solid tumors is still largely unknown. Gene expression can be 
epigenetically regulated by DNA methylation and histone acetylation. We found
that histone deacetylase inhibitors, trichostatin A (TSA) and suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA), induced CD1d gene expression in human (A549 and NCI-H292)
and mouse (TC-1 and B16/F0) cancer cells. Simultaneous knockdown of HDAC1 and 2
induced CD1d gene expression. Sp1 inhibitor mitramycin A (MTM) blocked TSA- and
SAHA-induced CD1d mRNA expression and Sp1 luciferase activity. Co-transfection of
GAL4-Sp1 and Fc-luciferase reporters demonstrated that TSA and SAHA induced Sp1
luciferase reporter activity by enhancing Sp1 transactivation activity. The
binding of Sp1 to CD1d promoter and histone H3 acetylation on Sp1 sites were
increased by TSA and SAHA. These results indicate that TSA and SAHA could
up-regulate CD1d expression in tumor cells through inhibition of HDAC1/2 and
activation of Sp1.

PMCID: PMC3368821
PMID: 22419072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 4;287(19):15622-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.315861. Epub 2012
Mar 13.

Leucine zipper domain is required for Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
(KSHV) K-bZIP protein to interact with histone deacetylase and is important for
KSHV replication.

Martínez FP(1), Tang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Research Centers in Minority Institutions (RCMI)
Program, Ponce School of Medicine, Ponce, Puerto Rico.

The Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV; or human herpesvirus-8)-encoded 
protein called K-bZIP (also named K8) was found to be multifunctional. In this
study, we discovered that K-bZIP interacts with histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1/2 in
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-stimulated BCBL-1 lymphocyte cells. K-bZIP
appears to repress HDAC activity through this interaction, which we determined to
be independent of K-bZIP SUMOylation. We dissected the domains of K-bZIP and
found that the leucine zipper (LZ) domain is essential for the interaction of
K-bZIP and HDAC. In addition, we constructed a KSHV bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) with LZ domain-deleted K-bZIP (KSHVdLZ) and transfected this
mutated KSHV BAC DNA into HEK 293T cells. As a result, it was consistently found 
that K-bZIP without its LZ domain failed to interact with HDAC2. We also showed
that the interaction between K-bZIP and HDAC is necessary for the inhibition of
the lytic gene promoters (ORF50 and OriLyt) of KSHV by K-bZIP. Furthermore, we
found that the LZ domain is also important for the interaction of K-bZIP with the
promoters of ORF50 and OriLyt. Most interestingly, although it was found to have 
suppressive effects on the promoters of ORF50 and OriLyt, KSHVdLZ replicates at a
significantly lower level than its BAC-derived revertant (KSHVdLZRev) or KSHVWT
(BAC36) in HEK 293T cells. The defectiveness of KSHVdLZ replication can be
partially rescued by siRNA against HDAC2. Our results suggest that the function
of K-bZIP interaction with HDAC is two-layered. 1) K-bZIP inhibits HDAC activity 
generally so that KSHVdLZ replicates at a lower level than does KSHVWT. 2) K-bZIP
can recruit HDAC to the promoters of OriLyt and ORF50 through interaction with
HDAC for K-bZIP to have a temporary repressive effect on the two promoters.

PMCID: PMC3346108
PMID: 22416134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Mar 13;9:51. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-51.

Acetate supplementation modulates brain histone acetylation and decreases
interleukin-1ß expression in a rat model of neuroinflammation.

Soliman ML(1), Smith MD, Houdek HM, Rosenberger TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Therapeutics, University of North
Dakota School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Grand Forks, North Dakota 58203,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-term acetate supplementation reduces neuroglial activation and
cholinergic cell loss in a rat model of lipopolysaccharide-induced
neuroinflammation. Additionally, a single dose of glyceryl triacetate, used to
induce acetate supplementation, increases histone H3 and H4 acetylation and
inhibits histone deacetylase activity and histone deacetylase-2 expression in
normal rat brain. Here, we propose that the therapeutic effect of acetate in
reducing neuroglial activation is due to a reversal of lipopolysaccharide-induced
changes in histone acetylation and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression.
METHODS: In this study, we examined the effect of a 28-day-dosing regimen of
glyceryl triacetate, to induce acetate supplementation, on brain histone
acetylation and interleukin-1ß expression in a rat model of
lipopolysaccharide-induced neuroinflammation. The effect was analyzed using
Western blot analysis, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and
enzymic histone deacetylase and histone acetyltransferase assays. Statistical
analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance, parametric or
nonparametric when appropriate, followed by Tukey's or Dunn's post-hoc test,
respectively.
RESULTS: We found that long-term acetate supplementation increased the proportion
of brain histone H3 acetylated at lysine 9 (H3K9), histone H4 acetylated at
lysine 8 and histone H4 acetylated at lysine 16. However, unlike a single dose of
glyceryl triacetate, long-term treatment increased histone acetyltransferase
activity and had no effect on histone deacetylase activity, with variable effects
on brain histone deacetylase class I and II expression. In agreement with this
hypothesis, neuroinflammation reduced the proportion of brain H3K9 acetylation by
50%, which was effectively reversed with acetate supplementation. Further, in
rats subjected to lipopolysaccharide-induced neuroinflammation, the
pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1ß protein and mRNA levels were increased
by 1.3- and 10-fold, respectively, and acetate supplementation reduced this
expression to control levels.
CONCLUSION: Based on these results, we conclude that dietary acetate
supplementation attenuates neuroglial activation by effectively reducing
pro-inflammatory cytokine expression by a mechanism that may involve a distinct
site-specific pattern of histone acetylation and histone deacetylase expression
in the brain.

PMCID: PMC3317831
PMID: 22413888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Neurosci. 2012 Feb 15;32(7):2344-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5819-11.2012.

Hippocampal histone acetylation regulates object recognition and the
estradiol-induced enhancement of object recognition.

Zhao Z(1), Fan L, Fortress AM, Boulware MI, Frick KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Histone acetylation has recently been implicated in learning and memory
processes, yet necessity of histone acetylation for such processes has not been
demonstrated using pharmacological inhibitors of histone acetyltransferases
(HATs). As such, the present study tested whether garcinol, a potent HAT
inhibitor in vitro, could impair hippocampal memory consolidation and block the
memory-enhancing effects of the modulatory hormone 17ß-estradiol E2. We first
showed that bilateral infusion of garcinol (0.1, 1, or 10 µg/side) into the
dorsal hippocampus (DH) immediately after training impaired object recognition
memory consolidation in ovariectomized female mice. A behaviorally effective dose
of garcinol (10 µg/side) also significantly decreased DH HAT activity. We next
examined whether DH infusion of a behaviorally subeffective dose of garcinol (1
ng/side) could block the effects of DH E2 infusion on object recognition and
epigenetic processes. Immediately after training, ovariectomized female mice
received bilateral DH infusions of vehicle, E2 (5 µg/side), garcinol (1 ng/side),
or E2 plus garcinol. Forty-eight hours later, garcinol blocked the
memory-enhancing effects of E2. Garcinol also reversed the E2-induced increase in
DH histone H3 acetylation, HAT activity, and levels of the de novo
methyltransferase DNMT3B, as well as the E2-induced decrease in levels of the
memory repressor protein histone deacetylase 2. Collectively, these findings
suggest that histone acetylation is critical for object recognition memory
consolidation and the beneficial effects of E2 on object recognition.
Importantly, this work demonstrates that the role of histone acetylation in
memory processes can be studied using a HAT inhibitor.

PMCID: PMC3401048
PMID: 22396409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nature. 2012 Feb 29;483(7388):222-6. doi: 10.1038/nature10849.

An epigenetic blockade of cognitive functions in the neurodegenerating brain.

Gräff J(1), Rei D, Guan JS, Wang WY, Seo J, Hennig KM, Nieland TJ, Fass DM, Kao
PF, Kahn M, Su SC, Samiei A, Joseph N, Haggarty SJ, Delalle I, Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, 
USA.

Cognitive decline is a debilitating feature of most neurodegenerative diseases of
the central nervous system, including Alzheimer's disease. The causes leading to 
such impairment are only poorly understood and effective treatments are slow to
emerge. Here we show that cognitive capacities in the neurodegenerating brain are
constrained by an epigenetic blockade of gene transcription that is potentially
reversible. This blockade is mediated by histone deacetylase 2, which is
increased by Alzheimer's-disease-related neurotoxic insults in vitro, in two
mouse models of neurodegeneration and in patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Histone deacetylase 2 associates with and reduces the histone acetylation of
genes important for learning and memory, which show a concomitant decrease in
expression. Importantly, reversing the build-up of histone deacetylase 2 by
short-hairpin-RNA-mediated knockdown unlocks the repression of these genes,
reinstates structural and synaptic plasticity, and abolishes
neurodegeneration-associated memory impairments. These findings advocate for the 
development of selective inhibitors of histone deacetylase 2 and suggest that
cognitive capacities following neurodegeneration are not entirely lost, but
merely impaired by this epigenetic blockade.

PMCID: PMC3498952
PMID: 22388814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Reprod Sci. 2012 May;19(5):483-92. doi: 10.1177/1933719111432870. Epub 2012 Feb
16.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 are differentially expressed in endometriosis.

Colón-Díaz M(1), Báez-Vega P, García M, Ruiz A, Monteiro JB, Fourquet J, Bayona
M, Alvarez-Garriga C, Achille A, Seto E, Flores I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ponce School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Ponce, PR 00731, USA.

Epigenetic mechanisms have been ascribed important roles in endometriosis.
Covalent histone modifications at lysine residues have been shown to regulate
gene expression and thus contribute to pathological states in many diseases. In
endometriosis, histone deacetylase inhibition (HDACi) resulted in reactivation of
E-cadherin, attenuation of invasion, decreased proliferation of endometriotic
cells, and caused lesion regression in an animal model. This study was conducted 
to assess basal and hormone-regulated gene expression levels of HDAC1 and HDAC2
(HDAC1/2) in cell lines and protein expression levels in tissues. Basal and
steroid hormone-regulated HDAC1/2 gene expression levels were determined by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction in cell lines and tissues. Protein levels 
were measured by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissues on an endometriosis tissue
microarray (TMA). Basal HDAC1/2 gene expression levels were significantly higher 
in endometriotic versus endometrial stromal cells, which was confirmed by Western
blot analysis. Estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P4) significantly downregulated
HDAC1 expression in endometrial epithelial cells. Levels of HDAC2 were
upregulated by E2 and downregulated by E2 + P4 in endometrial stromal cells.
Hormone modulation of HDAC1/2 gene expression was lost in the endometriotic cell 
line. Immunohistochemistry showed that HDAC1/2 proteins were expressed in a
substantial proportion of lesions and endometrium from patients, and their
expression levels varied according to lesion localization. The highest proportion
of strong HDAC1 immunostaining was seen in ovarian, skin, and gastrointestinal
lesions, and of HDAC2 in skin lesions and endometrium from patients with
endometriosis. These studies suggest that endometriosis etiology may be partially
explained by epigenetic regulation of gene expression due to dysregulations in
the expression of HDACs.

PMCID: PMC3343094
PMID: 22344732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 May 15;21(10):2205-10. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds035. Epub 2012 Feb
9.

Mutations in DNMT1 cause autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia, deafness and
narcolepsy.

Winkelmann J(1), Lin L, Schormair B, Kornum BR, Faraco J, Plazzi G, Melberg A,
Cornelio F, Urban AE, Pizza F, Poli F, Grubert F, Wieland T, Graf E, Hallmayer J,
Strom TM, Mignot E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich 81675,
Germany.

Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia, deafness and narcolepsy (ADCA-DN) is
characterized by late onset (30-40 years old) cerebellar ataxia, sensory neuronal
deafness, narcolepsy-cataplexy and dementia. We performed exome sequencing in
five individuals from three ADCA-DN kindreds and identified DNMT1 as the only
gene with mutations found in all five affected individuals. Sanger sequencing
confirmed the de novo mutation p.Ala570Val in one family, and showed
co-segregation of p.Val606Phe and p.Ala570Val, with the ADCA-DN phenotype, in two
other kindreds. An additional ADCA-DN kindred with a p.GLY605Ala mutation was
subsequently identified. Narcolepsy and deafness were the first symptoms to
appear in all pedigrees, followed by ataxia. DNMT1 is a widely expressed DNA
methyltransferase maintaining methylation patterns in development, and mediating 
transcriptional repression by direct binding to HDAC2. It is also highly
expressed in immune cells and required for the differentiation of CD4+ into T
regulatory cells. Mutations in exon 20 of this gene were recently reported to
cause hereditary sensory neuropathy with dementia and hearing loss (HSAN1). Our
mutations are all located in exon 21 and in very close spatial proximity,
suggesting distinct phenotypes depending on mutation location within this gene.

PMCID: PMC3465691
PMID: 22328086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2012 Sep;13(3):163-71. doi: 10.1007/s11154-012-9202-z.

Epigenetic mechanisms are involved in sexual differentiation of the brain.

Matsuda KI(1), Mori H, Kawata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan. matsuken@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Sexual differentiation of the brain can be considered as a process during which
effects of sex steroid hormones secreted during early development is maintained
into adulthood. Epigenetic regulation is emerging as a potentially important
mechanism of conveyance of long-lasting effects of the hormonal and environmental
milieu in the developing brain. Evidence has accumulated to show that epigenetic 
regulation is involved in the control of sexual differentiation of the brain. In 
the preoptic area (POA), which is important for male sexual behavior, histones
associated with the estrogen receptor (ER) a and aromatase (Arom) gene promoters 
are differentially acetylated between the sexes, and two subtypes of histone
deacetylase (HDAC2 and 4) are associated with the same promoters at higher
frequencies in males in the early postnatal period. Since ERa and Arom are
essential genes in masculinization of the brain, these findings suggest that
histone deacetylation in the early postnatal period is involved in
masculinization of the brain. Indeed, inhibition of HDAC activity in males during
this period abrogates brain masculinization: structural sexual dimorphism of the 
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis is eliminated and expression of male sexual
behavior is reduced in adulthood. Previous reports have demonstrated that ERa
gene expression in the POA is higher in females during the developmental and
pubertal periods and in adulthood, indicating that sexually dimorphic ERa
expression that appears in early postnatal development is maintained until
adulthood by epigenetic programming. The ERa promoter is also more sparsely
methylated in females, with an inverse correlation with ERa expression. In
addition to the hormonal effect, the amount of maternal care received during
postnatal development has a lasting effect on ERa expression mediated by DNA
methylation of its promoter. Taken together, these results suggest that
epigenetic mechanisms play a central role in the transduction and maintenance of 
early hormonal and social cues to organize sexually differentiated brain
functions.

PMID: 22327342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 31;109(5):1649-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121159109. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 regulate autophagy flux and skeletal muscle
homeostasis in mice.

Moresi V(1), Carrer M, Grueter CE, Rifki OF, Shelton JM, Richardson JA,
Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology, Internal Medicine, and Pathology, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Maintenance of skeletal muscle structure and function requires efficient and
precise metabolic control. Autophagy plays a key role in metabolic homeostasis of
diverse tissues by recycling cellular constituents, particularly under conditions
of caloric restriction, thereby normalizing cellular metabolism. Here we show
that histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1 and 2 control skeletal muscle homeostasis and
autophagy flux in mice. Skeletal muscle-specific deletion of both HDAC1 and HDAC2
results in perinatal lethality of a subset of mice, accompanied by mitochondrial 
abnormalities and sarcomere degeneration. Mutant mice that survive the first day 
of life develop a progressive myopathy characterized by muscle degeneration and
regeneration, and abnormal metabolism resulting from a blockade to autophagy.
HDAC1 and HDAC2 regulate skeletal muscle autophagy by mediating the induction of 
autophagic gene expression and the formation of autophagosomes, such that
myofibers of mice lacking these HDACs accumulate toxic autophagic intermediates. 
Strikingly, feeding HDAC1/2 mutant mice a high-fat diet from the weaning age
releases the block in autophagy and prevents myopathy in adult mice. These
findings reveal an unprecedented and essential role for HDAC1 and HDAC2 in
maintenance of skeletal muscle structure and function and show that, at least in 
some pathological conditions, myopathy may be mitigated by dietary modifications.

PMCID: PMC3277131
PMID: 22307625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neurodegener Dis. 2012;10(1-4):191-4. doi: 10.1159/000334602. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Cognitive function in health and disease: the role of epigenetic mechanisms.

Mungenast AE(1), Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Cambridge, Mass, USA.

Epigenetic mechanisms regulate the interaction between the genome and the
environment and have been implicated in the etiology of various brain diseases.
One type of epigenetic modification, histone acetylation, is dynamically altered 
during memory formation. Histone acetylation is regulated by the activities of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) and histone acetyltransferase enzymes. The use of HDAC
inhibitors has emerged as a promising new strategy for the therapeutic
intervention of neurodegenerative disease. We used a combination of
pharmacological and mouse genetic approaches that allowed us to identify HDAC2 as
a specific negative regulator of synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Our
results suggest that HDAC inhibitors enhance cognitive function by inhibiting
HDAC2, which renders HDAC2 target genes more accessible to transcriptional
activators and coactivators recruited by neuronal activity stimulation. The data 
presented at the 2011 Barcelona ADPD Conference delineate a novel and important
role for HDAC2 activity in the cognitive impairments associated with
neurodegenerative disease.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22301371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Histochem Cell Biol. 2012 May;137(5):697-702. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-0920-9.
Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Histone deacetylases 2 and 9 are coexpressed and nuclear localized in human molar
odontoblasts in vivo.

Klinz FJ(1), Korkmaz Y, Bloch W, Raab WH, Addicks K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy I, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9, 50931
Cologne, Germany. franzjosef.klinz@uni-koeln.de

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are components of nuclear multiprotein complexes
that deacetylate histones and perform important roles in repression of
transcription.Using specific rabbit mAbs, we analyzed by immune histochemistry
and confocal immunofluorescence analysis the expression and subcellular
localization of HDAC14 and HDAC9 in sections of adult human third molars. HDAC2 
and HDAC9 were expressed in some pulpal cells and strongly expressed in the
majority of mature odontoblasts.In contrast, only weak expression of HDAC1, HDAC3
and HDAC4 was observed. Confocal immunofluorescence analysis together with the
DNA stain DRAQ5 revealed that HDAC2 and HDAC9 were coexpressed within the
odontoblast nucleus, but localized to distinct subnuclear structures.In contrast 
to the current point of view, HDAC2 is strongly expressed in a terminally
differentiated cell type.Our results imply that class I and II HDACs are involved
in the transcriptional regulation of human odontoblasts in vivo.

PMID: 22297573  [PubMed - in process]


87. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Apr 15;302(8):L764-74. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00342.2011. Epub 2012 Jan 27.

Inhibitory effects of theophylline on the peroxynitrite-augmented release of
matrix metalloproteinases by lung fibroblasts.

Sugiura H(1), Kawabata H, Ichikawa T, Koarai A, Yanagisawa S, Kikuchi T, Minakata
Y, Matsunaga K, Nakanishi M, Hirano T, Akamatsu K, Furukawa K, Ichinose M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University School of
Medicine, Wakayama, Japan. sugiura@wakayama-med.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Sep;305(5):L404.

The anti-inflammatory effects of theophylline have been reported to include
inhibition of the release of proinflammatory mediators from macrophages and
neutrophils. Overproduction of reactive nitrogen species (RNS) has been reported 
in the airways of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and
this causes tissue inflammation and injury. We investigated whether peroxynitrite
stimulated the release of matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9 (MMP-2 and -9;
gelatinases) from human fetal lung fibroblasts (HFL-1 cell line) and whether
theophylline inhibited the peroxynitrite-augmented release of MMPs. HFL-1 cells
and primary lung fibroblasts were treated with peroxynitrite (an RNS), and
gelatinases levels were evaluated by gelatin zymography. The inhibitory effect of
theophylline on the peroxynitrite-augmented release of MMP-2 and MMP-9 was also
investigated. To explore the cell signaling pathways involved in the
peroxynitrite-induced gelatinases release and the inhibitory effect of
theophylline, transforming growth factor-ß(1) (TGF-ß(1)), nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B), and histone deacetylase (HDAC) were measured. Peroxynitrite
significantly augmented the release of MMP-2 and MMP-9 by fibroblasts (P < 0.01),
as well as TGF-ß(1) release (P < 0.01), NF-<U+03BA>B activation (P < 0.01), and HDAC2
inactivation (P < 0.01). An NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor diminished the RNS-augmented release 
of MMPs and TGF-ß(1) (P < 0.01), and a neutralizing TGF-ß antibody also
diminished MMP release (P < 0.01). Theophylline significantly inhibited the
peroxynitrite-augmented release of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in HFL-1 cells and normal
adult lung fibroblasts, and it also inhibited the peroxynitrite-mediated HDAC2
inactivation, NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and TGF-ß(1) release in HFL-1 cells (all P <
0.01). These results suggest that peroxynitrite can influence tissue remodeling
by promoting gelatinases release, while theophylline suppresses
peroxynitrite-induced tissue remodeling via pathways involving NF-<U+03BA>B/TGF-ß(1)
and/or HDAC in the HFL-1 cell line.

PMID: 22287608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncogene. 2012 Dec 6;31(49):5099-107. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.2. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of p53 induces gene-specific transcriptional repression of
MTA1.

Lee MH(1), Na H, Kim EJ, Lee HW, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Bio-MAX Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

The metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is overexpressed in various human
cancers and is closely connected with aggressive phenotypes; however, little is
known about the transcriptional regulation of the MTA1 gene. This study
identified the MTA1 gene as a target of p53-mediated transrepression. The MTA1
promoter contains two putative p53 response elements (p53REs), which were
repressed by the p53-inducing drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Notably, 5-FU treatment
decreased MTA1 expression only in p53 wild-type cells. p53 and histone
deacetylases 1/2 were recruited, and acetylation of H3K9 was decreased on the
promoter region including the p53REs after 5-FU treatment. Proteomics analysis of
the p53 repressor complex, which was pulled down by the MTA1 promoter, revealed
that the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) was part of the complex.
Interestingly, p53 was poly(ADP-ribose)ylated by PARP-1, and the p53-mediated
transrepression of the MTA1 gene required poly(ADP-ribose)ylation of p53. In
summary, we report a novel function for poly(ADP-ribose)ylation of p53 in the
gene-specific regulation of the transcriptional mode of p53 on the promoter of
MTA1.

PMID: 22286760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Jul;18(3):713-20. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9499-7. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

SAHA inhibits the growth of colon tumors by decreasing histone deacetylase and
the expression of cyclin D1 and survivin.

Jin JS(1), Tsao TY, Sun PC, Yu CP, Tzao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tungs' Taichung MetroHarbor Hospital, Wuqi Township, 
Taichung County, Taiwan, Republic of China.

We studied the effects of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, on colon cancer. The expression of HDACs in
colorectal cancer specimens and the effects of SAHA on colon cancer cells and
tumors of nude mice were assessed. Treatment with SAHA (3 µm) for 72 h induced
downregulation of different subtypes of HDAC proteins and also induced
acetylation of histone 3 and histone 4. SAHA significantly inhibited the
expression of the oncogenic protein c-myc and also increased the expression of
the p53 and Rb proteins. The immunohistochemical staining of HDACs, including
HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC4, was significantly increased in colorectal
adenocarcinoma specimens compared to healthy control tissues. In addition, murine
studies showed that 100 mg/kg SAHA administered by intraperitoneal injection
significantly induced tumor necrosis and inhibited the growth of colon tumors.
Immunohistochemistry of the tumor tissues from nude mice revealed that SAHA
inhibited the expression of different subtypes of histone deacetylase, the
anti-apoptotic proteins cyclin D1, survivin, and also inhibited cell
proliferative as determined by Ki67 expression. SAHA inhibited the growth of
colon tumors by decreasing histone deacetylases and the expression of cyclin D1
and survivin in nude mice.

PMID: 22270866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2012 May;79(5):760-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2012.01341.x.
Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Pharmacophore and QSAR studies to design novel histone deacetylase 2 inhibitors.

Xiang Y(1), Hou Z, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China.

One pharmacophore model and three quantitative structure-activity relationship
models were developed on a series of benzimidazole and imidazole inhibitors of
histone deacetylase 2. The goodness of hit score value of the best pharmacophore 
model was 0.756, which indicated that it is reliable to be used for virtual
screening. The built pharmacophore model was used to search the NCI database. The
hit compounds were subjected to molecular docking. The results showed that 25
compounds had high scores and strong interactions with histone deacetylase 2. In 
three-dimensional quantitative structure-activity relationship studies, good
predictive models were obtained using comparative molecular field analysis,
comparative molecular similarity indices analysis, and Topomer comparative
molecular field analysis. Some putative active compounds were proposed based on
compound no. 41. Twenty-six compounds had high scores and good interactions when 
they were docking into histone deacetylase 2.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22268420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer Lett. 2012 Jul 1;320(1):14-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.018. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

Impairment of p53 acetylation by EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein in Ewing family
tumors.

Li Y(1), Li X, Fan G, Fukushi J, Matsumoto Y, Iwamoto Y, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) yields the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene, 
which contributes to the development of Ewing Family Tumors (EFTs). Previous
studies have shown the ability of EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein to silence p53
activity. Here we demonstrate that the introduction of EWS-Fli1 significantly
inhibited p300-mediated acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 and depletion of EWS-Fli1
protein by small interfering RNAs (siRNA) in EFTs cells facilitated it in
response to DNA damage. Furthermore, the deacetylation of p53 by EWS-Fli1
suppressed its transcriptional activity and enhanced mdm2-mediated p53
degradation. On the other hand, immunoprecipitation study shows that N-terminal
region of EWS-Fli1 associated with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to forms a
complex with p53. Knockdown of HDAC1, but not HDAC2 or HDAC3 protein restored the
expression of p53 Lys-382 in EFTs cells. Overexpression of HDAC1 also
significantly inhibited p53 transcriptional activity. Pharmacologic inhibitor of 
HDAC, trichostatin A (TSA) promoted p53-p300 interaction and recruitment of p53
Lys-382 to promoter regions of its target genes p21 and Puma, consequently
inducing apoptosis and stabilizing the acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 together
with the upregulation of p21 and Puma, which were impaired in EFTs cells after
the knockdown of p53 expression. Our data indicate EWS-Fli1 might deacetylate p53
to inhibit its transcriptional function and protein stability via the recruitment
of HDAC1. These results might elucidate a novel molecular mechanism about the
abrogation of p53 pathway by EWS-Fli1 in EFTs pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22266186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Apr;12(4):643-50. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.12.022.
Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Effect of erythromycin on cigarette-induced histone deacetylase protein
expression and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B activity in human macrophages in vitro.

Li M(1), Zhong X, He Z, Wen M, Li J, Peng X, Liu G, Deng J, Zhang J, Bai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are families of enzymes that regulate chromatin
structure and thus affect inflammatory gene expression. The anti-inflammatory
properties of macrolides are well documented. However, the effects of macrolides 
on HDAC protein expression have not been studied. This study aimed to examine the
molecular mechanism of the inflammatory responses caused by cigarette smoke
extract (CSE) and the effects of erythromycin (EM) on CSE-induced HDAC protein
expression in human macrophages in vitro. The cells were preincubated with EM and
were then exposed to CSE. Levels of interleukin-8 (IL-8) and tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a) were assayed by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activity was assessed by an electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. HDAC activity was measured with a colorimetric assay kit, and
Western blotting was used for HDAC1, -2, -3 and NF-<U+03BA>B protein expression assays. 
The results showed that CSE causes decreases in HDAC activity and HDAC1, -2, -3
levels and upregulates NF-<U+03BA>B activity, resulting in increased NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
proinflammatory cytokine release in human macrophage cells. Moreover, EM was able
to reverse the CSE-induced decline in HDAC1, -2, -3 protein expression, which was
most prominent for HDAC2; these changes were associated with the suppression of
both NF-<U+03BA>B protein expression and the production of inflammatory mediators. These
results suggest that relieving inflammation with EM can be useful in therapeutic 
approaches for modulating intracellular nuclear signaling in chronic airway
inflammatory diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22265969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Chem Inf Model. 2012 Feb 27;52(2):589-603. doi: 10.1021/ci200584f. Epub 2012
Feb 7.

Exploring inhibitor release pathways in histone deacetylases using random
acceleration molecular dynamics simulations.

Kalyaanamoorthy S(1), Chen YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Computer Engineering, Faculty of Science,
Technology and Engineering, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia.

Molecular channel exploration perseveres to be the prominent solution for
eliciting structure and accessibility of active site and other internal spaces of
macromolecules. The volume and silhouette characterization of these channels
provides answers for the issues of substrate access and ligand swapping between
the obscured active site and the exterior of the protein. Histone deacetylases
(HDACs) are metal-dependent enzymes that are involved in the cell growth, cell
cycle regulation, and progression, and their deregulations have been linked with 
different types of cancers. Hence HDACs, especially the class I family, are
widely recognized as the important cancer targets, and the characterizations of
their structures and functions have been of special interest in cancer drug
discovery. The class I HDACs are known to possess two different protein channels,
an 11 Å and a 14 Å (named channels A and B1, respectively), of which the former
is a ligand or substrate occupying tunnel that leads to the buried active site
zinc ion and the latter is speculated to be involved in product release. In this 
work, we have carried out random acceleration molecular dynamics (RAMD)
simulations coupled with the classical molecular dynamics to explore the release 
of the ligand, N-(2-aminophenyl) benzamide (LLX) from the active sites of the
recently solved X-ray crystal structure of HDAC2 and the computationally modeled 
HDAC1 proteins. The RAMD simulations identified significant structural and
dynamic features of the HDAC channels, especially the key 'gate-keeping' amino
acid residues that control these channels and the ligand release events. Further,
this study identified a novel and unique channel B2, a subchannel from channel
B1, in the HDAC1 protein structure. The roles of water molecules in the LLX
release from the HDAC1 and HDAC2 enzymes are also discussed. Such structural and 
dynamic properties of the HDAC protein channels that govern the ligand escape
reactions will provide further mechanistic insights into the HDAC enzymes, which,
in the long run, have a potential to bring new ideas for developing more
promising HDAC inhibitors as well as extend our atomic level understandings on
their mechanisms of action.

PMID: 22263580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Pept Sci. 2012 Apr;18(4):242-51. doi: 10.1002/psc.2392. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Synthesis, evaluation and molecular modeling of cyclic tetrapeptide histone
deacetylase inhibitors as anticancer agents.

Huang D(1), Li X, Sun L, Xiu Z, Nishino N.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian 116024, China.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are a promising class of anticancer
agents. To examine whether a slight change in the recognition domain could alter 
their inhibitory activity, we synthesized a series of
cyclo(-L-Am7(S2Py)-Aib-L-Phe(n-Me)-D-Pro)derivatives and evaluated their HDAC
inhibitory and anticancer activities. The peptides exhibited potent HDAC
inhibitory activity and inhibited three human cancer cell lines with IC50 in the 
micromolar range. Docking and molecular dynamics simulation were conducted to
explore the interaction mechanisms of class I and II HDACs with these inhibitors.
It revealed that the zinc ion in the active site coordinated five atoms of HDACs 
and the sulfur atom of the inhibitor. The metal binding domains of these
compounds interacted with HDAC2, and the surface recognition domains of these
compounds interacted with HDAC4 through hydrogen bonding. The hydrophobic
interactions also provided favorable contributions to stabilize the complexes.
The results obtained from this study would be helpful for us to design some novel
cyclic tetrapeptides that may act as potent HDACIs.

Copyright © 2012 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22253009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Clin Exp Allergy. 2012 Jun;42(6):872-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2011.03931.x.

Epigenetic regulation of myofibroblast differentiation and extracellular matrix
production in nasal polyp-derived fibroblasts.

Cho JS(1), Moon YM, Park IH, Um JY, Moon JH, Park SJ, Lee SH, Kang HJ, Lee HM.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Project for Biomedical Science, College of Medicine, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Nasal polyposis is a multi-factorial disease associated with chronic 
inflammatory condition of the paranasal sinuses. Myofibroblast differentiation
and extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation are involved in the pathogenesis of
nasal polyposis.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to study the effect of trichostatin A (TSA),
a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, on transforming growth factor
(TGF)-ß1-induced myofibroblast differentiation and ECM accumulation in nasal
polyp-derived fibroblasts (NPDFs).
METHODS: Nasal polyp-derived fibroblasts were isolated from nasal polyps of
patients who have chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyp. TSA was treated in
TGF-ß1-induced NPDFs. Expression levels of HDAC2, a-smooth muscle actin (SMA),
TGF-ß1, collagen type I, acetylated Histone H3, acetylated Histone H4,
phosphorylated Smad2/3 and Smad7 were determined by RT-PCR, western blot and/or
immunofluorescent staining. The total collagen amount production was analysed by 
Sircol soluble collagen assay and contractile activity was measured by collagen
gel contraction assay. HDAC2 inhibition by TSA or HDAC2 silencing was established
by RT-PCR and western blot. The epigenetic effect on a-SMA gene inactivation was 
examined by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Proliferation was determined by 
Ki67-positive cell staining and cytotoxicity was assessed by 3-(4,5-
dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay.
RESULTS: The expression levels of HDAC2, a-SMA and TGF-ß1 were increased in nasal
polyp tissues compared to normal inferior turbinate tissues. TSA and HDAC2
silencing inhibited expression levels a-SMA, collagen and HDAC2. TSA induced
hyperacetylation of histone and suppressed opening of a-SMA gene promoter in
TGF-ß1-induced NPDFs. TSA inhibited TGF-ß1-induced Smad 2/3 and rescued
TGF-ß1-suppressed Smad7 signalling pathway. Finally, TSA blocked proliferation in
TGF-ß1-induced NPDFs and has no cytotoxic effect in NPDFs.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: These results suggest that HDAC inhibition is
associated with myofibroblast differentiation and extracelluar matrix
accumulation in nasal polyposis. TSA may be useful as an inhibitor of nasal polyp
growth, and thus has potential to be used as a novel treatment option for nasal
polyposis.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22239687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):E481-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1118403109. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Compensatory functions of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 regulate
transcription and apoptosis during mouse oocyte development.

Ma P(1), Pan H, Montgomery RL, Olson EN, Schultz RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Dramatic changes in chromatin structure and histone modification occur during
oocyte growth, as well as a global cessation of transcription. The role of
histone modifications in these processes is poorly understood. We report the
effect of conditionally deleting Hdac1 and Hdac2 on oocyte development. Deleting 
either gene has little or no effect on oocyte development, whereas deleting both 
genes results in follicle development arrest at the secondary follicle stage.
This developmental arrest is accompanied by substantial perturbation of the
transcriptome and a global reduction in transcription even though histone
acetylation is markedly increased. There is no apparent change in histone
repressive marks, but there is a pronounced decrease in histone H3K4 methylation,
an activating mark. The decrease in H3K4 methylation is likely a result of
increased expression of Kdm5b because RNAi-mediated targeting of Kdm5b in
double-mutant oocytes results in an increase in H3K4 methylation. An increase in 
TRP53 acetylation also occurs in mutant oocytes and may contribute to the
observed increased incidence of apoptosis. Taken together, these results suggest 
seminal roles of acetylation of histone and nonhistone proteins in oocyte
development.

PMCID: PMC3286984
PMID: 22223663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Neurogenetics. 2012 Feb;13(1):31-47. doi: 10.1007/s10048-011-0306-5. Epub 2012
Jan 5.

Genotype-phenotype correlation in interstitial 6q deletions: a report of 12 new
cases.

Rosenfeld JA(1), Amrom D, Andermann E, Andermann F, Veilleux M, Curry C, Fisher
J, Deputy S, Aylsworth AS, Powell CM, Manickam K, Heese B, Maisenbacher M,
Stevens C, Ellison JW, Upton S, Moeschler J, Torres-Martinez W, Stevens A, Marion
R, Pereira EM, Babcock M, Morrow B, Sahoo T, Lamb AN, Ballif BC, Paciorkowski AR,
Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, PerkinElmer, Inc., 2820 N. Astor St., Spokane,
WA 99207, USA.

Interstitial deletions of 6q are associated with variable phenotypes, including
growth retardation, dysmorphic features, upper limb malformations, and
Prader-Willi (PW)-like features. Only a minority of cases in the literature have 
been characterized with high resolution techniques, making genotype-phenotype
correlations difficult. We report 12 individuals with overlapping, 200-kb to
16.4-Mb interstitial deletions within 6q15q22.33 characterized by
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization to better correlate deletion
regions with specific phenotypes. Four individuals have a PW-like phenotype,
though only two have deletion of SIM1, the candidate gene for this feature.
Therefore, other genes on 6q may contribute to this phenotype including multiple 
genes on 6q16 and our newly proposed candidate, the transcription cofactor gene
VGLL2 on 6q22.2. Two individuals present with movement disorders as a major
feature, and ataxia is present in a third. The 4.1-Mb 6q22.1q22.2 critical region
for movement disorders includes the cerebellar-expressed candidate gene GOPC.
Observed brain malformations include thick corpus callosum in two subjects,
cerebellar vermal hypoplasia in two subjects, and cerebellar atrophy in one
subject. Seven subjects' deletions overlap a ~250-kb cluster of four genes on
6q22.1 including MARCKS, HDAC2, and HS3ST5, which are involved in neural
development. Two subjects have only this gene cluster deleted, and one deletion
was apparently de novo, suggesting at least one of these genes plays an important
role in development. Although the phenotypes associated with 6q deletions can
vary, using overlapping deletions to delineate critical regions improves
genotype-phenotype correlation for interstitial 6q deletions.

PMID: 22218741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Clin Invest. 2012 Feb;122(2):612-23. doi: 10.1172/JCI58620. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

CBX7 is a tumor suppressor in mice and humans.

Forzati F(1), Federico A, Pallante P, Abbate A, Esposito F, Malapelle U, Sepe R, 
Palma G, Troncone G, Scarfò M, Arra C, Fedele M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Dipartimento di 
Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia,
Università di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Feb 1;123(2):934.

The CBX7 gene encodes a polycomb group protein that is known to be downregulated 
in many types of human cancers, although the role of this protein in
carcinogenesis remains unclear. To shed light on this issue, we generated mice
null for Cbx7. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from these mice had a higher
growth rate and reduced susceptibility to senescence compared with their WT
counterparts. This was associated with upregulated expression of multiple cell
cycle components, including cyclin E, which is known to play a key role in lung
carcinogenesis in humans. Adult Cbx7-KO mice developed liver and lung adenomas
and carcinomas. In in vivo and in vitro experiments, we demonstrated that CBX7
bound to the CCNE1 promoter in a complex that included HDAC2 and negatively
regulated CCNE1 expression. Finally, we found that the lack of CBX7 protein
expression in human lung carcinomas correlated with CCNE1 overexpression. These
data suggest that CBX7 is a tumor suppressor and that its loss plays a key role
in the pathogenesis of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3266782
PMID: 22214847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Schizophr Res. 2012 Feb;134(2-3):260-6. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.11.029. Epub
2011 Dec 27.

Epigenetic regulation on GABRB2 isoforms expression: developmental variations and
disruptions in psychotic disorders.

Zhao C(1), Wang F, Pun FW, Mei L, Ren L, Yu Z, Ng SK, Chen J, Tsang SY, Xue H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Applied Genomics Center and Fok Ying Tung Graduate
School, The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong
Kong, China.

INTRODUCTION: To improve the understanding of psychotic abnormalities and their
non-Mendelian inheritance patterns, the epigenetic regulation of the psychotic
disorder-associated GABRB2, gene for the type A <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid receptor
ß(2)-subunit, was investigated.
METHODS: Expression of GABRB2, and the epigenetic regulatory enzymes histone
deacetylases (HDACs) and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) in mouse and postmortem
human brains was analyzed using real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Results showed that expression of GABRB2 isoforms significantly
increased over time in both mouse and human, especially for the long splicing
isoform. In the brains of non-psychiatric controls (CON), a significant positive 
correlation of GABRB2 expression with age was observed in individuals with MM
genotypes of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs187269 and rs1816072.
This was reversed to a significant negative correlation in schizophrenics (SCZ). 
A similar reversal was also displayed by bipolar disorder (BPD) patients. In
parallel, a significant co-variation of HDAC1 with GABRB2 expression observed in 
CON remained significant in BPD but not in SCZ; comparably, a significant
co-variation of HDAC2 with GABRB2 expression observed in CON became
non-significant in both SCZ and BPD. Moreover, co-variations of DNMT1 and DNMT3B 
with GABRB2, not observable in CON, became significant in BPD.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrated that GABRB2 expression was under
epigenetic regulation that varied with development, genotype and disease status, 
and these regulatory mechanisms were observably disrupted in SCZ and BPD. This
study provided insight into the complex inheritance patterns of psychiatric
disorders, and pointed to the involvement of epigenetic dysregulation in the
disease process of major psychotic disorders.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22206711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Apr;132(4):1293-6. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.432. Epub 2011
Dec 29.

Histone deacetylase 2 is upregulated in normal and keloid scars.

Fitzgerald O'Connor EJ, Badshah II, Addae LY, Kundasamy P, Thanabalasingam S,
Abioye D, Soldin M, Shaw TJ.

PMID: 22205303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Anticancer Res. 2011 Dec;31(12):4115-25.

Histone-modifier gene expression profiles are associated with pathological and
clinical outcomes in human breast cancer.

Patani N(1), Jiang WG, Newbold RF, Mokbel K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The London Breast Institute, The Princess Grace 
Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is under normal
circumstances tightly controlled by the specific methylation of cytosine residues
in CpG dinucleotides and coordinated by adjustments in the histone-dependent
configuration of chromatin. Following our original report, providing the first
description of potential tumor suppressor function associated with the histone
methyltransferase SET domain containing 2 (SETD2) in breast cancer, the objective
of this study was to determine the expression profiles of 16 further
histone-modifier genes in a well annotated cohort of patients with primary
operable breast cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Breast cancer tissues (n=127) and normal tissues (n=33)
underwent RNA extraction and reverse transcription, and histone-modifier gene
transcript levels were determined using real-time quantitative PCR. The
histone-modifier genes included: histone acetyltransferases (cAMP response
element-binding protein-binding protein (CREBBP)); class I (histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)), II (histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5))
and III (sirtuin 1 (SIRT1)) histone deacetylases; and histone methyltransferases 
(SET domain containing suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 1 (SUV39H1) and
suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 2 (SUV39H2)) amongst others. Expression
levels were analysed against tumor size, grade, nodal involvement, histological
subtype, receptor status, TNM stage, Nottingham Prognostic Index, and
disease-free and overall survival over a 10-year follow-up period.
RESULTS: Expression of histone-modifier genes in breast cancer differed
significantly from those in normal tissue (HDAC5, HDAC1, lysine (K)-specific
demethylase 4A (KDM4A) and lysine (K)-specific demethylase 6A (KDM6A)).
Differences in expression profiles were also found to exist between individual
breast tumors and, in some cases, were significantly associated with conventional
pathological parameters and prognostic indices: tumor grade (K (lysine)
acetyltransferase 5 (KAT5), HDAC1, KDM4A, SUV39H1 and KDM6A)); TNM stage
(SUV39H1, K (lysine) acetyltransferase 2B (KAT2B), lysine (K)-specific
demethylase 1A (KDM1A), KDM4A, lysine (K)-specific demethylase 5C (KDM5C), K
(lysine) acetyltransferase 8 (KAT8), HDAC5 and KAT5)); Nottingham Prognostic
Index (KDM5C, myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL), KAT8 and SET and 
MYND domain containing 3 (SMYD3)); receptor status (KAT5, SMYD3 and KDM1A);
histological type (KAT5, KDM5C, KAT8, KDM4A and MLL); disease-free survival
(SUV39H1, SMYD3, HDAC5, KDM6A, HDAC1, KDM1A, KDM4A, KAT8, KDM5C, KAT5 and MLL)
and overall survival (KAT8). Significant correlations were identified between the
differential expression profiles of particular histone-modifying genes.
CONCLUSION: Expression levels of histone-modifier genes in breast cancer differ
significantly from normal tissue. Differences in expression profiles exist
between breast tumors and are significantly associated with conventional
pathological parameters and clinical outcomes. Further study is warranted to
determine the consequences of altered expression for each specific
histone-modifier gene and the biological and clinical implications of
combinatorial variations in expression profiles. Histone-modifier enzymes offer
utility as biomarkers and potential for targeted therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 22199269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Respir Med. 2012 Mar;106(3):319-28. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2011.11.003. Epub 2011
Dec 22.

The effects of cigarette smoke on airway inflammation in asthma and COPD:
therapeutic implications.

Tamimi A(1), Serdarevic D, Hanania NA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Sciences, Primary Care Business Unit, Pfizer Inc, Ramsgate Road,
Sandwich CT13 9NJ, UK.

Asthma and COPD are two chronic inflammatory disorders of the airway
characterized by airflow limitation. While many similarities exist between these 
two diseases, they are pathologically distinct due to the involvement of
different inflammatory cells; predominantly neutrophils, CD8 lymphocytes in COPD 
and eosinophils and CD4 lymphocytes in asthma. Cigarette smoking is associated
with accelerated decline of lung function, increased mortality, and worsening of 
symptoms in both asthma and COPD. Furthermore, exposure to cigarette smoke can
alter the inflammatory mechanisms in asthma to become similar to that seen in
COPD with increasing CD8 cells and neutrophils and may therefore alter the
response to therapy. Cigarette smoke exposure has been associated with a poor
response to inhaled corticosteroids which are recommended as first line
anti-inflammatory medications in asthma and as an add-on therapy in patients with
severe COPD with history of exacerbations. While the main proposed mechanism for 
this altered response is the reduction of the histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)
enzyme system, other possible mechanisms include the overexpression of GR-ß,
activation of p38 MAPK pathway and increased production of inflammatory cytokines
such as IL-2, 4, 8, TNF-a and NF-Kß. Few clinical trials suggest that leukotriene
modifiers may be an alternative to corticosteroids in smokers with asthma but
there are currently no drugs which effectively reduce the progression of
inflammation in smokers with COPD. However, several HDAC2 enhancers including low
dose theophylline and other potential anti-inflammatory therapies including PDE4 
inhibitors and p38 MAPK inhibitors are being evaluated.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22196881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5615-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.314088. Epub 2011 
Dec 19.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 drives tumor cell migration and invasion through 
transcriptional repression of RING finger protein 144A.

Marzook H(1), Li DQ, Nair VS, Mudvari P, Reddy SD, Pakala SB, Santhoshkumar TR,
Pillai MR, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram 695014, India.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):12158.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):6751.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), a component of the nucleosome-remodeling 
and histone deacetylase complex, is widely up-regulated in human cancers and
significantly correlated with tumor invasion and metastasis, but the mechanisms
involved remain largely unknown. Here, we report that MTA1 transcriptionally
represses the expression of RING finger protein 144A (RNF144A), an
uncharacterized gene whose protein product possesses potential E3 ubiquitin
ligase activity, by recruiting the histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (c/EBPa) co-repressor complex onto human RNF144A
promoter. Furthermore, an inverse correlation between the expression levels of
MTA1 and RNF144A was demonstrated in publicly available breast cancer microarray 
datasets and the MCF10 breast cancer progression model system. To address
functional aspects of MTA1 regulation of RNF144A, we demonstrate that RNF144A is 
a novel suppressor of cancer migration and invasion, two requisite steps of
metastasis in vivo, and knockdown of endogenous RNF144A by small interfering RNAs
accelerates the migration and invasion of MTA1-overexpressing cells. These
results suggest that RNF144A is partially responsible for MTA1-mediated migration
and invasion and that MTA1 overexpression in highly metastatic cancer cells
drives cell migration and invasion by, at least in part, interfering with the
suppressive function of RNF144A through transcriptional repression of RNF144A
expression. Together, these findings provide novel mechanistic insights into
regulation of tumor progression and metastasis by MTA1 and highlight a previously
unrecognized role of RNF144A in MTA1-driven cancer cell migration and invasion.

PMCID: PMC3285335
PMID: 22184113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jan 2;586(1):102-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.12.005. Epub 2011
Dec 9.

HPV E7 viral oncoprotein disrupts transcriptional regulation of L1Md
retrotransposon.

Montoya-Durango DE(1), Ramos KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 
40202, USA.

Murine L1Md-A5 retrotransposon is a redox-inducible element regulated by
Nrf-2/JunD and E2F/Rb-binding sites within its promoter (5'-UTR). Because the
human papillomavirus (HPV) oncoprotein E7 interacts with retinoblastoma (pRb) and
members of the AP1 family, studies were conducted to examine functional
interactions between HPV E7, pRb, and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in the
regulation of L1Md-A5. Using a transient heterologous transcription system we
found that HPV E7 alone, or in combination with HDAC2, disrupted pRb-mediated
L1MdA-5 transactivation. HPV E7 also ablated the transcriptional response of
L1Md-A5 to genotoxic stress, but did not interfere with basal activity. We
conclude that HPV E7 associates with proteins involved in the assembly of
macromolecular complexes that regulate antioxidant and E2F/Rb sites within
L1MdA-5 to regulate biological activity.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3263525
PMID: 22172279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Neurosci. 2011 Dec 7;31(49):17800-10. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3878-11.2011.

Epigenetic enhancement of BDNF signaling rescues synaptic plasticity in aging.

Zeng Y(1), Tan M, Kohyama J, Sneddon M, Watson JB, Sun YE, Xie CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles,
California 90024, USA.

Retraction in
    J Neurosci. 2013 Dec 11;33(50):19735.

Aging-related cognitive declines are well documented in humans and animal models.
Yet the synaptic and molecular mechanisms responsible for cognitive aging are not
well understood. Here we demonstrated age-dependent deficits in long-term
synaptic plasticity and loss of dendritic spines in the hippocampus of aged
Fisher 344 rats, which were closely associated with reduced histone acetylation, 
upregulation of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2, and decreased expression of a
histone acetyltransferase. Further analysis showed that one of the key genes
affected by such changes was the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) gene.
Age-dependent reductions in H3 and H4 acetylation were detected within multiple
promoter regions of the Bdnf gene, leading to a significant decrease in BDNF
expression and impairment of downstream signaling in the aged hippocampus. These 
synaptic and signaling deficits could be rescued by enhancing BDNF and trkB
expression via HDAC inhibition or by directly activating trkB receptors with
7,8-dihydroxyflavone, a newly identified, selective agonist for trkB. Together,
our findings suggest that age-dependent declines in chromatin histone acetylation
and the resulting changes in BDNF expression and signaling are key mechanisms
underlying the deterioration of synaptic function and structure in the aging
brain. Furthermore, epigenetic or pharmacological enhancement of BDNF-trkB
signaling could be a promising strategy for reversing cognitive aging.

PMCID: PMC3278324
PMID: 22159096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Thorax. 2012 May;67(5):392-8. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2011-200760. Epub 2011 Dec
8.

Glucocorticoid receptor ß and histone deacetylase 1 and 2 expression in the
airways of severe asthma.

Butler CA(1), McQuaid S, Taggart CC, Weldon S, Carter R, Skibinski G, Warke TJ,
Choy DF, McGarvey LP, Bradding P, Arron JR, Heaney LG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queens University Belfast, Level 8, Belfast
City Hospital, Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7AB, Northern Ireland, UK.

RATIONALE: Upregulation of glucocorticoid receptor ß (GRß) has been implicated in
steroid resistance in severe asthma, although previous studies are conflicting.
GRß has been proposed as a dominant negative isoform of glucocorticoid receptor a
(GRa) but it has also been suggested that GRß can cause steroid resistance via
reduced expression of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), a key regulator of steroid
responsiveness in the airway.
OBJECTIVES: To examine GRß, GRa, HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression at transcript and
protein levels in bronchial biopsies from a large series of patients with severe 
asthma, and to compare the findings with those of patients with mild to moderate 
asthma and healthy volunteers.
METHODS: Bronchoscopic study in two UK centres with real-time PCR and
immunohistochemistry performed on biopsies, western blotting of bronchial
epithelial cells and immunoprecipitation with anti-GRß antibody.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Protein and mRNA expression for GRa and HDAC2 did 
not differ between groups. GRß mRNA was detected in only 13 of 73 samples (seven 
patients with severe asthma), however immunohistochemistry showed widespread
epithelial staining in all groups. Western blotting of bronchial epithelial cells
with GRß antibody detected an additional 'cross-reacting' protein, identified as 
clathrin. HDAC1 expression was increased in patients with severe asthma compared 
with healthy volunteers.
CONCLUSIONS: GRß mRNA is expressed at low levels in a minority of patients with
severe asthma. HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression was not downregulated in severe asthma.
These data do not support upregulated GRß and resultant reduced HDAC expression
as the principal mechanism of steroid resistance in severe asthma. Conflicting
GRß literature may be explained in part by clathrin cross-reactivity with
commercial antibodies.

PMID: 22156779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Feb 1;318(3):177-86. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.11.010. Epub
2011 Nov 28.

Role for Class I histone deacetylases in multidrug resistance.

Xu Y(1), Jiang Z, Yin P, Li Q, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering & Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Chemical Biology, School of Pharmacy, East China University of Science and
Technology, #268, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, PR China.

Recent reports have showed that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor resulted in 
multidrug resistance (MDR) to other chemotherapeutic agents. However, the
molecular mechanisms of Class I HDACs on MDR regulation are poorly understood. In
this study, HDAC1 and HDAC2 acted as enhancers to intensify the
chemosensitivities of anti-cancer drugs via reducing the expression levels of
P-gp, MRP1 and MRP2. Furthermore, the dissociation of HDAC1 and HDAC2 led to
transcriptional regulation of P-gp expression via the recruitment of p300, PCAF
and NF-Y to the P-gp promoter region, which subsequently increased the level of
the active gene marker, hyperacetylated histone H3. In parallel, selective
inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 induced the recruitment of p300, PCAF, NF-Y via
acetylation of Sp1. Thus, our findings showed HDAC1 and 2 regulated P-gp
expression through dynamic changes in chromatin structure and transcription
factor association within the promoter region.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22154511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):439-48. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300060. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Recruitment of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 by the transcriptional
repressor ZEB1 downregulates E-cadherin expression in pancreatic cancer.

Aghdassi A(1), Sendler M, Guenther A, Mayerle J, Behn CO, Heidecke CD, Friess H, 
Büchler M, Evert M, Lerch MM, Weiss FU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universität Greifswald,
Friedrich-Loefler-Str. 23a, 17475 Greifswald, Germany.

Comment in
    Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):329-30.

OBJECTIVE: Pancreatic cancer is characterised by invasive tumour spread and early
metastasis formation. During epithelial-mesenchymal transition, loss of the cell 
adhesion molecule E-cadherin is frequent and can be caused by genetic or
epigenetic modifications, recruitment of transcriptional activators/repressors or
post-translational modifications. A study was undertaken to investigate how
E-cadherin expression in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma and pancreatic cancer
cell lines is regulated.
METHODS: In 25 human pancreatic cancer resection specimens, the coding region of 
the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) was sequenced for somatic mutations. The tumour
samples and 11 established human pancreatic cancer cell lines were analysed by
immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation and
methylation-specific PCR. The role of specific histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi) on pancreatic tumour cell migration and proliferation was studied in
vitro.
RESULTS: Neither somatic mutations nor CDH1 promoter hypermethylation were found 
to be responsible for downregulation of E-cadherin in pancreatic cancer. In the
transcriptionally active CDH1 promoter, acetylation of histones H3 and H4 was
detected whereas HDAC1 and HDAC2 were found attached only to a silent promoter.
Expression of ZEB1, a transcription factor known to recruit HDACs, was seen in
E-cadherin-deficient cell lines in which ZEB1/HDAC complexes were found attached 
to the CDH1 promoter. Moreover, knockdown of ZEB1 prevented HDAC from binding to 
the CDH1 promoter, resulting in histone acetylation and expression of E-cadherin.
HDACi treatment attenuated tumour cell migration and proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings imply an important role for histone deacetylation in 
the downregulation of E-cadherin in human pancreatic cancer. Recruitment of HDACs
to the CDH1 promoter is regulated by the transcription factor ZEB1, and
inhibition of HDACs may be a promising antitumour therapy for pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22147512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):329-30. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301576. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

A ZEB1-HDAC pathway enters the epithelial to mesenchymal transition world in
pancreatic cancer.

Schneider G(1), Krämer OH, Saur D.

Author information: 
(1)II Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, München, Germany. guenter.schneider@lrz.tum.de

Comment on
    Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):439-48.

PMID: 22147511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27746. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027746. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

SAHA decreases HDAC 2 and 4 levels in vivo and improves molecular phenotypes in
the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease.

Mielcarek M(1), Benn CL, Franklin SA, Smith DL, Woodman B, Marks PA, Bates GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, London,
United Kingdom.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive neurological disorder for which there 
are no disease-modifying treatments. Transcriptional dysregulation is a major
molecular feature of HD, which significantly contributes to disease progression. 
Therefore, the development of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors as
therapeutics for HD has been energetically pursued. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid (SAHA) - a class I HDAC as well an HDAC6 inhibitor, improved motor
impairment in the R6/2 mouse model of HD. Recently it has been found that SAHA
can also promote the degradation of HDAC4 and possibly other class IIa HDACs at
the protein level in various cancer cell lines. To elucidate whether SAHA is a
potent modifier of HDAC protein levels in vivo, we performed two independent
mouse trials. Both WT and R6/2 mice were chronically treated with SAHA and
vehicle. We found that prolonged SAHA treatment causes the degradation of HDAC4
in cortex and brain stem, but not hippocampus, without affecting its transcript
levels in vivo. Similarly, SAHA also decreased HDAC2 levels without modifying the
expression of its mRNA. Consistent with our previous data, SAHA treatment
diminishes Hdac7 transcript levels in both wild type and R6/2 brains and
unexpectedly was found to decrease Hdac11 in R6/2 but not wild type. We
investigated the effects of SAHA administration on well-characterised molecular
readouts of disease progression. We found that SAHA reduces SDS-insoluble
aggregate load in the cortex and brain stem but not in the hippocampus of the
R6/2 brains, and that this was accompanied by restoration of Bdnf cortical
transcript levels.

PMCID: PMC3225376
PMID: 22140466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28103. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028103. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Aberrant regulation of HDAC2 mediates proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma
cells by deregulating expression of G1/S cell cycle proteins.

Noh JH(1), Jung KH, Kim JK, Eun JW, Bae HJ, Xie HJ, Chang YG, Kim MG, Park WS,
Lee JY, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Functional RNomics Research
Center, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is crucial for embryonic development, affects
cytokine signaling relevant for immune responses and is often significantly
overexpressed in solid tumors; but little is known about its role in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, we showed that targeted-disruption
of HDAC2 resulted in reduction of both tumor cell growth and de novo DNA
synthesis in Hep3B cells. We then demonstrated that HDAC2 regulated cell cycle
and that disruption of HDAC2 caused G1/S arrest in cell cycle. In G1/S
transition, targeted-disruption of HDAC2 selectively induced the expression of
p16(INK4A) and p21(WAF1/Cip1), and simultaneously suppressed the expression of
cyclin D1, CDK4 and CDK2. Consequently, HDAC2 inhibition led to the
down-regulation of E2F/DP1 target genes through a reduction in phosphorylation
status of pRb protein. In addition, sustained suppression of HDAC2 attenuated in 
vitro colony formation and in vivo tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model.
Further, we found that HDAC2 suppresses p21(WAF1/Cip1) transcriptional activity
via Sp1-binding site enriched proximal region of p21(WAF1/Cip1) promoter. In
conclusion, we suggest that the aberrant regulation of HDAC2 may play a pivotal
role in the development of HCC through its regulation of cell cycle components at
the transcription level providing HDAC2 as a relevant target in liver cancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3223227
PMID: 22132221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 6;287(2):925-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.279950. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

The histone acetyltransferase TIP60 interacts with c-Myb and inactivates its
transcriptional activity in human leukemia.

Zhao H(1), Jin S, Gewirtz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
huiwuz@mail.med.upenn.edu

The histone acetyltransferase TIP60 is a coregulator of transcription factors and
is implicated in tumorigenesis. In this study, we explored potential regulatory
relationships between TIP60 and the c-Myb oncoprotein in hematopoietic cells. We 
first showed that TIP60 is a c-Myb interacting protein and that the interaction
is dependent on the TIP60 acetyltransferase domain and c-Myb transactivation
domain. We then found that coexpressing TIP60 decreases the transcriptional
activation ability of c-Myb in functional reporter assays. A ChIP assay also
revealed that TIP60 binds to the c-Myb target gene c-Myc promoter in a
c-Myb-dependent manner. Consistently, knockdown of Tip60 expression by siRNA
increased endogenous c-Myc expression. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation of
Jurkat cell lysates revealed that c-Myb is associated with histone deacetylases
HDAC1 and HDAC2, known to interact with TIP60 and repress transcription. Finally,
we compared Tip60 expression in six primary AML samples with three normal CD34(+)
cell samples using quantitative RT-PCR. Tip60 expression was significantly (~60%)
lower in the AML samples. In summary, these studies demonstrate that TIP60
negatively modulates c-Myb transcriptional activity by recruiting histone
deacetylases in human hematopoietic cells, leading us to hypothesize that TIP60
is a normal regulator of c-Myb function and that dysregulated or mutated TIP60
may contribute to c-Myb-driven leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3256894
PMID: 22110127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Fertil Steril. 2012 Jan;97(1):178-84.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.10.023.
Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Insufficient histone-3 lysine-9 deacetylation in human oocytes matured in vitro
is associated with aberrant meiosis.

Huang J(1), Li T, Ding CH, Brosens J, Zhou CQ, Wang HH, Xu YW.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic
of China.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize histone acetylation during meiosis in human oocytes
matured in vitro or in vivo.
DESIGN: Experimental study.
SETTING: University reproductive medical center.
PATIENT(S): Patients undergoing routine intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)
cycles.
INTERVENTION(S): Immature and mature oocytes were collected from patients
undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Immunohistochemical assessment of the levels of
acetylated lysine-9 of histone-3 (H3K9) and lysine-12 of histone-4 (H4K12)
combined with spindle and chromosome configurations in in vitro- and
in vivo-matured human oocytes. Transcript levels of histone deacetylases (HDACs) 
1 and 2 were measured by single-cell quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULT(S): Acetylation of H3K9 and H4K12 decreased during human oocyte
maturation. Residual H3K9 acetylation was found in 37.7% of oocytes matured
in vitro, compared with 11.8% in oocytes matured in vivo. Abnormal metaphase
spindle was more frequent in oocytes with residual histone acetylation than
without (51.6% vs. 25.4%, respectively). Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A increased the incidence of an abnormal metaphase but had no
adverse effect on maturation efficiency. Furthermore, expression of HDAC1
transcripts was significantly lower in oocytes matured in vitro versus in vivo.
CONCLUSION(S): Reduced HDAC1 expression and insufficient histone deacetylation
are associated with metaphase defects in human oocytes matured in vitro.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22100169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 15;18(2):360-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3022.
Epub 2011 Nov 17.

A noncanonical Flt3ITD/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway represses DAPK1 in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Shanmugam R(1), Gade P, Wilson-Weekes A, Sayar H, Suvannasankha A, Goswami C, Li 
L, Gupta S, Cardoso AA, Al Baghdadi T, Sargent KJ, Cripe LD, Kalvakolanu DV,
Boswell HS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology Division) and Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Indiana, USA.

PURPOSE: Death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1), a tumor suppressor, is a
rate-limiting effector in an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-dependent
apoptotic pathway. Its expression is epigenetically suppressed in several tumors.
A mechanistic basis for epigenetic/transcriptional repression of DAPK1 was
investigated in certain forms of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with poor
prognosis, which lacked ER stress-induced apoptosis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Heterogeneous primary AMLs were screened to identify a
subgroup with Flt3ITD in which repression of DAPK1, among NF-<U+03BA>B-and
c-Jun-responsive genes, was studied. RNA interference knockdown studies were
carried out in an Flt3ITD(+) cell line, MV-4-11, to establish genetic epistasis
in the pathway Flt3ITD-TAK1-DAPK1 repression, and chromatin immunoprecipitations 
were carried out to identify proximate effector proteins, including
TAK1-activated p52NF-<U+03BA>B, at the DAPK1 locus.
RESULTS: AMLs characterized by normal karyotype with Flt3ITD were found to have
10- to 100-fold lower DAPK1 transcripts normalized to the expression of c-Jun, a 
transcriptional activator of DAPK1, as compared with a heterogeneous cytogenetic 
category. In addition, Meis1, a c-Jun-responsive adverse AML prognostic gene
signature was measured as control. These Flt3ITD(+) AMLs overexpress relB, a
transcriptional repressor, which forms active heterodimers with p52NF-<U+03BA>B.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays identified p52NF-<U+03BA>B binding to the DAPK1
promoter together with histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and HDAC6 in the Flt3ITD(+) 
human AML cell line MV-4-11. Knockdown of p52NF-<U+03BA>B or its upstream regulator,
NF-<U+03BA>B-inducing kinase (NIK), de-repressed DAPK1. DAPK1-repressed primary
Flt3ITD(+) AMLs had selective nuclear activation of p52NF-<U+03BA>B.
CONCLUSIONS: Flt3ITD promotes a noncanonical pathway via TAK1 and p52NF-<U+03BA>B to
suppress DAPK1 in association with HDACs, which explains DAPK1 repression in
Flt3ITD(+) AML.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3918433
PMID: 22096027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. BMC Genomics. 2011 Nov 12;12:555. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-555.

Sex-dimorphism in cardiac nutrigenomics: effect of trans fat and/or monosodium
glutamate consumption.

Collison KS(1), Zaidi MZ, Maqbool Z, Saleh SM, Inglis A, Makhoul NJ, Bakheet R,
Shoukri M, Al-Mohanna FA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology & Diabetes Research Unit, Department of Biological & Medical
Research, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, PO BOX 3354, Riyadh 
11211, Saudi Arabia. kate@kfshrc.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: A paucity of information on biological sex-specific differences in
cardiac gene expression in response to diet has prompted this present
nutrigenomics investigation. Sexual dimorphism exists in the physiological and
transcriptional response to diet, particularly in response to high-fat feeding.
Consumption of Trans-fatty acids (TFA) has been linked to substantially increased
risk of heart disease, in which sexual dimorphism is apparent, with males
suffering a higher disease rate. Impairment of the cardiovascular system has been
noted in animals exposed to Monosodium Glutamate (MSG) during the neonatal
period, and sexual dimorphism in the growth axis of MSG-treated animals has
previously been noted. Processed foods may contain both TFA and MSG.
METHODS: We examined physiological differences and changes in gene expression in 
response to TFA and/or MSG consumption compared to a control diet, in male and
female C57BL/6J mice.
RESULTS: Heart and % body weight increases were greater in TFA-fed mice, who also
exhibited dyslipidemia (P < 0.05). Hearts from MSG-fed females weighed less than 
males (P < 0.05). 2-factor ANOVA indicated that the TFA diet induced over twice
as many cardiac differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in males compared to
females (P < 0.001); and 4 times as many male DEGs were downregulated including
Gata4, Mef2d and Srebf2. Enrichment of functional Gene Ontology (GO) categories
were related to transcription, phosphorylation and anatomic structure (P < 0.01).
A number of genes were upregulated in males and downregulated in females,
including pro-apoptotic histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2). Sexual dimorphism was also
observed in cardiac transcription from MSG-fed animals, with both sexes
upregulating approximately 100 DEGs exhibiting sex-specific differences in GO
categories. A comparison of cardiac gene expression between all diet combinations
together identified a subset of 111 DEGs significant only in males, 64 DEGs
significant in females only, and 74 transcripts identified as differentially
expressed in response to dietary manipulation in both sexes.
CONCLUSION: Our model identified major changes in the cardiac transcriptional
profile of TFA and/or MSG-fed mice compared to controls, which was reflected by
significant differences in the physiological profile within the 4 diet groups.
Identification of sexual dimorphism in cardiac transcription may provide the
basis for sex-specific medicine in the future.

PMCID: PMC3238303
PMID: 22078008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Plant Signal Behav. 2011 Nov;6(11):1865-7. doi: 10.4161/psb.6.11.17848. Epub 2011
Nov 1.

Type 2 histone deacetylases play a major role in the control of elicitor-induced 
cell death in tobacco.

Dahan J(1), Hammoudi V, Wendehenne D, Bourque S.

Author information: 
(1)UMR Université de Bourgogne Plante-Microbe-Environnement, Dijon, France.

The cell death which characterizes the onset of the Hypersensitive Response (HR) 
is a very important weapon evolved by plants to block pathogen development. By
the use of numerous plant/avirulent pathogen or plant/elicitor models, we have
now obtained detailed signalling pathways allowing, after pathogen or elicitor
perception, the control of the expression of specific sets of genes that
contribute to cell death. However, our knowledge of the molecular actors involved
in this process still remains limited. This is particularly true when regarding
what happen in the nucleus. We recently reported that nuclear post-translational 
protein modifications are major processes that control cell death. Using the
tobacco/cryptogein model, we showed that type 2 histone deacetylase activities,
which act as negative regulators of cell death, depend on their phosphorylation
status. In the present paper, we integrated all these results to propose a model 
depicting the putative nuclear signalling pathways controlling the establishment 
of cell death in tobacco in response to the cryptogein elicitor. This model
highlights the role of the nuclear protein acetylation and phosphorylation in the
establishment of plant defences.

PMCID: PMC3343733
PMID: 22067994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2011 Aug;42(4):281-4.

[The progress study of HDAC2 function in diseases].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangxi University, NanNing 530004, China.

HDAC2 is a histone acetyltransferase I, promotes the hormone and
cytokine-dependent signal transduction. HDAC2 is unique marker for oral,
prostate, ovarian, endometrial or gastric cancer, and related with muscle and
heart related diseases, it plays an important role in embryonic development and
neural function. As the precise target of drug development and drug intervention 
technology, HDAC2 has been proved to be an effective treatment. In this paper,
the role of HDAC2 is summarized in health and related diseases.

PMID: 22066420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mod Pathol. 2012 Feb;25(2):222-30. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.157. Epub 2011 Oct
28.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 in mesenchymal tumors.

Pacheco M(1), Nielsen TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have a critical role in epigenetic gene silencing,
rendering a compact chromatin structure by removing acetyl groups from lysine
residues within the tails of core histones, thereby repressing gene expression.
Epigenetic transcriptional dysregulation is an important oncogenic mechanism in
some sarcomas associated with translocations, for which antitumor activity by
HDAC inhibitors has been shown in preclinical studies. Nevertheless, the
expression of the protein targets of these drugs has not yet been broadly
surveyed in this neoplasia. In this study, we assess the expression of HDAC1 and 
2 by immunohistochemistry in a tissue microarray series of 1332 cases,
representing 44 categories of malignant and borderline mesenchymal tumors. HDAC2 
was the more highly expressed isoform, and was more strongly expressed in
translocation-associated sarcomas than in other mesenchymal tumors or normal
tissues. HDAC1, in contrast, displayed lower expression in
translocation-associated sarcomas than in other mesenchymal tumors or in normal
tissues. These results indicate that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are differentially expressed
in mesenchymal neoplasms, and suggest that HDAC2 is the isoform more likely
contributing to the pathogenesis of many translocation-associated sarcomas and to
their response to HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 22037263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026013. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Transient protection from heat-stress induced apoptotic stimulation by
metastasis-associated protein 1 in pachytene spermatocytes.

Li W(1), Wu ZQ, Zhao J, Guo SJ, Li Z, Feng X, Ma L, Zhang JS, Liu XP, Zhang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, People's Republic of China. liweipepeyato@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Deregulated thermal factors have been frequently implicated in the
pathogenesis of male infertility, but the molecular basis through which certain
responses are directed remain largely unknown. We previously reported that
overexpression of exogenous Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) protects
spermatogenic tumor cells GC-2spd (ts) against heat-induced apoptosis. To further
dissect the underlying mechanism, we addressed here the fine coordination between
MTA1 and p53 in pachytene spermatocytes upon hyperthermal stimulation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: High level of MTA1 expression sustained for 1.5 h
in primary spermatocytes after heat stress before a notable decrease was detected
conversely correlated to the gradual increase of acetylation status of p53 and of
p21 level. Knockdown of the endogenous MTA1 in GC-2spd (ts) elevated the
acetylation of p53 by diminishing the recruitment of HDAC2 and thereafter led to 
a dramatic increase of apoptosis after heat treatment. Consistent with this, in
vivo interference of MTA1 expression in the testes of C57BL/6 mice also urged an 
impairment of the differentiation of spermatocytes and a disruption of Sertoli
cell function due to the elevated apoptotic rate after heat stress. Finally,
attenuated expression of MTA1 of pachytene spermatocytes was observed in arrested
testes (at the round spermatid level) of human varicocele patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These data underscore a transient protective effect of this histone 
modifier in primary spermatocytes against heat-stress, which may operate as a
negative coregulator of p53 in maintenance of apoptotic balance during early
phase after hyperthermal stress.

PMCID: PMC3192157
PMID: 22022494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Genes Dev. 2011 Dec 15;25(24):2610-8. doi: 10.1101/gad.170605.111. Epub 2011 Oct 
20.

Mule determines the apoptotic response to HDAC inhibitors by targeted
ubiquitination and destruction of HDAC2.

Zhang J(1), Kan S, Huang B, Hao Z, Mak TW, Zhong Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720,
USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are major epigenetic modulators involved in a broad 
spectrum of human diseases including cancers. Administration of HDAC inhibitors
(HDACis) leads to growth inhibition, differentiation, and apoptosis of cancer
cells. Understanding the regulatory mechanism of HDACs is imperative to harness
the therapeutic potentials of HDACis. Here we show that HDACi- and DNA
damage-induced apoptosis are severely compromised in mouse embryonic fibroblasts 
lacking a HECT domain ubiquitin ligase, Mule (Mcl-1 ubiquitin ligase E3). Mule
specifically targets HDAC2 for ubiquitination and degradation. Accumulation of
HDAC2 in Mule-deficient cells leads to compromised p53 acetylation as well as
crippled p53 transcriptional activation, accumulation, and apoptotic response
upon DNA damage and Nutlin-3 treatments. These defects in Mule-null cells can be 
partially reversed by HDACis and fully rescued by lowering the elevated HDAC2 in 
Mule-null cells to the normal levels as in wild-type cells. Taken together, our
results reveal a critical regulatory mechanism of HDAC2 by Mule and suggest this 
pathway determines the cellular response to HDACis and DNA damage.

© 2011 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

PMCID: PMC3248682
PMID: 22016339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2011 Jul;55(7):999-1009. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201000547. Epub
2011 Mar 4.

Differential effects of sulforaphane on histone deacetylases, cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis in normal prostate cells versus hyperplastic and cancerous prostate
cells.

Clarke JD(1), Hsu A, Yu Z, Dashwood RH, Ho E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR
97331, USA.

SCOPE: Sulforaphane (SFN) is an isothiocyanate derived from cruciferous
vegetables such as broccoli. The ability of SFN to inhibit histone deacetylase
(HDAC) enzymes may be one mechanism by which it acts as a chemoprevention agent. 
The ability of a chemopreventive agent to specifically cause cytotoxicity in
cancer and not normal cells is an important factor in determining its safety and 
clinical relevance.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We characterized the effects of SFN in normal (PrEC), benign
hyperplasia (BPH1) and cancerous (LnCap and PC3) prostate epithelial cells. We
observed that 15<U+2009>µM SFN selectively induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
BPH1, LnCap and PC3 cells but not PrEC cells. SFN treatment also selectively
decreased HDAC activity, and Class I and II HDAC proteins, increased acetylated
histone H3 at the promoter for P21, induced p21 expression and increased tubulin 
acetylation in prostate cancer cells. HDAC6 over-expression was able to reverse
SFN-induced cyotoxicity. In PrEC cells, SFN caused only a transient reduction in 
HDAC activity with no change in any other endpoints tested. The differences in
sensitivity to SFN in PrEC and PC3 are likely not due to differences in SFN
metabolism or differences in phase 2 enzyme induction.
CONCLUSION: SFN exerts differential effects on cell proliferation, HDAC activity 
and downstream targets in normal and cancer cells.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3129466
PMID: 21374800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 8;108(10):4123-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1015081108. Epub 2011 Feb 18.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors attenuate cardiac hypertrophy by
suppressing autophagy.

Cao DJ(1), Wang ZV, Battiprolu PK, Jiang N, Morales CR, Kong Y, Rothermel BA,
Gillette TG, Hill JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology), University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate cardiac plasticity; however, their
molecular targets are unknown. As autophagy contributes to pathological cardiac
remodeling, we hypothesized that HDAC inhibitors target autophagy. The
prototypical HDAC inhibitor (HDACi), trichostatin A (TSA), attenuated both load- 
and agonist-induced hypertrophic growth and abolished the associated activation
of autophagy. Phenylephrine (PE)-triggered hypertrophy and autophagy in cultured 
cardiomyocytes were each blocked by a panel of structurally distinct HDAC
inhibitors. RNAi-mediated knockdown of either Atg5 or Beclin 1, two essential
autophagy effectors, was similarly capable of suppressing ligand-induced
autophagy and myocyte growth. RNAi experiments uncovered the class I isoforms
HDAC1 and HDAC2 as required for the autophagic response. To test the functional
requirement of autophagic activation, we studied mice that overexpress Beclin 1
in cardiomyocytes. In these animals with a fourfold amplified autophagic response
to TAC, TSA abolished TAC-induced increases in autophagy and blunted load-induced
hypertrophy. Finally, we subjected animals with preexisting hypertrophy to HDACi,
finding that ventricular mass reverted to near-normal levels and ventricular
function normalized completely. Together, these data implicate autophagy as an
obligatory element in pathological cardiac remodeling and point to HDAC1/2 as
required effectors. Also, these data reveal autophagy as a previously unknown
target of HDAC inhibitor therapy.

PMCID: PMC3053983
PMID: 21367693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell Death Dis. 2010 May 20;1:e44. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2010.21.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 differentially regulate apoptosis by opposing effects
on extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2.

Lei WW(1), Zhang KH, Pan XC, Wang DM, Hu Y, Yang YN, Song JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are epigenetic regulators that are important for the
control of various pathophysiological events. We found that HDAC inhibitors
completely abolished transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)-induced apoptosis in 
AML-12 and primary mouse hepatocytes. Expression of a dominant-negative mutant of
HDAC1 or downregulation of HDAC1 by RNAi both suppressed TGF-ß1-induced
apoptosis. In addition, overexpression of HDAC1 enhanced TGF-ß1-induced
apoptosis, and the rescue of HDAC1 expression in HDAC1 RNAi cells restored the
apoptotic response of cells to TGF-ß1. These data indicate that HDAC1 functions
as a proapoptotic factor in TGF-ß1-induced apoptosis. In contrast, downregulation
of HDAC2 by RNAi increased spontaneous apoptosis and markedly enhanced
TGF-ß1-induced apoptosis, suggesting that HDAC2 has a reciprocal role in
controlling cell survival. Furthermore, inhibition of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) by MEK1 inhibitor PD98059 or expression of a
kinase-dead mutant of MEK1 restored the apoptotic response to TGF-ß1 in HDAC1
RNAi cells. Strikingly, HDAC2 RNAi caused an inhibition of ERK1/2, and the
spontaneous apoptosis can be abolished by reactivation of ERK1/2. Taken together,
our data demonstrate that HDAC1 and 2 reciprocally affect cell viability by
differential regulation of ERK1/2; these observations provide insight into the
roles and potential mechanisms of HDAC1 and 2 in apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3032309
PMID: 21364650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 16;6(2):e17138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017138.

Inhibition of histone deacetylases 1 and 6 enhances cytarabine-induced apoptosis 
in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Xu X(1), Xie C, Edwards H, Zhou H, Buck SA, Ge Y.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains a challenging disease 
to treat even with intensified cytarabine-based chemotherapy. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) have been reported to be promising therapeutic targets for
treating AML. However, HDAC family members that are involved in chemotherapy
sensitivities remain unknown. In this study, we sought to identify members of the
HDAC family that are involved in cytarabine sensitivities, and to select the
optimal HDACI that is most efficacious when combined with cytarabine for treating
children with AML.
METHODOLOGY: Expression profiles of classes I, II, and IV HDACs in 4 pediatric
AML cell lines were determined by Western blotting. Inhibition of class I HDACs
by different HDACIs was measured post immnunoprecipitation. Individual
down-regulation of HDACs in pediatric AML cells was performed with lentiviral
shRNA. The effects of cytarabine and HDACIs on apoptosis were determined by flow 
cytometry analysis.
RESULTS: Treatments with structurally diverse HDACIs and HDAC shRNA knockdown
experiments revealed that down-regulation of both HDACs 1 and 6 is critical in
enhancing cytarabine-induced apoptosis in pediatric AML, at least partly mediated
by Bim. However, down-regulation of HDAC2 may negatively impact cytarabine
sensitivities in the disease. At clinically achievable concentrations, HDACIs
that simultaneously inhibited both HDACs 1 and 6 showed the best anti-leukemic
activities and significantly enhanced cytarabine-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Our results further confirm that HDACs are bona fide therapeutic
targets for treating pediatric AML and suggest that pan-HDACIs may be more
beneficial than isoform-specific drugs.

PMCID: PMC3040224
PMID: 21359182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3433-41. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22700.

p53 Suppresses lung resistance-related protein expression through Y-box binding
protein 1 in the MCF-7 breast tumor cell line.

Tian B(1), Liu J, Liu B, Dong Y, Liu J, Song Y, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Beijing Institute of
Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China.

Lung resistance-related protein (LRP) has roles in multi-drug resistance of tumor
cells. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate LRP expression in tumor cells
is an important research area. A putative p53 response element in the LRP
promoter has been found. Thus, p53-related regulation of LRP expression was
explored in this study. We first demonstrated that p53 overexpression inhibited
LRP expression both at the protein and mRNA levels. Then, using a dual-luciferase
reporter assay, we located the p53 response element to the Y-box (-263~-407) of
the LRP promoter, the YB-1 binding site, but not the putative p53 response
element. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation
showed p53 could bind to the Y-box of the LRP promoter through interaction of p53
with YB-1. YB-1 coexpression with p53 facilitated p53-induced suppression of
endogenous LRP expression in MCF-7 cells. HDAC2, a corepressor of p53, was found 
to also interact with YB-1, and this interaction was mediated by p53. These
results showed that the p53-HDAC2 transcriptional repressor complex can bind to
the Y-box of the LRP promoter and repress LRP expression through interaction with
YB-1. p53-related suppression of LRP expression was completely reversed by
doxorubicin treatment and Adr, whereas CP and VP-16 treatment induced LRP
expression increased significantly. Inhibition of LRP expression by siRNA
facilitated Adr induced apoptosis of MCF-7 cells. All these findings indicated
that loss of p53-related suppression of LRP may be the reason for LRP expression 
increase, and, therefore, chemotherapy resistance in tumor cells.

Copyright© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Oral Pathol Med. 2011 Aug;40(7):567-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2011.01009.x. 
Epub 2011 Feb 18.

HDAC2 promotes cell migration/invasion abilities through HIF-1a stabilization in 
human oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Chang CC(1), Lin BR, Chen ST, Hsieh TH, Li YJ, Kuo MY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) expressions in oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) had been implicated in advanced stage and poor prognosis. It
suggests a possible link between the migration/invasion potential of oral cancer 
cells and the prevalent expression of HDAC2.
METHODS: Five head and neck cancer (HNC) cell lines, including Ca9-22, Cal-27,
HSC-3, SAS, and TW2.6, were used. Cells stably overexpressing HDAC2 and shRNA
against HDAC2 were established to investigate migration/invasion ability in vitro
and tumorigenesis and progression in vivo.
RESULTS: We found that alterations in the HDAC2 level in OSCC cell lines
modulated their invasive ability with a positive correlation. Animal model also
showed that knockdown of HDAC2 expression in SAS cells, originally containing
high endogenous HDAC2 expression, resulted in decrease in tumor initiation and
progression. Using high-throughput transcriptome analysis, numerous genes
involved in HIF-1a-associated pathways were found. At the mechanism levels, using
agents to block de novo protein synthesis or prevent protein degradation by
ubiquitination, we found the stability of hypoxia inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a)
protein was maintained in OSCC cells with HDAC2 overexpression. In addition,
co-immunoprecipitation assay also revealed that HDAC2-mediated HIF-1a protein
stability is because of direct interaction of HIF-1a with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work demonstrates that HDAC2 maintains HIF-1a stability,
probably at the level of protein modification, which in turn leads to the
increase in cell invasion/migration ability in oral cancer progression. These
findings implicate the potential of HDAC inhibitors for oral cancer therapy.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21332579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Jul 1;317(11):1534-40. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.02.001. Epub 
2011 Feb 14.

MRG15 activates the cdc2 promoter via histone acetylation in human cells.

Peña AN(1), Tominaga K, Pereira-Smith OM.

Author information: 
(1)Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, The University 
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, TX, USA. andreana.pena@gmail.com

Chromatin remodeling is required for transcriptional activation and repression.
MRG15 (MORF4L1), a chromatin modulator, is a highly conserved protein and is
present in complexes containing histone acetyltransferases (HATs) as well as
histone deacetylases (HDACs). Loss of expression of MRG15 in mice and Drosophila 
results in embryonic lethality and fibroblast and neural stem/progenitor cells
cultured from Mrg15 null mouse embryos exhibit marked proliferative defects when 
compared with wild type cells. To determine the role of MRG15 in cell cycle
progression we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation with an antibody to MRG15 
on normal human fibroblasts as they entered the cell cycle from a quiescent
state, and analyzed various cell cycle gene promoters. The results demonstrated a
3-fold increase in MRG15 occupancy at the cdc2 promoter during S phase of the
cell cycle and a concomitant increase in acetylated histone H4. H4 lysine 12 was 
acetylated at 24 h post-serum stimulation while there was no change in
acetylation of lysine 16. HDAC1 and 2 were decreased at this promoter during cell
cycle progression. Over-expression of MRG15 in HeLa cells activated a cdc2
promoter-reporter construct in a dose-dependent manner, whereas knockdown of
MRG15 resulted in decreased promoter activity. In order to implicate HAT
activity, we treated cells with the HAT inhibitor anacardic acid and determined
that HAT inhibition results in loss of expression of cdc2 mRNA. Further,
chromatin immunoprecipitation with Tip60 localizes the protein to the same 110bp 
stretch of the cdc2 promoter pulled down by MRG15. Additionally, we determined
that cotransfection of MRG15 with the known associated HAT Tip60 had a
cooperative effect in activating the cdc2 promoter. These results suggest that
MRG15 is acting in a HAT complex involving Tip60 to modify chromatin via
acetylation of histone H4 at the cdc2 promoter to activate transcription.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3410549
PMID: 21324423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Mar 11;406(2):292-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.02.035. Epub 2011 Feb 12.

Decreased histone deacetylase 2 impairs Nrf2 activation by oxidative stress.

Mercado N(1), Thimmulappa R, Thomas CM, Fenwick PS, Chana KK, Donnelly LE, Biswal
S, Ito K, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College,
London SW3 6LY, UK.

Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) plays a crucial role in
cellular defence against oxidative stress by inducing the expression of multiple 
anti-oxidant genes. However, where high levels of oxidative stress are observed, 
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), Nrf2 activity is reduced,
although the molecular mechanism for this defect is uncertain. Here, we show that
down-regulation of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2 causes Nrf2 instability,
resulting in reduced anti-oxidant gene expression and increase sensitivity to
oxidative stress. Although Nrf2 protein was clearly stabilized after hydrogen
peroxide (H(2)O(2)) stimulation in a bronchial epithelial cell line (BEAS2B),
Nrf2 stability was decreased and Nrf2 acetylation increased in the presence of an
HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA). TSA also reduced Nrf2-regulated
heme-oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression in these cells, and this was confirmed in
acute cigarette-smoke exposed mice in vivo. HDAC2 knock-down by RNA interference 
resulted in reduced H(2)O(2)-induced Nrf2 protein stability and activity in
BEAS2B cells, whereas HDAC1 knockdown had no effect. Furthermore,
monocyte-derived macrophages obtained from healthy volunteers (non-smokers and
smokers) and COPD patients showed a significant correlation between HDAC2
expression and Nrf2 expression (r=0.92, p<0.0001). Thus, reduced HDAC2 activity
in COPD may account for increased Nrf2 acetylation, reduced Nrf2 stability and
impaired anti oxidant defences.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3061319
PMID: 21320471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Jun;89(6):577-93. doi: 10.1007/s00109-011-0732-8. Epub
2011 Feb 12.

Critical role of proteostasis-imbalance in pathogenesis of COPD and severe
emphysema.

Min T(1), Bodas M, Mazur S, Vij N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Respiratory Sciences, Department of Pediatrics, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

The environmental, genetic, and/or age-related changes in proteostasis induce
inflammation, oxidative stress, and apoptosis. We quantified the correlation of
protein expression of critical proteostasis mediators to severity of chronic lung
disease using lung tissue samples from control and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) subjects (GOLD stage 0-IV) and cigarette smoke (CS)-induced murine
model. The human bronchial epithelial cells, HEK-293, and Beas2B cells were used 
for in vitro experiments to verify the mechanisms. Our data verifies the
correlation of higher expression of valosin-containing protein (VCP) retrograde
translocation complex (VCP-Rma1-gp78) with severity of emphysema in COPD lung
tissues and over-expression of inflammatory, ER stress and apoptotic mediators
like NF<U+03BA>B, GADD-153/CHOP, and p-eIF2a. Moreover, subjects with severe emphysema
had a higher accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and deubiquitinating enzyme, 
UCHL-1, indicating towards the aggregation of misfolded or damaged proteins. The 
modulation of both protein degradation and synthesis rates by CS-extract
substantiates the pathogenetic role of proteostasis-imbalance in emphysema and
COPD. We identified that VCP also mediates proteasomal degradation of HDAC2 and
Nrf2, as a potential mechanism for increased oxidative stress and corticosteroid 
resistance in COPD subjects with emphysema. Next, we confirmed that higher VCP
expression associates with increased inflammation and apoptosis using in vitro
and murine models. Our data clearly shows aberrant proteostasis in COPD subjects 
with severe emphysema. In addition, we evaluate therapeutic efficacy of
salubrinal (ER stress inhibitor) to correct the proteostasis-imbalance based on
its ability to control VCP expression and ubiquitin accumulation. Overall, our
data demonstrate for the first time the critical role of proteostasis-imbalance
in pathogenesis of severe emphysema.

PMCID: PMC3128462
PMID: 21318260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12033-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.207241. Epub 2011
Feb 12.

DeltaNp63, a target of DEC1 and histone deacetylase 2, modulates the efficacy of 
histone deacetylase inhibitors in growth suppression and keratinocyte
differentiation.

Qian Y(1), Jung YS, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)From the Comparative Oncology Laboratory, University of California, Davis,
California 95616, USA.

The p63 gene, a member of the p53 family, is expressed as TA and <U+0394>N isoforms.
<U+0394>Np63 is the predominant isoform expressed in cells of epithelial origin and
frequently overexpressed in cancers. However, what regulates p63 expression is
uncertain. Here, we showed that <U+0394>Np63 is regulated by the transcription factor
DEC1, a p53 family target. We also showed that the ability of DEC1 to regulate
<U+0394>Np63 is enhanced by histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors or knockdown of
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2). Consistent with this, we found that DEC1 and HDAC2
physically interact and knockdown of HDAC2 leads to increased binding of DEC1 to 
the <U+0394>Np63 promoter. Interestingly, we found that growth suppression induced by
HDAC inhibitors is attenuated by ectopic expression of DEC1 in a <U+0394>Np63-dependent 
manner. In addition, we showed that ectopic expression of DEC1 inhibits, whereas 
knockdown of DEC1 promotes, keratinocyte differentiation via modulating <U+0394>Np63
expression. Finally, we showed that DEC1 cooperates with HDAC inhibitors to
further decrease keratinocyte differentiation. Together, we conclude that <U+0394>Np63
is a novel target of DEC1 and HDAC2 and modulates the efficacy of HDAC inhibitors
in growth suppression and keratinocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3069406
PMID: 21317427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Neurochem Int. 2011 May;58(6):656-64. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2011.02.004. Epub
2011 Feb 17.

HIV-1 Tat upregulates expression of histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) in human
neurons: implication for HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND).

Saiyed ZM(1), Gandhi N, Agudelo M, Napuri J, Samikkannu T, Reddy PV, Khatavkar P,
Yndart A, Saxena SK, Nair MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of NeuroImmune Pharmacology, Herbert
Wertheim College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, 
USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a pivotal role in epigenetic regulation of
transcription and homeostasis of protein acetylation in histones and other
proteins involved in chromatin remodeling. Histone hypoacetylation and
transcriptional dysfunction have been shown to be associated with a variety of
neurodegenerative diseases. More recently, neuron specific overexpression of
HDAC2 has been shown to modulate synaptic plasticity and learning behavior in
mice. However, the role of HDAC2 in development of HIV-associated neurocognitive 
disorders (HAND) is not reported. Herein we report that HIV-1 Tat protein
upregulate HDAC2 expression in neuronal cells leading to transcriptional
repression of genes involved in synaptic plasticity and neuronal function thereby
contributing to the progression of HAND. Our results indicate upregulation of
HDAC2 by Tat treatment in dose and time dependant manner by human neuroblastoma
SK-N-MC cells and primary human neurons. Further, HDAC2 overexpression was
associated with concomitant downregulation in CREB and CaMKIIa genes that are
known to regulate neuronal activity. These observed effects were completely
blocked by HDAC2 inhibition. These results for the first time suggest the
possible role of HDAC2 in development of HAND. Therefore, use of HDAC2 specific
inhibitor in combination with HAART may be of therapeutic value in treatment of
neurocognitive disorders observed in HIV-1 infected individuals.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3085929
PMID: 21315782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 May;337(2):465-70. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.175950. Epub 
2011 Feb 7.

Nortriptyline reverses corticosteroid insensitivity by inhibition of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase-d.

Mercado N(1), To Y, Ito K, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Dovehouse St.,
London, SW3 6LY, United Kingdom.

Corticosteroid insensitivity represents a major barrier to the treatment of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma. It is caused by
oxidative stress, leading to reduced histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) function
through activation of phosphoinositide-3-kinase-d (PI3Kd). The tricyclic
antidepressant nortriptyline has been identified in high-throughput screens as an
agent that increases corticosteroid responsiveness. The aim of this study was to 
identify the molecular mechanism whereby nortriptyline increases corticosteroid
sensitivity. Phosphorylation of Akt, a footprint of PI3K activation, and HDAC
activity were evaluated by Western blotting and fluorescent activity assay in
U937 monocytic cells. Corticosteroid sensitivity was evaluated by the inhibition 
of tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa)-induced interleukin 8 (IL-8) production by
budesonide. Hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) or cigarette smoke extract (CSE)
increased the level of phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) and reduced HDAC activity.
Pretreatment with nortriptyline inhibited pAkt induced by CSE and H(2)O(2) as
well as restored HDAC activity that had been decreased by H(2)O(2) and CSE. In
addition, nortriptyline inhibited PI3Kd activity, but had no effect on the PI3Ka 
and PI3K<U+03B3> isoforms. Although CSE reduced the effects of budesonide on
TNFa-induced IL-8 production in U937 cells, nortriptyline reversed CSE-induced
corticosteroid insensitivity. Nortriptyline restores corticosteroid sensitivity
induced by oxidative stress via direct inhibition of PI3Kd and is a potential
treatment for corticosteroid-insensitive diseases such as COPD and severe asthma.

PMCID: PMC3083104
PMID: 21300705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Oct;68(19):3261-74. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0628-3. Epub 
2011 Feb 3.

HDAC2 and TXNL1 distinguish aneuploid from diploid colorectal cancers.

Gemoll T(1), Roblick UJ, Szymczak S, Braunschweig T, Becker S, Igl BW, Bruch HP, 
Ziegler A, Hellman U, Difilippantonio MJ, Ried T, Jörnvall H, Auer G, Habermann
JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet,
17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

DNA aneuploidy has been identified as a prognostic factor for epithelial
malignancies. Further understanding of the translation of DNA aneuploidy into
protein expression will help to define novel biomarkers to improve therapies and 
prognosis. DNA ploidy was assessed by image cytometry. Comparison of
gel-electrophoresis-based protein expression patterns of three diploid and four
aneuploid colorectal cancer cell lines detected 64 ploidy-associated proteins.
Proteins were identified by mass spectrometry and subjected to Ingenuity Pathway 
Analysis resulting in two overlapping high-ranked networks maintaining Cellular
Assembly and Organization, Cell Cycle, and Cellular Growth and Proliferation.
CAPZA1, TXNL1, and HDAC2 were significantly validated by Western blotting in cell
lines and the latter two showed expression differences also in clinical samples
using a tissue microarray of normal mucosa (n=19), diploid (n=31), and aneuploid 
(n=47) carcinomas. The results suggest that distinct protein expression patterns,
affecting TXNL1 and HDAC2, distinguish aneuploid with poor prognosis from diploid
colorectal cancers.

© Springer Basel AG 2011

PMCID: PMC4721677
PMID: 21290163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Pediatr Res. 2011 May;69(5 Pt 1):371-7. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318211c917.

Hyperoxia impairs alveolar formation and induces senescence through decreased
histone deacetylase activity and up-regulation of p21 in neonatal mouse lung.

Londhe VA(1), Sundar IK, Lopez B, Maisonet TM, Yu Y, Aghai ZH, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA. vlondhe@mednet.ucla.edu

Alveolar development comprises the transition of lung architecture from saccules 
to gas-exchange units during late gestation and early postnatal development.
Exposure to hyperoxia disrupts developmental signaling pathways and causes
alveolar hypoplasia as seen in bronchopulmonary dysplasia affecting preterm human
newborns. Expanding literature suggests that epigenetic changes caused by
environmental triggers during development may lead to heritable changes in gene
expression. Given recent data on altered histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in
lungs of humans and animal models with airspace enlargement/emphysema, we
hypothesized that alveolar hypoplasia from hyperoxia exposure in neonatal mice is
a consequence of cell cycle arrest and reduced HDAC activity and up-regulation of
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p21. We exposed newborn mice to hyperoxia 
and compared lung morphologic and epigenetic changes to room air controls.
Furthermore, we pretreated a subgroup of animals with the macrolide antibiotic
azithromycin (AZM), known to possess antiinflammatory properties. Our results
showed that hyperoxia exposure resulted in alveolar hypoplasia and was associated
with decreased HDAC1 and HDAC2 and increased p53 and p21 expression. Furthermore,
AZM did not confer protection against hyperoxia-induced alveolar changes. These
findings suggest that alveolar hypoplasia caused by hyperoxia is mediated by
epigenetic changes affecting cell cycle regulation/senescence during lung
development.

PMCID: PMC3092484
PMID: 21270677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cell Cycle. 2011 Feb 1;10(3):406-12. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Distinct and redundant functions of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 in
proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Jurkin J(1), Zupkovitz G, Lagger S, Grausenburger R, Hagelkruys A, Kenner L,
Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are negative regulators of gene expression and have 
been implicated in tumorigenesis and tumor progression. Therefore, HDACs are
promising targets for anti-tumor drugs. However, the relevant isoforms of the 18 
members encompassing HDAC family have not been identified. Studies utilizing
either gene targeting or knockdown approaches reveal both specific and redundant 
functions of the closely related class I deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the
control of proliferation and differentiation. Combined ablation of HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in different cell types led to a severe proliferation defects or enhanced
apoptosis supporting the idea that both enzymes are relevant targets for tumor
therapy. In a recent study on the role of HDAC1 in teratoma formation we have
reported a novel and surprising function of HDAC1 in tumorigenesis. In this tumor
model HDAC1 attenuates proliferation during teratoma formation. In the present
work we discuss new findings on redundant and unique functions of HDAC1 and HDAC2
as regulators of proliferation and tumorigenesis and potential implications for
applications of HDAC inhibitors as therapeutic drugs.

PMCID: PMC3115015
PMID: 21270520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Neuron. 2011 Jan 27;69(2):359-72. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.12.023.

Epigenetic status of Gdnf in the ventral striatum determines susceptibility and
adaptation to daily stressful events.

Uchida S(1), Hara K, Kobayashi A, Otsuki K, Yamagata H, Hobara T, Suzuki T,
Miyata N, Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, Yamaguchi University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minamikogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.
s-uchida@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Neuron. 2011 Jan 27;69(2):188-90.

Stressful events during adulthood are potent adverse environmental factors that
can predispose individuals to psychiatric disorders, including depression;
however, many individuals exposed to stressful events can adapt and function
normally. While stress vulnerability may influence depression, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the susceptibility and adaptation to chronic stress within 
the brain are poorly understood. In this study, two genetically distinct mouse
strains that exhibit different behavioral responses to chronic stress were used
to demonstrate how the differential epigenetic status of the glial cell-derived
neurotrophic factor (Gdnf) gene in the ventral striatum modulates susceptibility 
and adaptation to chronic stress. Our results suggest that the histone
modifications and DNA methylation of the Gdnf promoter have crucial roles in the 
control of behavioral responses to chronic stress. Our data provide insights into
these mechanisms, suggesting that epigenetic modifications of Gdnf, along with
genetic and environmental factors, contribute to behavioral responses to stress.

© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21262472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Oncogene. 2011 May 12;30(19):2230-41. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.608. Epub 2011 Jan
24.

TGF-ß1 signaling targets metastasis-associated protein 1, a new effector in
epithelial cells.

Pakala SB(1), Singh K, Reddy SD, Ohshiro K, Li DQ, Mishra L, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Institute of Coregulator 
Biology, The George Washington University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037,
USA.

In spite of a large number of transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß1)-regulated
genes, the nature of its targets with roles in transformation continues to be
poorly understood. Here, we discovered that TGF-ß1 stimulates transcription of
metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), a dual master coregulator, in epithelial 
cells, and that MTA1 status is a determinant of TGF-ß1-induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotypes. In addition, we found that
MTA1/polymerase II/activator protein-1 (AP-1) co-activator complex interacts with
the FosB-gene chromatin and stimulates its transcription, and FosB in turn,
utilizes FosB/histone deacetylase 2 complex to repress E-cadherin expression in
TGF-ß1-stimulated mammary epithelial cells. These findings suggest that TGF-ß1
regulates the components of EMT via stimulating the expression of MTA1, which in 
turn, induces FosB to repress E-cadherin expression and thus, revealed an
inherent function of MTA1 as a target and effector of TGF-ß1 signaling in
epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3617575
PMID: 21258411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jun 1;90(3):464-74. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr017. Epub 2011 Jan
20.

ATRA activates and PDGF-BB represses the SM22a promoter through KLF4 binding to, 
or dissociating from, its cis-DNA elements.

Yu K(1), Zheng B, Han M, Wen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Neural and Vascular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Ministry of Education, Hebei Medical University, No. 361,
Zhongshan East Road, Shijiazhuang 050017, China.

AIMS: Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is implicated in all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA)-induced and platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB)-repressed SM22a
expression in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). However, its exact mechanism 
of action remains unclear. We determined how KLF4 plays different roles in ATRA- 
and PDGF-BB-dependent regulation of the SM22a gene.
METHODS AND RESULTS: ATRA and PDGF-BB induced KLF4 expression but exhibited an
opposite effect on SM22a expression and VSMC proliferation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and oligonucleotide pull-down assays showed that KLF4 was
directly bound to the KLF4 binding sites 1 ((-263)CACCC(-259)) and 2
((-136)GTGGG(-132)) of the SM22a promoter. ATRA increased the binding of KLF4 to 
site 2, whereas PDGF-BB decreased the binding of KLF4 to site 1. ATRA stimulated 
KLF4 acetylation by inducing KLF4 phosphorylation and increasing its interaction 
with p300 via activating c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 pathways, and 
acetylated KLF4 increased its binding activity to site 2. PDGF-BB stimulated KLF4
deacetylation by inducing KLF4 dephosphorylation and increasing its interaction
with histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) via activating extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase (ERK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt (PI3K/Akt) pathways, and
deacetylated KLF4 dissociated from site 1.
CONCLUSIONS: In VSMCs, ATRA activates and PDGF-BB represses SM22a expression
through KLF4 binding to, or dissociating from, its different cis-elements in an
acetylation-dependent manner.

PMID: 21252119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mucosal Immunol. 2011 Jul;4(4):409-19. doi: 10.1038/mi.2010.83. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

Epigenetic regulation of human ß-defensin 2 and CC chemokine ligand 20 expression
in gingival epithelial cells in response to oral bacteria.

Yin L(1), Chung WO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA. leiyin@u.washington.edu

Gingival epithelia utilize multiple signaling pathways to regulate innate immune 
responses to various oral bacteria, but little is understood about how these
bacteria alter epithelial epigenetic status. In this study we report that DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT1) and histone deacetylase expression were decreased in
gingival epithelial cells treated with oral pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis and
nonpathogen Fusobacterium nucleatum. Pretreatment with trichostatin A and sodium 
butyrate, which increase acetylation of chromatin histones, significantly
enhanced the gene expression of antimicrobial proteins human ß-defensin 2 (hBD2) 
and CC chemokine ligand 20 (CCL20) in response to both bacterial challenges.
Pretreatment with DNMT inhibitor 5'-azacytidine increased hBD2 and CCL20
expression in response to F. nucleatum, but not to P. gingivalis. Furthermore, we
observed a differential pattern of protein levels of H3K4me3, which has been
associated with chromatin remodeling and activation of gene transcription, in
response to P. gingivalis vs. F. nucleatum. This study provides a new insight
into the bacteria-specific innate immune responses via epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC3118861
PMID: 21248725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Respiration. 2011;81(5):362-71. doi: 10.1159/000322560. Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Patterns of inflammatory responses in large and small airways in smokers with and
without chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Isajevs S(1), Taivans I, Svirina D, Strazda G, Kopeika U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Riga,
Latvia. sergisajevs@inbox.lv

Comment in
    Respiration. 2011;81(5):359-61.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterised by
progressive and irreversible airway obstruction. Smoking causes persistent
inflammation in lung tissue. However, differences in inflammatory responses
between the large and small airways have not been systematically explored among
smokers with and without COPD.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our research was to characterise the expression and
localisation of NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) as well as
inflammatory cell (macrophages, lymphocytes, neutrophils) distribution in large
and small airways, in nonsmokers and in smokers with and without COPD.
METHODS: Nineteen nonsmokers, 20 smokers with normal lung ventilation function
and 20 smokers with moderate COPD, undergoing lung resection for a solitary
peripheral carcinoma, were enrolled in the study. Immunohistochemical methods
were used to evaluate NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 and HDAC2 expression and identify inflammatory
cells in airways.
RESULTS: COPD patients had increased NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 expression compared to nonsmokers
and smokers without COPD, in both large and small airways, which corresponded to 
increased numbers of macrophages, CD8+ T lymphocytes and neutrophils. COPD
patients had more macrophages in large compared to small airways and more CD8+ T 
lymphocytes and neutrophils in small compared to large airways. HDAC2 expression 
was significantly downregulated in smokers with COPD in small compared to large
airways.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate a nonuniform distribution of inflammatory
cells throughout the bronchial tree. However, in both smokers with and without
COPD, similar patterns of inflammatory processes occur in both large and small
airways. The difference between smokers with and without COPD is only
quantitative.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21228544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2011 Mar;300(3):L402-13. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00207.2010. Epub 2010 Dec 17.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase causes emphysema.

Mizuno S(1), Yasuo M, Bogaard HJ, Kraskauskas D, Natarajan R, Voelkel NF.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Division, Victoria Johnson Center for
Obstructive Lung Diseases, Virginia Commonwealth Univ., Richmond, VA 23284, USA.

In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), histone
deacetylase (HDAC) expression and activity are reduced in the lung tissue.
However, whether HDAC activity controls the maintenance of the lung alveolar
septal structures has not been investigated. To explore the consequences of HDAC 
inhibition and address the question of whether HDAC inhibition causes lung cell
apoptosis and emphysema, male Sprague-Dawley rats and human pulmonary
microvascular endothelial cells (HPMVEC) were treated with trichostatin A (TSA), 
a specific inhibitor of HDACs. Chronic TSA treatment increased the alveolar air
space area, mean linear intercept, and the number of caspase-3-positive cells in 
rat lungs. TSA suppressed hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), VEGF, and lysyl
oxidase (LOX) and increased microtubule-associated protein-1 light chain 3 (LC3),
p53, and miR34a microRNA expression in both rat lungs and cultured HPMVEC. Gene
silencing of HDAC2 using small interfering RNA (siRNA) in cultured HPMVEC
resulted in the suppression of HIF-1a, VEGF, and LOX and an increase of p53
expression. These data indicate that HDAC inhibition causes emphysema and that
HDAC-dependent mechanisms contribute to the maintenance of the adult lung
structure. Our results also suggest that the increase in apoptosis, as a
consequence of HDAC inhibition, is associated with decreased VEGF and HIF-1a
expression.

PMID: 21224215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr;79(4):672-80. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.068122. Epub 2011 Jan 
10.

The tricyclic antidepressant amitriptyline inhibits D-cyclin transactivation and 
induces myeloma cell apoptosis by inhibiting histone deacetylases: in vitro and
in silico evidence.

Mao X(1), Hou T, Cao B, Wang W, Li Z, Chen S, Fei M, Hurren R, Gronda M, Wu D,
Trudel S, Schimmer AD.

Author information: 
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, the First
Affiliated Hospital, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
xinliangmao@suda.edu.cn

Amitriptyline is a classic tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) and has been used to
treat the depression and anxiety of patients with cancer, but its relevance to
cancer cell apoptosis is not known. In the present study, we demonstrated that
amitriptyline inhibited cyclin D2 transactivation and displayed potential
antimyeloma activity by inhibiting histone deacetylases (HDACs). Amitriptyline
markedly decreased cyclin D2 promoter-driven luciferase activity, reduced cyclin 
D2 expression, and arrested cells at the G(0)/G(1) phase of the cell cycle.
Amitriptyline-induced apoptosis was confirmed by Annexin V staining, and cleavage
of caspase-3 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1. D-Cyclin expression is reported
to be epigenetically regulated by histone acetylation. Thus, we examined the
effects of amitriptyline on histone 3 (H3) acetylation and demonstrated that
amitriptyline increased acetylation of H3 and expression of p27 and p21. Further 
studies indicated that amitriptyline interfered with HDAC function by
down-regulation of HDAC3, -6, -7, and -8, but not HDAC2, and by interacting with 
HDAC7. Molecular docking analysis and molecular dynamics simulations revealed
that amitriptyline bound to HDAC7 and formed strong van der Waals interactions
with five residues of HDAC7, including Phe162, His192, Phe221, Leu293, and
His326, thus inhibiting HDAC activity. Therefore, we found that amitriptyline
inhibited cyclin D2 transactivation and HDAC activity and could be a promising
treatment for multiple myeloma.

PMID: 21220410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):7893-904. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.165431. Epub
2011 Jan 7.

Positive regulatory domain I (PRDM1) and IRF8/PU.1 counter-regulate MHC class II 
transactivator (CIITA) expression during dendritic cell maturation.

Smith MA(1), Wright G, Wu J, Tailor P, Ozato K, Chen X, Wei S, Piskurich JF, Ting
JP, Wright KL.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Department of Molecular
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are key mediators of immune function through robust and
tightly regulated presentation of antigen in the context of the MHC Class II. MHC
Class II expression is controlled by the transactivator CIITA. CIITA expression
in conventional DCs is uniquely dependent on an uncharacterized myeloid
cell-specific promoter, CIITApI. We now identify in vivo the promoter structure
and factors regulating CIITApI. In immature DCs transcription requires binding of
PU.1, IRF8, NF<U+03BA>B, and Sp1 to the promoter. PU.1 binds independently at one site
and in a required heterodimer with IRF8 at a composite element. DCs from
IRF8-null mice have an unoccupied CIITApI promoter that can be rescued by
reconstitution with IRF8 in vitro. Furthermore, mutation of either PU.1 site or
the IFR8 site inhibits transcriptional activation. In vivo footprinting and
chromatin immunoprecipitation reveals that DC maturation induces complete
disassociation of the bound activators paralleled by recruitment of PRDM1/Blimp-1
to the promoter. PRDM1 is a transcriptional repressor with essential roles in B
cells, T cells, NK cells, and DCs. We show that PRDM1 co-repressors, G9a and
HDAC2, are recruited to CIITApI, leading to a loss of histone acetylation and
acquisition of histone H3K9 dimethylation and heterochromatin protein 1<U+03B3> (HP1<U+03B3>). 
PRDM1 binding also blocks IRF8-mediated activation dependent on the PU.1/IRF
composite element. Together these findings reveal the mechanisms regulating CIITA
and, thus, antigen presentation in DCs, demonstrating that PRDM1 and IRF8/PU.1
counter-regulate expression. The activity of PRDM1 in silencing all three cell
type-specific CIITA promoters places it as a central regulator of antigen
presentation.

PMCID: PMC3048676
PMID: 21216962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e14460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014460.

Identification of histone deacetylase 3 as a biomarker for tumor recurrence
following liver transplantation in HBV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wu LM(1), Yang Z, Zhou L, Zhang F, Xie HY, Feng XW, Wu J, Zheng SS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Key Lab of Organ
Transplantation, Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of 
Surgery, Ministry of Public Health, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that high expression levels of class I
histone deacetylases (HDACs) correlate with malignant phenotype and poor
prognosis in some human tumors. However, the expression patterns and prognostic
role of class I HDAC isoforms in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The expression patterns and clinical significance
of class I HDAC isoforms were assessed by immunohistochemistry in a cohort of 43 
hepatitis B virus-associated HCC patients treated with liver transplantation. In 
addition, the effects of HDAC inhibition on HCC cell behavior were investigated
by knockdown of the HDAC isoform with short interfering RNA. Class I HDACs were
highly expressed in a subset of HCCs with positivity for HDAC1 in 51.2%, HDAC2 in
48.8%, and HDAC3 in 32.6% of cases. The expression levels of HDAC isoforms were
significantly associated with the proliferation index of HCC. Kaplan-Meier curves
showed that a high expression level of HDAC2 or HDAC3 implicated significantly
reduced recurrence-free survival. Cox proportional hazards model analysis
revealed HDAC3 overexpression was an unfavorable independent prognostic factor
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002; HR 3.907). In vitro, inhibition of HDAC2 and HDAC3, but not HDAC1,
suppressed proliferation and the invasiveness of liver cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings demonstrate that HDAC3 plays a significant
role in regulating tumor cell proliferation and invasion, and it could be served 
as a candidate biomarker for predicting the recurrence of hepatitis B
virus-associated HCC following liver transplantation and a potential therapeutic 
target.

PMCID: PMC3012077
PMID: 21206745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Blood. 2011 Mar 3;117(9):2649-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312462. Epub 2011
Jan 3.

Epigenetic control of IRF1 responses in HIV-exposed seronegative versus
HIV-susceptible individuals.

Su RC(1), Sivro A, Kimani J, Jaoko W, Plummer FA, Ball TB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. su@cc.umanitoba.ca

Not all individuals exposed to HIV become infected. Understanding why these
HIV-exposed seronegative individuals remain uninfected will help inform the
development of preventative measures against HIV infection. Interferon regulatory
factor-1 (IRF1) plays a critical role both in host antiviral immunity and in
HIV-1 replication. This study examined IRF1 expression regulation in the ex vivo 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of HIV-exposed seronegative commercial sex
workers who can be epidemiologically defined as relatively resistant to HIV
infection (HIV-R), versus HIV-uninfected, susceptible controls (HIV-S). Whereas
HIV-susceptible individuals demonstrated a biphasic, prolonged increase in IRF1
expression after interferon-<U+03B3> stimulation, HIV-R individuals demonstrated a
robust, but transient response. We also found that the IRF1 promoter in HIV-R was
primed by increased basal histone deacetylase-2 binding, independently of
transcription regulators, STAT1 and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B/p65, implicating an
epigenetic silencing mechanism. Interestingly, the transitory IRF1 response in
HIV-R was sufficient in comparable regulation of interleukin-12 and interleukin-4
expression compared with the HIV-susceptible controls. This is the first study
characterizing IRF1 responsiveness in individuals who demonstrate altered
susceptibility to HIV infection. These data suggest that transitory IRF1
responsiveness in HIV-R may be one of the key contributors to the altered
susceptibility to HIV infection during the early stages of primary HIV infection.

© 2011 by The American Society of Hematology

PMCID: PMC3062355
PMID: 21200019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Neurochem. 2011 Mar;116(6):1077-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07163.x. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and PI3-kinase are involved in up-regulation
of mu opioid receptor transcription induced by cycloheximide.

Kim do K(1), Hwang CK, Wagley Y, Law PY, Wei LN, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Despite several decades of efforts to develop safer, efficacious, and
non-addictive opioids for pain treatment, morphine remains the most valuable
painkiller in contemporary medicine. Morphine and endogenous mu opioid peptides
exert their pharmacological actions mainly through the mu opioid receptor (MOR). 
Analgesic effects of opioids in animals are dependent on the MOR expression
levels, as demonstrated by studies of MOR-knockout mice (homo/heterozygotes) and 
MOR-less expressing mice. Surprisingly, in the course of our investigation to
understand the mechanisms involved in the regulation of MOR gene expression,
cycloheximide (CHX), a known protein synthesis inhibitor, markedly induced
accumulation of MOR mRNAs in both MOR-negative and -positive cells. This
induction was blocked by inhibitors of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-K) and p38 
MAPK, but not by a p42/44 MAPK inhibitor. In vitro, CHX was found to activate the
MOR promoter and this activation was suppressed by inhibition of PI3-K. The
transcriptional activator Sox18 was recruited to the MOR promoter in CHX-treated 
cells and this recruitment was also inhibited by the PI3-K and p38 MAPK
inhibitors, Ly294002 and SB203580, respectively. Consistently, acetylation of
histone H3 and induction of H3-K4 methylation were detected while reductions of
histone deacetylase 2 binding and H3-K9 methylation were observed on the
promoter. Furthermore, the MOR mRNA accumulation was almost completely inhibited 
in the presence of actinomycin-D, indicating that this effect occurs mainly
through activation of the transcriptional machinery. These observations suggest
that CHX directly induces MOR gene transcription by recruiting the active
transcription factor Sox18 to the MOR promoter through PI3- and/or p38 MAPK
pathways.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3078638
PMID: 21198637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Br J Pharmacol. 2011 May;163(1):29-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.01199.x.

Glucocorticosteroids: current and future directions.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, UK.
p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Glucocorticoids are the most effective anti-inflammatory therapy for asthma yet
are relatively ineffective in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Glucocorticoids suppress inflammation via several molecular mechanisms.
Glucocorticoids suppress the multiple inflammatory genes that are activated in
chronic inflammatory diseases, such as asthma, by reversing histone acetylation
of activated inflammatory genes through binding of ligand-bound glucocorticoid
receptors (GR) to co-activator molecules and recruitment of histone deacetylase-2
to the activated inflammatory gene transcription complex (trans-repression). At
higher concentrations of glucocorticoids GR homodimers interact with DNA
recognition sites to activate transcription through increased histone acetylation
of anti-inflammatory genes and transcription of several genes linked to
glucocorticoid side effects (trans-activation). Glucocorticoids also have
post-transcriptional effects and decrease stability of some pro-inflammatory mRNA
species. Decreased glucocorticoid responsiveness is found in patients with severe
asthma and asthmatics who smoke, as well as in all patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Several molecular mechanisms of glucocorticoid
resistance have now been identified which involve post-translational
modifications of GR. Histone deacetylase-2 is markedly reduced in activity and
expression as a result of oxidative/nitrative stress so that inflammation becomes
resistant to the anti-inflammatory actions of glucocorticoids. Dissociated
glucocorticoids and selective GR modulators which show improved trans-repression 
over trans-activation effects have been developed to reduce side effects, but so 
far it has been difficult to dissociate anti-inflammatory effects from adverse
effects. In patients with glucocorticoid resistance alternative anti-inflammatory
treatments are being investigated as well as drugs that may reverse the molecular
mechanisms of glucocorticoid resistance.

© 2011 The Author. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3085866
PMID: 21198556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:690848. doi: 10.1155/2011/690848. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Regulating the regulators: the post-translational code of class I HDAC1 and
HDAC2.

Segré CV(1), Chiocca S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, IFOM-IEO 
Campus, Via Adamello 16, 20139 Milan, Italy.

Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are cellular enzymes expressed in many
tissues and play crucial roles in differentiation, proliferation, and cancer.
HDAC1 and HDAC2 in particular are highly homologous proteins that show redundant 
or specific roles in different cell types or in response to different stimuli and
signaling pathways. The molecular details of this dual regulation are largely
unknown. HDAC1 and HDAC2 are not only protein modifiers, but are in turn
regulated by post-translational modifications (PTMs): phosphorylation,
acetylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation, nitrosylation, and carbonylation. Some 
of these PTMs occur and crosstalk specifically on HDAC1 or HDAC2, creating a
rational "code" for a differential, context-related regulation. The global
comprehension of this PTM code is central for dissecting the role of single HDAC1
and HDAC2 in physiology and pathology.

PMCID: PMC3004424
PMID: 21197454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Tanaffos. 2011;10(4):7-16.

Epigenetics and chromatin remodeling play a role in lung disease.

Mortaz E(1), Masjedi MR(2), Barnes PJ(3), Adcock IM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands ; Chronic
Respiratory Disease Research Center, National Research Institute of Tuberculosis 
and Lung Disease (NRITLD), Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (2)Chronic Respiratory Disease Research Center, National Research
Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (NRITLD), Shahid Beheshti University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (3)Cell and Molecular Biology Group, Airways
Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
London, UK.

Epigenetics is defined as heritable changes that affect gene expression without
altering the DNA sequence. Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is
facilitated through different mechanisms such as DNA methylation, histone
modifications and RNA-associated silencing by small non-coding RNAs. All these
mechanisms are crucial for normal development, differentiation and
tissue-specific gene expression. These three systems interact and stabilize one
another and can initiate and sustain epigenetic silencing, thus determining
heritable changes in gene expression. Histone acetylation regulates diverse
cellular functions including inflammatory gene expression, DNA repair and cell
proliferation. Transcriptional coactivators possess intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase activity and this activity drives inflammatory gene expression.
Eleven classical histone deacetylases (HDACs) act to regulate the expression of
distinct subsets of inflammatory/immune genes. Thus, loss of HDAC activity or the
presence of HDAC inhibitors can further enhance inflammatory gene expression by
producing a gene-specific change in HAT activity. For example, HDAC2 expression
and activity are reduced in lung macrophages, biopsy specimens, and blood cells
from patients with severe asthma and smoking asthmatics, as well as in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This may account, at least in 
part, for the enhanced inflammation and reduced steroid responsiveness seen in
these patients. Other proteins, particularly transcription factors, are also
acetylated and are targets for deacetylation by HDACs and sirtuins, a related
family of 7 predominantly protein deacetylases. Thus the
acetylation/deacetylation status of NF-<U+03BA>B and the glucocorticoid receptor can
also affect the overall expression pattern of inflammatory genes and regulate the
inflammatory response. Understanding and targeting specific enzymes involved in
this process might lead to new therapeutic agents, particularly in situations in 
which current anti-inflammatory therapies are suboptimal.

PMCID: PMC4153170
PMID: 25191382  [PubMed]


210. J Vet Med Sci. 2011 May;73(5):623-31. Epub 2010 Dec 24.

Extended exposure to trichostatin A after activation alters the expression of
genes important for early development in nuclear transfer murine embryos.

Kang H(1), Roh S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming and Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Dental Research
Institute and CLS 21, Seoul National University School of Dentistry, Seoul
110749, Korea.

The low viability of embryos reconstructed by somatic cell nuclear transfer
(SCNT) is believed to be associated with epigenetic modification errors, and
reduction of those errors may improve the viability of SCNT embryos. The present 
study shows the effect of trichostatin A (TSA), a strong inhibitor of histone
deacetylase, on the development of murine SCNT embryos. After enucleation and
nuclear injection, reconstructed murine oocytes were activated with or without
TSA for 6 hr (TSA-6 hr). After activation, TSA treatment was extended to 3 hr
(TSA-9 hr), 5 hr (TSA-11 hr) and 18 hr (TSA-24 hr) during culture. As a result,
the SCNT embryos in the TSA-11 hr group showed a remarkably higher blastocyst
rate (21.1%) when compared with the nontreated embryos (3.4%), while the
concentration of TSA did not significantly affect embryonic development. The
expressions of histone deacetylase (HDAC1 and HDAC2) and DNA methylation (DNMT3a 
and DNMT3b) genes decreased in the TSA-11 hr and TSA-24 hr groups, while there
was an increase in the expression of histone acetyltransferase (P300 and CBP),
pluripotency (OCT4 and NANOG) and embryonic growth/trophectoderm formation
(FGF4)-related genes in the same groups. The expression of CDX2, a critical gene 
for trophectoderm formation was upregulated only in the TSA-24 hr group. Our
results show that TSA treatment during the peri- and postactivation period
improves the development of reconstructed murine embryos, and this observation
may be explained by enhanced epigenetic modification of somatic cells caused by
TSA-induced hyperacetylation, demethylation and upregulation of pluripotency and 
embryonic growth after SCNT.

PMID: 21187677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Neurochem Int. 2011 Feb;58(3):366-75. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2010.12.012. Epub
2010 Dec 24.

mRNA for the EAAC1 subtype of glutamate transporter is present in neuronal
dendrites in vitro and dramatically increases in vivo after a seizure.

Ross JR(1), Porter BE, Buckley PT, Eberwine JH, Robinson MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, USA.

The neuronal Na(+)-dependent glutamate transporter, excitatory amino acid carrier
1 (EAAC1, also called EAAT3), has been implicated in the control of synaptic
spillover of glutamate, synaptic plasticity, and the import of cysteine for
neuronal synthesis of glutathione. EAAC1 protein is observed in both perisynaptic
regions of the synapse and in neuronal cell bodies. Although amino acid residues 
in the carboxyl terminal tail have been implicated in the dendritic targeting of 
EAAC1 protein, it is not known if mRNA for EAAC1 may also be targeted to
dendrites. Sorting of mRNA to specific cellular domains provides a mechanism by
which signals can rapidly increase translation in a local environment; this form 
of regulated translation has been linked to diverse biological phenomena ranging 
from establishment of polarity during embryogenesis to synapse development and
synaptic plasticity. In the present study, EAAC1 mRNA sequences were amplified
from dendritic samples that were mechanically harvested from low-density
hippocampal neuronal cultures. In parallel analyses, mRNA for histone deacetylase
2 (HDAC-2) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was not detected,
suggesting that these samples are not contaminated with cell body or glial mRNAs.
EAAC1 mRNA also co-localized with Map2a (a marker of dendrites) but not Tau1 (a
marker of axons) in hippocampal neuronal cultures by in situ hybridization. In
control rats, EAAC1 mRNA was observed in soma and proximal dendrites of
hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Following pilocarpine- or kainate-induced
seizures, EAAC1 mRNA was present in CA1 pyramidal cell dendrites up to 200µm from
the soma. These studies provide the first evidence that EAAC1 mRNA localizes to
dendrites and suggest that dendritic targeting of EAAC1 mRNA is increased by
seizure activity and may be regulated by neuronal activity/depolarization.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3040252
PMID: 21185901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 28;404(4):915-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.081. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Involvement of HDAC1 in E-cadherin expression in prostate cancer cells; its
implication for cell motility and invasion.

Kim NH(1), Kim SN, Kim YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kwandong University College of Medicine, Gangneung
210-701, Republic of Korea.

In this study, we investigate the molecular mechanism by which histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors exert anti-invasiveness effect against prostate
cancer cells. We first evaluate the growth inhibition effect of HDAC inhibitors
in prostate cancer cells, which is accompanied by induction of p21(WAF1)
expression and accumulation of acetylated histones. And we found that the
migration and invasion of prostate cancer cells is strongly inhibited by
treatment with HDAC inhibitors. In parallel, E-cadherin level is highly
up-regulated in HDAC inhibitor-treated prostate cancer cells. And siRNA knockdown
of E-cadherin significantly diminishes the anti-invasion effect of HDAC
inhibitors, indicating that E-cadherin overexpression is one of possible
mechanism for anti-invasion effect of HDAC inhibitors. Furthermore, specific
downregulation of HDAC1, but not HDAC2, causes E-cadherin expression and
subsequent inhibition of cell motility and invasion. Collectively, our data
demonstrate that HDAC1 is a major repressive enzyme for E-cadherin expression as 
well as HDAC inhibitor-mediated anti-invasiveness.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21184735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cancer Biomark. 2010;7(2):79-90. doi: 10.3233/CBM-2010-0150.

Formation of AR-SMRT binding in prostate cancer cells treated with natural
histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Trtková K(1), Paková L, Matijecuková N, Kolár Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology and Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University, Olomouc, the Czech Republic.
trtkova@post.cz

Signaling through the androgen receptor (AR) plays a critical role in prostate
cancer progression. The AR is a classical nuclear receptor (NR) providing a link 
between signaling molecule and transcription response. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACI) have antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects on prostate
cancer cells and their implication in silence AR signaling may have potential
therapeutic use. We aimed to study the inhibitory effects of the corepressor SMRT
(Silencing Mediator for Retinoid and Thyroid hormone receptors) which forms a
complex together with nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR) and with histone
deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) on AR activity. The androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cell
line LNCaP and androgen-insensitive prostate cancer cell line C4-2 both
AR-positive, and androgen-insensitive DU145 and PC3 prostate cancer cell lines
were treated with two HDACIs, sodium butyrate (NaB) and/or trichostatin A (TSA). 
We amplified immunoprecipitated DNA by conventional PCR and in the following step
we used the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis coupled with
quantitative PCR for monitoring NaB induced formation of AR-SMRT/N-CoR complex
binding on the PSA promoter. The co-immunoprecipitation assay revealed increase
in AR-SMRT formation in NaB treated cells. Simultaneously, the Western blot
analysis showed a significant decrease in AR protein expression. Furthermore, we 
estimated the reduced presence of HDAC2 and HDAC3 proteins by NaB and TSA
treatment in AR-negative DU145 cell line. In conclusion, the inhibitory effect of
NaB on AR gene expression seems to be specific and unique for prostate cancer
AR-positive cell lines and corresponds with its ability to stimulate AR-SMRT
complex formation. We suggest that AR and SMRT/N-CoR corepressors may form a
stable complex in vitro and NaB may facilitate the interaction between AR nuclear
steroid receptor and SMRT corepressor protein.

PMID: 21178266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Eur J Med Res. 2010 Nov 4;15 Suppl 2:64-7.

Tiotropium increases cytosolic muscarinic M3 receptors and acetylated H3 histone 
proteins in induced sputum cells of COPD patients.

Holownia A(1), Mroz RM, Skopinski T, Kielek A, Kolodziejczyk A, Chyczewska E,
Braszko JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland. holow_sinai@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by
irreversible progressive airflow limitation related to tobacco smoking. This
limitation is caused by chronic inflammation of the airways and lung parenchyma
and is associated with increased activity of parasympathetic system. The most
effective bronchodilators in COPD are muscarinic receptor antagonists (MRA),
which reverse, at least in part, compromised respiratory function. MRA also
contribute to control inflammatory processes via interactions with inflammatory
signaling molecules. The use of the long-acting cholinolytic bronchodilatator -
tiotropium, with high affinity to M3 receptors, is suggested as a first line
maintenance treatment in COPD patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In this study we assessed M3 receptor protein expression in
induced sputum of 27 stable COPD patients before and after therapy consisting of 
18 µg once daily tiotropium for 12 weeks. Lung function tests including
spirometry, lung volumes, and DLCO were performed before and after therapy in all
COPD patients. The patients were subjected to the sputum induction procedures
before and after therapy. Sputum cells were isolated, sample-specific cell
profiles were characterized, and the cells were processed to isolate pure
cytosolic fractions. Cytosolic M3 protein and HDAC2 levels and nuclear acetylated
histone H3 (AcH3) expression was quantified using specific antibodies against
human proteins and Western blot with enhanced luminescence detection.
RESULTS: Therapy significantly increased the mean forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC) volume (P<0.05). The mean
expression of M3 protein was higher by 37% after therapy (P<0.05), HDAC2
expression was not altered, while AcH3 level was increased by about 90% (P<0.01),
compared with the corresponding data before therapy. HDAC2 expression before
therapy was positively correlated with AcH3 expression (r = 0.74), while after
therapy no correlation was detected. FEV1, FCV, and cytosolic M3 protein
expression did not correlate with other biochemical parameters tested.
CONCLUSIONS: Twelve weeks of tiotropium therapy in COPD patients improves
clinical indices of lung function and involves alterations in sputum cell
chromatin acetylation and also increased cholinergic M3 receptor internalization.

PMCID: PMC4360339
PMID: 21147623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Neurochem. 2011 Feb;116(4):636-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07149.x. Epub 
2011 Jan 19.

Histone deacetylase inhibition decreases preference without affecting aversion
for nicotine.

Pastor V(1), Host L, Zwiller J, Bernabeu R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología e Instituto de Biología Celular, Universidad de
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Epigenetic mechanisms have recently been shown to be involved in the long-term
effects of drugs of abuse. A well described epigenetic mechanism modulating
transcriptional activity consists in the binding to DNA of methyl-CpG binding
proteins, such as MeCP2, recruiting histone deacetylases (HDACs). Nicotine causes
long-term changes in the brain, but little is known concerning the mechanisms
involved in nicotine-preference. Using a nicotine-conditioned place preference
protocol, we demonstrate here that the histone deacetylase inhibitor
phenylbutyrate was able to dramatically reduce the preference for nicotine,
without altering the aversive properties of the drug. We measured
immunohistochemically the acetylation of lysine-9 of histone H3, and the
expression of phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding protein, HDAC2 and
methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 in the striatum and prefrontal cortex of rats
displaying nicotine-preference or aversion and treated with phenylbutyrate. We
show that, at the dose administered, the inhibitor was effective in inhibiting
HDAC activity. The data suggest that phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding
protein participates in the establishment of conditioned place preference, but
not in the reduction of nicotine-preference in response to phenylbutyrate.
Moreover, striatal expression of HDAC2 in response to phenylbutyrate mirrored the
behavioral effects of the inhibitor, suggesting that HDAC2 is involved in
promoting synaptic plasticity underlying the preference for nicotine.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21166804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(5):2373-85. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01602-10. Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Interplay between PKCd and Sp1 on histone deacetylase inhibitor-mediated
Epstein-Barr virus reactivation.

Tsai PF(1), Lin SJ, Weng PL, Tsai SC, Lin JH, Chou YC, Tsai CH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10051, Taiwan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) undergoes latent and lytic replication cycles, and its
reactivation from latency to lytic replication is initiated by expression of the 
two viral immediate-early transactivators, Zta and Rta. In vitro, reactivation of
EBV can be induced by anti-immunoglobulin, tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate, and
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi). We have discovered that protein kinase C
delta (PKCd) is required specifically for EBV reactivation by HDACi.
Overexpression of PKCd is sufficient to induce the activity of the Zta promoter
(Zp) but not of the Rta promoter (Rp). Deletion analysis revealed that the ZID
element of Zp is important for PKCd activation. Moreover, the Sp1 putative
sequence on ZID is essential for PKCd-induced Zp activity, and the physiological 
binding of Sp1 on ZID has been confirmed. After HDACi treatment, activated PKCd
can phosphorylate Sp1 at serine residues and might result in dissociation of the 
HDAC2 repressor from ZID. HDACi-mediated HDAC2-Sp1 dissociation can be inhibited 
by the PKCd inhibitor, Rotterlin. Furthermore, overexpression of HDAC2 can
suppress the HDACi-induced Zp activity. Consequently, we hypothesize that HDACi
induces PKCd activation, causing phosphorylation of Sp1, and that the interplay
between PKCd and Sp1 results in the release of HDAC2 repressor from Zp and
initiation of Zta expression.

PMCID: PMC3067761
PMID: 21159880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:928326. doi: 10.1155/2011/928326. Epub 2010 Nov
29.

Roles and targets of class I and IIa histone deacetylases in cardiac hypertrophy.

Kee HJ(1), Kook H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center for Gene Regulation, Chonnam National University
Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Republic of Korea.

Cardiac hypertrophy occurs in association with heart diseases and ultimately
results in cardiac dysfunction and heart failure. Histone deacetylases (HDACs)
are post-translational modifying enzymes that can deacetylate histones and
non-histone proteins. Research with HDAC inhibitors has provided evidence that
the class I HDACs are pro-hypertrophic. Among the class I HDACs, HDAC2 is
activated by hypertrophic stresses in association with the induction of heat
shock protein 70. Activated HDAC2 triggers hypertrophy by inhibiting the signal
cascades of either Krüppel like factor 4 (KLF4) or inositol
polyphosphate-5-phosphatase f (Inpp5f). Thus, modulators of HDAC2 enzymes, such
as selective HDAC inhibitors, are considered to be an important target for heart 
diseases, especially for preventing cardiac hypertrophy. In contrast, class IIa
HDACs have been shown to repress cardiac hypertrophy by inhibiting
cardiac-specific transcription factors such as myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2), 
GATA4, and NFAT in the heart. Studies of class IIa HDACs have shown that the
underlying mechanism is regulated by nucleo-cytoplasm shuttling in response to a 
variety of stress signals. In this review, we focus on the class I and IIa HDACs 
that play critical roles in mediating cardiac hypertrophy and discuss the
non-histone targets of HDACs in heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2997602
PMID: 21151616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cancer Sci. 2011 Feb;102(2):387-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01792.x. Epub
2010 Dec 10.

Expression of nuclear receptor corepressors and class I histone deacetylases in
astrocytic gliomas.

Campos B(1), Bermejo JL, Han L, Felsberg J, Ahmadi R, Grabe N, Reifenberger G,
Unterberg A, Herold-Mende C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgical Research, Department of Neurosurgery, University of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Transcriptional repressors such as nuclear receptor corepressors (NCORs) and
class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are considered potential therapeutic targets
in various human malignancies. In astrocytic gliomas, however, there is still a
need to understand the role of these transcriptional repressors in tumor
proliferation, tumor differentiation, and patient survival. We
immunohistochemically analyzed the expression of NCOR1 and 2 as well as HDAC1, 2,
and 3 on a tissue microarray comprising tumor samples from 283 astrocytic gliomas
and correlated the expression levels with tumor differentiation, tumor
proliferation, and patient survival. Strong nuclear expression was found in
glioma cells for HDAC1, HDAC2, and NCOR2. In contrast, weak expression of NCOR1
and HDAC3 was detected in the cytoplasm and nuclei of tumor cells. HDAC3
expression was inversely associated with tumor grade. Consequently, increased
HDAC3 expression was associated with better patient survival in univariate
regression. Expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 increased during tumor recurrence and
malignant tumor progression, respectively, whereas expression of the remaining
antigens did not seem to depend on tumor grade and was comparable to expression
levels found in non-neoplastic brain tissues. Finally, we detected a positive
association between HDAC2 expression and tumor proliferation as well as between
NCOR1 and expression of the stem cell-associated intermediate filament protein
nestin. Our findings suggest that "classical" transcriptional repressors are
expressed in astrocytic tumors and that the roles of HDAC2 and HDAC3 in these
tumors deserve further investigation.

© 2010 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21143702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Haematologica. 2010 Dec;95(12):1985-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.033225.

Erythroblast enucleation.

Migliaccio AR.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2010 Dec;95(12):2013-21.

PMCID: PMC2995553
PMID: 21123437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 7;404(1):166-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.086. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

The role of class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) on gluconeogenesis in liver.

Oiso H(1), Furukawa N, Suefuji M, Shimoda S, Ito A, Furumai R, Nakagawa J,
Yoshida M, Nishino N, Araki E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Hepatic gluconeogenesis is crucial for glucose homeostasis. Although sirtuin 1
(Sirt1) is implicated in the regulation of gluconeogenesis in the liver, the
effects of other histone deacetylases (HDAC) on gluconeogenesis are unclear. The 
aim of this study was to identify the role of class I HDACs in hepatic
gluconeogenesis. In HepG2 cells and the liver of mice, the expressions of
phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a
(HNF4a) were significantly decreased by treatment with a newly designed class I
HDAC inhibitor, Ky-2. SiRNA knockdown of HDAC1 expression, but not of HDAC2 or
HDAC3, in HepG2 cells decreased PEPCK and HNF4a expression. In HepG2 cells,
insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt and forkhead box O 1 (FoxO1) was
increased by Ky-2. Pyruvate tolerance tests in Ky-2-treated high-fat-diet
(HFD)-fed mice showed a marked reduction in blood glucose compared with
vehicle-treated HFD mice. These data suggest that class I HDACs increase HNF4a
protein expression and the transcriptional activity of FoxO1, followed by the
induction of PEPCK mRNA expression and gluconeogenesis in liver.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21108932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 12;5(11):e15486. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015486.

Sox2 uses multiple domains to associate with proteins present in Sox2-protein
complexes.

Cox JL(1), Mallanna SK, Luo X, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.

Master regulators, such as Sox2, Oct4 and Nanog, control complex gene networks
necessary for the self-renewal and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells (ESC).
These master regulators associate with co-activators and co-repressors to
precisely control their gene targets. Recent studies using proteomic analysis
have identified a large, diverse group of co-activators and co-repressors that
associate with master regulators, including Sox2. In this report, we examined the
size distribution of nuclear protein complexes containing Sox2 and its associated
proteins HDAC1, Sall4 and Lin28. Interestingly, we determined that Sox2 and HDAC1
associate with protein complexes that vary greatly in size; whereas, Lin28
primarily associates with smaller complexes, and Sall4 primarily associates with 
larger complexes. Additionally, we examined the domains of Sox2 necessary to
mediate its association with its partner proteins Sall4, HDAC1 and HDAC2. We
determined that Sox2 uses multiple and distinct domains to associate with its
partner proteins. We also examined the domains of Sox2 necessary to mediate its
self-association, and we determined that Sox2 self-association is mediated
through multiple domains. Collectively, these studies provide novel insights into
how Sox2 is able to associate with a wide array of nuclear proteins that control 
gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2980493
PMID: 21103394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Dec 17;403(3-4):452-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.054. Epub 2010 Nov 19.

Nrf2 deficiency influences susceptibility to steroid resistance via HDAC2
reduction.

Adenuga D(1), Caito S, Yao H, Sundar IK, Hwang JW, Chung S, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, Lung Biology and Disease Program,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

Abnormal lung inflammation and oxidant burden are associated with a significant
reduction in histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) abundance and steroid resistance. We
hypothesized that Nrf2 regulates steroid sensitivity via HDAC2 in response to
inflammation in mouse lung. Furthermore, HDAC2 deficiency leads to steroid
resistance in attenuating lung inflammatory response, which may be due to
oxidant/antioxidant imbalance. Loss of antioxidant transcription factor Nrf2
resulted in decreased HDAC2 level in lung, and increased inflammatory lung
response which was not reversed by steroid. Thus, steroid resistance or inability
of steroids to control lung inflammatory response is dependent on Nrf2-HDAC2
axis. These findings have implications in steroid resistance, particularly during
the conditions of oxidative stress when the lungs are more susceptible to
inflammatory response, which is seen in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and inflammatory bowel disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3031165
PMID: 21094147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Dev Cell. 2010 Dec 14;19(6):807-18. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.015. Epub 2010 
Nov 18.

Hdac1 and Hdac2 act redundantly to control p63 and p53 functions in epidermal
progenitor cells.

LeBoeuf M(1), Terrell A, Trivedi S, Sinha S, Epstein JA, Olson EN, Morrisey EE,
Millar SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Epidermal and hair follicle development from surface ectodermal progenitor cells 
requires coordinated changes in gene expression. Histone deacetylases alter gene 
expression programs through modification of chromatin and transcription factors. 
We find that deletion of ectodermal Hdac1 and Hdac2 results in dramatic failure
of hair follicle specification and epidermal proliferation and stratification,
phenocopying loss of the key ectodermal transcription factor p63. Although
expression of p63 and its positively regulated basal cell targets is maintained
in Hdac1/2-deficient ectoderm, targets of p63-mediated repression, including p21,
14-3-3s, and p16/INK4a, are ectopically expressed, and HDACs bind and are active 
at their promoter regions in normal undifferentiated keratinocytes. Mutant
embryos display increased levels of acetylated p53, which opposes p63 functions, 
and p53 is required for HDAC inhibitor-mediated p21 expression in keratinocytes. 
Our data identify critical requirements for HDAC1/2 in epidermal development and 
indicate that HDAC1/2 directly mediate repressive functions of p63 and suppress
p53 activity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3003338
PMID: 21093383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):1767-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.157768. Epub 2010 
Nov 16.

PARP-14 functions as a transcriptional switch for Stat6-dependent gene
activation.

Mehrotra P(1), Riley JP, Patel R, Li F, Voss L, Goenka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, HB Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

A subset of poly ADP-ribose polymerases (PARP) that also contain macro domains
regulate transcription. One such macro PARP, PARP-14 alters interleukin 4 (IL-4) 
and Stat6-dependent transcription. Stat6, activated by IL-4 plays an important
role in T helper cell immunity and B cell responses. Here we define the mechanism
by which PARP-14 regulates Stat6-activated transcription. Under non-stimulating
conditions, PARP-14 recruits HDAC 2 and 3 to IL-4 responsive promoters. In the
presence of IL-4, PARP-14 promotes efficient binding of Stat6 to its target
genes. Moreover, HDAC 2 and 3 are released from the promoter with an IL-4 signal,
this is aided by the ADP-ribosylation of the HDACs by PARP-14. The HDACs and
PARP-14 get replaced by coactivators containing HAT activity. Based on these
observations we put forth a mechanism in which PARP-14 functions as a
transcriptional switch for Stat6-dependent gene induction. Thus, in the absence
of a signal PARP-14 acts as a transcriptional repressor by recruiting HDACs. In
contrast, in the presence of IL-4 the catalytic activity of PARP-14 facilitates
Stat6 binding to the promoter, and release of HDACs so as to activate
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3023471
PMID: 21081493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 17;29:149. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-29-149.

Effects of valproic acid on the cell cycle and apoptosis through acetylation of
histone and tubulin in a scirrhous gastric cancer cell line.

Yagi Y(1), Fushida S, Harada S, Kinoshita J, Makino I, Oyama K, Tajima H, Fujita 
H, Takamura H, Ninomiya I, Fujimura T, Ohta T, Yashiro M, Hirakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterologic Surgery, Division of Cancer Medicine, Graduate
School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan.
y-yagi@live.jp

BACKGROUND: Management of peritoneal dissemination is the most critical problem
in gastric cancer. This study was performed to investigate the inhibitory effects
of valproic acid (VPA) on a highly peritoneal-seeding cell line of human
scirrhous gastric cancer, OCUM-2MD3, and to explore the mechanism and the
potential of VPA.
METHODS: The effects of VPA on the growth of OCUM-2MD3 cells were assessed by MTT
assay. In addition, paclitaxel (PTX) was combined with VPA to evaluate their
synergistic effects. HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression were evaluated by western
blotting in OCUM-2MD3 cells and other gastric cancer cell lines (TMK-1, MKN-28). 
The acetylation status of histone H3 and a-tubulin after exposure to VPA were
analyzed by western blotting. The activities of cell cycle regulatory proteins
and apoptosis-modulating proteins were also examined by western blotting. The
effects of VPA in vivo were evaluated in a xenograft model, and apoptotic
activity was assessed by TUNEL assay.
RESULTS: OCUM-2MD3 cells showed high levels of HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression
compared with TMK-1 and MKN-28. The concentration of VPA required for significant
inhibition of cell viability (P < 0.05) was 5 mM at 24 h and 0.5 mM at 48 h and
72 h. The inhibition of VPA with PTX showed dose-dependent and combinatorial
effects. VPA increased acetyl-histone H3, acetyl-a-tubulin, and p21WAF1 levels
accompanied by upregulation of p27, caspase 3, and caspase 9, and downregulation 
of bcl-2, cyclin D1, and survivin. In the xenograft model experiment, the mean
tumor volume of the VPA-treated group was significantly reduced by 36.4%,
compared with that of the control group at 4 weeks after treatment (P < 0.01).
The apoptotic index was significantly higher in the VPA-treated group (42.3% ±
3.5%) than in the control group (7.7% ± 2.5%) (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: VPA induced dynamic modulation of histone H3 and a-tubulin
acetylation in relation with the anticancer effect and the enhancement of PTX in 
the OCUM-2MD3 cell line. Therefore, VPA in combination with PTX is expected to be
a promising therapy for peritoneal dissemination of scirrhous gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC2994814
PMID: 21080974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cell Metab. 2010 Nov 3;12(5):425-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.10.007.

Megarole for microRNA in muscle disease.

Crist CG(1), Buckingham M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA, Department of Developmental Biology, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Comment on
    Cell Metab. 2010 Oct 6;12(4):341-51.

Deregulation of microRNAs in dystrophic muscle highlights their importance in
muscle homeostasis. A recent study in Cell Metabolism (Cacchiarelli et al., 2010)
shows that the presence of functional dystrophin is required for NO-dependent
nitrosylation of the HDAC2 repressor and subsequent activation of a group of
microRNAs required for muscle function.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21035752  [PubMed]


227. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1094-100. doi: 10.1038/ncb2114. Epub 2010 Oct 24.

GAPDH mediates nitrosylation of nuclear proteins.

Kornberg MD(1), Sen N, Hara MR, Juluri KR, Nguyen JV, Snowman AM, Law L, Hester
LD, Snyder SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1024-6.

S-nitrosylation of proteins by nitric oxide is a major mode of signalling in
cells. S-nitrosylation can mediate the regulation of a range of proteins,
including prominent nuclear proteins, such as HDAC2 (ref. 2) and PARP1 (ref. 3). 
The high reactivity of the nitric oxide group with protein thiols, but the
selective nature of nitrosylation within the cell, implies the existence of
targeting mechanisms. Specificity of nitric oxide signalling is often achieved by
the binding of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) to target proteins, either directly or
through scaffolding proteins such as PSD-95 (ref. 5) and CAPON. As the three
principal isoforms of NOS--neuronal NOS (nNOS), endothelial NOS (eNOS) and
inducible NOS (iNOS)--are primarily non-nuclear, the mechanisms by which nuclear 
proteins are selectively nitrosylated have been elusive.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is physiologically nitrosylated 
at its Cys 150 residue. Nitrosylated GAPDH (SNO-GAPDH) binds to Siah1, which
possesses a nuclear localization signal, and is transported to the nucleus. Here,
we show that SNO-GAPDH physiologically transnitrosylates nuclear proteins,
including the deacetylating enzyme sirtuin-1 (SIRT1), histone deacetylase-2
(HDAC2) and DNA-activated protein kinase (DNA-PK). Our findings reveal a novel
mechanism for targeted nitrosylation of nuclear proteins and suggest that
protein-protein transfer of nitric oxide groups may be a general mechanism in
cellular signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC2972384
PMID: 20972425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;22(4):1209-21. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-100651.

Chromatin-modifying agents increase transcription of CYP46A1, a key player in
brain cholesterol elimination.

Milagre I(1), Nunes MJ, Moutinho M, Rivera I, Fuso A, Scarpa S, Gama MJ,
Rodrigues E.

Author information: 
(1)iMed.UL-Research Institute for Medicines and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty 
of Pharmacy, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

The major mechanism of brain cholesterol elimination is the conversion of
cholesterol into 24S-hydroxycholesterol by CYP46A1, a neuron-specific cytochrome 
P450. Since increasing evidence suggests that upregulation of CYP46A1 may be
relevant for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, we aim to identify the
molecular mechanisms involved in CYP46A1 transcription. Our previous studies
demonstrated the role of Sp transcription factors in basal expression and histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor-dependent derepression of CYP46A1. Here, we show
that the demethylating agent 5'-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC) is a CYP46A1 inducer
and that pre-treatment with DAC causes a marked synergistic activation of CYP46A1
transcription by trichostatin A. Surprisingly, bisulfite sequencing analysis
revealed that the CYP46A1 core promoter is completely unmethylated in both human 
brain and non-neuronal human tissues where CYP46A1 is not expressed. Therefore,
we have investigated Sp expression levels by western blot and real-time PCR, and 
their binding patterns to the CYP46A1 promoter, by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, after DAC treatment. Our results 
showed that DAC decreases not only Sp1 and Sp3 protein levels, but also the
binding activity of Sp3 to the +1 region of the CYP46A1 locus. Concomitantly,
HDAC1 and HDAC2 were also significantly dissociated from the promoter. In
conclusion, DAC induces CYP46A1 gene expression, in a DNA methylation-independent
mechanism, decreasing Sp3/HDAC binding to the proximal promoter. Furthermore, by 
affecting the expression of the Sp3 transcription factor in neuronal cells, DAC
might affect not only brain cholesterol metabolism, but also the expression of
many other neuronal genes.

PMID: 20930312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Clin Pathol. 2010 Nov;63(11):994-8. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2010.080952. Epub 2010 Oct
5.

Expression of class I histone deacetylases (HDAC1 and HDAC2) in oesophageal
adenocarcinomas: an immunohistochemical study.

Langer R(1), Mutze K, Becker K, Feith M, Ott K, Höfler H, Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
rupert.langer@lrz.tum.de

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes which play a central role in
post-translational histone and non-histone protein modification. Deregulation of 
HDACs has been detected in various human malignancies and may also influence
response to chemotherapy.
AIMS: To investigate the expression of class I histone deacetylase (HDAC)
isoforms 1 and 2 in oesophageal adenocarcinomas.
METHODS: 132 primary resected tumours and 48 tumours treated by chemotherapy were
analysed. Expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 was determined by immunohistochemistry,
applied on a tissue microarray and on pretherapeutic biopsies, and correlated
with pathological features and prognosis.
RESULTS: There was negative or low expression of HDAC1 in 54% of tumours,
moderate expression in 41% and high expression in 5%. HDAC2 expression was
negative or low in 30% of tumours, moderate in 47% and high in 21%. In primary
resected tumours, high HDAC2 levels were associated with lymphatic tumour spread 
and lower tumour differentiation grade. HDAC1 levels were not associated with pT,
pN category or tumour differentiation grade. For neoadjuvant treated tumours,
there was only a trend for an association with high pretherapeutic HDAC2
expression and tumour regression after chemotherapy. Pretherapeutic HDAC1 levels 
were not associated with regression after chemotherapy. Survival analysis failed 
to show any prognostic impact of HDAC1 or HDAC2 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: High HDAC2 expression is associated with aggressive tumour behaviour
in oesophageal adenocarcinomas. No significant prognostic value could be found
with respect to overall survival or an association with response to conventional 
chemotherapy for HDAC expression. Immunohistochemical determination of HDACs may 
be useful for prediction of response to specific HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 20924032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Reprod Sci. 2011 Jan;18(1):28-45. doi: 10.1177/1933719110381928. Epub 2010 Sep
30.

Levo-tetrahydropalmatine retards the growth of ectopic endometrial implants and
alleviates generalized hyperalgesia in experimentally induced endometriosis in
rats.

Zhao T(1), Liu X, Zhen X, Guo SW.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China.

One primary goal of medical treatment of endometriosis is to alleviate pain and
there is a pressing need for new therapeutics for endometriosis with better
efficacy and side-effect profiles. Levo-tetrahydropalmatine (l-THP) has been used
as a sedative or analgesic for chronic pains in China since 1970s. In this study,
we sought to evaluate the efficacy of l-THP, with or without valproic acid (VPA),
in a rat model of endometriosis. We surgically induced endometriosis in 55 adult 
female rats. Two weeks after, all rats were further divided into 5 groups
randomly: untreated, low- and high-dose of l-THP, VPA, and l-THP + VPA. Response 
latency in hotplate test was measured before the surgery, before and after 3-week
treatment of respective drugs. All rats were then sacrificed for analysis. The
average lesion size and the immunoreactivity to N-methyl-D-asparate receptor 1
(NMDAR1), acid-sensing ion channel 3 (ASIC3), calcitonin gene-related peptide
(CGRP), c-Fos, tyrosine kinase receptor A (TrkA), and histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2) in dorsal root ganglia (DRG), to phorphorylated p65, HDAC2, TrkA, and
CGRP in ectopic endometrium and to phorphorylated p65 and CGRP in eutopic
endometrium were evaluated. We found that rats receiving l-THP, with or without
VPA, had significantly reduced lesion size and exhibited significantly improved
response to noxious thermal stimulus. The treatment also significantly lowered
immunoreactivity to all mediators involved in central sensitization and to HDAC2 
in DRG, to TrkA and CGRP in ectopic endometrium, and to CGRP in eutopic
endometrium. In summary, l-THP reduces lesion growth and generalized
hyperalgesia. Thus, l-THP may be a promising therapeutics for endometriosis.

PMID: 20884991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Stem Cells. 2010 Nov;28(11):2088-98. doi: 10.1002/stem.532.

Cardiospheres recapitulate a niche-like microenvironment rich in stemness and
cell-matrix interactions, rationalizing their enhanced functional potency for
myocardial repair.

Li TS(1), Cheng K, Lee ST, Matsushita S, Davis D, Malliaras K, Zhang Y,
Matsushita N, Smith RR, Marbán E.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.
toasheng.li@cshs.org

Cardiac stem cells (CSCs) are promising candidates for use in myocardial
regenerative therapy. We test the hypothesis that growing cardiac-derived cells
as three-dimensional cardiospheres may recapitulate a stem cell niche-like
microenvironment, favoring cell survival and enhancing functional benefit after
transplantation into the injured heart. CSCs and supporting cells from human
endomyocardial biopsies were grown as cardiospheres and compared with cells
cultured under traditional monolayer condition or dissociated from cardiospheres.
Cardiospheres self-assembled into stem cell niche-like structures in vitro in
suspension culture, while exhibiting greater proportions of c-kit(+) cells and
upregulated expression of SOX2 and Nanog. Pathway-focused polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) array, quantitative real-time PCR, and immunostaining revealed
enhanced expression of stem cell-relevant factors and
adhesion/extracellular-matrix molecules (ECM) in cardiospheres including IGF-1,
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), Tert, integrin-a(2), laminin-ß(1), and matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs). Implantation of cardiospheres in severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse hearts with acute infarction disproportionately
improved cell engraftment and myocardial function, relative to monolayer-cultured
cells. Dissociation of cardiospheres into single cells decreased the expression
of ECM and adhesion molecules and undermined resistance to oxidative stress,
negating the improved cell engraftment and functional benefit in vivo. Growth of 
cardiac-derived cells as cardiospheres mimics stem cell niche properties with
enhanced "stemness" and expression of ECM and adhesion molecules. These changes
underlie an increase in cell survival and more potent augmentation of global
function following implantation into the infarcted heart.

Copyright © 2010 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3405979
PMID: 20882531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Diabetologia. 2010 Dec;53(12):2569-78. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1892-8. Epub 2010 
Sep 28.

Lysine deacetylases are produced in pancreatic beta cells and are differentially 
regulated by proinflammatory cytokines.

Lundh M(1), Christensen DP, Rasmussen DN, Mascagni P, Dinarello CA, Billestrup N,
Grunnet LG, Mandrup-Poulsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Research Methodology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Cytokine-induced beta cell toxicity is abrogated by
non-selective inhibitors of lysine deacetylases (KDACs). The KDAC family consists
of 11 members, namely histone deacetylases HDAC1 to HDAC11, but it is not known
which KDAC members play a role in cytokine-mediated beta cell death. The aim of
the present study was to examine the KDAC gene expression profile of the beta
cell and to investigate whether KDAC expression is regulated by cytokines. In
addition, the protective effect of the non-selective KDAC inhibitor ITF2357 and
interdependent regulation of four selected KDACs were investigated.
METHODS: The beta cell line INS-1 and intact rat and human islets were exposed to
cytokines with or without ITF2357. Expression of mRNA was assessed by real-time
PCR and selected targets validated at the protein level by immunoblotting.
Effects on cytokine-induced toxicity were investigated by in vitro assays.
RESULTS: Hdac1 to Hdac11 were expressed and differentially regulated by cytokines
in INS-1 cells and rat islets. HDAC1, -2, -6 and -11 were found to be expressed
and regulated by cytokines in human islets. ITF2357 protected against
cytokine-induced beta cell apoptosis and counteracted cytokine-induced
attenuation of basal insulin secretion. In addition, cytokine-induced regulation 
of Hdac2 and Hdac6, but not Hdac1 and Hdac11, was reduced by KDAC inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: All classical KDAC genes are expressed by beta cells 
and differentially regulated by cytokines. Based on the relative expression
levels and degree of regulation by cytokines, we propose that HDAC1, -2, -6 and
-11 are of particular importance for beta cell function. These observations may
help in the design of specific KDAC inhibitors to prevent beta cell destruction
in situ and in islet grafts.

PMID: 20878317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. ACS Chem Biol. 2010 Sep 17;5(9):863-73. doi: 10.1021/cb100088g.

Peptide arrays identify isoform-selective substrates for profiling endogenous
lysine deacetylase activity.

Gurard-Levin ZA(1), Kilian KA, Kim J, Bähr K, Mrksich M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

This paper reports the development of a class of isoform-selective peptide
substrates for measuring endogenous lysine deacetylase (KDAC) activities in cell 
culture. The peptides were first identified by comparing the substrate
specificity profiles of the four KDAC isoforms KDAC2, KDAC3, KDAC8, and sirtuin 1
(SIRT1) on a 361-member hexapeptide array wherein the two C-terminal residues to 
the acetylated lysine were varied. The arrays were prepared by immobilizing the
peptides to a self-assembled monolayer of alkanethiolates on gold and could
therefore be analyzed by a mass spectrometry technique termed SAMDI
(self-assembled monolayers for matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry). Arrays presenting the selective substrates
were treated with nuclear extracts from HeLa, Jurkat, and smooth muscle cells and
analyzed to measure endogenous deacetylase activities. We then use the arrays to 
profile KDAC activity through the HeLa cell cycle. We find that the activity
profile of the KDAC3 selective peptide closely mirrors the changing acetylation
state of the H4 histone, suggesting a role for this enzyme in cell cycle
regulation. This work is significant because it describes a general route for
identifying selective substrates that can be used to understand the differential 
roles of members of the deacetylase enzyme family in complex biological processes
and further because the label-free approach avoids perturbation of enzyme
activity that has plagued fluorescence-based assays.

PMCID: PMC2941244
PMID: 20849068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Virol J. 2010 Sep 16;7:237. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-237.

A role for the histone deacetylase HDAC4 in the life-cycle of HIV-1-based
vectors.

Smith JA(1), Yeung J, Kao GD, Daniel R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases-Center for Human Virology, Department of
Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

HIV-1 integration is mediated by the HIV-1 integrase protein, which joins 3'-ends
of viral DNA to host cell DNA. To complete the integration process, HIV-1 DNA has
to be joined to host cell DNA also at the 5'-ends. This process is called
post-integration repair (PIR). Integration and PIR involve a number of cellular
co-factors. These proteins exhibit different degrees of involvement in
integration and/or PIR. Some are required for efficient integration or PIR. On
the other hand, some reduce the efficiency of integration. Finally, some are
involved in integration site selection. We have studied the role of the histone
deacetylase HDAC4 in these processes. HDAC4 was demonstrated to play a role in
both cellular double-strand DNA break repair and transcriptional regulation. We
observed that HDAC4 associates with viral DNA in an integrase-dependent manner.
Moreover, infection with HIV-1-based vectors induces foci of the HDAC4 protein.
The related histone deacetylases, HDAC2 and HDAC6, failed to associate with viral
DNA after infection. These data suggest that HDAC4 accumulates at integration
sites. Finally, overexpression studies with HDAC4 mutants suggest that HDAC4 may 
be required for efficient transduction by HIV-1-based vectors in cells that are
deficient in other DNA repair proteins. We conclude that HDAC4 is likely involved
in PIR.

PMCID: PMC2949839
PMID: 20846395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Reprod Dev. 2011 Feb;57(1):34-42. Epub 2010 Sep 10.

Trichostatin A promotes the development of bovine somatic cell nuclear transfer
embryos.

Lee MJ(1), Kim SW, Lee HG, Im GS, Yang BC, Kim NH, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Animal Science, Suwon 441-706, Korea.

We studied the effects of trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, 
on the development of bovine somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) embryos by
investigating (1) the optimal concentration and treatment time of TSA for
development of bovine SCNT embryos, (2) the status of histone acetylation in
TSA-treated and control SCNT embryos and (3) the expression of histone
acetylation- and deacetylation-related genes in TSA-treated and control SCNT
embryos. We observed that 50 nM TSA-treatment for 20 h following fusion resulted 
in more efficient in vitro development of bovine SCNT embryos to the blastocyst
stage. In regard to histone H4K5 acetylation, half of the control SCNT embryos
faintly displayed histone H4K5 signals 30 min after electrofusion, while most of 
the TSA-treated SCNT embryos displayed histone H4K5 signals within 30 min after
electrofusion. Furthermore, the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the blastocysts
were significantly lower (P<0.05) in the TSA-treated SCNT than in the control
SCNT. However, the expression of GCN5 and HAT1 did not differ between the
TSA-treated and control SCNT. In conclusion, we demonstrated that TSA-treatment
after SCNT in bovine embryos can dramatically improve the practical applications 
of current cloning techniques.

PMID: 20834196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Dev Cell. 2010 Sep 14;19(3):450-9. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.08.012.

Hopx and Hdac2 interact to modulate Gata4 acetylation and embryonic cardiac
myocyte proliferation.

Trivedi CM(1), Zhu W, Wang Q, Jia C, Kee HJ, Li L, Hannenhalli S, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Regulation of chromatin structure via histone modification has recently received 
intense attention. Here, we demonstrate that the chromatin-modifying enzyme
histone deacetylase 2 (Hdac2) functions with a small homeodomain factor, Hopx, to
mediate deacetylation of Gata4, which is expressed by cardiac progenitor cells
and plays critical roles in the regulation of cardiogenesis. In the absence of
Hopx and Hdac2 in mouse embryos, Gata4 hyperacetylation is associated with a
marked increase in cardiac myocyte proliferation, upregulation of Gata4 target
genes, and perinatal lethality. Hdac2 physically interacts with Gata4, and this
interaction is stabilized by Hopx. The ability of Gata4 to transactivate cell
cycle genes is impaired by Hopx/Hdac2-mediated deacetylation, and this effect is 
abrogated by loss of Hdac2-Gata4 interaction. These results suggest that Gata4 is
a nonhistone target of Hdac2-mediated deacetylation and that Hdac2, Hopx, and
Gata4 coordinately regulate cardiac myocyte proliferation during embryonic
development.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2947937
PMID: 20833366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Biol Reprod. 2010 Dec;83(6):887-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.088310. Epub 2010 
Sep 8.

Is the perfect mouse cloning experiment in sight?

Boiani M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Muenster, Germany.
mboiani@mpi-muenster.mpg.de

Comment on
    Biol Reprod. 2010 Dec;83(6):929-37.

PMID: 20826725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Haematologica. 2010 Dec;95(12):2013-21. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.029827. Epub
2010 Sep 7.

Histone deacetylase 2 is required for chromatin condensation and subsequent
enucleation of cultured mouse fetal erythroblasts.

Ji P(1), Yeh V, Ramirez T, Murata-Hori M, Lodish HF.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, 9 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2010 Dec;95(12):1985-8.

BACKGROUND: During the final stages of differentiation of mammalian erythroid
cells, the chromatin is condensed and enucleated. We previously reported that Rac
GTPases and their downstream target, mammalian homolog of Drosophila diaphanous 2
(mDia2), are required for enucleation of in vitro cultured mouse fetal liver
erythroblasts. However, it is not clear how chromatin condensation is achieved
and whether it is required for enucleation.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Mouse fetal liver erythroblasts were purified from embryonic 
day 14.5 pregnant mice and cultured in erythropoietin-containing medium.
Enucleation was determined by flow-cytometry based analysis after treatment with 
histone deacetylase inhibitors or infection with lentiviral short hairpin RNA.
RESULTS: We showed that histone deacetylases play critical roles in chromatin
condensation and enucleation in cultured mouse fetal liver erythroblasts.
Enzymatic inhibition of histone deacetylases by trichostatin A or valproic acid
prior to the start of enucleation blocked chromatin condensation, contractile
actin ring formation and enucleation. We further demonstrated that histone
deacetylases 1, 2, 3 and 5 are highly expressed in mouse fetal erythroblasts.
Short hairpin RNA down-regulation of histone deacetylase 2, but not of the other 
histone deacetylases, phenotypically mimicked the effect of trichostatin A or
valproic acid treatment, causing significant inhibition of chromatin condensation
and enucleation. Importantly, knock-down of histone deacetylase 2 did not affect 
erythroblast proliferation, differentiation, or apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify histone deacetylase 2 as an important
regulator, mediating chromatin condensation and enucleation in the final stages
of mammalian erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2995558
PMID: 20823130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Sep;17(9):1144-51. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1899. Epub 2010
Aug 29.

Human HDAC1 and HDAC2 function in the DNA-damage response to promote DNA
nonhomologous end-joining.

Miller KM(1), Tjeertes JV, Coates J, Legube G, Polo SE, Britton S, Jackson SP.

Author information: 
(1)The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair occurs within chromatin and can be modulated
by chromatin-modifying enzymes. Here we identify the related human histone
deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 as two participants in the DNA-damage response. We
show that acetylation of histone H3 Lys56 (H3K56) was regulated by HDAC1 and
HDAC2 and that HDAC1 and HDAC2 were rapidly recruited to DNA-damage sites to
promote hypoacetylation of H3K56. Furthermore, HDAC1- and 2-depleted cells were
hypersensitive to DNA-damaging agents and showed sustained DNA-damage signaling, 
phenotypes that reflect defective DSB repair, particularly by nonhomologous
end-joining (NHEJ). Collectively, these results show that HDAC1 and HDAC2
function in the DNA-damage response by promoting DSB repair and thus provide
important insights into the radio-sensitizing effects of HDAC inhibitors that are
being developed as cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3018776
PMID: 20802485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2010 Dec;48(12):1785-91. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2010.353. Epub 2010
Aug 24.

Combination of polymorphisms within the HDAC1 and HDAC3 gene predict tumor
recurrence in hepatocellular carcinoma patients that have undergone transplant
therapy.

Yang Z(1), Zhou L, Wu LM, Xie HY, Zhang F, Zheng SS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health,
Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, P.R.
China.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been reported to be poor prognostic
indicators in patients with cancer. However, no data are available for the role
of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of class I HDAC in hepato-cellular
carcinoma (HCC). Therefore, we investigated the association of class I HDAC
isoforms genomic polymorphisms with risk of HCC and tumor recurrence following
liver transplantation (LT).
METHODS: One hundred and ninety-six Chinese subjects consisting of 97 HCC
patients and 99 controls were enrolled in this study. Nine polymorphisms of the
HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 gene (rs2530223, rs1741981, rs2547547, rs13204445,
rs6568819, rs10499080, rs11741808, rs2475631, rs11391) were examined using
Applied Biosystems SNaP-Shot and TaqMan technology.
RESULTS: We found no significant difference in genotype frequencies between the
HCC cases and controls. In terms of tumor recurrence following LT, patients
carrying the T allele of HDAC1 SNP rs1741981 showed a favorable outcome for
recurrence free survival when compared with patients homozygous for CC. In
addition, the same significant trend was observed in HDAC3 SNP rs2547547.
Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the combination of the T variant allele (CT+TT)
of HDAC1 SNP rs1741981 and the homozygous TT variant allele of HDAC3 SNP
rs2547547 was the most favorable prognostic factor. The risk for postoperative
tumor recurrence was about 2.2-fold lower for patients with this genotype
combination compared with carriers of the HDAC1 SNP rs1741981 CC and HDAC3 SNP
rs2547547 CT genotype combination (hazard ratio: 2.235, p=0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that combined analysis of HDAC1 SNP rs1741981 and
HDAC3 SNP rs2547547 may be a potential genetic marker for HCC recurrence in LT
patients.

PMID: 20731616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):646-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1924. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Chemopreventive agent 3,3'-diindolylmethane selectively induces proteasomal
degradation of class I histone deacetylases.

Li Y(1), Li X, Guo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, North Dakota 58108, USA.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane (DIM) is an anticancer agent that induces cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis through unknown mechanisms. Here, we report that DIM can
selectively induce proteasome-mediated degradation of class I histone
deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8) without affecting the class II HDAC
proteins. DIM induced downregulation of class I HDACs in human colon cancer cells
in vitro and in vivo in tumor xenografts. HDAC depletion relieved HDAC-mediated
transcriptional inhibition of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21WAF1 and 
p27KIP2, significantly increasing their expression and triggering cell cycle
arrest in the G(2) phase of the cell cycle. Additionally, HDAC depletion was
associated with an induction of DNA damage that triggered apoptosis. Our findings
indicate that DIM acts to selectively target the degradation of class I HDACs.

PMCID: PMC2808120
PMID: 20068155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Sci Signal. 2010 Jan 5;3(103):pe1. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.3103pe1.

New endogenous regulators of class I histone deacetylases.

Riccio A(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular and Cell Biology and Department of Neuroscience, 
Physiology and Pharmacology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
a.riccio@ucl.ac.uk

Gene expression in eukaryotes depends on epigenetic changes that occur on both
histones and DNA. Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that remove
acetyl groups from histones and other nuclear proteins, thereby inducing
chromatin condensation and transcriptional repression. HDACs belong to a large
family of enzymes that undergo posttranslational modifications after the
activation of several intracellular pathways. However, the environmental stimuli 
that change nuclear HDAC functions remain largely unknown. New evidence has
demonstrated that the lipid sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) inhibits the activity
of HDAC1 and HDAC2. Both S1P and sphingosine kinase 2 (SphK2), the enzyme that
synthesizes S1P, are assembled in corepressor complexes containing HDAC1 and
HDAC2. S1P is among the few endogenous HDAC inhibitors that is synthesized in the
nucleus in response to extracellular stimulation, and the first nuclear lipid
associated with an epigenetic modification. The discovery of endogenous molecules
that regulate HDAC activity in vivo has implications for the development of new
therapeutic approaches for a host of human diseases, including cancer and
neurodegenerative disorders.

PMID: 20051592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Int J Cancer. 2010 Sep 1;127(6):1332-46. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25151.

Type-specific roles of histone deacetylase (HDAC) overexpression in ovarian
carcinoma: HDAC1 enhances cell proliferation and HDAC3 stimulates cell migration 
with downregulation of E-cadherin.

Hayashi A(1), Horiuchi A, Kikuchi N, Hayashi T, Fuseya C, Suzuki A, Konishi I,
Shiozawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan. aki9hori@shinshu-u.ac.jp

Histone acetylation/deacetylation controls chromatin activity and subsequent gene
transcription. Recent studies demonstrated the activation of histone deacetylases
(HDACs) in various human malignancies; however, the expression and function of
HDACs in ovarian tumors are not fully understood. In this study, we examined the 
immunohistochemical expression of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 using tissues obtained
from 115 cases of ovarian tumors and compared it with that of Ki-67 (a growth
marker), p21, and E-cadherin and clinicopathological parameters. In addition, we 
analyzed the effect of specific siRNA for HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 on the
expression of cell cycle-related molecules and E-cadherin to clarify the
functional difference among the 3 HDACs. The results indicated that the
immunohistochemical expression of nuclear HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 proteins
increased stepwise in benign, borderline and malignant tumors. The expression of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2 was correlated with Ki-67 expression and that of HDAC3 was
inversely correlated with E-cadherin expression. Among the HDACs examined, only
HDAC1 was associated with a poor outcome, when overexpressed. Treatment with HDAC
inhibitors suppressed the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells in association
with apoptosis. A specific siRNA for HDAC1 significantly reduced the
proliferation of ovarian carcinoma cells via downregulation of cyclin A
expression, but siRNA for HDAC3 reduced the cell migration with elevated
E-cadherin expression. Our results suggested that HDAC1 plays an important role
in the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells, whereas HDAC3 functions in cell
adhesion and migration. Therefore, specific therapeutic approaches should be
considered according to the HDAC subtypes.

PMID: 20049841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Oncogene. 2010 Feb 25;29(8):1179-89. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.404. Epub 2009 Dec 14.

NF-kappaB signaling mediates the induction of MTA1 by hepatitis B virus
transactivator protein HBx.

Bui-Nguyen TM(1), Pakala SB, Sirigiri RD, Xia W, Hung MC, Sarin SK, Kumar V,
Slagle BL, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), a master chromatin modifier, has been
shown to regulate cancer progression and is widely upregulated in human cancer,
including hepatitis B virus-associated hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Here we 
provide evidence that hepatitis B virus transactivator protein HBx stimulates the
expression of MTA1 but not of MTA2 or MTA3. The underlying mechanism of HBx
stimulation of MTA1 involves HBx targeting of transcription factor nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB and the recruitment of HBx/p65 complex to the NF-kappaB consensus
motif on the relaxed MTA1 gene chromatin. We also discovered that MTA1 depletion 
in HBx-expressing cells severely impairs the ability of HBx to stimulate
NF-kappaB signaling and the expression of target proinflammatory molecules.
Furthermore, the presence of HBx in HBx-infected HCCs correlated well with
increased MTA1 and NF-kappaB-p65. Collectively, these findings revealed a
previously unrecognized integral role of MTA1 in HBx stimulation of NF-kappaB
signaling and consequently, the expression of NF-kappaB targets gene products
with functions in inflammation and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3621706
PMID: 20010875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2009 Dec;6(8):693-6. doi: 10.1513/pats.200907-071DP.

Targeting the epigenome in the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School of Medicine,
Dovehouse St., London SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Epigenetic modification of gene expression by methylation of DNA and various
post-translational modifications of histones may affect the expression of
multiple inflammatory genes. Acetylation of histones by histone
acetyltransferases activates inflammatory genes, whereas histone deacetylation
results in inflammatory gene repression. Corticosteroids exert their
antiinflammatory effects partly by inducing acetylation of antiinflammatory
genes, but mainly by recruiting histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) to activated
inflammatory genes. HDAC2 deacetylates acetylated glucocorticoid receptors so
that they can suppress activated inflammatory genes in asthma. In chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), there is resistance to the antiinflammatory
actions of corticosteroids, which is explained by reduced activity and expression
of HDAC2. This can be reversed by a plasmid vector, which restores HDAC2 levels, 
but may also be achieved by low concentrations of theophylline. Oxidative stress 
causes corticosteroid resistance by reducing HDAC2 activity and expression by
activation of phosphoinositide-3-kinase-delta, resulting in HDAC2 phosphorylation
via a cascade of kinases. Theophylline reverses corticosteroid resistance by
directly inhibiting oxidant-activated PI3Kdelta and is mimicked by PI3Kdelta
knockout or by selective inhibitors. Other treatments may also interact in this
pathway, making it possible to reverse corticosteroid resistance in patients with
COPD, as well as in smokers with asthma and some patients with severe asthma in
whom similar mechanisms operate. Other histone modifications, including
methylation, tyrosine nitration, and ubiquitination may also affect histone
function and inflammatory gene expression, and better understanding of these
epigenetic pathways could led to novel antiinflammatory therapies, particularly
in corticosteroid-resistant inflammation.

PMID: 20008877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Mar;67(6):949-57. doi: 10.1007/s00018-009-0223-z. Epub
2009 Dec 10.

LIM domain only 4 protein promotes granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-induced 
signaling in neurons.

Gomez-Smith M(1), Qin Z, Zhou X, Schock SC, Chen HH.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) is currently in clinical trials to
treat neurodegenerative diseases and stroke. Here, we tested whether LIM domain
only 4 protein (LMO4), a hypoxia-inducible gene that protects neurons from
ischemic injury, could modulate the neuroprotective effect of GCSF. We showed
that GCSF treatment acetylates and phosphorylates Stat3, activates expression of 
a Stat3-dependent anti-apoptotic gene, p27, and increases neuron survival from
ischemic injury. LMO4 participates in Stat3 signaling in hepatocytes and
associates with histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in cancer cells. In the absence of 
LMO4, GCSF fails to rescue neurons from ischemic insults. In wild-type neurons,
inhibition of HDAC promoted Stat3 acetylation and the antiapoptotic effect of
GCSF. In LMO4 null cortical neurons, expression of wild-type but not
HDAC-interaction-deficient LMO4 restored GCSF-induced Stat3 acetylation and p27
expression. Thus, our results indicate that LMO4 enhances GCSF-induced Stat3
signaling in neurons, in part by sequestering HDAC.

PMCID: PMC2954186
PMID: 19997957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Psychopharmacol. 2011 Feb;25(2):222-9. doi: 10.1177/0269881109348173. Epub 2009
Nov 25.

Cocaine self-administration alters the expression of chromatin-remodelling
proteins; modulation by histone deacetylase inhibition.

Host L(1), Dietrich JB, Carouge D, Aunis D, Zwiller J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U575, Centre de Neurochimie, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France.

Injection of the histone deacetylases inhibitor trichostatin A to rats has been
shown to decrease the reinforcing properties of cocaine. In the present study, we
investigated alterations in gene expression patterns in the anterior cingulate
cortex, caudate-putamen and nucleus accumbens of rats self-administering cocaine 
and treated with trichostatin A. As recent studies highlighted the importance of 
chromatin remodelling in the regulation of gene transcription in neurons, we
studied the expression of Mecp2 and of several histone deacetylases. Cocaine
self-administration was accompanied by an increased synthesis of Mecp2, HDAC2 and
HDAC11 and by a decreased nuclear localization of HDAC5 and of the phospho-form
of HDAC5, suggesting a nuclear export of this protein in response to the drug.
The latter mechanism was further addressed by the demonstration of an enhanced
expression of MEF2C transcription factor. Among the genes we examined, treatment 
with trichostatin A before each cocaine self-administration session was found to 
mostly affect Mecp2 and HDAC11 expression. A correlation was found between the
modification of Mecp2 and MEF2C gene expression and the reinforcing property of
cocaine. The two factors known to regulate gene transcription are likely to play 
a role in the neurobiological mechanism underlying a decrease in the reinforcing 
properties of cocaine.

PMID: 19939859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Oncogene. 2010 Feb 11;29(6):909-19. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.387. Epub 2009 Nov 23.

Transcriptional induction of MMP-10 by TGF-beta, mediated by activation of MEF2A 
and downregulation of class IIa HDACs.

Ishikawa F(1), Miyoshi H, Nose K, Shibanuma M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Cell Biology, Showa University School of Pharmacy, Tokyo,
Japan.

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta regulates the expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and components of the extracellular matrix, thereby
profoundly affecting the microenvironment of cells including cancerous ones. We
studied MMP-10 induction by TGF-beta in mammary epithelial cells and found that
the induction was dependent on the myocyte enhancer factor (MEF)-2 transcription 
factor. TGF-beta upregulated the gene promoter through the MEF2 site, and
knockdown of the MEF2A transcription factor negatively affected MMP-10 induction,
whereas its overexpression had a positive effect on the induction. In response to
TGF-beta, acetylation and concomitant binding of MEF2A to the promoter region
increased, thus suggesting a critical role of MEF2A in transactivation of MMP-10 
by TGF-beta. Consistent with the fact that class IIa histone deacetylases (HDACs)
interact with MEF2 and suppress transcription, knockdown of HDACs increased and
their overexpression inhibited MMP-10 expression. Intriguingly, TGF-beta promoted
proteasome-dependent degradation of HDACs. Consistent with this, acetylation of
core histones was increased around the MEF2 site of the MMP-10 promoter by
TGF-beta and alleviated by overexpression of HDACs. Collectively, it is possible 
that TGF-beta transcriptionally upregulated MMP-10 through activation of MEF2A,
concomitant with acetylation of core histones increasing around the promoter, as 
a consequence of degradation of the class IIa HDACs.

PMID: 19935709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. BMC Cancer. 2009 Nov 13;9:395. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-395.

High class I HDAC activity and expression are associated with RelA/p65 activation
in pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo.

Lehmann A(1), Denkert C, Budczies J, Buckendahl AC, Darb-Esfahani S, Noske A,
Müller BM, Bahra M, Neuhaus P, Dietel M, Kristiansen G, Weichert W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
annika.lehmann@charite.de

BACKGROUND: The strong association between aberrant HDAC activity and the
occurrence of cancer has led to the development of a variety of HDAC inhibitors
(HDIs), which emerge as promising new targeted anticancer therapeutics.
METHODS: Due to the pivotal role of RelA/p65 in the tumorigenesis of pancreatic
neoplasia we examined the expression of class I HDACs 1, 2 and 3 in a large
cohort of human pancreatic carcinomas and correlated our findings with RelA/p65
expression status. Furthermore, we investigated the impact of the HDIs SAHA and
VPA on RelA/p65 activity in pancreatic cancer cell culture models.
RESULTS: Class I HDACs were strongly expressed in a subset of pancreatic
adenocarcinomas and high expression was significantly correlated with increased
nuclear translocation of RelA/p65 (p = 0.024). The link of HDAC activity and
RelA/p65 in this tumor entity was confirmed in vitro, where RelA/p65 nuclear
translocation as well as RelA/p65 DNA binding activity could be markedly
diminished by HDI treatment.
CONCLUSION: The RelA/p65 inhibitory effects of SAHA and VPA in vitro and the
close relationship of class I HDACs and RelA/p65 in vivo suggest that treatment
with HDIs could serve as a promising approach to suppress NF-kappaB activity
which in turn may lead to enhanced apoptosis and chemosensitization of pancreatic
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2779818
PMID: 19912635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Jan;298(1):F133-41. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00400.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Histone deacetylase modulates the proinflammatory and -fibrotic changes in
tubulointerstitial injury.

Marumo T(1), Hishikawa K, Yoshikawa M, Hirahashi J, Kawachi S, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Clinical Renal Regeneration, and Div. of Nephrology and
Endocrinology, Dept. of Internal Medicine, Univ. of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, 113-8655 Tokyo, Japan. tmarumo-npr@umin.ac.jp

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) regulates gene expression by modifying chromatin
structure. Although changes in the expression and activities of HDAC may affect
the course of kidney disease, the role of HDAC in tubulointerstitial injury has
not been explored. We therefore investigated the alterations in HDAC expression
and determined the effects of HDAC inhibition on the tubulointerstitial injury
induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction. The induction of HDAC1 and HDAC2,
accompanied by a decrease in histone acetylation was observed in kidneys injured 
by ureteral obstruction. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that HDAC1 and
HDAC2 were induced in renal tubular cells. Treatment with an HDAC inhibitor,
trichostatin A (TSA), attenuated macrophage infiltration and fibrotic changes in 
tubulointerstitial injury induced by ureteral obstruction. The induction of
colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1), a chemokine known to be involved in
macrophage infiltration in tubulointerstitial injury, was reduced in injured
kidneys from mice treated with TSA. TSA, valproate, and the knockdown of HDAC1 or
HDAC2 significantly reduced CSF-1 induced by TNF-alpha in renal tubular cells.
These results suggest that tubular HDAC1 and HDAC2, induced in response to
injury, may contribute to the induction of CSF-1 and the initiation of macrophage
infiltration and profibrotic responses. These findings suggest a potential of
HDAC inhibition therapy aimed at reducing inflammation and fibrosis in
tubulointerstitial injury.

PMID: 19906951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Med Oncol. 2010 Dec;27(4):1144-8. doi: 10.1007/s12032-009-9350-5. Epub 2009 Nov
7.

Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater.

Stojsic Z(1), Brasanac D, Bilanovic D, Mitrovic O, Stevanovic R, Boricic I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Dr
Subotica 1/II, 11000, Belgrade, Serbia. zstojsic@med.bg.ac.rs

Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma is a high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma,
originally described in the lung. The tumor rarely occurs in extrapulmonary sites
like the gastrointestinal tract, and only few examples have been described in the
ampulla of Vater. A new case of large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
ampulla of Vater in a 60-year-old man is reported. After pancreatoduodenectomy,
macroscopic examination revealed ulcerated tumor in the region of the ampulla of 
Vater. Microscopically, the tumor exhibited organoid, predominantly nested growth
pattern, consisting of large, polygonal cells with pleomorphic nuclei. Average
number of mitoses was 36 per 10 high-power fields. Small and large areas of
necrosis were identified. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive
for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, PGP 9.5, neuron-specific enolase,
pancytokeratin, CK8 and somatostatin and negative for CK7, CK20, S-100, TTF-1,
HMB-45, CD117, E-cadherin and regulatory peptides. Ki-67 proliferative index was 
41%. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) analysis showed almost identical results for
HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3--60, 60.3 and 61%, respectively. Two months after surgery,
liver metastases occurred, confirming highly aggressive behavior of large-cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma.

PMID: 19898974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2009 Dec;30(12):647-55. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2009.09.007.
Epub 2009 Nov 4.

HDAC2: a critical factor in health and disease.

Krämer OH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine (CMB), Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of Jena, Hans-Knöll-Str. 2, 07743 Jena, Germany.
oliver.kraemer@uni-jena.de

Histone deacetylases control cellular signaling and gene expression. Histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is crucial for embryonic development, affects cytokine
signaling relevant for immune responses and is often significantly overexpressed 
in solid tumors. Nevertheless, transformed cells lacking HDAC2 due to somatic
mutations have recently been discovered. This finding has raised a question
regarding the functions of this enzyme. Detailed analyses of the molecular
mechanisms governing gene regulation by HDAC2 illustrate how this protein
influences proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation of cells. Beyond
clarifying the role of HDAC2 for cellular fate, such data position the epigenetic
regulator HDAC2 as a therapeutically important prognostic marker that can be
subjected to pharmacological control.

PMID: 19892411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Med Chem. 2009 Nov 12;52(21):6782-9. doi: 10.1021/jm900555u.

Identification of novel, selective, and stable inhibitors of class II histone
deacetylases. Validation studies of the inhibition of the enzymatic activity of
HDAC4 by small molecules as a novel approach for cancer therapy.

Ontoria JM(1), Altamura S, Di Marco A, Ferrigno F, Laufer R, Muraglia E, Palumbi 
MC, Rowley M, Scarpelli R, Schultz-Fademrecht C, Serafini S, Steinkühler C, Jones
P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Di Ricerche Di Biologia Molecolare, P. Angeletti SpA (IRBM-MRL,
Rome), Via Pontina Km 30,600, I-00040 Pomezia, Italy. jmontoria@gmail.com

5-Aryl-2-(trifluoroacetyl)thiophenes were identified as a new series of class II 
HDAC inhibitors (HDACi). Further development of this new series led to compounds 
such as 6h, a potent inhibitor of HDAC4 and HDAC6 (HDAC4 WT IC(50) = 310 nM,
HDAC6 IC(50) = 70 nM) that displays 40-fold selectivity over HDAC1 and improved
stability in HCT116 cancer cells (t(1/2) = 11 h). Compounds 6h and 2 show
inhibition of alpha-tubulin deacetylation in HCT116 cells at 1 microM
concentration and antiproliferation effects only at concentrations where
inhibition of histone H3 deacetylation is observed.

PMID: 19888759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Oncogene. 2010 Jan 14;29(2):305-12. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.324. Epub 2009 Nov 2.

HDAC inhibitors regulate claudin-1 expression in colon cancer cells through
modulation of mRNA stability.

Krishnan M(1), Singh AB, Smith JJ, Sharma A, Chen X, Eschrich S, Yeatman TJ,
Beauchamp RD, Dhawan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN,
USA.

Expression and cellular distribution of claudin-1, a tight junction protein, is
dysregulated in colon cancer and its overexpression in colon cancer cells induced
dedifferentiation and increased invasion. However, the molecular mechanism(s)
underlying dysregulated claudin-1 expression in colon cancer remains poorly
understood. Histone deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent histone acetylation is an
important mechanism of the regulation of cancer-related genes and inhibition of
HDACs induces epithelial differentiation and decreased invasion. Therefore, in
this study, we examined the role of HDAC-dependent epigenetic regulation of
claudin-1 in colon cancer. In this study, we show that sodium butyrate and
Trichostatin A (TSA), two structurally different and widely used HDAC inhibitors,
inhibited claudin-1 expression in multiple colon cancer cell lines. Further
studies revealed modulation of claudin-1 mRNA stability by its 3'-UTR as the
major mechanism underlying HDAC-dependent claudin-1 expression. In addition,
overexpression of claudin-1 abrogated the TSA-induced inhibition of invasion in
colon cancer cells suggesting functional crosstalk. Analysis of mRNA expression
in colon cancer patients, showed a similar pattern of increase in claudin-1 and
HDAC-2 mRNA expression throughout all stages of colon cancer. Inhibition of
claudin-1 expression by HDAC-2-specific small interfering RNA further supported
the role of HDAC-2 in this regulation. Taken together, we report a novel
post-transcriptional regulation of claudin-1 expression in colon cancer cells and
further show a functional correlation between claudin-1 expression and
TSA-mediated regulation of invasion. As HDAC inhibitors are considered to be
promising anticancer drugs, these new findings will have implications in both
laboratory and clinical settings.

PMCID: PMC3388773
PMID: 19881542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 25;284(52):36047-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.025387. Epub
2009 Oct 30.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha induces corticosteroid-insensitive inflammation
via reduction of histone deacetylase-2 transcription.

Charron CE(1), Chou PC, Coutts DJ, Kumar V, To M, Akashi K, Pinhu L, Griffiths M,
Adcock IM, Barnes PJ, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London SW3 6LY, United Kingdom. c.charron@imperial.ac.uk

Corticosteroids are potent anti-inflammatory agents, but corticosteroid
insensitivity is a major barrier for the treatment of some chronic inflammatory
diseases. Here, we show that hypoxia induces corticosteroid-insensitive
inflammation via reduced transcription of histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) in lung
epithelial and macrophage cells. HDAC2 mRNA and protein expression was reduced
under hypoxic conditions (1% O(2)). Hypoxia enhanced interleukin-1beta-induced
interleukin-8 (CXCL8) production in A549 cells and decreased the ability of
dexamethasone to suppress the CXCL8 production. Deletion or point mutation
studies revealed that binding of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) 1alpha to a HIF response element at position -320, but not HIF-1beta
or HIF-2alpha, results in reduced polymerase II binding at the site, leading to
reduced promoter activity of HDAC2. Our results suggest that activation of
HIF-1alpha by hypoxia decreases HDAC2 levels, resulting in amplified inflammation
and corticosteroid resistance.

PMCID: PMC2794720
PMID: 19880520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Nov 15;19(22):6358-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.09.075. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Histone deacetylase and microtubules as targets for the synthesis of releasable
conjugate compounds.

Passarella D(1), Comi D, Vanossi A, Paganini G, Colombo F, Ferrante L, Zuco V,
Danieli B, Zunino F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica e Industriale, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Via Venezian 21, Italy. Daniele.Passarella@unimi.it

Design and synthesis of an HDAC inhibitor and its merger with three tubulin
binders to create releasable conjugate compounds is described. The biological
evaluation includes: (a) in vitro reactivity with glutathione, (b)
antiproliferative activity, (c) cell cycle analysis and (d) quantification of
protein acetylation. The cellular pharmacology study indicated that the
HDAC-inhibitor-drug conjugates retained antimitotic and proapoptotic activity
with a reduced potency.

PMID: 19833515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Epigenetics. 2009 Oct 1;4(7):440-4. Epub 2009 Oct 14.

SUMO engages multiple corepressors to regulate chromatin structure and
transcription.

Ouyang J(1), Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

Post-translational modification of many transcription factors and cofactors by
the small ubiquitin-related modifier SUMO has been correlated with
transcriptional repression. Recent investigations of the molecular mechanisms
underlying SUMO-dependent repression have identified diverse chromatin modifying 
enzymes and chromatin associated proteins as effectors of SUMO-dependent changes 
in chromatin structure and gene expression. A surprising diversity of proteins
has been identified to be recruited to promoters in a SUMO-dependent manner,
including the histone deacetylase HDAC2, the histone demethylase LSD1, the
histone methyltransferase SETDB1, the nucleosome remodeling ATPase Mi-2, and
chromatin-associated proteins HP1 and L3MBTL1 and L3MBTL2. These findings suggest
that SUMOylation plays a central role in coordinating histone modifications and
chromatin structure important for regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 19829068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 11;284(50):34901-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038356. Epub
2009 Oct 11.

Trans-regulation of histone deacetylase activities through acetylation.

Luo Y(1), Jian W, Stavreva D, Fu X, Hager G, Bungert J, Huang S, Qiu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida 32610, USA.

HDAC1 and -2 are highly conserved enzymes and often coexist in the same
coregulator complexes. Understanding the regulation of histone deacetylase
activities is extremely important because these enzymes play key roles in
epigenetic regulation in normal and cancer cells. We previously showed that HDAC1
is required for glucocorticoid receptor-mediated transcription activation and
that its activity is regulated through acetylation by p300 during the induction
cycle. Here, we showed that HDAC2 is also required for glucocorticoid
receptor-mediated gene activation. HDAC2, however, is regulated through a
different mechanism from that of HDAC1. HDAC2 is not acetylated by p300, although
5 of 6 acetylated lysine residues in HDAC1 are also present in HDAC2. More
importantly, the activity of HDAC2 is inhibited by acetylated HDAC1.
Additionally, we showed that acetylated HDAC1 can trans-regulate HDAC2 through
heterodimerization. Thus, this study uncovered fundamental differences between
HDAC1 and HDAC2. It also unveiled a new mechanism of collaborative regulation by 
HDAC1/2 containing coregulator complexes.

PMCID: PMC2787352
PMID: 19822520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Nov 15;19(22):6284-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.09.100.
Epub 2009 Sep 29.

Novel N-hydroxybenzamide-based HDAC inhibitors with branched CAP group.

Su H(1), Yu L, Nebbioso A, Carafa V, Chen Y, Altucci L, You Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China.

Ongoing effort to gather further knowledge about the structural requirements on
histone deacetylase inhibitors led to the synthesis of novel
N-hydroxybenzamide-based HDAC inhibitors 1a-o, introducing branched hydrophobic
groups at the capping group, and their inhibition activity against HDACs and
anti-proliferation activity in four tumor cell lines were determined. Compounds
1j-o were further tested against recombinant human HDAC1 and HDAC4 to evaluate
their selectivity profile. This work further suggests that the chemical nature of
the capping group is critical for subtle discrimination between the class I and
the class II HDAC isoforms.

PMID: 19822426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Exp Gerontol. 2010 Apr;45(4):279-85. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2009.10.001. Epub 2009 
Oct 8.

Role of HDAC1 in senescence, aging, and cancer.

Willis-Martinez D(1), Richards HW, Timchenko NA, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

HDAC1 is a member of the class I of histone deacetylases that also includes
HDAC2, -3 and -8. Although HDAC1 has been mostly studied in the context of
cancer, recent evidence strongly suggests that it plays critical roles in
cellular senescence, aging of the liver, myelination, and adult neurogenesis.
Here we review such roles and discuss the entangled relationships between HDAC1
with histone acetyltransferases and other HDACs including SIRT1.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2838962
PMID: 19818845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Jan;15(1):94-108. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00927.x.

Epigenetic modulation of the protein kinase A RIIa (PRKAR2A) gene by histone
deacetylases 1 and 2 in human smooth muscle cells.

Karolczak-Bayatti M(1), Loughney AD, Robson SC, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
magda.karolczak@newcastle.ac.uk

Recently we reported that the expression of the protein kinase A (PKA) regulatory
subunit RIIa is dynamically regulated in human smooth muscle cells of the uterus.
We showed that expression levels of mRNA/protein were substantially increased
during pregnancy and decreased upon labour, changes that were mirrored by
particulate type II PKA activity. This implied an important role for RIIa in
maintaining uterine quiescence during pregnancy. Consequently the purpose of the 
present study was to identify potential mechanisms by which expression of the
RIIa gene was regulated in this tissue. We indicate here that the three SpI-III
(GC) binding domains within the proximal promoter region of the human RIIa gene
may play important roles in modulating expression of the gene in human myometrial
cells. We show that all three GC binding domains are involved in binding Sp1,
Sp3, histone deacetylase (HDACs) 1/2 and RbAp48 transcriptional complexes. The
functional significance of these binding domains was further analysed employing
in vitro luciferase reporter assays with full-length/truncated RIIa promoter
constructs. Importantly we show that treatment of primary human myometrial cell
cultures with the general class I/II HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A results in an 
increase in mRNA/protein levels. Moreover the increase in mRNA levels appeared to
be preceded by an increase in aH3, PolIIa, Sp3 and HDAC 2 binding to the three
SpI-III (GC) binding sites within the RIIa promoter. These results enable us to
provide a model whereby RIIa expression is epigenetically regulated in human
myometrial smooth muscle cells by histone deacetylase(s) activity within the
GC-rich proximal promoter region of the gene.

© 2011 The Author Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822497
PMID: 19818097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2009 Oct;3(5):235-43. doi: 10.1177/1753465809348648. Epub
2009 Oct 7.

Histone deacetylase-2 and airway disease.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, UK.
p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

The increased expression of inflammatory genes in inflammatory lung diseases is
regulated by acetylation of core histones, whereas histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) 
suppresses inflammatory gene expression. Corticosteroids suppress inflammatory
genes in asthma by inhibiting histone acetyltransferase and in particular by
recruiting HDAC2 to the nuclear factor-kappaB-activated inflammatory gene
complex. This involves deacetylation of the acetylated glucocorticoid receptor.
In COPD, severe asthma and asthmatics who smoke, HDAC2 is reduced, thus
preventing corticosteroids from suppressing inflammation. The reduction in HDAC2 
appears to be secondary to increased oxidative and nitrative stress in the lungs.
Antioxidants and inhibitors of nitric oxide synthesis may therefore restore
corticosteroid sensitivity in COPD, but this can also be achieved by low
concentrations of theophylline and curcumin, which act as HDAC activators.
Theophylline is a direct inhibitor of oxidant-activated
phosphoinositide-3-kinase-delta, which is involved in inactivation of HDAC2. In
the future selective PI3Kdelta inhibitors and more direct activators of HDAC2 may
be used to treat corticosteroid-resistant inflammatory diseases of the lung,
including COPD, severe asthma and asthma in smokers.

PMID: 19812111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. COPD. 2009 Aug;6(4):291-7.

Current perspectives on role of chromatin modifications and deacetylases in lung 
inflammation in COPD.

Rajendrasozhan S(1), Yao H, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, Lung Biology and Disease Program,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, USA.

Chromatin modifications and epigenetic regulation are critical for sustained and 
abnormal inflammatory response seen in lungs of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) because the activities of enzymes that regulate these
epigenetic modifications are altered in response to cigarette smoke. Cigarette
smoke induces chromatin modifications and epigenetic changes by causing
post-translational modifications of histone acetyltransferases, and
histone/non-histone deacetylases (HDACs), such as HDAC2 and sirtuin 1 (SIRT1),
which leads to chromatin remodeling. In this review, we discussed the current
knowledge on cigarette smoke/oxidants-induced post-translational modifications of
deacetylases (HDAC2 and SIRT1), disruption of HDAC2/SIRT1-RelA/p65 corepressor
complex associated with acetylation of RelA/p65, and chromatin modifications
(histone H3 phospho-acetylation) leading to sustained pro-inflammatory gene
transcription. Knowledge on molecular mechanisms of epigenetic changes in
abnormal lung inflammation will help in understanding the pathophysiology of COPD
which may lead to the development of novel epigenetic therapies in the near
future.

PMCID: PMC2760053
PMID: 19811389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Dec;20(23):4976-84. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-04-0295. Epub 2009
Sep 30.

Heat-shock factor 1 controls genome-wide acetylation in heat-shocked cells.

Fritah S(1), Col E, Boyault C, Govin J, Sadoul K, Chiocca S, Christians E,
Khochbin S, Jolly C, Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U823, Institut
Albert Bonniot, Université Joseph Fourier, F-38706 Grenoble, France.

A major regulatory function has been evidenced here for HSF1, the key
transcription factor of the heat-shock response, in a large-scale remodeling of
the cell epigenome. Indeed, upon heat shock, HSF1, in addition to its well-known 
transactivating activities, mediates a genome-wide and massive histone
deacetylation. Investigating the underlying mechanisms, we show that HSF1
specifically associates with and uses HDAC1 and HDAC2 to trigger this
heat-shock-dependent histone deacetylation. This work therefore identifies HSF1
as a master regulator of global chromatin acetylation and reveals a cross-talk
between HSF1 and histone deacetylases in the general control of genome
organization in response to heat shock.

PMCID: PMC2785740
PMID: 19793920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Int J Oncol. 2009 Nov;35(5):977-82.

Analysis of candidate target genes for mononucleotide repeat mutation in
microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) endometrial cancer.

Kawaguchi M(1), Banno K, Yanokura M, Kobayashi Y, Kishimi A, Ogawa S, Kisu I,
Nomura H, Hirasawa A, Susumu N, Aoki D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Microsatellite instability (MSI) is an indicator of DNA instability and is caused
by abnormalities in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes such as hMLH1, hMSH2 and
hMSH6. MSI occurs frequently in endometrial cancer (in approximately 30% of
cases), and accumulation of gene mutations due to MSI may therefore have a major 
role in the mechanism of malignant transformation. However, a responsible target 
gene has not been identified in endometrial cancer. In this study, we analyzed
mutations in 11 cancer-related genes with mononucleotide repeats susceptible to
MSI in a coding region [hMSH3 (A8), hMSH6 (C8), TGF-beta RII (A10), MBD4 (A10),
BAX (G8), PTEN (A6 in exon 7), HDAC2 (A9), EPHB2 (A9), Caspase-5 (A10), TCF-4
(A9) and Axin2 (G7)] in 22 patients with MSI-H sporadic endometrial cancer.
Mutations in hMSH6 (C8) and TGF-beta RII (A10) were found most frequently, at
rates of 36.3% (8/22) each. Mutations of BAX (G8) and TCF-4 (A9), which are
common in MSI-positive colorectal cancer, occurred at rates of 22.7 and 0%,
respectively, which suggests that the MSI target gene may differ between
endometrial and colorectal cancers. Mutations in hMSH6 (C8) were correlated with 
reduced protein expression (p=0.042) and patients with these mutations had
significantly more mutations in mononucleotide repeats in other cancer-related
genes compared to patients without hMSH6 (C8) mutations (p=0.042). This suggests 
the possibility of a novel cascade in carcinogenesis of endometrial cancer in
which MSI mutates hMSH6 (C8), increases gene instability, and leads to
accumulation of mutations in other cancer-related genes. To our knowledge, this
is the first report to show that hMSH6 (C8) has an important role as an MSI
target gene in sporadic endometrial cancer.

PMID: 19787250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Neurotox Res. 2010 May;17(4):399-405. doi: 10.1007/s12640-009-9116-z. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

Dysregulation of CREB activation and histone acetylation in 3-nitropropionic
acid-treated cortical neurons: prevention by BDNF and NGF.

Almeida S(1), Cunha-Oliveira T, Laço M, Oliveira CR, Rego AC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of
Biochemistry, University of Coimbra, 3004-504 Coimbra, Portugal.

3-Nitropropionic acid (3-NP), an inhibitor of mitochondrial complex II, leads to 
metabolic impairment and neurodegeneration. In this study, we investigated the
roles of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and nerve growth factor (NGF)
in the dysregulation of transcription factors and histone modifying enzymes
induced by 3-NP in primary cortical neurons. BDNF prevented the 3-NP-induced
decrease in cAMP response-element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation and
CREB-binding protein levels. Both NGF and BDNF counteracted the increase in the
levels of histone H3 and H4 acetylations and reduced histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activity induced by 3-NP. BDNF further led to hyperphosphorylation of HDAC2. Our 
results support an important role for neurotrophins, particularly BDNF, in
preventing detrimental changes in transcription factors and histone acetylation
states in cortical neurons that have been subjected to selective mitochondrial
inhibition.

PMID: 19779956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Chem Biol. 2009 Sep 25;16(9):980-9. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2009.07.010.

Chemical probes identify a role for histone deacetylase 3 in Friedreich's ataxia 
gene silencing.

Xu C(1), Soragni E, Chou CJ, Herman D, Plasterer HL, Rusche JR, Gottesfeld JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

We recently identified a class of pimelic diphenylamide histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors that show promise as therapeutics in the neurodegenerative
diseases Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) and Huntington's disease. Here, we describe
chemical approaches to identify the HDAC enzyme target of these inhibitors.
Incubation of a trifunctional activity-based probe with a panel of class I and
class II recombinant HDAC enzymes, followed by click chemistry addition of a
fluorescent dye and gel electrophoresis, identifies HDAC3 as a unique
high-affinity target of the probe. Photoaffinity labeling in a nuclear extract
prepared from human lymphoblasts with the trifunctional probe, followed by biotin
addition through click chemistry, streptavidin enrichment, and Western blotting
also identifies HDAC3 as the preferred cellular target of the inhibitor.
Additional inhibitors with different HDAC specificity profiles were synthesized, 
and results from transcription experiments in FRDA cells point to a unique role
for HDAC3 in gene silencing in Friedreich's ataxia.

PMCID: PMC2909763
PMID: 19778726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cellscience. 2009 Jul 27;6(1):44-48.

The dynamics of HDAC activity on memory formation.

Grissom NM(1), Lubin FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Evelyn F. McKnight Brain institute, The University
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham AL 35294-2182, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have previously been shown to be critical for the
formation of long-term memories. Recent findings now show that a specific HDAC
isoform, HDAC2, negatively regulates formation of hippocampus-dependent memory.
These recent findings published in Nature highlight potential new therapeutic
interventions for the treatment of memory impairments associated with human
neurological disorders.

PMCID: PMC2748411
PMID: 19777123  [PubMed]


329. J Psychiatr Res. 2010 Apr;44(5):263-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.08.015.
Epub 2009 Sep 19.

Altered gene expression of histone deacetylases in mood disorder patients.

Hobara T(1), Uchida S, Otsuki K, Matsubara T, Funato H, Matsuo K, Suetsugi M,
Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, Yamaguchi University,
Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami-kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505,
Japan.

Chromatin remodeling such as changes in histone acetylation has been suggested to
play an important role in the pathophysiology and treatment of mood disorders. In
the present study, we investigated whether the expression of histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) genes are altered in mood disorder patients. We used quantitative
real-time PCR to measure the mRNA levels of 11 HDACs (HDAC1-11) in peripheral
white blood cells of major depressive disorder (MDD) and bipolar disorder (BPD)
patients during depressive and remissive episodes and in the first-degree
relatives of BPD patients. In addition, we investigated the effect of
antidepressants and mood stabilizers on the mRNA levels of HDACs using mice. In
MDD, the expression of HDAC2 and -5 mRNA was increased in a depressive state, but
not in a remissive state, compared to controls. In BPD, the expression of HDAC4
mRNA was increased only in a depressive state, and the expression of HDAC6 and -8
was decreased in both depressive and remissive states compared to controls,
whereas the first-degree relatives did not show any significant alteration in
expression levels. Animal study showed that the expression of HDAC2 and -5 or
HDAC4, -6 and -8 mRNAs in the mouse leukocytes were not affected by chronic
treatment with antidepressants or mood stabilizers. Our data suggest that
aberrant transcriptional regulation caused by the altered expression of HDACs is 
associated with the pathophysiology of mood disorders.

PMID: 19767015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Theriogenology. 2009 Nov;72(8):1097-110. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2009.06.030. Epub 2009 Sep 17.

Trichostatin A affects histone acetylation and gene expression in porcine somatic
cell nucleus transfer embryos.

Cervera RP(1), Martí-Gutiérrez N, Escorihuela E, Moreno R, Stojkovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming Laboratory, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe,
Valencia, Spain. rcervera@cipf.es

Epigenetic aberrancies likely preclude correct and complete nuclear reprogramming
after somatic cell nucleus transfer (SCNT) and may underlie the observed reduced 
viability of cloned embryos. In the current study, we tested the effects of the
histone deacetylase-inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) on preimplantation development
and on histone acetylation and the gene expression of nucleus transfer (NT)
porcine (Sus scrofa) embryos. Our results showed that 5 nM TSA for 26 h after
reconstitution resulted in embryos (NTTSA) that reached the blastocyst stage at a
higher level (48.1% vs. 20.2%) and increased number of cells (105.0 vs. 75.3)
than that of the control (NTC) embryos. In addition, and unlike the NTC embryos, 
the treated embryos displayed a global acetylated histone H4 at lysine 8 profile 
similar to the in vitro-fertilized (IVF) and cultured embryos during the
preimplantation development. Finally, we determined that several transcription
factors exert a dramatic amount of genetic control over pluripotency, including
Oct4, Nanog, Cdx2, and Rex01, the imprinting genes Igf2 and Igf2r, and the
histone deacetyltransferase gene Hdac2. The NT blastocysts showed similar levels 
of Oct4, Cdx2, and Hdac2 but lower levels of Nanog than those of the IVF
blastocyst. However, the NTTSA blastocysts showed similar levels of Rex01, Igf2, 
and Igf2r as those of IVF blastocysts, whereas the NTC blastocysts showed
significantly lower levels for those genes. Our results suggest that TSA improves
porcine SCNT preimplantation development and affects the acetylated status of the
H4K8, rendering acetylation levels similar to those of the IVF counterparts.

PMID: 19765811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Neurosci. 2009 Sep 16;29(37):11451-60. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1758-09.2009.

Antidepressant actions of histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Covington HE 3rd(1), Maze I, LaPlant QC, Vialou VF, Ohnishi YN, Berton O, Fass
DM, Renthal W, Rush AJ 3rd, Wu EY, Ghose S, Krishnan V, Russo SJ, Tamminga C,
Haggarty SJ, Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
New York 10029, USA.

Persistent symptoms of depression suggest the involvement of stable molecular
adaptations in brain, which may be reflected at the level of chromatin
remodeling. We find that chronic social defeat stress in mice causes a transient 
decrease, followed by a persistent increase, in levels of acetylated histone H3
in the nucleus accumbens, an important limbic brain region. This persistent
increase in H3 acetylation is associated with decreased levels of histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in the nucleus accumbens. Similar effects were observed in 
the nucleus accumbens of depressed humans studied postmortem. These changes in H3
acetylation and HDAC2 expression mediate long-lasting positive neuronal
adaptations, since infusion of HDAC inhibitors into the nucleus accumbens, which 
increases histone acetylation, exerts robust antidepressant-like effects in the
social defeat paradigm and other behavioral assays. HDAC inhibitor
[N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[N-(pyridine-3-ylmethoxy-carbonyl)aminomethyl]benzamide
(MS-275)] infusion also reverses the effects of chronic defeat stress on global
patterns of gene expression in the nucleus accumbens, as determined by microarray
analysis, with striking similarities to the effects of the standard
antidepressant fluoxetine. Stress-regulated genes whose expression is normalized 
selectively by MS-275 may provide promising targets for the future development of
novel antidepressant treatments. Together, these findings provide new insight
into the underlying molecular mechanisms of depression and antidepressant action,
and support the antidepressant potential of HDAC inhibitors and perhaps other
agents that act at the level of chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC2775805
PMID: 19759294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Sep 15;10:89. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-89.

Interaction of ZEB and histone deacetylase with the PLDLS-binding cleft region of
monomeric C-terminal binding protein 2.

Zhao LJ(1), Kuppuswamy M, Vijayalingam S, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, St, Louis, Missouri 63104, USA. zhaol@slu.edu

BACKGROUND: Proteins of the C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family, CtBP1 and
CtBP2 are closely related transcriptional regulators that are coded by two
different gene loci in the vertebrate genomes. They perform redundant and unique 
functions during animal development. CtBP proteins mediate their transcriptional 
function through interaction with various DNA-binding repressors that contain
PLDLS-like motifs and chromatin modifying enzymes, such as class I histone
deacetylases (HDAC) that do not contain such motifs. The N-terminal region of
CtBP1/2 forms a hydrophobic cleft and is involved in interaction with both
PLDLS-containing factors and non-PLDLS factors. CtBP proteins function as dimers 
to mediate transcriptional repression and dimerization is modulated by specific
binding to NAD/NADH.
RESULTS: In this study, we have investigated the role of dimerization of CtBP2 in
recruitment of PLDLS-motif cofactors and non-PLDLS cofactors. Our results
indicate that mutations in CtBP2 that interfere with dimerization abolish CtBP2
interaction with most cellular factors, except the PLDLS-motif factor zinc-finger
E-box binding homeobox (ZEB) and the non-PLDLS factor HDAC2. Unlike most
PLDLS-containing CtBP-binding proteins, ZEB contains three PLDLS-like motifs and 
all three contribute to the interaction with the CtBP2 monomer. Despite the
ability to interact with ZEB and HDAC, the CtBP2 monomer fails to mediate
ZEB-dependent transcriptional repression. The lack of repression activity of the 
CtBP2 monomer is correlated with the competition between ZEB and HDAC for
interaction with the CtBP2 monomer.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a competition between the canonical PLDLS-motif
factors such as E1A and non-PLDLS factor HDAC for interaction with CtBP. They
also indicate that the affinity for the CtBP monomer may be determined by the
number as well as amino acid sequence compositions of the PLDLS-like motifs. Our 
results are consistent with a model that the CtBP2 dimer may interact with a
PLDLS-containing repressor through one monomer and recruit HDAC and other
chromatin modifying enzymes through the second monomer in the CtBP2 dimer.

PMCID: PMC2749851
PMID: 19754958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Sep;11(3):397-405. doi: 10.1089/clo.2009.0016.

Transcript levels of several epigenome regulatory genes in bovine somatic donor
cells are not correlated with their cloning efficiency.

Zhou W(1), Sadeghieh S, Abruzzese R, Uppada S, Meredith J, Ohlrichs C, Broek D,
Polejaeva I.

Author information: 
(1)Viagen, Inc. Austin, Texas 78732, USA. wenli.zhou@viagen.com

Among many factors that potentially affect somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)
embryo development is the donor cell itself. Cloning potentials of somatic donor 
cells vary greatly, possibly because the cells have different capacities to be
reprogrammed by ooplasma. It is therefore intriguing to identify factors that
regulate the reprogrammability of somatic donor cells. Gene expression analysis
is a widely used tool to investigate underlying mechanisms of various phenotypes.
In this study, we conducted a retrospective analysis investigating whether donor 
cell lines with distinct cloning efficiencies express different levels of genes
involved in epigenetic reprogramming including histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), -2 
(HDAC2); DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1), -3a (DNMT3a),-3b (DNMT3b), and the
bovine homolog of yeast sucrose nonfermenting-2 (SNF2L), a SWI/SNF family of
ATPases. Cell samples from 12 bovine donor cell lines were collected at the time 
of nuclear transfer experiments and expression levels of the genes were measured 
using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Our results show that there
are no significant differences in expression levels of these genes between donor 
cell lines of high and low cloning efficiency defined as live calving rates,
although inverse correlations are observed between in vitro embryo developmental 
rates and expression levels of HDAC2 and SNF2L. We also show that selection of
stable reference genes is important for relative quantification, and different
batches of cells can have different gene expression patterns. In summary, we
demonstrate that expression levels of these epigenome regulatory genes in bovine 
donor cells are not correlated with cloning potential. The experimental design
and data analysis method reported here can be applied to study any genes
expressed in donor cells.

PMID: 19751110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Virol. 2009 Nov;83(22):11502-13. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01318-09. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 are phosphorylated at novel sites during
varicella-zoster virus infection.

Walters MS(1), Erazo A, Kinchington PR, Silverstein S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, 701 W. 168th St., New York, NY 10032, USA.

ORF66p, a virion-associated varicella-zoster virus (VZV) protein, is a member of 
a conserved Alphaherpesvirinae kinase family with homology to herpes simplex
virus US3 kinase. Expression of ORF66p in cells infected with VZV or an
adenovirus expressing only ORF66p results in hyperphosphorylation of histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2. Mapping studies reveal that phosphorylation is
at a unique conserved Ser residue in the C terminus of both HDACs. This
modification requires an active kinase domain in ORF66p, as neither protein is
phosphorylated in cells infected with VZV lacking kinase activity. However,
hyperphosphorylation appears to occur indirectly, as within the context of in
vitro kinase reactions, purified ORF66p phosphorylates a peptide derived from
ORF62p, a known substrate, but does not phosphorylate HDAC. These results support
a model where ORF66p is necessary but not sufficient to effect
hyperphosphorylation of HDAC1 and HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC2772673
PMID: 19740981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Br J Cancer. 2009 Oct 6;101(7):1044-50. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605293. Epub 2009
Sep 8.

Phase I trial of vorinostat and doxorubicin in solid tumours: histone deacetylase
2 expression as a predictive marker.

Munster PN(1), Marchion D, Thomas S, Egorin M, Minton S, Springett G, Lee JH,
Simon G, Chiappori A, Sullivan D, Daud A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, 
CA 94143, USA. pmunster@medicine.ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) can sensitise cancer cells to 
topoisomerase inhibitors by increasing their access and binding to DNA.
METHODS: This phase I trial was designed to determine the toxicity profile,
tolerability, and recommended phase II dose of escalating doses of the HDACi
vorinostat, with weekly doxorubicin.
RESULTS: In total, 32 patients were treated; vorinostat was dosed at 400, 600,
800, or 1000 mg day(-1) on days 1-3, followed by doxorubicin (20 mg m(-2)) on day
3 for 3 of 4 weeks. Maximal tolerated dose was determined to be 800 mg day(-1) of
vorinostat. Dose-limiting toxicities were grade 3 nausea/vomiting (two out of
six) and fatigue (one out of six) at 1000 mg day(-1). Non-dose-limiting grade 3/4
toxicities included haematological toxicity and venous thromboembolism. Antitumor
activity in 24 evaluable patients included two partial responses (breast and
prostate cancer). Two patients with melanoma had stable disease for > or =8
months. Histone hyperacetylation changes in peripheral blood mononuclear and
tumour cells were comparable. Histone hyperacetylation seemed to correlate with
pre-treatment HDAC2 expression.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that vorinostat can be combined with weekly
doxorubicin in this schedule at a dose of 800 mg day(-1). The HDAC2 expression
may be a marker predictive of HDAC inhibition. Antitumor activity of this regimen
in breast cancer, prostate cancer, and melanoma seems interesting.

PMCID: PMC2768109
PMID: 19738609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Science. 2009 Sep 4;325(5945):1254-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1176709.

Regulation of histone acetylation in the nucleus by sphingosine-1-phosphate.

Hait NC(1), Allegood J, Maceyka M, Strub GM, Harikumar KB, Singh SK, Luo C,
Marmorstein R, Kordula T, Milstien S, Spiegel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Massey Cancer Center,
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Erratum in
    Science. 2009 Oct 16;326(5951):366.

The pleiotropic lipid mediator sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) can act
intracellularly independently of its cell surface receptors through unknown
mechanisms. Sphingosine kinase 2 (SphK2), one of the isoenzymes that generates
S1P, was associated with histone H3 and produced S1P that regulated histone
acetylation. S1P specifically bound to the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2
and inhibited their enzymatic activity, preventing the removal of acetyl groups
from lysine residues within histone tails. SphK2 associated with HDAC1 and HDAC2 
in repressor complexes and was selectively enriched at the promoters of the genes
encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 or the transcriptional
regulator c-fos, where it enhanced local histone H3 acetylation and
transcription. Thus, HDACs are direct intracellular targets of S1P and link
nuclear S1P to epigenetic regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2850596
PMID: 19729656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Dec;47(6):770-80. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.08.022. Epub
2009 Aug 31.

Krüppel-like factor 4 mediates histone deacetylase inhibitor-induced prevention
of cardiac hypertrophy.

Kee HJ(1), Kook H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Medical Research Center for Gene Regulation,
Chonnam National University Medical School, Heart Research Center of Chonnam
National University Hospital, Gwangju 501-746, South Korea.

Recently, we reported that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors block cardiac
hypertrophy and that activation of HDAC2, one of the class I HDACs, is required
for hypertrophy. In the present study, we tried to find the downstream target of 
HDAC inhibitor by utilizing cardiomyocytes and H9c2 cells. Both trichostatin A
(TSA, class I and II HDAC inhibitor) and SK7041 (SK, class I HDAC blocker)
attenuated the expression level and promoter activity of Nppa (natriuretic
polypeptide precursor type A) and Myh7 (myosin heavy polypeptide 7), which are
fetal genes associated with hypertrophy. Promoter-mapping revealed that the Nppa 
promoter region from -130 to approximately -105, which contains binding sites for
Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), is responsible for the HDAC inhibitor-mediated
inhibition. SK-induced repression of Nppa promoter activity was attenuated when
the KLF4-binding element was deleted or disrupted. Klf4 was upregulated by HDAC
inhibitors, whereas it was down-regulated by phenylephrine in cardiomyocytes or
by partial aortic constriction in mice. Klf4 successfully recruited the proximal 
Nppa promoter region flanking the KLF4-binding element in cardiomyocytes, and the
recruitment was reduced by treatment with phenylephrine, which was recovered by
SK. Overexpression of Klf4 blocked the agonist-induced increase in cardiomyocyte 
size, [(3)H]-leucine incorporation, and Nppa promoter activation. However,
promoter activity was not prominently inhibited when the KLF4-binding element was
disrupted or when a small inhibitory RNA to KLF4 was transfected into cells.
Hypertrophic phenotypes were enhanced in Klf4-knockdown cells. These results
suggest that KLF4, a novel anti-hypertrophic transcriptional regulator, mediates 
the HDAC inhibitor-induced prevention of cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 19729022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Int J Oncol. 2009 Oct;35(4):909-20.

Efficacy of MS-275, a selective inhibitor of class I histone deacetylases, in
human colon cancer models.

Bracker TU(1), Sommer A, Fichtner I, Faus H, Haendler B, Hess-Stumpp H.

Author information: 
(1)Global Drug Discovery, Therapeutic Research Group Oncology, Bayer Schering
Pharma AG, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[N-(pyridine-3yl-methoxy-carbonyl) aminomethyl] benzamide
(MS-275) is a second generation histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor with
significant anti-tumor efficacy currently in clinical development. We
investigated the effect of MS-275 treatment on various colon cancer cell lines,
as well as on mouse xenograft models derived from human colorectal cancer. MS-275
exerted strong anti-proliferative effects in five cell lines and increased the
acetylation of histones 3 and 4. In vivo testing of the compound in eight
different models of human colon cancer derived from primary colorectal cancers or
from established cell lines revealed that five models were responders, two
non-responders and one an anti-responder. Gene expression profiles were
determined in order to identify genes and pathways differentially regulated upon 
MS-275 treatment in responder versus non-responder models. Principle component
analysis revealed a correlation of the anti-tumor efficacy with the
sub-clustering of the MS-275 treatment groups in 7 out of 8 models. Although the 
overall gene expression pattern was rather unique for each individual model, 129 
genes were significantly up- and 58 genes significantly down-regulated in at
least 2 out of 5 responder models in response to MS-275 treatment. We identified 
potential biomarkers for response to MS-275, such as PRA1, MYADM and PALM2-AKAP2 
which were up-regulated in all responder models and down-regulated or unchanged
in all non-responder models. Our results provide a starting point for the
development of clinically relevant biomarkers for predicting a response to MS-275
and the understanding of the mode of action of this HDAC inhibitor.

PMID: 19724929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2009 Sep;219(1):17-23.

Angiotensin II induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy probably through histone
deacetylases.

Lu Y(1), Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, China. lyholly@163.com

Angiotensin II (Ang II) plays a pathophysiological role in the genesis of cardiac
hypertrophy as a hypertrophic stimulus. But little is known about the terminal
steps, in which Ang II reprograms cardiac gene expression. Histone
deacetyltransferases (HDACs) are considered as the integrators of divergent
stress-response pathways during heart remodeling. However, the exact role of
HDACs in the hypertrophic process is not clear yet. Therefore, we studied the
expression of HDAC2, one of Class I HDACs, and the effect of valproic acid (VPA),
a nonspecific HDAC inhibitor, in the Ang II-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.
Primary cultures of neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were prepared from 1-day-old
Wistar rats and treated with Ang II. The mRNA levels of HDAC2 and beta-myosin
heavy chain (beta-MHC), a hypertrophic marker gene, were determined by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The protein expression of HDAC2
and c-fos, an immediate early response gene, was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry, and the surface areas of cardiomyocytes were measured using
Motic Images software. The expression levels of HDAC2 mRNA and protein were
increased in a time-dependent manner during the hypertrophic process, accompanied
with the increment of beta-MHC and c-fos proteins. Ang II also increased the
surface area of cardiomyocytes by more than twofold. VPA significantly reversed
these changes. These results suggest that Ang II may induce cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy through HDACs in combination with c-fos and that VPA has the
protective effect on cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Thus, HDAC inhibition is a
feasible therapeutic strategy that holds promise in the treatment of cardiac
hypertrophy.

PMID: 19713680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;69(17):7079-87. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1542. Epub
2009 Aug 25.

Chromobox protein homologue 7 protein, with decreased expression in human
carcinomas, positively regulates E-cadherin expression by interacting with the
histone deacetylase 2 protein.

Federico A(1), Pallante P, Bianco M, Ferraro A, Esposito F, Monti M, Cozzolino M,
Keller S, Fedele M, Leone V, Troncone G, Chiariotti L, Pucci P, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università degli studi di Napoli 
Federico II, Italy.

Chromobox protein homologue 7 (CBX7) is a chromobox family protein encoding a
novel polycomb protein, the expression of which shows a progressive reduction,
well related with the malignant grade of the thyroid neoplasias. Indeed, CBX7
protein levels decreased in an increasing percentage of cases going from benign
adenomas to papillary, follicular, and anaplastic thyroid carcinomas. To
elucidate the function of CBX7 in carcinogenesis, we searched for CBX7
interacting proteins by a proteomic analysis. By this approach, we identified
several proteins. Among these proteins, we selected histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2), which is well known to play a key role in neoplastic cell transformation
and down-regulation of E-cadherin expression, the loss of which is a critical
event in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. We confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation that CBX7 physically interacts with the HDAC2 protein and
is able to inhibit its activity. Then, we showed that both these proteins bind
the E-cadherin promoter and that CBX7 up-regulates E-cadherin expression.
Consistent with these data, we found a positive statistical correlation between
CBX7 and E-cadherin expression in human thyroid carcinomas. Finally, we showed
that the expression of CBX7 increases the acetylation status of the histones H3
and H4 on the E-cadherin promoter. Therefore, the ability of CBX7 to positively
regulate E-cadherin expression by interacting with HDAC2 and inhibiting its
activity on the E-cadherin promoter would account for the correlation between the
loss of CBX7 expression and a highly malignant phenotype.

PMID: 19706751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Commun Integr Biol. 2009;2(1):11-3.

Nitric oxide and histone deacetylases: A new relationship between old molecules.

Watson PM(1), Riccio A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular and Cell Biology; and Department of Neuroscience,
Physiology and Pharmacology; University College London; London UK.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that catalyze the removal of acetyl
groups from a range of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. Recently, we described a
novel route to neurotrophin-dependent gene activation in neurons, which requires 
the S-nitrosylation of nuclear HDAC2 by the gaseous molecule nitric oxide (NO).1 
We have further investigated the NO-dependent regulation of HDACs in neurons.
Using a fluorogenic deacetylation assay, we show that NO decreases the enzymatic 
activity of a subgroup of neuronal HDACs in vitro and that this inhibition is not
due to damaging modifications such as oxidation or tyrosine nitration. The
neuronal HDACs whose catalytic activity is inhibited by NO are entirely those
that are localized in the cytoplasm. These observations support and extend the
concept that nitric oxide is a key regulator of HDAC function in mammalian
neurons.

PMCID: PMC2649289
PMID: 19704855  [PubMed]


342. Cancer Lett. 2010 Feb 28;288(2):236-50. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.07.011. Epub
2009 Aug 20.

Troglitazone inhibits histone deacetylase activity in breast cancer cells.

Davies GF(1), Ross AR, Arnason TG, Juurlink BH, Harkness TA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Saskatchewan, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Saskatoon,
SK, Canada.

We previously demonstrated that the PPARgamma agonist Troglitazone (TRG), a
potent antiproliferative agent, in combination with the anthracycline antibiotic 
Doxorubicin (DOX), is an effective killer of multiple drug resistant (MDR) human 
cancer cells. Cell killing was accompanied by increased global histone H3
acetylation. Presently, we investigated the epigenetic and cell killing effects
of TRG in estrogen receptor (ER) positive MCF7 breast cancer cells. MCF7 cells
were treated with the Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) TRG and Ciglitazone (CIG), the
non-TZD PPARgamma agonist 15PGJ2, and the histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi's) Trichostatin A (TSA), sodium butyrate and PXD101. Using MTT cell
viability assays, Western analyzes and mass spectrometry, we showed a
dose-dependent increase in cell killing in TRG and HDACi treated cells, that was 
associated with increased H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and H3K23 acetylation, H2AX and
H3S10 phosphorylation, and H3K79 mono- and di-methylation. These effects were
mediated through an ER independent pathway. Using HDAC activity assays, TRG
inhibited HDAC activity in cells and in cell lysates, similar to that observed
with TSA. Furthermore, TRG and TSA induced a slower migrating HDAC1 species that 
was refractory to HDAC2 associations. Lastly, TRG and the HDACi's decreased total
and phosphorylated AKT levels. These findings suggest that TRG's mode of killing 
may involve downregulation of PI3K signaling through HDAC inhibition, leading to 
increased global histone post-translational modifications.

2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19699029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochem J. 2009 Oct 12;423(3):389-400. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090086.

Functional characterization of the interactions between endosomal adaptor protein
APPL1 and the NuRD co-repressor complex.

Banach-Orlowska M(1), Pilecka I, Torun A, Pyrzynska B, Miaczynska M.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Cell
Biology, Ks. Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland.

Multifunctional adaptor protein APPL1 [adaptor protein containing PH (pleckstrin 
homology) domain, PTB (phosphotyrosine binding) domain and leucine zipper motif] 
belongs to a growing group of endocytic proteins which actively participate in
various stages of signalling pathways. Owing to its interaction with the small
GTPase Rab5, APPL1 localizes predominantly to a subpopulation of early endosomes 
but is also capable of nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. Among its various binding
partners, APPL1 was reported to associate with the nuclear co-repressor complex
NuRD (nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase), containing both nucleosome
remodelling and HDAC (histone deacetylase) activities, but the biochemical basis 
or functional relevance of this interaction remained unknown. Here we
characterized the binding between APPL1 and NuRD in more detail, identifying
HDAC2 as the key NuRD subunit responsible for this association. APPL1 interacts
with the NuRD complex containing enzymatically active HDAC2 but not HDAC1 as the 
only deacetylase. However, the cellular levels of HDAC1 can regulate the extent
of APPL1-NuRD interactions, which in turn modulates the nucleocytoplasmic
distribution of APPL1. Increased binding of APPL1 to NuRD upon silencing of HDAC1
promotes the nuclear localization of APPL1, whereas HDAC1 overexpression exerts
an opposite effect. Moreover, we also uncovered a NuRD-independent interaction of
APPL1 with HDAC1. APPL1 overexpression affects the composition of the
HDAC1-containing NuRD complex and the expression of HDAC1 target p21WAF1/CIP1.
Cumulatively, these data reveal a surprising complexity of APPL1 interactions
with HDACs, with functional consequences for the modulation of gene expression.
In a broader sense, these results contribute to an emerging theme of endocytic
proteins playing alternative roles in the cell nucleus.

PMCID: PMC2762692
PMID: 19686092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Front Mol Neurosci. 2009 Jul 24;2:7. doi: 10.3389/neuro.02.007.2009. eCollection 
2009.

Major signaling pathways in migrating neuroblasts.

Khodosevich K(1), Seeburg PH, Monyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurobiology, Interdisciplinary Center for
Neurosciences Heidelberg, Germany.

Neuronal migration is a key process in the developing and adult brain. Numerous
factors act on intracellular cascades of migrating neurons and regulate the final
position of neurons. One robust migration route persists postnatally - the
rostral migratory stream (RMS). To identify genes that govern neuronal migration 
in this unique structure, we isolated RMS neuroblasts by making use of transgenic
mice that express EGFP in this cell population and performed microarray analysis 
on RNA. We compared gene expression patterns of neuroblasts obtained from two
sites of the RMS, one closer to the site of origin, the subventricular zone, and 
one closer to the site of the final destination, the olfactory bulb (OB). We
identified more than 400 upregulated genes, many of which were not known to be
involved in migration. These genes were grouped into functional networks by
bioinformatics analysis. Selecting a specific upregulated intracellular network, 
the cytoskeleton pathway, we confirmed by functional in vitro and in vivo
analysis that the identified genes of this network affected RMS neuroblast
migration. Based on the validity of this approach, we chose four new networks and
tested by functional in vivo analysis their involvement in neuroblast migration. 
Thus, knockdown of Calm1, Gria1 (GluA1) and Camk4 (calmodulin-signaling network),
Hdac2 and Hsbp1 (Akt1-DNA transcription network), Vav3 and Ppm1a (growth factor
signaling network) affected neuroblast migration to the OB.

PMCID: PMC2724029
PMID: 19668709  [PubMed]


345. Cell Res. 2009 Aug;19(8):920-1. doi: 10.1038/cr.2009.93.

Histone modifier, the gatekeeper of good memory.

Qiu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Section, Division of Biology, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. zqiu@ucsd.edu; zqiu@ion.ac.cn

PMID: 19648947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 9;284(41):27933-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.025742. Epub 2009
Jul 31.

Injury-induced platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha expression mediated 
by interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) release and cooperative transactivation by
NF-kappaB and ATF-4: IL-1beta facilitates HDAC-1/2 dissociation from promoter.

Zhang N(1), Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 9;285(28):21902.

Platelet-derived growth factors are a family of potent mitogens and
chemoattractants for fibroblasts and other cells of mesenchymal origin.
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) dimeric ligands (composed of A-, B-, C-,
and D-chains) exert their biological activity through high affinity interactions 
with cell surface receptor subunits (alpha and beta). PDGF-receptor-alpha is
widely implicated in the pathogenesis of hyperplastic fibrotic disease, yet the
molecular mechanisms controlling its expression in response to injury are poorly 
understood. Here we show that PDGF-R alpha expression is induced in fibroblasts
by mechanical injury and interleukin (IL)-1beta, which was abolished by
neutralizing IL-1beta antibodies in the culture supernatant or inhibitors of
NF-kappaB. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays revealed the existence of a new NF-kappaB binding site at -531/-521 bp in 
the PDGF-R alpha promoter. We have recently shown that ATF-4 is also induced by
injury (Malabanan, K. P., Kanellakis, P., Bobik, A., and Khachigian, L. M. (2008)
Circ. Res. 103, 378-387), and we demonstrate here that ATF-4 binds a novel
element -259/-254 and stimulates PDGF-R alpha transcription. ATF-4 and NF-kappaB 
interact, occupy the PDGF-R alpha promoter, and induce PDGF-R alpha transcription
in a cooperative manner. IL-1beta facilitates the dissociation of histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-1/2 from the PDGF-R alpha promoter, whereas the HDAC
inhibitors suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid and trichostatin A potentiate IL-1beta
induction of PDGF-R alpha transcription. These findings, taken together,
demonstrate that injury stimulates IL-1beta secretion by fibroblasts, which
activates NF-kappaB and ATF-4 and stimulates interaction with the PDGF-R alpha
promoter, triggering PDGF-R alpha transcription. Physical and functional
interactions between NF-kappaB and ATF-4 have not been reported in any gene. This
is also the first report of HDAC regulation of PDGF-R alpha transcription.

PMCID: PMC2788845
PMID: 19648113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Aug;37(15):5183-96. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp533. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

Senescence delay and repression of p16INK4a by Lsh via recruitment of histone
deacetylases in human diploid fibroblasts.

Zhou R(1), Han L, Li G, Tong T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Research Center on Aging, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of
China.

Lymphoid specific helicase (Lsh) belongs to the family of SNF2/helicases.
Disruption of Lsh leads to developmental growth retardation and premature aging
in mice. However, the specific effect of Lsh on human cellular senescence remains
unknown. Herein, we report that Lsh overexpression delays cell senescence by
silencing p16(INK4a) in human fibroblasts. The patterns of p16(INK4a) and Lsh
expression during cell senescence present the inverse correlation. We also find
that Lsh requires histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity to repress p16(INK4a) and
treatment with trichostatin A (TSA) is sufficient to block the repressor effect
of Lsh. Moreover, overexpression of Lsh is correlated with deacetylation of
histone H3 at the p16 promoter, and TSA treatment in Lsh-expressing cells
reverses the acetylation status of histones. Additionally, we demonstrate an
interaction between Lsh, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 in vivo.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that Lsh interacts in vivo with the p16 promoter and 
recruits HDAC1. Our data suggest that Lsh represses endogenous p16(INK4a)
expression by recruiting HDAC to establish a repressive chromatin structure at
the p16(INK4a) promoter, which in turn delays cell senescence.

PMCID: PMC2731912
PMID: 19561196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. FASEB J. 2009 Oct;23(10):3539-52. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-133215. Epub 2009 Jun 26.

A novel domain in histone deacetylase 1 and 2 mediates repression of
cartilage-specific genes in human chondrocytes.

Hong S(1), Derfoul A, Pereira-Mouries L, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cartilage Molecular Genetics Group, Cartilage Biology and Orthopaedics Branch,
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The role of histone deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) in regulating
cartilage-specific gene expression was explored in primary human chondrocytes.
HDAC1 and HDAC2 protein levels were elevated in chondrocytes from osteoarthritic 
patients, consistent with a down-regulation of some cartilage marker genes. When 
expressed in these cells, HDAC1 and HDAC2 repressed aggrecan and collagen
2(alpha1) expression but differed in their repression of collagen 9(alpha1),
collagen 11(alpha1), dermatopontin, and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein
(COMP). To identify the basis of these differences between HDAC1 and HDAC2, their
carboxy-terminal domains (CTDs) were deleted, which led to proteins that retained
enzymatic activity but were unable to repress cartilage gene expression. Further,
exchange of the CTDs between HDAC1 and HDAC2 led to proteins that were
enzymatically active but displayed altered target gene specificity, indicating
that these CTDs can function independently of HDAC enzymatic activity, to target 
the HDACs to specific genes. The Snail transcription factor was identified as a
mediator of HDAC1 and HDAC2 repression of the collagen 2(alpha1) gene, via its
interaction with the HDAC1 and 2 CTDs. The data indicate that the CTD serves a
novel function within HDAC1 and HDAC2, to mediate repression of
cartilage-specific gene expression in human chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC2747680
PMID: 19561124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000495. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000495. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

Epigenetic regulation of HIV-1 latency by cytosine methylation.

Kauder SE(1), Bosque A, Lindqvist A, Planelles V, Verdin E.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, San Francisco, California,
United States of America.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) persists in a latent state within
resting CD4+ T cells of infected persons treated with highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART). This reservoir must be eliminated for the
clearance of infection. Using a cDNA library screen, we have identified
methyl-CpG binding domain protein 2 (MBD2) as a regulator of HIV-1 latency. Two
CpG islands flank the HIV-1 transcription start site and are methylated in
latently infected Jurkat cells and primary CD4+ T cells. MBD2 and histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) are found at one of these CpG islands during latency.
Inhibition of cytosine methylation with 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine (aza-CdR) abrogates
recruitment of MBD2 and HDAC2. Furthermore, aza-CdR potently synergizes with the 
NF-kappaB activators prostratin or TNF-alpha to reactivate latent HIV-1. These
observations confirm that cytosine methylation and MBD2 are epigenetic regulators
of HIV-1 latency. Clearance of HIV-1 from infected persons may be enhanced by
inclusion of DNA methylation inhibitors, such as aza-CdR, and NF-kappaB
activators into current antiviral therapies.

PMCID: PMC2695767
PMID: 19557157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):815-7. doi: 10.1038/nn0709-815.

Genetics meets epigenetics: HDACs and Wnt signaling in myelin development and
regeneration.

Li H, Richardson WD.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):829-38.

PMID: 19554044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Neurosci. 2009 Jun 24;29(25):8288-97. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0097-09.2009.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 form a developmental switch that controls excitatory
synapse maturation and function.

Akhtar MW(1), Raingo J, Nelson ED, Montgomery RL, Olson EN, Kavalali ET,
Monteggia LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9111, USA.

The structural assembly of synapses can be accomplished in a rapid time frame,
although most nascent synapses formed during early development are not fully
functional and respond poorly to presynaptic action potentials. The mechanisms
that are responsible for this delay in synapse maturation are unknown. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) regulate the activity state of chromatin and repress gene
expression through the removal of acetyl groups from histones. Class I HDACs,
which include HDAC1 and HDAC2, are expressed in the CNS, although their specific 
role in neuronal function has not been studied. To delineate the contribution of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the brain, we have used pharmacological inhibitors of HDACs
and mice with conditional alleles to HDAC1 and HDAC2. We found that a decrease in
the activities of both HDAC1 and HDAC2 during early synaptic development causes a
robust facilitation of excitatory synapse maturation and a modest increase in
synapse numbers. In contrast, in mature neurons a decrease in HDAC2 levels alone 
was sufficient to attenuate basal excitatory neurotransmission without a
significant change in the numbers of detectable nerve terminals. Therefore, we
propose that HDAC1 and HDAC2 form a developmental switch that controls synapse
maturation and function acting in a manner dependent on the maturational states
of neuronal networks.

PMCID: PMC2895817
PMID: 19553468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Sep;297(3):F729-39. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00086.2009. Epub 2009 Jun 24.

Histone deacetylase-2 is a key regulator of diabetes- and transforming growth
factor-beta1-induced renal injury.

Noh H(1), Oh EY, Seo JY, Yu MR, Kim YO, Ha H, Lee HB.

Author information: 
(1)Hyonam Kidney Laboratory, Soon Chun Hyang University, Seoul, Korea.

Excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) in the kidneys and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of renal tubular epithelial cells
contributes to the renal fibrosis that is associated with diabetic nephropathy.
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) determines the acetylation status of histones and
thereby controls the regulation of gene expression. This study examined the
effect of HDAC inhibition on renal fibrosis induced by diabetes or transforming
growth factor (TGF)-beta1 and determined the role of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) as mediators of HDAC activation. In streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic
kidneys and TGF-beta1-treated normal rat kidney tubular epithelial cells
(NRK52-E), we found that trichostatin A, a nonselective HDAC inhibitor, decreased
mRNA and protein expressions of ECM components and prevented EMT. Valproic acid
and class I-selective HDAC inhibitor SK-7041 also showed similar effects in
NRK52-E cells. Among the six HDACs tested (HDAC-1 through -5 and HDAC-8), HDAC-2 
activity significantly increased in the kidneys of STZ-induced diabetic rats and 
db/db mice and TGF-beta1-treated NRK52-E cells. Levels of mRNA expression of
fibronectin and alpha-smooth muscle actin were decreased, whereas E-cadherin mRNA
was increased when HDAC-2 was knocked down using RNA interference in NRK52-E
cells. Interestingly, hydrogen peroxide increased HDAC-2 activity, and the
treatment with an antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine, almost completely reduced
TGF-beta1-induced activation of HDAC-2. These findings suggest that HDAC-2 plays 
an important role in the development of ECM accumulation and EMT in diabetic
kidney and that ROS mediate TGF-beta1-induced activation of HDAC-2.

PMID: 19553350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000488. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000488. Epub 2009
Jun 19.

Epigenetic silencing of host cell defense genes enhances intracellular survival
of the rickettsial pathogen Anaplasma phagocytophilum.

Garcia-Garcia JC(1), Barat NC, Trembley SJ, Dumler JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Intracellular bacteria have evolved mechanisms that promote survival within
hostile host environments, often resulting in functional dysregulation and
disease. Using the Anaplasma phagocytophilum-infected granulocyte model, we
establish a link between host chromatin modifications, defense gene transcription
and intracellular bacterial infection. Infection of THP-1 cells with A.
phagocytophilum led to silencing of host defense gene expression. Histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) expression, activity and binding to the defense gene
promoters significantly increased during infection, which resulted in decreased
histone H3 acetylation in infected cells. HDAC1 overexpression enhanced
infection, whereas pharmacologic and siRNA HDAC1 inhibition significantly
decreased bacterial load. HDAC2 does not seem to be involved, since HDAC2
silencing by siRNA had no effect on A. phagocytophilum intracellular propagation.
These data indicate that HDAC up-regulation and epigenetic silencing of host cell
defense genes is required for A. phagocytophilum infection. Bacterial epigenetic 
regulation of host cell gene transcription could be a general mechanism that
enhances intracellular pathogen survival while altering cell function and
promoting disease.

PMCID: PMC2694362
PMID: 19543390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jun 30;106(26):10626-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0812099106. Epub 2009 Jun 16.

Unbiased RNA-protein interaction screen by quantitative proteomics.

Butter F(1), Scheibe M, Mörl M, Mann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute for
Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative interaction proteomics has successfully
elucidated specific protein-protein, DNA-protein, and small molecule-protein
interactions. Here, we developed a gel-free, sensitive, and scalable technology
that addresses the important area of RNA-protein interactions. Using
aptamer-tagged RNA as bait, we captured RNA-interacting proteins from stable
isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-labeled mammalian cell
extracts and analyzed them by high-resolution, quantitative MS. Binders specific 
to the RNA sequence were distinguished from background by their isotope ratios
between bait and control. We demonstrated the approach by retrieving known and
novel interaction partners for the HuR interaction motif, H4 stem loop, "zipcode"
sequence, tRNA, and a bioinformatically-predicted RNA fold in DGCR-8/Pasha mRNA. 
In all experiments we unambiguously identified known interaction partners by a
single affinity purification step. The 5' region of the mRNA of DGCR-8/Pasha, a
component of the microprocessor complex, specifically interacts with components
of the translational machinery, suggesting that it contains an internal ribosome 
entry site.

PMCID: PMC2697111
PMID: 19541640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Rheumatol. 2009 Aug;36(8):1580-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081115. Epub 2009 Jun 16.

Expression and function of histone deacetylases in rheumatoid arthritis synovial 
fibroblasts.

Horiuchi M(1), Morinobu A, Chin T, Sakai Y, Kurosaka M, Kumagai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology and Immunology, Kobe University School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of histone deacetylases (HDAC) on rheumatoid
arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RA-SF).
METHODS: The expression of mRNA encoding HDAC1 through HDAC11 in RA-SF and
osteoarthritis-SF (OA-SF) was determined using real-time polymerase chain
reactions. The functions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in RA-SF were assessed using small
interfering RNA (siRNA) technology. Cell counts and proliferation were examined
by MTT assays and BrDU ELISA, respectively, and apoptosis was determined using
the TUNEL assay and annexin V staining. Levels of cell cycle-related molecules
and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) were tested by Western blotting and ELISA,
respectively.
RESULTS: Messenger RNA expression of HDAC1 was significantly higher in RA-SF than
in OA-SF. Knockdown of HDAC1 and HDAC2 by siRNA resulted in decreased cell counts
and cell proliferation, and increased apoptosis in RA-SF. Expression of p16, p21,
and p53 was increased by knockdown of both HDAC1 and HDAC2. On the other hand,
knockdown of HDAC1, but not of HDAC2, upregulated tumor necrosis
factor-alpha-induced MMP-1 production by RA-SF.
CONCLUSION: HDAC1 is overexpressed in RA-SF compared to OA-SF. HDAC1 supports
cell proliferation and survival of RA-SF, but suppresses MMP-1 production. HDAC2 
also plays an important role in cell proliferation and apoptosis of RA-SF. Our
study provides useful information to develop new HDAC inhibitors for the
treatment of RA.

PMID: 19531758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Gut. 2009 Oct;58(10):1399-409. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.180711. Epub 2009 Jun 14.

HDAC2 mediates therapeutic resistance of pancreatic cancer cells via the BH3-only
protein NOXA.

Fritsche P(1), Seidler B, Schüler S, Schnieke A, Göttlicher M, Schmid RM, Saur D,
Schneider G.

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität München, Klinikum rechts der Isar, II Medizinische
Klinik, Ismaninger Str 22, 81675 Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Although histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are promising cancer 
therapeutics regulating proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, molecular
pathways engaged by specific HDAC isoenzymes in cancer are ill defined.
RESULTS: In this study we demonstrate that HDAC2 is highly expressed in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), especially in undifferentiated tumours. 
We show that HDAC2, but not HDAC1, confers resistance towards the topoisomerase
II inhibitor etoposide in PDAC cells. Correspondingly, the class I selective
HDACi valproic acid (VPA) synergises with etoposide to induce apoptosis of PDAC
cells. Transcriptome profiling of HDAC2-depleted PDAC cells revealed upregulation
of the BH3-only protein NOXA. We show that the epigenetically silenced NOXA gene 
locus is opened after HDAC2 depletion and that NOXA upregulation is sufficient to
sensitise PDAC cells towards etoposide-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our data characterise a novel molecular mechanism that
links the epigenetic regulator HDAC2 to the regulation of the pro-apoptotic
BH3-only protein NOXA in PDAC. Targeting HDAC2 will therefore be a promising
strategy to overcome therapeutic resistance of PDAC against chemotherapeutics
that induce DNA damage.

PMID: 19528037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jun-Aug;1789(6-8):443-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.05.007. Epub 2009 Jun 6.

Sin3: master scaffold and transcriptional corepressor.

Grzenda A(1), Lomberk G, Zhang JS, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Sin3 was isolated over two decades ago as a negative regulator of transcription
in budding yeast. Subsequent research has established the protein as a master
transcriptional scaffold and corepressor capable of transcriptional silencing via
associated histone deacetylases (HDACs). The core Sin3-HDAC complex interacts
with a wide variety of repressors and corepressors, providing flexibility and
expanded specificity in modulating chromatin structure and transcription. As a
result, the Sin3/HDAC complex is involved in an array of biological and cellular 
processes, including cell cycle progression, genomic stability, embryonic
development, and homeostasis. Abnormal recruitment of this complex or alteration 
of its enzymatic activity has been implicated in neoplastic transformation.

PMCID: PMC3686104
PMID: 19505602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):829-38. doi: 10.1038/nn.2333. Epub 2009 Jun 7.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation by disrupting the
beta-catenin-TCF interaction.

Ye F(1), Chen Y, Hoang T, Montgomery RL, Zhao XH, Bu H, Hu T, Taketo MM, van Es
JH, Clevers H, Hsieh J, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN, Lu QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for
Basic Neuroscience Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):815-7.

Oligodendrocyte development is regulated by the interaction of repressors and
activators in a complex transcriptional network. We found that two
histone-modifying enzymes, HDAC1 and HDAC2, were required for oligodendrocyte
formation. Genetic deletion of both Hdac1 and Hdac2 in oligodendrocyte lineage
cells resulted in stabilization and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin, which 
negatively regulates oligodendrocyte development by repressing Olig2 expression. 
We further identified the oligodendrocyte-restricted transcription factor
TCF7L2/TCF4 as a bipartite co-effector of beta-catenin for regulating
oligodendrocyte differentiation. Targeted disruption of Tcf7l2 in mice led to
severe defects in oligodendrocyte maturation, whereas expression of its
dominant-repressive form promoted precocious oligodendrocyte specification in
developing chick neural tube. Transcriptional co-repressors HDAC1 and HDAC2
compete with beta-catenin for TCF7L2 interaction to regulate downstream genes
involved in oligodendrocyte differentiation. Thus, crosstalk between HDAC1/2 and 
the canonical Wnt signaling pathway mediated by TCF7L2 serves as a regulatory
mechanism for oligodendrocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2701973
PMID: 19503085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jun 23;106(25):10141-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900437106. Epub 2009 Jun 3.

LSD1-mediated epigenetic modification is required for TAL1 function and
hematopoiesis.

Hu X(1), Li X, Valverde K, Fu X, Noguchi C, Qiu Y, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Genetics Institute, and Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

TAL1 is a critical transcription factor required for hematopoiesis. However,
perturbation of its activity often leads to T cell leukemia. Whether and how its 
transcriptional activities are regulated during hematopoiesis remains to be
addressed. Here, we show that TAL1 is associated with histone demethylase
complexes containing lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1), RE1 silencing
transcription factor corepressor (CoREST), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and
histone deacetylase 2 in erythroleukemia and T cell leukemia cells. The enzymatic
domain of LSD1 plays an important role in repressing the TAL1-directed
transcription of GAL4 reporter linked to a thymidine kniase minimal promoter.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the TAL1-associated LSD1, HDAC1, and their
enzymatic activities are coordinately down-regulated during the early phases of
erythroid differentiation. Consistent with the rapid changes of TAL1-corepressor 
complex during differentiation, TAL1 recruits LSD1 to the silenced p4.2 promoter 
in undifferentiated, but not in differentiated, murine erythroleukemia (MEL)
cells. Finally, shRNA-mediated knockdown of LSD1 in MEL cells resulted in
derepression of the TAL1 target gene accompanied by increasing dimeH3K4 at the
promoter region. Thus, our data revealed that histone lysine demethylase LSD1 may
negatively regulate TAL1-mediated transcription and suggest that the dynamic
regulation of TAL1-associated LSD1/HDAC1 complex may determine the onset of
erythroid differentiation programs.

PMCID: PMC2700898
PMID: 19497860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Sep 11;387(1):13-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.112. Epub 2009 May 30.

All-trans retinoic acid increases KLF4 acetylation by inducing HDAC2
phosphorylation and its dissociation from KLF4 in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Meng F(1), Han M, Zheng B, Wang C, Zhang R, Zhang XH, Wen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, PR China.

The zinc finger transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) has been
implicated in vascular smooth muscle cell differentiation induced by all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA). However, the molecular mechanism whereby ATRA regulates
KLF4 activity is still poorly understood. Here, we show that ATRA-induced histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) phosphorylation at Ser424 in VSMCs and inhibited the
interaction of HDAC2 with KLF4. Inhibiting JNK by JNK inhibitor SP600125 or
knockdown of JNK by JNK siRNA abrogated ATRA-induced HDAC2 phosphorylation and
reversed ATRA-induced suppression of the interaction of HDAC2 with KLF4. We
further demonstrated that HDAC2 directly deacetylated KLF4, and that KLF4
acetylation and binding activity of KLF4 to the SM22alpha promoter were
significantly increased in ATRA-treated VSMCs. Collectively, our results indicate
that ATRA induces HDAC2 phosphorylation mediated by JNK signaling, and thus
causes HDAC2 dissociation from KLF4, subsequently leading to the increase in KLF4
acetylation.

PMID: 19486889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 May;34(5):369-74.

Relation of promoter methylation of mdr-1 gene and histone acetylation status
with multidrug resistance in MCF-7/Adr cells.

Huang C(1), Cao P, Xie Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha 410013, China. hchdoctor@sohu.com

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the mdr-1 gene promoter methylation and histone acetylation
status in both MCF-7/Adr and MCF-7 cells and to preliminarily explore the
epigenetic mechanism of multidrug resistance in breast cancer.
METHODS: mdr-1 gene promoter methylation status of the 2 cell lines was detected 
by methylation-sensitive PCR. mRNA expression of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs)
and histone deacetylases (HDACs) was detected by real-time quantitative PCR.
Acetylation level of histone H3 and H4 was examined by optical density assay.
RESULTS: Promoter hypermethylation of mdr-1 gene was observed in MCF-7 cells
whereas hypomethylation was found in MCF-7/Adr cells. Expression of DNMT1,
DNMT3a, and DNMT3b mRNA in MCF-7/Adr cells significantly decreased compared with 
that of MCF-7 cells (P<0.05). H3 and H4 histone acetylation levels of MCF-7/Adr
cells were obviously higher than those of the MCF-7 cells (P<0.01). Expression of
HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC7, and Sirtuin type 1 (SIRT1) mRNA in MCF-7/Adr cells was
significantly reduced (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Hypomethylation of the promoter region of mdr-1 gene, high H3 and H4 
histone acetylation, and low mRNA expression of DNMTs and HDACs may be important 
epigenetic factors for the development of MDR in MCF-7/ Adr cells.

PMID: 19483282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Lancet. 2009 May 30;373(9678):1905-17. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60326-3.

Glucocorticoid resistance in inflammatory diseases.

Barnes PJ(1), Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, UK.
p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Glucocorticoid resistance or insensitivity is a major barrier to the treatment of
several common inflammatory diseases-including chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and acute respiratory distress syndrome; it is also an issue for some
patients with asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and inflammatory bowel disease.
Several molecular mechanisms of glucocorticoid resistance have now been
identified, including activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase
pathways by certain cytokines, excessive activation of the transcription factor
activator protein 1, reduced histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) expression, raised
macrophage migration inhibitory factor, and increased P-glycoprotein-mediated
drug efflux. Patients with glucocorticoid resistance can be treated with
alternative broad-spectrum anti-inflammatory treatments, such as calcineurin
inhibitors and other immunomodulators, or novel anti-inflammatory treatments,
such as inhibitors of phosphodiesterase 4 or nuclear factor kappaB, although
these drugs are all likely to have major side-effects. An alternative treatment
strategy is to reverse glucocorticoid resistance by blocking its underlying
mechanisms. Some examples of this approach are inhibition of p38 MAP kinase, use 
of vitamin D to restore interleukin-10 response, activation of HDAC2 expression
by use of theophylline, antioxidants, or phosphoinositide-3-kinase-delta
inhibitors, and inhibition of macrophage migration inhibitory factor and
P-glycoprotein.

PMID: 19482216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Gynecol Oncol. 2008 Sep;19(3):185-90. doi: 10.3802/jgo.2008.19.3.185. Epub 2008
Sep 30.

Expression profile of histone deacetylases 1, 2 and 3 in ovarian cancer tissues.

Jin KL(1), Pak JH, Park JY, Choi WH, Lee JY, Kim JH, Nam JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, University of
Ulsan, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression levels of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1, 
2, and 3 in ovarian cancer tissues and normal ovarian tissues.
METHODS: Randomly assigned each of six patients with serous, mucinous and
endometrioid ovarian cancer were included. Another six patients with normal
ovarian tissue were included for comparison. RT-PCR was performed to quantify the
levels of HDACs1-3 mRNA in the cancer and normal tissues. Western blot analysis
was performed to measure the expression levels of HDACs1-3 protein. The HDACs1-3 
expression pattern was also topologically examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Increased mRNA expressions of HDCA1, HDAC 2 and HDAC 3 were detected in 
83%, 67% and 83% of 18 cancer tissue samples, compared to normal tissue samples. 
The relative densities of HDAC1 mRNA and HDAC3 mRNA in the serous, mucinous and
endometrioid cancer tissues, and HDAC2 mRNA in serous cancer tissues were
significantly higher than those of the normal tissues, respectively (p<0.05).
Overexpression of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 proteins were detected in 94%, 72% and
83% of 18 cancer samples, respectively. The relative densities of HDAC1 protein
and HDAC3 protein in serous, mucinous and endometrioid cancer, and HDAC2 protein 
in serous and mucinous cancer tissues were significantly higher than those of
normal tissues, respectively (p<0.05). Most cancer tissues expressed moderate to 
strong staining of HDACs1, 2 and 3 in immunohistochemistry. Staining of HDAC2 was
weak in only one endometrioid cancer tissue.
CONCLUSION: HDACs1-3 are over expressed in ovarian cancer tissues and probably
play a significant role in ovarian carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2676472
PMID: 19471575  [PubMed]


364. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jul;37(13):4393-406. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp398. Epub 2009
May 22.

RFXB and its splice variant RFXBSV mediate the antagonism between IFNgamma and
TGFbeta on COL1A2 transcription in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Fang M(1), Kong X, Li P, Fang F, Wu X, Bai H, Qi X, Chen Q, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics,
Atherosclerosis Research Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu
210029, China.

Cytokines secreted by infiltrating immune cells during atherogenesis modulate
vascular remodeling. One exemplary event is the antagonism between transformed
growth factor (TGF-beta) and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) on the transcriptional 
control of type I collagen gene (COL1A2). Previously we have reported that
IFN-gamma up-regulates regulatory factor for X-box B (RFXB) to repress collagen
transcription while down-regulates the expression of RFXBSV, a splice variant of 
RFXB that blocks collagen repression in fibroblasts. Here we demonstrate that
TGF-beta abrogated COL1A2 repression by IFN-gamma through altering the relative
expression of RFXB and RFXBSV. Unlike RFXB, RFXBSV did not bind to the collagen
promoter and competed with RFXB for the co-repressor histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2), limiting HDAC2 recruitment to the collagen transcription start site as
evidenced by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Over-expression of RFXB by
lentiviral infection in HASMCs enhanced HDAC2 enlistment, promoted histone
deacetylation surrounding the collagen site by IFN-gamma, and blocked the
TGF-beta antagonism, a pattern reversed by RFXBSV infection. On the contrary,
silencing of RFXB, but not both RFXB and RFXBSV, expression promoted the TGF-beta
antagonism. Thus, we have identified a novel mechanism whereby TGF-beta
antagonizes the IFN-gamma repression of collagen transcription in HASMCs and as
such provided new insights into antiatherogenic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2715248
PMID: 19465385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Nov;41(11):2270-80. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.05.003. Epub 2009 May 13.

Regulation of chemokine gene expression by hypoxia via cooperative activation of 
NF-kappaB and histone deacetylase.

Safronova O(1), Pluemsampant S, Nakahama K, Morita I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Physiological Chemistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.

Hypoxia is a microenvironmental factor frequently associated with tumors and
inflammation. This study addresses the question of how hypoxia modulates the
basal and IL-1 beta-induced production of cytokines and aims to identify the
underlying mechanism of hypoxic transcriptional repression. We found that despite
the similarities of the promoter structures of IL-8 and MCP-1, these chemokines
were differently regulated by hypoxia (an increase in IL-8, but a decrease in
MCP-1 mRNA and protein expression). Such differences were not observed in a
reporter gene assay, in which both of the promoters were activated by hypoxia.
The difference in the response to hypoxia between MCP-1 expression and the
promoter assay was not due to mRNA instability. Using proteosome inhibitor MG132 
and I kappaB overexpression we demonstrated that an NF-kappaB-dependent mechanism
was involved in both the activation of IL-8 and the repression of MCP-1 mRNA
expression in response to hypoxia. The histone deacetylase inhibitor Trihostatin 
A abolished the inhibitory actions of hypoxia on IL-1 beta-induced MCP-1 gene
expression. Furthermore, hypoxia induced histone deacetylase activity in the
nuclear extracts. Although stimulation with IL-1 beta and/or hypoxia increased
the acetylation of histones H3 and H4 in the presence of Trihostatin A, histone
acetylation remained unchanged when the cells were treated without histone
deacetylase inhibitor. Collectively, our findings suggest that transiently
transfected promoters are not subject to the same NF-kappaB regulatory mechanisms
as their chromatinized counterparts. NF-kappaB, activated by hypoxia, can act as 
a transcriptional repressor via a mechanism that involves deacetylation of
histones.

PMID: 19446037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Histopathology. 2009 May;54(6):688-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03290.x.

Histone deacetylase 1, 2, 6 and acetylated histone H4 in B- and T-cell lymphomas.

Marquard L(1), Poulsen CB, Gjerdrum LM, de Nully Brown P, Christensen IJ, Jensen 
PB, Sehested M, Johansen P, Ralfkiaer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen N,
Denmark. l.m.ipsen@mail.tele.dk

AIMS: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are novel therapeutics in the
treatment of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified (PTCL) and diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), where, for unknown reasons, T-cell malignancies appear
to be more sensitive than B-cell malignancies. The aim was to determine HDAC
expression in DLBCL and PTCL which has not previously been investigated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6 and acetylated histone
H4 was examined immunohistochemically in 31 DLBCL and 45 PTCL. All four markers
showed high expression in both DLBCL and PTCL compared with normal lymphoid
tissue. HDAC1 was more abundantly expressed in PTCL than in DLBCL (P = 0.0046),
whereas acetylated H4 was more frequent in DLBCL (P < 0.0001), the latter
suggesting a mechanism for T-cell lymphoma sensitivity to HDAC inhibitors.
Moderate to strong HDAC6 expression was significantly correlated with favourable 
outcome (P = 0.016) in DLBCL patients, whereas the opposite effect was observed
in PTCL patients (P < 0.0001). The other markers did not correlate with survival 
(P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6 and acetylated H4 are overexpressed in DLBCL and
PTCL relative to normal lymphoid tissue. Furthermore, HDAC6 may be an important
prognostic marker associated with favourable outcome in DLBCL and a more
aggressive course in PTCL.

PMID: 19438744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 May;7(5):735-44. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0296. Epub
2009 May 12.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor induction of P-glycoprotein transcription requires 
both histone deacetylase 1 dissociation and recruitment of CAAT/enhancer binding 
protein beta and pCAF to the promoter region.

Kim SN(1), Kim NH, Lee W, Seo DW, Kim YK.

Author information: 
(1)KIST Gangneung Institute, Gangneung, Korea.

Although histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are appreciated as a promising
class of anticancer drugs, recent reports show that P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is
induced by HDAC inhibitor treatment in cancer cells, resulting in multidrug
resistance of cancer cells to other chemotherapeutic agents. In this study, we
investigated the molecular mechanism of HDAC inhibitor induction of P-gp
expression. HDAC inhibitor treatment causes cell type-specific induction of P-gp 
expression without changes in the CpG methylation status of the promoter region. 
In addition, our data show that HDAC inhibitor does not alter the DNA binding
activity of Sp1 but facilitates both the recruitment of a coactivator complex
that includes CAAT/enhancer binding protein beta and pCAF and the dissociation of
the repressive complex, HDAC1, to the Sp1 binding region. Subsequently, the
hyperacetylated histone H3 becomes enriched in the promoter region, leading to
RNA polymerase II recruitment to activate P-gp gene transcription. Furthermore,
specific down-regulation of HDAC1, but not HDAC2, by RNA silencing was enough to 
induce P-gp expression in HeLa cells, strongly supporting the essential role of
HDAC1 in HDAC inhibitor induction of P-gp. Concomitantly, cell type-specific
induction of P-gp expression seems to be dependent on phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase activity. Taken together, our findings show that HDAC inhibitor
treatment leads to an increase in P-gp expression through dynamic changes in
chromatin structure and transcription factor association within the promoter
region.

PMID: 19435809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 3;284(27):18115-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.007237. Epub 2009
May 11.

Endosomal adaptor proteins APPL1 and APPL2 are novel activators of
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription.

Rashid S(1), Pilecka I, Torun A, Olchowik M, Bielinska B, Miaczynska M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Ks. Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland.

Canonical Wnt signaling regulates many aspects of cellular physiology and tissue 
homeostasis during development and in adult organisms. In molecular terms,
stimulation by Wnt ligands leads to the stabilization of beta-catenin, its
translocation to the nucleus, and stimulation of TCF (T-cell factor)-dependent
transcription of target genes. This process is controlled at various stages by a 
number of regulatory proteins, including transcriptional activators and
repressors. Here we demonstrate that the endosomal proteins APPL1 and APPL2 are
novel activators of beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription. APPL proteins are
multifunctional adaptors and effectors of the small GTPase Rab5, which localize
to a subpopulation of early endosomes but are also capable of nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling. Overexpression of APPL1 or APPL2 protein stimulates the activity of
beta-catenin/TCF-dependent reporter construct, whereas silencing of APPL1 reduces
it. Both APPL proteins interact directly with Reptin, a transcriptional repressor
binding to beta-catenin and HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1), and this interaction
was mapped to the pleckstrin homology domain of APPL1. Moreover, APPL proteins
are present in an endogenous complex containing Reptin, beta-catenin, HDAC1, and 
HDAC2. Overexpression of either APPL protein relieves Reptin-dependent
transcriptional repression and correlates with the reduced amounts of HDACs and
beta-catenin associated with Reptin as well as with the lower levels of Reptin
and HDAC1 on the promoters of beta-catenin target genes. We propose that APPL
proteins exert their stimulatory effects on beta-catenin/TCF-dependent
transcription by decreasing the activity of a Reptin-containing repressive
complex.

PMCID: PMC2709337
PMID: 19433865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mutat Res. 2009 Jun 1;665(1-2):20-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2009.02.011. Epub 2009
Mar 9.

Epigenetic control of mammalian LINE-1 retrotransposon by retinoblastoma
proteins.

Montoya-Durango DE(1), Liu Y, Teneng I, Kalbfleisch T, Lacy ME, Steffen MC, Ramos
KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine Health Sciences
Center, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs or L1 elements) are targeted for
epigenetic silencing during early embryonic development and remain inactive in
most cells and tissues. Here we show that E2F-Rb family complexes participate in 
L1 elements epigenetic regulation via nucleosomal histone modifications and
recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2. Our experiments
demonstrated that (i) Rb and E2F interact with human and mouse L1 elements, (ii) 
L1 elements are deficient in both heterochromatin-associated histone marks H3 tri
methyl K9 and H4 tri methyl K20 in Rb family triple knock out (Rb, p107, and
p130) fibroblasts (TKO), (iii) L1 promoter exhibits increased histone H3
acetylation in the absence of HDAC1 and HDAC2 recruitment, (iv) L1 expression in 
TKO fibroblasts is upregulated compared to wild type counterparts, (v) L1
expression increases in the presence of the HDAC inhibitor TSA. On the basis of
these findings we propose a model in which L1 sequences throughout the genome
serve as centers for heterochromatin formation in an Rb family-dependent manner. 
As such, Rb proteins and L1 elements may play key roles in heterochromatin
formation beyond pericentromeric chromosomal regions. These findings describe a
novel mechanism of L1 reactivation in mammalian cells mediated by failure of
corepressor protein recruitment by Rb, loss of histone epigenetic marks,
heterochromatin formation, and increased histone H3 acetylation.

PMCID: PMC3418809
PMID: 19427507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Mol Med. 2009 Jun;23(6):811-9.

Enriching protein-protein and functional interaction networks in human embryonic 
stem cells.

Zuo C(1), Liang S, Wang Z, Li H, Zheng W, Ma W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510515, People's Republic of China.

Human Embryonic Stem Cells (hESCs) have a great therapeutic potential in
regenerative medicine, but the precise molecular mechanisms by which hESCs
maintain or regulate their characteristics remain largely unknown. Since
protein-protein interaction is vitally important in regulating hESCs, we utilized
a network-based bioinformatics analysis in order to learn what and how specific
proteins interact with each other. By combining protein-protein interaction data 
and a collection of genes over-expressed in hESCs, we constructed a protein
interaction network using a breadth-first search algorithm. This scale-free
network which is significantly larger than networks generated by random
samplings, illustrates how these hESC-enriched proteins might interact with each 
other in hESCs. Of the top 5% highly connected nodes (corresponding to 21
proteins including MYC, H2AFX, RUVBL1, DDX18, CDC2, HDAC2 and HIST1H4C)
presumably critical for determining the fate of hESCs, nearly half are known to
be regulated by NANOG/SOX2/MYC. This underscores importance of these
transcription factors in hESCs. In addition, in silico cis-element analysis
suggests that NF-Y may be an important transcription factor regulating many of
these hub proteins (high connected nodes) in hESCs. To further abstract the
functional significance, directly connected proteins were matched to and grouped 
by gene ontology (GO) terms in molecular function category. Sixty- six
interacting GO-GO terms paired through protein interactions were found
over-represented in hESCs. This functional enrichment may be essential for
understanding molecular characteristics in hESCs. Collectively, we analyzed
hESC-enriched genes based on protein-protein interaction data, from which an
hESC-enriched protein interaction network was constructed and a network of
molecular functional terms was also identified. The results of this analysis, on 
the systems level, may shed new light to further our understanding of hESCs.

PMID: 19424609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Nature. 2009 May 7;459(7243):55-60. doi: 10.1038/nature07925.

HDAC2 negatively regulates memory formation and synaptic plasticity.

Guan JS(1), Haggarty SJ, Giacometti E, Dannenberg JH, Joseph N, Gao J, Nieland
TJ, Zhou Y, Wang X, Mazitschek R, Bradner JE, DePinho RA, Jaenisch R, Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences.

Chromatin modifications, especially histone-tail acetylation, have been
implicated in memory formation. Increased histone-tail acetylation induced by
inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACis) facilitates learning and memory in
wild-type mice as well as in mouse models of neurodegeneration. Harnessing the
therapeutic potential of HDACis requires knowledge of the specific HDAC family
member(s) linked to cognitive enhancement. Here we show that neuron-specific
overexpression of HDAC2, but not that of HDAC1, decreased dendritic spine
density, synapse number, synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Conversely,
Hdac2 deficiency resulted in increased synapse number and memory facilitation,
similar to chronic treatment with HDACis in mice. Notably, reduced synapse number
and learning impairment of HDAC2-overexpressing mice were ameliorated by chronic 
treatment with HDACis. Correspondingly, treatment with HDACis failed to further
facilitate memory formation in Hdac2-deficient mice. Furthermore, analysis of
promoter occupancy revealed an association of HDAC2 with the promoters of genes
implicated in synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Taken together, our
results suggest that HDAC2 functions in modulating synaptic plasticity and
long-lasting changes of neural circuits, which in turn negatively regulates
learning and memory. These observations encourage the development and testing of 
HDAC2-selective inhibitors for human diseases associated with memory impairment.

PMCID: PMC3498958
PMID: 19424149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(2-3):275-89. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082649rb.

Histone deacetylase HDAC1/HDAC2-controlled embryonic development and cell
differentiation.

Brunmeir R(1), Lagger S, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter,
Vienna, Austria.

During development from the fertilized egg to a multicellular organism, cell fate
decisions have to be taken and cell lineage or tissue-specific gene expression
patterns are created and maintained. These alterations in gene expression occur
in the context of chromatin structure and are controlled by chromatin modifying
enzymes. Gene disruption studies in different genetic systems have shown an
essential role of various histone deacetylases (HDACs) during early development
and cellular differentiation. In this review, we focus on the functions of the
class I enzymes HDAC1 and HDAC2 during development in different organisms and
summarise the current knowledge about their involvement in neurogenesis,
myogenesis, haematopoiesis and epithelial cell differentiation.

PMID: 19412887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):L35-43. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.90399.2008. Epub 2009 May 1.

Loss of CFTR results in reduction of histone deacetylase 2 in airway epithelial
cells.

Bartling TR(1), Drumm ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University and Rainbow Babies and
Children's Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Inflammatory cytokines, particularly the neutrophil chemoattractant IL-8, are
elevated in the cystic fibrosis (CF) airway, even in the absence of detectable
infection. The transcriptional regulation of many inflammatory genes, including
IL8 (CXCL8), involves chromatin remodeling through histone acetylation. NF-kappaB
is known to facilitate histone acetylation of IL8 and other proinflammatory gene 
promoters, but we find that increased NF-kappaB activation cannot explain the
elevated IL8 expression and promoter acetylation seen in CFTR-deficient cells.
Recognized components of the NF-kappaB-coactivator complex, acetyltransferase
CBP, p300, and the histone deacetylase HDAC1, are unchanged by CFTR activity.
However, we find that the histone acetyltransferase (HAT)/HDAC balance is
sensitive to CFTR function, as cells with reduced or absent CFTR function have
decreased HDAC2 protein, resulting in hyperacetylation of the IL8 promoter and
increased IL8 transcription. Reduced HDAC2 and HDAC2 activity, but not HDAC2
mRNA, is observed in cells deficient in CFTR. Suppressing HDAC2 expression with
HDAC2 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) results in increased IL8 expression and promoter 
acetylation comparable with CFTR-deficient cells. Treating CFTR-deficient cells
with N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) increases HDAC2 expression to near control levels.
Our data suggest that there is an intrinsic alteration in the HAT/HDAC balance in
cells lacking CFTR function in vitro and in native CF tissue and that oxidative
stress is likely contributing to this alteration. This mechanism, found in other 
inflammatory airway diseases, provides an explanation for the apparent
dysregulation of inflammatory mediators seen in the CF airway, as reduced histone
deacetylation would potentially influence many genes.

PMCID: PMC2711807
PMID: 19411311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jul 3;384(3):366-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.128. Epub 2009 May 3.

Nitration of distinct tyrosine residues causes inactivation of histone
deacetylase 2.

Osoata GO(1), Yamamura S, Ito M, Vuppusetty C, Adcock IM, Barnes PJ, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, United Kingdom.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are key molecules involved in epigenetic regulation 
of gene expression. We have previously demonstrated that oxidative stress caused 
a reduction in HDAC2, resulting in amplified inflammation and reduced
corticosteroid responsiveness. Here we showed nitrative/oxidative stress reduced 
HDAC2 expression via nitration of distinct tyrosine residues. Peroxynitrite,
hydrogen peroxide and cigarette smoke-conditioned medium reduced HDAC2 expression
in A549 epithelial cells in vitro. This reduction was due to increased
proteasomal degradation following ubiquitination rather than reduction of mRNA
expression or stability. HDAC2 was nitrated under nitrative/oxidative stress and 
in the peripheral lung tissues of smokers and patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Mutagenesis studies replacing tyrosine (Y) residues with
alanine revealed that Y253 is at least partly responsible for the proteasomal
degradation of HDAC2 under nitrative stress. Thus, nitration of distinct tyrosine
residues modifies both the expression and activity of HDAC2, having an impact on 
epigenetic regulation.

PMID: 19410558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jul 15;125(2):463-73. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24403.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress thymidylate synthase gene expression and 
synergize with the fluoropyrimidines in colon cancer cells.

Fazzone W(1), Wilson PM, Labonte MJ, Lenz HJ, Ladner RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center/University of
Southern California, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Despite recent therapeutic advances, the response rates to chemotherapy for
patients with metastatic colon cancer remain at approximately 50% with the
fluoropyrimidine, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), continuing to serve as the foundation
chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of this disease. Previous studies have
demonstrated that overexpression of thymidylate synthase (TS) is a key
determinant of resistance to 5-FU-based chemotherapy. Therefore, there is a
significant need to develop alternative therapeutic strategies to overcome
TS-mediated resistance. In this study, we demonstrate that the histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) vorinostat and LBH589 significantly downregulate
TS gene expression in a panel of colon cancer cell lines. Downregulation of TS
was independent of p53, p21 and HDAC2 expression and was achievable in vivo as
demonstrated by mouse xenograft models. We provide evidence that HDACi treatment 
leads to a potent transcriptional repression of the TS gene. Combination of the
fluoropyrimidines 5-FU or FUdR with both vorinostat and LBH589 enhanced cell
cycle arrest and growth inhibition. Importantly, the downstream effects of TS
inhibition were significantly enhanced by this combination including the
inhibition of acute TS induction and the enhanced accumulation of the cytotoxic
nucleotide intermediate dUTP. These data demonstrate that HDACi repress TS
expression at the level of transcription and provides the first evidence
suggesting a direct mechanistic link between TS downregulation and the
synergistic interaction observed between HDACi and 5-FU. This study provides
rationale for the continued clinical evaluation of HDACi in combination with
5-FU-based therapies as a strategy to overcome TS-mediated resistance.

Copyright 2009 UICC.

PMID: 19384949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 May 1;15(9):3163-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2319.
Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Protein acetylation and histone deacetylase expression associated with malignant 
breast cancer progression.

Suzuki J(1), Chen YY, Scott GK, Devries S, Chin K, Benz CC, Waldman FM, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA.

PURPOSE: Excess histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity can induce hypoacetylation of
histone and nonhistone protein substrates, altering gene expression patterns and 
cell behavior potentially associated with malignant transformation. However, HDAC
expression and protein acetylation have not been studied in the context of breast
cancer progression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We assessed expression levels of acetylated histone H4
(ac-H4), ac-H4K12, ac-tubulin, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC6 in 22 reduction
mammoplasties and in 58 specimens with synchronous normal epithelium, ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) components.
Differences among groups were tested for significance using nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: From normal epithelium to DCIS, there was a marked reduction in histone 
acetylation (P < 0.0001). Most cases showed similar levels of acetylation in DCIS
and IDC, although some showed further reduction of ac-H4 and ac-H4K12 from DCIS
to IDC. Expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC6 was also significantly reduced but 
by a smaller magnitude. Greater reductions of H4 acetylation and HDAC1 levels
were observed from normal to DCIS in estrogen receptor-negative compared with
estrogen receptor-positive, and in high-grade compared with non-high-grade
tumors.
CONCLUSION: Overall, there was a global pattern of hypoacetylation associated
with progression from normal to DCIS to IDC. These findings suggest that the
reversal of this hypoacetylation in DCIS and IDC could be an early measure of
HDAC inhibitor activity.

PMCID: PMC3746548
PMID: 19383825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 12;106(19):7876-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902750106. Epub 2009 Apr 20.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 control the progression of neural precursors to
neurons during brain development.

Montgomery RL(1), Hsieh J, Barbosa AC, Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The molecular mechanism by which neural progenitor cells commit to a specified
lineage of the central nervous system remains unknown. We show that HDAC1 and
HDAC2 redundantly control neuronal development and are required for neuronal
specification. Mice lacking HDAC1 or HDAC2 in neuronal precursors show no overt
histoarchitectural phenotypes, whereas deletion of both HDAC1 and HDAC2 in
developing neurons results in severe hippocampal abnormalities, absence of
cerebellar foliation, disorganization of cortical neurons, and lethality by
postnatal day 7. These abnormalities in brain formation can be attributed to a
failure of neuronal precursors to differentiate into mature neurons and to
excessive cell death. These results reveal redundant and essential roles for
HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the progression of neuronal precursors to mature neurons in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2683090
PMID: 19380719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Apr;7(4):511-22. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0107.

Genetic alterations and oncogenic pathways associated with breast cancer
subtypes.

Hu X(1), Stern HM, Ge L, O'Brien C, Haydu L, Honchell CD, Haverty PM, Peters BA, 
Wu TD, Amler LC, Chant J, Stokoe D, Lackner MR, Cavet G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.

Breast cancers can be divided into subtypes with important implications for
prognosis and treatment. We set out to characterize the genetic alterations
observed in different breast cancer subtypes and to identify specific candidate
genes and pathways associated with subtype biology. mRNA expression levels of
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2 were shown to predict marker
status determined by immunohistochemistry and to be effective at assigning
samples to subtypes. HER2(+) cancers were shown to have the greatest frequency of
high-level amplification (independent of the ERBB2 amplicon itself), but
triple-negative cancers had the highest overall frequencies of copy gain.
Triple-negative cancers also were shown to have more frequent loss of phosphatase
and tensin homologue and mutation of RB1, which may contribute to genomic
instability. We identified and validated seven regions of copy number alteration 
associated with different subtypes, and used integrative bioinformatics analysis 
to identify candidate oncogenes and tumor suppressors, including ERBB2, GRB7,
MYST2, PPM1D, CCND1, HDAC2, FOXA1, and RASA1. We tested the candidate oncogene
MYST2 and showed that it enhances the anchorage-independent growth of breast
cancer cells. The genome-wide and region-specific differences between subtypes
suggest the differential activation of oncogenic pathways.

PMID: 19372580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Apr;8(4):794-801. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0985.

HDAC2 regulates chromatin plasticity and enhances DNA vulnerability.

Marchion DC(1), Bicaku E, Turner JG, Schmitt ML, Morelli DR, Munster PN.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Program, Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology,
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) may have a prominent role in the development of
cancer and the response to anticancer therapy. However, the therapeutic relevance
and tissue specificity of individual HDAC enzymes remain largely unknown. HDAC
inhibitors may function as sensitizing agents to chemotherapies that target DNA
through their effects on chromatin structure and plasticity. Here, we report a
new role for HDAC2 as a regulator of chromatin compaction status and the mediator
of HDAC inhibitor-induced sensitization to chemotherapy. The selective depletion 
of HDAC2 by small interfering RNA led to reduced expression of heterochromatin
maintenance proteins and morphologic changes indicative of chromatin
decondensation. Furthermore, depletion of HDAC2 but not HDAC1 or HDAC6 was
sufficient to sensitize breast cancer cells to topoisomerase inhibitor-induced
apoptosis. The levels of HDAC2 expression appear to correlate with the degree of 
HDAC inhibitor-induced histone acetylation in a surrogate tissue in patients.
These data suggest that HDAC2 may be a relevant pharmacologic and biological
target for combination therapy involving drugs that target DNA.

PMID: 19372552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Gastroenterology. 2009 Jul;137(1):361-71, 371.e1-5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.04.004. Epub 2009 Apr 9.

E-cadherin regulates metastasis of pancreatic cancer in vivo and is suppressed by
a SNAIL/HDAC1/HDAC2 repressor complex.

von Burstin J(1), Eser S, Paul MC, Seidler B, Brandl M, Messer M, von Werder A,
Schmidt A, Mages J, Pagel P, Schnieke A, Schmid RM, Schneider G, Saur D.

Author information: 
(1)II. Medizinische Klinik, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Early metastasis is a hallmark of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma and responsible for >90% of pancreatic cancer death. Because
little is known about the biology and genetics of the metastatic process, we
desired to elucidate molecular pathways mediating pancreatic cancer metastasis in
vivo by an unbiased forward genetic approach.
METHODS: Highly metastatic pancreatic cancer cell populations were selected by
serial in vivo passaging of parental cells with low metastatic potential and
characterized by global gene expression profiling, chromatin immunoprecipitation,
and in vivo metastatic assay.
RESULTS: In vivo selection of highly metastatic pancreatic cancer cells induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), loss of E-cadherin expression, and
up-regulation of mesenchymal genes such as Snail. Genetic inactivation of
E-cadherin in parental cells induced EMT and increased metastasis in vivo.
Silencing of E-cadherin in highly metastatic cells is mediated by a
transcriptional repressor complex containing Snail and histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and HDAC2. In line, mesenchymal pancreatic cancer specimens and primary
cell lines from genetically engineered Kras(G12D) mice showed HDAC-dependent
down-regulation of E-cadherin and high metastatic potential. Finally,
transforming growth factor beta-driven E-cadherin silencing and EMT of human
pancreatic cancer cells depends on HDAC activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first in vivo evidence that HDACs and Snail play an
essential role in silencing E-cadherin during the metastatic process of
pancreatic cancer cells. These data link the epigenetic HDAC machinery to EMT and
metastasis and provide preclinical evidence that HDACs are promising targets for 
antimetastatic therapy.

PMID: 19362090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2009 Sep;10(3):341-53. doi: 10.1007/s10162-009-0166-y.
Epub 2009 Apr 2.

Epigenetic influences on sensory regeneration: histone deacetylases regulate
supporting cell proliferation in the avian utricle.

Slattery EL(1), Speck JD, Warchol ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The sensory hair cells of the cochlea and vestibular organs are essential for
normal hearing and balance function. The mammalian ear possesses a very limited
ability to regenerate hair cells and their loss can lead to permanent sensory
impairment. In contrast, hair cells in the avian ear are quickly regenerated
after acoustic trauma or ototoxic injury. The very different regenerative
abilities of the avian vs. mammalian ear can be attributed to differences in
injury-evoked expression of genes that either promote or inhibit the production
of new hair cells. Gene expression is regulated both by the binding of
cis-regulatory molecules to promoter regions as well as through structural
modifications of chromatin (e.g., methylation and acetylation). This study
examined effects of histone deacetylases (HDACs), whose main function is to
modify histone acetylation, on the regulation of regenerative proliferation in
the chick utricle. Cultures of regenerating utricles and dissociated cells from
the utricular sensory epithelia were treated with the HDAC inhibitors valproic
acid, trichostatin A, sodium butyrate, and MS-275. All of these molecules prevent
the enzymatic removal of acetyl groups from histones, thus maintaining nuclear
chromatin in a "relaxed" (open) configuration. Treatment with all inhibitors
resulted in comparable decreases in supporting cell proliferation. We also
observed that treatment with the HDAC1-, 2-, and 3-specific inhibitor MS-275 was 
sufficient to reduce proliferation and that two class I HDACs--HDAC1 and
HDAC2--were expressed in the sensory epithelium of the utricle. These results
suggest that inhibition of specific type I HDACs is sufficient to prevent cell
cycle entry in supporting cells. Notably, treatment with HDAC inhibitors did not 
affect the differentiation of replacement hair cells. We conclude that histone
deacetylation is a positive regulator of regenerative proliferation but is not
critical for avian hair cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3084382
PMID: 19340485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jul;43(1):29-41. doi: 10.1677/JME-09-0001. Epub 2009 Apr
1.

Interplay between polypyrimidine tract binding protein-associated splicing factor
and human myometrial progesterone receptors.

Tyson-Capper AJ(1), Shiells EA, Robson SC.

Author information: 
(1)The Medical School, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, 3rd 
Floor, William Leech Building, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
a.j.tyson-capper@ncl.ac.uk

The precise molecular mechanisms controlling progesterone receptor (PR)-mediated 
gene regulation within the human myometrium in pregnancy and in labour remain
poorly defined. PR recruit different nuclear co-activators/co-repressors to
mediate receptor-specific transcription regulation and expression of PR, and
these co-factors may alter within the myometrium during pregnancy and labour. The
aims of this study were to test the hypotheses that i) the human splicing and
transcription factor, polypyrimidine tract binding protein-associated splicing
factor (PSF), is spatially and temporally regulated in the myometrium during
pregnancy and labour; ii) PSF influences the expression of myometrial PR and iii)
the action of PR in regulating specific hormone response target genes in the
human myometrium may involve PSF. Immunoblotting indicated that PSF expression is
significantly up-regulated within the human myometrium as pregnancy progresses,
in particular within the upper uterine region, and levels remain elevated in
labour. Co-immunoprecipitations and DNA-binding assays show that PSF directly
interacts with nuclear PR and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and specific
co-regulatory proteins, all of which have defined roles as co-activators or
co-repressors in gene regulation. Over-expression and inhibition of PSF by
transient transfection and RNAi respectively alters expression of myometrial PR
and GR and may influence expression of two PR/GR-target genes, cyclooxygenase-2
and histone deacetylase-2. These findings are suggestive of a role for myometrial
PSF as a nuclear co-regulator in the regulation of specific hormone receptor
genes and their target hormone response genes.

PMID: 19339282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Genomics. 2009 Jul;94(1):20-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2009.03.003. Epub 2009 Mar
28.

Left ventricular global transcriptional profiling in human end-stage dilated
cardiomyopathy.

Colak D(1), Kaya N, Al-Zahrani J, Al Bakheet A, Muiya P, Andres E, Quackenbush J,
Dzimiri N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scientific Computing, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

We employed ABI high-density oligonucleotide microarrays containing 31,700
sixty-mer probes (representing 27,868 annotated human genes) to determine
differential gene expression in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). We
identified 626 up-regulated and 636 down-regulated genes in DCM compared to
controls. Most significant changes occurred in the tricarboxylic acid cycle,
angiogenesis, and apoptotic signaling pathways, among which 32 apoptosis- and 13 
MAPK activity-related genes were altered. Inorganic cation transporter, catalytic
activities, energy metabolism and electron transport-related processes were among
the most critically influenced pathways. Among the up-regulated genes were HTRA1 
(6.9-fold), PDCD8(AIFM1) (5.2) and PRDX2 (4.4) and the down-regulated genes were 
NR4A2 (4.8), MX1 (4.3), LGALS9 (4), IFNA13 (4), UNC5D (3.6) and HDAC2 (3)
(p<0.05), all of which have no clearly defined cardiac-related function yet. Gene
ontology and enrichment analysis also revealed significant alterations in
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, metabolism and Alzheimer's disease
pathways. Concordance was also confirmed for a significant number of genes and
pathways in an independent validation microarray dataset. Furthermore,
verification by real-time RT-PCR showed a high degree of consistency with the
microarray results. Our data demonstrate an association of DCM with alterations
in various cellular events and multiple yet undeciphered genes that may
contribute to heart muscle disease pathways.

PMCID: PMC4152850
PMID: 19332114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;15(7):2488-96. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1930.
Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Clinical and biological effects of valproic acid as a histone deacetylase
inhibitor on tumor and surrogate tissues: phase I/II trial of valproic acid and
epirubicin/FEC.

Munster P(1), Marchion D, Bicaku E, Lacevic M, Kim J, Centeno B, Daud A, Neuger
A, Minton S, Sullivan D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology Oncology, University of California, San Francisco,
Divisadero, San Francisco, California 94143-1711, USA. pmunster@medicine.ucsf.edu

PURPOSE: The aim was to study the biological and molecular effects of the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, valproic acid, in patients with solid tumor
malignancies.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A phase I dose escalation of valproic acid given on days 1
to 3 followed by epirubicin (day 3) was followed by a dose expansion of valproic 
acid combined with 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FEC100).
Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic studies entailed valproic acid and epirubicin
plasma levels and their interaction, the effects of valproic acid on histone
acetylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and tumor cells at
baseline and day 3, and baseline expression of HDAC2 and HDAC6 as therapeutic
targets.
RESULTS: Forty-four patients were enrolled in the phase I part, with a
disease-specific cohort expansion of 15 breast cancer patients (median age, 55
years; range, 28-66 years) receiving 120 mg/kg/day valproic acid followed by
FEC100. Partial responses were seen in 9 of 41 (22%) patients during the phase I 
part. Objective responses were seen in 9 of 14 (64%) evaluable patients at the
dose expansion with a median number of 6 administered cycles. Predominant
toxicities were valproic acid-associated somnolence and epirubicin-induced
myelosuppression. Valproic acid plasma levels were associated with short-term,
reversible depletion of WBC and neutrophils within 48 hours. Histone acetylation 
in tumor samples and in PBMCs correlated with valproic acid levels and was
further linked to baseline HDAC2 but not to HDAC6 expression.
CONCLUSION: Valproic acid is a clinically relevant HDAC inhibitor, and PBMCs may 
serve as a surrogate for tumor histone acetylation in solid tumor malignancies.
HDAC2 should be further considered as a relevant therapeutic target.

PMID: 19318486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Virol. 2009 May;83(10):4749-56. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02585-08. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

A limited group of class I histone deacetylases acts to repress human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 expression.

Keedy KS(1), Archin NM, Gates AT, Espeseth A, Hazuda DJ, Margolis DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, 3302 Michael Hooker Research Ctr., CB#7435, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7435, USA.

Silencing of the integrated human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) genome in
resting CD4(+) T cells is a significant contributor to the persistence of
infection, allowing the virus to evade both immune detection and pharmaceutical
attack. Nonselective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are capable of
inducing expression of quiescent HIV-1 in latently infected cells. However,
potent global HDAC inhibition can induce host toxicity. To determine the specific
HDACs that regulate HIV-1 transcription, we evaluated HDAC1 to HDAC11 RNA
expression and protein expression and compartmentalization in the resting CD4(+) 
T cells of HIV-1-positive, aviremic patients. HDAC1, -3, and -7 had the highest
mRNA expression levels in these cells. Although all HDACs were detected in
resting CD4(+) T cells by Western blot analysis, HDAC5, -8, and -11 were
primarily sequestered in the cytoplasm. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays, we detected HDAC1, -2, and -3 at the HIV-1 promoter in Jurkat J89GFP
cells. Targeted inhibition of HDACs by small interfering RNA demonstrated that
HDAC2 and HDAC3 contribute to repression of HIV-1 long terminal repeat expression
in the HeLa P4/R5 cell line model of latency. Together, these results suggest
that HDAC inhibitors specific for a limited number of class I HDACs may offer a
targeted approach to the disruption of persistent HIV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC2682072
PMID: 19279091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 15;69(6):2252-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3717. Epub
2009 Mar 10.

FOXP3 up-regulates p21 expression by site-specific inhibition of histone
deacetylase 2/histone deacetylase 4 association to the locus.

Liu R(1), Wang L, Chen G, Katoh H, Chen C, Liu Y, Zheng P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunotherapy and Department of Surgery, University of Michigan
School of Medicine and Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

p21 loss has been implicated in conferring oncogenic activity to known tumor
suppressor gene KLF4 and cancer drug tamoxifen. Regulators of p21, therefore,
play critical roles in tumorigenesis. Here, we report that X-linked tumor
suppressor FOXP3 is essential for p21 expression in normal epithelia and that
lack of FOXP3 is associated with p21 down-regulation in breast cancer samples. A 
specific FOXP3 binding site in the intron 1 is essential for p21 induction by
FOXP3. FOXP3 specifically inhibited binding of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and 
HDAC4 to the site and increased local histone H3 acetylation. Short hairpin RNA
silencing of either HDAC2 or HDAC4 is sufficient to induce p21 expression. Our
data provides a novel mechanism for transcription activation by FOXP3 and a
genetic mechanism for lack of p21 in a large proportion of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2715174
PMID: 19276356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Apr 1;19(7):2053-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.02.009.
Epub 2009 Feb 8.

Exploring the pharmacokinetic properties of phosphorus-containing selective HDAC 
1 and 2 inhibitors (SHI-1:2).

Heidebrecht RW Jr(1), Chenard M, Close J, Dahlberg WK, Fleming J, Grimm JB,
Hamill JE, Harsch A, Haines BB, Hughes B, Kral AM, Middleton RE, Mushti C,
Ozerova N, Szewczak AA, Wang H, Wilson K, Witter DJ, Secrist JP, Miller TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Merck Research Laboratories, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. richard_heidebrecht@merck.com

We report the preparation and structure-activity relationships of
phosphorus-containing histone deacetylase inhibitors. A strong trend between
decreasing phosphorus functional group size and superior mouse pharmacokinetic
properties was identified. In addition, optimized candidates showed tumor growth 
inhibition in xenograft studies.

PMID: 19268585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Oncogene. 2009 Mar 26;28(12):1496-505. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.494. Epub 2009 Feb
9.

15-LOX-1 transcription suppression through the NuRD complex in colon cancer
cells.

Zuo X(1), Morris JS, Broaddus R, Shureiqi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA.

15-Lipoxygenase-1 (15-LOX-1) is transcriptionally silenced in cancer cells, and
its transcription reactivation (for example, through histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACIs)) restores apoptosis to cancer cells. However, the exact
mechanism underlying 15-LOX-1 transcription reactivation in cancer cells is still
undefined. Therefore, we evaluated the critical mechanisms required for 15-LOX-1 
transcription reactivation in colon cancer cells. Specific HDAC1 and HDAC2
inhibition activated 15-LOX-1 transcription. 15-LOX-1 transcription was repressed
through transcription repressor complex recruitment in the region of -120 to -391
of the 15-LOX-1 promoter. The nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase
(NuRD) repression complex was recruited to this region. Depsipeptide
significantly reduced the recruitment of NuRD key components (for example,
metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) and HDAC1) to the 15-LOX-1 promoter before
15-LOX-1 transcriptional activation. Knock down of NuRD key components (for
example, MTA1 and HDAC1) by small interfering RNA (siRNA) activated 15-LOX-1
transcription, as measured by luciferase reporter assays in stably transfected
SW480 cells with the 15-LOX-1 promoter construct of the -391, but not the -120
region. Relative to expression in normal tissue, MTA1 expression in colorectal
cancer mucosa from colorectal cancer patients was negatively related to 15-LOX-1 
expression. Thus, our results show that NuRD contributes to 15-LOX-1
transcription suppression in colon cancer cells and that HDACIs can inhibit NuRD 
recruitment to a promoter to activate gene transcription, as in the case of
15-LOX-1.

PMCID: PMC2743348
PMID: 19198625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 15;18(8):1415-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp048. Epub 2009 Jan 
27.

MeCP2 involvement in the regulation of neuronal alpha-tubulin production.

Abuhatzira L(1), Shemer R, Razin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Hebrew University
Medical School, Ein Kerem, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a dominant 
mutation in the X-linked methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) gene.
Neuroanatomically, RTT is characterized by a reduction in dendritic arborization 
and perikaryal size in the brain. MECP2 binds methylated promoters and
facilitates assembly of a multiprotein repressor complex that includes Sin3A and 
the histone deacetylases HDAC1/HDAC2. MeCP2 has recently been found to be
downregulated in autistic spectrum disorders such as Angelman syndrome (AS) and
RTT, which share some phenotypic manifestations. We have conducted expression
analysis of cytoskeleton-related genes in brain tissue of RTT and AS patients.
Striking examples of genes with reduced expression were TUBA1B and TUBA3 that
encode the ubiquitous alpha-tubulin and the neuronal specific alpha-tubulin,
respectively. In accordance with the downregulation of expression of these genes,
we have observed a reduction in the level of the corresponding protein
product-tyrosinated alpha-tubulin. Low levels of alpha-tubulin and deteriorated
cell morphology were also observed in MeCP2(-/y) MEF cells. The effects of MeCP2 
deficiency in these cells were completely reversed by introducing and expressing 
the human MeCP2 gene. These results imply that MeCP2 is involved in the
regulation of neuronal alpha-tubulin and add molecular evidence that reversal of 
the effects of MeCP2 deficiency is achievable. This raises hopes for a cure of
Rett syndrome and related MeCP2 deficiency disorders of the autistic spectrum.

PMID: 19174478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Apr 1;179(7):542-8. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200810-1570OC. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

Inhibition of PI3Kdelta restores glucocorticoid function in smoking-induced
airway inflammation in mice.

Marwick JA(1), Caramori G, Stevenson CS, Casolari P, Jazrawi E, Barnes PJ, Ito K,
Adcock IM, Kirkham PA, Papi A.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Disease Section, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK. j.marwick@imperial.ac.uk

RATIONALE: There is an increasing prevalence of reduced responsiveness to
glucocorticoid therapy in severe asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The molecular mechanism of this remains unknown. Recent studies have
shown that histone deacetylase activity, which is critical to glucocorticoid
function, is altered by oxidant stress and may be involved in the development of 
glucocorticoid insensitivity.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the role of phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) in the
development of cigarette smoke-induced glucocorticoid insensitivity.
METHODS: Wild-type, PI3Kgamma knock-out and PI3Kdelta kinase dead knock-in
transgenic mice were used in a model of cigarette smoke-induced glucocorticoid
insensitivity. Peripheral lung tissue was obtained from six healthy nonsmokers,
nine smokers with normal lung function, and eight patients with COPD.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In vitro oxidative stress activates PI3K and
induced a relative glucocorticoid resistance, which is restored by PI3K
inhibition. In vivo, cigarette smoke exposure in mice increased tyrosine
nitration of histone deacetylase 2 in the lung, correlating with reduced histone 
deacetylase 2 activity and reduced glucocorticoid function. Histone deacetylase 2
activity and the antiinflammatory effects of glucocorticoids were restored in
PI3Kdelta kinase dead knock-in but not PI3Kgamma knock-out smoke-exposed mice
compared with wild type mice, correlating with reduced histone deacetylase 2
tyrosine nitration. Glucocorticoid receptor expression was significantly reduced 
in smoke-exposed mice, in smokers with normal lung function, and in patients with
COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that therapeutic inhibition of PI3Kdelta may restore
glucocorticoid function in oxidative stress-induced glucocorticoid insensitivity.

PMID: 19164702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7970-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808220200. Epub 2009
Jan 20.

Histone H3 lysine 36 dimethylation (H3K36me2) is sufficient to recruit the Rpd3s 
histone deacetylase complex and to repress spurious transcription.

Li B(1), Jackson J, Simon MD, Fleharty B, Gogol M, Seidel C, Workman JL,
Shilatifard A.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

Histone methylation is associated with both transcription activation and
repression. However, the functions of different states of methylation remain
largely elusive. Here, using methyl-lysine analog technology, we demonstrate that
the histone deacetylase complex, Rpd3S, can distinguish the nucleosomes
methylated to different extents and that K36me2 is sufficient to target Rpd3S in 
vitro. Through a genome-wide survey, we identified a few mutants in which the
level of K36me3 is significantly reduced, whereas the level of K36me2 is
sustained. Transcription analysis and genome-wide histone modification studies on
these mutants suggested that K36me2 is sufficient to target Rpd3S in vivo,
thereby maintaining a functional Set2-Rpd3S pathway.

PMCID: PMC2658090
PMID: 19155214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 15;15(2):570-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1813.

Combination of proteasome and HDAC inhibitors for uterine cervical cancer
treatment.

Lin Z(1), Bazzaro M, Wang MC, Chan KC, Peng S, Roden RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: Cervical cancer cells are addicted to the expression of the human
papillomavirus (HPV) oncoproteins E6 and E7. The oncogencity of E6 is mediated in
part by targeting p53 and PDZ-family tumor suppressor proteins for rapid
proteasomal degradation, whereas the E7 oncoprotein acts in part by coopting
histone deacetylases (HDAC)1/2. Here, we examine the hypothesis that inhibition
of proteasome function and HDAC activity would synergistically and specifically
trigger cervical cancer cell death by the interruption of E6 and E7 signaling.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The sensitivity and molecular responses of keratinocytes and
HPV-positive and HPV-negative cervical cancer cells and xenografts to
combinations of proteasome and HDAC inhibitors were tested. The expression of
HDAC1/HDAC2 in situ was examined in cervical cancer, its precursors, and normal
epithelium.
RESULTS: Cervical cancer cell lines exhibit greater sensitivity to proteasome
inhibitors than do HPV-negative cervical cancers or primary human keratinocytes. 
Treatment of cervical cancer cells with bortezomib elevated the level of p53 but 
not hDlg, hScribble or hMAGI. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed elevated
HDAC1/HDAC2 expression in cervical dysplasia and cervical carcinoma versus normal
cervical epithelium. The combination of bortezomib and HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A or vorinostat shows synergistic killing of HPV-positive, but not
HPV-negative, cervical cancer cell lines. Similarly, treatment of HeLa xenografts
with the combination of bortezomib and trichostatin A retarded tumor growth
significantly more effectively than either agent alone.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of proteasome and HDAC inhibitors, including
bortezomib and vorinostat, respectively, warrants exploration for the treatment
of cervical cancer.

PMCID: PMC2714480
PMID: 19147762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Hypertension. 2009 Mar;53(3):549-55. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.125088.
Epub 2009 Jan 12.

Endothelin-stimulated human B-type natriuretic peptide gene expression is
mediated by Yin Yang 1 in association with histone deacetylase 2.

Glenn DJ(1), Wang F, Chen S, Nishimoto M, Gardner DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Diabetes Center, University of California at San
Francisco, USA.

Increased B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) gene expression is regarded as one of 
the hallmarks of cardiac myocyte hypertrophy. Here we demonstrate that both
basal- and endothelin-1-dependent stimulation of human (h) BNP gene transcription
requires the presence of an intact Yin Yang 1 (YY1) binding site positioned at
-62 bp relative to the transcription start site. Mutation of this site reduced
both basal and stimulated hBNP promoter activity. This site was shown to bind YY1
both in vitro and within the context of the intact cell. The latter interaction
increased after endothelin-1 treatment. Exposure to endothelin-1 also resulted in
increased nuclear localization of YY1 and a reduction in acetylation of the YY1
protein. Overexpression of wild-type YY1 increased both basal and
endothelin-stimulated hBNP promoter activity, whereas a carboxy-terminal deletion
mutant of YY1 was devoid of activity. Treatment with the histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A resulted in decreased hBNP reporter activity. YY1 was
shown to associate with histone deacetylase 2, and histone deacetylase 2 was
shown to associate directly with the hBNP promoter in the intact cell.
Collectively these findings demonstrate that YY1 plays an important role in
regulating the transcriptional activity of the hBNP gene promoter. These data
suggest a model in which YY1 activates hBNP transcription through interaction
with histone deacetylase 2.

PMCID: PMC2710878
PMID: 19139378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Feb 15;19(4):1168-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.12.083.
Epub 2008 Dec 25.

Parallel medicinal chemistry approaches to selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibitor
(SHI-1:2) optimization.

Kattar SD(1), Surdi LM, Zabierek A, Methot JL, Middleton RE, Hughes B, Szewczak
AA, Dahlberg WK, Kral AM, Ozerova N, Fleming JC, Wang H, Secrist P, Harsch A,
Hamill JE, Cruz JC, Kenific CM, Chenard M, Miller TA, Berk SC, Tempest P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Merck Research Laboratories, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. sam_kattar@merck.com

The successful application of both solid and solution phase library synthesis,
combined with tight integration into the medicinal chemistry effort, resulted in 
the efficient optimization of a novel structural series of selective HDAC1/HDAC2 
inhibitors by the MRL-Boston Parallel Medicinal Chemistry group. An initial lead 
from a small parallel library was found to be potent and selective in biochemical
assays. Advanced compounds were the culmination of iterative library design and
possess excellent biochemical and cellular potency, as well as acceptable PK and 
efficacy in animal models.

PMID: 19138845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Mar;29(3):380-6. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.178319. Epub 2009 Jan 2.

Statins control oxidized LDL-mediated histone modifications and gene expression
in cultured human endothelial cells.

Dje N'Guessan P(1), Riediger F, Vardarova K, Scharf S, Eitel J, Opitz B, Slevogt 
H, Weichert W, Hocke AC, Schmeck B, Suttorp N, Hippenstiel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases and Respiratory Medicine, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Activation of the endothelium by oxidized low-density lipoprotein
(oxLDL) has been implicated in the development of atherosclerosis. Histone
modifications impact on the transcriptional activity state of genes. We tested
the hypothesis that oxLDL-induced inflammatory gene expression is regulated by
histone modifications and experienced the effect of statins on these alterations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: OxLDL-related interleukin-8 (IL-8) and
monocyte-chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) secretion in endothelial cells was
reduced by statins but enhanced by histone deacetylase inhibitors. OxLDL induced 
lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) and extracellular regulated kinases
(ERK1/2)-dependent acetylation of histone H3 and H4 as well as phosphorylation of
histone H3, both globally and on the promoters of il8 and mcp1. Pretreatment of
oxLDL-exposed cells with statins reduced the above mentioned histone
modification, as well as recruitment of CREB binding protein (CBP) 300,
NF-kappaB, and of RNA polymerase II but prevented loss of binding of histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-1 and -2 at the il8 and mcp1 gene promoters. OxLDL reduced
HDAC1 and 2 expression, and statins partly restored global HDAC-activity.
Statin-related effects were reverted with mevalonate. In situ experiments
indicated decreased expression of HDAC2 in endothelial cells in atherosclerotic
plaques of human coronary arteries.
CONCLUSIONS: Histone modifications seem to play an important role in
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 19122173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Mar;46(3):289-91. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.11.013. Epub
2008 Dec 3.

Stable protein, unstable plaque?

Sibinga NE.

Comment on
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Mar;46(3):292-9.

PMCID: PMC2669595
PMID: 19101562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. BMC Cancer. 2008 Dec 19;8:381. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-381.

Class I histone deacetylases 1, 2 and 3 are highly expressed in renal cell
cancer.

Fritzsche FR(1), Weichert W, Röske A, Gekeler V, Beckers T, Stephan C, Jung K,
Scholman K, Denkert C, Dietel M, Kristiansen G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
florian.fritzsche@usz.ch

BACKGROUND: Enhanced activity of histone deacetylases (HDAC) is associated with
more aggressive tumour behaviour and tumour progression in various solid tumours.
The over-expression of these proteins and their known functions in malignant
neoplasms has led to the development of HDAC inhibitors (HDI) as new
anti-neoplastic drugs. However, little is known about HDAC expression in renal
cell cancer.
METHODS: We investigated the expression of HDAC 1, 2 and 3 in 106 renal cell
carcinomas and corresponding normal renal tissue by immunohistochemistry on
tissue micro arrays and correlated expression data with clinico-pathological
parameters including patient survival.
RESULTS: Almost 60% of renal cell carcinomas expressed the HDAC isoforms 1 and 2.
In contrast, HDAC 3 was only detected in 13% of all renal tumours, with
particular low expression rates in the clear cell subtype. HDAC 3 was
significantly higher expressed in pT1/2 tumours in comparison to pT3/4 tumours.
Expression of class I HDAC isoforms correlated with each other and with the
proliferative activity of the tumours. We found no prognostic value of the
expression of any of the HDAC isoforms in this tumour entity.
CONCLUSION: Class I HDAC isoforms 1 and 2 are highly expressed in renal cell
cancer, while HDAC 3 shows low, histology dependent expression rates. These
unexpected differences in the expression patterns suggests alternative regulatory
mechanisms of class I HDACs in renal cell cancer and should be taken into account
when trials with isoform selective HDI are being planned. Whether HDAC expression
in renal cancers is predictive of responsiveness for HDI will have to be tested
in further studies.

PMCID: PMC2631013
PMID: 19099586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 6;284(10):6291-300. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807791200. Epub 2008 
Dec 15.

Silencing of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) receptor II by
Kruppel-like factor 14 underscores the importance of a negative feedback
mechanism in TGFbeta signaling.

Truty MJ(1), Lomberk G, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Gastroenterology Research
Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The role of non-Smad proteins in the regulation of transforming growth
factor-beta (TGFbeta) signaling is an emerging line of active investigation.
Here, we characterize the role of KLF14, as a TGFbeta-inducible, non-Smad protein
that silences the TGFbeta receptor II (TGFbetaRII) promoter. Together with
endocytosis, transcriptional silencing is a critical mechanism for
down-regulating TGFbeta receptors at the cell surface. However, the mechanisms
underlying transcriptional repression of these receptors remain poorly
understood. KLF14 has been chosen from a comprehensive screen of 24 members of
the Sp/KLF family due to its TGFbeta inducibility, its ability to regulate the
TGFbetaRII promoter, and the fact that this protein had yet to be functionally
characterized. We find that KLF14 represses the TGFbetaRII, a function that is
augmented by TGFbeta treatment. Mapping of the TGFbetaRII promoter, in
combination with site-directed mutagenesis, electromobility shift, and chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays, have identified distinct GC-rich sequences used by
KLF14 to regulate this promoter. Mechanistically, KLF14 represses the TGFbetaRII 
promoter via a co-repressor complex containing mSin3A and HDAC2. Furthermore, the
TGFbeta pathway activation leads to recruitment of a KLF14-mSin3A-HDAC2 repressor
complex to the TGFbetaRII promoter, as well as the remodeling of chromatin to
increase histone marks that associate with transcriptional silencing. Thus, these
results describe a novel negative-feedback mechanism by which TGFbetaRII
activation at the cell surface induces the expression of KLF14 to ultimately
silence the TGFbetaRII and further expand the network of non-Smad transcription
factors that participate in the TGFbeta pathway.

PMCID: PMC2649086
PMID: 19088080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Eur J Med Chem. 2009 May;44(5):1900-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2008.11.005. Epub
2008 Nov 19.

Design, synthesis, and evaluation of biphenyl-4-yl-acrylohydroxamic acid
derivatives as histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors.

Dallavalle S(1), Cincinelli R, Nannei R, Merlini L, Morini G, Penco S, Pisano C, 
Vesci L, Barbarino M, Zuco V, De Cesare M, Zunino F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Molecolari Agroalimentari, Università di Milano, Via
Celoria 2, 20133 Milano, Italy.

A series of hydroxamic acid-based histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors were
designed on the basis of a model of the HDAC2 binding site and synthesized. They 
are characterized by a cinnamic spacer, capped with a substituted phenyl group.
Modifications of the spacer are also reported. In an in vitro assay with the
isoenzyme HDAC2, a good correlation of the activity with the docking energy was
found. In human ovarian carcinoma IGROV-1 cells, selected compounds produced
significant acetylation of p53 and alpha-tubulin. Most compounds showed an
antiproliferative activity comparable to that of SAHA. At equitoxic
concentrations, the tested compounds were more effective than SAHA in inducing
apoptotic cell death. Compounds selected for in vivo evaluation exhibited a
significant antitumor activity on three tumor models at well tolerated doses,
thus suggesting a good therapeutic index.

PMID: 19084294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 15;68(24):10290-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2038.

A transcription-independent function of FOXO1 in inhibition of
androgen-independent activation of the androgen receptor in prostate cancer
cells.

Liu P(1), Li S, Gan L, Kao TP, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Increasing evidence suggests that aberrant activation of the androgen receptor
(AR) plays a pivotal role in the development and progression of androgen
depletion-independent prostate cancer (PCa) after androgen deprivation therapy.
Here, we show that loss of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene is associated with
hyperactivation of the AR in human PCa cell lines. This effect is mediated
primarily by its downstream effector FOXO1. In addition to the inhibition of
androgenic activation of the AR, forced expression of FOXO1 in PTEN-negative PCa 
cells also inhibits androgen-independent activation of the AR in a manner
independent of FOXO1 transcriptional function. In contrast, silencing of FOXO1 in
PTEN-positive cells not only increases the basal activity of the AR in the
absence of androgens, it also markedly sensitizes the AR activation by low levels
of androgens or nonandrogenic factors such as interleukin-6. FOXO1-mediated
inhibition of the AR is partially attenuated by the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor trichostatin A. Accordingly, FOXO1 interacts with HDAC3 as shown by
coimmunoprecipitation assays, and cotransfection of cells with FOXO1 and HDAC3,
but not HDAC1 and HDAC2, results in a greater inhibition of AR activity than in
cells transfected with FOXO1 or HDAC3 individually. Together, our findings define
a novel corepressor function of FOXO1 in inhibition of androgen-independent
activation of the AR.

PMID: 19074897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Chest. 2008 Dec;134(6):1278-86. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-1385.

Emerging pharmacotherapies for COPD.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School of Medicine,
London, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Chest. 2009 Apr;135(4):1114.

The mainstay of current drug therapy is long-acting bronchodilators; several
longer acting inhaled beta(2)-agonists and muscarinic antagonists (and
combinations) are now in development. No treatments have so far been shown to
reduce the progression or suppress the inflammation of COPD. With better
understanding of the inflammatory and destructive processes in the
pathophysiology of COPD, several new targets have been identified. Several
mediator antagonists tested in COPD patients have so far been disappointing, but 
CXC receptor 2 antagonists that block pulmonary neutrophil and monocyte
recruitment may be more promising. Broad-spectrum antiinflammatory drugs,
including inhibitors of the enzymes phosphodiesterase 4, p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase, nuclear factor-kappaB, and phosphoinositide-3-kinase-gamma, may
be more effective, but the side effects will be a major limitation so that
inhaled delivery may be necessary. Perhaps the most promising approach is the
reversal of corticosteroid resistance through increasing histone deacetylase-2
activity. This might be achieved by theophylline-like drugs, more effective
antioxidants, and nonantibiotic macrolide agents.

PMID: 19059958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Dig Dis Sci. 2009 Oct;54(10):2109-17. doi: 10.1007/s10620-008-0601-7. Epub 2008
Dec 5.

Global histone H4 acetylation and HDAC2 expression in colon adenoma and
carcinoma.

Ashktorab H(1), Belgrave K, Hosseinkhah F, Brim H, Nouraie M, Takkikto M, Hewitt 
S, Lee EL, Dashwood RH, Smoot D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, Howard University College of
Medicine, Washington, DC, USA. hashktorab@howard.edu

Chromatin remodeling and activation of transcription are important aspects of
gene regulation, but these often go awry in disease progression, including during
colon cancer development. We investigated the status of global histone
acetylation (by measuring H3, H4 acetylation of lysine residues, which also occur
over large regions of chromatin including coding regions and non-promoter
sequences) and expression of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in colorectal cancer
(CRC) tissue microarrays using immunohistochemical staining. Specifically, HDAC2 
and the acetylation of histones H4K12 and H3K18 were evaluated in 134 colonic
adenomas, 55 moderate to well differentiated carcinomas, and 4 poorly
differentiated carcinomas compared to matched normal tissue. In addition, the
correlation between expression of these epigenetic biomarkers and various
clinicopathological factors including, age, location, and stage of the disease
were analyzed. HDAC2 nuclear expression was detected at high levels in 81.9%,
62.1%, and 53.1% of CRC, adenomas, and normal tissue, respectively (P = 0.002).
The corresponding nuclear global expression levels in moderate to well
differentiated tumors for H4K12 and H3K18 acetylation were increased while these 
levels were decreased in poorly differentiated tumors (P = 0.02). HDAC2
expression was correlated significantly with progression of adenoma to carcinoma 
(P = 0.002), with a discriminative power of 0.74, when comparing cancer and
non-cancer cases. These results suggest HDAC2 expression is significantly
associated with CRC progression.

PMCID: PMC2737733
PMID: 19057998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 9;105(49):19183-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805514105. Epub 2008 Dec 1.

HDAC2 blockade by nitric oxide and histone deacetylase inhibitors reveals a
common target in Duchenne muscular dystrophy treatment.

Colussi C(1), Mozzetta C, Gurtner A, Illi B, Rosati J, Straino S, Ragone G,
Pescatori M, Zaccagnini G, Antonini A, Minetti G, Martelli F, Piaggio G,
Gallinari P, Steinkuhler C, Clementi E, Dell'Aversana C, Altucci L, Mai A,
Capogrossi MC, Puri PL, Gaetano C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Terapia Genica e Biologia Vascolare, Istituto Cardiologico
Monzino, 20138 Milan, Italy.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 3;106(5):1679. Steinkulher, Christian
[corrected to Steinkuhler, Christian].

The overlapping histological and biochemical features underlying the beneficial
effect of deacetylase inhibitors and NO donors in dystrophic muscles suggest an
unanticipated molecular link among dystrophin, NO signaling, and the histone
deacetylases (HDACs). Higher global deacetylase activity and selective increased 
expression of the class I histone deacetylase HDAC2 were detected in muscles of
dystrophin-deficient MDX mice. In vitro and in vivo siRNA-mediated
down-regulation of HDAC2 in dystrophic muscles was sufficient to replicate the
morphological and functional benefits observed with deacetylase inhibitors and NO
donors. We found that restoration of NO signaling in vivo, by adenoviral-mediated
expression of a constitutively active endothelial NOS mutant in MDX muscles, and 
in vitro, by exposing MDX-derived satellite cells to NO donors, resulted in HDAC2
blockade by cysteine S-nitrosylation. These data reveal a special contribution of
HDAC2 in the pathogenesis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy and indicate that HDAC2 
inhibition by NO-dependent S-nitrosylation is important for the therapeutic
response to NO donors in MDX mice. They also define a common target for
independent pharmacological interventions in the treatment of Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

PMCID: PMC2614736
PMID: 19047631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Mar;46(3):292-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.10.023. Epub 
2008 Nov 7.

HDAC2 deacetylates class II transactivator and suppresses its activity in
macrophages and smooth muscle cells.

Kong X(1), Fang M, Li P, Fang F, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 
210029, China.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Mar;46(3):289-91.

Macrophage-triggered chronic inflammation and smooth muscle cell-initiated
vascular remodeling are two major pathophysiologic events during atherogenesis.
Major histocompatibility class II (MHC II) transactivator (CIITA) is a key
mediator of these processes through transcriptional regulation of interferon
gamma (IFN-gamma) induced MHC II activation and type I collagen repression.
Transcriptional activity of CIITA is regulated by multiple post-translational
modifications. Here we report that CIITA and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)
interact in smooth muscle cells and macrophages as assayed by
co-immunoprecipitations. HDAC2 deacetylates CIITA whereas both the HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA) and over-expression of HDAC2 interfering RNA increase CIITA 
acetylation. HDAC2 down-regulates CIITA recruitment to target promoters as
evidenced by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, and suppresses MHC II
activation and collagen repression mediated by CIITA in luciferase reporter
assays. Quantitative PCR reveals that TSA enhances MHC II activation and collagen
repression by IFN-gamma. Wild type but not enzyme-deficient HDAC2 promotes the
degradation of CIITA protein, whereas TSA and the proteasome inhibitor MG132
restore CIITA activity by stabilizing CIITA protein and increasing its
association with target promoters. Furthermore, TSA treatment enhances the
association of CIITA with the transcription factor RFX5, which ameliorates the
down-regulation of CIITA recruitment to target promoters by HDAC2. In conclusion,
our data suggest that HDAC2 antagonizes CIITA activity by committing CIITA to
protein degradation and decreasing the interaction of CIITA with RFX5 in a
deacetylation-dependent manner. Therefore, modulating CIITA activity by targeting
HDAC2 may provide potential anti-atherogenic strategies.

PMID: 19041327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Circ Res. 2008 Nov 21;103(11):1194-6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.189118.

A new (heat) shocking player in cardiac hypertrophy.

Vondriska TM, Wang Y.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2008 Nov 21;103(11):1259-69.

PMCID: PMC2903428
PMID: 19028916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 16;284(3):1343-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806075200. Epub 2008
Nov 17.

Autoacetylation regulates P/CAF nuclear localization.

Blanco-García N(1), Asensio-Juan E, de la Cruz X, Martínez-Balbás MA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Baldiri i Reixac 15-21, Parc Cientific de Barcelona,
E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Acetylation is a posttranslational modification that alters the biological
activities of proteins by affecting their association with other proteins or DNA,
their catalytic activities, or their subcellular distribution. The
acetyltransferase P/CAF is autoacetylated and acetylated by p300 in vivo. P/CAF
autoacetylation is an intramolecular or intermolecular event. Intramolecular
acetylation targets five lysines within the nuclear localization signal at the
P/CAF C terminus. We analyzed how the subcellular distribution of P/CAF is
regulated by intramolecular autoacetylation and found that a P/CAF mutant lacking
histone acetyltransferase activity accumulated primarily in the cytoplasm. This
cytoplasmic fraction of P/CAF is enriched for nonautoacetylated P/CAF. In
addition, P/CAF deacetylation by HDAC3 and in a minor degree by HDAC1, HDAC2, or 
HDAC4 leads to cytoplasmic accumulation of P/CAF. Importantly, our data show that
P/CAF accumulates in the cytoplasm during apoptosis. These results reveal the
molecular mechanism of autoacetylation control of P/CAF nuclear translocation and
suggest a novel pathway by which P/CAF activity is controlled in vivo.

PMID: 19015268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 15;68(22):9331-7. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2893.

Repression of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase involves histone deacetylase 
2 and snail in colorectal cancer.

Backlund MG(1), Mann JR, Holla VR, Shi Q, Daikoku T, Dey SK, DuBois RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) promotes cancer progression by modulating
proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and the immune response. Enzymatic
degradation of PGE(2) involves the NAD(+)-dependent 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH). Recent reports have shown a marked diminution of 15-PGDH
expression in colorectal carcinomas (CRC). We report here that treatment of CRC
cells with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, including sodium butyrate and
valproic acid, induces 15-PGDH expression. Additionally, we show that
pretreatment of CRC cells with HDAC inhibitors can block epidermal growth
factor-mediated or Snail-mediated transcriptional repression of 15-PGDH. We show 
an interaction between Snail and HDAC2 and the binding of HDAC2 to the 15-PGDH
promoter. In vivo, we observe increased Hdac2 expression in Apc-deficient mouse
adenomas, which inversely correlated with loss of 15-Pgdh expression. Finally, in
human colon cancers, elevated HDAC expression correlated with down-regulation of 
15-PGDH. These data suggest that class I HDACs, specifically HDAC2, and the
transcriptional repressor Snail play a central role in the suppression of 15-PGDH
expression. These results also provide a cyclooxygenase-2-independent mechanism
to explain increased PGE(2) levels that contribute to progression of CRC.

PMCID: PMC2628771
PMID: 19010907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Oral Oncol. 2009 Jul;45(7):610-4. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2008.08.011. Epub
2008 Oct 31.

Histone deacetylase 2 expression predicts poorer prognosis in oral cancer
patients.

Chang HH(1), Chiang CP, Hung HC, Lin CY, Deng YT, Kuo MY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 
Taiwan, ROC.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) has been implicated in the development and
progression of several human tumors. We immunohistochemically examined the
expression of HDAC2 protein in 20 cases of oral epithelial dysplasia (OED) and 93
cases of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Positive HDAC2 nuclear staining was
observed in 80 of the 93 (86.02%) cases of SCC and 11 of the 20 (55%) cases of
ED. The labeling index (LI) for HDAC2 nuclear staining increased significantly
from ED (25.8+/-26.5%) to SCCs (59.8+/-28.5%) (p<0.001). No significant
correlation was found between the HDAC2 expression level and patient's age, sex, 
oral habits in oral SCC patients. However, cancer with advanced stage, larger
tumor size, or positive lymph node metastasis had higher level of HDAC2 protein
expression. Kaplan-Meier curves showed oral SCC patients with high HDAC2
expression (LI>50%), advanced stage, larger tumor size, or positive lymph node
metastasis had significantly shorter overall survival (p=0.0158, 0.0267, 0.0029
and 0.02514, respectively by log-rank test) than others. The results of this
study show for the first time that overexpression of the HDAC protein is a
frequent event in oral cancer and could be used as a prognostic factor in oral
SCC.

PMID: 18951835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Dec 1;18(23):6104-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.10.052. 
Epub 2008 Oct 14.

SAR profiles of spirocyclic nicotinamide derived selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibitors
(SHI-1:2).

Methot JL(1), Hamblett CL, Mampreian DM, Jung J, Harsch A, Szewczak AA, Dahlberg 
WK, Middleton RE, Hughes B, Fleming JC, Wang H, Kral AM, Ozerova N, Cruz JC,
Haines B, Chenard M, Kenific CM, Secrist JP, Miller TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Merck Research Laboratories, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. joey_methot@merck.com

A potent family of spirocyclic nicotinyl aminobenzamide selective HDAC1/HDAC2
inhibitors (SHI-1:2) is profiled. The incorporation of a biaryl zinc-binding
motif into a nicotinyl scaffold resulted in enhanced potency and selectivity
versus HDAC3, but also imparted hERG activity. It was discovered that increasing 
polar surface area about the spirocycle attenuates this liability. Compound 12
induced a 4-fold increase in acetylated histone H2B in an HCT-116 xenograft model
study with acute exposure, and inhibited tumor growth in a 21-day efficacy study 
with qd dosing.

PMID: 18951790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Brain Res. 2008 Dec 30;1246:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.09.083. Epub 2008 
Oct 11.

Effects of trichostatin A on neuronal mu-opioid receptor gene expression.

Lin YC(1), Flock KE, Cook RJ, Hunkele AJ, Loh HH, Ko JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seton Hall University, 400 South Orange
Ave., South Orange, NJ 07079, USA.

In this study, we determined the effects of a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), on neuronal mu-opioid receptor (MOR) gene
expression using human neuronal NMB cells, endogenously expressing MOR.
Recruitment of two classes of HDAC, HDAC1 and HDAC2, to MOR promoter region in
situ was detected via chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis with NMB
cells. Functional analysis using the luciferase reporter gene system showed that 
TSA induced an approximately 3-fold increase of the promoter activity as compared
to the vehicle treated group. Mutation analysis demonstrated that TSA response
was mediated by both dsDNA (Sp1/Sp3 binding site) and ssDNA (PolyC binding
protein1, PCBP, binding site) elements located in mouse MOR proximal core
promoter region, further suggesting the functional importance of this
cis-element, which shows high sequence homology between human and mouse MOR
genes. ChIP analysis further suggested that TSA enhanced the recruitment of
Sp1/Sp3 and PCBP to the promoter region, whereas no significant changes of total 
proteins were observed in response to TSA using Western blot analysis. Moreover, 
confocal images showed TSA-induced nuclear hot spots of endogenous PCBP in
neuronal cells, whereas no obvious nuclear PCBP hotspot was observed in vehicle
treated cells. Taken together, these results suggested that TSA enhanced neuronal
MOR gene expression at the transcriptional level. RT-PCR analysis further
revealed that TSA also decreased the steady-state level of MOR mRNA in a
time-dependent manner by enhancing its instability. Thus, data suggest that TSA, 
an epigenetic regulator, affects neuronal MOR gene expression at both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.

PMCID: PMC2639711
PMID: 18950606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Apr;40(4):464-73. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0255OC. 
Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Histone deacetylase 2 is phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, and degraded by cigarette
smoke.

Adenuga D(1), Yao H, March TH, Seagrave J, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Cigarette smoke (CS)-induced lung inflammation involves the reduction of histone 
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) abundance, which is associated with steroid resistance in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and in individuals with
severe asthma who smoke cigarettes. However, the molecular mechanism of
CS-mediated reduction of HDAC2 is not clearly known. We hypothesized that HDAC2
is phosphorylated and subsequently degraded by the proteasome in vitro in
macrophages (MonoMac6), human bronchial and primary small airway epithelial
cells, and in vivo in mouse lungs in response to chronic CS exposure. Cigarette
smoke extract (CSE) exposure in MonoMac6 and in bronchial and airway epithelial
cells led to phosphorylation of HDAC2 on serine/threonine residues by a protein
kinase CK2-mediated mechanism, decreased HDAC2 activity, and increased
ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent HDAC2 degradation. CK2 and proteasome inhibitors
reversed CSE-mediated HDAC2 degradation, whereas serine/threonine phosphatase
inhibitor, okadaic acid, caused phosphorylation and subsequent ubiquitination of 
HDAC2. CS-induced HDAC2 phosphorylation was detected in mouse lungs from 2 weeks 
to 4 months of CS exposure, and mice showed significantly lower lung HDAC2
levels. Thus, CS-mediated down-regulation of HDAC2 in human macrophages and lung 
epithelial cells in vitro and in mouse lung in vivo involves the induction of
serine/threonine phosphorylation and proteasomal degradation, which may have
implications for steroid resistance and abnormal inflammation caused by cigarette
smoke.

PMCID: PMC2660563
PMID: 18927347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Gastroenterology. 2008 Nov;135(5):1457-9. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.09.039. Epub
2008 Oct 11.

Making sense of HDAC2 mutations in colon cancer.

Mariadason JM.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2008 Nov;135(5):1654-1664.e2.

PMCID: PMC2897904
PMID: 18851967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Circ Res. 2008 Nov 21;103(11):1259-69. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000338570.27156.84.
Epub 2008 Oct 10.

Activation of histone deacetylase 2 by inducible heat shock protein 70 in cardiac
hypertrophy.

Kee HJ(1), Eom GH, Joung H, Shin S, Kim JR, Cho YK, Choe N, Sim BW, Jo D, Jeong
MH, Kim KK, Seo JS, Kook H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Chonnam National University Medical School,
Gwangju, South Korea.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Nov 21;103(11):1194-6.

Diverse cardiac diseases induce cardiac hypertrophy, which leads to dilatation
and heart failure. We previously reported that hypertrophy can be blocked by
class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, which prompted us to investigate
the regulatory mechanism of class I HDACs. Cardiac hypertrophy was introduced by 
aortic banding, by infusion of isoproterenol or angiotensin II, or by swimming.
Hypertrophic stimuli transiently elevated the activity of histone deacetylase-2
(Hdac2), a class I HDAC. In cardiomyocytes, forced expression of Hdac2 simulated 
hypertrophy in an Akt-dependent manner, whereas enzymatically inert Hdac2 H141A
failed to do so. Hypertrophic stimuli induced the expression of heat shock
protein (Hsp)70. The induced Hsp70 physically associated with and activated
Hdac2. Hsp70 overexpression produced a hypertrophic phenotype, which was blocked 
either by siHdac2 or by a dominant negative Hsp70DeltaABD. In Hsp70.1(-/-) mice, 
cardiac hypertrophy and Hdac2 activation were significantly blunted. Heat shock
either to cardiomyocytes or to mice activated Hdac2 and induced hypertrophy.
However, heat shock-induced Hdac2 activation was blunted in the cardiomyocytes
isolated from Hsp70.1(-/-) mice. These results suggest that the induction of
Hsp70 in response to diverse hypertrophic stresses and the ensuing activation of 
HDAC2 trigger cardiac hypertrophy, emphasizing HSP70/HDAC2 as a novel mechanism
regulating hypertrophy.

PMID: 18849323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Dec 10;314(20):3614-27. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.09.008. Epub
2008 Sep 25.

Blimp-1Deltaexon7: a naturally occurring Blimp-1 deletion mutant with
auto-regulatory potential.

Schmidt D(1), Nayak A, Schumann JE, Schimpl A, Berberich I, Berberich-Siebelt F.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wuerzburg, Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, Versbacher 
Strasse 7, 97078, Wuerzburg, Germany.

Blimp-1 is a master regulator of terminal B cell differentiation and plays a
pivotal role in various developmental processes. In addition to full length
Blimp-1, a Blimp-1 mRNA lacking exon 7 (Blimp-1Delta7) has been described to
occur in murine B cells. The activity and function of the mutant mRNA-encoded
protein (Blimp-1Delta7), lacking three crucial zinc fingers necessary for DNA
interaction, is completely unknown. Since isoforms of other prdm family proteins 
affect each other's functions, we wondered whether Blimp-1Delta7 still plays a
role in B cells, independent of direct DNA binding. In this study, we found that 
Blimp-1Delta7 is preferentially expressed in naïve CD19(+) B cells. A fraction of
Blimp-1Delta7 migrates to the nucleus, colocalizes with HDAC2 and is found at
sites of repressed chromatin, although it does not bind to the Blimp-1 DNA
consensus site. Unexpectedly, Blimp-1 and Blimp-1Delta7 homodimerize as well as
heterodimerize with each other. Ectopic expression of Blimp-1Delta7 in WEHI 231
cells, a Blimp-1-negative murine lymphoma line, leads to cessation of
proliferation and enhancement of apoptosis. Importantly, LPS-induced
differentiation is suppressed in the presence of Blimp-1Delta7. This is in
agreement with our finding that Blimp-1Delta7 interferes with endogenous Blimp-1 
expression. Thus, our data suggest an auto-regulatory mechanism of Blimp-1
activation.

PMID: 18845144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Gastroenterology. 2008 Nov;135(5):1654-1664.e2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.07.078. Epub 2008 Aug 7.

An inactivating mutation in HDAC2 leads to dysregulation of apoptosis mediated by
APAF1.

Hanigan CL(1), Van Engeland M, De Bruine AP, Wouters KA, Weijenberg MP, Eshleman 
JR, Herman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center and Graduate Program in Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2008 Nov;135(5):1457-9.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are important regulators of
chromatin involved in silencing tumor suppressor genes. We examined mutation of
HDAC2 and examined consequences of HDAC2 loss.
METHODS: Colon cancer cell lines and primary cancers were examined for mutations 
in HDAC2 by direct sequencing and capillary electrophoresis. Promoter methylation
was determined using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction in primary
tumors. Sensitivity to HDAC inhibitors and resistance in vitro used colon cancer 
cell lines.
RESULTS: HDAC2 mutations in the poly(A) tract in exon 1 result in a frameshift
and premature stop codon. These were found in microsatellite instability (MSI)
cell lines and 43% of MSI colon cancers, but only 7% of microsatellite stable
cancers. Mutation was associated with complete or regional tumor specific loss of
HDAC2 protein. Inactivation of HDAC2 was not associated with large-scale changes 
in promoter region methylation, but rather is a consequence of epigenetic MLH1
inactivation leading to MSI. HDAC2 mutation results in apoptotic resistance to
HDAC inhibitors (trichostatin A or suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid), despite
induction of global histone acetylation. Differential induction of apoptosis by
HDAC inhibitors is mediated by the proapoptotic gene APAF1, as shown by specific 
APAF1 induction only in cell lines with functional HDAC2, HDAC2 protein
localization to the APAF1 promoter by chromatin immunoprecipitation, siRNA
knockdown of HDAC2 leading to up-regulation of APAF1, and stable knockdown of
APAF1 reducing apoptotic response to HDAC inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: Frequent HDAC2 mutations are found in MSI tumors and HDAC2 plays a
major role in mediating apoptotic response to HDAC inhibitors through direct
regulation of APAF1.

PMID: 18834886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2009 Apr;135(4):523-31. doi: 10.1007/s00432-008-0484-1. 
Epub 2008 Sep 27.

MAGE-A1 expression is associated with good prognosis in neuroblastoma tumors.

Grau E(1), Oltra S, Martínez F, Orellana C, Cañete A, Fernández JM,
Hernández-Martí M, Castel V.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genética y Diagnóstico Prenatal, Hospital Universitario La Fe,
Av/Campanar no. 21, 46009, Valencia, Spain. elena_grau@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: Neuroblastoma is an embryonal tumor of neuroectodermal cells. Patients
with metastatic neuroblastoma have a poor survival rate, which has led to
numerous efforts to develop prognostic markers. Cancer/testis-specific antigens
MAGE-A1 and MAGE-A3 genes were proposed as minimal residual disease (MRD) markers
in neuroblastoma, but its usefulness for this purpose is rather limited.
METHODS: We studied 47 primary neuroblastoma tumors. RNA was extracted and cDNA
was prepared by reverse transcription. Detection of the MAGE-A1 expression was
done by hybridization of the RT-PCR products. We used methylation-specific-PCR to
perform the epigenetic studies.
RESULTS: We studied the MAGE-A1 and MAGE-A3 expressions, and the MAGE-A1
expression showed significant association with tumor stage, absence of bone
marrow infiltration and survival. A multivariate analysis enabled us to conclude 
that the MAGE-A1 expression represents a new independent predictive factor, which
is independent of N-Myc amplification (P value = 0.000), age at diagnosis (P
value = 0.002) or tumoral stage (P value = 0.024). Considering the epigenetic
regulation of MAGE-A1, we analyzed its methylation profile, and found a
significant association with its expression in tumor cells. Moreover, we found
tumors that failed to show the MAGE-A1 expression despite the hypomethylated
sequence, and corresponded to advanced neuroblastoma that might share another
mechanism involved in MAGE-A1 silencing. Given the association described between 
genome-wide hypomethylation and microsatellite instability, we determined the MSI
status of tumor samples, finding a significant correlation with the MAGE-A1
expression and, more specifically, with the hypomethylated status of this gene
only in female patients.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the MAGE-A1 expression is associated with good
prognosis in neuroblastoma.

PMID: 18820946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Annu Rev Physiol. 2009;71:451-64. doi: 10.1146/annurev.physiol.010908.163257.

Role of HDAC2 in the pathophysiology of COPD.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London SW3 6LY, United
Kingdom. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), characterized by progressive
inflammation in the small airways and lung parenchyma, is mediated by the
increased expression of multiple inflammatory genes. The increased expression of 
these genes is regulated by acetylation of core histones, whereas histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) suppresses inflammatory gene expression. In COPD, HDAC2
activity and expression are reduced in peripheral lung and in alveolar
macrophages, resulting in amplification of the inflammatory response.
Corticosteroid resistance in COPD occurs because corticosteroids use HDAC2 to
switch off activated inflammatory genes. The reduction in HDAC2 appears to be
secondary to the increased oxidative and nitrative stress in COPD lungs.
Antioxidants and inhibitors of nitric oxide synthesis may therefore restore
corticosteroid sensitivity in COPD, but this can also be achieved by low
concentrations of theophylline and curcumin, which act as HDAC activators.

PMID: 18817512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mol Cancer. 2008 Sep 12;7:70. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-70.

Differential effects of class I isoform histone deacetylase depletion and
enzymatic inhibition by belinostat or valproic acid in HeLa cells.

Dejligbjerg M(1), Grauslund M, Litman T, Collins L, Qian X, Jeffers M,
Lichenstein H, Jensen PB, Sehested M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Unit, National University Hospital, Biocentre,
Copenhagen, Denmark. mdejligbjerg@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Histone acetylation is an epigenetic modification involved in the
regulation of gene expression, balanced by histone acetyl transferases and
histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) induce growth arrest 
and cell death in transformed cells, and are currently in many clinical cancer
trials. The transcriptional response to HDACi is complex, as is the response to
HDAC isoform knockdown (KD). Here, we describe for the first time in a human
cancer cell line, a transcriptional comparison of treatment by two structurally
unrelated HDACi; belinostat and valproic acid with the KD of HDAC1, 2 and 3
isoforms.
RESULTS: HDAC KD showed anti-proliferative effects, although to a lesser extent
than HDACi treatment. Moreover, we found a 2-fold increased resistance of HDAC1
knockdown cells to belinostat, suggesting this isoenzyme as a selective target.
While both HDACi treatment and individual class I HDAC KD produce significant
transcriptional effects, three-times higher for HDACi, the gene-expression
profiles of class I HDAC KD compared with that obtained by HDACi treatment
exhibited less than 4% of altered genes in common between the two modes of
inhibition. Further, cell-specific effects of HDAC KD are evident by comparison
with a recent study in a different cell line.
CONCLUSION: The increased resistance to belinostat in response to HDAC1 depletion
indicates the possibility of using this isoform as a predictive biomarker of
response to HDACi treatment. Further, the transcriptional response to chemical
inhibition of HDACs is very different from that of KD of individual class I HDAC 
isoforms. These data suggest that the anti-tumor effect of HDACi is indeed linked
to class I inhibition, but may be more complex than simply targeting individual
HDAC enzymes.

PMCID: PMC2553797
PMID: 18789133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Nov;295(5):C1175-82. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00288.2008. Epub 2008 Sep 3.

Kruppel-like factor 4, Elk-1, and histone deacetylases cooperatively suppress
smooth muscle cell differentiation markers in response to oxidized phospholipids.

Yoshida T(1), Gan Q, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, Univ. of Virginia, MR5
Room 1226, 415 Lane Road, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. ty2c@virginia.edu

Phenotypic switching of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs), such as increased
proliferation, enhanced migration, and downregulation of SMC differentiation
marker genes, is known to play a key role in the development of atherosclerosis. 
However, the factors and mechanisms controlling this process are not fully
understood. We recently showed that oxidized phospholipids, including
1-palmitoyl-2-(5-oxovaleroyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POVPC), which
accumulate in atherosclerotic lesions, are potent repressors of expression of SMC
differentiation marker genes in cultured SMCs as well as in rat carotid arteries 
in vivo. Here, we examined the molecular mechanisms whereby POVPC induces
suppression of SMC differentiation marker genes in cultured SMCs. Results showed 
that POVPC induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Elk-1. The MEK inhibitors U-0126
and PD-98059 attenuated POVPC-induced suppression of smooth muscle (SM)
alpha-actin and SM-myosin heavy chain. POVPC also induced expression of
Krüppel-like factor 4 (Klf4). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that 
POVPC caused simultaneous binding of Elk-1 and Klf4 to the promoter region of the
SM alpha-actin gene. Moreover, coimmunoprecipitation assays showed a physical
interaction between Elk-1 and Klf4. Results in Klf4-null SMCs showed that
blockade of both Klf4 induction and Elk-1 phosphorylation completely abolished
POVPC-induced suppression of SMC differentiation marker genes. POVPC-induced
suppression of SMC differentiation marker genes was also accompanied by
hypoacetylation of histone H4 at the SM alpha-actin promoter, which was mediated 
by the recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs), HDAC2 and HDAC5.
Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that Klf4 interacted with HDAC5. Results
provide evidence that Klf4, Elk-1, and HDACs coordinately mediate POVPC-induced
suppression of SMC differentiation marker genes.

PMCID: PMC2584997
PMID: 18768922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Anticancer Drugs. 2008 Oct;19(9):891-7. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e32830ef8ca.

In-vivo effects and mechanisms of celecoxib-reduced growth of cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2)-expressing versus COX-2-deleted human HCC xenografts in nude mice.

Cui W(1), Hu SX, Tang ZY, Hu KQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of California, Irvine 
Medical Center, Orange, CA, USA.

We previously reported that celecoxib, a cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor,
suppresses growth of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells through both
COX-2 dependence and independence. Recently, we established COX-2-deleted human
HCC cells, C2D-HuH7, and C2D-HuH7-bearing nude mice. Using this novel model, we
examined the pharmacological effects and mechanisms of celecoxib on in-vivo
growth of HCC xenografts in relation to COX-2 expression. After treatment with
celecoxib, the mice bearing HuH7 or C2D-HuH7 xenografts were assessed for the
pharmacological effects and mechanisms of celecoxib on HCC xenograft growth in
relation to COX-2 expression. Celecoxib resulted in an effective and comparable
growth reduction of both COX-2-expressing and COX-2-deleted HuH7 xenografts in
association with decreased Ki-67 expression. These results demonstrated
celecoxib's COX-2-independent in-vivo anti-HCC effects. Celecoxib increased
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma predominantly in HuH7
xenografts, indicating its COX-2 dependency. Celecoxib reduced p-Rb and DP1/E2F1 
complex predominantly via upregulated p21/CDK4 complex in HuH7 xenograft, but
p27/CDK4 complex in C2D-HuH7 xenografts. The effects of celecoxib on phosphatase 
and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten/PI3K/Akt signaling were COX-2
independent, but its effects on extracellular-regulated kinase signaling seemed
COX-2 dependent. In addition, the effects of celecoxib on AC-H3, AC-H4, and
histone deacetylase 2 could be both COX-2 dependent and independent. In
conclusion, celecoxib suppresses growth of HuH7 xenografts regardless of COX-2
expression, which may be mediated through different signaling.

PMID: 18766003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Int J Oncol. 2007 Oct;31(4):851-8.

Ebp1-mediated inhibition of cell growth requires serine 363 phosphorylation.

Akinmade D(1), Lee M, Zhang Y, Hamburger AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Ebp1 is an ErbB3 binding phosphoprotein with pleiotropic effects. Overexpression 
of Ebp1 represses transcription of E2F1 responsive cell cycle regulated genes and
inhibits cell growth. However, the effect of phosphorylation on Ebp1-mediated
transcriptional repression and cell growth inhibition is currently unknown. In
this study, we show that serine 363 (S363) of Ebp1 is phosphorylated in vivo.
Although total Ebp1 is located in the nucleus, organelles and the cytoplasm, Ebp1
phosphorylated at S363 (Ebp1 pS363) is localized exclusively to the nucleus.
Mutation of S363 to alanine did not change the subcellular localization of Ebp1. 
However, the S363A mutation significantly decreased the ability of Ebp1 to
repress transcription and abrogated its ability to inhibit cell growth. We have
previously shown that Ebp1 can bind the E2F1 promoter in vitro and in vivo as
part of a protein complex and that Ebp1-transcriptional repression is mediated
via its interaction with the co-repressors HDAC2 and mSin3a present in this
complex. Although Ebp1 S363A interacted with an E2F1 promoter element, it did not
bind HDAC2 and mSin3a. These results indicate the importance of S363
phosphorylation in the function of Ebp1.

PMID: 17786317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Hum Reprod. 2007 Nov;22(11):2956-66. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Class I histone deacetylase expression in the human cyclic endometrium and
endometrial adenocarcinomas.

Krusche CA(1), Vloet AJ, Classen-Linke I, von Rango U, Beier HM, Alfer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Reproductive Biology, RWTH University of Aachen,
Wendlingweg 2, 52074, Aachen, Germany. ckrusche@ukaachen.de

BACKGROUND: Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) and acetylases (HATs) are
members of transcriptional pre-initiation complexes assembled by steroid hormone 
receptors. Recently, HDAC inhibitors were shown to enhance differentiation of
endometrial fibroblasts and endometrial adenocarcinomas. However, there is only
rare information on HDAC and HAT expression in the human endometrium.
METHODS: HDAC-1, -2, -3 and HAT (PCAF and GCN5) mRNA expression was studied in
tissue from premenopausal women undergoing hysterectomy by real-time or
semiquantitative RT-PCR. HDAC protein expression was assessed by Western Blot and
immunohistochemistry. In endometrial adenocarcinomas (n = 17), HDAC-1 expression 
was studied by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In the human endometrium, HDAC-1, -2, -3 and PCAF mRNA are expressed
without cyclical changes. Western blot analysis demonstrated that HDAC-2 protein 
expression was slightly, but significantly elevated in the secretory phase (P <
0.01 versus day 5-8), whereas HDAC-1 and -3 protein expression was constitutive
throughout the menstrual cycle. By immunohistochemistry, nuclear expression of
HDAC proteins was detected in all endometrial cell types. In the case of HDAC-3, 
immunostaining was significantly reduced in the endometrial surface epithelium on
day 6-10 (P < 0.01 versus days 15-18 and 24-28). Compared to normal endometrium, 
a high proportion of endometrial adenocarcinomas showed impaired HDAC-1 protein
expression in the epithelial and stromal compartment.
CONCLUSIONS: Class I HDACs and HATs are expressed in the human endometrium
throughout the menstrual cycle, suggesting the cyclic endometrium as a potential 
target for HDAC inhibitors. We hypothesis that alterations of HDAC and/or HAT
expression are potentially involved in impaired endometrial differentiation.

PMID: 17728353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Curr Opin Immunol. 2007 Dec;19(6):694-700. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

Epigenetic regulation of airway inflammation.

Adcock IM(1), Tsaprouni L, Bhavsar P, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, UK. ian.adcock@imperial.ac.uk

Diverse cellular functions including the regulation of inflammatory gene
expression, DNA repair and cell proliferation are regulated by epigenetic
changes. Transcriptional co-activators possess intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity, and histone acetylation plays a major role in
inflammatory gene expression. Other marks such as histone methylation are also
associated with gene induction and gene repression. Recent evidence implicates
histone acetylation and methylation as being crucial for the development of
tolerance in macrophages and CpG methylation for T regulatory cell development
and function. The expression of the enzymes that lay down or remove these
epigenetic marks have not been well studied in human airways disease, but reduced
HDAC2 expression and activity is reported in lung macrophages, biopsies and blood
cells from patients with COPD, severe asthma and smoking asthma. In vitro,
inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDAC) often lead to a further induction of
inflammatory gene expression. This is not always the case, however, as HATs and
HDACs also target non-histone proteins particularly transcription factors to
alter their activity. Furthermore, trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor, can reduce 
inflammation in a murine model of allergic asthma. This effect of HDAC inhibitors
may be due to their effects on cell death acting through acetylation of
non-histone proteins. The role of epigenetic modifications in inflammatory gene
expression and in the control of cell function in the airways is becoming
clearer. Targeting specific enzymes involved in this process may lead to new
therapeutic agents, in particular, in situations where current anti-inflammatory 
therapies are currently suboptimal.

PMID: 17720468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Pharmacol Ther. 2007 Nov;116(2):249-65. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

Impact of protein acetylation in inflammatory lung diseases.

Ito K(1), Charron CE, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School of 
Medicine, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, United Kingdom. k.ito@imperial.ac.uk

Chronic inflammatory lung diseases are characterized by increased expression of
multiple inflammatory genes following activation by proinflammatory transcription
factors, such as nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and AP-1. Gene expression is, 
at least in part, regulated by acetylation of core histones through the action of
coactivators, such as CREB-binding protein (CBP), which have intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. Conversely gene repression is mediated via a
combination of histone deacetylases (HDAC) and other corepressors. In asthma, the
level of HAT activity is elevated in bronchial biopsies, whereas HDAC activity
levels are only partially reduced and inhaled corticosteroids are able to reduce 
the increased HAT activity back to those seen in normal subjects. In contrast, in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), there is a greater reduction in
HDAC activity and HDAC2 expression but no difference in HAT activity. HAT and
HDAC are also reported to modify a large and expanding number of nonhistone
proteins, including nuclear import proteins, chaperones, cytoskeletal proteins,
and other transcriptional factors, such as NF-kappaB and signal transducer and
activation of transcription (STAT). Acetylation regulates several aspects of
protein function and stability leading to differing effects on inflammatory gene 
expression and cell recruitment involved in the pathogenesis of inflammatory
diseases. This review will examine the impact of acetylation on the function of
key proteins involved in airway inflammatory disease and the effects of current
therapies on acetylation status of key proteins. Further appreciation of the role
of these changes may lead to the development of novel therapeutic approaches to
inflammatory lung diseases that are currently difficult to treat.

PMID: 17720252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Clin Genet. 2007 Sep;72(3):175-82.

Of old and new diseases: genetics of pituitary ACTH excess (Cushing) and
deficiency.

Drouin J(1), Bilodeau S, Vallette S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal QC, Canada. jacques.drouin@ircm.qc.ca

The pituitary gland orchestrates our endocrine environment: it produces hormones 
in response to hypothalamic factors that integrate neural inputs and its activity
is balanced by the feedback action of peripheral hormones. Disruption of this
equilibrium has severe consequences that affect multiple systems and may be
fatal. Genetic analysis of pituitary function led to discovery of critical
transcription factors that cause hormone deficiencies when mis-expressed. This
review will summarize recent findings that led to the first complete clinical
description of inherited, isolated corticotropin (ACTH) deficiency (IAD) and to
the first molecular mechanism for excessive ACTH production in Cushing's disease.
Indeed, mutations in TPIT, a positive or negative regulator of cell fates for
different pituitary lineages, cause neonatal IAD, a condition considered
anecdotic before discovery of this transcription factor. Cushing's disease is
caused by corticotroph adenomas that produce excess ACTH as a result of
resistance to glucocorticoids (Gc). Molecular investigation of the normal
mechanism of Gc feedback led to identification of two essential proteins for
pro-opiomelanocortin repression that are often mis-expressed in corticotroph
adenomas thus providing a molecular explanation for Gc resistance. These two
proteins, Brg1 and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), are involved in chromatin
remodeling and may also participate in the tumorigenic process, as Brg1 is a
tumor suppressor. These recent advances have provided improved diagnosis and
opened new perspectives for patient management and therapies.

PMID: 17718852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Genes Dev. 2007 Jul 15;21(14):1790-802.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 redundantly regulate cardiac morphogenesis, growth, 
and contractility.

Montgomery RL(1), Davis CA, Potthoff MJ, Haberland M, Fielitz J, Qi X, Hill JA,
Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) tighten chromatin structure and repress gene
expression through the removal of acetyl groups from histone tails. The class I
HDACs, HDAC1 and HDAC2, are expressed ubiquitously, but their potential roles in 
tissue-specific gene expression and organogenesis have not been defined. To
explore the functions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in vivo, we generated mice with
conditional null alleles of both genes. Whereas global deletion of HDAC1 results 
in death by embryonic day 9.5, mice lacking HDAC2 survive until the perinatal
period, when they succumb to a spectrum of cardiac defects, including
obliteration of the lumen of the right ventricle, excessive hyperplasia and
apoptosis of cardiomyocytes, and bradycardia. Cardiac-specific deletion of either
HDAC1 or HDAC2 does not evoke a phenotype, whereas cardiac-specific deletion of
both genes results in neonatal lethality, accompanied by cardiac arrhythmias,
dilated cardiomyopathy, and up-regulation of genes encoding skeletal
muscle-specific contractile proteins and calcium channels. Our results reveal
cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous functions for HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the
control of myocardial growth, morphogenesis, and contractility, which reflect
partially redundant roles of these enzymes in tissue-specific transcriptional
repression.

PMCID: PMC1920173
PMID: 17639084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Nov;21(11):2698-712. Epub 2007 Jul 17.

Functional interaction of hepatic nuclear factor-4 and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1alpha in CYP7A1 regulation is 
inhibited by a key lipogenic activator, sterol regulatory element-binding
protein-1c.

Ponugoti B(1), Fang S, Kemper JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Insulin inhibits transcription of cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (Cyp7a1), a key 
gene in bile acid synthesis, and the hepatic nuclear factor-4 (HNF-4) site in the
promoter was identified as a negative insulin response sequence. Using a
fasting/feeding protocol in mice and insulin treatment in HepG2 cells, we
explored the inhibition mechanisms. Expression of sterol regulatory
element-binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c), an insulin-induced lipogenic factor,
inversely correlated with Cyp7a1 expression in mouse liver. Interaction of HNF-4 
with its coactivator, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha), was observed in livers of fasted mice and was
reduced after feeding. Conversely, HNF-4 interaction with SREBP-1c was increased 
after feeding. In vitro studies suggested that SREBP-1c competed with PGC-1alpha 
for direct interaction with the AF2 domain of HNF-4. Reporter assays showed that 
SREBP-1c, but not of a SREBP-1c mutant lacking the HNF-4 interacting domain,
inhibited HNF-4/PGC-1alpha transactivation of Cyp7a1. SREBP-1c also inhibited
PGC-1alpha-coactivation of estrogen receptor, constitutive androstane receptor,
pregnane X receptor, and farnesoid X receptor, implying inhibition of HNF-4 by
SREBP-1c could extend to other nuclear receptors. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies, HNF-4 binding to the promoter was not altered, but
PGC-1alpha was dissociated, SREBP-1c and histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) were
recruited, and acetylation of histone H3 was decreased upon feeding.
Adenovirus-mediated expression of a SREBP-1c dominant-negative mutant, which
blocks the interaction of SREBP-1c and HNF-4, partially but significantly
reversed the inhibition of Cyp7a1 after feeding. Our data show that SREBP-1c
functions as a non-DNA-binding inhibitor and mediates, in part, suppression of
Cyp7a1 by blocking functional interaction of HNF-4 and PGC-1alpha. This mechanism
may be relevant to known repression of many other HNF-4 target genes upon
feeding.

PMID: 17636037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Br J Cancer. 2007 Jul 16;97(2):177-82. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

Valproic acid (VPA) in patients with refractory advanced cancer: a dose
escalating phase I clinical trial.

Atmaca A(1), Al-Batran SE, Maurer A, Neumann A, Heinzel T, Hentsch B, Schwarz SE,
Hövelmann S, Göttlicher M, Knuth A, Jäger E.

Author information: 
(1)II. Medizinische Klinik/Onkologie, Krankenhaus Nordwest, Steinbacher Hohl
2-26, D-60488 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. atmaca.akin@khnw.de

Altered histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity has been identified in several types 
of cancer. This study was designed to determine the safety and maximum tolerated 
dose (MTD) of valproic acid (VPA) as an HDAC inhibitor in cancer patients.
Twenty-six pre-treated patients with progressing solid tumours were enrolled in
dose-escalating three-patient cohorts, starting at a dose of VPA 30 mg kg(-1)
day(-1). VPA was administered as an 1-h infusion daily for 5 consecutive days in 
a 21-day cycle. Neurocognitive impairment dominated the toxicity profile, with
grade 3 or 4 neurological side effects occurring in 8 out of 26 patients. No
grade 3 or 4 haematological toxicity was observed. The MTD of infusional VPA was 
60 mg kg(-1) day(-1). Biomonitoring of peripheral blood lymphocytes demonstrated 
the induction of histone hyperacetylation in the majority of patients and
downmodulation of HDAC2. Pharmacokinetic studies showed increased mean and
maximum serum VPA concentrations >120 and >250 mg l(-1), respectively, in the 90 
and 120 mg kg(-1) cohorts, correlating well with the incidence of dose-limiting
toxicity (DLT). Neurotoxicity was the main DLT of infusional VPA, doses up to 60 
mg kg(-1) day(-1) for 5 consecutive days are well tolerated and show detectable
biological activity. Further investigations are warranted to evaluate the
effectivity of VPA alone and in combination with other cytotoxic drugs.

PMCID: PMC2360302
PMID: 17579623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Reprod Dev. 2007 Aug;53(4):903-13. Epub 2007 Jun 8.

Effect of histone acetylation modification with sodium butyrate, a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, on cell cycle, apoptosis, ploidy and gene expression in
porcine fetal fibroblasts.

Mohana Kumar B(1), Song HJ, Cho SK, Balasubramanian S, Choe SY, Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang
National University, Jinju, Korea.

The present study evaluated the effective dose of sodium butyrate (NaB), a
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, for determination of the level of
enhancement of histone acetylation in porcine fetal fibroblasts (PFFs) based on
their morphology, growth, apoptosis and cell cycle status. Cells were analyzed
for their histone acetylation levels at H3, H4 and H2A and expression of genes
related to histone deacetylation (HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3), pro-apoptosis (Bax and
Bak) and anti-apoptosis (Bcl-2). PFFs at passage 3-4 were cultured with 0, 0.5,
1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 mM NaB for 96 h. NaB inhibited cell proliferation at all tested 
concentrations in a dose-dependent manner. However, there was slow cell growth
for PFFs treated with 2.0 and 3.0 mM NaB compared with those of untreated PFFs
and those treated with other lower concentrations (0.5 and 1.0 mM). More than 85%
of the cells that were untreated or treated with 0.5 or 1.0 mM NaB had intact
membranes, whereas, approximately 30% of the cells treated with 2.0 or 3.0 mM NaB
had increased cell sizes and a more flattened and elongated appearance. NaB
induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner; the rates of apoptosis were 2.5 +/-
0.4% for 1.0 mM NaB, 7.6 +/- 1.1% for 2.0 mM NaB and 11.2 +/- 1.4% for 3.0 mM
NaB. The chromosomal sets of PFFs treated with 0.5 and 1.0 mM NaB were normal,
whereas a lower proportion of PFFs treated with 2.0 and 3.0 mM were classified as
normal. NaB at 0.5 and 1.0 mM showed little effect on cell cycle. However, 2.0
and 3.0 mM resulted in an increased cell population at the G(0)/G(1) phase.
Increased NaB concentrations led to elevated acetylation of H3, H4 and H2A. NaB
altered the expression of histone deacetylation and apoptosis-related genes. In
conclusion, 1.0 mM NaB induced histone hyperacetylation in the PFFs and produced 
less deleterious effects than other concentrations; these PFFs might serve as
suitable donors for porcine somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).

PMID: 17558190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2007 Jun;11(6):745-55.

Oxidative stress and steroid resistance in asthma and COPD: pharmacological
manipulation of HDAC-2 as a therapeutic strategy.

Marwick JA(1), Ito K, Adcock IM, Kirkham PA.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institute For Biomedical Research, Respiratory Disease Area,
Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex, RH12 5AB, UK.

Insensitivity to corticosteroid treatment in inflammatory conditions, such as
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, present considerable management
problems and cost burdens to health services. Oxidative stress is a major
component of chronic inflammation and can have a significant suppressive effect
on corticosteroid efficacy. Recent advances in the understanding of both the
mechanisms of corticosteroid action and corticosteroid insensitivity have
provided hope for a therapeutic strategy of restoring corticosteroid sensitivity.
Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC-2) plays a pivotal role in corticosteroid action and 
is reduced in many cases of steroid insensitivity. Moreover, it has shown that
oxidative stress can be responsible for this reduction in HDAC-2 activity. Two
structurally different compounds; methyl-xanthine theophylline and polyphenol
curcumin restore HDAC activity, thereby restoring corticosteroid function. Low,
subbronchodilator doses of theophylline can also act as corticosteroid-sparing
drugs in asthmatics. Although these compounds appear to restore corticosteroid
function and may initially provide therapeutic potential, they lack specificity
and the mechanism of their action is unknown. Once their mechanisms of action are
established, it is likely that derivatives of these compounds may be used as a
therapeutic strategy to restore corticosteroid insensitivity in the future.

PMID: 17504013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Oncogene. 2007 Oct 4;26(45):6566-76. Epub 2007 Apr 30.

Epigenetic regulation (DNA methylation, histone modifications) of the 11p15 mucin
genes (MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, MUC6) in epithelial cancer cells.

Vincent A(1), Perrais M, Desseyn JL, Aubert JP, Pigny P, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U560, Place de Verdun, Lille cedex, France.

The human genes MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B and MUC6 are clustered on chromosome 11 and
encode large secreted gel-forming mucins. The frequent occurrence of their
silencing in cancers and the GC-rich structure of their promoters led us to study
the influence of epigenetics on their expression. Pre- and post-confluent cells
were treated with demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A. Mapping of methylated cytosines was
performed by bisulfite-treated genomic DNA sequencing. Histone modification
status at the promoters was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Our
results indicate that MUC2 was regulated by site-specific DNA methylation
associated with establishment of a repressive histone code, whereas
hypermethylation of MUC5B promoter was the major mechanism responsible for its
silencing. DNA methyltransferase 1 was identified by small interfering RNA
approach as a regulator of MUC2 and MUC5B endogenous expression that was
potentiated by HDAC2. MUC2 and MUC5B epigenetic regulation was cell-specific,
depended on cell differentiation status and inhibited their activation by Sp1.
The expression of MUC5AC was rarely influenced by epigenetic mechanisms and
methylation of MUC6 promoter was not correlated to its silencing. In conclusion, 
this study demonstrates the important role for methylation and/or histone
modifications in regulating the 11p15 mucin genes in epithelial cancer cells.

PMID: 17471237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(13):4784-95. Epub 2007 Apr 30.

Role for histone deacetylase 1 in human tumor cell proliferation.

Senese S(1), Zaragoza K, Minardi S, Muradore I, Ronzoni S, Passafaro A, Bernard
L, Draetta GF, Alcalay M, Seiser C, Chiocca S.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

Posttranslational modifications of core histones are central to the regulation of
gene expression. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) repress transcription by
deacetylating histones, and class I HDACs have a crucial role in mouse, Xenopus
laevis, zebra fish, and Caenorhabditis elegans development. The role of
individual class I HDACs in tumor cell proliferation was investigated using RNA
interference-mediated protein knockdown. We show here that in the absence of
HDAC1 cells can arrest either at the G(1) phase of the cell cycle or at the
G(2)/M transition, resulting in the loss of mitotic cells, cell growth
inhibition, and an increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells. On the
contrary, HDAC2 knockdown showed no effect on cell proliferation unless we
concurrently knocked down HDAC1. Using gene expression profiling analysis, we
found that inactivation of HDAC1 affected the transcription of specific target
genes involved in proliferation and apoptosis. Furthermore, HDAC2 downregulation 
did not cause significant changes compared to control cells, while inactivation
of HDAC1, HDAC1 plus HDAC2, or HDAC3 resulted in more distinct clusters. Loss of 
these HDACs might impair cell cycle progression by affecting not only the
transcription of specific target genes but also other biological processes. Our
data support the idea that a drug targeting specific HDACs could be highly
beneficial in the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC1951481
PMID: 17470557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Nat Med. 2007 May;13(5):597-603. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

SIK1 is a class II HDAC kinase that promotes survival of skeletal myocytes.

Berdeaux R(1), Goebel N, Banaszynski L, Takemori H, Wandless T, Shelton GD,
Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Peptide Biology Laboratories, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

During physical exercise, increases in motor neuron activity stimulate the
expression of muscle-specific genes through the myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) 
family of transcription factors. Elevations in intracellular calcium increase
MEF2 activity via the phosphorylation-dependent inactivation of class II histone 
deacetylases (HDACs). In studies to determine the role of the cAMP responsive
element binding protein (CREB) in skeletal muscle, we found that mice expressing 
a dominant-negative CREB transgene (M-ACREB mice) exhibited a dystrophic
phenotype along with reduced MEF2 activity. Class II HDAC phosphorylation was
decreased in M-ACREB myofibers due to a reduction in amounts of Snf1lk (encoding 
salt inducible kinase, SIK1), a CREB target gene that functions as a class II
HDAC kinase. Inhibiting class II HDAC activity either by viral expression of
Snf1lk or by the administration of a small molecule antagonist improved the
dystrophic phenotype in M-ACREB mice, pointing to an important role for the
SIK1-HDAC pathway in regulating muscle function.

PMID: 17468767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Nature. 2007 May 31;447(7144):601-5. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

The histone H3K4 demethylase SMCX links REST target genes to X-linked mental
retardation.

Tahiliani M(1), Mei P, Fang R, Leonor T, Rutenberg M, Shimizu F, Li J, Rao A, Shi
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Department of Medicine 
and BCMP, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 221 Longwood
Avenue Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Gene transcription is critically influenced by chromatin structure and the
modification status of histone tails. Methylation of lysine residues in histone
tails is dynamically regulated by the opposing activities of histone
methyltransferases and histone demethylases. Here we show that JARID1C/SMCX, a
JmjC-domain-containing protein implicated in X-linked mental retardation and
epilepsy, possesses H3K4 tri-demethylase activity and functions as a
transcriptional repressor. An SMCX complex isolated from HeLa cells contains
additional chromatin modifiers (the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2, and the
histone H3K9 methyltransferase G9a) and the transcriptional repressor REST,
suggesting a direct role for SMCX in chromatin dynamics and REST-mediated
repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation reveals that SMCX and REST co-occupy
the neuron-restrictive silencing elements in the promoters of a subset of REST
target genes. RNA-interference-mediated depletion of SMCX derepresses several of 
these targets and simultaneously increases H3K4 trimethylation at the sodium
channel type 2A (SCN2A) and synapsin I (SYN1) promoters. We propose that loss of 
SMCX activity impairs REST-mediated neuronal gene regulation, thereby
contributing to SMCX-associated X-linked mental retardation.

PMID: 17468742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Oncogene. 2007 Sep 27;26(44):6431-41. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

The LIM-only factor LMO4 regulates expression of the BMP7 gene through an
HDAC2-dependent mechanism, and controls cell proliferation and apoptosis of
mammary epithelial cells.

Wang N(1), Lin KK, Lu Z, Lam KS, Newton R, Xu X, Yu Z, Gill GN, Andersen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-4030, USA.

The nuclear LIM-only protein 4 (LMO4) is upregulated in breast cancer, especially
estrogen receptor-negative tumors, and its overexpression in mice leads to
hyperplasia and tumor formation. Here, we show that deletion of LMO4 in the
mammary glands of mice leads to impaired lobuloalveolar development due to
decreased epithelial cell proliferation. With the goal of discovering potential
LMO4-target genes, we also developed a conditional expression system in MCF-7
cells for both LMO4 and a dominant negative (DN) form of its co-regulator,
cofactor of LIM domains (Clim/Ldb/Nli). We then used DNA microarrays to identify 
genes responsive to LMO4 and DN-Clim upregulation. One of the genes common to
both data sets was bone morphogenic protein 7 (BMP7), whose expression is also
significantly correlated with LMO4 transcript levels in a large dataset of human 
breast cancers, suggesting that BMP7 is a bona fide target gene of LMO4 in breast
cancer. Inhibition of BMP7 partially blocks the effects of LMO4 on apoptosis,
indicating that BMP7 mediates at least some functions of LMO4. Gene transfer
studies show that LMO4 regulates the BMP7 promoter, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies show that LMO4 and its cofactor Clim2 are recruited
to the BMP7 promoter. Furthermore, we demonstrate that HDAC2 recruitment to the
BMP7 promoter is inhibited by upregulation of LMO4 and that HDAC2 knockdown
upregulates the promoter. These studies suggest a novel mechanism of action for
LMO4: LMO4, Clim2 and HDAC2 are part of a transcriptional complex, and increased 
LMO4 levels can disrupt the complex, leading to decreased HDAC2 recruitment and
increased promoter activity.

PMID: 17452977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Med Chem. 2007 May 17;50(10):2497-505. Epub 2007 Apr 21.

Bispyridinium dienes: histone deacetylase inhibitors with selective activities.

Pérez-Balado C(1), Nebbioso A, Rodríguez-Graña P, Minichiello A, Miceli M,
Altucci L, de Lera AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidade de Vigo, Lagoas-Marcosende,
36310 Vigo, Spain.

A novel synthetic route to the cyclostellettamines 1 using as the key step a
microwave-mediated macrocyclic ring-closing metathesis of precursors
bispyridinium dienes 10 followed by catalytic hydrogenation has been developed.
The open-chain bispyridinium dienes 10 showed uniformly higher histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitory potency than the natural products. Diene 10b
inhibited HDAC1 and was inactive on HDAC4, whereas 10a showed a weak inhibition
of HDAC1 and a higher activity on HDAC4. Neither 10b nor 10a inhibited isoforms
HDAC2 and HDAC3. Cell cycle analysis, cell differentiation, and apoptosis as well
as evaluation of the acetylation status of H3 lysine tails, up-regulation of
p21WAF1/CIP1, and alpha-tubulin acetylation induced by the dienes 10 and
cyclostellettamines 1 were also carried out on the human leukemia U937 cell line.
These enzymatic and functional assays suggest that 10b is a HDAC1-selective
inhibitor and 10a is a HDAC subclass IIa-selective inhibitor.

PMID: 17447750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3145-52.

Histone deacetylase 2 modulates p53 transcriptional activities through regulation
of p53-DNA binding activity.

Harms KL(1), Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are emerging as promising cancer
therapeutics. HDAC inhibitors have been found to induce cellular activities that 
are strikingly similar to p53-mediated responses to genotoxic stress. For
example, HDAC inhibitors induce cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and cellular
senescence. Because at least 11 HDACs are affected by the current HDAC
inhibitors, the HDAC critical for tumor cell survival and proliferation remains
unknown. Thus, we sought to characterize the distinct roles of HDACs in the p53
pathway. Through the use of stable MCF7 cell lines which inducibly express short 
hairpin RNA targeting HDAC2, we found that HDAC2 plays important roles in the p53
pathway. Specifically, we found that knockdown of HDAC2 inhibited cellular
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner which was also partly p53-dependent.
Furthermore, knockdown of HDAC2 induced cellular senescence. Importantly, we
found that knockdown of HDAC2 enhanced p53-dependent trans-repression and
trans-activation of a subset of target genes. We found that the enhancement was
due to increased p53-DNA binding activity but not alterations in p53 stability or
posttranslational modification(s). Thus, for the first time, our data suggest
that HDAC inhibitors function through the p53 pathway, at least in part, by
activating p53-DNA binding activity.

PMID: 17409421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(8):2522-32. Epub 2007 Apr 1.

Nitric oxide controls nuclear export of APE1/Ref-1 through S-nitrosation of
cysteines 93 and 310.

Qu J(1), Liu GH, Huang B, Chen C.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, and Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China.

Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1/redox effector factor-1 (APE1/Ref-1,
abbreviated as APE1) is a molecule with dual functions in DNA repair and redox
regulation of transcription factors. Accumulated work has shown that the
biological activities of APE1 are sensitive to oxidative stress; however, whether
APE1 functions can be regulated by nitrosative stress remains unknown. In this
investigation, we found that S-nitrosoglutathion (GSNO), a nitric oxide donor and
also an S-nitrosating agent, effectively stimulated nuclear export of APE1 in a
CRM1-independent manner. This nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation was dependent on 
S-nitrosation modification of APE1, as simultaneous mutation of S-nitrosation
target sites Cys93 and Cys310 completely abrogated the cytoplasmic
redistribution. The translocation process was reversal and specific, as it could 
be reversed by reductive reagents, but could not be mimicked by H2O2. In
structure, the region aa.64-80 and the beta-strand aa.311-316 in proximity to
Cys93 and Cys310 were important for GSNO-induced APE1 relocalization. In
addition, a defect of importin-mediated nuclear import pathway was found in the
NO-insulted cells, and p50 and HDAC2 were identified as APE1 nuclear export
inhibitory proteins. Together, this study may provide a novel molecular
mechanism, which links nitrosative stress to APE1-associated physiological and
pathological processes.

PMCID: PMC1885639
PMID: 17403694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Apr;56(4):1087-93.

Histone deacetylase/acetylase activity in total synovial tissue derived from
rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis patients.

Huber LC(1), Brock M, Hemmatazad H, Giger OT, Moritz F, Trenkmann M, Distler JH, 
Gay RE, Kolling C, Moch H, Michel BA, Gay S, Distler O, Jüngel A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich, and Zurich
Center of Integrative Human Physiology, Zurich, Switzerland. Lars.Huber@usz.ch

OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of
unknown origin. Histone deacetylase (HDA) activity is considered to play a major 
role in the transcriptional regulation of proinflammatory genes. We undertook
this study to investigate the balance of histone acetylase and HDA activity in
synovial tissue from RA patients compared with that from patients with
osteoarthritis (OA) and normal controls.
METHODS: Activity of histone acetylases and HDAs was measured in nuclear extracts
of total synovial tissue samples, which were obtained from RA and OA patients
undergoing surgical joint replacement, and compared with the activity in synovial
tissues from patients without arthritis. Tissue expression of HDAs 1 and 2 was
quantified by Western blotting. In addition, immunohistochemistry was performed
for HDA-2.
RESULTS: Mean+/-SEM HDA activity in synovial tissue samples derived from patients
with RA was measured as 1.5+/-0.3 micromoles/microg, whereas the activity levels 
in OA (3.2+/-0.7 micromoles/microg) and normal (7.1+/-4.2 micromoles/microg)
synovial tissue samples were significantly higher. Histone acetylase activity
reached similar levels in RA and OA tissues and in normal tissues. The ratio of
HDA activity to histone acetylase activity in RA synovial tissue was
significantly reduced (12+/-2%) compared with that in OA synovial tissue
(26+/-3%). The activity ratio in normal control samples was arbitrarily set at
100+/-40%. In addition, the tissue expression of HDA-1 and HDA-2 proteins was
clearly lower in RA samples than in OA samples.
CONCLUSION: The balance of histone acetylase/HDA activities is strongly shifted
toward histone hyperacetylation in patients with RA. These results offer novel
molecular insights into the pathogenesis of the disease that might be relevant to
the development of future therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 17393417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Jun;321(3):953-60. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Targeting AML1/ETO-histone deacetylase repressor complex: a novel mechanism for
valproic acid-mediated gene expression and cellular differentiation in
AML1/ETO-positive acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Liu S(1), Klisovic RB, Vukosavljevic T, Yu J, Paschka P, Huynh L, Pang J, Neviani
P, Liu Z, Blum W, Chan KK, Perrotti D, Marcucci G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Ohio State University, 320 West 10th Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

In t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the AML1/ETO fusion protein promotes
leukemogenesis by recruiting class I histone deacetylase (HDAC)-containing
repressor complex to the promoter of AML1 target genes. Valproic acid (VPA), a
commonly used antiseizure and mood stabilizer drug, has been shown to cause
growth arrest and induce differentiation of malignant cells via HDAC inhibition. 
VPA causes selective proteasomal degradation of HDAC2 but not other class I HDACs
(i.e., HDAC 1, 3, and 8). Therefore, we raised the question of whether this drug 
can effectively target the leukemogenic activity of the AML1/ETO fusion protein
that also recruits HDAC1, a key regulator of normal and aberrant histone
acetylation. We report here that VPA treatment disrupts the AML1/ETO-HDAC1
physical interaction, stimulates the global dissociation of AML1/ETO-HDAC1
complex from the promoter of AML1/ETO target genes, and induces relocation of
both AML1/ETO and HDAC1 protein from nuclear to perinuclear region. Furthermore, 
we show that mechanistically these effects associate with a significant
inhibition of HDAC activity, histone H3 and H4 hyperacetylation, and recruitment 
of RNA polymerase II, leading to transcriptional reactivation of target genes
(i.e., IL-3) otherwise silenced by AML1/ETO fusion protein. Ultimately, these
pharmacological effects resulted in significant antileukemic activity mediated by
partial cell differentiation and caspase-dependent apoptosis. Taken together,
these data support the notion that VPA might effectively target AML1/ETO-driven
leukemogenesis through disruption of aberrant HDAC1 function and that VPA should 
be integrated in novel therapeutic approaches for AML1/ETO-positive AML.

PMID: 17389244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2007 Apr;35(Pt 2):284-7.

Oxidative stress and macrophage function: a failure to resolve the inflammatory
response.

Kirkham P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West
Sussex, UK. paul.kirkham@novartis.com

The suppression of pro-inflammatory gene expression along with the clearance of
apoptotic cells by phagocytosis can play an important role in resolving the
inflammatory response. Any impairment of these processes can therefore lead to a 
chronic inflammatory state. Oxidative stress can have both direct and indirect
effects on macrophage function. This mini-review highlights a mechanism through
which oxidative stress via the production of reactive carbonyls alters the ECM
(extracellular matrix) environment of macrophages, thereby altering their
behaviour. Carbonyl modification of ECM proteins causes increased macrophage
adhesion and activation through receptors that are also involved in phagocytosis.
Moreover, interaction of macrophages with these carbonyl-modified ECM proteins
leads to decreased phagocytic activity towards apoptotic cells. At a more direct 
level, both oxidative and carbonyl stress inhibits activity of the
transcriptional co-repressor HDAC-2 (histone deacetylase 2), which under normoxic
conditions helps to suppress pro-inflammatory gene expression. Consequently,
macrophages activated under conditions of oxidative or carbonyl stress can lead
to a more enhanced inflammatory response. Coupled with an impairment of the
phagocytic response, this can lead to ineffective clearance of apoptotic cells
and secondary necrosis, with the result being failure to resolve the inflammatory
response and the establishment of a chronic inflammatory state.

PMID: 17371261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(10):3868-80. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

DeltaNp73 modulates nerve growth factor-mediated neuronal differentiation through
repression of TrkA.

Zhang J(1), Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Oncology, 2128 Tupper Hall, University of California at
Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

p73, a member of the p53 family, expresses two classes of proteins: the
full-length TAp73 and the N-terminally truncated DeltaNp73. While TAp73 possesses
many p53-like features, DeltaNp73 is dominant negative towards TAp73 and p53 and 
appears to have distinct functions in tumorigenesis and neuronal development.
Given its biological importance, we investigated the role of DeltaNp73 in nerve
growth factor (NGF)-mediated neuronal differentiation in PC12 cells. We show that
overexpression of DeltaNp73alpha or DeltaNp73beta inhibits NGF-mediated neuronal 
differentiation in both p53-dependent and -independent manners. In line with
this, we showed that the level of endogenous DeltaNp73 is progressively
diminished in differentiating PC12 cells upon NGF treatment and knockdown of
DeltaNp73 promotes NGF-mediated neuronal differentiation. Interestingly, we found
that the ability of DeltaNp73 to suppress NGF-mediated neuronal differentiation
is correlated with its ability to regulate the expression of TrkA, the
high-affinity NGF receptor. Specifically, we found that DeltaNp73 directly binds 
to the TrkA promoter and transcriptionally represses TrkA expression, which in
turn attenuates the NGF-mediated mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.
Conversely, the steady-state level of TrkA is increased upon knockdown of
DeltaNp73. Furthermore, we found that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 are
recruited by DeltaNp73 to the TrkA promoter and act as corepressors to suppress
TrkA expression, which can be relieved by trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor.
Taken together, we conclude that DeltaNp73 negatively regulates NGF-mediated
neuronal differentiation by transrepressing TrkA.

PMCID: PMC1899982
PMID: 17353261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genes Cells. 2007 Mar;12(3):359-73.

HDAC2 controls IgM H- and L-chain gene expressions via EBF1, Pax5, Ikaros, Aiolos
and E2A gene expressions.

Nakayama M(1), Suzuki H, Yamamoto-Nagamatsu N, Barman HK, Kikuchi H, Takami Y,
Toyonaga K, Yamashita K, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 5200, Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki
889-1692, Japan. tnakayam@med.miyazaki-u.ac.jp

We previously reported that histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) controls the amount of 
IgM H-chain at the steps of transcription of its gene and alternative processing 
of its pre-mRNA in DT40 cells. Here, we showed not only that the HDAC2-deficiency
caused repressions of gene expressions for HDAC7, EBF1, Pax5, Aiolos and Ikaros, 
and elevations of gene expressions for HDAC4, HDAC5, PCAF and E2A, but also that 
it caused altered acetylation levels of several Lys residues of core histones.
Using gene targeting techniques, we generated three homozygous DT40 mutants:
EBF1(-/-), Aiolos(-/-) and E2A(-/-), devoid of EBF1, Aiolos and E2A genes,
respectively. Semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis of the resultant mutants revealed 
not only that EBF1 and Aiolos down-regulate expressions of IgM H- and L-chain
genes, but also that E2A up-regulates expressions of these two genes. These
results, together with others, indicate that HDAC2 controls indirectly
expressions of IgM H- and L-chain genes through opposite transcriptional
regulations of EBF1, Pax5, Aiolos plus Ikaros and E2A genes.

PMID: 17352740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Acta Biochim Pol. 2007;54(1):89-98. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

A common cis-element in promoters of protein synthesis and cell cycle genes.

Wyrwicz LS(1), Gaj P, Hoffmann M, Rychlewski L, Ostrowski J.

Author information: 
(1)BioInfoBank Institute, Poznan, Poland. lucjan@bioinfo.pl

Gene promoters contain several classes of functional sequence elements (cis
elements) recognized by protein agents, e.g. transcription factors and essential 
components of the transcription machinery. Here we describe a common DNA
regulatory element (tandem TCTCGCGAGA motif) of human TATA-less promoters. A
combination of bioinformatic and experimental methodology suggests that the
element can be critical for expression of genes involved in enhanced protein
synthesis and the G1/S transition in the cell cycle. The motif was identified in 
a substantial fraction of promoters of cell cycle genes, like cyclins (CCNC,
CCNG1), as well as transcription regulators (TAF7, TAF13, KLF7, NCOA2), chromatin
structure modulators (HDAC2, TAF6L), translation initiation factors (EIF5,
EIF2S1, EIF4G2, EIF3S8, EIF4) and previously reported 18 ribosomal protein genes.
Since the motif can define a subset of promoters with a distinct mechanism of
activation involved in regulation of expression of about 5% of human genes,
further investigation of this regulatory element is an emerging task.

PMID: 17351670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Med. 2007 Mar;13(3):324-31. Epub 2007 Feb 18.

Hdac2 regulates the cardiac hypertrophic response by modulating Gsk3 beta
activity.

Trivedi CM(1), Luo Y, Yin Z, Zhang M, Zhu W, Wang T, Floss T, Goettlicher M,
Noppinger PR, Wurst W, Ferrari VA, Abrams CS, Gruber PJ, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, 1156 Basic Research Building II,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

In the adult heart, a variety of stresses induce re-expression of a fetal gene
program in association with myocyte hypertrophy and heart failure. Here we show
that histone deacetylase-2 (Hdac2) regulates expression of many fetal cardiac
isoforms. Hdac2 deficiency or chemical histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition
prevented the re-expression of fetal genes and attenuated cardiac hypertrophy in 
hearts exposed to hypertrophic stimuli. Resistance to hypertrophy was associated 
with increased expression of the gene encoding inositol
polyphosphate-5-phosphatase f (Inpp5f) resulting in constitutive activation of
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (Gsk3beta) via inactivation of thymoma viral
proto-oncogene (Akt) and 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 (Pdk1). In
contrast, Hdac2 transgenic mice had augmented hypertrophy associated with
inactivated Gsk3beta. Chemical inhibition of activated Gsk3beta allowed
Hdac2-deficient adults to become sensitive to hypertrophic stimulation. These
results suggest that Hdac2 is an important molecular target of HDAC inhibitors in
the heart and that Hdac2 and Gsk3beta are components of a regulatory pathway
providing an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of cardiac
hypertrophy and heart failure.

PMID: 17322895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. EMBO Rep. 2007 Apr;8(4):394-400. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Nucleophosmin acts as a novel AP2alpha-binding transcriptional corepressor during
cell differentiation.

Liu H(1), Tan BC, Tseng KH, Chuang CP, Yeh CW, Chen KD, Lee SC, Yung BY.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Pharmacology, Chang Gung
University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Nucleophosmin (NPM) is an important nucleolar phosphoprotein with pleiotropic
functions in various cellular processes. In this study, we have further examined 
the largely uncharacterized role of NPM in transcriptional regulation by
uncovering novel NPM-binding transcriptional factors. Among potential
interactors, we found that activating protein transcription factor 2 (AP2)alpha
forms a complex with NPM during retinoic-acid-induced cell differentiation. We
show that this complex is recruited to the promoters of certain
retinoic-acid-responsive genes, including NPM itself. Such binding of AP2alpha,
and consequent recruitment of NPM, is selective and dependent on a consensus
AP2alpha-binding sequence. Remarkably, suppression of NPM by RNA interference
alleviates the repression of gene expression mediated by retinoic acid and
AP2alpha. Our findings further show that, on promoter binding, NPM probably
exerts its repressive effect by inducing a change in local chromatin structure
that also engages histone deacetylases. This study unveils a hitherto
unrecognized transcriptional corepressor function of the NPM protein, and
highlights a novel mechanism by which NPM regulates cell growth and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1852768
PMID: 17318229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 1;178(5):3059-66.

17beta-estradiol induces IL-1alpha gene expression in rheumatoid fibroblast-like 
synovial cells through estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and augmentation of
transcriptional activity of Sp1 by dissociating histone deacetylase 2 from
ERalpha.

Itoh Y(1), Hayashi H, Miyazawa K, Kojima S, Akahoshi T, Onozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Health Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) occurs four times more frequently in women than in men,
although the mechanistic basis of the gender difference is unknown. RA is
characterized by the overproliferation of synoviocytes producing proinflammatory 
cytokines such as IL-1, implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease. In this
study we examined whether 17beta-estradiol (E2) induced IL-1alpha mRNA expression
in the rheumatoid fibroblast-like cell line MH7A, as well as in primary synovial 
cells from RA patients, and investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms. E2 
induced IL-1alpha mRNA expression in both cell types in an estrogen
receptor-dependent manner. In MH7A cells ERalpha but not ERbeta mediated the
effects of E2. Deletion and mutation analysis revealed that a GC-rich region
within the IL-1alpha gene promoter was responsible for the response to E2. EMSAs 
showed that Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the GC-rich region and that the transcriptional 
activity of Sp1 was up-regulated by the treatment with E2. Sp1 and ERalpha
interacted physically regardless of the presence of E2. Physical interaction was 
also observed between ERalpha and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), and E2 induced
the dissociation of HDAC2 from ERalpha. These results suggest that E2 induces the
dissociation of corepressor HDAC2 from ERalpha, which leads to the augmentation
of Sp1 transcriptional activity through the GC-rich region within the IL-1alpha
gene promoter.

PMID: 17312152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Acta Biochim Pol. 2007;54(1):63-9. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Sirtuin inhibition increases the rate of non-homologous end-joining of DNA double
strand breaks.

Wojewódzka M(1), Kruszewski M, Buraczewska I, Xu W, Massuda E, Zhang J, Szumiel
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiobiology and Health Protection, Institute of Nuclear
Chemistry and Technology, Warszawa, Poland. marylaw@ichtj.waw.pl

Sirtuins (type III histone deacetylases) are an important member of a group of
enzymes that modify chromatin conformation. We investigated the role of sirtuin
inhibitor, GPI 19015, in double strand break (DSB) repair in CHO-K1 wt and xrs-6 
mutant cells. The latter is defective in DNA-dependent protein kinase
(DNA-PK)-mediated non-homologous end-joining (D-NHEJ). DSB were estimated by the 
neutral comet assay and histone gammaH2AX foci formation. We observed a weaker
effect of GPI 19015 treatment on the repair kinetics in CHO wt cells than in
xrs6. In the latter cells the increase in DNA repair rate was most pronounced in 
G1 phase and practically absent in S and G2 cell cycle phases. The decrease in
the number of histone gammaH2AX foci was faster in xrs6 than in CHO-K1 cells. The
altered repair rate did not affect survival of X-irradiated cells. Since in G1
xrs6 cells DNA-PK-dependent non-homologous end-joining, D-NHEJ, does not operate,
these results indicate that inhibition of sirtuins modulates DNA-PK-independent
(backup) non-homologous end-joining, B-NHEJ, to a greater extent than the other
DSB repair system, D-NHEJ.

PMID: 17311110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Leukemia. 2007 Apr;21(4):747-53. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Activation of the c-myc p1 promoter in Burkitt's lymphoma by the hs3
immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene enhancer.

Hu HM(1), Kanda K, Zhang L, Boxer LM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology in Medicine, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health
Care System, Stanford, CA, USA.

The expression of c-myc is deregulated in Burkitt's lymphoma by the translocation
t(8;14). Most of the increased c-myc expression is from the P1 promoter, which is
normally a minor promoter. How the P1 promoter is activated by the immunoglobulin
heavy chain gene enhancers is not understood. We identified a YY1 site in the
immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene HS3 enhancer, which increased c-myc P1 promoter
activity, and a MARE site, which decreased c-myc P1 activity. Small Maf proteins 
bound to the MARE site both in vitro and in vivo, recruited histone deacetylase
2, and resulted in deacetylation of histones H3 and H4 at the c-myc promoter
region. In contrast, YY1 recruited CBP and increased histone acetylation at the
c-myc promoter. Rb interacts with YY1 to prevent DNA binding in normal B cells,
but no significant interaction with YY1 was detected in Burkitt's cells, and
binding of YY1 to the HS3 enhancer was observed by chromatin immunoprecipitaton. 
Increased expression of MafK and/or decreased expression of YY1 by silencing RNA 
downregulated endogenous c-myc mRNA levels and increased the sensitivity of the
cells to doxorubicin. Mutation of the major active sites (nuclear factor-kappa B 
and YY1) in the enhancers prevented c-myc activation.

PMID: 17287852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. EMBO J. 2007 Jan 24;26(2):412-23.

Recruitment of chromatin-modifying enzymes by CTIP2 promotes HIV-1
transcriptional silencing.

Marban C(1), Suzanne S, Dequiedt F, de Walque S, Redel L, Van Lint C, Aunis D,
Rohr O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM unité 575 Pathophysiology of Nervous System, Centre de Neurochimie,
Strasbourg, France.

Following entry and reverse transcription, the HIV-1 genome is integrated into
the host genome. In contrast to productively infected cells, latently infected
cells frequently harbor HIV-1 genomes integrated in heterochromatic structures,
allowing persistence of transcriptionally silent proviruses. Microglial cells are
the main HIV-1 target cells in the central nervous system and constitute an
important reservoir for viral pathogenesis. In the present work, we show that, in
microglial cells, the co-repressor COUP-TF interacting protein 2 (CTIP2) recruits
a multienzymatic chromatin-modifying complex and establishes a heterochromatic
environment at the HIV-1 promoter. We report that CTIP2 recruits histone
deacetylase (HDAC)1 and HDAC2 to promote local histone H3 deacetylation at the
HIV-1 promoter region. In addition, DNA-bound CTIP2 also associates with the
histone methyltransferase SUV39H1, which increases local histone H3 lysine 9
methylation. This allows concomitant recruitment of HP1 proteins to the viral
promoter and formation of local heterochromatin, leading to HIV-1 silencing.
Altogether, our findings uncover new therapeutic opportunities for purging latent
HIV-1 viruses from their cellular reservoirs.

PMCID: PMC1783449
PMID: 17245431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Dev Dyn. 2007 Feb;236(2):435-46.

Differential gene expression patterns in porcine nuclear transfer embryos
reconstructed with fetal fibroblasts and mesenchymal stem cells.

Kumar BM(1), Jin HF, Kim JG, Ock SA, Hong Y, Balasubramanian S, Choe SY, Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang
National University, Chinju, Republic of Korea.

The present study compared the developmental ability and gene expression pattern 
at 4-cell, 8-cell, morula, and blastocyst stages of porcine nuclear transfer (NT)
embryos from fetal fibroblasts (FFs) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), in vitro 
fertilized (IVF), and in vivo derived embryos. MSC-NT embryos showed enhanced
blastocyst formation, higher total cell number, and a low incidence of apoptosis 
compared to FF-NT embryos. Alterations in the expression pattern of genes
implicated in transcription and pluripotency (Oct4, Stat3, Nanog), DNA
methylation (Dnmt1, Dnmt3a), histone deacetylation (Hdac2), growth factor
signaling, and imprinting (Igf2, Igf2r) and apoptosis (Bax, Bcl2) regulation were
observed in NT embryos. The expression of transcripts in MSC-NT embryos more
closely followed that of the in vivo derived embryos compared with FF-NT embryos.
In conclusion, MSCs with a relatively undifferentiated genome might serve as
suitable donors that could be more efficiently reprogrammed to re-activate
expression of early embryonic genes in porcine NT.

PMID: 17191234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Mar;18(3):755-67. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Cell fate determination factor DACH1 inhibits c-Jun-induced contact-independent
growth.

Wu K(1), Liu M, Li A, Donninger H, Rao M, Jiao X, Lisanti MP, Cvekl A, Birrer M, 
Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The cell fate determination factor DACH1 plays a key role in cellular
differentiation in metazoans. DACH1 is engaged in multiple context-dependent
complexes that activate or repress transcription. DACH1 can be recruited to DNA
via the Six1/Eya bipartite transcription (DNA binding/coactivator) complex. c-Jun
is a critical component of the activator protein (AP)-1 transcription factor
complex and can promote contact-independent growth. Herein, DACH1 inhibited
c-Jun-induced DNA synthesis and cellular proliferation. Excision of c-Jun with
Cre recombinase, in c-jun(f1/f1) 3T3 cells, abrogated DACH1-mediated inhibition
of DNA synthesis. c-Jun expression rescued DACH1-mediated inhibition of cellular 
proliferation. DACH1 inhibited induction of c-Jun by physiological stimuli and
repressed c-jun target genes (cyclin A, beta-PAK, and stathmin). DACH1 bound
c-Jun and inhibited AP-1 transcriptional activity. c-jun and c-fos were
transcriptionally repressed by DACH1, requiring the conserved N-terminal (dac and
ski/sno [DS]) domain. c-fos transcriptional repression by DACH1 requires the SRF 
site of the c-fos promoter. DACH1 inhibited c-Jun transactivation through the
delta domain of c-Jun. DACH1 coprecipitated the histone deacetylase proteins
(HDAC1, HDAC2, and NCoR), providing a mechanism by which DACH1 represses c-Jun
activity through the conserved delta domain. An oncogenic v-Jun deleted of the
delta domain was resistant to DACH1 repression. Collectively, these studies
demonstrate a novel mechanism by which DACH1 blocks c-Jun-mediated
contact-independent growth through repressing the c-Jun delta domain.

PMCID: PMC1805093
PMID: 17182846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(4):1280-95. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

Histone deacetylase 3 interacts with and deacetylates myocyte enhancer factor 2.

Grégoire S(1), Xiao L, Nie J, Zhang X, Xu M, Li J, Wong J, Seto E, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Royal Victoria Hospital, McGill University Health
Center, 687 Pine Avenue West, Montréal, Quebec H3A 1A1, Canada.

The myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) family of transcription factors is not only 
important for controlling gene expression in normal cellular programs, like
muscle differentiation, T-cell apoptosis, neuronal survival, and synaptic
differentiation, but has also been linked to cardiac hypertrophy and other
pathological conditions. Lysine acetylation has been shown to modulate MEF2
function, but it is not so clear which deacetylase(s) is involved. We report here
that treatment of HEK293 cells with trichostatin A or nicotinamide upregulated
MEF2D acetylation, suggesting that different deacetylases catalyze the
deacetylation. Related to the trichostatin A sensitivity, histone deacetylase 4
(HDAC4) and HDAC5, two known partners of MEF2, exhibited little deacetylase
activity towards MEF2D. In contrast, HDAC3 efficiently deacetylated MEF2D in
vitro and in vivo. This was specific, since HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC8 failed to do 
so. While HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC7, and HDAC9 are known to recognize primarily the
MEF2-specific domain, we found that HDAC3 interacts directly with the MADS box.
In addition, HDAC3 associated with the acetyltransferases p300 and
p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) to reverse autoacetylation. Furthermore, the
nuclear receptor corepressor SMRT (silencing mediator of retinoid acid and
thyroid hormone receptor) stimulated the deacetylase activity of HDAC3 towards
MEF2 and PCAF. Supporting the physical interaction and deacetylase activity,
HDAC3 repressed MEF2-dependent transcription and inhibited myogenesis. These
results reveal an unexpected role for HDAC3 and suggest a novel pathway through
which MEF2 activity is controlled in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1800729
PMID: 17158926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Virol. 2007 Feb;81(4):1980-9. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Mapping of key functions of the herpes simplex virus 1 U(S)3 protein kinase: the 
U(S)3 protein can form functional heteromultimeric structures derived from
overlapping truncated polypeptides.

Poon AP(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Earlier studies have shown that the herpes simplex virus (HSV) U(S)3 encodes two 
transcriptional units directing the synthesis of the U(S)3 (residues 1 to 481)
and U(S)3.5 (residues 77 to 481) protein kinases. Both kinases phosphorylate
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 and enable the expression of genes
cotransduced into U2OS cells by recombinant baculoviruses, an activity designated
the "helper function." The two kinases differ with respect to antiapoptotic
activity. In the studies reported here, we made a series of FLAG-tagged amino-
and carboxyl-terminal truncations of U(S)3 and these were tested for
antiapoptotic activity, phosphorylation of HDAC1, and the helper function. We
report the following. (i) HDAC1 phosphorylation and the helper function were
expressed in cells transduced by the truncation encoding residues 182 to 481 but 
not in cells transduced by the truncation encoding residues 189 to 481 or the
amino-terminal polypeptides encompassing the first 188 amino acids. (ii) The
self-posttranslational modification requires residues 164 to 481. (iii) The
antiapoptotic activity requires both the amino-terminal and the carboxyl-terminal
domains, of which the truncated protein containing residues 1 to 163 and that
containing residues 164 to 481, respectively, were the smallest fragments tested 
to be effective. The two domains need not be on the same molecule, but they must 
overlap. The smallest overlapping pair tested was the fragment containing
residues 1 to 181 and that containing residues 164 to 481. Consistent with the
hypothesis that the effective overlapping truncations form a heteromultimeric
structure, antibody to FLAG coprecipitated untagged U(S)3 from lysates of cells
cotransduced with FLAG-tagged, truncated U(S)3 constructs. Although U(S)3 has
been reported to be a monomeric enzyme, the results indicate that it can form
enzymatically active multimeric structures.

PMCID: PMC1797600
PMID: 17151133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. COPD. 2005 Dec;2(4):445-55.

Histone deacetylation: an important mechanism in inflammatory lung diseases.

Adcock IM(1), Ito K, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, UK.
ian.adcock@imperial.ac.uk

Inflammatory lung diseases are characterised by increased expression of multiple 
inflammatory genes that are regulated by proinflammatory transcription factors,
such as NF-kappaB. Gene expression is regulated by modifications such as
acetylation of core histones through the concerted action of coactivators such as
CBP (cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB)-binding protein) which have
intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity and are able to recruit other 
HAT enzymes. Conversely gene repression is mediated via histone deacetylases
(HDAC) and other corepressors. In biopsies from asthmatic subjects there is an
increase in HAT activity and some reduction in HDAC activity. Both of these
changes are partially reversed by corticosteroid therapy. Corticosteroids switch 
off inflammatory genes in asthma through a combination of a direct inhibition of 
HAT activity and by the recruitment of HDAC2 to the activated
NF-kappaB-stimulated inflammatory gene complex. In chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), a corticosteroid insensitive disease, there is a reduction in
HDAC activity and HDAC2 expression, which may account for the amplified
inflammation and resistance to the actions of corticosteroids. The reduction in
HDAC2 may be secondary to oxidative and nitrative stress as a result of cigarette
smoking and severe inflammation. This may also occur to differing degrees in
severe asthma, smoking asthmatic patients and cystic fibrosis. Similar mechanisms
may also account for the steroid resistance seen within latent adenovirus
infections. The reduction in HDAC activity induced by oxidative stress can be
restored by theophylline, acting through specific kinases, which may be able to
reverse steroid resistance in COPD and other inflammatory lung diseases. The
modulation of HAT/HDAC activity may lead to the development of novel
anti-inflammatory approaches to inflammatory lung diseases that are currently
difficult to treat.

PMID: 17147010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Feb;21(2):334-42. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

1Alpha,25(OH)2D3-induced transrepression by vitamin D receptor through E-box-type
elements in the human parathyroid hormone gene promoter.

Kim MS(1), Fujiki R, Murayama A, Kitagawa H, Yamaoka K, Yamamoto Y, Mihara M,
Takeyama K, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo,
1-1-1 Yayoi, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Although transactivation by the liganded vitamin D receptor (VDR) is well
described at the molecular level, the precise molecular mechanism of negative
regulation by the liganded VDR remains to be elucidated. We have previously
reported a novel class of negative vitamin D response element (nVDRE) called
1alphanVDRE in the human 25(OH)D31alpha-hydroxylase [1alpha(OH)ase] gene by
1alpha,25(OH)2D3-bound VDR. This element was composed of two E-box-type motifs
that bound to VDIR for transactivation, which was attenuated by liganded VDR.
Here, we explore the possible functions of VDIR and E-box motifs in the human (h)
PTH and hPTHrP gene promoters. Functional mapping of the hPTH and hPTHrP
promoters identified E-box-type elements acting as nVDREs in both the hPTH
promoter (hPTHnVDRE; -87 to -60 bp) and in the hPTHrP promoter (hPTHrPnVDRE; -850
to -600 bp; -463 to -104 bp) in a mouse renal tubule cell line. The hPTHnVDRE
alone was enough to direct ligand-induced transrepression mediated through
VDR/retinoid X receptor and VDIR. Direct DNA binding of hPTHnVDRE to VDIR, but
not VDR/retinoid X receptor, was observed and ligand-induced transrepression was 
coupled with recruitment of VDR and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) to the hPTH
promoter. These results suggest that negative regulation of the hPTH gene by
liganded VDR is mediated by VDIR directly binding to the E-box-type nVDRE at the 
promoter, together with recruitment of an HDAC corepressor for ligand-induced
transrepression.

PMID: 17095575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Mol Neurosci. 2006;29(3):227-39.

CoREST-like complexes regulate chromatin modification and neuronal gene
expression.

Lakowski B(1), Roelens I, Jacob S.

Author information: 
(1)Nematode Genetics Group, Department of Neuroscience, Pasteur Institute, 75724 
Paris Cedex 15, France. lakowski@pasteur.fr

The mammalian CoREST ([co]repressor for element-1-silencing transcription factor)
complex was first identified associated with the repressor for element-1
silencing transcription factor (REST)/neuronal restrictive silencing factor. The 
CoREST complex is a chromatin-modifying corepressor complex that acts with REST
to regulate neuronal gene expression and neuronal stem cell fate. Components of a
CoREST-like complex have been identified recently in Xenopus laevis,
Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila melanogaster. Like the mammalian complex, 
the Drosophila complex is required to regulate neuronal gene expression, whereas 
the C. elegans homologs regulate the expression of the hop-1 presenilin gene,
suggesting an ancient conserved function of CoREST complexes in regulating
neuronal gene expression.

PMID: 17085781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2006 Dec;102(1-5):32-40. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Co-expression of steroid receptors (estrogen receptor alpha and/or progesterone
receptors) and Her-2/neu: Clinical implications.

Ciocca DR(1), Gago FE, Fanelli MA, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncology, Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biology of Cuyo
(IMBECU-CONICET), Casilla de Correo 855, 5500 Mendoza, Argentina.
dciocca@lab.cricyt.edu.ar

The response of breast cancer patients to endocrine therapy is guided by the
expression of two steroid hormone receptors (HR): estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) and/or progesterone receptors (PR). In most laboratories the expression
of these predictive markers is studied by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in the
breast cancer biopsy samples. Another molecular marker that is being increasingly
examined in breast cancer is the oncoprotein Her-2/neu, whose
expression/amplification predicts the response to anti-Her-2/neu immunotherapy.
The co-expression of HR with that of Her-2/neu is infrequent (most reports agree 
on this), however, there are some conflicting reports about the clinical
implications in term of response to endocrine therapy in the patients that
co-express HR and Her-2/neu. We have examined these molecular markers for a
number of years in our tumor bank, in this dissertation we will present the
method and cut-off to study these markers, the correlations between their
expression, and the follow-up of the patients that received tamoxifen-based
endocrine therapy, alone or following chemotherapy. We confirmed that the
co-expression of HR with Her-2/neu is infrequent, and that these patients
presented both a shorter disease free survival and overall survival. Our results 
will be compared with others related recently published. For example, the
aromatase inhibitor anastrozole appears to be an effective endocrine treatment in
HR+ patients, irrespective of the Her-2/neu status. We will present data on the
molecular mechanisms that could explain the relatively poor outcome of these
patients. Heregulin has been found to be a potent inducer of heat shock factor 1 
(HSF1) activity and of heat shock protein (Hsp) synthesis in breast cancer cells 
and HSF1 activation plays a role in the tumorigenic changes induced by heregulin,
heregulin exerts its tumorigenic changes through the cell surface tyrosine kinase
receptors c-erbB-3 and c-erbB-4 which are able to form dimers with the
"ligandless" Her-2/neu. We found that HSF1 associates with metastasis associated 
protein 1 (MTA1) on the promoters of genes as well as other molecules involved in
gene repression (HDAC1, HDAC2) in a manner that is enhanced by either heregulin
exposure or heat shock. ERs, although promoting the growth of breast cancer cells
are less associated with invasion/metastasis and ER-induced gene expression is
involve in this effect. Heregulin can overcome the protective effects of ER and
at least a component of this appears to be due to MTA1 repression of ERE
dependent transcription, HSF1 and MTA1 cooperate in gene repression. The
co-expression of HSF1 and MTA1 was confirmed by IHC in human breast cancer biopsy
samples.

PMID: 17049840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genes Dev. 2006 Oct 15;20(20):2871-86.

Role of Brg1 and HDAC2 in GR trans-repression of the pituitary POMC gene and
misexpression in Cushing disease.

Bilodeau S(1), Vallette-Kasic S, Gauthier Y, Figarella-Branger D, Brue T,
Berthelet F, Lacroix A, Batista D, Stratakis C, Hanson J, Meij B, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Negative feedback regulation of the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene by the
glucocorticoid (Gc) receptor (GR) is a critical feature of the
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis, and it is in part exerted by trans-repression
between GR and the orphan nuclear receptors related to NGFI-B. We now show that
Brg1, the ATPase subunit of the Swi/Snf complex, is essential for this
trans-repression and that Brg1 is required in vivo to stabilize interactions
between GR and NGFI-B as well as between GR and HDAC2. Whereas Brg1 is
constitutively present at the POMC promoter, recruitment of GR and HDAC2 is
ligand-dependent and results in histone H4 deacetylation of the POMC locus. In
addition, GR-dependent repression inhibits promoter clearance by RNA polymerase
II. Thus, corecruitment of repressor and activator at the promoter and chromatin 
modification jointly contribute to trans-repression initiated by direct
interactions between GR and NGFI-B. Loss of Brg1 or HDAC2 should therefore
produce Gc resistance, and we show that approximately 50% of Gc-resistant human
and dog corticotroph adenomas, which are the hallmark of Cushing disease, are
deficient in nuclear expression of either protein. In addition to providing a
molecular basis for Gc resistance, these deficiencies may also contribute to the 
tumorigenic process.

PMCID: PMC1619949
PMID: 17043312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. COPD. 2004 Apr;1(1):59-70.

Alveolar macrophages as orchestrators of COPD.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School of Medicine,
Dovehouse St., SW3 6LY, London, UK. p.j.barnes@ic.ac.uk

Alveolar macrophages play a critical role in the pathophysiology of COPD and are 
a major target for future anti-inflammatory therapy. Macrophage numbers are
markedly increased in the lung and alveolar space of patients with COPD and are
localized to sites of alveolar destruction. The increased numbers of macrophages 
may result from increased recruitment of blood monocytes, prolonged survival in
the lung and to a lesser extent to increased proliferation in the lung. Alveolar 
macrophages from COPD patients have an increased baseline and stimulated
secretion of inflammatory proteins, including certain cytokines, chemokines,
reactive oxygen species and elastolytic enzymes, which together could account for
all of the pathophysiological features of COPD. Alveolar macrophages form COPD
appear to be resistant to the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteriods and
this is linked to reduced activity and expression of histone deacetylase 2, a
nuclear enzyme that switches off inflammatory genes activated through the
transcription factor nuclear factor-KB. Alternative anti-inflammatory therapies
that inhibit macrophages are therefore needed in the future to deal with the
chronic inflammation of COPD. These drugs may include resveratrol, theophylline
derivatives, MAP kinase inhibitors and phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors.

PMID: 16997739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):C886-95. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

Platelet-derived growth factor-BB represses smooth muscle cell marker genes via
changes in binding of MKL factors and histone deacetylases to their promoters.

Yoshida T(1), Gan Q, Shang Y, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, Univ. of Virginia, MR5
Rm. 1220, 415 Lane Road, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

A hallmark of smooth muscle cell (SMC) phenotypic switching is suppression of SMC
marker gene expression. Although myocardin has been shown to be a key regulator
of this process, the role of its related factors, MKL1 and MKL2, in SMC
phenotypic switching remains unknown. The present studies were aimed at
determining if: 1) MKL factors contribute to the expression of SMC marker genes
in cultured SMCs; and 2) platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB)-induced
repression of SMC marker genes is mediated by suppression of MKL factors. Results
of gain- and loss-of-function experiments showed that MKL factors regulated the
expression of single and multiple CArG [CC(AT-rich)(6)GG]-containing SMC marker
genes, such as smooth muscle (SM) alpha-actin and telokin, but not
CArG-independent SMC marker genes such as smoothelin-B. Treatment with PDGF-BB
reduced the expression of CArG-containing SMC marker genes, as well as myocardin 
expression in cultured SMCs, while it had no effect on expression of MKL1 and
MKL2. However, of interest, PDGF-BB induced the dissociation of MKL factors from 
the CArG-containing region of SMC marker genes, as determined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. This dissociation was caused by the competition
between MKL factors and phosphorylated Elk-1 at early time points, but
subsequently by the reduction in acetylated histone H4 levels at these promoter
regions mediated by histone deacetylases, HDAC2, HDAC4, and HDAC5. Results
provide novel evidence that PDGF-BB-induced repression of SMC marker genes is
mediated through combinatorial mechanisms, including downregulation of myocardin 
expression and inhibition of the association of myocardin/MKL factors with
CArG-containing SMC marker gene promoters.

PMID: 16987998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Sep;5(9):2203-10.

Valproate inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 affects differentiation and
decreases proliferation of endometrial stromal sarcoma cells.

Hrzenjak A(1), Moinfar F, Kremser ML, Strohmeier B, Staber PB, Zatloukal K, Denk 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 25, 8036
Graz, Austria. andelko.hrzenjak@klinikum-graz.at

Covalent modifications of histone proteins, in particular deacetylation of lysine
residues, are important for the regulation of gene transcription both in normal
and malignant cells. These processes are controlled by histone acetyltransferases
and histone deacetylases (HDAC) and have up to now not been described in solid
mesenchymal tumors. The present study shows differences in the HDAC1 and HDAC2
expression in endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) and a cognate cell line (ESS-1) 
compared with nonneoplastic endometrial stroma. We show for the first time that
HDAC2 expression is consistently increased in ESS. In contrast, HDAC1 expression 
is generally lower than HDAC2 both in nonneoplastic stroma and in ESS, suggesting
that these two proteins, although closely related, are regulated in different
ways. In vitro experiments with an ESS cell line showed that valproate, an
inhibitor of the class I HDACs, led to significant HDAC2 decrease and to cell
differentiation. HDAC2 inhibition in ESS-1 cells caused significant changes in
the cell cycle by inhibiting G1-S transition and influencing expression of
p21WAF1 and cyclin D1. Moreover, in ESS-1 cells, increased expression of the
p21WAF1 was associated with reduction of HDAC2 expression after transfection with
small interfering RNA directed against HDAC2. Our results suggest that HDAC2
might be considered as potential drug target in the therapy of ESS and that HDAC 
inhibitors should be further evaluated in clinical trials in ESS.

PMID: 16985053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Immunol. 2006 Oct 1;177(7):4605-11.

Molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation of human high-affinity IgE
receptor beta-chain gene induced by GM-CSF.

Takahashi K(1), Hayashi N, Kaminogawa S, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cell Immunology and Allergology, Advanced Medical
Research Center, Nihon University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 30-1
Oyaguchi Kamimachi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.

The beta-chain of the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcepsilonRI) plays an
important role in regulating activation of FcepsilonRI-expressing cells such as
mast cells in allergic reactions. We already reported that the transcription
factor myeloid zinc finger (MZF) 1 which formed a high m.w. complex including
four and a half LIM-only protein (FHL)3 in the nucleus repressed human beta-chain
gene expression through an element in the fourth intron. We also found that
GM-CSF induced expression of MZF-1 and nuclear translocation of FHL3. We screened
a human cDNA library and identified NFY which was reported to bind histone
deacetylases (HDACs) as a constituent of the complex. The C-subunit of NFY was
demonstrated to form a ternary complex with MZF-1/FHL3 and interact with a
beta-chain gene region including the element in the fourth intron. HDAC1 and
HDAC2 were also shown to interact with the fourth intron region of the beta-chain
gene. In a human mast cell line HMC-1 cultured with GM-CSF, both beta-chain
expression and acetylation of histones interacting with the fourth intron region 
of the beta-chain gene were decreased. Collectively, these results indicated that
HDACs, which were recruited to the beta-chain gene through the element in the
fourth intron by MZF-1/FHL3/NFY, repressed beta-chain gene transcription by
deacetylation of histones in the presence of GM-CSF. These mechanisms will be
involved in not only the cell type-specific repression of beta-chain gene
expression in differentiating hemopoietic cells but also the repression of
beta-chain gene expression in the peripheral cells under specific circumstances.

PMID: 16982898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Nov 3;349(4):1315-21. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

HPV16E7 mediates HADC chromatin repression and downregulation of MHC class I
genes in HPV16 tumorigenic cells through interaction with an MHC class I
promoter.

Li H(1), Ou X, Xiong J, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genome Research and College of Life Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, PR China.
huili0930@163.com

Downregulation of the expression of major histocompatibility complex class I
antigens on the surface of high-risk HPVs-transformed cells may contribute to
their high tumorigenic potential, which enables them to escape immune recognition
by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. In this study, we show that the viral E7 oncoprotein 
mediates transcriptional downregulation of the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I genes by targeting the class I promoter in HPV16 containing CaSki
tumor cells. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrated that 
HPV16E7 and specific HADCs, including HADC1, HADC2, and HADC8, are physically
associated with the class I promoter and the histone of the class I promoter was 
deacetylated. Knocking down of HPV16E7 expression with the E7-specific small
interfering RNA induced the release of HPV17E7 as well as HDAC1 and HDAC2 from
the class I promoter. Furthermore, HPV16E7 siRNA resulted in a dramatic increase 
in histone acetylation. Importantly, MHC class I antigen expression was
up-regulated on the surface of cells transfected with the E7 siRNA, but not on
that of untransfected cells. Taken together, our results demonstrate that the
HPV16E7 protein is associated with the MHC class I promoter and mediates MHC
class I downregulation by repressing chromatin activation.

PMID: 16979588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 3;281(44):33226-32. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Yin Yang 1 physically interacts with Hoxa11 and represses Hoxa11-dependent
transcription.

Luke MP(1), Sui G, Liu H, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

Yin Yang 1 (YY1) plays an indispensable role in embryonic development. YY1
contains an evolutionarily conserved, 22-amino acid segment, the PHO homology
region (PHR), which is located within its central domain (spacer) and has been
shown previously to participate in the recruitment of Polycomb group of proteins 
and in YY1-mediated transcription. In this report, we show that the PHR
physically interacts with several Abd-B-type Hox proteins. Although ectopic
expression of Hoxa11 enhanced target promoter activity, overexpression of YY1
repressed this effect, which was abrogated by YY1 siRNA and the histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A. We have further demonstrated that this
suppression effect was the result of YY1-dependent recruitment of HDAC2 to the
Hoxa11 target promoter. Taken together, our findings show that YY1 represses
Hoxa11-dependent transcription via interactions with the Hox proteins and HDAC
recruitment, providing a link between an Abd-type Hox protein and a Polycomb
group protein at the level of direct protein-protein interactions. These findings
not only provide a novel insight into YY1 function but also identify a new
regulation of homeotic protein-mediated transcriptional regulation in general.

PMID: 16963455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 1;66(17):8814-21.

Class II histone deacetylases are associated with VHL-independent regulation of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha.

Qian DZ(1), Kachhap SK, Collis SJ, Verheul HM, Carducci MA, Atadja P, Pili R.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Johns Hopkins 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) plays a critical role in
transcriptional gene activation involved in tumor angiogenesis. A novel class of 
agents, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, has been shown to inhibit
tumor angiogenesis and HIF-1 alpha protein expression. However, the molecular
mechanism responsible for this inhibition remains to be elucidated. In the
current study, we investigated the molecular link between HIF-1 alpha inhibition 
and HDAC inhibition. Treatment of the VHL-deficient human renal cell carcinoma
cell line UMRC2 with the hydroxamic HDAC inhibitor LAQ824 resulted in a
dose-dependent inhibition of HIF-1 alpha protein via a VHL-independent mechanism 
and reduction of HIF-1 alpha transcriptional activity. HIF-1 alpha inhibition by 
LAQ824 was associated with HIF-1 alpha acetylation and polyubiquitination. HIF-1 
alpha immunoprecipitates contained HDAC activity. Then, we tested different
classes of HDAC inhibitors with diverse inhibitory activity of class I versus
class II HDACs and assessed their capability of targeting HIF-1 alpha. Hydroxamic
acid derivatives with known activity against both class I and class II HDACs were
effective in inhibiting HIF-1 alpha at low nanomolar concentrations. In contrast,
valproic acid and trapoxin were able to inhibit HIF-1 alpha only at
concentrations that are effective against class II HDACs. Coimmunoprecipitation
studies showed that class II HDAC4 and HDAC6 were associated with HIF-1 alpha
protein. Inhibition by small interfering RNA of HDAC4 and HDAC6 reduced HIF-1
alpha protein expression and transcriptional activity. Taken together, these
results suggest that class II HDACs are associated with HIF-1 alpha stability and
provide a rationale for targeting HIF-1 alpha with HDAC inhibitors against class 
II isozymes.

PMID: 16951198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 1;66(17):8397-403.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 interacts with forkhead transcription factor 
CHES1 in DNA damage response.

Busygina V(1), Kottemann MC, Scott KL, Plon SE, Bale AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 15;66(24):12039.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is a cancer susceptibility syndrome
affecting several endocrine tissues. Investigations of the biochemical function
of the MEN1 protein, menin, have suggested a role as a transcriptional
comodulator. The mechanism by which MEN1 inactivation leads to tumor formation is
not fully understood. MEN1 was implicated to function in both regulation of cell 
proliferation and maintenance of genomic integrity. Here, we investigate the
mechanism by which MEN1 affects DNA damage response. We found that Drosophila
larval tissue and mouse embryonic fibroblasts mutant for the MEN1 homologue were 
deficient for a DNA damage-activated S-phase checkpoint. The forkhead
transcription factor CHES1 (FOXN3) was identified as an interacting protein by a 
genetic screen, and overexpression of CHES1 restored both cell cycle arrest and
viability of MEN1 mutant flies after ionizing radiation exposure. We showed a
biochemical interaction between human menin and CHES1 and showed that the COOH
terminus of menin, which is frequently mutated in MEN1 patients, is necessary for
this interaction. Our data indicate that menin is involved in the activation of
S-phase arrest in response to ionizing radiation. CHES1 is a component of a
transcriptional repressor complex, that includes mSin3a, histone deacetylase
(HDAC) 1, and HDAC2, and it interacts with menin in an S-phase checkpoint pathway
related to DNA damage response.

PMID: 16951149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Reprod Dev. 2007 Jan;74(1):18-27.

Gene expression in bovine nuclear transfer embryos in relation to donor cell
efficiency in producing live offspring.

Beyhan Z(1), Forsberg EJ, Eilertsen KJ, Kent-First M, First NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.
beyhan@msu.edu

Developmental abnormalities associated with the cloning process suggest that
reprogramming of donor nuclei into an embryonic state may not be fully completed 
in most of the cloned animals. One of the areas of interest in this regard, is
the analysis of gene expression patterns in nuclear transfer (NT) embryos to
dissect the processes that failed and develop means to overcome the limitations
imposed by these factors. In this study, we investigated expression patterns of
histone deacetylase-1, -2, -3 (HDAC-1, -2, -3), DNA methyltransferase-3a
(DNMT3A), and octamer binding protein-4 gene (OCT4) in donor cells with different
cloning efficiencies and NT embryos derived from these cells employing a
real-time RT-PCR assay. All genes investigated followed altered expression
patterns in NT embryos when compared to IVF-derived embryos. In general,
expression of HDAC genes was elevated especially at the compact morula stage and 
comparable to in vitro fertilized (IVF) embryos at the hatched blastocyst stage. 
DNMT3A expression in NT embryos was lower than IVF embryos at all stages. Oct-4
transcript levels were also reduced in cloned compared to IVF embryos at the
compact morula and blastocyst stages. This difference disappeared at the hatched 
blastocyst stage. There was a donor cell effect on the expression patterns of all
genes investigated. These results demonstrate altered gene expression patterns
for certain genes, in cloned cattle embryos from our donor cells of different
efficiency in producing live offspring. Therefore we suggest that differences in 
expression of developmentally important genes during early embryo development may
characterize the efficiency of donor cells in producing live offspring.

PMID: 16941691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):7913-28. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Negative and positive regulation of gene expression by mouse histone deacetylase 
1.

Zupkovitz G(1), Tischler J, Posch M, Sadzak I, Ramsauer K, Egger G, Grausenburger
R, Schweifer N, Chiocca S, Decker T, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical
University of Vienna, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the removal of acetyl groups from core
histones. Because of their capacity to induce local condensation of chromatin,
HDACs are generally considered repressors of transcription. In this report, we
analyzed the role of the class I histone deacetylase HDAC1 as a transcriptional
regulator by comparing the expression profiles of wild-type and HDAC1-deficient
embryonic stem cells. A specific subset of mouse genes (7%) was deregulated in
the absence of HDAC1. We identified several putative tumor suppressors (JunB,
Prss11, and Plagl1) and imprinted genes (Igf2, H19, and p57) as novel HDAC1
targets. The majority of HDAC1 target genes showed reduced expression accompanied
by recruitment of HDAC1 and local reduction in histone acetylation at regulatory 
regions. At some target genes, the related deacetylase HDAC2 partially masks the 
loss of HDAC1. A second group of genes was found to be downregulated in
HDAC1-deficient cells, predominantly by additional recruitment of HDAC2 in the
absence of HDAC1. Finally, a small set of genes (Gja1, Irf1, and Gbp2) was found 
to require HDAC activity and recruitment of HDAC1 for their transcriptional
activation. Our study reveals a regulatory cross talk between HDAC1 and HDAC2 and
a novel function for HDAC1 as a transcriptional coactivator.

PMCID: PMC1636735
PMID: 16940178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):7929-41. Epub 2006 Aug 21.

Role of topoisomerase IIbeta in the expression of developmentally regulated
genes.

Lyu YL(1), Lin CP, Azarova AM, Cai L, Wang JC, Liu LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Mice lacking topoisomerase IIbeta (TopIIbeta) are known to exhibit a perinatal
death phenotype. In the current study, transcription profiles of the brains of
wild-type and top2beta knockout mouse embryos were generated. Surprisingly, only 
a small number (1 to 4%) of genes were affected in top2beta knockout embryos.
However, the expression of nearly 30% of developmentally regulated genes was
either up- or down-regulated. By contrast, the expression of genes encoding
general cell growth functions and early differentiation markers was not affected,
suggesting that TopIIbeta is not required for early differentiation programming
but is specifically required for the expression of developmentally regulated
genes at later stages of differentiation. Consistent with this notion,
immunohistochemical analysis of brain sections showed that TopIIbeta and histone 
deacetylase 2, a known TopIIbeta-interacting protein, were preferentially
expressed in neurons which are in their later stages of differentiation.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of the developing brains revealed
TopIIbeta binding to the 5' region of a number of TopIIbeta-sensitive genes.
Further studies of a TopIIbeta-sensitive gene, Kcnd2, revealed the presence of
TopIIbeta in the transcription unit with major binding near the promoter region. 
Together, these results support a role of TopIIbeta in activation/repression of
developmentally regulated genes at late stages of neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1636731
PMID: 16923961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Acta Haematol. 2006;116(2):77-89.

Acute myeloid leukemia subgroups identified by pathway-restricted gene expression
signatures.

Serrano E(1), Lasa A, Perea G, Carnicer MJ, Brunet S, Aventín A, Sierra J,
Nomdedéu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori d'Hematologia, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized 
by abnormal proliferation of myeloid precursors and a maturation block.
Underlying genetic lesions determine an altered expression program
(transcriptosome) that can be studied in depth by massive technologies.
Alternatively, we selected a pathway profiling strategy based on the current
knowledge in order to stratify de novo AML patients and identify those cases
which would potentially benefit from the use of new chemotherapeutic agents. One 
hundred and thirty-two RNA samples obtained from de novo adult AML patients were 
tested for FLT3, FLT3-LG, NDST1, HDAC2, ATRX, FOS, DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, NBS1,
RAD50, MRE11A, Meis1 and Meis2 expression using quantitative PCR (qPCR) assays.
Clinical and biologic findings were correlated with expression results. Cluster
analysis was also performed. FLT3 expression defined three subgroups of patients.
The best outcome was found in the group with the lowest FLT3 expression.
Intermediate levels of FLT3 were associated with the worst outcome. Patients with
low levels of ATRX more frequently presented an adverse karyotype whereas cases
with preserved ATRX levels showed an excellent outcome. In accordance with
previous results, Meis1 downregulation is a useful surrogate marker indicating a 
good prognosis in AML patients. Simple qPCR platforms may help to identify
different biologic subgroups in AML.

PMID: 16914901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):1693-701.

CRA-026440: a potent, broad-spectrum, hydroxamic histone deacetylase inhibitor
with antiproliferative and antiangiogenic activity in vitro and in vivo.

Cao ZA(1), Bass KE, Balasubramanian S, Liu L, Schultz B, Verner E, Dai Y, Molina 
RA, Davis JR, Misialek S, Sendzik M, Orr CJ, Leung L, Callan O, Young P,
Dalrymple SA, Buggy JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Celera Genomics, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
alex_cao001@hotmail.com

CRA-026440 is a novel, broad-spectrum, hydroxamic acid-based inhibitor of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) that shows antitumor and antiangiogenic activities in vitro
and in vivo preclinically. CRA-026440 inhibited pure recombinant isozymes HDAC1, 
HDAC2, HDAC3/SMRT, HDAC6, HDAC8, and HDAC10 in the nanomolar range. Treatment of 
cultured tumor cell lines grown in vitro with CRA-026440 resulted in the
accumulation of acetylated histone and acetylated tubulin, leading to an
inhibition of tumor cell growth and the induction of apoptosis. CRA-026440
inhibited ex vivo angiogenesis in a dose-dependent manner. CRA-026440
parenterally given to mice harboring HCT116 or U937 human tumor xenografts
resulted in a statistically significant reduction in tumor growth. CRA-026440,
when used in combination with Avastin, achieved greater preclinical efficacy in
HCT 116 colorectal tumor model. Inhibition of tumor growth was accompanied by an 
increase in the acetylation of alpha-tubulin in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells and an alteration in the expression of many genes in the tumors, including 
several involved in angiogenesis, apoptosis, and cell growth. These results
reveal CRA-026440 to be a novel HDAC inhibitor with potent antitumor activity.

PMID: 16891455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 8;347(4):1088-93. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Involvement of HDAC1 and the PI3K/PKC signaling pathways in NF-kappaB activation 
by the HDAC inhibitor apicidin.

Kim YK(1), Seo DW, Kang DW, Lee HY, Han JW, Kim SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kwandong University College of Medicine, Gangneung
210-701, Republic of Korea. yksnbk@kwandong.ac.kr

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are appreciated as one of promising
anticancer drugs, but they exert differential responses depending on the cell
type. We recently reported the critical role of NF-kappaB as a modulator in
determining cell fate for apoptosis in response to an HDAC inhibitor. In this
study, we investigate a possible signaling pathway required for NF-kappaB
activation in response to the HDAC inhibitor apicidin. Treatment of HeLa cells
with apicidin leads to an increase in transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB and
the expression of its target genes, IL-8 and TNF-alpha. TNF-alpha expression by
apicidin is induced at earlier time points than NF-kappaB activation or IL-8
expression. In addition, our data show that the early expression of TNF-alpha
does not lead to activation of NF-kappaB, because disruption of TNF-alpha
activity by a neutralizing antibody does not affect nuclear translocation of
NF-kappaB, IkappaBalpha degradation or reporter gene activation by apicidin.
However, this activation of NF-kappaB requires the PI3K and PKC signaling
pathways, but not ERK or JNK. Furthermore, apicidin activation of NF-kappaB seems
to result from HDAC1 inhibition, as evidenced by the observation that
overexpression of HDAC1, but not HDAC2, 3 or 4, dramatically inhibits NF-kappaB
reporter gene activity. Collectively, our results suggest that activation of
NF-kappaB signaling by apicidin requires both the PI3K/PKC signaling pathways and
HDAC1, and functions as a critical modulator in determining the cellular effect
of apicidin.

PMID: 16870149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Lab Invest. 2006 Sep;86(9):867-72. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Transcription factors in airway diseases.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of airway diseases, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, UK.

Transcription factors regulate the expression of multiple inflammatory genes and 
play a pivotal role in chronic inflammatory diseases, such as asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Prominent transcription factors in airway
diseases include nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and activator protein-1
(AP-1), which together regulate the expression of multiple inflammatory proteins.
Glucocorticoids activate glucocorticoid receptors (GR), which act as
transcription factors and inhibit transcription induced by NF-kappaB and AP-1.
Activation of genes involves hyperacetylation of core histones to open up the
chromatin structure to initiate transcription. GR recruit histone deacetylase-2
(HDAC2) to the activated inflammatory gene to switch off transcription. In COPD, 
there is a marked reduction in HDAC2 expression, resulting in glucocorticoid
resistance. Therapeutic implications, which may be generalized to all
inflammatory diseases, are discussed.

PMID: 16865089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Blood. 2006 Nov 1;108(9):3179-86. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

Short-chain fatty acids induce gamma-globin gene expression by displacement of a 
HDAC3-NCoR repressor complex.

Mankidy R(1), Faller DV, Mabaera R, Lowrey CH, Boosalis MS, White GL, Castaneda
SA, Perrine SP.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratories, Inc, Newton, MA, USA.

High-level induction of fetal (gamma) globin gene expression for therapy of
beta-hemoglobinopathies likely requires local chromatin modification and
dissociation of repressor complexes for gamma-globin promoter activation. A novel
gamma-globin-inducing short-chain fatty acid derivative (SCFAD), RB7, which was
identified through computational modeling, produced a 6-fold induction in a
reporter assay that detects only strong inducers of the gamma-globin gene
promoter and in cultured human erythroid progenitors. To elucidate the molecular 
mechanisms used by high-potency SCFADs, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays performed at the human gamma- and beta-globin gene promoters in GM979
cells and in erythroid progenitors demonstrate that RB7 and butyrate induce
dissociation of HDAC3 (but not HDAC1 or HDAC2) and its adaptor protein NCoR,
specifically from the gamma-globin gene promoter. A coincident and proportional
recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the gamma-globin gene promoter was observed
with exposure to these gamma-globin inducers. Knockdown of HDAC3 by siRNA induced
transcription of the gamma-globin gene promoter, demonstrating that displacement 
of HDAC3 from the gamma-globin gene promoter by the SCFAD is sufficient to induce
gamma-globin gene expression. These studies demonstrate new dynamic alterations
in transcriptional regulatory complexes associated with SCFAD-induced activation 
of the gamma-globin gene and provide a specific molecular target for potential
therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC1895523
PMID: 16849648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 1;66(13):6785-92.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase class I but not class II is critical for the
sensitization of leukemic cells to tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis.

Inoue S(1), Mai A, Dyer MJ, Cohen GM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Lancaster
Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, United Kingdom.

From work done largely on derived cell lines, it has been suggested that tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) might be a therapeutic 
target for many forms of malignancy. However, use of primary tumor cells,
including chronic lymphocytic leukemic (CLL) cells, has shown inherent resistance
to TRAIL. Although the molecular basis for this resistance remains unknown,
treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) often sensitizes resistant 
cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. We used structurally diverse HDACi to ascertain
which HDAC needs to be inhibited for the sensitization. Inhibition of HDAC class 
I but not class II is required for sensitization to TRAIL-induced apoptosis of
CLL cells and various cell lines. Using different HDACi together with small
interfering RNA for HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6, we report that inhibition of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2 but not HDAC3, HDAC6, and HDAC8 are primarily responsible for
sensitization to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Based on these data and our previous
studies, we propose that a clinical trial in CLL is warranted using a combination
of a selective HDACi that inhibits HDAC1 and/or HDAC2 together with a form of
TRAIL that signals through TRAIL receptor 1.

PMID: 16818655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem J. 2006 Oct 15;399(2):297-304.

Recruitment of the SWI/SNF protein Brg1 by a multiprotein complex effects
transcriptional repression in murine erythroid progenitors.

Xu Z(1), Meng X, Cai Y, Koury MJ, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

SWI/SNF complexes are involved in both activation and repression of
transcription. While one of two homologous ATPases, Brg1 [Brm (Brahma)-related
gene 1] or Brm, is required for their chromatin remodelling function, less is
known about how these complexes are recruited to DNA. We recently established
that a DNA-binding complex containing TAL1/SCL, E47, GATA-1, LMO2 and Ldb1
stimulates P4.2 (protein 4.2) transcription in erythroid progenitors via two E
box-GATA elements in the gene's proximal promoter. We show here that the SWI/SNF 
protein Brg1 is also associated with this complex and that both the E box and
GATA DNA-binding sites in these elements are required for Brg1 recruitment.
Further, Brg1 occupancy of the P4.2 promoter decreased with terminal erythroid
differentiation in association with increased P4.2 transcription, while enforced 
expression of Brg1 in murine erythroleukaemia cells reduced P4.2 gene expression.
Overexpression of Brg1 was associated with increased occupancy of the P4.2
promoter by the nuclear co-repressor mSin3A and HDAC2 (histone deacetylase 2) and
with reduced histone H3 and H4 acetylation. Finally, a specific HDAC inhibitor
attenuated Brg1-directed repression of P4.2 promoter activity in transfected
cells. These results provide insight into the mechanism by which SWI/SNF proteins
are recruited to promoters and suggest that transcription of P4.2, and most
likely other genes, is actively repressed until the terminal differentiation of
erythroid progenitors.

PMCID: PMC1609906
PMID: 16800816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Blood. 2006 Oct 15;108(8):2836-45. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

MBD2 is a critical component of a methyl cytosine-binding protein complex
isolated from primary erythroid cells.

Kransdorf EP(1), Wang SZ, Zhu SZ, Langston TB, Rupon JW, Ginder GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth
University, 401 College Street, PO Box 980037, Richmond, VA 23298-0037, USA.

The chicken embryonic beta-type globin gene, rho, is a member of a small group of
vertebrate genes whose developmentally regulated expression is mediated by DNA
methylation. Previously, we have shown that a methyl cytosine-binding complex
binds to the methylated rho-globin gene in vitro. We have now chromatographically
purified and characterized this complex from adult chicken primary erythroid
cells. Four components of the MeCP1 transcriptional repression complex were
identified: MBD2, RBAP48, HDAC2, and MTA1. These 4 proteins, as well as the
zinc-finger protein p66 and the chromatin remodeling factor Mi2, were found to
coelute by gel-filtration analysis and pull-down assays. We conclude that these 6
proteins are components of the MeCPC. In adult erythrocytes, significant
enrichment for MBD2 is seen at the inactive rho-globin gene by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, whereas no enrichment is observed at the active
beta(A)-globin gene, demonstrating MBD2 binds to the methylated and
transcriptionally silent rho-globin gene in vivo. Knock-down of MBD2 resulted in 
up-regulation of a methylated rho-gene construct in mouse erythroleukemic
(MEL)-rho cells. These results represent the first purification of a MeCP1-like
complex from a primary cell source and provide support for a role for MBD2 in
developmental gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC1895583
PMID: 16778143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Circulation. 2006 Jun 6;113(22):2579-88. Epub 2006 May 30.

Suppression of class I and II histone deacetylases blunts pressure-overload
cardiac hypertrophy.

Kong Y(1), Tannous P, Lu G, Berenji K, Rothermel BA, Olson EN, Hill JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8573, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent work has demonstrated the importance of chromatin remodeling, 
especially histone acetylation, in the control of gene expression in the heart.
In cell culture models of cardiac hypertrophy, pharmacological suppression of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) can either blunt or amplify cell growth. Thus, HDAC 
inhibitors hold promise as potential therapeutic agents in hypertrophic heart
disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In the present investigation, we studied 2 broad-spectrum
HDAC inhibitors in a physiologically relevant banding model of hypertrophy,
observing dose-responsive suppression of ventricular growth that was well
tolerated in terms of both clinical outcome and cardiac performance measures. In 
both short-term (3-week) and long-term (9-week) trials, cardiomyocyte growth was 
blocked by HDAC inhibition, with no evidence of cell death or apoptosis. Fibrotic
change was diminished in hearts treated with HDAC inhibitors, and collagen
synthesis in isolated cardiac fibroblasts was blocked. Preservation of systolic
function in the setting of blunted hypertrophic growth was documented by
echocardiography and by invasive pressure measurements. The
hypertrophy-associated switch of adult and fetal isoforms of myosin heavy chain
expression was attenuated, which likely contributed to the observed preservation 
of systolic function in HDAC inhibitor-treated hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these data suggest that HDAC inhibition is a viable
therapeutic strategy that holds promise in the treatment of load-induced heart
disease.

PMCID: PMC4105979
PMID: 16735673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 4;281(31):22062-72. Epub 2006 May 30.

Role of DNA methyltransferases in regulation of human ribosomal RNA gene
transcription.

Majumder S(1), Ghoshal K, Datta J, Smith DS, Bai S, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. majumder.2@osu.edu

We have previously demonstrated that the expression of human ribosomal RNA genes 
(rDNA) in normal and cancer cells is differentially regulated by methylation of
the promoter CpG islands. Furthermore, we showed that the methyl CpG-binding
protein MBD2 plays a selective role in the methylation-mediated block in rDNA
expression. Here, we analyzed the role of three functional mammalian DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) in regulating the rDNA promoters activity.
Immunofluorescence analysis and biochemical fractionation showed that all three
DNMTs (DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B) are associated with the inactive rDNA in the
nucleolus. Although DNMTs associate with both methylated and unmethylated rDNA
promoters, DNMT1 preferentially associates with the methylated genes. The rDNA
primary transcript level was significantly elevated in DNMT1-/- or DNMT3B-/-
human colon carcinoma (HCT116) cells. Southern blot analysis demonstrated a
moderate level of rDNA promoter hypomethylation in DNMT1-/- cells and a dramatic 
loss of rDNA promoter methylation in double knockout cells. Transient
overexpression of DNMT1 or DNMT3B suppressed the luciferase expression from both 
methylated and unmethylated pHrD-IRES-Luc, a reporter plasmid where the rDNA
promoter drives luciferase expression. DNMT1-mediated suppression of the
unmethylated promoter involves de novo methylation of the promoter, whereas
histone deacetylase 2 cooperates with DNMT1 to inhibit the methylated rDNA
promoter. Unlike DNMT1, both the wild type and catalytically inactive DNMT3B
mutant can suppress rDNA promoter irrespective of its methylation status.
DNMT3B-mediated suppression of the rDNA promoter also involves histone
deacetylation. Treatment of HCT116 cells with Decitabine (a DNMT inhibitor) or
trichostatin A (a histone deacetylase inhibitor) up-regulated endogenous rDNA
expression. These inhibitors synergistically activated methylated pHrD-IRES-Luc, 
whereas they exhibited additive effects on the unmethylated promoter. These
results demonstrate localization of DNMTs with the inactive rDNA in the
nucleolus, the specific role of DNMT1 and DNMT3B in rDNA expression and the
differential regulation of rDNA expression from the methylated and unmethylated
rDNA promoters.

PMCID: PMC2243234
PMID: 16735507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 May;5(5):1309-17.

CRA-024781: a novel synthetic inhibitor of histone deacetylase enzymes with
antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo.

Buggy JJ(1), Cao ZA, Bass KE, Verner E, Balasubramanian S, Liu L, Schultz BE,
Young PR, Dalrymple SA.

Author information: 
(1)Celera Genomics, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
drjbuggy@yahoo.com

CRA-024781 is a novel, broad spectrum hydroxamic acid-based inhibitor of histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) that shows antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo
preclinically and is under evaluation in phase I clinical trials for cancer.
CRA-024781 inhibited pure recombinant HDAC1 with a K(i) of 0.007 mumol/L, and
also inhibited the other HDAC isozymes HDAC2, HDAC3/SMRT, HDAC6, HDAC8, and
HDAC10 in the nanomolar range. Treatment of cultured tumor cell lines grown in
vitro with CRA-024781 resulted in the accumulation of acetylated histone and
acetylated tubulin, resulting in an inhibition of tumor cell growth and the
induction of apoptosis. CRA-024781 parenterally administered to mice harboring
HCT116 or DLD-1 colon tumor xenografts resulted in a statistically significant
reduction in tumor growth at doses that were well tolerated as measured by body
weight. Inhibition of tumor growth was accompanied by an increase in the
acetylation of alpha-tubulin in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and an
alteration in the expression of many genes in the tumors, including several
involved in apoptosis and cell growth. These results reveal CRA-024781 to be a
novel HDAC inhibitor with potent antitumor activity.

PMID: 16731764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell. 2006 May 19;22(4):477-87.

PIASxalpha differentially regulates the amplitudes of transcriptional responses
following activation of the ERK and p38 MAPK pathways.

Yang SH(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, UK.

Activation of the MAP kinase pathways leads to changes in gene expression
profiles through direct targeting of transcription factors and their
coregulators. Here we identify PIASxalpha as a key regulator that determines the 
differential response of the transcription factor Elk-1 to the ERK and the
stress-activated p38 MAP kinase pathways. While PIASxalpha functions as a
coactivator to facilitate SUMO and HDAC-2 removal from Elk-1 in response to ERK
pathway activation, PIASxalpha acts in the opposite manner to inhibit HDAC-2 and 
SUMO loss following stress-activated MAP kinase pathway signaling. Thus,
PIASxalpha either enhances or dampens down the activation of Elk-1 target genes, 
depending on the pathway activated. p38 MAP kinase-mediated PIASxalpha
phosphorylation allows it to switch between these two alternative modes of
operation. Thus, PIASxalpha acts as a key signal integrator that permits
different responses from the same transcription factor, depending on the
signaling pathway that is activated.

PMID: 16713578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Aug;70(2):487-92. Epub 2006 May 2.

Fluoxetine and cocaine induce the epigenetic factors MeCP2 and MBD1 in adult rat 
brain.

Cassel S(1), Carouge D, Gensburger C, Anglard P, Burgun C, Dietrich JB, Aunis D, 
Zwiller J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM U575, Centre de Neurochimie, 5 rue Blaise Pascal, 67084
STRASBOURG Cedex, France.

Comment in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Aug;70(2):440-3.

Once bound to methylated CpG sites, methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is
thought to silence transcription of downstream genes by recruiting a histone
deacetylase (HDAC). Mutations within the MeCP2 gene have been found to cause Rett
syndrome, a disorder of arrested neuronal development. Using
immunohistochemistry, we found that Mecp2, as well as the methyl-CpG-binding
protein MBD1, were significantly induced in normal adult rat brain after repeated
injections of fluoxetine or cocaine for 10 days (one injection per day). Mecp2
was not induced by repeated injections of
1-(2-bis(4-fluorphenyl)-methoxy)-ethyl)-4-(3-phenyl-propyl)piperazine (GBR-12909)
or nortriptyline. Together, the data indicate that the serotonergic system is
predominantly involved. Using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction experiments, MBD1 mRNA and both Mecp2_e1 and Mecp2_e2 transcripts were
found to be induced by fluoxetine. Induction of the methylbinding proteins was
accompanied with enhanced HDAC2 labeling intensity and mRNA synthesis in response
to fluoxetine. In tandem, acetylated forms of histone H3 were found to be
decreased. The effect was characterized in three serotonin projection areas, the 
caudate-putamen, the frontal cortex, and the dentate gyrus subregion of
hippocampus. Our data highlight GABAergic neurons as major target cells
expressing Mecp2 in response to the serotonin-elevating agents and suggest that
serotonin signaling enhances gene silencing in postmitotic neurons.

PMID: 16670375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nat Genet. 2006 May;38(5):566-9. Epub 2006 Apr 16.

A truncating mutation of HDAC2 in human cancers confers resistance to histone
deacetylase inhibition.

Ropero S(1), Fraga MF, Ballestar E, Hamelin R, Yamamoto H, Boix-Chornet M,
Caballero R, Alaminos M, Setien F, Paz MF, Herranz M, Palacios J, Arango D,
Orntoft TF, Aaltonen LA, Schwartz S Jr, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), 28029
Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):812-3; author reply 813.

Disruption of histone acetylation patterns is a common feature of cancer cells,
but very little is known about its genetic basis. We have identified truncating
mutations in one of the primary human histone deacetylases, HDAC2, in sporadic
carcinomas with microsatellite instability and in tumors arising in individuals
with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome. The presence of the
HDAC2 frameshift mutation causes a loss of HDAC2 protein expression and enzymatic
activity and renders these cells more resistant to the usual antiproliferative
and proapoptotic effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors. As such drugs may
serve as therapeutic agents for cancer, our findings support the use of HDAC2
mutational status in future pharmacogenetic treatment of these individuals.

PMID: 16642021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Genomics. 2006 Apr 25;7:90.

Differential expression of selected histone modifier genes in human solid
cancers.

Ozdag H(1), Teschendorff AE, Ahmed AA, Hyland SJ, Blenkiron C, Bobrow L,
Veerakumarasivam A, Burtt G, Subkhankulova T, Arends MJ, Collins VP, Bowtell D,
Kouzarides T, Brenton JD, Caldas C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XZ, UK. hilalozdag@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Post-translational modification of histones resulting in chromatin
remodelling plays a key role in the regulation of gene expression. Here we report
characteristic patterns of expression of 12 members of 3 classes of chromatin
modifier genes in 6 different cancer types: histone acetyltransferases (HATs)-
EP300, CREBBP, and PCAF; histone deacetylases (HDACs)- HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC4,
HDAC5, HDAC7A, and SIRT1; and histone methyltransferases (HMTs)- SUV39H1and
SUV39H2. Expression of each gene in 225 samples (135 primary tumours, 47 cancer
cell lines, and 43 normal tissues) was analysedby QRT-PCR, normalized with 8
housekeeping genes, and given as a ratio by comparison with a universal reference
RNA.
RESULTS: This involved a total of 13,000 PCR assays allowing for rigorous
analysis by fitting a linear regression model to the data. Mutation analysis of
HDAC1, HDAC2, SUV39H1, and SUV39H2 revealed only two out of 181 cancer samples
(both cell lines) with significant coding-sequence alterations. Supervised
analysis and Independent Component Analysis showed that expression of many of
these genes was able to discriminate tumour samples from their normal
counterparts. Clustering based on the normalized expression ratios of the 12
genes also showed that most samples were grouped according to tissue type. Using 
a linear discriminant classifier and internal cross-validation revealed that with
as few as 5 of the 12 genes, SIRT1, CREBBP, HDAC7A, HDAC5 and PCAF, most samples 
were correctly assigned.
CONCLUSION: The expression patterns of HATs, HDACs, and HMTs suggest these genes 
are important in neoplastic transformation and have characteristic patterns of
expression depending on tissue of origin, with implications for potential
clinical application.

PMCID: PMC1475574
PMID: 16638127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Br J Pharmacol. 2006 Jun;148(3):245-54.

How corticosteroids control inflammation: Quintiles Prize Lecture 2005.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, Section of Airway
Disease, Dovehouse St, London SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Corticosteroids are the most effective anti-inflammatory therapy for many chronic
inflammatory diseases, such as asthma but are relatively ineffective in other
diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Chronic
inflammation is characterised by the increased expression of multiple
inflammatory genes that are regulated by proinflammatory transcription factors,
such as nuclear factor-kappaB and activator protein-1, that bind to and activate 
coactivator molecules, which then acetylate core histones to switch on gene
transcription. Corticosteroids suppress the multiple inflammatory genes that are 
activated in chronic inflammatory diseases, such as asthma, mainly by reversing
histone acetylation of activated inflammatory genes through binding of liganded
glucocorticoid receptors (GR) to coactivators and recruitment of histone
deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) to the activated transcription complex. At higher
concentrations of corticosteroids GR homodimers also interact with DNA
recognition sites to active transcription of anti-inflammatory genes and to
inhibit transcription of several genes linked to corticosteroid side effects. In 
patients with COPD and severe asthma and in asthmatic patients who smoke HDAC2 is
markedly reduced in activity and expression as a result of oxidative/nitrative
stress so that inflammation becomes resistant to the anti-inflammatory actions of
corticosteroids. Theophylline, by activating HDAC, may reverse this
corticosteroid resistance. This research may lead to the development of novel
anti-inflammatory approaches to manage severe inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC1751559
PMID: 16604091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 9;281(23):15605-14. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Orphan nuclear receptor Nur77 induces zinc finger protein GIOT-1 gene expression,
and GIOT-1 acts as a novel corepressor of orphan nuclear receptor SF-1 via
recruitment of HDAC2.

Song KH(1), Park YY, Kee HJ, Hong CY, Lee YS, Ahn SW, Kim HJ, Lee K, Kook H, Lee 
IK, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) domain-containing proteins consist of potential
transcriptional repression modules. Previously, gonadotropin-inducible ovarian
transcription factor-1 (GIOT-1) was identified as a novel KRAB-containing zinc
finger protein and shown to have transcriptional repression activity. Here, we
demonstrate that orphan nuclear receptor Nur77 regulates GIOT-1 gene expression
in testicular Leydig cell lines and that GIOT-1 acts as a novel corepressor of
the orphan nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1). Mutation analysis of
the GIOT-1 promoter and overexpression analysis of dominant-negative Nur77
revealed that luteinizing hormone activates GIOT-1 gene expression through Nur77.
Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed
that Nur77 directly binds to the GIOT-1 promoter. GIOT-1 represses the SF-1
transactivation, and specific interaction between GIOT-1 and SF-1 was observed.
We also demonstrate an interaction between GIOT-1 and histone deacetylase 2
(HDAC2). GIOT-1-mediated transrepression was recovered by down-regulation of
HDAC2 expression with small interfering RNA of HDAC2. Knock down of the
endogenous GIOT-1 results in significant enhancement of CYP17 expression in
Leydig cells. In conclusion, this study of cross-talk between GIOT-1 and orphan
nuclear receptors will provide new insights into the role of KRAB-containing zinc
finger proteins in nuclear receptor action.

PMID: 16595694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Jul 1;174(1):41-50. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

The effect of smoking on the transcriptional regulation of lung inflammation in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Szulakowski P(1), Crowther AJ, Jiménez LA, Donaldson K, Mayer R, Leonard TB,
MacNee W, Drost EM.

Author information: 
(1)ELEGI Colt Laboratories, MRC Centre for Inflammation Research, University of
Edinburgh, Queen's Medical Research Institute, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Jul 1;174(1):2-3.

RATIONALE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is believed to result
from an abnormal inflammatory response in the lungs to noxious particles and
gases usually found in cigarette smoke.
OBJECTIVES: In this study, the molecular mechanisms for the enhanced
proinflammatory cytokine gene transcription in COPD were investigated.
METHODS: Lung tissue was examined from 56 subjects undergoing resection for
peripheral lung tumors as follows: current smokers with (n = 14) and without COPD
(n = 17), ex-smokers with COPD (n = 13), and nonsmokers (n = 12). The levels of
inhibitor kappaB-alpha (IkappaB-alpha), histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), acetylated
(ac-) histone H3 and H4, the transcription factor nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB), proinflammatory cytokine messenger RNA, and 8-isoprostane were
measured.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: IkappaB-alpha levels were significantly decreased 
in healthy smokers and current and ex-smoking patients with COPD when compared
with nonsmokers (p < 0.001), with an associated increase in NF-kappaB DNA binding
in current smokers (p < 0.05). An increase in acetylated histone 4 (ac-H4; p <
0.01) was found in current smokers. Conversely, ex-smokers with COPD showed an
increase in ac-H3 (p < 0.05). Decreased levels of cytoplasmic, but not nuclear,
HDAC2 protein levels were detected. From the cytokine profiles, no significant
differences were detected; however, interleukin-12p40 expression correlated with 
ac-H4 in current smokers with COPD (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: These data propose a role for modification of nucleosomal structure
in inflammatory cytokine gene transcription in response to smoking. The imbalance
between histone deacetylation and acetylation in favor of acetylation may
contribute to the enhanced inflammation in smokers susceptible to the development
of COPD.

PMID: 16574938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(8):3752-64.

U(S)3 and U(S)3.5 protein kinases of herpes simplex virus 1 differ with respect
to their functions in blocking apoptosis and in virion maturation and egress.

Poon AP(1), Benetti L, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
910 East 58th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Previously, we reported that the U(S)3 protein kinase blocks apoptosis, that it
activates protein kinase A (PKA), that activation of PKA blocks apoptosis in
cells infected with a U(S)3 deletion mutant, and that an overlapping
transcriptional unit encodes a truncated kinase designated U(S)3.5. Here, we
report the properties of the kinases based on comparisons of herpes simplex virus
and baculoviruses expressing U(S)3 or U(S)3.5 kinase. Specifically, we report the
following. (i) Both kinases mediate the phosphorylation of HDAC1, HDAC2, and the 
PKA regulatory IIalpha subunit in the absence of other viral proteins. (ii) Both 
enzymes mediate the phosphorylation of largely identical sets of proteins
carrying the phosphorylation consensus site of PKA, but only U(S)3 blocks
apoptosis, suggesting that it is U(S)3 and not PKA that is responsible for the
phosphorylation of the proteins bearing the shared consensus phosphorylation site
and the antiapoptotic activity. (iii) Both kinases cofractionate with
mitochondria. Immune depletion of the U(S)3 and U(S)3.5 kinases from the
cytoplasm removed the kinases from the supernatant fraction, but not from the
mitochondrial fraction, and therefore, if the antiapoptotic activity of the U(S)3
kinase is expressed in mitochondria, the localization signal and the
antiapoptotic functions are located on different parts of the protein. (iv) The
U(S)3 protein kinase is required for the translocation of virus particles from
the nucleus. Although the U(L)31 protein is phosphorylated in cells infected with
the mutant expressing U(S)3.5 kinase, the release of virus particles from nuclei 
was impeded in some cells, suggesting that the U(S)3 kinase affects the
modification of the nuclear membrane more efficiently than the U(S)3.5 kinase.

PMCID: PMC1440442
PMID: 16571792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biochem J. 2006 Jul 1;397(1):169-77.

INSM1 functions as a transcriptional repressor of the neuroD/beta2 gene through
the recruitment of cyclin D1 and histone deacetylases.

Liu WD(1), Wang HW, Muguira M, Breslin MB, Lan MS.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute for Children, Children's Hospital, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA.

INSM1/IA-1 (insulinoma-associated 1) is a developmentally regulated zinc-finger
transcription factor, exclusively expressed in the foetal pancreas and nervous
system, and in tumours of neuroendocrine origin. We have identified an INSM1
binding site in the neuroD/beta2 promoter and demonstrated transcriptional
repressor activity of INSM1 by transient transfection assay. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that in vivo INSM1 is situated on the
promoter region of the neuroD/beta2 gene. In an attempt to elucidate the
molecular mechanism of transcriptional repression by the INSM1 gene, cyclin D1
was identified as an interacting protein by using a 45-day-old human foetal brain
cDNA library and a yeast two-hybrid screen. The physical association between
INSM1 and cyclin D1 was confirmed by in vitro and in vivo pull-down assay. Cyclin
D1 co-operates with INSM1 and suppresses neuroD/beta2 promoter activity.
Co-immunoprecipitation of INSM1, cyclin D1 and HDACs (histone deacetylases) in
mammalian cells revealed that INSM1 interacts with HDAC-1 and -3 and that this
interaction is mediated through cyclin D1. Overexpression of cyclin D1 and HDAC-3
significantly enhanced the transcriptional repression activity of INSM1 on the
neuroD/beta2 promoter. A further chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed
that HDAC-3 occupies this same region of the neuroD/beta2 promoter, by forming a 
transcription complex with INSM1. Thus we conclude that INSM1 recruits cyclin D1 
and HDACs, which confer transcriptional repressor activity.

PMCID: PMC1479746
PMID: 16569215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13604-11. Epub 2006 Mar 14.

Identification of T-cadherin as a novel target of DNA methyltransferase 3B and
its role in the suppression of nerve growth factor-mediated neurite outgrowth in 
PC12 cells.

Bai S(1), Ghoshal K, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Previously we showed that DNA methyltransferase 3b (Dnmt3b) is required for nerve
growth factor (NGF)-induced differentiation of PC12 cells to neuronal phenotype. 
The present study identified T-cadherin (T-Cad) as one of the targets of Dnmt3b
by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Combined bisulfite restriction
analysis and bisulfite sequencing showed that T-Cad promoter was sparsely
methylated in PC12 cells. ChIP-CHOP analysis demonstrated that Dnmt3b is
associated with T-Cad promoter irrespective of its methylation status. The mRNA
and protein levels of T-Cad were markedly elevated in cells depleted of Dnmt3b by
antisense or small interfering RNA. Suppression of T-Cad promoter activity by
Dnmt3b was independent of its catalytic activity, which was consistent with the
insignificant change in T-Cad promoter methylation status in Dnmt3b-depleted
cells. In contrast, deletion of its N-terminal ATRX and PWWP domain abolished its
repressor function. Association of histone deacetylase 2 (Hdac2) with T-Cad
promoter and restoration of the promoter activity from Dnmt3b-mediated
suppression upon treatment with Hdac inhibitor indicated involvement of histone
deacetylation in this process. NGF-induced neurite outgrowth was inhibited in a
dose dependent manner upon ectopic expression of T-Cad in PC12 cells.
Immunofluorescence studies showed that T-Cad was redistributed upon NGF
treatment, as evident from its concentration in axon growth cones as opposed to
its localization at cell-cell contact region in undifferentiated cells. These
results demonstrate a novel role of T-Cad in the NGF-mediated differentiation of 
PC12 cells to neuronal phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2241734
PMID: 16537533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13548-58. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) and other class I HDACs regulate colon cell
maturation and p21 expression and are deregulated in human colon cancer.

Wilson AJ(1), Byun DS, Popova N, Murray LB, L'Italien K, Sowa Y, Arango D,
Velcich A, Augenlicht LH, Mariadason JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical
Center, Bronx, New York 10467, USA.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) induce growth arrest, differentiation,
and apoptosis of colon cancer cell lines in vitro and have demonstrated
anti-cancer efficacy in clinical trials. Whereas a role for HDAC1 and -2 in
mediating components of the HDAC inhibitor response has been reported, the role
of HDAC3 is unknown. Here we demonstrate increased protein expression of HDAC3 in
human colon tumors and in duodenal adenomas from Apc1638(N/+) mice. HDAC3 was
also maximally expressed in proliferating crypt cells in normal intestine.
Silencing of HDAC3 expression in colon cancer cell lines resulted in growth
inhibition, a decrease in cell survival, and increased apoptosis. Similar effects
were observed for HDAC2 and, to a lesser extent, for HDAC1. HDAC3 silencing also 
selectively induced expression of alkaline phosphatase, a marker of colon cell
maturation. Concurrent with its effect on cell growth, overexpression of HDAC3
and other Class I HDACs inhibited basal and butyrate-induced p21 transcription in
a Sp1/Sp3-dependent manner, whereas silencing of HDAC3 stimulated p21 promoter
activity and expression. However, the magnitude of the effects elicited by
silencing of individual Class I HDACs was significantly less than that induced by
HDAC inhibitors. These findings identify HDAC3 as a gene deregulated in human
colon cancer and as a novel regulator of colon cell maturation and p21
expression. These findings also demonstrate that multiple Class I HDACs are
involved in repressing p21 and suggest that the growth-inhibitory and apoptotic
effects induced by HDAC inhibitors are probably mediated through the inhibition
of multiple HDACs.

PMID: 16533812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006 Mar;117(3):703-5.

Increased glucocorticoid receptor-beta expression, but not decreased histone
deacetylase 2, in severe asthma.

Bergeron C, Fukakusa M, Olivenstein R, Lemiere C, Shannon J, Ernst P, Martin JG, 
Hamid Q.

PMID: 16522474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Aug;291(2):L191-9. Epub 2006 Mar 1.

Hop functions downstream of Nkx2.1 and GATA6 to mediate HDAC-dependent negative
regulation of pulmonary gene expression.

Yin Z(1), Gonzales L, Kolla V, Rath N, Zhang Y, Lu MM, Kimura S, Ballard PL,
Beers MF, Epstein JA, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Hop is an unusual homeodomain protein that was first identified in the developing
heart where it functions downstream of Nkx2.5 to modulate cardiac gene
expression. Hop functions through interactions with histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2 
to mediate repression of cardiac-specific genes, and recent studies show that
HDAC activity and HDAC2 expression are decreased in people with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Here, we show that Hop is expressed in airway
epithelium coincident with HDAC2, and expression is induced by the combination of
dexamethasone and cAMP in parallel with induction of surfactant protein gene
expression. Hop functions in the developing pulmonary airway, acting downstream
of Nkx2.1 and GATA6, to negatively regulate surfactant protein expression. Loss
of Hop expression in vivo results in defective type 2 pneumocyte development with
increased surfactant production and disrupted alveolar formation. Thus Hop
represents a novel regulator of pulmonary maturation that is induced by
glucocorticoids to mediate functionally important HDAC-dependent negative
feedback regulation.

PMID: 16510470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Jul;291(1):L46-57. Epub 2006 Feb 10.

Cigarette smoke induces proinflammatory cytokine release by activation of
NF-kappaB and posttranslational modifications of histone deacetylase in
macrophages.

Yang SR(1), Chida AS, Bauter MR, Shafiq N, Seweryniak K, Maggirwar SB, Kilty I,
Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Environmental Medicine, Lung Biology and Disease Program, Univ. of
Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Ave., Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Cigarette smoke-mediated oxidative stress induces an inflammatory response in the
lungs by stimulating the release of proinflammatory cytokines. Chromatin
remodeling due to histone acetylation and deacetylation is known to play an
important role in transcriptional regulation of proinflammatory genes. The aim of
this study was to investigate the molecular mechanism(s) of inflammatory
responses caused by cigarette smoke extract (CSE) in the human macrophage-like
cell line MonoMac6 and whether the treatment of these cells with the antioxidant 
glutathione (GSH) monoethyl ester, or modulation of the thioredoxin redox system,
can attenuate cigarette smoke-mediated IL-8 release. Exposure of MonoMac6 cells
to CSE (1% and 2.5%) increased IL-8 and TNF-alpha production vs. control at 24 h 
and was associated with significant depletion of GSH levels associated with
increased reactive oxygen species release in addition to activation of NF-kappaB.
Inhibition of IKK ablated the CSE-mediated IL-8 release, suggesting that this
process is dependent on the NF-kappaB pathway. CSE also reduced histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity and HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 protein levels. This was 
associated with posttranslational modification of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 protein
by nitrotyrosine and aldehyde-adduct formation. Pretreatment of cells with GSH
monoethyl ester, but not thioredoxin/thioredoxin reductase, reversed cigarette
smoke-induced reduction in HDAC levels and significantly inhibited IL-8 release. 
Thus cigarette smoke-induced release of IL-8 is associated with activation of
NF-kappaB via IKK and reduction in HDAC levels/activity in macrophages. Moreover,
cigarette smoke-mediated proinflammatory events are regulated by the redox status
of the cells.

PMID: 16473865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 Mar 9;247(1-2):150-65. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Testicular zinc finger protein recruits histone deacetylase 2 and suppresses the 
transactivation function and intranuclear foci formation of agonist-bound
androgen receptor competitively with TIF2.

Tao RH(1), Kawate H, Wu Y, Ohnaka K, Ishizuka M, Inoue A, Hagiwara H, Takayanagi 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

We previously reported that testicular zinc finger protein (TZF) is a corepressor
for androgen receptor (AR). The present study demonstrated that a central portion
(amino acids 512-663) of TZF, TZF(512-663), is responsible for both binding to AR
and repressing the transactivation. TZF recruited endogenous histone deacetylase 
2 (HDAC2) and formed a complex with agonist-bound AR. Imaging analyses showed
that TZF and TZF(512-663) were recruited by AR and simultaneously impaired
distinct AR foci formation. Quantification of the foci number using a
three-dimensional imaging method revealed that the number of intranuclear AR foci
was related to its transactivation activity. Moreover, increased levels of TZF
dissociated a coactivator, TIF2, from the AR foci and vice versa. These results
indicate that the ligand-dependent transactivation function of AR is
quantitatively related to its intranuclear foci formation, and suggest that
corepressors, such as TZF, act on these intranuclear events competitively with
coactivators.

PMID: 16469430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;281(14):9260-70. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Regulatory factor for X-box family proteins differentially interact with histone 
deacetylases to repress collagen alpha2(I) gene (COL1A2) expression.

Xu Y(1), Sengupta PK, Seto E, Smith BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Our studies indicate that the regulatory factor for X-box (RFX) family proteins
repress collagen alpha2(I) gene (COL1A2) expression (Xu, Y., Wang, L., Buttice,
G., Sengupta, P. K., and Smith, B. D. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 49134-49144; Xu,
Y., Wang, L., Buttice, G., Sengupta, P. K., and Smith, B. D. (2004) J. Biol.
Chem. 279, 41319-41332). In this study, we examined the mechanism(s) underlying
the repression of collagen gene by RFX proteins. Two members of the RFX family,
RFX1 and RFX5, associate with distinct sets of co-repressors on the collagen
transcription start site in vitro. RFX5 specifically interacts with histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and the mammalian transcriptional repressor (mSin3B),
whereas RFX1 preferably interacts with HDAC1 and mSin3A. HDAC2 cooperates with
RFX5 to down-regulate collagen promoter activity, whereas HDAC1 enhances
inhibition of collagen promoter activity by RFX1. Interferon-gamma promotes the
recruitment of RFX5/HDAC2/mSin3B to the collagen transcription start site but
decreases the occupancy by RFX1/mSin3A as manifested by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. RFX1 binds to the methylated collagen sequence with
much higher affinity than unmethylated sequence, recruiting more HDAC1 and
mSin3A. The DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, which
inhibits DNA methylation, reduces RFX1/HDAC1 binding to the collagen
transcription start site in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Finally, both
RFX1 and RFX5 are acetylated in vivo. Trichostatin A stimulates the acetylation
of RFX proteins and activates the collagen promoter activity. Collectively, our
data strongly indicate two separate pathways for RFX proteins to repress collagen
gene expression as follows: one for RFX5/HDAC2 in interferon-gamma-mediated
repression, and the other for RFX1/HDAC1 in methylation-mediated collagen
silencing.

PMCID: PMC1434794
PMID: 16464847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Pharmacol Ther. 2006 Aug;111(2):476-94. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Oxidative stress in asthma and COPD: antioxidants as a therapeutic strategy.

Kirkham P(1), Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Diseases, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Horsham,
West Sussex, RH12 5AB, UK. paul.kirkham@novartis.com

Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are inflammatory lung
diseases that are characterized by systemic and chronic localized inflammation
and oxidative stress. Sources of oxidative stress arise from the increased burden
of inhaled oxidants, as well as elevated amounts of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
released from inflammatory cells. Increased levels of ROS, either directly or via
the formation of lipid peroxidation products, may play a role in enhancing the
inflammatory response in both asthma and COPD. Moreover, in COPD it is now
recognized as the main pathogenic factor for driving disease progression and
increasing severity. ROS and lipid peroxidation products can influence the
inflammatory response at many levels through its impact on signal transduction
mechanisms, activation of redox-sensitive transcriptions factors, and chromatin
regulation resulting in pro-inflammatory gene expression. It is this impact of
ROS on chromatin regulation by reducing the activity of the transcriptional
co-repressor, histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC-2), that leads to the poor efficacy of 
corticosteroids in COPD, severe asthma, and smoking asthmatics. Thus, the
presence of oxidative stress has important consequences for the pathogenesis,
severity, and treatment of asthma and COPD. However, for ROS to have such an
impact, it must first overcome a variety of antioxidant defenses. It is likely,
therefore, that a combination of antioxidants may be effective in the treatment
of asthma and COPD. Various approaches to enhance the lung antioxidant screen and
clinical trials of antioxidant compounds are discussed.

PMID: 16458359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Eur Respir J. 2006 Feb;27(2):413-26.

Corticosteroid effects on cell signalling.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Dovehouse St,
London, SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Corticosteroids are the most effective anti-inflammatory therapy for asthma.
Inflammation in asthma is characterised by the increased expression of multiple
inflammatory genes regulated by pro-inflammatory transcription factors, such as
nuclear factor-kappaB and activator protein-1, which bind to and activate
coactivator molecules that acetylate core histones and switch on gene
transcription. Corticosteroids suppress the multiple inflammatory genes that are 
activated in asthmatic airways, mainly by reversing histone acetylation of
activated inflammatory genes through binding of glucocorticoid receptors to
coactivators and recruitment of histone deacetylase 2 to the activated
transcription complex. Activated glucocorticoid receptors also bind to
recognition sites in the promoters of certain genes in order to activate their
transcription, resulting in secretion of anti-inflammatory proteins, such as
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1, which inhibits mitogen-activated 
protein kinase signalling pathways. Glucocorticoid receptors may also interact
with other recognition sites to inhibit transcription, for example of several
genes linked to their side-effects. In some patients with steroid-resistant
asthma, there are abnormalities in glucocorticoid receptor signalling pathways.
In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients and asthmatic patients who
smoke, histone deacetylase 2 is markedly impaired as a result of
oxidative/nitrative stress, and so inflammation is resistant to the
anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids. The therapeutic implications of
these new findings are discussed.

PMID: 16452600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Jan;4(1):27-37.

Heregulins implicated in cellular functions other than receptor activation.

Breuleux M(1), Schoumacher F, Rehn D, Küng W, Mueller H, Eppenberger U.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Pharma AG, Klybeckstrasse 125, WKL-125.12.59, 4002 Basel,
Switzerland. madlaina.breuleux@novartis.com

Heregulins (HRG) are known as soluble secreted growth factors that, on binding
and activating ErbB3 and ErbB4 cell surface receptors, are involved in cell
proliferation, metastasis, survival, and differentiation in normal and malignant 
tissues. Previous studies have shown that some HRG1 splice variants are
translocated to the nucleus. By investigating the subcellular localization of
HRGalpha(1-241), nuclear translocation and accumulation in nuclear dot-like
structures was shown in breast cancer cells. This subcellular distribution
pattern depends on the presence of at least one of two nuclear localization
sequences and on two domains on the HRG construct that were found to be necessary
for nuclear dot formation. Focusing on the nuclear function of HRG, a mammary
gland cDNA library was screened with the mature form of HRGalpha in a yeast
two-hybrid system, and coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous HRG was done. The data
reveal positive interactions of HRGalpha(1-241) with nuclear factors implicated
in different biological functions, including transcriptional control as
exemplified by interaction with the transcriptional repressor histone deacetylase
2. In addition, HRGalpha(1-241) showed transcriptional repression activity in a
reporter gene assay. Furthermore, a potential of HRG proteins to form homodimers 
was reported and the HRG sequence responsible for dimerization was identified.
These observations strongly support the notion that HRG1 splice variants have
multifunctional properties, including previously unknown regulatory functions
within the nucleus that are different from the activation of ErbB receptor
signaling.

PMID: 16446404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Mar 8;533(1-3):2-14. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Corticosteroids: the drugs to beat.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, Dovehouse St, London SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@ic.ac.uk

Corticosteroids are the most effective anti-inflammatory therapy for asthma and
other chronic inflammatory and immune diseases. Recently new insights have been
gained into the molecular mechanisms whereby corticosteroids suppress
inflammation. Inflammation is characterised by the increased expression of
multiple inflammatory genes that are regulated by proinflammatory transcription
factors, such as nuclear factor-kappaB and activator protein-1. These
transcription factors bind to and activate coactivator molecules, which acetylate
core histones and switch on gene transcription. Corticosteroids suppress the
multiple inflammatory genes that are activated in asthmatic airways mainly by
reversing histone acetylation of activated inflammatory genes through binding of 
glucocorticoid receptors to coactivators and recruitment of histone deacetylase-2
(HDAC2) to the activated inflammatory gene transcription complex. Activated
glucocorticoid receptors also bind to recognition sites in the promoters of
certain genes to activate their transcription, resulting in secretion of
anti-inflammatory proteins, such as mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase,
which inhibits MAP kinase signalling pathways. Glucocorticoid receptors may also 
interact with other recognition sites to inhibit transcription, for example of
several genes linked to their side effects. In some patients with
steroid-resistant asthma there are abnormalities in GR signalling pathways. In
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients and asthmatic patients who 
smoke HDAC2 is markedly impaired as a result of oxidative and nitrative stress so
that inflammation is resistant to the anti-inflammatory effects of
corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are likely to remain the mainstay of asthma
therapy and new therapeutic strategies may reverse the corticosteroid
insensitivity in COPD and severe asthma.

PMID: 16436275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. EMBO J. 2006 Feb 8;25(3):490-501. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Skeletal muscle specification by myogenin and Mef2D via the SWI/SNF ATPase Brg1.

Ohkawa Y(1), Marfella CG, Imbalzano AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Myogenin is required not for the initiation of myogenesis but instead for
skeletal muscle formation through poorly understood mechanisms. We demonstrate in
cultured cells and, for the first time, in embryonic tissue, that myogenic late
genes that specify the skeletal muscle phenotype are bound by MyoD prior to the
initiation of gene expression. At the onset of muscle specification, a transition
from MyoD to myogenin occurred at late gene loci, concomitant with loss of HDAC2,
the appearance of both the Mef2D regulator and the Brg1 chromatin-remodeling
enzyme, and the opening of chromatin structure. We further demonstrated that
ectopic expression of myogenin and Mef2D, in the absence of MyoD, was sufficient 
to induce muscle differentiation in a manner entirely dependent on Brg1. These
results indicate that myogenin specifies the muscle phenotype by cooperating with
Mef2D to recruit an ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling enzyme that alters
chromatin structure at regulatory sequences to promote terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1383528
PMID: 16424906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Jan 12;34(1):364-72. Print 2006.

TACC3 mediates the association of MBD2 with histone acetyltransferases and
relieves transcriptional repression of methylated promoters.

Angrisano T(1), Lembo F, Pero R, Natale F, Fusco A, Avvedimento VE, Bruni CB,
Chiariotti L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare L. Califano,
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jan;42(2):1392.

We have recently reported that a novel MBD2 interactor (MBDin) has the capacity
to reactivate transcription from MBD2-repressed methylated promoters even in the 
absence of demethylation events. Here we show that another unrelated protein,
TACC3, displays a similar activity on methylated genes. In addition the data
reported here provide possible molecular mechanisms for the observed phenomenon. 
Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that MBD2/TACC3 form a complex in vivo
with the histone acetyltransferase pCAF. MBD2 could also associate with HDAC2, a 
component of MeCP1 repression complex. However, we found that the complexes
formed by MBD2 with TACC3/pCAF and with HDAC2 were mutually exclusive. Moreover, 
HAT enzymatic assays demonstrated that HAT activity associates with MBD2 in vivo 
and that such association significantly increased when TACC3 was over-expressed. 
Overall our findings suggest that TACC3 can be recruited by MBD2 on methylated
promoters and is able to reactivate transcription possibly by favoring the
formation of an HAT-containing MBD2 complex and, thus, switching the repression
potential of MBD2 in activation even prior to eventual demethylation.

PMCID: PMC1331987
PMID: 16410616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Exp Med. 2006 Jan 23;203(1):7-13. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Histone deacetylase 2-mediated deacetylation of the glucocorticoid receptor
enables NF-kappaB suppression.

Ito K(1), Yamamura S, Essilfie-Quaye S, Cosio B, Ito M, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College,
London SW3 6LY, England, UK. k.ito@imperial.ac.uk

Glucocorticoids are the most effective antiinflammatory agents for the treatment 
of chronic inflammatory diseases even though some diseases, such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), are relatively glucocorticoid insensitive. 
However, the molecular mechanism of this glucocorticoid insensitivity remains
uncertain. We show that a defect of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) deacetylation
caused by impaired histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2 induces glucocorticoid
insensitivity toward nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB-mediated gene expression.
Specific knockdown of HDAC2 by RNA interference resulted in reduced sensitivity
to dexamethasone suppression of interleukin 1beta-induced granulocyte/macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor production. Loss of HDAC2 did not reduce GR nuclear
translocation, GR binding to glucocorticoid response element (GRE) on DNA, or
GR-induced DNA or gene induction but inhibited the association between GR and
NF-kappaB. GR becomes acetylated after ligand binding, and HDAC2-mediated GR
deacetylation enables GR binding to the NF-kappaB complex. Site-directed
mutagenesis of K494 and K495 reduced GR acetylation, and the ability to repress
NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression becomes insensitive to histone deacetylase
inhibition. In conclusion, we show that overexpression of HDAC2 in
glucocorticoid-insensitive alveolar macrophages from patients with COPD is able
to restore glucocorticoid sensitivity. Thus, reduction of HDAC2 plays a critical 
role in glucocorticoid insensitivity in repressing NF-kappaB-mediated, but not
GRE-mediated, gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2118081
PMID: 16380507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Genomics. 2006 Jan;87(1):113-8. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Mouse cDNA microarray analysis uncovers Slug targets in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts.

Bermejo-Rodríguez C(1), Pérez-Caro M, Pérez-Mancera PA, Sánchez-Beato M, Piris
MA, Sánchez-García I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio 13, Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer,
CSIC/Universidad de Salamanca, Campus Unamuno, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.

There is a need to reveal mechanisms that account for maintenance of the
mesenchymal phenotype in normal development and cancer. Slug (approved gene
symbol Snai2), a member of the Snail gene family of zinc-finger transcription
factors, is believed to function in the maintenance of the nonepithelial
phenotype. This study identified candidate Slug target genes linked to Slug gene 
suppression in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Expression analyses were
performed with a mouse cDNA microarray (Mousechip-CNIO) containing 15,000 clones.
A total of 15 novel Slug target species were validated by real-time PCR or
Western analyses. These included self-renewal genes (Bmi1, Nanog, Gfi1),
epithelial-mesenchymal genes (Tcfe2a, Ctnb1, Sin3a, Hdac1, Hdac2, Muc1, Cldn11), 
survival genes (Bcl2, Bbc3), and cell cycle/damage genes (Cdkn1a, Rbl1, Mdm2).
Expression patterns were studied in wild-type MEFs and Slug-deficient MEFs.
Slug-complementation studies recovered aberrant gene expression in cells lacking 
Slug, indicating that these genes were regulated directly by Slug. These results 
highlight their potential roles in mediating Slug function in mesenchymal cells
and may help to identify novel therapeutic biomarkers in cancers linked to Slug.

PMID: 16311016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Anticancer Res. 2005 Nov-Dec;25(6B):4287-92.

Expression analysis of a subset of coregulators and three nuclear receptors in
human colorectal carcinoma.

Giannini R(1), Cavallini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Institute for Digestive Diseases,
I.R.C.C.S. Saverio de Bellis, 70013-Castellana Grotte, BA, Italy.

In human colorectal tissue samples, the gene expressions of 4 coactivators, p300,
pCAF, TIF-2 and TRAP 220, and 7 corepressors, N-CoR, REA, MTA1, MTA1L1, HDAC1,
HDAC2 and HDAC3, linked to estrogen receptors (ER), were revealed by traditional 
RT-PCR. Cofactors ERalpha, ERbeta and ERRalpha mRNA levels were then measured in 
40 tumor tissue samples matched with respective normal mucosa by real-time PCR.
The decline of mRNA levels of all coactivators and the increase of NCoR, HDAC1,
HDAC2 and MTA1 were observed from normal to tumor tissue, whereas REA, HDAC3 and 
MTA1L1 expressions were similar in both tissue compartments. The gene expression 
of ERbeta correlated with those of p300, TIF-2 and REA in normal mucosa, and with
that of REA in tumor tissue only. No association was found between ERalpha and
coregulators and between each coregulator and different clinical parameters. Our 
findings suggest that the co-induction of ERbeta and some cofactors may play an
important role during the development of human colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 16309230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2005 Dec;9(6):1111-21.

Targeting histone deacetylase 2 in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
treatment.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School of Medicine, London
SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

There is increasing evidence that histone acetylation plays a critical role in
the regulation of inflammatory genes and in mediating the anti-inflammatory
effects of corticosteroids. Inflammatory stimuli through transcription factors,
such as NF-kappaB, recruit co-activator molecules with intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase activity, leading to hyperacetylation of core histones and gene
activation. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) reverse this process and suppress
inflammatory genes. Corticosteroids, the most effective anti-inflammatory drugs
so far available, recruit HDAC2 to activated inflammatory gene complexes through 
an interaction with glucocorticoid receptor and thus switch off activated
inflammatory genes. In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and in asthmatic
patients who smoke, there is a reduction in HDAC2 activity and expression,
resulting in amplification of inflammation and corticosteroid resistance.
Therapeutic strategies to increase HDAC activity may, therefore, be expected to
reduce inflammation and restore steroid responsiveness. These strategies include 
low doses of theophylline or antioxidants and nitric oxide synthase inhibitors.
HDACs may be inhibited directly by siRNA and in the future by small-molecule
activators may be discovered through high output screening. These drugs may
represent a novel approach to treating chronic inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 16300464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cancer. 2005 Dec 15;104(12):2717-25.

Clinical trial of valproic acid and all-trans retinoic acid in patients with
poor-risk acute myeloid leukemia.

Bug G(1), Ritter M, Wassmann B, Schoch C, Heinzel T, Schwarz K, Romanski A,
Kramer OH, Kampfmann M, Hoelzer D, Neubauer A, Ruthardt M, Ottmann OG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital, JW Goethe-University 
Frankfurt, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Valproic acid (VPA), a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, induced 
in vitro differentiation of primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) blasts, an
effect enhanced by all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Clinical responses to VPA were
recently observed in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Herein, the
authors have described results of a clinical trial with VPA plus ATRA in 26
patients with poor-risk AML.
METHODS: VPA (5-10 mg/kg starting dose) and ATRA (45 mg/m(2)) were administered
orally. Low-dose AraC or hydroxyurea were permitted to control leukocytosis.
Biologic activity of VPA was confirmed by serial analysis of HDAC2 protein levels
in peripheral blood (PB) mononuclear cells.
RESULTS: Nineteen of 26 patients completed at least 4 weeks of VPA/ATRA
treatment; 7 patients were withdrawn prematurely because of rapidly progressive
disease (n = 3) or unacceptable neurologic and cardiovascular toxicity (n = 4).
Additional cytoreductive treatment was required in 58% of patients enrolled.
Median treatment duration was 3 months. No patient achieved complete remission,
one with de novo AML had a minor response, and two patients with secondary AML
arising from myeloproliferative disorder (MPD) achieved a partial remission and
clearance of PB blasts, respectively. The latter responses were accompanied by
profound granulocytosis and erythrocytosis in both patients, reminiscent of the
response pattern known from ATRA treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
However, cytogenetic analysis of isolated CD34(+) cells and granulocytes did not 
reveal terminal differentiation of leukemic blasts.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with VPA/ATRA results in transient disease control in a
subset of patients with AML that has evolved from a myeloproliferative disorder
but not in patients with a primary or MDS-related AML.

Copyright 2005 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 16294345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 15;288(2):461-73. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

Stage-specific induction of DNA methyltransferases in olfactory receptor neuron
development.

MacDonald JL(1), Gin CS, Roskams AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, 6270 University
Boulevard, Rm 3479, Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6T 1Z4.

DNA methylation-dependent gene silencing, mediated by DNA methyltransferases
(DNMTs), is essential for normal mammalian development and its dysregulation has 
been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders. Despite this, little is known
about DNMTs in the developing or mature nervous system. Here, we show that DNMT1,
3a and 3b are expressed at discrete developmental stages in the olfactory neuron 
lineage, coincident with key shifts in developmental gene expression. DNMT1 is
induced in cycling progenitors and is retained in post-mitotic olfactory receptor
neurons (ORNs). DNMT3b is restricted to mitotic olfactory progenitors, whereas
DNMT3a is expressed only in post-mitotic immature neurons prior to ORN terminal
maturation, coincident with histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), a key downstream
effector of methylation-dependent chromatin condensation. Similar stage-specific 
expression of DNMT3b and 3a was also found in other developing sensory and CNS
neurons. This suggests that progressive lineage restriction regulated by
methylation-dependent silencing could be a highly conserved mechanism shared by
multiple lineages in the developing nervous system.

PMID: 16288735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 22;102(47):16973-8. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

SUMO modification negatively modulates the transcriptional activity of
CREB-binding protein via the recruitment of Daxx.

Kuo HY(1), Chang CC, Jeng JC, Hu HM, Lin DY, Maul GG, Kwok RP, Shih HM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan 11529, Republic of China.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) modification is emerging as an important
control in transcription regulation. Here, we show that CREB-binding protein
(CBP), a versatile transcriptional coactivator for numerous transcription factors
in response to diverse signaling events, can be modified by SUMO-1 at lysine
residues 999, 1034, and 1057 both in vitro and in vivo. Mutation of the SUMO
acceptor lysine residues either individually or in combination enhanced CBP
transcriptional activity, and expression of a SUMO protease SENP2 potentiated the
transcriptional activity of CBP wild-type but not its sumoylation mutant,
indicating that SUMO modification negatively regulates CBP transcriptional
activity. Furthermore, we demonstrated an interaction of SUMO-1-modified CBP with
the transcriptional corepressor Daxx and an essential role of Daxx in mediating
SUMO-dependent transcriptional regulation of CBP through histone deacetylase 2
recruitment. Together, our findings indicate that SUMO modification and
subsequent recruitment of Daxx represent a previously undescribed mechanism in
modulating CBP transcriptional potential.

PMCID: PMC1287974
PMID: 16287980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2005;2(4):334-9; discussion 340-1.

Theophylline in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: new horizons.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Although theophylline has side effects when used in bronchodilator doses,
increasing evidence shows that it has significant antiinflammatory effects in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at lower plasma concentrations. These
antiinflammatory effects are unlikely to be accounted for by phosphodiesterase
inhibition or adenosine receptor antagonism, which require higher concentrations.
There is now evidence that theophylline at low therapeutic concentrations is an
activator of histone deacetylases and that this activation enhances the
antiinflammatory effect of corticosteroids. There appears to be a marked
reduction in histone deacetylase-2 in macrophages and peripheral lung of patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which accounts for amplified
inflammation and steroid resistance. Theophylline has been shown to restore
steroid sensitivity in vitro. The effect of theophylline on histone deacetylase
activity appears to be enhanced by oxidative stress. The mechanism whereby
theophylline activates histone deacetylase is not yet known, but it does not
involve other known actions of theophylline that account for its side effects.
Better understanding of the molecular basis for the action of theophylline might 
lead to the development of novel drugs.

PMID: 16267358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2005;2(4):313-9; discussion 340-1.

Glucocorticoid pathways in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease therapy.

Adcock IM(1), Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology, Airways Disease Section, National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK.
ian.adcock@imperial.ac.uk

Lung function measures in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
remain insensitive to corticosteroid actions, in contrast to the clinical
improvements observed in most patients with asthma. By uncovering the reason for 
this paradox, physicians should be able to implement treatment regimens that
restore corticosteroid sensitivity. Corticosteroids exert their effects by
binding to a cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptor, which is subjected to
post-translational modification by phosphorylation. Receptor phosphorylation may 
influence hormone binding and nuclear translocation, as well as alter other
glucocorticoid receptor interactions, its protein half-life, and downregulation
processes. This suggests that a "phosphorylation code" may exist for
glucocorticoid receptor function. Oxidative stress due to cigarette smoke may
also be a mechanism for the corticosteroid resistance observed in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, as it enhances proinflammatory transcription.
Reduced glucocorticoid nuclear translocation along with attenuated histone
deacetylase activity may be partially responsible for this effect. Therapies
targeting these aspects of the glucocorticoid receptor activation pathway may
reverse steroid resistance in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

PMID: 16267355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Oct 27;33(18):6024-33. Print 2005.

The ErbB3 binding protein Ebp1 interacts with Sin3A to repress E2F1 and
AR-mediated transcription.

Zhang Y(1), Akinmade D, Hamburger AW.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, BRB 9-029, 655 W.
Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Ectopic expression of ebp1, a member of the PA2G4 family, inhibits the
proliferation and induces the differentiation of human breast and prostate cancer
cell lines. Ebp1 inhibits transcription of E2F1 and androgen receptor regulated
genes such as prostate specific antigen (PSA) through its interactions with
histone deacetylases (HDACs). To further understand Ebp1's interactions with
other components of the transcriptional repression machinery, we examined the
association of Ebp1 with the corepressor Sin3A. Ebp1 interacted with Sin3A both
in vitro and in vivo as demonstrated by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down
and coimmunoprecipitation analysis. The C-terminal domain of Ebp1, responsible
for its ability to repress transcription and arrest cell growth, was necessary
and sufficient for binding Sin3A. The C-terminal domain of Sin3A, containing the 
paired amphipathic domain 4 and the HDAC interacting domain, bound Ebp1.
Recombinant Sin3A bound Ebp1 directly, but recombinant HDAC2 failed to bind Ebp1.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and DNA affinity precipitation analysis
demonstrated that Ebp1 and Sin3A associate at the PSA and E2F1 promoters.
Functionally, Sin3A enhanced the ability of Ebp1 to repress transcription of
androgen receptor (AR) and E2F1 regulated genes. These results demonstrate that
Ebp1 participates in transcriptional regulation via its interaction with the
Sin3-HDAC.

PMCID: PMC1270947
PMID: 16254079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Med Chem. 2005 Nov 3;48(22):6936-47.

Toward selective histone deacetylase inhibitor design: homology modeling, docking
studies, and molecular dynamics simulations of human class I histone
deacetylases.

Wang DF(1), Helquist P, Wiech NL, Wiest O.

Author information: 
(1)Walther Cancer Research Center and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556-5670, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play an important role in gene transcription.
Inhibitors of HDACs induce cell differentiation and suppress cell proliferation
in tumor cells. Although many HDAC inhibitors have been designed and synthesized,
selective inhibition for class I HDAC isoforms is a goal that has yet to be
achieved. To understand the difference between class I HDAC isoforms that could
be exploited for the design of isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors, we have built
three-dimensional models of four class I histone deacetylases, HDAC1, HDAC2,
HDAC3, and HDAC8. Comparison of the homology model of HDAC8 with the recently
published X-ray structure shows excellent agreement and validates the approach. A
series of HDAC inhibitors were docked to the homology models to understand the
similarities and differences between the binding modes. Molecular dynamic
simulations of these HDAC-inhibitor complexes indicate that the interaction
between the protein surface and inhibitor is playing an important role; also some
active site residues show some flexibility, which is usually not included in
routine docking protocols. The implications of these results for the design of
isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors are discussed.

PMID: 16250652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Br J Haematol. 2005 Oct;131(2):214-8.

Transcription repression activity is associated with the type I isoform of the
MMSET gene involved in t(4;14) in multiple myeloma.

Todoerti K(1), Ronchetti D, Agnelli L, Castellani S, Marelli S, Deliliers GL,
Zanella A, Lombardi L, Neri A.

Author information: 
(1)U.O. Ematologia 2, Centro Trapianti di Midollo, Dipartimento di Scienze
Mediche, Università degli Studi di Milano, Ospedale Maggiore IRCCS Milano, Milan,
Italy.

The WHSC1/MMSET gene, involved in t(4;14)(p16.3;q32) in multiple myeloma, encodes
putative isoforms (MMSET I, MMSET II and RE-IIBP) which are thought to be
involved in transcription regulation. We investigated their activity in
transfected 293T and HeLa cells. Both MMSET I and MMSET II were localised in the 
nucleus, whereas RE-IIBP showed cytoplasmic and nucleolar staining. MMSET I
dose-dependently repressed the transcriptional activity of the promoter region of
the thymidine kinase gene, whereas MMSET II and RE-IIBP had no effect. The HDAC
inhibitor, trichostatin A, reduced MMSET I repression activity and in vitro
co-immunoprecipitation analyses indicated that MMSET I specifically recruits
HDAC1 and mSin3b, but not HDAC2 or HDAC4. Our data support the hypothesis that
MMSET may act as a transcription regulator; different functions may be associated
with distinct isoforms.

PMID: 16197452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jan;20(1):100-13. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

Association of the mSin3A-histone deacetylase 1/2 corepressor complex with the
mouse steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene.

Clem BF(1), Clark BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA.

Several factors have been identified in the transcriptional repression of the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene promoter; yet, no associating 
corepressor complexes have been characterized for the mouse promoter in MA-10
mouse Leydig tumor cells. We now report that Sp3, CAGA element binding proteins, 
and a corepressor complex consisting of mSin3A, histone deacetylase (HDAC)1, and 
HDAC2 associates with a transcriptional repressor region within the mouse StAR
promoter. 5'-Promoter deletion analysis localized the negative regulatory region 
between -180 and -150 bp upstream of the transcription start site, and mutations 
in both the CAGA and Sp binding elements were required to relieve the repression 
of basal StAR promoter activity. Protein-DNA binding analysis revealed Sp3 and
specific CAGA element-binding protein(s) associated with the repressor region.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis identified the presence of the mSin3A, HDAC1, and 
HDAC2 corepressor complex in MA-10 cells. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed Sp3, mSin3A, and HDAC1/2 association with the
proximal region of the StAR promoter in situ. In addition, HDAC inhibition
resulted in a dose-dependent activation of a mouse StAR reporter construct,
whereas mutations within the repressor region diminished this effect by 44%. In
sum, these data support a novel regulatory mechanism for transcriptional
repression of the mouse StAR promoter by DNA binding of Sp3 and CAGA
element-binding proteins, and association of the Sin3 corepressor complex
exhibiting HDAC activity.

PMID: 16109738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Aug 30;137(2):136-8.

Mutation analysis of the HDAC 1, 2, 8 and CDKL5 genes in Rett syndrome patients
without mutations in MECP2.

Huppke P(1), Ohlenbusch A, Brendel C, Laccone F, Gärtner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Georg
August University, Robert-Koch-Strasse 40, D-37075 Göttingen, Germany.
phuppke@med.uni-goettingen.de

Mutations in the MECP2 gene are found in only 80% of patients with Rett syndrome 
(RTT). Therefore other genes have to be involved in the pathogenesis of RTT. By
using our defined diagnostic criteria we first re-evaluated 50 girls with
possible RTT in whom the sequencing of the MECP2 gene had not revealed any
mutations. Only 15 of theses patients fulfilled all criteria for RTT and could be
considered to have classical RTT. In eight of these, further molecular analyses
revealed large deletions of the MECP2 gene. In the remaining seven girls we then 
analyzed the genes HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC8 that encode for the histone
deacetylases 1, 2, and 8 which interact with MeCP2 and are essential for its
function. Although these histone deacetylase genes have been considered as good
candidate genes for RTT our molecular analysis of these genes did not detect any 
mutations. Because recently mutations in CDKL5 were reported in patients with
RTT, we included this gene in our analysis but failed to detect any mutations. We
conclude that only a subgroup of girls with possible RTT and no detectable
mutation in the sequencing of the MECP2 gene do really have classical RTT. In
many of those large MECP2 gene deletions can be detected by further analysis. The
genes HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC8 do not seem to play a role in the pathogenesis of
RTT and at least in our subgroup no mutations in the CDKL5 gene were detected.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16086395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cell Cycle. 2005 Aug;4(8):1019-21. Epub 2005 Aug 7.

The first 30 minutes in the life of a virus: unREST in the nucleus.

Roizman B(1), Gu H, Mandel G.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. Bernard.Roizman@bsd.uchicago.edu

On entry of viral DNA into cells, a competition ensues between cellular factors
that silence viral genes and transcriptional factors that block silencing and
transcribe the DNA. In the case of herpes simplex virus 1, the first set of genes
expressed after infection-are induced by a viral protein (alphaTIF or VP16).
Expression of later (beta,gamma) genes in cells infected at low ratios of virus
per cells requires a transcriptional activator (ICP4) that cannot block silencing
and a protein, ICP0, hitherto characterized as a promiscuous transactivator.
Recent studies indicate that ICP0 blocks silencing of viral DNA by dissociating
HDACs 1 and 2 from the CoREST/REST repressor complex. HDACs 1/2 are
phosphorylated and translocated to the nucleus. The findings have broad
implications regarding silencing of the viral genome during latency and,
potentially, the expression of genes encoded by other DNA viruses as well.

PMID: 16082207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. N Engl J Med. 2005 Aug 4;353(5):528-9; author reply 528-9.

Histone deacetylase activity and COPD.

Lin AY.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2005 May 12;352(19):1967-76.

PMID: 16079382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2005 Aug;25(3):451-68.

Molecular mechanisms and cellular effects of glucocorticosteroids.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Dovehouse 
Street, London SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@ic.ac.uk

GCSs exert their anti-inflammatory effects through influencing multiple signal
transduction pathways. Their most important action is switching off multiple
activated inflammatory genes through inhibition of HAT and recruitment of HDAC2
activity to the inflammatory gene transcriptional complex. In addition, GCSs may 
activate several anti-inflammatory genes and increase the degradation of mRNA
encoding certain inflammatory proteins. This broad array of actions may account
for the striking effectiveness of GCSs in complex inflammatory diseases such as
asthma and the difficulty in finding alternative anti-inflammatory drugs. There
is now a better understanding of how the responsiveness to GCSs is reduced in
patients who have severe asthma, who have asthma and smoke, and who have COPD. An
important mechanism now emerging is a reduction in HDAC2 activity as a result of 
oxidative stress. These new insights into GCS action may lead to new approaches
to treating inflammatory lung diseases and in particular to increasing
effectiveness of steroids in situations where they are less effective.

PMID: 16054537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Clin Exp Allergy. 2005 Jul;35(7):843-5.

Will it be steroids for ever?

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Airway Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

PMID: 16008667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 23;280(38):32569-77. Epub 2005 Jul 1.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress the induction of c-Jun and its target
genes including COX-2.

Yamaguchi K(1), Lantowski A, Dannenberg AJ, Subbaramaiah K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York,
New York 10021, USA.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is considered to be a target for anticancer therapy.
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors exhibit antitumor activity, but the
mechanisms of action are incompletely understood. We investigated whether HDAC
inhibitors blocked AP-1-mediated activation of COX-2 transcription. Trichostatin 
A and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, two structurally related inhibitors of
HDAC activity, blocked AP-1-mediated induction of COX-2 expression and
prostaglandin E2 biosynthesis. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated
that HDAC inhibitors suppressed c-Jun binding to the COX-2 promoter and thereby
blocked transcription. The observed reduction in binding reflected reduced levels
of c-Jun. HDAC inhibitors suppressed the induction of c-jun transcription by
blocking the recruitment of the preinitiation complex (RNA polymerase II and
TFIIB) to the c-jun promoter. HDAC3 but not HDAC1 or HDAC2 was required for
AP-1-mediated stimulation of c-jun expression. Because HDAC inhibitors suppressed
the induction of c-jun gene expression, resulting in reduced COX-2 transcription,
it was important to determine whether other known AP-1 target genes were also
modulated. Cyclin D1 and collagenase-1 are AP-1-dependent genes that have been
implicated in carcinogenesis. HDAC inhibitors suppressed the induction of both
cyclin D1 and collagenase-1 transcription by inhibiting the binding of c-Jun to
the respective promoters. Taken together, these results suggest that HDAC
inhibitors block the induction of c-jun transcription by inhibiting the
recruitment of the preinitiation complex to the c-jun promoter. This led, in
turn, to reduced expression of several activator protein-1-dependent genes
(COX-2, cyclin D1, collagenase-1). These findings provide new insights into the
mechanisms underlying the antitumor activity of HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 15994313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Cancer. 2005 Dec 10;117(5):800-6.

Antibody response to a non-conserved C-terminal part of human histone deacetylase
3 in colon cancer patients.

Shebzukhov YV(1), Koroleva EP, Khlgatian SV, Belousov PV, Kuz'mina KE, Radko BV, 
Longpre F, Lagarkova MA, Kadachigova TS, Gurova OV, Meshcheryakov AA, Lichinitser
MR, Knuth A, Jager E, Kuprash DV, Nedospasov SA.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, and Laboratory of Molecular
Immunoregulation, Center for Cancer Research, NCI Frederick, Frederick, MD, USA.

Antibodies to cancer antigens can often be detected in the sera of patients,
although the mechanism of the underlying humoral immune response is poorly
understood. Using immunoscreening of tumor-derived cDNA expression libraries
(SEREX), we identified human histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) as serologically
defined antigen in colon cancer. Closely related HDAC1 and HDAC2 do not elicit
humoral response in colon cancer patients. We show that the C-terminal region of 
HDAC3 protein lacking the homology to other Class I HDAC contains at least 3
distinct B-cell epitopes that are recognized by the serum antibodies. HDAC3 in
combination with other SEREX antigens may become a useful molecular biomarker
with diagnostic or prognostic value for a subset of colon cancer patients.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15981215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Neurochem. 2005 Jun;93(6):1444-53.

Myt1 family recruits histone deacetylase to regulate neural transcription.

Romm E(1), Nielsen JA, Kim JG, Hudson LD.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Developmental Genetics, National Institute of Neurologic Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The myelin transcription factor 1 (Myt1) gene family is comprised of three zinc
finger genes [Myt1, Myt1L (Myt1-Like) and NZF3] of the structurally unique CCHHC 
class that are expressed predominantly in the developing CNS. To understand the
mechanism by which this family regulates neural differentiation, we searched for 
interaction partners. In both yeast and a mammalian two-hybrid system, Myt1 and
Myt1L interacted with Sin3B, a protein that mediates transcriptional repression
by binding to histone deacetylases (HDACs). Myt1-Sin3B complexes were
co-immunoprecipitated from transfected mammalian cells and included HDAC1 and
HDAC2. Myt1 and Myt1L could partner with all three Sin3B isoforms, the long form 
(Sin3B(LF)) that includes the HDAC-binding domain, and the two short forms
(Sin3B(SF293) and Sin3B(SF302)) that lack this domain and may consequently
antagonize Sin3B(LF)/HDAC-mediated co-repression. Myt1 or Myt1L interactions with
the HDAC-binding form of Sin3B conferred repression on a heterologous promoter.
Oligodendrocytes were shown to express transcripts encoding each of the Sin3B
isoforms. We present a model in which the Myt1 family of zinc finger proteins,
when bound to a neural promoter, can recruit Sin3B. Depending on the relative
availability of Sin3B isoforms, the Myt1 gene family may favor the silencing of
genes during neural development.

PMCID: PMC1201409
PMID: 15935060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. N Engl J Med. 2005 May 12;352(19):1967-76.

Decreased histone deacetylase activity in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Ito K(1), Ito M, Elliott WM, Cosio B, Caramori G, Kon OM, Barczyk A, Hayashi S,
Adcock IM, Hogg JC, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College,
London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2005 May 12;352(19):2016-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Aug 4;353(5):528-9; author reply 528-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Aug 4;353(5):528-9; author reply 528-9.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by
chronic airway inflammation that is greater in patients with advanced disease. We
asked whether there is a link between the severity of disease and the reduction
in histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in the peripheral lung tissue of patients 
with COPD of varying severity. HDAC is a key molecule in the repression of
production of proinflammatory cytokines in alveolar macrophages.
METHODS: HDAC activity and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity were
determined in nuclear extracts of specimens of surgically resected lung tissue
from nonsmokers without COPD, patients with COPD of varying severity, and
patients with pneumonia or cystic fibrosis. Alveolar macrophages from nonsmokers,
smokers, and patients with COPD and bronchial-biopsy specimens from nonsmokers,
healthy smokers, patients with COPD, and those with mild asthma were also
examined. Total RNA extracted from lung tissue and macrophages was used for
quantitative reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction assay of HDAC1
through HDAC8 and interleukin-8. Expression of HDAC2 protein was quantified with 
the use of Western blotting. Histone-4 acetylation at the interleukin-8 promoter 
was evaluated with the use of a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
RESULTS: Specimens of lung tissue obtained from patients with increasing clinical
stages of COPD had graded reductions in HDAC activity and increases in
interleukin-8 messenger RNA (mRNA) and histone-4 acetylation at the interleukin-8
promoter. The mRNA expression of HDAC2, HDAC5, and HDAC8 and expression of the
HDAC2 protein were also lower in patients with increasing severity of disease.
HDAC activity was decreased in patients with COPD, as compared with normal
subjects, in both the macrophages and biopsy specimens, with no changes in HAT
activity, whereas HAT activity was increased in biopsy specimens obtained from
patients with asthma. Neither HAT activity nor HDAC activity was changed in lung 
tissue from patients with cystic fibrosis or pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with COPD have a progressive reduction in total HDAC
activity that reflects the severity of the disease.

Copyright 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMID: 15888697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. APMIS. 2005 Apr;113(4):264-8.

Increased expression of histone deacetylase 2 is found in human gastric cancer.

Song J(1), Noh JH, Lee JH, Eun JW, Ahn YM, Kim SY, Lee SH, Park WS, Yoo NJ, Lee
JY, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microdissection Genomics Research Institute, College 
of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Accumulated evidence has established that aberrant regulation of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) is one of the major causes of the development of human
malignancies. Among different iso-enzymes of HDAC and sirtuins grouped as the
HDAC super family, little is known as to how histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) causes
carcinogenesis in solid tumors. Here, in order to investigate the possible role
of HDAC2 in gastric carcinogenesis, we analyzed the expression of HDAC2 in 71
gastric adenocarcinomas by immunohistochemistry. Moderate to strong expression of
HDAC2 was found in 44 (62%) out of a total of 71 tumors. The majority of positive
tumors, which were detected in the nucleus but not in normal gastric epithelium, 
did not express HDAC2 or showed only weak positive staining. Interestingly, we
also noted that HDAC2 expression appeared to be associated with tumor
aggressiveness as HDAC2 expression was observed to be statistically significant
in advanced gastric cancer (P=0.0023, Chi-square test) and in positive lymph node
metastasis (P=0.0713, Chi-square test). Taken together, these results suggest
that HDAC2 may play an important role in the aggressiveness of gastric cancer.

PMID: 15865607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21091-8. Epub 2005 Apr 4.

Coactivators and corepressors of NF-kappaB in IkappaB alpha gene promoter.

Gao Z(1), Chiao P, Zhang X, Zhang X, Lazar MA, Seto E, Young HA, Ye J.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University Systems,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70808, USA.

In this study, we investigated recruitment of coactivators (SRC-1, SRC-2, and
SRC-3) and corepressors (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, SMRT, and NCoR) to the IkappaB
alpha gene promoter after NF-kappaB activation by tumor necrosis factor-alpha.
Our data from chromatin immunoprecipitation assay suggest that coactivators and
corepressors are simultaneously recruited to the promoter, and their binding to
the promoter DNA is oscillated in HEK293 cells. SRC-1, SRC-2, and SRC-3 all
enhanced IkappaB alpha transcription. However, the interaction of each
coactivator with the promoter exhibited different patterns. After tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha treatment, SRC-1 signal was increased gradually, but SRC-2 signal
was reduced immediately, suggesting replacement of SRC-2 by SRC-1. SRC-3 signal
was increased at 30 min, reduced at 60 min, and then increased again at 120 min, 
suggesting an oscillation of SRC-3. The corepressors were recruited to the
promoter together with the coactivators. The binding pattern suggests that the
corepressor proteins formed two types of corepressor complexes, SMRT-HDAC1 and
NCoR-HDAC3. The two complexes exhibited a switch at 30 and 60 min. The functions 
of cofactors were confirmed by gene overexpression and RNA interference-mediated 
gene knockdown. These data suggest that gene transactivation by the transcription
factor NF-kappaB is subject to the regulation of a dynamic balance between the
coactivators and corepressors. This model may represent a mechanism for
integration of extracellular signals into a precise control of gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC1237005
PMID: 15811852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. EMBO J. 2005 Apr 6;24(7):1406-17. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Cell cycle regulation of chromatin at an origin of DNA replication.

Zhou J(1), Chau CM, Deng Z, Shiekhattar R, Spindler MP, Schepers A, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Selection and licensing of mammalian DNA replication origins may be regulated by 
epigenetic changes in chromatin structure. The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) origin of
plasmid replication (OriP) uses the cellular licensing machinery to regulate
replication during latent infection of human cells. We found that the minimal
replicator sequence of OriP, referred to as the dyad symmetry (DS), is flanked by
nucleosomes. These nucleosomes were subject to cell cycle-dependent chromatin
remodeling and histone modifications. Restriction enzyme accessibility assay
indicated that the DS-bounded nucleosomes were remodeled in late G1. Remarkably, 
histone H3 acetylation of DS-bounded nucleosomes decreased during late G1,
coinciding with nucleosome remodeling and MCM3 loading, and preceding the onset
of DNA replication. The ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling factor SNF2h was also 
recruited to DS in late G1, and formed a stable complex with HDAC2 at DS. siRNA
depletion of SNF2h reduced G1-specific nucleosome remodeling, histone
deacetylation, and MCM3 loading at DS. We conclude that an SNF2h-HDAC1/2 complex 
coordinates G1-specific chromatin remodeling and histone deacetylation with the
DNA replication initiation process at OriP.

PMCID: PMC1142536
PMID: 15775975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 May 1;14(9):1171-82. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

The role of histone acetylation in SMN gene expression.

Kernochan LE(1), Russo ML, Woodling NS, Huynh TN, Avila AM, Fischbeck KH, Sumner 
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Increasing survival motor neuron 2 (SMN2) gene expression may be an effective
strategy for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) inhibitors have been shown to increase SMN transcript and protein levels, 
but the specific role of histone acetylation in regulating SMN gene expression
has not been explored. Using chromatin immunopreciptation, we investigated the
levels of acetylated H3 and H4 histones and HDACs associated with different
regions of the human and mouse SMN genes in both cultured cells and tissues. We
show that the SMN gene has a reproducible pattern of histone acetylation that is 
largely conserved among different tissues and species. A limited region of the
promoter surrounding the transcriptional start site has relatively high levels of
histone acetylation, whereas regions further upstream or downstream have lower
levels. After HDAC inhibitor treatment, acetylated histone levels increased,
particularly at upstream regions, correlating with a 2-fold increase in promoter 
activity. During development in mouse tissues, histone acetylation levels
decreased and associated HDAC2 levels increased at the region closest to the
transcriptional start site, correlating with a 40-60% decrease in SMN transcript 
and protein levels. These data indicate that histone acetylation modulates SMN
gene expression and that pharmacological manipulation of this epigenetic
determinant is feasible. HDAC2, in particular, may be a future therapeutic target
for SMA.

PMID: 15772088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cell Death Differ. 2005 May;12(5):482-91.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors differentially stabilize acetylated p53 and induce
cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.

Roy S(1), Packman K, Jeffrey R, Tenniswood M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556, USA.

In LNCaP prostate cancer cells CG-1521, a new inhibitor of histone deacetylases, 
alters the acetylation of p53 in a site-specific manner. While p53 is
constitutively acetylated at Lys320 in LNCaP cells, treatment with CG-1521,
stabilizes the acetylation of p53 at Lys373, elevating p21 (and inducing cell
cycle arrest). Treatment with CG-1521 also promotes Bax translocation to the
mitochondria and cleavage, and apoptosis. TSA stabilizes the acetylation of p53
at Lys382, elevating p21 levels and inducing cell cycle arrest, but does not
induce Bax translocation or apoptosis. In LNCaP cells CG-1521, but not TSA,
promotes the rapid degradation of HDAC2. These data suggest that the acetylation 
of p53 at Lys373 is required for the p53-mediated induction of cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis, while acetylation of p53 at Lys382 induces only cell cycle arrest.
In p53(-/-) PC3 cells both compounds induce p21 and cell cycle arrest, but not
Bax translocation or apoptosis, suggesting that both compounds can also induce
p21 through a p53-independent mechanism.

PMID: 15746940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur Respir J. 2005 Mar;25(3):552-63.

Histone acetylation and deacetylation: importance in inflammatory lung diseases.

Barnes PJ(1), Adcock IM, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London SW3 6LY, UK.
p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Inflammatory lung diseases are characterised by increased expression of multiple 
inflammatory genes that are regulated by proinflammatory transcription factors,
such as nuclear factor-kappa B. Gene expression is regulated by acetylation of
core histones through the action of coactivators, such as CREB-binding protein,
with intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. Conversely, gene
repression is mediated via histone deacetylases (HDACs) and other corepressors.
In asthma, there is an increase in HAT activity and some reduction in HDAC
activity, which is restored by corticosteroid therapy. Corticosteroids switch off
inflammatory genes in asthma through the inhibition of HAT activity and by the
recruitment of HDAC2 to the activated inflammatory gene complex. In chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, there is a reduction in HDAC2 activity and
expression, which may account for the amplified inflammation and resistance to
the actions of corticosteroids. The reduction in HDAC2 may be secondary to
oxidative and nitrative stress as a result of cigarette smoking and severe
inflammation, and may also occur in severe asthma, smoking asthmatic patients and
cystic fibrosis. Similar mechanisms may also account for the steroid resistance
seen with latent adenovirus infections. The reduction in histone deacetylase
activity can be restored by theophylline, which may be able to reverse steroid
resistance in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and other inflammatory
diseases.

PMID: 15738302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Jul;19(7):1904-17. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Epigenetic mechanisms in the dopamine D2 receptor-dependent inhibition of the
prolactin gene.

Liu JC(1), Baker RE, Chow W, Sun CK, Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 100
College Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L5.

Transcription of the prolactin gene is dynamically controlled by positive and
negative hormone signals that target the regulatory promoter region. Based on the
inducibility of prolactin gene expression by inhibitors of histone deacetylases
(HDACs), we examined the role of histone acetylation at the genomic prolactin
promoter as a late step in transcriptional regulation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of GH4 cells revealed elevated levels of acetylated 
histones in the promoter and enhancer regions of the gene, compared with
downstream intron sequences. 17beta-Estradiol stimulated histone H4 acetylation
in the promoter region by 2- to 3-fold within 30 min. Dopamine inhibited histone 
H4 acetylation by 2-fold in 30 min, an effect mimicked by the MAPK kinase (MEK1) 
inhibitor U0126. In contrast, the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone, which
inhibits prolactin transcription, failed to alter histone acetylation over the
same time frame. Association of transcription activator Pit-1 with the prolactin 
promoter was unchanged by hormone treatment. However, in response to dopamine,
histone deacetylase HDAC2 and corepressor mSin3A were rapidly recruited to the
prolactin promoter, and association was sustained above basal levels over a 1-h
period. Consistent with this corepressor function, depletion of endogenous mSin3A
by small interfering RNA was sufficient to enhance prolactin gene expression by
70%, comparable to the induction by the HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A. These
studies demonstrate that dopamine D2 receptor activation and inhibition of MAPK
(ERK1/2) signaling lead to rapid deacetylation of histones at the genomic
prolactin promoter. Recruitment of specific HDAC/ corepressor complexes may be an
important mechanism for repression of target gene transcription by Gi/o-coupled
receptors.

PMID: 15731170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):16934-41. Epub 2005 Feb 14.

Cyclin D1 inhibits peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-mediated
adipogenesis through histone deacetylase recruitment.

Fu M(1), Rao M, Bouras T, Wang C, Wu K, Zhang X, Li Z, Yao TP, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Georgetown
University, Washington, D. C. 20057, USA.

The cyclin D1 gene encodes the labile serum-inducible regulatory subunit of a
holoenzyme that phosphorylates and inactivates the retinoblastoma protein.
Overexpression of cyclin D1 promotes cellular proliferation and normal
physiological levels of cyclin D1 function to inhibit adipocyte differentiation
in vivo. We have previously shown that cyclin D1 inhibits peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)gamma-dependent activity through a
cyclin-dependent kinase- and retinoblastoma protein-binding-independent
mechanism. In this study, we determined the molecular mechanism by which cyclin
D1 regulated PPARgamma function. Herein, murine embryonic fibroblast (MEF)
differentiation by PPARgamma ligand was associated with a reduction in histone
deacetylase (HDAC1) activity. Cyclin D1-/- MEFs showed an increased propensity to
undergo differentiation into adipocytes. Genetic deletion of cyclin D1 reduced
HDAC1 activity. Reconstitution of cyclin D1 into the cyclin D1-/- MEFs increased 
HDAC1 activity and blocked PPARgamma-mediated adipogenesis. PPARgamma activity
was enhanced in cyclin D1-/- cells. Reintroduction of cyclin D1 inhibited basal
and ligand-induced PPARgamma activity and enhanced HDAC repression of PPARgamma
activity. Cyclin D1 bound HDAC in vivo and preferentially physically associated
with HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC5. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that cyclin D1 enhanced recruitment of HDAC1 and HDAC3 and histone
methyltransferase SUV39H1 to the PPAR response element of the lipoprotein lipase 
promoter and decreased acetylation of total histone H3 and histone H3 lysine 9.
Collectively, these studies suggest an important role of cyclin D1 in regulation 
of PPARgamma-mediated adipocyte differentiation through recruitment of HDACs to
regulate PPAR response element local chromatin structure and PPARgamma function.

PMID: 15713663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;25(5):1608-19.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors down-regulate bcl-2 expression and induce
apoptosis in t(14;18) lymphomas.

Duan H(1), Heckman CA, Boxer LM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology in Medicine, Veterans Affairs, Palo Alto Health
Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are promising antitumor agents, but they
have not been extensively explored in B-cell lymphomas. Many of these lymphomas
have the t(14;18) translocation, which results in increased bcl-2 expression and 
resistance to apoptosis. In this study, we examined the effects of two
structurally different HDAC inhibitors, trichostatin A (TSA) and sodium butyrate 
(NaB), on the cell cycle, apoptosis, and bcl-2 expression in t(14;18) lymphoma
cells. We found that in addition to potent cell cycle arrest, TSA and NaB also
dramatically induced apoptosis and down-regulated bcl-2 expression, and
overexpression of bcl-2 inhibited TSA-induced apoptosis. The repression of bcl-2 
by TSA occurred at the transcriptional level. Western blot analysis and
quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that even though
HDAC inhibitors increased overall acetylation of histones, localized histone H3
deacetylation occurred at both bcl-2 promoters. TSA treatment increased the
acetylation of the transcription factors Sp1 and C/EBPalpha and decreased their
binding as well as the binding of CBP and HDAC2 to the bcl-2 promoters. Mutation 
of Sp1 and C/EBPalpha binding sites reduced the TSA-induced repression of bcl-2
promoter activity. This study provides a mechanistic rationale for the use of
HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of human t(14;18) lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC549348
PMID: 15713621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12700-9. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

MBD3L2 interacts with MBD3 and components of the NuRD complex and can oppose
MBD2-MeCP1-mediated methylation silencing.

Jin SG(1), Jiang CL, Rauch T, Li H, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010, USA.

MBD2 and MBD3 are two proteins that contain methyl-CpG binding domains and have a
transcriptional repression function. Both proteins are components of a large
CpG-methylated DNA binding complex named MeCP1, which consists of the nucleosome 
remodeling and histone deacetylase complex Mi2-NuRD and MBD2. MBD3L2
(methyl-CpG-binding protein 3-like 2) is a protein with substantial homology to
MBD2 and MBD3, but it lacks the methyl-CpG-binding domain. Unlike MBD3L1, which
is specifically expressed in haploid male germ cells, MBD3L2 expression is more
widespread. MBD3L2 interacts with MBD3 in vitro and in vivo, co-localizes with
MBD3 but not MBD2, and does not localize to methyl-CpG-rich regions in the
nucleus. In glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays, MBD3L2 is found
associated with several known components of the Mi2-NuRD complex, including
HDAC1, HDAC2, MTA1, MBD3, p66, RbAp46, and RbAp48. Gel shift experiments with
nuclear extracts and a CpG-methylated DNA probe indicate that recombinant MBD3L2 
can displace a form of the MeCP1 complex from methylated DNA. MBD3L2 acts as a
transcriptional repressor when tethered to a GAL4-DNA binding domain. Repression 
by GAL4-MBD3L2 is relieved by MBD2 and vice versa, and repression by MBD2 from a 
methylated promoter is relieved by MBD3L2. The data are consistent with a role of
MBD3L2 as a transcriptional modulator that can interchange with MBD2 as an
MBD3-interacting component of the NuRD complex. Thus, MBD3L2 has the potential to
recruit the MeCP1 complex away from methylated DNA and reactivate transcription.

PMID: 15701600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell Death Differ. 2005 Apr;12(4):395-404.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 increases apoptosis and p21Cip1/WAF1
expression, independent of histone deacetylase 1.

Huang BH(1), Laban M, Leung CH, Lee L, Lee CK, Salto-Tellez M, Raju GC, Hooi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1 and 2 share a high degree of homology and coexist 
within the same protein complexes. Despite their close association, each
possesses unique functions. We show that the upregulation of HDAC2 in colorectal 
cancer occurred early at the polyp stage, was more robust and occurred more
frequently than HDAC1. Similarly, while the expression of HDACs1 and 2 were
increased in cervical dysplasia and invasive carcinoma, HDAC2 expression showed a
clear demarcation of high-intensity staining at the transition region of
dysplasia compared to HDAC1. Upon HDAC2 knockdown, cells displayed an increased
number of cellular extensions reminiscent of cell differentiation. There was also
an increase in apoptosis, associated with increased p21Cip1/WAF1 expression that 
was independent of p53. These results suggest that HDACs, especially HDAC2, are
important enzymes involved in the early events of carcinogenesis, making them
candidate markers for tumor progression and targets for cancer therapy.

PMID: 15665816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jan;25(2):751-66.

DNA methyltransferase 3b regulates nerve growth factor-induced differentiation of
PC12 cells by recruiting histone deacetylase 2.

Bai S(1), Ghoshal K, Datta J, Majumder S, Yoon SO, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

To elucidate the role of epigenetic reprogramming in cell- or tissue-specific
differentiation, we explored the role of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts) in the
nerve growth factor (NGF)-induced differentiation of PC12 (pheochromocytoma)
cells into neuronal cells. The mRNA and protein levels of de novo
methyltransferase Dnmt3b increased, whereas those of Dnmt3a and Dnmt1 decreased, 
during NGF-induced neurite outgrowth. Dnmt3b localized in the nucleus, as well as
in the growing neurites. When the expression of Dnmt3b was inhibited by antisense
or small interfering RNA, PC12 cells continued to proliferate and failed to
generate neurites. Cells depleted of Dnmt3b were unable to exit the cell cycle
even after 6 days of NGF treatment. Furthermore, this failure in differentiation 
correlated with significant attenuation in tyrosine phosphorylation of TrkA (a
marker for NGF-induced differentiation) and reduced the expression of neuronal
markers, Hu antigen, and MAP2. The methyl-CpG content of the PC12 genome or the
methylation status of repetitive elements was not significantly altered after
differentiation and was not affected by Dnmt3b depletion. This was consistent
with the ability of the catalytic-site mutant of Dnmt3b to induce differentiation
in Dnmt3b-depleted cells after NGF treatment. The Dnmt3b-mediated differentiation
was attributed to its N-terminal domain, which recruits histone deacetylase 2
(Hdac2), as demonstrated by (i) impeding of differentiation by the Hdac
inhibitors, (ii) facilitation of the differentiation process by overexpression of
the N-terminal domain of Dnmt3b, (iii) higher Hdac activity associated with
Dnmt3b after NGF treatment, and (iv) coimmunoprecipitation and cosedimentation of
Dnmt3b specifically with Hdac2 in a glycerol density gradient. These data
indicate a novel role of Dnmt3b in neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC543426
PMID: 15632075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2004;50 Online Pub:OL627-37.

Alveolar macrophages in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School of Medicine, London
SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

Alveolar macrophages play a critical role as orchestrators of inflammation in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The numbers of alveolar macrophages
are markedly increased in the lungs of patients with COPD as a result of
increased recruitment, proliferation and survival. Alveolar macrophages secrete
many inflammatory mediators, oxidants, proteins and proteinases in response to
cigarette smoke extract and other stimuli. In COPD there is amplified secretion
of these inflammatory products which may be related to defective histone
deacetylase-2, which may also account for the steroid resistance of these cells
in COPD patients. There are several novel therapeutic strategies targeted at
macrophages.

PMID: 15579256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jan 1;302(1):96-107.

Estrogen regulation of trefoil factor 1 expression by estrogen receptor alpha and
Sp proteins.

Sun JM(1), Spencer VA, Li L, Yu Chen H, Yu J, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, R3E 0V9, Canada.

Estrogen-responsive genes in human breast cancer cells often have an estrogen
response element (ERE) positioned next to an Sp1 binding site. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, we investigated the binding of estrogen
receptor alpha (ER), Sp1, and Sp3 to the episomal and native estrogen-responsive 
trefoil factor 1 (TFF1; formerly pS2) promoter in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Mutation of the Sp site upstream of the ERE reduced estrogen responsiveness and
prevented binding of Sp1 and Sp3, but not ER to the episomal promoter. In the
absence of estradiol (E2), Sp1, Sp3, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC), and HDAC2, and
low levels of acetylated H3 and H4 are associated with the native promoter, with 
the histones being engaged in dynamic reversible acetylation. Following E2
addition, levels of ER and acetylated H3 and H4 bound to the native promoter
increases. There is clearance of Sp1, but not of Sp3, from the promoter while
HDAC1 and HDAC2 remain bound. These data are consistent with a model in which Sp1
or Sp3 aid in recruitment of HDACs and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) to
mediate dynamic acetylation of histones associated with the TFF1 promoter, which 
is in a state of readiness to respond to events occurring following the addition 
of estrogen.

PMID: 15541729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Gene. 2004 Nov 10;342(1):125-36.

WD dipeptide motifs and LXXLL motif of chicken HIRA are essential for
interactions with the p48 subunit of chromatin assembly factor-1 and histone
deacetylase-2 in vitro and in vivo.

Ahmad A(1), Takami Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Frontier Science Research Center, Miyazaki Medical
College, University of Miyazaki, 5200, Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki 889-1692,
Japan.

We cloned cDNA encoding chicken HIRA, a homolog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
transcriptional corepressors Hir1p and Hir2p, possessing seven WD dipeptide
motifs and a LXXLL motif in its N-terminal and C-terminal regions, respectively. 
It binds to CAF-1p48, HDAC-1 and 2, but not to CAF-1p60, p46 polypeptide and
HDAC-3. The immunoprecipitation experiment involving truncated and missense
mutants of HIRA and CAF-1p48 revealed not only that even one of seven WD
dipeptide motifs in the N-terminal half of HIRA are necessary for the interaction
with CAF-1p48, but also that those of CAF-1p48 are necessary for the interaction 
with HIRA. These findings indicate that the proper propeller structures of both
HIRA and CAF-1p48 are necessary for their in vitro interaction. The
immunoprecipitation experiment involving truncated and missense mutants of HIRA
and HDAC-2 revealed that the LXXLL motif in the C-terminal half of HIRA and a
C-terminal region of HDAC-2 are necessary for their in vitro interaction.
Moreover, the WD dipeptide motifs and LXXLL motif of HIRA are essential for the
interaction with CAF-1p48 and HDAC-2 in vivo. Taken together, these results
indicate that HIRA should participate differentially in a number of DNA-utilizing
processes through interactions of its distinct regions with these proteins.

PMID: 15527972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. BMC Biol. 2004 Nov 2;2:23.

Acetylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 is permissive for tyrosine
phosphorylation.

Kaiser C(1), James SR.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Biovitrum AB, SE-112 76,
Stockholm, Sweden. christina.kaiser@biovitrum.com

BACKGROUND: Insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins are key moderators of
insulin action. Their specific regulation determines downstream protein-protein
interactions and confers specificity on growth factor signalling. Regulatory
mechanisms that have been identified include phosphorylation of IRS proteins on
tyrosine and serine residues and ubiquitination of lysine residues. This study
investigated other potential molecular mechanisms of IRS-1 regulation.
RESULTS: Using the sos recruitment yeast two-hybrid system we found that IRS-1
and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) interact in the cytoplasmic compartment of
yeast cells. The interaction mapped to the C-terminus of IRS-1 and was confirmed 
through co-immunoprecipitation in vitro of recombinant IRS-1 and HDAC2. HDAC2
bound to IRS-1 in mammalian cells treated with phorbol ester or after prolonged
treatment with insulin/IGF-1 and also in the livers of ob/ob mice but not PTP1B
knockout mice. Thus, the association occurs under conditions of compromised
insulin signalling. We found that IRS-1 is an acetylated protein, of which the
acetylation is increased by treatment of cells with Trichostatin A (TSA), an
inhibitor of HDAC activity. TSA-induced increases in acetylation of IRS-1 were
concomitant with increases in tyrosine phosphorylation in response to insulin.
These effects were confirmed using RNA interference against HDAC2, indicating
that HDAC2 specifically prevents phosphorylation of IRS-1 by the insulin
receptor.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that IRS-1 is an acetylated protein, a
post-translational modification that has not been previously described.
Acetylation of IRS-1 is permissive for tyrosine phosphorylation and facilitates
insulin-stimulated signal transduction. Specific inhibition of HDAC2 may increase
insulin sensitivity in otherwise insulin resistant conditions.

PMCID: PMC529456
PMID: 15522123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54241-7. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

The pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 protein (Pdx-1) interacts with histone
deacetylases Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 on low levels of glucose.

Mosley AL(1), Ozcan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that high concentrations of glucose stimulate
insulin gene expression by causing hyperacetylation of histone H4 at the insulin 
gene promoter. Furthermore, we have shown that the glucose-mediated
hyperacetylation of histone H4 depends on the recruitment of the histone
acetyltransferase p300 by the beta cell-specific transcription factor Pdx-1. In
this study, we demonstrate that the histone deacetylases Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 are
rapidly recruited to the insulin promoter in the mouse insulinoma cell line MIN6 
when cells are switched from high to low glucose media. Moreover, we demonstrate 
that the beta cell-specific homeodomain protein Pdx-1 interacts with histone
deacetylases Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 at low levels of glucose. In vitro studies
indicate that the interaction between Pdx-1 and Hdac-1 or Hdac-2 is direct and
requires the C terminus of Pdx-1. Treatment of MIN6 cells with okadaic acid,
which inhibits the activity of protein phosphatases, abolishes the interaction of
Pdx-1 with Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 on low levels of glucose, suggesting the requirement
of a dephosphorylation event for this interaction to occur. These data indicate
that insulin gene expression is decreased on low levels of glucose by recruitment
of Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 to the insulin promoter by the transcription factor Pdx-1.

PMID: 15496408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cell Cycle. 2004 Oct;3(10):1240-2. Epub 2004 Oct 26.

Specific and redundant functions of histone deacetylases in regulation of cell
cycle and apoptosis.

Zhu P(1), Huber E, Kiefer F, Göttlicher M.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Eggenstein,
Germany.

Inappropriate control of expression of genetic information is the cause of many
forms of cancer. Aberrant transcriptional repression by recruitment of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) is a key step in pathogenesis of myeloid leukemia. We
recently reported that development of colonic cancer involves alterations in the 
transcriptional repression machinery by increased expression of HDAC2 upon loss
of the APC tumor suppressor. Increased expression of HDAC2 is essential for
prevention of apoptosis of HT-29 colonic cancer cells. We now discuss whether
HDAC2 also plays a role for aberrant cell cycle regulation and expression of the 
p21(Cip/Waf) cell cycle inhibitor. Whereas inhibition of HDACs by valproic acid
or trichostatin A increases p21 expression, selective interference with HDAC2 by 
siRNA transfection or reconstitution of wildtype APC does not affect p21
expression. Likewise, treatment of HT-29 cells with the HDAC inhibitor valproic
acid leads to a moderate inhibition of cell cycle progression in the G1 phase
whereas interference with HDAC2 expression does not. Thus, HDAC2 appears to serve
a preferential role in the prevention of apoptosis and not in cell cycle control 
similar to the specific importance of HDAC1 for cell cycle regulation or HDAC 9
for the stress response of the heart.

PMID: 15477762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 3;279(49):50930-41. Epub 2004 Sep 27.

The transcriptional corepressor, PELP1, recruits HDAC2 and masks histones using
two separate domains.

Choi YB(1), Ko JK, Shin J.

Author information: 
(1)Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine and Samsung Biomedical Research
Institute, Suwon-Si, Kyonggi-Do 440-746, Republic of Korea.

PELP1 (proline-, glutamic acid-, and leucine-rich protein 1) has been recognized 
as a coactivator of estrogen receptor (ER)-recruiting p300/CREB-binding protein
histone acetyltransferase to the target chromosome. The present study shows that 
PELP1 does indeed coactivate ER-mediated transcription but also serves as a
corepressor of other nuclear hormone receptors (NR)- and non-NR sequence-specific
transcription factors tested, including GR, Nur77, AP1, NF-kappaB, and TCF/SRF.
PELP1 expression also retarded the proliferation of mouse fibroblast cell lines
in which there was no detectable ER. This was due, at least in part, to the
suppressed activation of serum-response genes such as c-fos that in turn resulted
from the blocked histone hyperacetylation of nucleosomes containing the c-fos
promoter region. The N-terminal leucine-abundant region of PELP1 was observed to 
interact with HDAC2 and exhibited repressive activity when tethered to the
chromatin. In addition, the C-terminal glutamic acid-abundant region bound to the
hypoacetylated histones H3 and H4 and prevented them from becoming substrates of 
histone acetyltransferase. Thus PELP1 promotes and maintains the hypoacetylated
state of histones at the target genomic site, and ER binding reverses its role to
hyperacetylate histones through an as yet unidentified mechanism.

PMID: 15456770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):52456-64. Epub 2004 Sep 28.

MBD3L1 is a transcriptional repressor that interacts with methyl-CpG-binding
protein 2 (MBD2) and components of the NuRD complex.

Jiang CL(1), Jin SG, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010, USA.

Methyl-CpG-binding domain proteins 2 and 3 (MBD2 and MBD3) are transcriptional
repressors that contain methyl-CpG binding domains and are components of a
CpG-methylated DNA binding complex named MeCP1. Methyl-CpG-binding protein 3-like
1 (MBD3L1) is a protein with substantial homology to MBD2 and MBD3, but it lacks 
the methyl-CpG binding domain. MBD3L1 interacts with MBD2 and MBD3 in vitro and
in yeast two-hybrid assays. Gel shift experiments with a CpG-methylated DNA probe
indicate that recombinant MBD3L1 can supershift an MBD2-methylated DNA complex.
In vivo, MBD3L1 associates with and colocalizes with MBD2 but not with MBD3 and
is recruited to 5-methylcytosine-rich pericentromeric heterochromatin in mouse
cells. In glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays MBD3L1 is found associated
with several known components of the MeCP1.NuRD complex, including HDAC1, HDAC2, 
MTA2, MBD2, RbAp46, and RbAp48, but MBD3 is not found in the MBD3L1-bound
fraction. MBD3L1 enhances transcriptional repression of methylated DNA by MBD2.
The data are consistent with a role of MBD3L1 as a methylation-dependent
transcriptional repressor that may interchange with MBD3 as an MBD2-interacting
component of the NuRD complex. MBD3L1 knockout mice were created and were found
to be viable and fertile, indicating that MBD3L1 may not be essential or there is
functional redundancy (through MBD3) in this pathway. Overall, this study reveals
additional complexities in the mechanisms of transcriptional repression by the
MBD family proteins.

PMID: 15456747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. FASEB J. 2004 Dec;18(15):1897-9. Epub 2004 Sep 28.

Oxidative stress and cigarette smoke alter chromatin remodeling but
differentially regulate NF-kappaB activation and proinflammatory cytokine release
in alveolar epithelial cells.

Moodie FM(1), Marwick JA, Anderson CS, Szulakowski P, Biswas SK, Bauter MR, Kilty
I, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)ELEGI and Colt Research Laboratories, MRC Centre for Inflammation Research,
University of Edinburgh Medical School, Edinburgh, UK.

Oxidative stress is implicated in lung inflammation due to its effect on
proinflammatory gene transcription. Changes in gene transcription depend on
chromatin remodeling and the relative activities of histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs). Alterations in the nuclear histone
acetylation:deacetylation balance may result in uncontrolled transcription of
specific proinflammatory genes. We studied the effect of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
and cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) on histone acetylation:deacetylation in
human alveolar epithelial cells (A549). H2O2 and CSC significantly increased
acetylation of histone H4 proteins and were associated with decreased HDAC
activity and HDAC2 levels in A549 cells. Also, the decreased HDAC2 activity was
due to protein modification by aldehydes and nitric oxide products. Pretreatment 
of A549 cells with N-acetyl-l-cysteine attenuated the oxidant-mediated reduction 
in HDAC activity. Treatment of A549 cells with CSC did not cause nuclear
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation or expression and release of either
interleukin (IL)-8 or IL-6. However, H2O2, tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha), and IL-1beta significantly increased NF-kappaB activation and
expression of IL-8 compared with control cells. Interestingly, CSC dose
dependently inhibited TNF-alpha- and IL-1beta-mediated NF-kappaB activation and
IL-8 expression. Thus, H2O2 and CSC enhance acetylation of histone proteins and
decrease histone deacetylase activity but differentially regulate proinflammatory
cytokine release in alveolar epithelial cells.

PMID: 15456740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cancer. 2004 Nov 1;101(9):2106-15.

Autoregulation of the N-myc gene is operative in neuroblastoma and involves
histone deacetylase 2.

Kim MK(1), Carroll WL.

Author information: 
(1)The Molecular, Cellular, Biochemical, and Developmental Sciences, Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Autoregulation of the myc gene family is a negative feedback
mechanism known to occur at high levels of Myc expression. Loss of this mechanism
and associated Myc overexpression has been observed in human tumors, thereby
contributing to tumorigenesis. The childhood tumor neuroblastoma is characterized
by N-myc amplification in aggressive and highly proliferative tumors that occur
in a subset of patients. The precise molecular mechanism of autoregulation is
unknown, and previous observations indicated that N-myc autoregulation was intact
only in single-copy neuroblastoma cell lines.
METHODS: Transient reporter assays and trichostatin A (TSA) experiments were
performed to evaluate several candidate genes, including Mxi1, c-myc promoter
binding protein 1 (MBP-1), Miz, and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), for their
involvement in N-myc autoregulation. Mxi1 and HDAC2 were examined further for
their expression levels and effects on endogenous N-myc levels. Finally, their
recruitments to the N-myc promoter were investigated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP).
RESULTS: The autoregulatory circuit was operative, even in amplified cell lines. 
Mxi1 consistently showed a modest effect in down-regulating N-myc in transient
reporter assays. Overexpression of the c-myc, Mxi1, and mHDAC2 genes resulted in 
a threefold to fourfold decrease in endogenous N-myc levels. Mxi1 and HDAC2 were 
up-regulated by N-Myc in an myc-inducible cell line and in N-myc-expressing cell 
lines. In addition, down-regulation of the N-myc promoter was relieved in the
presence of TSA. Increased association of HDAC2 with the autoregulatory region
within the N-myc promoter by ChIP was observed upon down-regulation of endogenous
N-myc.
CONCLUSIONS: The autoregulatory circuit was intact in both amplified and
single-copy neuroblastoma cell lines. Furthermore, myc gene autoregulation
occurred through histone deacetylation.

PMID: 15382088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer. 2004 Oct 1;101(7):1632-8.

Expression of syndecan-1 and expression of epidermal growth factor receptor are
associated with survival in patients with nonsmall cell lung carcinoma.

Shah L(1), Walter KL, Borczuk AC, Kawut SM, Sonett JR, Gorenstein LA, Ginsburg
ME, Steinglass KM, Powell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons, 
New York, New York 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recently, the authors identified molecular signatures and pathways
associated with nonsmall cell lung carcinoma histology and lung development. They
hypothesized that genetic classifiers of histology would provide insight into
lung tumorigenesis and would be associated with clinical outcome when evaluated
in a broader set of specimens.
METHODS: Associations between patient survival and immunostaining for 11
representative histologic classifiers (epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR],
CDK4, syndecan-1, singed-like, TTF-1, keratin 5, HDAC2, docking protein 1,
integrin alpha3, P63, and cyclin D1) were examined using a tissue microarray
constructed from nonsmall cell lung carcinoma specimens.
RESULTS: Sixty-three tumors were examined, including 43 adenocarcinomas, 11 large
cell carcinomas, and 9 squamous cell carcinomas. Sixty-three percent of tumors
were clinical Stage I lesions, and 37% were Stage II-III lesions. In a
multivariate analysis that controlled for age, gender, and race, syndecan-1
expression was found to be associated with a significant reduction in the risk of
death (hazard ratio, 0.31 [95% confidence interval, 0.18-0.87]; P < 0.05).
Multivariate analysis also indicated that EGFR expression was associated with a
significant reduced risk of death.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors demonstrated that expression of either of the nonsmall
cell lung carcinoma subtype classifiers syndecan-1 and EGFR was associated with a
30% reduction in the risk of death, with this reduction being independent of
histology and other confounders. The results of the current study suggest that
loss of expression of these histologic classifiers is associated with biologic
aggressiveness in lung tumors and with poor outcome for patients with such
tumors. If their significance can be validated prospectively, these biomarkers
may be used to guide therapeutic planning for patients with nonsmall cell lung
carcinoma.

(c) 2004 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 15378500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Microsc Res Tech. 2004 Jun 1;64(2):89-95.

From cells to tissues: fluorescence confocal microscopy in the study of
histological samples.

Transidico P(1), Bianchi M, Capra M, Pelicci PG, Faretta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141
Milan, Italy.

Our knowledge of the genetic mechanisms controlling cell proliferation and
differentiation usually originates from in vitro cultured cell line models.
However, the definition of the molecular switches involved in control of
homeostasis and the understanding of the changes occurring in neoplastic
transformation require looking at single cells as the components of a complex
tissue network. Histological examination of tissue samples can gain a substantial
amount of information from high-resolution fluorescence analysis. In particular, 
confocal microscopy can help in the definition of functional pathways using
multiparameter analysis. In this report, we present acquisition and analysis
procedures to obtain high-resolution data from tissue sections. Confocal
microscopy coupled to computational restoration, statistical evaluation of
spatial correlations, and morphological analysis over large tissue areas were
applied to colorectal samples providing a molecular fingerprint of the biological
differences inferred from classical histological examination.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15352079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2004 Dec;31(6):633-42. Epub 2004 Aug 27.

Cigarette smoke alters chromatin remodeling and induces proinflammatory genes in 
rat lungs.

Marwick JA(1), Kirkham PA, Stevenson CS, Danahay H, Giddings J, Butler K,
Donaldson K, Macnee W, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Inflammation Research, Department of Environmental Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, UK.

Cigarette smoke-triggered inflammation is considered to play a central role in
the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by a mechanism that may 
involve enhanced proinflammatory gene transcription. Histone acetylation and
deacetylation is a key regulator of the specificity and duration of gene
transcription. Disruption in the nuclear histone acetylation:deacetylation
balance (chromatin remodeling) may result in excessive transcription of specific 
proinflammatory genes in the lungs. In this study we show that cigarette smoke
exposure results in an influx of inflammatory cells and chromatin modifications
in rat lungs. This was associated with an increase in the active phosphorylated
form of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase concomitant with increased histone 3
phospho-acetylation, histone 4 acetylation, and increased DNA binding of the
redox-sensitive transcription factor nuclear factor-kappaB, independent of
inhibitory protein-kappaB degradation, and activator protein 1. We also observed 
decreased histone deacetylase 2 activity, which is due to protein modification by
aldehydes and nitric oxide products present in cigarette smoke. Furthermore, we
show that corticosteroid treatment has no effect on smoke-induced proinflammatory
mediator release. These findings suggest a possible molecular mechanism by which 
cigarette smoke drives proinflammatory gene transcription and an inflammatory
response in the lungs.

PMID: 15333327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 17;322(2):601-8.

Characterization of BHC80 in BRAF-HDAC complex, involved in neuron-specific gene 
repression.

Iwase S(1), Januma A, Miyamoto K, Shono N, Honda A, Yanagisawa J, Baba T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Institute of Applied
Biochemistry, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki 305-8572,
Japan.

BRAF-HDAC complex (BHC) has been shown to contain six components, including
BHC80, and to mediate REST-dependent transcriptional repression of
neuron-specific genes in non-neuronal cells. In this study, we have examined the 
functional role(s) of BHC80 in mouse tissues and human cultured cells. Two
isoforms of mouse BHC80 were predominantly present in the central nervous system 
and spermatogenic cells. Human cultured cells also contained two isoforms of
BHC80. Immunohistochemical analysis showed the presence of mouse BHC80 in the
nucleus of neuronal cells in the hippocampus and cerebellum. The C-terminal
region of human BHC80 containing PHD zinc-finger domain was capable of binding
directly to each of five other components of BHC, and of organizing BHC mediating
transcriptional repression. Moreover, two isoforms of human BHC80 were
distinguished from each other by reduced binding to HDAC1 and HDAC2, despite the 
presence of the PHD finger domain. These results suggest that BHC80 presumably
serves as a scaffold protein in BHC in neuronal as well as non-neuronal cells. A 
possible role of BHC80 in spermatogenesis is also suggested.

PMID: 15325272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biochemistry. 2004 Aug 31;43(34):11083-91.

Kinetics and comparative reactivity of human class I and class IIb histone
deacetylases.

Schultz BE(1), Misialek S, Wu J, Tang J, Conn MT, Tahilramani R, Wong L.

Author information: 
(1)Celera, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, California 94080, USA.
brian.schultz@celera.com

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes modulate gene expression through the
deacetylation of acetylated lysine residues on histone proteins. They operate in 
biological systems as part of multiprotein corepressor complexes. To understand
the reactivity of isolated HDACs and the contribution of cofactor binding to
reactivity, the reaction kinetics of isolated, recombinant human HDACs 1, 2, 3,
6, 8, and 10 were measured using a novel, continuous protease-coupled enzyme
assay. Values of k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m) and the pH dependence of these values
were determined for the reactions of each isozyme with
acetyl-Gly-Ala-(N(epsilon)-acetyl-Lys)-AMC. Values of k(cat) spanned the range of
0.006-2.8 s(-1), and k(cat)/K(m) values ranged from 60 to 110000 M(-1) s(-1). The
pH profiles for both k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m) were bell-shaped for all of the HDAC 
isozymes, with pH optima at approximately pH 8. Values of K(i) for the inhibitor 
trichostatin A were determined for each isozyme. The inhibition constants were
generally similar for all HDAC isozymes, except that the value for HDAC8 was
significantly higher than that for the other isozymes. The reaction of HDAC8 with
an alternative substrate was performed to assess the steric requirements of the
HDAC8 active site, and the effect of phosphorylation on HDAC1 activity was
examined. The results are discussed in terms of the biological roles of the HDAC 
enzymes and the proposed reaction mechanism of acetyllysine hydrolysis by these
enzymes.

PMID: 15323567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 1;10(15):5271-81.

Class I histone deacetylase-selective novel synthetic inhibitors potently inhibit
human tumor proliferation.

Park JH(1), Jung Y, Kim TY, Kim SG, Jong HS, Lee JW, Kim DK, Lee JS, Kim NK, Kim 
TY, Bang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Cancer Epigenetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We have developed previously a class of synthetic hybrid histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors, which were built from hydroxamic acid of trichostatin A and
pyridyl ring of MS-275. In this study we evaluated the antitumor effects of these
novel hybrid synthetic HDAC inhibitors, SK-7041 and SK-7068, on human cancer
cells. Both SK-7041 and SK-7068 effectively inhibited cellular HDAC activity at
nanomolar concentrations and induced the time-dependent hyperacetylation of
histones H3 and H4. These HDAC inhibitors preferentially inhibited the enzymatic 
activities of HDAC1 and HDAC2, as compared with the other HDAC isotypes,
indicating that class I HDAC is the major target of SK-7041 and SK-7068. We found
that these compounds exhibited potent antiproliferative activity against various 
human cancer cells in vitro. Growth inhibition effect of SK-7041 and SK-7068 was 
related with the induction of aberrant mitosis and apoptosis in human gastric
cancer cells. Both compounds induced the accumulation of cells at mitosis after 6
h of treatment, which was demonstrated by accumulation of tetraploid cells, lack 
of G(2) cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase inactivation, and higher mitotic index.
After 12 h of treatment, apoptotic cells were increased through mitochondrial and
caspase-mediated pathway. Finally, in vivo experiment showed that SK-7041 or
SK-7068 was found to reduce the growth of implanted human tumors in nude mice.
Therefore, based on isotype specificity and antitumor activity, SK-7041 and
SK-7068 HDAC inhibitors are expected to be promising anticancer therapeutic
agents and need additional clinical development.

PMID: 15297431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Jul 1;10(13):4314-24.

Chromatin remodeling factors and BRM/BRG1 expression as prognostic indicators in 
non-small cell lung cancer.

Fukuoka J(1), Fujii T, Shih JH, Dracheva T, Meerzaman D, Player A, Hong K,
Settnek S, Gupta A, Buetow K, Hewitt S, Travis WD, Jen J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Population Genetics, Biometric Research Branch, Center for
Bioinformatics, Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

We immunohistochemically examined 12 core proteins involved in the chromatin
remodeling machinery using a tissue microarray composed of 150 lung
adenocarcinoma (AD) and 150 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cases. Most of the
proteins showed nuclear staining, whereas some also showed cytoplasmic or
membranous staining. When the expression patterns of all tested antigens were
considered, proteins with nuclear staining clustered into two major groups.
Nuclear signals of BRM, Ini-1, retinoblastoma, mSin3A, HDAC1, and HAT1 clustered 
together, whereas nuclear signals of BRG1, BAF155, HDAC2, BAF170, and RbAP48
formed a second cluster. Additionally, two thirds of the cases on the lung tissue
array had follow-up information, and survival analysis was performed for each of 
the tested proteins. Positive nuclear BRM (N-BRM) staining correlated with a
favorable prognosis in SCC and AD patients with a 5 year-survival of 53.5%
compared with 32.3% for those whose tumors were negative for N-BRM (P = 0.015).
Furthermore, patients whose tumors stained positive for both N-BRM and nuclear
BRG1 had a 5 year-survival of 72% compared with 33.6% (P = 0.013) for those whose
tumors were positive for either or negative for both markers. In contrast,
membranous BRM (M-BRM) staining correlated with a poorer prognosis in AD patients
with a 5 year-survival of 16.7% compared with those without M-BRM staining
(38.1%; P = 0.016). These results support the notion that BRM and BRG1
participate in two distinct chromosome remodeling complexes that are functionally
complementary and that the nuclear presence of BRM, its coexpression with nuclear
BRG1, and the altered cellular localization of BRM (M-BRM) are useful markers for
non-small cell lung cancer prognosis.

PMID: 15240517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Jul 15;365(1):64-8.

Selective regulation of class I and class II histone deacetylases expression by
inhibitors of histone deacetylases in cultured mouse neural cells.

Ajamian F(1), Salminen A, Reeben M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, A.I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Science,
University of Kuopio, P.O. Box 1627 (Neulaniementie 2), FIN 70211 Kuopio,
Finland.

The expression of 10 histone deacetylases (HDAC1-10) mRNAs in mouse neuroblastoma
Neuro-2a and microglia N9 cell cultures after treatment by inhibitors of HDACs,
sodium butyrate and trichostatin A was studied to elucidate whether HDAC
inhibitors affect the gene expression of HDACs themselves. Northern blot analysis
demonstrated two- to four-fold elevated levels of mRNAs for HDAC1, -3, -5, and -6
after drug treatment in comparison with untreated cells, while mRNA levels for
HDAC2 and -7 did not change significantly. In both Neuro-2a and N9 cells the
highest increase was observed for HDAC5 and -6 mRNA, whereas, HDAC4 had a
prominent increase in mRNA levels after drug treatment only in N9 microglia cell 
line but not in Neuro-2a. Immunocytochemical examination confirmed that changes
in protein levels of HDACs were similar to changes in their mRNA levels. There
exists an auto-regulatory feedback loop to the expression levels of several HDACs
after inhibition of their biochemical activity, adding several HDAC genes to the 
list of genes regulated by HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 15234474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cancer Cell. 2004 May;5(5):455-63.

Induction of HDAC2 expression upon loss of APC in colorectal tumorigenesis.

Zhu P(1), Martin E, Mengwasser J, Schlag P, Janssen KP, Göttlicher M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe Branch,
H.-v.-H.-Platz 1, D-76344 Eggenstein, Germany.

Inappropriate transcriptional repression involving histone deacetylases (HDACs)
is a prominent cause for the development of leukemia. We now identify faulty
expression of a specific mediator of transcriptional repression in a solid tumor.
Loss of the adenomatosis polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor induces HDAC2
expression depending on the Wnt pathway and c-Myc. Increased HDAC2 expression is 
found in the majority of human colon cancer explants, as well as in intestinal
mucosa and polyps of APC-deficient mice. HDAC2 is required for, and sufficient on
its own to prevent, apoptosis of colonic cancer cells. Interference with HDAC2 by
valproic acid largely diminishes adenoma formation in APC(min) mice. These
findings point toward HDAC2 as a particularly relevant potential target in cancer
therapy.

PMID: 15144953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Plant J. 2004 Jun;38(5):715-24.

Expression and function of HD2-type histone deacetylases in Arabidopsis
development.

Zhou C(1), Labbe H, Sridha S, Wang L, Tian L, Latoszek-Green M, Yang Z, Brown D, 
Miki B, Wu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.

HD2 (histone deacetylase) proteins are plant-specific histone deacetylases
(HDACs). The Arabidopsis genome contains four HD2 genes, namely HD2A, HD2B, HD2C,
and HD2D. We have previously demonstrated that HD2A, HD2B, and HD2C can repress
transcription directly by targeting to promoters in planta. Here, we show that
the N-terminal conserved motif (EFWG) and histidine 25 (H25), a potential
catalytic residue, were important for the gene repression activity of HD2A. In
situ hybridization indicated that HD2A, HD2B, and HD2C were expressed in ovules, 
embryos, shoot apical meristems, and primary leaves. Furthermore, all three genes
were strongly induced during the process of somatic embryogenesis. HD2D mRNA was 
only detected in the stems and flowers with young siliques and may have adopted
different functions. Using green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusions, we
demonstrated that HD2A, HD2B, and HD2C accumulated in the nuclei of Arabidopsis
cells. Overexpression of 35S::GFP-HD2A in transgenic Arabidopsis plants generated
pleiotropic developmental abnormalities, including abnormal leaves, delayed
flowering, and aborted seed development. The data showed that normal pattern of
HD2 expression was essential for normal plant development and that HD2A, HD2B,
and HD2C may be needed for embryogenesis and embryo development. Reverse
transcriptase (RT)-PCR analysis revealed that a number of genes involved in seed 
development and maturation were repressed in the 35S::GFP-HD2A plants, supporting
a role of HD2A in the regulation of gene expression during seed development.

PMID: 15144374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(11):5856-66.

Proteomics of herpes simplex virus replication compartments: association of
cellular DNA replication, repair, recombination, and chromatin remodeling
proteins with ICP8.

Taylor TJ(1), Knipe DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200
Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

In this study, we have used immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to identify
over 50 cellular and viral proteins that are associated with the herpes simplex
virus 1 (HSV-1) ICP8 single-stranded DNA-binding protein. Many of the
coprecipitating cellular proteins are known members of large cellular complexes
involved in (i) DNA replication or damage repair, including RPA and MSH6; (ii)
nonhomologous and homologous recombination, including the catalytic subunit of
the DNA-dependent protein kinase, Ku86, and Rad50; and (iii) chromatin
remodeling, including BRG1, BRM, hSNF2H, BAF155, mSin3a, and histone deacetylase 
2. It appears that DNA mediates the association of certain proteins with ICP8,
while more direct protein-protein interactions mediate the association with other
proteins. A number of these proteins accumulate in viral replication compartments
in the infected cell nucleus, indicating that these proteins may have a role in
viral replication. WRN, which functions in cellular recombination pathways via
its helicase and exonuclease activities, is not absolutely required for viral
replication, as viral yields are only very slightly, if at all, decreased in
WRN-deficient human primary fibroblasts compared to control cells. In
Ku70-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts, viral yields are increased by almost
50-fold, suggesting that the cellular nonhomologous end-joining pathway inhibits 
HSV replication. We hypothesize that some of the proteins coprecipitating with
ICP8 are involved in HSV replication and may give new insight into viral
replication mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC415816
PMID: 15140983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Ann Hematol. 2004;83 Suppl 1:S91-2.

Valproic acid: an old drug newly discovered as inhibitor of histone deacetylases.

Göttlicher M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Environmental Hygiene, Technical University
Munich, Germany.

Fusion proteins encoded by several types of chromosomal translocations in
promyelocytic leukemia can serve as aberrant transcriptional repressors relying
on recruitment of histonedeacetylases (HDACs) into DNA-associated multi-protein
complexes. Thus, inappropriate modulation of chromatin structure by HDACs and
subsequently repression of gene expression that is critical for myeloid
differentiation appear to be major factors in the development of the disease.
They identify inhibitors of HDACs as prime candidates for novel anti leukemic
drugs. Over the last years several candidate compounds have been introduced into 
clinical trials and have successfully been used in compassionate use protocols.
Amongst them phenylbutyrate served as the first example to establish proof of
principle. Novel drugs such as suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) are
developed for example by modifications of the microbial HDAC inhibitory compound 
trichostatin A with a hydroxamic acid as the key structural element. The branched
chain carboxylic acid valproic acid (VPA) that is in use as antiepileptic drug
over decades was also discovered to inhibit HDACs and preferentially class I
HDACs. HDAC inhibition is likely to mediate the teratogenic side effects of VPA
but not the antiepileptic activity. In contrast to other HDAC inhibitors VPA also
induces proteasomal degradation of HDAC2. None of the currently available
compounds may be the optimum HDAC inhibitory drug but each of them may serve to
answer urgent questions concerning the concept of HDAC inhibition in the
treatment of malignant diseases. Prominent questions are i) whether and by which 
mechanisms HDAC inhibition can be expected to affect a malignant disease not only
in the early stage but also at later stages that have acquired additional genetic
defects, ii) which forms of cancer in addition to myelocytic leukemia respond to 
HDAC inhibition, iii) by which markers those susceptible forms could be
identified and iv) which individual HDACs are the most critical isoenzymes to
address in treatment of malignant diseases.

PMID: 15124690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30358-68. Epub 2004 May 3.

Requirement of histone deacetylase activity for signaling by STAT1.

Klampfer L(1), Huang J, Swaby LA, Augenlicht L.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical Center, Department of
Oncology, Bronx, New York 10467, USA. lklampf@aecom.yu.edu

STAT1 is a transcription factor that plays a crucial role in signaling by
interferons (IFNs). In this study we demonstrated that inhibitors of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity, butyrate, trichostatin A, and suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid, prevented IFNgamma-induced JAK1 activation, STAT1
phosphorylation, its nuclear translocation, and STAT1-dependent gene activation. 
Furthermore, we showed that silencing of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 through RNA
interference markedly decreased IFNgamma-driven gene activation and that
overexpression of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 enhanced STAT1-dependent
transcriptional activity. Our data therefore established the essential role of
deacetylase activity in STAT1 signaling. Induction of IRF-1 by IFNgamma requires 
functional STAT1 signaling and was abrogated by butyrate, trichostatin A,
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, and STAT1 small interfering RNA. In contrast,
silencing of STAT1 did not interfere with IFNgamma-induced expression of STAT2
and caspase-7, and HDAC inhibitors did not preclude IFNgamma-induced expression
of STAT1, STAT2, and caspase-7, suggesting that HDAC inhibitors impede the
expression of IFNgamma target genes whose expression depends on STAT1 but do not 
interfere with STAT1-independent signaling by IFNgamma. Finally, we showed that
inhibitors of deacetylase activity sensitized colon cancer cells to
IFNgamma-induced apoptosis through cooperative negative regulation of Bcl-x
expression, demonstrating that interruption of the balance between
STAT1-dependent and STAT1-independent signaling significantly alters the
biological activity of IFNgamma.

PMID: 15123634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 28;318(2):544-55.

DNMT3B interacts with hSNF2H chromatin remodeling enzyme, HDACs 1 and 2, and
components of the histone methylation system.

Geiman TM(1), Sankpal UT, Robertson AK, Zhao Y, Zhao Y, Robertson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetic Gene Regulation and Cancer Section, LRBGE/NCI/NIH, Bldg. 41, Rm.
C306, 41 Library Dr., Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The non-random pattern of genome-wide DNA methylation in mammalian cells is
established and maintained by DNA methyltransferases DNMT1, 3A, and 3B. De novo
DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B is critical for embryonic development and is mutated
in ICF syndrome. Despite its importance in normal cellular functioning, little is
known about how DNMT3B operates in the context of chromatin. Here we demonstrate 
that DNMT3B associates with four chromatin-associated enzymatic activities common
to transcriptionally repressed, heterochromatic regions of the genome: DNA
methyltransferase, histone deacetylase, ATPase, and histone methylase activities.
By immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down, we show that DNMT3B interacts with
HDAC1, HDAC2, HP1 proteins, Suv39h1, and the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
enzyme hSNF2H. Endogenous hSNF2H is also associated with DNA methyltransferase
activity. These proteins co-localize extensively with DNMT3B in heterochromatic
regions. Our results therefore link DNMT3B to three other components of the
epigenetic machinery and provide important insights into how DNA methylation
patterns may be established within the chromatin environment.

PMID: 15120635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Oncogene. 2004 Jul 8;23(31):5340-9.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors activate INK4d gene through Sp1 site in its
promoter.

Yokota T(1), Matsuzaki Y, Miyazawa K, Zindy F, Roussel MF, Sakai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular-Targeting Cancer Prevention, Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, 
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are known to arrest human tumor cells at
the G1 phase of the cell cycle and activate the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor, p21(WAF1/Cip1). However, several studies have suggested the existence 
of a p21(WAF1/Cip1)-independent molecular pathway. We report here that HDAC
inhibitors activate a member of the INK4 family, the INK4d gene, causing G1 phase
arrest, in the human T cell leukemia cell line, Jurkat. One of the major
Trichostatin A (TSA)-responsive elements is a specific Sp1 binding site in the
INK4d promoter. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assay revealed that Sp1 and Sp3
can specifically interact with this Sp1 binding site. Furthermore, using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrated that HDAC2 was present in
the INK4d proximal promoter region in the absence, but not the presence, of TSA. 
Taken together, these results suggest that treatment with TSA transcriptionally
activates INK4d by releasing HDAC2 from the histone-DNA complex at the INK4d
promoter. Using a p21(WAF1/Cip1)-deleted human colorectal carcinoma cell line,
HCT116 p21 (-/-), we show that upregulation of p19(INK4d) by TSA is associated
with inhibition of cell proliferation. Moreover, mouse embryo fibroblasts lacking
Ink4d were resistant to the growth inhibitory effects of TSA as compared to their
wild-type counterpart. Our findings suggest that p19(INK4d) in addition to
p21(WAF1/Cip1) is an important molecular target of HDAC inhibitors inducing
growth arrest.

PMID: 15107822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 18;279(25):26126-33. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

Heregulin regulates the ability of the ErbB3-binding protein Ebp1 to bind E2F
promoter elements and repress E2F-mediated transcription.

Zhang Y(1), Hamburger AW.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

The ErbB3/4 ligand heregulin (HRG) profoundly affects cell growth and
differentiation, but its mechanism of action is poorly understood. Ebp1, a
protein isolated by its binding to ErbB3, inhibits cell growth and represses
transcription of E2F-regulated cell cycle genes. Since Ebp1 shares 38% identity
with a Schizosaccharomyces pombe DNA-binding protein, we postulated that Ebp1
could bind E2F consensus elements in an HRG-inducible manner, leading to
transcriptional repression. We show here that GST-Ebp1 bound to the DNA sequence 
bound by the S. pombe protein. Whereas GST-Ebp1 alone failed to bind E2F1
promoter elements, Ebp1 contained in nuclear lysates associated with E2F1
consensus sequences in the E2F1 promoter. Endogenous Ebp1 was recruited to the
E2F1 promoter in vivo as demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Ebp1 bound E2F consensus oligonucleotides in association with E2F1,
retinoblastoma protein, and HDAC2. HRG regulated the association of Ebp1 with E2F
promoter sequences and enhanced the ability of Ebp1 to repress transcription. Our
findings suggest that Ebp1, by linking HRG activation of membrane receptors to
E2F gene activity, may be a downstream modulator of the effects of HRG on cell
cycle progression.

PMID: 15073182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(8):3132-9.

Regulation of mammalian epithelial differentiation and intestine development by
class I histone deacetylases.

Tou L(1), Liu Q, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The biochemical mechanisms underlying epigenetic control of gene expression are
increasingly well known. In contrast, the contributions of individual
modifications toward activation of lineage-specific genes during vertebrate
development are poorly understood. Class II histone deacetylases (HDACs), which
show restricted tissue distribution, regulate muscle-specific gene expression, in
part through interactions with myogenic transcription factors. We have combined
gene expression profiling with manipulation of fetal mouse intestinal tissue to
define roles for other regulatory factors. We found that in the developing mouse 
intestine class I HDACs are confined to the prospective epithelium and that their
levels decline coincidently with activation of differentiation genes, suggesting 
a functional relationship between these events. Overexpression of wild-type but
not of mutant HDACs 1 and 2 in fetal intestine explants reverses expression of
certain maturation markers. HDAC inhibitors, including the selective class I
antagonist valproic acid, activate the same genes prematurely and accelerate
cytodifferentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of freshly isolated organs
reveals early HDAC2 occupancy at differentiation gene promoters and corresponding
histone hypoacetylation that reverses as HDAC levels fall. Thus, modulation of
endogenous class I HDAC levels represents a previously unappreciated mechanism to
enable onset of tissue-restricted gene expression in a developing mammalian
organ.

PMCID: PMC381684
PMID: 15060137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Life Sci. 2004 Apr 16;74(22):2693-705.

Expression and functional characterization of recombinant human HDAC1 and HDAC3.

Li J(1), Staver MJ, Curtin ML, Holms JH, Frey RR, Edalji R, Smith R, Michaelides 
MR, Davidsen SK, Glaser KB.

Author information: 
(1)Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Cancer Research, R47J-AP9,
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064-6121, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of enzymes involved in transcription
regulation. HDACs are known to play key roles in the regulation of cell
proliferation; consequently, inhibition of HDACs has become an interesting
approach for anti-cancer therapy. However, expression of mammalian HDACs has
proven to be difficult. All attempts to express these HDACs in E.coli, Pichia and
baculovirus systems were unsuccessful. Here we present the stable expression of
human recombinant His-tagged HDAC1 and HDAC3 in mammalian cells. Full-length
human genes for HDAC1 and HDAC3 were cloned into the pcDNA 3.1 vector containing 
a N-terminal His-tag with an enterokinase cleavage site. Recombinant HDAC enzyme 
activity was only detected after nickel affinity purification due to high
activity of endogenous HDACs; and removal of the His-tag increased activity 2-4
fold. Western blots demonstrated the nickel affinity purified rhHDAC1 preparation
also contained endogenous HDAC2 and HDAC3; likewise, rhHDAC3 preparation
contained endogenous HDAC1 and HDAC2. Therefore, the active HDAC preparation is
actually a multi-protein and a multi-HDAC containing complex. This provides one
explanation for the similar IC50 values exhibited by SAHA and MS-275 against
nuclear HDACs and rhHDAC1 and 3 preparations. These results demonstrate that
recombinant forms of the HDACs can be over-expressed in mammalian cells, isolated
as active multi-protein complexes that contain multiple HDAC enzymes, and caution
must be used when determining HDAC inhibitor in vitro selectivity.

PMID: 15043985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(7):3533-41.

The binding of histone deacetylases and the integrity of zinc finger-like motifs 
of the E7 protein are essential for the life cycle of human papillomavirus type
31.

Longworth MS(1), Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, The Fineberg Medical School,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The E7 oncoprotein of high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) binds to and alters
the action of cell cycle regulatory proteins such as members of the
retinoblastoma (Rb) family of proteins as well as the histone deacetylases
(HDACs). To examine the significance of the binding of E7 to HDACs in the viral
life cycle, a mutational analysis of the E7 open reading frame was performed in
the context of the complete HPV type 31 (HPV-31) genome. Human foreskin
keratinocytes were transfected with wild-type HPV-31 genomes or HPV-31 genomes
containing mutations in HDAC binding sequences as well as in the C-terminal zinc 
finger-like domain, and stable cell lines were isolated. All mutant genomes,
except those with E7 mutations in the HDAC binding site, were found to be stably 
maintained extrachromosomally at an early passage following transfection. Upon
further passage in culture, genomes containing mutations to the Rb binding domain
as well as the zinc finger-like region quickly lost the ability to maintain
episomal genomes. Genomes containing mutations abolishing E7 binding to HDACs or 
to Rb or mutations to the zinc finger-like motifs failed to extend the life span 
of transfected keratinocytes and caused cells to arrest at the same time as the
untransfected keratinocytes. When induced to differentiate by suspension in
methylcellulose, cells maintaining genomes with mutations in the Rb binding
domain or the zinc finger-like motifs were impaired in their abilities to
activate late viral functions. This study demonstrates that the interaction of E7
with HDACs and the integrity of the zinc finger-like motifs are essential for
extending the life span of keratinocytes and for stable maintenance of viral
genomes.

PMCID: PMC371089
PMID: 15016876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Feb 27;315(1):240-5.

Oxidative stress reduces histone deacetylase 2 activity and enhances IL-8 gene
expression: role of tyrosine nitration.

Ito K(1), Hanazawa T, Tomita K, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK.

Oxidative stress is a characteristic of chronic inflammatory diseases. The
reactive oxygen intermediate hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) is an important
signaling molecule that modulates gene expression. We have demonstrated that
H(2)O(2) significantly enhanced cytokine production in BEAS-2B cells, with a
maximal effect at 4h. This did not result from enhanced NF-kappaB activation, but
through decreased activity of histone deacetylase (HDAC)2. This results in
increased inflammatory gene expression following acetylation of specific histone 
residues. Decreased HDAC2 activity was associated with tyrosine nitration status.
Peroxynitrite and SIN-1, a peroxynitrite generator, were also able to reduce
HDAC2 activity via tyrosine nitration. Our data suggest that oxidative stress
contributes to worsening inflammation via reduction of HDAC2 activity through
HDAC2 nitration. This novel mechanism of inflammation may be important in
increasing the severity and chronicity of inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 15013452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Lancet. 2004 Feb 28;363(9410):731-3.

Corticosteroid resistance in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: inactivation 
of histone deacetylase.

Barnes PJ(1), Ito K, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London SW3 6LY, UK. p.j.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

By contrast with patients with asthma, those with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) are poorly responsive to the anti-inflammatory actions of
corticosteroids, and these drugs provide little clinical benefit. In both
diseases, multiple inflammatory genes are activated, which results from
acetylation of core histones around which DNA is wound. This acetylation opens up
the chromatin structure allowing gene transcription and synthesis of inflammatory
proteins to proceed. Corticosteroids recruit histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) to the
actively transcribing gene, which reverses this process and switches off
inflammatory gene transcription. We propose that in patients with COPD, HDAC2
function is impaired by cigarette smoking and oxidative stress, leading to a
pronounced reduction in responsiveness to corticosteroids. Oxidative stress could
generate peroxynitrite, which impairs HDAC2 activity through nitration of
critical tyrosine residues. This hypothesis raises the possibility that novel
therapeutic approaches might unlock this corticosteroid resistance, leading to
more effective anti-inflammatory treatments for COPD and other severe
inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 15001333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 15;23(17):3059-66.

PIASy-mediated repression of the androgen receptor is independent of sumoylation.

Gross M(1), Yang R, Top I, Gasper C, Shuai K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, 11-934 Factor Bldg, 10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1678, USA.

PIASy, a member of the protein inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) family,
represses the transcriptional activity of the androgen receptor (AR). In this
report, we investigate the mechanism of PIASy-mediated repression of AR. We show 
that AR binds to the RING-finger like domain of PIASy. PIASy contains two
transcriptional repression domains, RD1 and RD2. RD1, but not RD2, is required
for PIASy-mediated repression of AR. We show that the RD1 domain binds HDAC1 and 
HDAC2 and that HDAC activity is required for PIASy-mediated AR repression. PIAS
proteins possess small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) E3 ligase activity.
Conjugation of SUMO-1 to AR has been implicated in the regulation of AR activity.
We examine if the SUMO ligase activity of PIASy is required for PIASy to repress 
AR. We show that a mutant PIASy, defective in promoting sumoylation, retains the 
ability to repress AR transcription. In addition, mutation of all the known
sumoylation acceptor sites of AR does not affect the transrepression activity of 
PIASy on AR. Our results suggest that PIASy may repress AR by recruiting histone 
deacetylases, independent of its SUMO ligase activity.

PMID: 14981544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):765-73.

Negative regulation of histone deacetylase 8 activity by cyclic AMP-dependent
protein kinase A.

Lee H(1), Rezai-Zadeh N, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive,
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that catalyze the removal of acetyl
groups from lysine residues of histone and nonhistone proteins. Recent studies
suggest that they are key regulators of many cellular events, including cell
proliferation and cancer development. Human class I HDACs possess homology to the
yeast RPD3 protein and include HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8. While HDAC1,
HDAC2, and HDAC3 have been characterized extensively, almost nothing is known
about HDAC8. Here we report that HDAC8 is phosphorylated by cyclic AMP-dependent 
protein kinase A (PKA) in vitro and in vivo. The PKA phosphoacceptor site of
HDAC8 is Ser(39), a nonconserved residue among class I HDACs. Mutation of Ser(39)
to Ala enhances the deacetylase activity of HDAC8. In contrast, mutation of
Ser(39) to Glu or induction of HDAC8 phosphorylation by forskolin, a potent
activator of adenyl cyclase, decreases HDAC8's enzymatic activity. Remarkably,
inhibition of HDAC8 activity by hyperphosphorylation leads to hyperacetylation of
histones H3 and H4, suggesting that PKA-mediated phosphorylation of HDAC8 plays a
central role in the overall acetylation status of histones.

PMCID: PMC343812
PMID: 14701748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(1):306-19.

Snail mediates E-cadherin repression by the recruitment of the Sin3A/histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)/HDAC2 complex.

Peinado H(1), Ballestar E, Esteller M, Cano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquimica, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto
Sols," Madrid, Spain.

The transcription factor Snail has been described as a direct repressor of
E-cadherin expression during development and carcinogenesis; however, the
specific mechanisms involved in this process remain largely unknown. Here we show
that mammalian Snail requires histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity to repress
E-cadherin promoter and that treatment with trichostatin A (TSA) is sufficient to
block the repressor effect of Snail. Moreover, overexpression of Snail is
correlated with deacetylation of histones H3 and H4 at the E-cadherin promoter,
and TSA treatment in Snail-expressing cells reverses the acetylation status of
histones. Additionally, we demonstrate that Snail interacts in vivo with the
E-cadherin promoter and recruits HDAC activity. Most importantly, we demonstrate 
an interaction between Snail, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2, and the
corepressor mSin3A. This interaction is dependent on the SNAG domain of Snail,
indicating that the Snail transcription factor mediates the repression by
recruitment of chromatin-modifying activities, forming a multimolecular complex
to repress E-cadherin expression. Our results establish a direct causal
relationship between Snail-dependent repression of E-cadherin and the
modification of chromatin at its promoter.

PMCID: PMC303344
PMID: 14673164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 27;279(9):7685-91. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Deactylase inhibitors disrupt cellular complexes containing protein phosphatases 
and deacetylases.

Brush MH(1), Guardiola A, Connor JH, Yao TP, Shenolikar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Affinity isolation of protein serine/threonine phosphatases on the immobilized
phosphatase inhibitor microcystin-LR identified histone deacetylase 1(HDAC1),
HDAC6, and HDAC10 as novel components of cellular phosphatase complexes. Other
HDACs, specifically HDAC2, -3, -4, and -5, were excluded from such complexes. In 
vitro biochemical studies showed that recombinant HDAC6, but not HDAC4, bound
directly to the protein phosphatase (PP)1 catalytic subunit. No association was
observed between HDAC6 and PP2A, another major protein phosphatase. PP1 binding
was mapped to the second catalytic domain and adjacent C-terminal sequences in
HDAC6, and treatment of cells with trichostatin A (TSA) disrupted endogenous
HDAC6.PP1 complexes. Consistent with the inhibition of tubulin deactylase
activity of HDAC6, TSA enhanced cellular tubulin acetylation, and acetylated
tubulin was present in the PP1 complexes from TSA-treated cells. Trapoxin B, a
weak HDAC6 inhibitor, and calyculin A, a cell-permeable phosphatase inhibitor,
had no effect on the stability of the HDAC6.PP1 complexes or on tubulin
acetylation. Mutations that inactivated HDAC6 prevented its incorporation into
cellular PP1 complexes and suggested that when bound together both enzymes were
active. Interestingly, TSA disrupted all the cellular HDAC.phosphatase complexes 
analyzed. This study provided new insight into the mechanism by which HDAC
inhibitors elicited coordinate changes in cellular protein phosphorylation and
acetylation and suggested that changes in these protein modifications at multiple
subcellular sites may contribute to the known ability of HDAC inhibitors to
suppress cell growth and transformation.

PMID: 14670976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Dec 26;312(4):1266-72.

WD dipeptide motifs and LXXLL motif of chicken HIRA are necessary for
transcription repression and the latter motif is essential for interaction with
histone deacetylase-2 in vivo.

Ahmad A(1), Takami Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Frontier Science Research Center, University of
Miyazaki, 5200, Kihara, Kiyotake, 889-1692, Miyazaki, Japan.

We previously reported not only that chicken HIRA, a homolog of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae transcriptional corepressors Hir1p and Hir2p, possesses seven WD
dipeptide motifs and a LXXLL motif in its N-terminal half and C-terminal half,
respectively, but also that the N-terminal and C-terminal halves, respectively,
bind to CAF-1p48 and HDAC-1 and -2 in vitro. Seven WD dipeptide motifs in the
N-terminal half of HIRA are required for the in vitro interaction with CAF-1p48. 
The LXXLL motif at positions 993-997 of HIRA is necessary for the in vitro
interaction with HDAC-2. Here we revealed not only that the N-terminal and
C-terminal halves of HIRA mediate individually transcription repressions but also
that even one of the seven WD dipeptide motifs and the LXXLL motif of HIRA are
essential for the mediations in vivo. Moreover, the LXXLL motif is essential for 
the interaction with endogenous or recombinant HDAC-2 in vivo, probably resulting
in formation of the active complex, harboring the HDAC activity. Taken together, 
these results indicate that HIRA should participate differentially in a number of
DNA-utilizing processes, including transcription repressions, through
interactions of its distinct regions with CAF-1p48 and HDAC-2, respectively.

PMID: 14652010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Dec;3(6):697-702.

Expression and localization of components of the histone deacetylases
multiprotein repressory complexes in the mouse preimplantation embryo.

Kantor B(1), Makedonski K, Shemer R, Razin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, The Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, 91120, Jerusalem, Israel.

DNA methylation had been implicated in the assembly of multiprotein repressory
complexes that affect chromatin architecture thereby rendering genes inactive.
Proteins containing methyl binding domains (MBDs) are major components of these
complexes. MBD3 is a component of the HDAC associated chromatin remodeling
complex Mi2/NuRD. The addition of MBD2 to the Mi2/NuRD complex creates MeCP1, a
complex that is known to inactivate methylated promoters. The undermethylated
state of the mouse preimplantation embryo prompted us to investigate the known
repressory complexes at this developmental stage. We found individual components 
of Mi2/NuRD: MBD3, Mi2, HDAC1 and HDAC2 to be expressed from a very early stage
of embryo development and to localize in close proximity with each other and with
constitutive heterochromatin by the blastula stage. Expression of MBD2, a
component of MeCP1, starts in the blastula stage. Then it is also found to be in 
proximity with heterochromatin (based on DAPI staining) and with MBD3, Mi2 and
HDAC1. In contrast, expression of MeCP2, an MBD containing component of a third
repressory complex (MeCP2/Sin3A), is not seen in the preimplantation embryo. Our 
results suggest that both Mi2/NuRD and MeCP1 complexes are already present at the
very early stages of embryo development, while a MeCP2 complex is added to the
arsenal of repressory complexes post-implantation at a stage when DNA methylation
takes place.

PMID: 14643676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Virol. 2003 Dec;77(23):12671-8.

Herpes simplex virus 1 gene expression is accelerated by inhibitors of histone
deacetylases in rabbit skin cells infected with a mutant carrying a cDNA copy of 
the infected-cell protein no. 0.

Poon AP(1), Liang Y, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

An earlier report showed that the expression of viral genes by a herpes simplex
virus 1 mutant [HSV-1(vCPc0)] in which the wild-type, spliced gene encoding
infected-cell protein no. 0 (ICP0) was replaced by a cDNA copy is dependent on
both the cell type and multiplicity of infection. At low multiplicities of
infection, viral gene expression in rabbit skin cells was delayed by many hours, 
although ultimately virus yield was comparable to that of the wild-type virus.
This defect was rescued by replacement of the cDNA copy with the wild-type gene. 
To test the hypothesis that the delay reflected a dysfunction of ICP0 in altering
the structure of host protein-viral DNA complexes, we examined the state of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) (HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3). We report the following. 
(i) HDAC1 and HDAC2, but not HDAC3, were modified in infected cells. The
modification was mediated by the viral protein kinase U(S)3 and occurred between 
3 and 6 h after infection with wild-type virus but was delayed in rabbit skin
cells infected with HSV-1(vCPc0) mutant, concordant with a delay in the
expression of viral genes. (ii) Pretreatment of rabbit skin cells with inhibitors
of HDAC activity (e.g., sodium butyrate, Helminthosporium carbonum toxin, or
trichostatin A) accelerated the expression of HSV-1(vCPc0) but not that of
wild-type virus. We conclude the following. (i) In the interval in which
HSV-1(vCPc0) DNA is silent, its DNA is in chromatin-like structures amenable to
modification by inhibitors of histone deacetylases. (ii) Expression of wild-type 
virus genes in these cells precluded the formation of DNA-protein structures that
would be affected by either the HDACs or their inhibitors. (iii) Since the defect
in HSV-1(vCPc0) maps to ICP0, the results suggest that this protein initiates the
process of divestiture of viral DNA from tight chromatin structures but could be 
replaced by other viral proteins in cells infected with a large number of
virions.

PMCID: PMC262575
PMID: 14610189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Am J Pathol. 2003 Nov;163(5):1949-60.

Non-small-cell lung cancer molecular signatures recapitulate lung developmental
pathways.

Borczuk AC(1), Gorenstein L, Walter KL, Assaad AA, Wang L, Powell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Current paradigms hold that lung carcinomas arise from pleuripotent stem cells
capable of differentiation into one or several histological types. These
paradigms suggest lung tumor cell ontogeny is determined by consequences of gene 
expression that recapitulate events important in embryonic lung development.
Using oligonucleotide microarrays, we acquired gene profiles from 32
microdissected non-small-cell lung tumors. We determined the 100 top-ranked
marker genes for adenocarcinoma, squamous cell, large cell, and carcinoid using
nearest neighbor analysis. Results were validated by immunostaining for 11
selected proteins using a tissue microarray representing 80 tumors. Gene
expression data of lung development were accessed from a publicly available
dataset generated with the murine Mu11k genome microarray. Self-organized mapping
identified two temporally distinct clusters of murine orthologues. Supervised
clustering of lung development data showed large-cell carcinoma gene orthologues 
were in a cluster expressed in pseudoglandular and canalicular stages whereas
adenocarcinoma homologues were predominantly in a cluster expressed later in the 
terminal sac and alveolar stages of murine lung development. Representative
large-cell genes (E2F3, MYBL2, HDAC2, CDK4, PCNA) are expressed in the nucleus
and are associated with cell cycle and proliferation. In contrast, adenocarcinoma
genes are associated with lung-specific transcription pathways (SFTPB, TTF-1),
cell adhesion, and signal transduction. In sum, non-small-cell lung tumors
histology gene profiles suggest mechanisms relevant to ontogeny and clinical
course. Adenocarcinoma genes are associated with differentiation and glandular
formation whereas large-cell genes are associated with proliferation and
differentiation arrest. The identification of developmentally regulated pathways 
active in tumorigenesis provides insights into lung carcinogenesis and suggests
early steps may differ according to the eventual tumor morphology.

PMCID: PMC1892411
PMID: 14578194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 2;279(1):556-61. Epub 2003 Oct 15.

Distinct RE-1 silencing transcription factor-containing complexes interact with
different target genes.

Belyaev ND(1), Wood IC, Bruce AW, Street M, Trinh JB, Buckley NJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2
9JT, UK.

Establishment of neuronal identity requires co-ordinated expression of specific
batteries of genes. These programs of gene expression are executed by activation 
of neuron-specific genes in neuronal cells and their repression in non-neuronal
cells. Such co-ordinate regulation requires that individual activators and
repressors regulate transcription from specific subsets of their potential target
genes, yet we know little of the mechanisms that underlie this selective process.
The RE-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is a repressor that is proposed to
silence transcription of numerous neuron-specific genes in non-neuronal cells via
recruitment of two independent histone deacetylase (HDAC)-containing co-repressor
complexes. However, in vivo, REST appears to be an obligate silencer for only a
minority of RE-1-bearing genes. Here we examine the interaction of REST, Co-REST,
Sin3A, HDAC1, and HDAC2 with two archetypical endogenous target genes, the M4
muscarinic receptor and the sodium type II channel (NaV1.2) genes. We find that
these genes are present in distinct chromosomal domains. The NaV1.2 gene is
actively transcribed but repressed by REST independently of histone deacetylation
or DNA methylation and does not co-localize with epigenetic markers of silence,
including dimethylation of H3K9 and HP1. In contrast, the M4 gene is maintained
in a silent state independently of REST and co-localizes with dimethylated H3K9
and HP1alpha and HP1gamma, characteristic of silenced or senescent euchromatic
DNA. This contrasts with the coordinate REST-dependent regulation of this locus
reported previously. Taken together, we infer that distinct repressor complexes
and mechanisms are operative at particular loci even in cell lines derived from a
common embryological origin.

PMID: 14561745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7475-87.

mSin3A/histone deacetylase 2- and PRMT5-containing Brg1 complex is involved in
transcriptional repression of the Myc target gene cad.

Pal S(1), Yun R, Datta A, Lacomis L, Erdjument-Bromage H, Kumar J, Tempst P, Sif 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine and
Public Health, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The role of hSWI/SNF complexes in transcriptional activation is well
characterized; however, little is known about their function in transcriptional
repression. We have previously shown that subunits of the mSin3A/histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) corepressor complex copurify with hSWI/SNF complexes. Here 
we show that the type II arginine-specific methyltransferase PRMT5, which is
involved in cyclin E repression, can be found in association with Brg1 and
hBrm-based hSWI/SNF complexes. We also show that hSWI/SNF-associated PRMT5 can
methylate hypoacetylated histones H3 and H4 more efficiently than hyperacetylated
histones H3 and H4. Protein-protein interaction studies indicate that PRMT5 and
mSin3A interact with the same hSWI/SNF subunits as those targeted by c-Myc. These
observations prompted us to examine the expression profile of the c-Myc target
genes, carbamoyl-phosphate synthase-aspartate carbamoyltransferase-dihydroorotase
(cad) and nucleolin (nuc). We found that cad repression is altered in cells that 
express inactive Brg1 and in cells treated with the HDAC inhibitor depsipeptide. 
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we found that Brg1, mSin3A, HDAC2,
and PRMT5 are directly recruited to the cad promoter. These results suggest that 
hSWI/SNF complexes, through their ability to interact with activator and
repressor proteins, control expression of genes involved in cell growth and
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC207647
PMID: 14559996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Dec 1;12(23):3109-21. Epub 2003 Sep 30.

Analysis of mammalian proteins involved in chromatin modification reveals new
metaphase centromeric proteins and distinct chromosomal distribution patterns.

Craig JM(1), Earle E, Canham P, Wong LH, Anderson M, Choo KH.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

We have examined the metaphase chromosomal localization of 15 proteins that have 
previously been described as involved in mammalian chromatin modification and/or 
transcriptional modulation. Immunofluorescence data indicate that all the
proteins localize to human and mouse centromeres, a neocentromere, and the active
centromere of a dicentric chromosome, with six of these proteins (Sin3A, PCAF,
MYST, MBD2, ORC2, P300/CBP) being demonstrated at mammalian centromeres for the
first time. Most of these proteins fall into two distinct chromosomal
distribution patterns: (a) kinetochore-associated proteins (Sin3A, PCAF, MYST and
BAF180), which colocalize with metaphase kinetochores, but not any of the
pericentric and other major heterochromatic regions; and (b)
heterochromatin-associated proteins (MeCP2, MBD1, MBD2, ATRX, HP1alpha, HDAC1,
HDAC2, DNMT1 and DNMT3b), which colocalize with centromeric/pericentric
heterochromatin and all other major heterochromatic sites. A heterogeneous third 
group (c) consists of the origin recognition complex subunit ORC2 and the histone
acetyltransferase P300/CBP, which associate generally with kinetochores in humans
and centromeric/pericentric heterochromatin in mouse, with some minor differences
in localization. These observations indicate an extensive sharing of protein
components involved in chromatin modification at gene loci, centromeres and
various chromosomal heterochromatic landmarks. The definition of distinct
patterns of chromosomal distribution for these proteins provides a useful basis
for the further investigation of the broad-ranging roles of these proteins.

PMID: 14519686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47792-802. Epub 2003 Sep 25.

HoxA10 represses gene transcription in undifferentiated myeloid cells by
interaction with histone deacetylase 2.

Lu Y(1), Goldenberg I, Bei L, Andrejic J, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Fineberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, and Chicago Lakeside Veterans Affairs Hospital, Illinois
60611, USA.

The homeodomain proteins, HoxA10 and Pbx1a, interact with negative cis elements
to repress gene transcription in undifferentiated myeloid cells. The CYBB and
NCF2 genes, which encode the gp91PHOX and p67PHOX proteins, are two such
HoxA10-Pbx1a target genes. In previous studies, we found that HoxA10-Pbx1a
represses transcription of these genes by two mechanisms: competition for DNA
binding with transcriptional activators and endogenous repression activity. In
these studies, we identify a novel molecular mechanism of endogenous
transcriptional repression by HoxA10-Pbx1a. Endogenous repression activity of
other Hox-Pbx1a complexes requires recruitment of transcriptional co-repressor
proteins by Pbx1a. In contrast, our investigations have determined that HoxA10
has Pbx1a-independent endogenous repression activity. We find that this
transcriptional repression activity is abrogated by histone deacetylase
inhibitors, suggesting involvement of co-repressor proteins. Consistent with
this, we identify HoxA10 amino acids 224-249 as a Pbx1-independent repression
domain, which interacts with histone deacetylase 2. We have determined that this 
HoxA10 domain is not conserved with other Abd Hox proteins, although homology
exists with other transcription factors and co-repressors. Understanding the
roles different Hox proteins play in myeloid differentiation is a challenging
problem. Our results suggest that insight into this problem can be obtained from 
biochemical characterization of the various molecular mechanisms of Hox protein
function.

PMID: 14512427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Clin Invest. 2003 Sep;112(6):863-71.

Cardiac hypertrophy and histone deacetylase-dependent transcriptional repression 
mediated by the atypical homeodomain protein Hop.

Kook H(1), Lepore JJ, Gitler AD, Lu MM, Wing-Man Yung W, Mackay J, Zhou R,
Ferrari V, Gruber P, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, University of Pennsylvania Health System,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Sep;112(6):824-6.

Activation of multiple pathways is associated with cardiac hypertrophy and heart 
failure. Repression of antihypertrophic pathways has rarely been demonstrated to 
cause cardiac hypertrophy in vivo. Hop is an unusual homeodomain protein that is 
expressed by embryonic and postnatal cardiac myocytes. Unlike other homeodomain
proteins, Hop does not bind DNA. Rather, it modulates cardiac growth and
proliferation by inhibiting the transcriptional activity of serum response factor
(SRF) in cardiomyocytes. Here we show that Hop can inhibit SRF-dependent
transcriptional activation by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and 
can form a complex that includes HDAC2. Transgenic mice that overexpress Hop
develop severe cardiac hypertrophy, cardiac fibrosis, and premature death. A
mutant form of Hop, which does not recruit HDAC activity, does not induce
hypertrophy. Treatment of Hop transgenic mice with trichostatin A, an HDAC
inhibitor, prevents hypertrophy. In addition, trichostatin A also attenuates
hypertrophy induced by infusion of isoproterenol. Thus, chromatin remodeling and 
repression of otherwise active transcriptional processes can result in
hypertrophy and heart failure, and this process can be blocked with chemical HDAC
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC193673
PMID: 12975471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46541-8. Epub 2003 Sep 12.

Cytoplasmic IkappaBalpha increases NF-kappaB-independent transcription through
binding to histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3.

Viatour P(1), Legrand-Poels S, van Lint C, Warnier M, Merville MP, Gielen J,
Piette J, Bours V, Chariot A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Chemistry and Human Genetics, Center for Cellular and
Molecular Therapy, University of Liège, Sart-Tillman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

IkappaBalpha is an inhibitory molecule that sequesters NF-kappaB dimers in the
cytoplasm of unstimulated cells. Upon stimulation, NF-kappaB moves to the nucleus
and induces the expression of a variety of genes including IkappaBalpha. This
newly synthesized IkappaBalpha also translocates to the nucleus, removes
activated NF-kappaB from its target genes, and brings it back to the cytoplasm to
terminate the phase of NF-kappaB activation. We show here that IkappaBalpha
enhances the transactivation potential of several homeodomain-containing proteins
such as HOXB7 and Pit-1 through a NF-kappaB-independent association with histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3 but not with HDAC2, -4, -5, and -6. IkappaBalpha
bound both HDAC proteins through its ankyrin repeats, and this interaction was
disrupted by p65. Immunofluorescence experiments demonstrated further that
IkappaBalpha acts by partially redirecting HDAC3 to the cytoplasm. At the same
time, an IkappaBalpha mutant, which lacked a functional nuclear localization
sequence, interacted very efficiently with HDAC1 and -3 and intensively enhanced 
the transactivation potential of Pit-1. Our results support the hypothesis that
the NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaBalpha regulates the transcriptional activity of
homeodomain-containing proteins positively through cytoplasmic sequestration of
HDAC1 and HDAC3, a mechanism that would assign a new and unexpected role to
IkappaBalpha.

PMID: 12972430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Neurosurg. 2003 Sep;99(3):534-41.

Transcriptional profiling of medulloblastoma in children.

Park PC(1), Taylor MD, Mainprize TG, Becker LE, Ho M, Dura WT, Squire J, Rutka
JT.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECT: Although medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor found
in children, little is known about its molecular pathogenesis. The authors have
attempted to compare patterns of gene expression in medulloblastoma samples with 
those in the healthy cerebellum.
METHODS: The authors used complementary (c)DNA microarray analysis to compare the
expression of genes in samples of medulloblastoma and normal cerebellum. The
expression levels of a subset of genes were then verified by immunohistochemical 
analysis. Six genes were identified that were expressed at a much higher level in
at least five of six medulloblastomas: ezrin, cyclin D2, high mobility group
protein 2, MAPRE1, histone deacetylase 2, and ornithine decarboxylase 1. A number
of potentially important genes whose expression was much lower in
medulloblastomas than in control cerebellum were also identified: tenascin R,
TRK-B, FGF receptor, and death receptor 3. The expression levels of a subset of
the identified genes were confirmed by immunohistochemical analysis, which was
performed on fetal cerebellum and medulloblastoma samples.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors demonstrate that cDNA microarray analysis is an
effective method of increasing understanding of the molecular biology of
medulloblastomas found in children. A comparison between gene expression patterns
in medulloblastoma and those observed in healthy cerebellum may provide clues as 
to the origin of these tumors and may lead to the identification of new genes or 
pathways to be targeted for future therapies.

PMID: 12959442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. EMBO Rep. 2003 Sep;4(9):877-82. Epub 2003 Aug 8.

Cdyl: a new transcriptional co-repressor.

Caron C(1), Pivot-Pajot C, van Grunsven LA, Col E, Lestrat C, Rousseaux S,
Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de la
Différenciation--INSERM U309, Equipe Chromatine et Expression des Gènes, Institut
Albert Bonniot, Faculté de Médecine de Grenoble, Domaine de la Merci, 38706 La
Tronche Cedex, France.

Cdyl (chromodomain-Y-like) is a chromodomain-containing protein that is
predominantly expressed during mouse spermiogenesis. In its carboxy-terminal
portion, there is a domain with homology to the coenzyme A (CoA) pocket of the
enoyl-CoA hydratase/isomerase, which is shown here to be able to bind CoA and
histone deacetylases (HDACs). It also efficiently represses transcription.
Moreover, the binding of Hdac1 represses the ability of Cdyl to bind CoA, and a
Cdyl-CoA interaction only occurs in the absence of HDACs. These data suggest that
Cdyl is primarily a transcriptional co-repressor. However, the degradation of
cellular Hdac1 and Hdac2, as observed here in the elongating spermatids, may
provide an HDAC-free environment in which Cdyl could bind CoA and participate in 
the global chromatin remodelling that occurs in these cells.

PMCID: PMC1326355
PMID: 12947414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Jun;85(2-5):401-14.

Dual mechanisms of regulation of transcription of luteinizing hormone receptor
gene by nuclear orphan receptors and histone deacetylase complexes.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Section, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, National Institute of Child Health & Human Development/NIH, 49 Convent
Drive, Building 49, Room 6A-36, Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, USA.

The luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR), a member of the G protein-coupled, seven 
transmembrane receptor family, is essential for normal sexual development and
reproductive function. LHR are expressed primarily in the gonads, but also are
found in non-gonadal and cancer tissues. LH acts through LH receptors in Leydig
cells to maintain general metabolic processes and steroidogenic enzymes, and in
the ovary enhances follicular development and steroidogenesis in granulosa and
luteal cells. The major transcriptional start sites of the LHR gene are located
within the 176bp promoter domain. In the rat, the LHR gene is constitutively
inhibited by upstream sequences (-176/-2056bp) in several cell systems, while in 
the human only a minor inhibitory effect was observed in JAR and HeLa cells
(>20%). The TATA-less human promoter is driven by Sp1 and Sp3 transactivators
that bind to two Sp1 domains at -79bp [Sp1(I)] and -119bp [Sp1(II)] (from ATG)
with additive effects. An imperfect estrogen receptor half-site response element 
direct-repeat within the LHR promoter is an inhibitory locus. Endogenous orphan
receptors, EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI, bind this motif and repress promoter activity 
by 70%. TR4 also binds this motif and stimulates promoter activity (up to
2.5-fold). This is reversed by coexpression of EAR2 or EAR3/COUP-TFI through
competitive binding to this site. Comparative studies of hDR and rDR orphan
receptors binding and function revealed sequence-specific requirements. The A/C
mismatch between hDR and rDR is responsible for the lack of TR4 binding and
function in the rat. The G 3'-adjacent to the hDR core is important for
EAR2/EAR3-COUP-TFI high-affinity binding. The Sp1-1 site is critical for
EAR3/COUP-TFI repression, with minor participation for EAR2, and is not involved 
in the TR4 effect. Interaction of EAR3/COUP-TFI with Sp1 perturbs association of 
TFIIB with Sp1, independently of HDACs, and caused impairment of LHR
transcription. Other aspect of control is through HDAC/mSin3A mechanism.
Inhibition of HDACs by TSA increases LHR promoter activity in JAR cells
(40-fold), association of acetylated H3/H4 with the LHR promoter, recruitment of 
Pol II to the promoter, and LHR mRNA levels. A multiprotein complex is recruited 
to the hLHR promoter via interaction with Sp1/Sp3: HDACs dock directly to Sp1-1
bound DNA and indirectly to Sp3-1 bound DNA through RbAp48, while mSin3A
interacts HDACs and potentiates HDAC1-mediated repression. Our studies have
demonstrated that orphan receptor-ERE complexes, and the HDAC1-HDAC2-mSin3A
complex have important roles in the regulation of LHR gene transcription by
interaction with Sp1/Sp3, and by region-specific changes in histone acetylation
and Pol II recruitment within the LHR promoter.

PMID: 12943729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Immunity. 2003 Aug;19(2):281-94.

CD8 T cell-specific downregulation of histone hyperacetylation and gene
activation of the IL-4 gene locus by ROG, repressor of GATA.

Omori M(1), Yamashita M, Inami M, Ukai-Tadenuma M, Kimura M, Nigo Y, Hosokawa H, 
Hasegawa A, Taniguchi M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Chromatin remodeling of type 2 cytokine gene loci occurs during differentiation
of naive CD4 and CD8 T cells into type 2 helper (Th2) and cytotoxic (Tc2) T
cells. IL-4 production and histone hyperacetylation in IL-4-associated
nucleosomes in developing Tc2 cells were significantly lower than those of Th2
cells; however, cytokine production and histone hyperacetylation of IL-5 and
IL-13 genes were equivalent. Developing Tc2 cells expressed lower GATA3 levels
and dramatically increased levels of repressor of GATA (ROG). A ROG response
element in the IL-13 gene exon 4 displayed Tc2-specific binding of ROG, HDAC1,
and HDAC2 and exhibited repression of IL-4 gene activation. Thus, ROG may confer 
CD8 T cell-specific repression of histone hyperacetylation and activation of the 
IL-4 gene locus.

PMID: 12932361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(17):6243-54.

Acetylation-mediated transcriptional activation of the ETS protein ER81 by p300, 
P/CAF, and HER2/Neu.

Goel A(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The regulated expression of the ETS transcription factor ER81 is a prerequisite
for normal development, and its dysregulation contributes to neoplasia. Here, we 
demonstrate that ER81 is acetylated by two coactivators/acetyltransferases, p300 
and p300- and CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) in vitro and in vivo. Whereas p300
acetylates two lysine residues (K33 and K116) within the ER81 N-terminal
transactivation domain, P/CAF targets only K116. Acetylation of ER81 not only
enhances its ability to transactivate but also increases its DNA binding activity
and in vivo half-life. Furthermore, oncogenic HER2/Neu, which induces
phosphorylation and thereby activation of ER81, was less able to activate
acetylation-deficient ER81 mutants, indicating that both acetyltransferase and
protein kinase-specific regulatory mechanisms control ER81 activity. Importantly,
HER2/Neu overexpression stimulates the ability of p300 to acetylate ER81, likely 
by inducing phosphorylation of p300 through the Ras-->Raf-->mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway. This represents a novel mechanism by which oncogenic
HER2/Neu, Ras, or Raf may promote tumor formation by enhancing acetylation not
only of ER81 but also of other downstream effector transcription factors as well 
as histones.

PMCID: PMC180970
PMID: 12917345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Aug 1;288(1):218-23.

The insulator binding protein CTCF associates with the nuclear matrix.

Dunn KL(1), Zhao H, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 0V9, Canada.

Nuclear DNA is organized into chromatin loop domains. At the base of these loops,
matrix-associated regions (MARs) of the DNA interact with nuclear matrix
proteins. MARs act as structural boundaries within chromatin, and MAR binding
proteins may recruit multiprotein complexes that remodel chromatin. The potential
tumor suppressor protein CTCF binds to vertebrate insulators and is required for 
insulator activity. We demonstrate that CTCF is associated with the nuclear
matrix and can be cross-linked to DNA by cisplatin, an agent that preferentially 
cross-links nuclear matrix proteins to DNA in situ. These results suggest that
CTCF anchors chromatin to the nuclear matrix, suggesting that there is a
functional connection between insulators and the nuclear matrix. We also show
that the chromatin-modifying enzymes HDAC1 and HDAC2, which are intrinsic nuclear
matrix components and thought to function as corepressors of CTCF, are incapable 
of associating with CTCF. Hence, the insulator activity of CTCF apparently
involves an HDAC-independent association with the nuclear matrix. We propose that
CTCF may demarcate nuclear matrix-dependent points of transition in chromatin,
thereby forming topologically independent chromatin loops that may support gene
silencing.

PMID: 12878173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Neurosci Lett. 2003 Jul 31;346(1-2):57-60.

Upregulation of class II histone deacetylases mRNA during neural differentiation 
of cultured rat hippocampal progenitor cells.

Ajamian F(1), Suuronen T, Salminen A, Reeben M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, A I Virtanen Institute for Molecular Science,
University of Kuopio, FIN-70211, Kuopio, Finland.

We studied the expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs 1-10) mRNAs during early
differentiation of cultured rat hippocampal progenitor cells using Northern blot 
analysis. Embryonic rat hippocampal progenitors were kept proliferating and
undifferentiated (neurospheres) in the presence of mitogens and induced to stop
proliferation and to differentiate into neurons and astrocytes by mitogen
removal. We found two- to four-fold elevated levels of mRNAs for HDAC 5, 6, 7 and
9 in early differentiation times in comparison with proliferating neurospheres
while mRNA levels for HDAC 1, 2 and 3 did not change significantly.
Interestingly, the upregulated HDACs all belong to class II of histone
deacetylases. mRNAs for HDAC 4, 8 and 10 were not detectable by Northern
analysis. We suggest that the changes in HDAC mRNA expression levels might be
connected with chromatin rearrangement during neural differentiation.

PMID: 12850547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Nutr. 2003 Jul;133(7 Suppl):2485S-2493S.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase activity by butyrate.

Davie JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
davie@cc.umanitoba.ca

This article reviews the effects of the short-chain fatty acid butyrate on
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity. Sodium butyrate has multiple effects on
cultured mammalian cells that include inhibition of proliferation, induction of
differentiation and induction or repression of gene expression. The observation
that butyrate treatment of cells results in histone hyperacetylation initiated a 
flurry of activity that led to the discovery that butyrate inhibits HDAC
activity. Butyrate has been an essential agent for determining the role of
histone acetylation in chromatin structure and function. Interestingly,
inhibition of HDAC activity affects the expression of only 2% of mammalian genes.
Promoters of butyrate-responsive genes have butyrate response elements, and the
action of butyrate is often mediated through Sp1/Sp3 binding sites (e.g.,
p21(Waf1/Cip1)). We demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 recruit HDAC1 and HDAC2, with
the latter being phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2. A model is proposed in
which inhibition of Sp1/Sp3-associated HDAC activity leads to histone
hyperacetylation and transcriptional activation of the p21(Waf1/Cip1) gene;
p21(Waf1/Cip1) inhibits cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity and thereby arrests
cell cycling. Pending the cell background, the nonproliferating cells may enter
differentiation or apoptotic pathways. The potential of butyrate and HDAC
inhibitors in the prevention and treatment of cancer is presented.

PMID: 12840228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. EMBO J. 2003 Jul 1;22(13):3411-20.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor valproic acid selectively induces proteasomal
degradation of HDAC2.

Krämer OH(1), Zhu P, Ostendorff HP, Golebiewski M, Tiefenbach J, Peters MA, Brill
B, Groner B, Bach I, Heinzel T, Göttlicher M.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 42-44, D-60596 Frankfurt, Germany.

Histone-modifying enzymes play essential roles in physiological and aberrant gene
regulation. Since histone deacetylases (HDACs) are promising targets of cancer
therapy, it is important to understand the mechanisms of HDAC regulation.
Selective modulators of HDAC isoenzymes could serve as efficient and
well-tolerated drugs. We show that HDAC2 undergoes basal turnover by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Valproic acid (VPA), in addition to selectively
inhibiting the catalytic activity of class I HDACs, induces proteasomal
degradation of HDAC2, in contrast to other inhibitors such as trichostatin A
(TSA). Basal and VPA-induced HDAC2 turnover critically depend on the E2 ubiquitin
conjugase Ubc8 and the E3 ubiquitin ligase RLIM. Ubc8 gene expression is induced 
by both VPA and TSA, whereas only TSA simultaneously reduces RLIM protein levels 
and therefore fails to induce HDAC2 degradation. Thus, poly-ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation provide an isoenzyme-selective mechanism for
downregulation of HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC165640
PMID: 12840003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30677-85. Epub 2003 Jun 3.

The protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) regulator, nuclear inhibitor of PP1 (NIPP1),
interacts with the polycomb group protein, embryonic ectoderm development (EED), 
and functions as a transcriptional repressor.

Jin Q(1), van Eynde A, Beullens M, Roy N, Thiel G, Stalmans W, Bollen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leuven, B-3000
Leuven, Belgium.

The nuclear protein NIPP1 (nuclear inhibitor of protein Ser/Thr phosphatase-1)
interacts with the splicing factors SAP155 and CDC5L and is involved in a late
step of spliceosome assembly. In addition, NIPP1 is an interactor of protein
phosphatase-1 and a COOH-terminal NIPP1 fragment displays an RNase E like
endoribonuclease activity. A yeast two-hybrid screening resulted in the
identification of the Polycomb group protein EED (embryonic ectoderm
development), an established transcriptional repressor, as a novel NIPP1
interactor. NIPP1 only interacted with full-length EED, whereas two EED
interaction domains were mapped to the central and COOH-terminal thirds of NIPP1.
The NIPP1-EED interaction was potentiated by the binding of (d)G-rich nucleic
acids to the central domain of NIPP1. Nucleic acids also decreased the potency of
NIPP1 as an inhibitor of PP1, but they did not prevent the formation of a ternary
NIPP1.EED.PP1 complex. EED had no effect on the function of NIPP1 as a splicing
factor or as an endoribonuclease. However, similar to EED, NIPP1 acted as a
transcriptional repressor of targeted genes and this NIPP1 effect was mediated by
the EED interaction domain. Also, the histone deacetylase 2 was present in a
complex with NIPP1. Our data are in accordance with a role for NIPP1 as a
DNA-targeting protein for EED and associated chromatin-modifying enzymes.

PMID: 12788942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. EMBO J. 2003 May 1;22(9):2135-45.

Stimulation of preadipocyte differentiation by steroid through targeting of an
HDAC1 complex.

Wiper-Bergeron N(1), Wu D, Pope L, Schild-Poulter C, Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Ottawa Health Research Institute, University of Ottawa, 725 Parkdale
Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1Y 4E9.

Glucocorticoids potentiate the early steps of preadipocyte differentiation and
promote obesity in Cushing's syndrome and during prolonged steroid therapy. We
show that glucocorticoids stimulate 3T3 L1 preadipocyte differentiation through a
non-transcriptional mechanism mediated through the ligand-binding domain of the
glucocorticoid receptor. This enhanced the onset of CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBPalpha) expression by potentiating its initial transcriptional
activation by C/EBPbeta. In the absence of steroid, C/EBPbeta associated with a
transcriptional corepressor complex containing mSin3A and histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1), but lacking HDAC2 and RbAp46/48. HDAC1/mSin3A were recruited to the
C/EBPalpha promoter with C/EBPbeta and promoted the deacetylation of histone H4. 
Steroid induced the specific depletion of this corepressor by targeting the HDAC1
within the complex for degradation through the 26S proteasome. Treatment with
histone deacetylase inhibitors replaced the effects of steroid treatment on
preadipocyte differentiation and C/EBPalpha expression, while overexpression of
HDAC1 abrogated the stimulatory effects of steroid. Recapitulation of the
glucocorticoid effect by progestin treatment in the presence of the progesterone 
receptor ligand-binding domain suggests a conserved mechanism relevant to many
aspects of steroid-mediated differentiation.

PMCID: PMC156090
PMID: 12727880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3456-67.

Identification and characterization of three new components of the mSin3A
corepressor complex.

Fleischer TC(1), Yun UJ, Ayer DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5555, USA.

The mSin3A corepressor complex contains 7 to 10 tightly associated polypeptides
and is utilized by many transcriptional repressors. Much of the corepressor
function of mSin3A derives from associations with the histone deacetylases HDAC1 
and HDAC2; however, the contributions of the other mSin3A-associated polypeptides
remain largely unknown. We have purified an mSin3A complex from K562
erythroleukemia cells and identified three new mSin3A-associated proteins (SAP): 
SAP180, SAP130, and SAP45. SAP180 is 40% identical to a previously identified
mSin3A-associated protein, RBP1. SAP45 is identical to mSDS3, the human ortholog 
of the SDS3p component of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sin3p-Rpd3p corepressor
complex. SAP130 does not have detectable homology to other proteins.
Coimmunoprecipitation and gel filtration data suggest that the new SAPs are, at
the very least, components of the same mSin3A complex. Each new SAP repressed
transcription when tethered to DNA. Furthermore, repression correlated with
mSin3A binding, suggesting that the new SAPs are components of functional mSin3A 
corepressor complexes. SAP180 has two repression domains: a C-terminal domain,
which interacts with the mSin3A-HDAC complex, and an N-terminal domain, which
functions independently of mSin3A-HDAC. SAP130 has a repression domain at its C
terminus that interacts with the mSin3A-HDAC complex and an N-terminal domain
that probably mediates an interaction with a transcriptional activator. Together,
our data suggest that these novel SAPs function in the assembly and/or enzymatic 
activity of the mSin3A complex or in mediating interactions between the mSin3A
complex and other regulatory complexes. Finally, all three SAPs bind to the
HDAC-interaction domain (HID) of mSin3A, suggesting that the HID functions as the
assembly interface for the mSin3A corepressor complex.

PMCID: PMC164750
PMID: 12724404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(9):3091-102.

Histone deacetylase 1/mSin3A disrupts gamma interferon-induced CIITA function and
major histocompatibility complex class II enhanceosome formation.

Zika E(1), Greer SF, Zhu XS, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, The University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The class II transactivator (CIITA) is a master transcriptional regulator of
major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) promoters. CIITA does not bind
DNA, but it interacts with the transcription factors RFX5, NF-Y, and CREB and
associated chromatin-modifying enzymes to form an enhanceosome. This report
examines the effects of histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1/HDAC2) on MHC-II gene
induction by gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) and CIITA. The results show that an
inhibitor of HDACs, trichostatin A, enhances IFN-gamma-induced MHC-II expression,
while HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibits IFN-gamma- and CIITA-induced MHC-II gene expression.
mSin3A, a corepressor of HDAC1/HDAC2, is important for this inhibition, while
NcoR, a corepressor of HDAC3, is not. The effect of this inhibition is directed
at CIITA, since HDAC1/HDAC2 reduces transactivation by a GAL4-CIITA fusion
protein. CIITA binds to overexpressed and endogenous HDAC1, suggesting that HDAC 
and CIITA may affect each other by direct or indirect association. Inhibition of 
HDAC activity dramatically increases the association of NF-YB and RFX5 with
CIITA, the assembly of CIITA, NF-YB, and RFX5 enhanceosome, and the extent of H3 
acetylation at the MHC-II promoter. These results suggest a model where
HDAC1/HDAC2 affect the function of CIITA through a disruption of MHC-II
enhanceosome and relevant coactivator-transcription factor association and
provide evidence that CIITA may act as a molecular switch to modulate MHC-II
transcription by coordinating the functions of both histone acetylases and HDACs.

PMCID: PMC153210
PMID: 12697811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Apr 15;31(8):2168-77.

Repression of E2F1-mediated transcription by the ErbB3 binding protein Ebp1
involves histone deacetylases.

Zhang Y(1), Woodford N, Xia X, Hamburger AW.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Ebp1, an ErbB3 binding protein that is a member of the proliferation-associated
PA2G4 family, inhibits the proliferation and induces the differentiation of human
ErbB positive breast and prostate cancer cell lines. Ebp1 binds the tumor
suppressor retinoblastoma protein (Rb) both in vivo and in vitro, and Rb and Ebp1
cooperate to inhibit the transcription of the E2F1-regulated cyclin E promoter.
We show here that Ebp1 can inhibit the transcription of other E2F-regulated
reporter genes and of several endogenous E2F-regulated genes important in cell
cycle progression in both Rb positive and Rb null cells. The Ebp1-mediated
transcriptional repression depended on the presence of an E2F1 consensus element 
in the promoters. A fusion of Ebp1 with the GAL4 DNA binding domain protein had
independent transcriptional repression activity that mapped to the C-terminal
region of Ebp1. This C-terminal region of Ebp1 bound functional histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity and inhibitors of HDAC significantly reduced
Ebp1-mediated repression. Ebp1 bound HDAC2, but not HDAC1, in vitro. An Ebp1
mutant lacking the HDAC binding domain failed to inhibit transcription. Our
results suggest that Ebp1 can repress transcription of some E2F-regulated
promoters and that one mechanism of Ebp1- mediated transcriptional repression is 
via its ability to recruit HDAC activity.

PMCID: PMC153746
PMID: 12682367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 21;302(4):759-66.

Methyl-CpG-DNA binding proteins in human prostate cancer: expression of CXXC
sequence containing MBD1 and repression of MBD2 and MeCP2.

Patra SK(1), Patra A, Zhao H, Carroll P, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Urology Research Center (112F), University of
California at San Francisco and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 4150 Clement
Street, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

We analyzed gene expression of MBD1, MBD2, MBD3, MBD4, and MeCP2 and protein
expression of MBD1, MBD2, and MeCP2 in prostate cancer cell lines, benign
prostate epithelium (BPH-1) cell line, 49 BPH tissues, and 46 prostate cancer
tissues. The results of this study demonstrate that MBD2 gene is expressed in all
samples and MeCP2 gene is expressed in all cancer cell lines but not in BPH-1
cell line. However, there was no protein expression for MBD2 and MeCP2 in cancer 
cell lines and cancer tissues. For CXXC sequence containing MBD1, both protein
and mRNA were expressed in cancer cell lines, cancer tissues, BPH-1 cell line,
and BPH tissues. We observed that, in BPH tissues and low-grade cancer tissues,
MBD1 protein expression was very high and gradually decreased with increase of
cancer grade. Treatment of cancer cell lines with proteasome inhibitor (MG-132)
did not restore expression of MBD2 and MeCP2 proteins. When prostate cancer cell 
lines were treated with hypomethylating agent, 5-aza-2(')-deoxycytidine (DNMT
inhibitor), HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression was decreased. This is the first report
demonstrating that CXXC sequence containing MBD1 is overexpressed and can be the 
major factor of hypermethylated chromatin segments through HDAC1/2 translocation 
and histone deacetylation in human prostate cancer.

PMID: 12646234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Virol. 2003 Apr;77(7):4261-72.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C recruits histone deacetylase activity and
associates with the corepressors mSin3A and NCoR in human B-cell lines.

Knight JS(1), Lan K, Subramanian C, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Pennsylvania Medical School, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) is a known regulatory
transcription factor that has been shown to interact with histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) when cotransfected in human cell lines and by in vitro binding
experiments. Previous studies have shown that EBNA3C interacts with p300 and
prothymosin alpha (ProTalpha) in EBV-infected cells and may be involved in
recruiting acetyltransferases to the chromatin for acetylation of histones and
transcriptional activation. EBNA3C has also been shown to function as a repressor
of transcription when directed to promoters. In this report, we show that EBNA3C 
complexed with ProTalpha can also recruit deacetylase activity and associates in 
a complex that includes HDAC1 and HDAC2 in human B cells. A complex of EBNA3C and
ProTalpha coimmunoprecipitated with HDAC1 and HDAC2 in cell lines stably
expressing EBNA3C. Additionally, this complex associated with the mSin3A and NCoR
corepressors in EBNA3C-expressing cell lines and may function in a complex with
additional transcription factors known to be repressors of transcription. EBNA3C 
in complex with ProTalpha recruited deacetylase activity in cell lines stably
expressing EBNA3C, and this activity was shown to be partially sensitive to
trichostatin A (TSA). This suggests an association with other deacetylases that
are insensitive to the general inhibitory effects of TSA, as the entire activity 
was not abolished in multiple assays. The association between EBNA3C and the
corepressors as well as HDACs is likely to depend on the presence of ProTalpha in
the complex. Immunoprecipitation with anti-ProTalpha antibody immunoprecipitated 
EBNA3C and the other repressors, whereas immunoprecipitation with anti-EBNA3C
antibody resulted in little or no association with these molecules associated
with transcription repression. Clearly, EBNA3C functions as a component of a
number of dynamic complexes which function in repression and activation of
transcription.

PMCID: PMC150657
PMID: 12634383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2002;98(1):29-37.

Physical map of the chromosome 6q22 region containing the oculodentodigital
dysplasia locus: analysis of thirteen candidate genes and identification of novel
ESTs and DNA polymorphisms.

Boyadjiev SA(1), Chowdry AB, Shapiro RE, Paznekas WA, Wandstrat AE, Choi JW,
Kasch L, Zhang G, Wollnik B, Burgess CE, Schalling M, Lovett M, Jabs EW.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Center for Craniofacial
Development and Disorders, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) is an autosomal dominant condition with
congenital anomalies of the craniofacial and limb regions and neurodegeneration. 
Genetic anticipation for the dysmorphic and neurologic features has been inferred
in a few families. Our previous linkage studies have refined the ODDD candidate
region to chromosome 6q22-->q23. In an attempt to clone the ODDD gene, we created
a yeast artificial chromosome contig with 31 redundant clones spanning the region
and identified and ordered candidate genes and markers. Fluorescent IN SITU
hybridization mapped two of these YAC clones to chromosome 6q22.2 telomeric to a 
known 6q21 fragile site, excluding it as a possible cause of the suggested
anticipation. We performed mutation analysis on thirteen candidate genes - GRIK2,
HDAC2, COL10A1, PTD013, KPNA5, PIST, ROS1, BRD7, PLN, HSF2, PKIB, FABP7, and
HEY2. Although no mutations were found, we identified 44 polymorphisms, including
28 single nucleotide polymorphisms. Direct cDNA selection was performed and
fifty-five clones were found to contain sequences that were not previously
reported as known genes or ESTs. These clones and polymorphisms will assist in
the further characterization of this region and identification of disease genes.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12584438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003 Mar;284(3):L533-40. Epub 2002 Nov 22.

Histone acetylation regulates epithelial IL-8 release mediated by oxidative
stress from environmental particles.

Gilmour PS(1), Rahman I, Donaldson K, MacNee W.

Author information: 
(1)Edinburgh Lung and the Environment Group Initiative/Colt Laboratory, The
University of Edinburgh, Department of Medicine and Radiological Sciences,
Medical School, Edinburgh EH8 9AG, United Kingdom.

Increases in the levels of environmental particulate matter with a diameter of
<10 microm diameter (PM(10)) in the air are associated with a variety of adverse 
health effects, particularly chronic lung and cardiovascular diseases. The
expression of many inflammatory genes involves the remodeling of the chromatin
structure provided by histone proteins. Histone acetylation causes the unwinding 
of chromatin structure, therefore allowing transcription factor access to
promoter sites. Acetylation is reversible and is regulated by histone
acetyltransferases (HATs), which promote acetylation, and deacetylases, which
promote deacetylation. PM(10) and H(2)O(2) increased IL-8 protein release from
A549 cells after 24-h treatment, and this was enhanced by histone deacetylase
inhibition by trichostatin A (cotreatment). PM(10) and H(2)O(2) treatment also
increased HAT activity as well as the level of acetylated histone 4 (H4). PM(10) 
enhanced H4 acetylation that was mediated by oxidative stress as shown by thiol
antioxidant inhibition. Acetylation of H4 mediated by PM(10) was associated with 
the promoter region of the IL-8 gene. These data suggest that remodeling of
chromatin by histone acetylation plays a role in PM(10)-mediated responses in the
lungs.

PMID: 12573991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Biol Reprod. 2003 Feb;68(2):383-9.

Quantification of histone acetyltransferase and histone deacetylase transcripts
during early bovine embryo development.

McGraw S(1), Robert C, Massicotte L, Sirard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Department of Animal
Sciences, Laval University, Québec, Canada G1K 7P4.

Mammalian oocytes are very unique cells with an unlimited developmental
potential. These totipotent cells are able to remove existing gene-expression
patterns and to impose new ones. However, genome reprogramming is still a
mystery. Posttranslational modifications by acetylation of the N-termini portion 
of histones composing the nucleosome are involved in genome reprogramming. These 
modifications alter the higher-order chromatin structure to render the DNA
accessible to the regulatory and transcriptional machinery. In the present study,
we have investigated, to our knowledge for the first time, precise expression
patterns of seven genes involved in chromatin structure throughout bovine embryo 
development. Oocytes harvested from bovine ovaries were used for in vitro
production of germinal vesicle oocytes, metaphase II oocytes, 2- and 8-cell
embryos, and blastocysts. Total RNA was extracted from pools (triplicates) of 20 
oocytes or from embryos of each developmental stage. By means of quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using SYBR Green to detect
double-stranded DNA, mRNA expression profiles for histone deacetylases (HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC7), histone acetyltransferases (GCN5 and HAT1), and histone
H2A were established. Transcripts for all genes were detected at all stages from 
the oocyte to the blastocyst. The HDAC1, HDAC2 (class I HDAC), and HAT1 (type B
HAT) revealed similar expression profiles. The HDAC3 (class I HDAC) tends to have
an expression profile similar to those of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HAT1, whereas the
HDAC7 (class II HDAC) and GCN5 (type A HAT) profiles were different from those
three. These results indicate variable levels of histone deacetylases and histone
acetyltransferases throughout embryonic development and may indicate the ones
that are involved in somatic remodeling.

PMID: 12533400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):11676-85. Epub 2003 Jan 13.

MTA1 interacts with MAT1, a cyclin-dependent kinase-activating kinase complex
ring finger factor, and regulates estrogen receptor transactivation functions.

Talukder AH(1), Mishra SK, Mandal M, Balasenthil S, Mehta S, Sahin AA, Barnes CJ,
Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The transcriptional activity of estrogen receptor-alpha is controlled by
coregulators. MTA1 (metastasis-associated protein 1) represses estrogen
receptor-alpha-driven transcription by recruiting histone deacetylases (HDACs) to
the estrogen response element containing target gene chromatin in breast cancer
cells. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen with the MTA1 C-terminal domain as bait,
we identified MAT1 (ménage á trois 1) as an MTA1-binding protein. MAT1 is an
assembly/targeting factor for cyclin-dependent kinase-activating kinase (CAK),
which has been shown to functionally interact with general transcriptional factor
TFIIH, a known inducer of ER transactivation. We show that estrogen signaling
promotes nuclear translocation of MAT1 and that MTA1 interacts with MAT1 both in 
vitro and in vivo. MAT1 binds to the C-terminal 389-441 amino acids GATA domain
and N-terminal 1-164 amino acids bromo-domain of MTA1, whereas MTA1 binds to the 
N-terminal ring finger domain of the MAT1. In addition, MAT1 interacts with the
activation function 2 domain of ER and colocalizes with ER in activated cells.
MTA1 deregulation in breast cancer cells led to its interactions with the CAK
complex components, ER, and HDAC2. Accordingly, MTA1 inhibited CAK stimulation of
ER transactivation that was partially relieved by HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A, 
suggesting that MTA1 might inhibit CAK-induced transactivation function of ER by 
recruiting HDAC. Furthermore, MTA1 overexpression inhibited the ability of CAK
complex to phosphorylate ER. Together, these findings identified MAT1 as a target
of MTA1 and provided new evidence to suggest that the transactivation functions
of ER might be influenced by the regulatory interactions between CAK and MTA1 in 
breast cancer cells.

PMID: 12527756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Virol. 2003 Jan;77(2):1357-67.

Mouse cytomegalovirus immediate-early protein 1 binds with host cell repressors
to relieve suppressive effects on viral transcription and replication during
lytic infection.

Tang Q(1), Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Herpesviruses start their transcriptional cascade at nuclear domain 10 (ND10).
The deposition of virus genomes at these nuclear sites occurs due to the binding 
of the interferon-inducible repressor protein promyelocytic leukemia protein
(PML) and/or Daxx to a viral DNA-protein complex. However, the presence of
repressive proteins at the nuclear site of virus transcription has remained
unexplained. We investigated the mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV) immediate-early 1
protein (IE1), which is necessary for productive infection at low multiplicities 
of infection and therefore likely to be involved in overcoming cellular
repression. Temporal analysis of IE1 distribution revealed its initial
segregation into ND10 by binding to PML and/or Daxx and IE1-dependent recruitment
of the transcriptional repressor histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC-2) to this site.
However, these protein aggregates are dissociated in cells producing sufficient
IE1 through titration of PML, Daxx, and HDAC-2. Importantly, binding of IE1 to
HDAC-2 decreased deacetylation activity. Moreover, inhibition of HDAC by
trichostatin-A resulted in an increase in viral protein synthesis, an increase in
cells starting the formation of prereplication compartments, and an increase in
the total infectious viruses produced. Thus, IE1, like trichostatin-A, reverses
the repressive effect of HDAC evident in the presence of acetylated histones in
the immediate-early promoter region. Since HDAC also binds to the promoter region
of IE1, as determined by the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, these combined 
results suggest that IE1 inhibits or reverses HDAC-mediated repression of the
infecting viral genomes, possibly by a process akin to activation of
heterochromatin. We propose that even permissive cells can repress transcription 
of infecting viral genomes through repressors, including HDAC, Daxx, and PML, and
the segregation of IE1 to ND10 that would inactivate those repressors. The virus 
can counter this repression by overexpressing IE1 when present in sufficient copy
number, thus reducing the availability and effectiveness of these repressors.

PMCID: PMC140816
PMID: 12502852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Nov 29;299(2):263-7.

Chicken HDAC2 down-regulates IgM light chain gene promoter activity.

Takechi S(1), Adachi M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Miyazaki Medical College, Kihara, Kiyotake,
889-1692, Miyazaki, Japan. stakechi@post1.miyazaki-med.ac.jp

In a chicken B cell line, DT40, the disruption of HDAC2 (chHDAC2) gene causes an 
alteration of several gene expressions including chicken IgM light chain
(chIgM-L) gene by 2D-PAGE analysis. To investigate the transcriptional function
of chHDAC2, we employed the chIgM-L promoter reporter plasmid. We found that
chHDAC2 represses activated chIgM-L promoter activity. In transient expression
experiments in NIH 3T3 cell, the specific histone deacetylase inhibitor
tricostatin A (TSA) increased transactivation of chIgM-L promoter activity
mediated by chicken Oct-1 and OBF-1 proteins. In transient coexpression of the
three class I chicken histone deacetylases (chHDAC1-3) tested, only chHDAC2
repressed the activated chIgM-L promoter activity. These findings suggest that
chHDAC2 might be recruited to the chIgM-L promoter and specifically repress
chIgM-L transcription.

PMID: 12437980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 24;278(4):2309-16. Epub 2002 Nov 12.

Repression of 92-kDa type IV collagenase expression by MTA1 is mediated through
direct interactions with the promoter via a mechanism, which is both dependent on
and independent of histone deacetylation.

Yan C(1), Wang H, Toh Y, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Although the expression of the metastases-associated gene MTA1 correlates with
tumor metastases, its role in regulating type IV collagenase expression is
unknown. Enforced MTA1 expression in HT1080 cells reduced basal and 12-myristate 
13-acetate-induced 92-kDa type IV collagenase (MMP-9) protein/mRNA levels. DNase 
I hypersensitivity and PstI accessibility assays revealed multiple regions of the
MMP-9 promoter (-650/-450 and -120/+1), showing reduced hypersensitivity in the
MTA1-expressing cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated MTA1
binding to the distal region, which spans several regulatory cis elements.
Co-immunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay experiments
revealed histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)-MTA1 protein-protein interactions and the 
MTA1-dependent recruitment of HDAC2 to the distal MMP-9 promoter region, yielding
diminished histone H3/H4 acetylation. However, HDAC2 binding and H3/H4
acetylation at the proximal MMP-9 region were unaffected by MTA1 expression.
Furthermore, trichostatin treatment only partially relieved MTA1-repressed MMP-9 
expression, indicating a HDAC-insensitive component possibly involv ing the
nucleosome-remodeling Mi2 activity, which was recruited to the promoter by MTA1. 
In summary, (a) MMP-9 adds to a short list of MTA1-regulated genes, which so far 
only includes c-myc and pS2, and (b) MTA1 binds to the MMP-9 promoter, thereby
repressing expression of this type IV collagenase via histone-dependent and
independent mechanisms.

PMID: 12431981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 24;278(4):2758-66. Epub 2002 Nov 4.

Post-activation turn-off of NF-kappa B-dependent transcription is regulated by
acetylation of p65.

Kiernan R(1), Brès V, Ng RW, Coudart MP, El Messaoudi S, Sardet C, Jin DY,
Emiliani S, Benkirane M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Institut de Génétique Humaine,
Montpellier 34296, France.

NF-kappaB represents a family of eukaryotic transcription factors participating
in the regulation of various cellular genes involved in the immediate early
processes of immune, acute-phase, and inflammatory responses. Cellular
localization and consequently the transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB is
tightly regulated by its partner IkappaBalpha. Here, we show that the p65 subunit
of NF-kappaB is acetylated by both p300 and PCAF on lysines 122 and 123. Both
HDAC2 and HDAC3 interact with p65, although only HDAC3 was able to deacetylate
p65. Acetylation of p65 reduces its ability to bind kappaBeta-DNA. Finally,
acetylation of p65 facilitated its removal from DNA and consequently its
IkappaBetaalpha-mediated export from the nucleus. We propose that acetylation of 
p65 plays a key role in IkappaBetaalpha-mediated attenuation of NF-kappaBeta
transcriptional activity which is an important process that restores the latent
state in post-induced cells.

PMID: 12419806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochem J. 2003 Feb 1;369(Pt 3):651-7.

An ERG (ets-related gene)-associated histone methyltransferase interacts with
histone deacetylases 1/2 and transcription co-repressors mSin3A/B.

Yang L(1), Mei Q, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, Matsui Y, Blackburn ML, Benedetti D,
Krumm AA, Taborsky GJ Jr, Chansky HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. lyang@u.washington.edu

Covalent modifications of histone tails play important roles in gene
transcription and silencing. We recently identified an ERG ( ets -related
gene)-associated protein with a SET (suppressor of variegation, enhancer of zest 
and trithorax) domain (ESET) that was found to have the activity of a histone
H3-specific methyltransferase. In the present study, we investigated the
interaction of ESET with other chromatin remodelling factors. We show that ESET
histone methyltransferase associates with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and
HDAC2, and that ESET also interacts with the transcription co-repressors mSin3A
and mSin3B. Deletion analysis of ESET reveals that an N-terminal region
containing a tudor domain is responsible for interaction with mSin3A/B and
association with HDAC1/2, and that truncation of ESET enhances its binding to
mSin3. When bound to a promoter, ESET represses the transcription of a downstream
luciferase reporter gene. This repression by ESET is independent of its histone
methyltransferase activity, but correlates with its binding to the mSin3
co-repressors. In addition, the repression can be partially reversed by treatment
with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A. Taken together, these data suggest that
ESET histone methyltransferase can form a large, multi-protein complex(es) with
mSin3A/B co-repressors and HDAC1/2 that participates in multiple pathways of
transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC1223118
PMID: 12398767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 1;62(17):4916-21.

FK228 (depsipeptide) as a natural prodrug that inhibits class I histone
deacetylases.

Furumai R(1), Matsuyama A, Kobashi N, Lee KH, Nishiyama M, Nakajima H, Tanaka A, 
Komatsu Y, Nishino N, Yoshida M, Horinouchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

FK228 is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, the molecular mechanism of
inhibition of which has been unknown. Here we show that reduction of an
intramolecular disulfide bond of FK228 greatly enhanced its inhibitory activity
and that the disulfide bond was rapidly reduced in cells by cellular reducing
activity involving glutathione. Computer modeling suggests that one of the
sulfhydryl groups of the reduced form of FK228 (redFK) interacts with the
active-site zinc, preventing the access of the substrate. HDAC1 and HDAC2 were
more strongly inhibited by redFK than HDAC4 and HDAC6. redFK was less active than
FK228 in inhibiting in vivo HDAC activity, due to rapid inactivation in medium
and serum. Thus, FK228 serves as a stable prodrug to inhibit class I enzymes and 
is activated by reduction after uptake into the cells. The glutathione-mediated
activation also implicates its clinical usefulness for counteracting
glutathione-mediated drug resistance in chemotherapy.

PMID: 12208741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cell. 2002 Aug 23;110(4):479-88.

Class II histone deacetylases act as signal-responsive repressors of cardiac
hypertrophy.

Zhang CL(1), McKinsey TA, Chang S, Antos CL, Hill JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas 75390, USA.

The heart responds to stress signals by hypertrophic growth, which is accompanied
by activation of the MEF2 transcription factor and reprogramming of cardiac gene 
expression. We show here that class II histone deacetylases (HDACs), which
repress MEF2 activity, are substrates for a stress-responsive kinase specific for
conserved serines that regulate MEF2-HDAC interactions. Signal-resistant HDAC
mutants lacking these phosphorylation sites are refractory to hypertrophic
signaling and inhibit cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Conversely, mutant mice lacking 
the class II HDAC, HDAC9, are sensitized to hypertrophic signals and exhibit
stress-dependent cardiomegaly. Thus, class II HDACs act as signal-responsive
suppressors of the transcriptional program governing cardiac hypertrophy and
heart failure.

PMCID: PMC4459650
PMID: 12202037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. EMBO J. 2002 Sep 2;21(17):4621-31.

TIS7 interacts with the mammalian SIN3 histone deacetylase complex in epithelial 
cells.

Vietor I(1), Vadivelu SK, Wick N, Hoffman R, Cotten M, Seiser C, Fialka I,
Wunderlich W, Haase A, Korinkova G, Brosch G, Huber LA.

Author information: 
(1)IMP, Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr Bohr-Gasse 7, A-1030
Vienna, Austria.

The mammalian SIN3 complex consists of histone deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2),
several known proteins (SAP30, N-CoR) and as yet unidentified proteins. Here we
show that the mouse tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate induced sequence 7 (TIS7)
protein is a novel transcriptional co-repressor that can associate with the SIN3 
complex. We have identified tis7 as a gene that is up-regulated upon loss of
polarity in a mouse mammary gland epithelial cell line expressing an
estrogen-inducible c-JunER fusion protein. In unpolarized cells, TIS7 protein
levels increase and TIS7 translocates into the nucleus. Overexpression of tis7
causes loss of polarity and represses a set of genes, as revealed by cDNA
microarray analysis. We have shown that TIS7 protein interacts with several
proteins of the SIN3 complex (mSin3B, HDAC1, N-CoR and SAP30) by yeast two-hybrid
screening and co-immunoprecipitations. TIS7 co-immunoprecipitated HDAC complex is
enzymatically active and represses a GAL4-dependent reporter transcription. The
transcriptional repression of endogenous genes by tis7 overexpression is HDAC
dependent. Thus, we propose TIS7 as a transcriptional co-repressor affecting the 
expression of specific genes in a HDAC activity-dependent manner during cell fate
decisions, e.g. scattering.

PMCID: PMC125408
PMID: 12198164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):35783-6. Epub 2002 Aug 9.

The transcriptional repressor Sp3 is associated with CK2-phosphorylated histone
deacetylase 2.

Sun JM(1), Chen HY, Moniwa M, Litchfield DW, Seto E, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 0V9, Canada.

Sp1 and Sp3 are ubiquitously expressed mammalian transcription factors that
function as activators or repressors. Although both transcription factors share a
common domain involved in forming multimers, we demonstrate that Sp1 and Sp3 form
separate complexes in estrogen-dependent human breast cancer cells. Sp1 and Sp3
complexes associate with histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1 and 2. Although most
HDAC2 is not phosphorylated in the breast cancer cells, HDAC2 bound to Sp1 and
Sp3 and cross-linked to chromatin in situ is highly enriched in a phosphorylated 
form that has a reduced mobility in SDS-polyacrylamide gels. We show that protein
kinase CK2 is associated with and phosphorylates HDAC2. Alkaline phosphatase
treatment of HDAC2 and Sp1 and Sp3 complexes reduced the associated HDAC
activity. Protein kinase CK2 is up-regulated in several cancers including breast 
cancer, and Sp1 and Sp3 have key roles in estrogen-induced proliferation and gene
expression in estrogen-dependent breast cancer cells. CK2 phosphorylation of
HDAC2 recruited by Sp1 or Sp3 could regulate HDAC activity and alter the balance 
of histone deacetylase and histone acetyltransferase activities and dynamic
chromatin remodeling of estrogen-regulated genes.

PMID: 12176973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Aug 1;166(3):392-6.

Expression and activity of histone deacetylases in human asthmatic airways.

Ito K(1), Caramori G, Lim S, Oates T, Chung KF, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School 
of Medicine, Dovehouse Street, London, SW3 6LY UK.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Aug 1;166(3):260-1.

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease that is characterized by increased
expression of multiple inflammatory genes. Chromatin modification plays a
critical role in the regulation of these genes. Acetyaltion of histones by
histone acetyltransferases (HATs) is associated with increased gene
transcription, whereas hypocetylation induced by histone deacetylases (HDACs) is 
associated with suppression of gene expression. We have examined the expression
and activity of HATs and HDACs in bronchial biopsies from normal subjects and
subjects with asthma. There was no difference in the site of HDAC1-HDAC6
expression between normal subjects and subjects with asthma, but subjects with
asthma had reduced HDAC enzymatic activity and reduced HDAC1 and HDAC2 protein
expression, as measured by Western blotting. In contrast, subjects with asthma
treated with inhaled steroids were found to have greater HDAC activity than
untreated subjects with asthma, although still lower than control subjects. In
contrast, although there was no change in the site of HAT (CREB binding protein
and p300/CREB binding protein-associated factor) expression, HAT activity was
increased in subjects with asthma. HAT activity was reduced to control levels in 
subjects with asthma treated with inhaled steroids. The increase in HAT activity 
and reduced HDAC activity in asthma may underlie the increased expression of
multiple inflammatory genes, and this is reversed, at least in part, by treatment
with inhaled steroids.

PMID: 12153977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 11;277(41):38230-8. Epub 2002 Jul 31.

Sp1 and Sp3 recruit histone deacetylase to repress transcription of human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter in normal human somatic cells.

Won J(1), Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Activation of telomerase is crucial for cells to gain immortality. In human
cells, telomerase activity is tightly regulated by the expression of its
catalytic subunit, human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). In most normal
human somatic cells, hTERT is not expressed, and its suppression acts as an
important gatekeeper against tumorigenesis. Here we describe the systematic
analyses of hTERT promoter to understand the transcriptional repression mechanism
of the hTERT gene in normal human somatic cells. Through the serial deletion
analysis of hTERT promoter in normal human fibroblasts, we identified a critical 
repressive element on the hTERT promoter. The repressive element formed
DNA-protein complexes with Sp1 and Sp3 in nuclear extracts. Using formaldehyde
cross-linked chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, we found that Sp1 and Sp3
were associated with the endogenously repressed hTERT promoter in human
fibroblasts. Furthermore, Sp1 and Sp3 interacted with histone deacetylase (HDAC) 
in these cells. Overexpression of dominant-negative mutants of Sp1 and Sp3, which
contained mainly the HDAC2-binding domain, relieved the HDAC-mediated repression 
of the hTERT promoter. Taken together, these results suggest that Sp1 and Sp3
associate with the hTERT promoter, recruiting HDAC for the localized
deacetylation of nucleosomal histones and transcriptional silencing of the hTERT 
gene in normal human somatic cells.

PMID: 12151407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Cell Sci. 2002 Aug 15;115(Pt 16):3319-30.

Daxx and histone deacetylase II associate with chromatin through an interaction
with core histones and the chromatin-associated protein Dek.

Hollenbach AD(1), McPherson CJ, Mientjes EJ, Iyengar R, Grosveld G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 North
Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Human Daxx is a protein that functions, in part, as a transcriptional
co-repressor through its interaction with a growing number of nuclear,
DNA-associated proteins. To determine the mechanism by which hDaxx represses
transcription, we used conventional chromatography to isolate endogenous hDaxx.
We determined that hDaxx has an apparent molecular weight of 360 kDa, which is
consistent with the fact that multiple domains of hDaxx are required for
transcriptional repression and suggests that hDaxx associates with multiple
proteins. Using co-fractionation and co-immunoprecipitation we demonstrate that
hDaxx associates with proteins that are critical for transcriptional repression, 
such as histone deacetylase II, constituents of chromatin such as core histones
H2A, H2B, H3 and H4, and Dek, a chromatin-associated protein reported to change
the topology of DNA in chromatin in vitro. We also demonstrate a requirement for 
the SPT domain and the first paired amphipathic helix of hDaxx for its
association with histone deacetylase II and acetylated histone H4, respectively. 
Finally, we provide evidence suggesting that the association of hDaxx with
chromatin-related proteins is dependent on the post-translational phosphorylation
status of hDaxx. A working model for the repressive action of hDaxx through its
association with chromatin related proteins is presented.

PMID: 12140263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2002 Aug;13(8):2009-17.

Histone deacetylases augment cytokine induction of the iNOS gene.

Yu Z(1), Zhang W, Kone BC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Department of Integrative Biology,
Pharmacology and Physiology, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston,
Houston Texas 77030, USA.

The inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene plays an important role in renal 
diseases. Transcription is the principal mode of regulation. This study explores 
the role of acetylation in cytokine-mediated iNOS induction in cultured murine
mesangial cells and RAW 264.7 cells. Nitric oxide production was measured by the 
Griess reaction. The activity of the iNOS promoter and a nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-kappa B) element promoter were assessed in transient transfection assays. Gel
shift and supershift assays were used to identify NF-kappa B in nuclear extracts.
Protein-protein interactions were assayed by co-immunoprecipitation and GST
pull-down assays. Treatment with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA) and overexpression of HDAC isoforms were used to assess the 
impact of acetylation status on iNOS and NF-kappa B element promoter activity.
TSA inhibited induction of endogenous NO production and iNOS as well as NF-kappa 
B element promoter activity in response to interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) + interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in both cell types
without altering NF-kappa B DNA binding activity. Overexpression of specific HDAC
isoforms enhanced cytokine induction of both the iNOS and the NF-kappa B element 
promoter. HDAC2 and NF-kappa B p65 co-immunoprecipitated from mesangial cell
nuclear extracts, and in vitro translated HDAC2 specifically interacted with an
NF-kappa B p65 GST fusion protein. Hyperacetylation diminishes cytokine induction
of iNOS transcription activity, at least partially, by limiting the functional
efficacy of NF-kappa B. The specific recruitment of HDAC2 to NF-kappa B at target
promoters and the consequent effects on acetylation status may play an important 
role in regulating iNOS as well as other NF-kappa B-dependent genes involved in
inflammation.

PMID: 12138131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):33431-8. Epub 2002 Jun 28.

Silencing of transcription of the human luteinizing hormone receptor gene by
histone deacetylase-mSin3A complex.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Modification of chromatin structure by histone acetylases and deacetylases is an 
important mechanism in modulation of eukaryotic gene transcription. The present
study investigated regulation of the human luteinizing hormone receptor (hLHR)
gene by histone deacetylases. Inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by
trichostatin A (TSA) increased hLHR promoter activity by 40-fold in JAR cells and
markedly elevated endogenous hLHR mRNA levels. Acetylated histones H3 and H4
accumulated in TSA-treated cells and associated predominantly with the hLHR
promoter. Furthermore, TSA significantly enhanced the recruitment of RNA
polymerase II to the promoter. One of the two Sp1 sites essential for basal
promoter activity was identified as critical for the TSA effect, but the binding 
of Sp1/Sp3 to this site remained unchanged in the absence or presence of TSA. A
multiprotein complex was recruited to the hLHR promoter via interaction with Sp1 
and Sp3, in which HDAC1 and HDAC2 were docked directly to Sp1-bound DNA and
indirectly to Sp3-bound DNA through RbAp48, while mSin3A interacted with both
HDACs. HDAC1 and HDAC2 were shown to potently repress the hLHR gene
transcription, and mSin3A potentiated the inhibition mediated by HDAC1. Our
studies have demonstrated that the HDAC-mSin3A complex has an important role in
the regulation of hLHR gene transcription by interaction with Sp1/Sp3 and by
region-specific changes in histone acetylation and polymerase II recruitment
within the hLHR promoter.

PMID: 12091390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31826-33. Epub 2002 Jun 24.

Regulation of histone deacetylase 2 by protein kinase CK2.

Tsai SC(1), Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is a member of a large family of enzymes that alter
gene expression by catalyzing the removal of acetyl groups from core histones.
Originally isolated as a transcriptional co-repressor, HDAC2 possesses extensive 
amino acid sequence homology to HDAC1 (the founding member and most extensively
studied HDAC enzyme). Because of this high degree of sequence similarity between 
HDAC1 and HDAC2, coupled with the fact that the two always co-exist in the same
complexes, it is difficult to assess whether different properties exist between
these two proteins. We report here that HDAC2 is a phosphoprotein similar to
HDAC1. In addition, like HDAC1, the phospho-acceptor sites in HDAC2 are located
in the C-terminal portion of the protein. However, unlike HDAC1, which can be
phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2, cAMP-dependent protein kinase, and protein 
kinase G, HDAC2 is phosphorylated uniquely by protein kinase CK2 in vitro.
Studies using unfractionated cell extracts with CK2 inhibitors suggest that
protein kinase CK2 is the major source of HDAC2 kinase. Finally, and perhaps most
interesting, HDAC2 phosphorylation promotes enzymatic activity, selectively
regulates complex formation, but has no effect on transcriptional repression.
Together, our data indicate that like many HDACs, HDAC2 is regulated by
post-translational modification, particularly phosphorylation. Furthermore, we
demonstrate for the first time that there are similarities and differences in the
regulation of HDAC1 and HDAC2 by phosphorylation.

PMID: 12082111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 3;21(11):2672-81.

Essential function of histone deacetylase 1 in proliferation control and CDK
inhibitor repression.

Lagger G(1), O'Carroll D, Rembold M, Khier H, Tischler J, Weitzer G,
Schuettengruber B, Hauser C, Brunmeir R, Jenuwein T, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Division of Molecular Biology, University
of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/2, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) modulate chromatin structure and transcription, but 
little is known about their function in mammalian development. HDAC1 was
implicated previously in the repression of genes required for cell proliferation 
and differentiation. Here we show that targeted disruption of both HDAC1 alleles 
results in embryonic lethality before E10.5 due to severe proliferation defects
and retardation in development. HDAC1-deficient embryonic stem cells show reduced
proliferation rates, which correlate with decreased cyclin-associated kinase
activities and elevated levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p27(KIP1). Similarly, expression of p21 and p27 is
up-regulated in HDAC1-null embryos. In addition, loss of HDAC1 leads to
significantly reduced overall deacetylase activity, hyperacetylation of a subset 
of histones H3 and H4 and concomitant changes in other histone modifications. The
expression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 is induced in HDAC1-deficient cells, but cannot
compensate for loss of the enzyme, suggesting a unique function for HDAC1. Our
study provides the first evidence that a histone deacetylase is essential for
unrestricted cell proliferation by repressing the expression of selective cell
cycle inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC126040
PMID: 12032080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23658-63. Epub 2002 Apr 17.

SUMO-1 modification of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) modulates its biological
activities.

David G(1), Neptune MA, DePinho RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Histone deacetylation plays a central role in the regulation of genes linked to
virtually all biological processes. This modification reaction is dependent on a 
family of related histone deacetylases (HDACs), which function as key components 
of large multiprotein complexes involved in the development of normal and
neoplastic cells. The mechanisms regulating HDACs and their roles in such
processes are not understood, and these form the major focus for the current
study. Here, in the course of assessing possible post-translational modifications
of HDAC1, we demonstrated that HDAC1 is a substrate for SUMO-1 (small
ubiquitin-related modifier) modification in vitro and in vivo. The HDAC1 lysines 
targeted for modification were identified as C-terminal Lys-444 and Lys-476,
which are also present in mammalian HDAC2 and lower vertebrate HDAC1/2 orthologs 
yet absent from other HDAC family members, pointing to a means of differential
regulation among HDAC proteins. Mutation of these target residues (lysine to
arginine substitution) profoundly reduced HDAC1-mediated transcriptional
repression in reporter assays without affecting HDAC1 ability to associate with
mSin3A and eliminated HDAC1-induced cell cycle and apoptotic responses upon
overexpression. Together, the results demonstrate that HDAC1 is modified by
SUMO-1, and this modification can dramatically affect HDAC1 activity in a number 
of surrogate biological assays.

PMID: 11960997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Curr Biol. 2002 Apr 2;12(7):594-8.

Histone deacetylase 1 inactivation by an adenovirus early gene product.

Chiocca S(1), Kurtev V, Colombo R, Boggio R, Sciurpi MT, Brosch G, Seiser C,
Draetta GF, Cotten M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141,
Milan, Italy. schiocca@ieo.it

Gam1 is an early gene product of the avian adenovirus CELO and is essential for
viral replication. Gam1 has no homology to any known proteins; however, its early
expression and nuclear localization suggest that the protein functions to
influence transcription in the infected cell. A determinant of eukaryotic gene
expression is the acetylation state of chromosomal histones and other nuclear
proteins. We find that Gam1 expression increases the level of transcription from 
a variety of eukaryotic promoters, similar to the effect of treating cells with
the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA ). We show that Gam1
can effectively inhibit histone deacetylation by HDAC1 and that Gam1 binds to
HDAC1 both in vitro and in vivo. A CELO virus lacking Gam1 (CELOdG) is
replication defective, but the defect can be overcome by either expressing an
interfering HDAC1 mutant or by treating infected cells with TSA. The
identification of a viral early gene product having the specific function of
binding and inactivating HDAC suggests that deacetylase complexes play an
important role in limiting early gene expression from invading viruses.

PMID: 11937030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):19618-26. Epub 2002 Mar 27.

Phosphatase inhibition leads to histone deacetylases 1 and 2 phosphorylation and 
disruption of corepressor interactions.

Galasinski SC(1), Resing KA, Goodrich JA, Ahn NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.

The regulation of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by phosphorylation was examined by
elevating intracellular phosphorylation in cultured cells with the protein
phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid. After fractionation of extracts from treated 
versus untreated cells, HDAC 1 and 2 eluted in several peaks of deacetylase
activity, assayed using mixed acetylated histones or acetylated histone H4
peptide. Stimulation of cells with okadaic acid led to hyperphosphorylation of
HDAC 1 and 2 as well as changes in column elution of both enzymes.
Hyperphosphorylated HDAC2 was also observed in cells synchronized with nocodazole
or taxol, demonstrating regulation of HDAC phosphorylation during mitosis.
Phosphorylated HDAC1 and 2 showed a gel mobility retardation that correlated with
a small but significant increase in activity, both of which were reversed upon
phosphatase treatment in vitro. However, the most pronounced effect of HDAC
phosphorylation was to disrupt protein complex formation between HDAC1 and 2 as
well as complex formation between HDAC1 and corepressors mSin3A and YY1. In
contrast, interactions between HDAC1/2 and RbAp46/48 were unaffected by okadaic
acid. These results establish a novel link between HDAC phosphorylation and the
control of protein-protein interactions and suggest a mechanism for relief of
deacetylase-catalyzed transcriptional repression by phosphorylation-dependent
signaling.

PMID: 11919195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Genes Dev. 2002 Mar 15;16(6):687-92.

Specific targeting and constitutive association of histone deacetylase complexes 
during transcriptional repression.

Li J(1), Lin Q, Wang W, Wade P, Wong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Specific recruitment of corepressor complexes containing histone deacetylases
(HDAC) by transcription factors is believed to play an essential role in
transcriptional repression. Recent studies indicate that repression by unliganded
nuclear hormone receptors and by the Mad family of repressors requires distinct
HDAC-containing corepressor complexes. In this work, we show that unliganded TR
specifically recruits only the closely related N-CoR and SMRT-HDAC3 complexes,
whereas the Mad1 recruits only the Sin3-HDAC1/2 complex. Significantly, both the 
Sin3 and Mi-2/NURD complexes also exhibit constitutive association with chromatin
and contribute to chromatin deacetylation in a nontargeted fashion. These results
suggest that HDAC complexes can contribute to gene repression by two distinct
mechanisms as follows: (1) specific targeting by repressors and (2) constitutive 
association with chromatin.

PMCID: PMC155360
PMID: 11914274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Genomics. 2002 Mar;79(3):423-31.

NAPP2, a peroxisomal membrane protein, is also a transcriptional corepressor.

Gavva NR(1), Wen SC, Daftari P, Moniwa M, Yang WM, Yang-Feng LP, Seto E, Davie
JR, Shen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Nuclear factor-erythroid number 2 (NF-E2) is a positive regulatory, DNA binding
transcription factor for gene expression in erythroid and megakaryocytic cells.
To further understand the mechanisms of NF-E2 function, we used expression
cloning to identify coregulators interacting with the erythroid-specific subunit 
of NF-E2, p45. We have isolated a protein, NAPP2, which contains an
aspartic-acid- and glutamic-acid-rich region and a nuclear localization signal.
The gene encoding NAPP2, PEX14, is located on chromosome 1p36 and is ubiquitously
expressed. The domains of interaction in vitro and in vivo between p45 and NAPP2 
were mapped by a yeast two-hybrid system and cotransfection experiments. In
mammalian cell culture, ectopically expressed NAPP2 inhibited p45-directed
transcriptional activation. Furthermore, NAPP2 functions as a corepressor and
interacts specifically with histone deacetylase l (HDAC1), but not HDAC2 or
HDAC3. NAPP2 is thus potentially a negative coregulator of NF-E2. NAPP2 is
identical to PEX14, an integral membrane protein essential for protein docking
onto the peroxisomes. These studies have identified a novel, bifunctional protein
capable of acting as a transcriptional corepressor and a polypeptide transport
modulator. They also suggest that NF-E2 may function both positively and
negatively in the transcription regulation of specific erythroid and
megakaryocytic genes.

PMID: 11863372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cancer Gene Ther. 2002 Feb;9(2):117-25.

Inhibition of LNCaP prostate tumor growth in vivo by an antisense oligonucleotide
directed against the human androgen receptor.

Eder IE(1), Hoffmann J, Rogatsch H, Schäfer G, Zopf D, Bartsch G, Klocker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Innsbruck, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Erratum in
    Cancer Gene Ther. 2007 Nov;14(11):934.

We have shown recently that a 15-mer phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotide
(ODNas750/15) that hybridizes to the (CAG)n polyglutamine region of mRNA encoding
human androgen receptor (AR) inhibits the expression of AR in LNCaP prostate
cancer cells in vitro. This AR downregulation was accompanied by significant cell
growth inhibition and reduced PSA secretion. In the present study we investigated
the effects of this antisense AR ODN on prostate tumor growth in vivo using a
mouse xenograft model. Via subcutaneously implanted diffusion pumps, either
ODNas750/15 or a scrambled control sequence ODNsr750/15 was continuously
administered into LNCaP tumor-bearing male nude mice for 7 weeks. Compared with
untreated control animals, treatment with ODNas750/15 resulted in significant
tumor growth inhibition. Retardation of tumor growth was also significant in
castrated mice, whereas the scrambled control ODN did not exert any effects. No
side effects such as loss of body weight were observed at any time of treatment. 
ODN treatment was well tolerated and, in contrast to castration, did not induce
shrinkage of mouse prostates. Both AR expression in the tumor and PSA levels in
mouse serum correlated with tumor size. However, we failed to demonstrate a
correlation between tumor retardation and Ki-67 antigen expression and the number
of apoptotic cells, respectively. Testing of antisense-treated LNCaP cells
revealed that expression levels of other proteins that contain shorter
polyglutamine sequence stretches such as HDAC2, TFIID, and c-jun were not
affected. The present study demonstrates that downregulation of AR with antisense
ODNas750/15 causes prostate tumor growth inhibition. These results further point 
out the important role of the AR in prostate tumors and support further testing
of AR downregulation for treatment of prostate cancer.

PMID: 11857028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Chem Biol. 2002 Jan;9(1):3-16.

Deacetylase enzymes: biological functions and the use of small-molecule
inhibitors.

Grozinger CM(1), Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Harvard University, 12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

PMID: 11841934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):14869-76. Epub 2002 Feb 8.

Murine Sall1 represses transcription by recruiting a histone deacetylase complex.

Kiefer SM(1), McDill BW, Yang J, Rauchman M.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 
63110, USA.

The multi-zinc finger proteins of the Sal family regulate organogenesis. Genetic 
evidence from Drosophila has shown that spalt (sal) can alter gene expression in 
a cell autonomous fashion, but Sal proteins have never been directly analyzed for
their ability to activate or repress transcription. In this report, we show that 
a member of the Sal family, mouse Sall1, is a potent transcriptional repressor.
When fused to a heterologous DNA-binding domain, Sall1 represses transcription of
a luciferase reporter by over 100-fold. Expression of the N terminus alone is
sufficient for dose-responsive repression that, as shown by deletion analysis,
requires the extreme N-terminal amino acids of the protein. The N terminus of
Sall1 can repress at both short and long range relative to the promoter, and
treatment with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A,
alleviates repression by 3-fold. The same regions of the protein that are
required for repression physically interact with components of chromatin
remodeling complexes, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46/48, MTA-1, and MTA-2. Finally, we
demonstrate that Sall1 is localized to discrete nuclear foci and this
localization depends on the N-terminal repression domain. Together, these results
suggest that the N terminus of mouse Sall1 can recruit HDAC complexes to mediate 
transcriptional repression.

PMID: 11836251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jan 15;30(2):475-81.

Functional and physical interaction between the histone methyl transferase
Suv39H1 and histone deacetylases.

Vaute O(1), Nicolas E, Vandel L, Trouche D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, CNRS UMR 5099, 118 Route de
Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France.

The histone methyl transferase Suv39H1 is involved in silencing by pericentric
heterochromatin. It specifically methylates K9 of histone H3, thereby creating a 
high affinity binding site for HP1 proteins. We and others have shown recently
that it is also involved in transcriptional repression by the retinoblastoma
protein Rb. Strikingly, both HP1 localisation and repression by Rb also require, 
at least in part, histone deacetylases. We found here that repression of a
heterologous promoter by Suv39H1 is dependent on histone deacetylase activity.
However, the enzymatic activity of Suv39H1 is not required, since the N-terminal 
part is by itself a transcriptional repression domain. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments indicated that Suv39H1 can physically interact with HDAC1, -2 and -3,
therefore suggesting that transcriptional repression by Suv39H1 could be the
consequence of histone deacetylases recruitment. Consistent with this
interpretation, the N-terminal transcriptional repression domain of Suv39H1 bound
the so-called 'core histone deacetylase complex', composed of HDAC1, HDAC2 and
the Rb-associated proteins RbAp48 and RbAp46. Taken together, our results suggest
that a complex containing both the Suv39H1 histone methyl transferase and histone
deacetylases could be involved in heterochromatin silencing or transcriptional
repression by Rb.

PMCID: PMC99834
PMID: 11788710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;22(3):835-48.

Role of the Sin3-histone deacetylase complex in growth regulation by the
candidate tumor suppressor p33(ING1).

Kuzmichev A(1), Zhang Y, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Sin3 is an evolutionarily conserved corepressor that exists in different
complexes with the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. Sin3-HDAC complexes are 
believed to deacetylate nucleosomes in the vicinity of Sin3-regulated promoters, 
resulting in a repressed chromatin structure. We have previously found that a
human Sin3-HDAC complex includes HDAC1 and HDAC2, the histone-binding proteins
RbAp46 and RbAp48, and two novel polypeptides SAP30 and SAP18. SAP30 is a
specific component of Sin3 complexes since it is absent in other
HDAC1/2-containing complexes such as NuRD. SAP30 mediates interactions with
different polypeptides providing specificity to Sin3 complexes. We have
identified p33ING1b, a negative growth regulator involved in the p53 pathway, as 
a SAP30-associated protein. Two distinct Sin3-p33ING1b-containing complexes were 
isolated, one of which associates with the subunits of the Brg1-based Swi/Snf
chromatin remodeling complex. The N terminus of p33ING1b, which is divergent
among a family of ING1 polypeptides, associates with the Sin3 complex through
direct interaction with SAP30. The N-terminal domain of p33 is present in several
uncharacterized human proteins. We show that overexpression of p33ING1b
suppresses cell growth in a manner dependent on the intact Sin3-HDAC-interacting 
domain.

PMCID: PMC133546
PMID: 11784859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9447-54. Epub 2002 Jan 4.

Functional domains of histone deacetylase-3.

Yang WM(1), Tsai SC, Wen YD, Fejer G, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Post-translational modifications of histones, in general, and
acetylation/deacetylation, in particular, can dramatically alter gene expression 
in eukaryotic cells. In humans, four highly homologous class I HDAC enzymes
(HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8) have been identified to date. Although HDAC3
shares some structural and functional similarities with other class I HDACs, it
exists in multisubunit complexes separate and different from other known HDAC
complexes, implying that individual HDACs might function in a distinct manner. In
this current study, to understand further the cellular function of HDAC3 and to
uncover possible unique roles this protein may have in gene regulation, we
performed a detailed analysis of HDAC3 using deletion mutations. Surprisingly, we
found that the non-conserved C-terminal region of HDAC3 is required for both
deacetylase and transcriptional repression activity. In addition, we discovered
that the central portion of the HDAC3 protein possesses a nuclear export signal, 
whereas the C-terminal part of HDAC3 contributes to the protein's localization in
the nucleus. Finally, we found that HDAC3 forms oligomers in vitro and in vivo
and that the N-terminal portion of HDAC3 is necessary for this property. These
data indicate that HDAC3 comprises separate, non-overlapping domains that
contribute to the unique properties and function of this protein.

PMID: 11779848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6656-66. Epub 2001 Dec 5.

Isolation and characterization of a novel class II histone deacetylase, HDAC10.

Fischer DD(1), Cai R, Bhatia U, Asselbergs FA, Song C, Terry R, Trogani N, Widmer
R, Atadja P, Cohen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Summit, New
Jersey 07901, USA.

A novel histone deacetylase, HDAC10, was isolated from a mixed tissue human cDNA 
library. HDAC10 was classified as a class II subfamily member based upon
similarity to HDAC6. The genomic structure of HDAC10 was found to consist of 20
exons. HDAC10 has two sequence variants, HDAC10v1 and HDAC10v2, and two
transcripts were detectable by Northern blot analysis. HDAC10v1 and HDAC10v2 were
found to be identical through exon 17 but diverged after this exon. HDAC10v2 has 
an 82-bp alternate exon that generates a frameshift and shortens the sequence by 
11 amino acids. In this study, the characterization of HDAC10v1 was performed.
HDAC10v1 has an N-terminal catalytic domain, two putative C-terminal
retinoblastoma protein binding domains, and a nuclear hormone receptor binding
motif. The HDAC10v1 enzyme was found to be catalytically active based upon its
ability to deacetylate a (3)H-acetylated histone H4 N-terminal peptide.
Immunofluorescence detection of transfected HDAC10v1-FLAG indicated that the
enzyme is a nuclear protein. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation experiments
indicated that HDAC10v1 associated with HDAC2 and SMRT (silencing mediator for
retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors). In addition, based upon the public data 
base, a single nucleotide polymorphism was found in the C terminus of HDAC10
which changes a Gly residue to Cys, suggesting that HDAC10 molecules containing
these single nucleotide polymorphisms may be folded improperly. HDAC10 extends
the HDAC superfamily and adds to a growing number of HDACs that have been found
to have splice variants, suggesting that RNA processing may play a role in
mediating the activity of HDACs.

PMID: 11739383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 9;288(4):921-6.

5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine induces histone hyperacetylation of mouse centromeric
heterochromatin by a mechanism independent of DNA demethylation.

Takebayashi S(1), Nakao M, Fujita N, Sado T, Tanaka M, Taguchi H, Okumura K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioresources, Mie University, 1515 Kamihama, Tsu, Mie, 514-8507,
Japan. ol31233@cc.mie-u.ac.jp

5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azadC) is widely used as a potent inhibitor of DNA
methyltransferase. Cells treated with this drug show various phenomena such as
the reactivation of repressed genes, change in replication timing, and
decondensation of heterochromatin. A number of studies using this drug have been 
reported so far but it is still controversial whether such changes are due to
5-azadC-induced demethylation itself or the side effects of the drug. Here we
report that 5-azadC treatment induces histone hyperacetylation in mouse
centromeric heterochromatin which normally contains methylated DNA and
hypoacetylated histones. Treatment also affects the intranuclear distribution of 
histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2). However, histone hyperacetylation was not observed
in DNA methyltransferase 1-deficient cells with a reduced level of genomic DNA
methylation. Our results suggest that 5-azadC-induced histone hyperacetylation is
independent of DNA demethylation and that DNA methylation is not essential for
the maintenance of the histone hypoacetylated state in centromeric
heterochromatin.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11688997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47733-41. Epub 2001 Oct 15.

Histone deacetylase 1 phosphorylation promotes enzymatic activity and complex
formation.

Pflum MK(1), Tong JK, Lane WS, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Accessibility of the genome to DNA-binding transcription factors is regulated by 
proteins that control the acetylation of amino-terminal lysine residues on
nucleosomal histones. Specifically, histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins repress
transcription by deacetylating histones. To date, the only known regulatory
mechanism of HDAC1 function is via interaction with associated proteins. Although
the control of HDAC1 function by protein interaction and recruitment is well
precedented, we were interested in exploring HDAC1 regulation by
post-translational modification. Human HDAC1 protein was analyzed by ion trap
mass spectrometry, and two phosphorylated serine residues, Ser(421) and Ser(423),
were unambiguously identified. Loss of phosphorylation at Ser(421) and Ser(423)
due to mutation to alanine or disruption of the casein kinase 2 consensus
sequence directing phosphorylation reduced the enzymatic activity and complex
formation of HDAC1. Deletion of the highly charged carboxyl-terminal region of
HDAC1 also decreased its deacetylase activity and protein associations, revealing
its requirement in maintaining HDAC1 function. Our results reinforce the
importance of protein associations in modulating HDAC1 function and provide the
first step toward characterizing the role of post-translational modifications in 
regulating HDAC activity in vivo.

PMID: 11602581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 27;20(43):6152-63.

Role of LXCXE motif-dependent interactions in the activity of the retinoblastoma 
protein.

Chan HM(1), Smith L, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Davidson Building, University 
of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK.

Cell cycle control by pRb requires the integrity of the pocket domain, which is a
region necessary for interactions with a variety of proteins, including E2F and
LXCXE-motif containing proteins. Through knowledge of the crystal structure of
pRb we have prepared a panel of pRb mutant derivatives in which a cluster of
lysine residues that demark the LXCXE peptide binding domain were systematically 
mutated. One of the mutant derivatives, Rb6A, exhibits significantly reduced
LXCXE-dependent interactions with HPV E7, cyclinD1 and HDAC2, but retained
LXCXE-independent binding to E2F. Consistent with these results, Rb6A could
down-regulate E2F-1-dependent activation of different E2F responsive promoters,
but was compromised in Rb-dependent repression. Most importantly, Rb6A retained
wild-type growth arrest activity, and colony forming activity similar to
wild-type pRb. It is compatible with these results that directly targeting HDAC2 
to E2F responsive promoters as an E2F/HDAC hybrid protein failed to effect cell
cycle arrest. These results suggest that LXCXE-dependent interactions are not
essential for pRb to exert growth arrest.

PMID: 11593423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;21(20):7065-77.

The p65 (RelA) subunit of NF-kappaB interacts with the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
corepressors HDAC1 and HDAC2 to negatively regulate gene expression.

Ashburner BP(1), Westerheide SD, Baldwin AS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Regulation of NF-kappaB transactivation function is controlled at several levels,
including interactions with coactivator proteins. Here we show that the
transactivation function of NF-kappaB is also regulated through interaction of
the p65 (RelA) subunit with histone deacetylase (HDAC) corepressor proteins. Our 
results show that inhibition of HDAC activity with trichostatin A (TSA) results
in an increase in both basal and induced expression of an integrated
NF-kappaB-dependent reporter gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
show that TSA treatment causes hyperacetylation of the wild-type integrated
NF-kappaB-dependent reporter but not of a mutant version in which the NF-kappaB
binding sites were mutated. Expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 repressed tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-induced NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression. Consistent
with this, we show that HDAC1 and HDAC2 target NF-kappaB through a direct
association of HDAC1 with the Rel homology domain of p65. HDAC2 does not interact
with NF-kappaB directly but can regulate NF-kappaB activity through its
association with HDAC1. Finally, we show that inhibition of HDAC activity with
TSA causes an increase in both basal and TNF-induced expression of the
NF-kappaB-regulated interleukin-8 (IL-8) gene. Similar to the wild-type
integrated NF-kappaB-dependent reporter, ChIP assays showed that TSA treatment
resulted in hyperacetylation of the IL-8 promoter. These data indicate that the
transactivation function of NF-kappaB is regulated in part through its
association with HDAC corepressor proteins. Moreover, it suggests that the
association of NF-kappaB with the HDAC1 and HDAC2 corepressor proteins functions 
to repress expression of NF-kappaB-regulated genes as well as to control the
induced level of expression of these genes.

PMCID: PMC99882
PMID: 11564889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. EMBO J. 2001 Sep 3;20(17):4814-25.

The FK506-binding protein 25 functionally associates with histone deacetylases
and with transcription factor YY1.

Yang WM(1), Yao YL, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H.Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

FK506-binding proteins (FKBPs) are cellular receptors for immunosuppressants that
belong to a subgroup of proteins, known as immunophilins, with peptidylprolyl
cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) activity. Sequence comparison suggested that the
HD2-type histone deacetylases and the FKBP-type PPIases may have evolved from a
common ancestor enzyme. Here we show that FKBP25 physically associates with the
histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 and with the HDAC-binding transcriptional
regulator YY1. An FKBP25 immunoprecipitated complex contains deacetylase
activity, and this activity is associated with the N-terminus of FKBP25, distinct
from the FK506/rapamycin-binding domain. Furthermore, FKBP25 can alter the
DNA-binding activity of YY1. Together, our data firmly establish a relationship
between histone deacetylases and the FKBP enzymes and provide a novel and
critical function for the FKBPs.

PMCID: PMC125595
PMID: 11532945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Neuron. 2001 Aug 16;31(3):353-65.

Regulation of neuronal traits by a novel transcriptional complex.

Ballas N(1), Battaglioli E, Atouf F, Andres ME, Chenoweth J, Anderson ME, Burger 
C, Moniwa M, Davie JR, Bowers WJ, Federoff HJ, Rose DW, Rosenfeld MG, Brehm P,
Mandel G.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, State University of New York, Stony Brook,
11794, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2001 Aug 16;31(3):339-40.

The transcriptional repressor, REST, helps restrict neuronal traits to neurons by
blocking their expression in nonneuronal cells. To examine the repercussions of
REST expression in neurons, we generated a neuronal cell line that expresses REST
conditionally. REST expression inhibited differentiation by nerve growth factor, 
suppressing both sodium current and neurite growth. A novel corepressor complex, 
CoREST/HDAC2, was shown to be required for REST repression. In the presence of
REST, the CoREST/HDAC2 complex occupied the native Nav1.2 sodium channel gene in 
chromatin. In neuronal cells that lack REST and express sodium channels, the
corepressor complex was not present on the gene. Collectively, these studies
define a novel HDAC complex that is recruited by the C-terminal repressor domain 
of REST to actively repress genes essential to the neuronal phenotype.

PMID: 11516394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(18):6312-21.

Identification of a signal-responsive nuclear export sequence in class II histone
deacetylases.

McKinsey TA(1), Zhang CL, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, 75390-9148, USA.

Activation of muscle-specific genes by the MEF2 transcription factor is inhibited
by class II histone deacetylases (HDACs) 4 and 5, which contain carboxy-terminal 
deacetylase domains and amino-terminal extensions required for association with
MEF2. The inhibitory action of HDACs is overcome by myogenic signals which
disrupt MEF2-HDAC interactions and stimulate nuclear export of these
transcriptional repressors. Nucleocytoplasmic trafficking of HDAC5 is mediated by
binding of the chaperone protein 14-3-3 to two phosphoserine residues (Ser-259
and Ser-498) in its amino-terminal extension. Here we show that HDAC4 and -5 each
contain a signal-responsive nuclear export sequence (NES) at their extreme
carboxy termini. The NES is conserved in another class II HDAC, HDAC7, but is
absent in class I HDACs and the HDAC-related corepressor, MEF2-interacting
transcription repressor. Our results suggest that this conserved NES is inactive 
in unphosphorylated HDAC5, which is localized to the nucleus, and that
calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK)-dependent binding of 14-3-3 to
phosphoserines 259 and 498 activates the NES, with consequent export of the
transcriptional repressor to the cytoplasm. A single amino acid substitution in
this NES is sufficient to retain HDAC5 in the nucleus in the face of CaMK
signaling. These findings provide molecular insight into the mechanism by which
extracellular cues alter chromatin structure to promote muscle differentiation
and other MEF2-regulated processes.

PMCID: PMC87361
PMID: 11509672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biol Chem. 2001 Jun;382(6):891-902.

Biological activity of mammalian transcriptional repressors.

Thiel G(1), Lietz M, Bach K, Guethlein L, Cibelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical School, Homburg, Germany.

Research on the regulation of transcription in mammals has focused in recent
years mainly on the mechanism of transcriptional activation. However,
transcriptional repression mediated by repressor proteins is a common regulatory 
mechanism in mammals and might play an important role in many biological
processes. To understand the molecular mechanism of transcriptional repression,
the activity of eight mammalian repressors or repressor domains was investigated 
using a set of model promoters in combination with two different transcriptional 
detection methods. The repressors studied were: REST, the thyroid hormone
receptors alpha and beta, the zinc finger protein NK10 containing a
'krüppel-associated box' (KRAB), repressor domains derived from the proteins
Egr-1, Oct2A and Dr1 and the repressor/activator protein YY1. Here we show that
the repressor domains of REST, Egr-1, the thyroid hormone receptors alpha< and
beta and NK10 were transferable to a heterologous DNA-binding domain and
repressed transcription from proximal and distal positions. Moreover, these
repressor domains also blocked the activity of a strong viral enhancer in a
'remote position'. Thus, these domains are 'general' transcriptional repressor
domains. The 'krüppel-associated box' was the most powerful repressor domain
tested. In contrast, the repressor domains derived from Oct2A and Dr1 were
inactive when fused to a heterologous DNA-binding domain. The repressor domain of
YY1 exhibited transcriptional repression activity only in one of the
transcriptional assay systems. The recruitment of histone deacetylases to the
proximity of the basal transcriptional apparatus was recently discussed as a
mechanism for some mammalian transcriptional repressor proteins. Here we show
here that histone deacetylase 2, targeted to the reporter gene via DNA-protein
interaction, functions as a transcriptional repressor protein regardless of the
location of its binding site within the transcription unit.

PMID: 11501753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Aug 14;98(17):9730-5. Epub 2001 Aug 7.

Essential role of Drosophila Hdac1 in homeotic gene silencing.

Chang YL(1), Peng YH, Pan IC, Sun DS, King B, Huang DH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Deacetylation of the N-terminal tails of core histones plays a crucial role in
gene silencing. Rpd3 and Hda1 represent two major types of genes encoding
trichostatin A-sensitive histone deacetylases. Although they have been widely
found, their cellular and developmental roles remain to be elucidated in metazoa.
We show that Drosophila Hdac1, an Rpd3-type gene, interacts cooperatively with
Polycomb group repressors in silencing the homeotic genes that are essential for 
axial patterning of body segments. The biochemical copurification and cytological
colocalization of HDAC1 and Polycomb group repressors strongly suggest that HDAC1
is a component of the silencing complex for chromatin modification on specific
regulatory regions of homeotic genes.

PMCID: PMC55521
PMID: 11493709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):5979-91.

Regulation of transcription factor YY1 by acetylation and deacetylation.

Yao YL(1), Yang WM, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Interdisciplinary Oncology 
Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, College of
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

YY1 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding transcription factor that has many
important biological roles. It activates or represses many genes during cell
growth and differentiation and is also required for the normal development of
mammalian embryos. Previous studies have established that YY1 interacts with
histone acetyltransferases p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), HDAC2, and HDAC3. Here, we present evidence that the
activity of YY1 is regulated through acetylation by p300 and PCAF and through
deacetylation by HDACs. YY1 was acetylated in two regions: both p300 and PCAF
acetylated the central glycine-lysine-rich domain of residues 170 to 200, and
PCAF also acetylated YY1 at the C-terminal DNA-binding zinc finger domain.
Acetylation of the central region was required for the full transcriptional
repressor activity of YY1 and targeted YY1 for active deacetylation by HDACs.
However, the C-terminal region of YY1 could not be deacetylated. Rather, the
acetylated C-terminal region interacted with HDACs, which resulted in stable HDAC
activity associated with the YY1 protein. Finally, acetylation of the C-terminal 
zinc finger domain decreased the DNA-binding activity of YY1. Our findings
suggest that in the natural context, YY1 activity is regulated through intricate 
mechanisms involving negative feedback loops, histone deacetylation, and
recognition of the cognate DNA sequence affected by acetylation and deacetylation
of the YY1 protein.

PMCID: PMC87316
PMID: 11486036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Aug 1;29(15):3131-6.

The histone deacetylase HDAC3 targets RbAp48 to the retinoblastoma protein.

Nicolas E(1), Ait-Si-Ali S, Trouche D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, UMR 5099 CNRS, 118 Route de
Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse Cedex, France and Institut André Lwoff, UPR 9079 CNRS,
Villejuif, France.

The product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene, the Rb protein, functions 
partly through transcriptional repression of E2F-regulated genes. Repression by
Rb is mediated, at least in part, by a histone deacetylase complex, whose
enzymatic activity relies on HDAC1, HDAC2 or HDAC3. Recently, we have shown that 
the Rb-associated histone deacetylase complex contains RbAp48 protein, which
interacts with HDAC1 and HDAC2. RbAp48 could favour the deacetylation of histones
since it binds directly to histone H4. In agreement with that, we show that
transcriptional repression of E2F activity requires the presence of RbAp48. HDAC3
was thought not to interact with RbAp48. However, we found that it shared with
HDAC1 the ability to favour the recruitment of RbAp48 to Rb. This latter effect
was unlikely to be due to activation of Rb function, since HDAC3 did not increase
Rb-E2F1 interaction. Rather, we found, surprisingly, that HDAC3 could physically 
interact with RbAp48 both in vitro and in living cells. Taken together, our data 
suggest a model in which Rb mediates the recruitment to E2F-regulating promoters 
of a repressive complex containing either HDAC1, HDAC2 or HDAC3 and the
histone-binding protein RbAp48.

PMCID: PMC55834
PMID: 11470869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Biochem Cell Biol. 2001;79(3):243-52.

Class II histone deacetylases: structure, function, and regulation.

Bertos NR(1), Wang AH, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Acetylation of histones, as well as non-histone proteins, plays important roles
in regulating various cellular processes. Dynamic control of protein acetylation 
levels in vivo occurs through the opposing actions of histone acetyltransferases 
and histone deacetylases (HDACs). In the past few years, distinct classes of
HDACs have been identified in mammalian cells. Class I members, such as HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8, are well-known enzymatic transcriptional corepressors
homologous to yeast Rpd3. Class II members, including HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC7,
and HDAC9, possess domains similar to the deacetylase domain of yeast Hdal.
HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7 function as transcriptional corepressors that interact
with the MEF2 transcription factors and the N-CoR, BCoR, and CtBP corepressors.
Intriguingly, HDAC4, HDAC5, and probably HDAC7 are regulated through subcellular 
compartmentalization controlled by site-specific phosphorylation and binding of
14-3-3 proteins; the regulation of these HDACs is thus directly linked to
cellular signaling networks. Both HDAC6 and HDAC9 possess unique structural
modules, so they may have special biological functions. Comprehension of the
structure, function, and regulation of class II deacetylases is important for
elucidating how acetylation regulates functions of histones and other proteins in
vivo.

PMID: 11467738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2001;14(3):211-9.

Glucocorticoid-regulated transcription factors.

Adcock IM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Medicine, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College of
Science, Technology & Medicine, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK.
ian.adcock@ic.ac.uk

Glucocorticoids are the most effective antiinflammatory drugs used in the
treatment of asthma. They act by binding to a specific receptor (GR) that, upon
activation, translocates to the nucleus and either increases (transactivates) or 
decreases (transrepresses) gene expression. Inhibition of pro-inflammatory
transcription factors such as activator protein (AP)-1, signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STATs), nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)
and nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B is thought to be a major action of
glucocorticoids. Acetylation of histones allows unwinding of the local DNA
structure and enables RNA polymerase II to enhance gene transcription. Histone
acetylation is regulated by a balance between the activity of histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs). GR acts as a direct
inhibitor of NF-kappa B-induced HAT activity and also by recruiting HDAC2 to the 
NF-kappa B/HAT complex. A sub-group of patients with glucocorticoid-insensitive
asthma have an inability to induce histone acetylation in response to
dexamethasone suggesting reduced expression of a GR-specific HAT. This suggests
that pharmacological manipulation of specific histone acetylation status is a
potentially useful approach for the treatment of inflammatory diseases.
Identification of the precise mechanism by which activated GR recruits HDAC2 may 
reveal new targets for the development of drugs that may dissociate the
antiinflammatory actions of glucocorticoids from their side effects that are
largely due to gene induction.

Copyright Academic Press.

PMID: 11448148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jun 15;499(1-2):101-6.

Histone deacetylases in replicative senescence: evidence for a
senescence-specific form of HDAC-2.

Wagner M(1), Brosch G, Zwerschke W, Seto E, Loidl P, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Ageing Research, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Innsbruck, Austria.

To analyze mechanisms of senescence-associated gene expression, we have
investigated histone deacetylases (HDACs) in human fibroblasts undergoing
replicative senescence. We found that the overall acetylation pattern of histones
does not vary detectably with replicative senescence. By Northern blot and
Western blot, we found a significant decrease in the abundance of HDAC-1 in
senescent cells. Biochemical analysis of deacetylase activities in extracts from 
old and young cells revealed a striking difference. While by anion exchange
chromatography we found a single peak of activity in extracts from young cells,
which coincided with the elution of both HDAC-1 and HDAC-2, in senescent cells a 
second peak of activity was found. This second peak of activity is associated
with HDAC-2 but does not contain HDAC-1. These results suggest that HDAC-2 is
present in at least two distinct forms, one of which is specific for senescent
cells. Further biochemical characterization of the enzyme activity revealed that 
addition of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) did not detectably influence 
the activity of any fraction, suggesting that NAD is not an essential co-factor
for the analyzed HDACs from diploid human fibroblasts.

PMID: 11418121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30208-15. Epub 2001 Jun 6.

p65-activated histone acetyltransferase activity is repressed by glucocorticoids:
mifepristone fails to recruit HDAC2 to the p65-HAT complex.

Ito K(1), Jazrawi E, Cosio B, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Medicine, Imperial College School of Medicine at the National Heart
and Lung Institute, Dovehouse St., London SW3 6LY, United Kingdom.

Glucocorticoids acting through their specific receptor can either enhance or
repress gene transcription. Dexamethasone represses interleukin-1beta-stimulated 
histone acetylation and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
expression through a combination of direct inhibition of p65-associated histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity and by recruiting histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) 
to the p65-HAT complex. Here we show that mifepristone, a glucocorticoid receptor
partial agonist, has no ability to induce gene expression but represses
interleukin-1beta-stimulated histone acetylation and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor release by 50% maximally. Mifepristone was able to
inhibit p65-associated HAT activity to the same extent as dexamethasone but
failed to inhibit the natural promoter to an equal extent due to an inability to 
recruit HDAC2 to the p65-associated HAT complex. These data suggest that the
maximal repressive actions of glucocorticoids require recruitment of HDAC2 to a
p65-HAT complex. These data also suggest that pharmacological manipulation of
specific histone acetylation status is a potentially useful approach for the
treatment of inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 11395507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Genes Dev. 2001 May 1;15(9):1140-51.

Sharp, an inducible cofactor that integrates nuclear receptor repression and
activation.

Shi Y(1), Downes M, Xie W, Kao HY, Ordentlich P, Tsai CC, Hon M, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
Gene Expression Laboratory, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

A yeast two-hybrid screen using the conserved carboxyl terminus of the nuclear
receptor corepressor SMRT as a bait led to the isolation of a novel human gene
termed SHARP (SMRT/HDAC1 Associated Repressor Protein). SHARP is a potent
transcriptional repressor whose repression domain (RD) interacts directly with
SMRT and at least five members of the NuRD complex including HDAC1 and HDAC2. In 
addition, SHARP binds to the steroid receptor RNA coactivator SRA via an
intrinsic RNA binding domain and suppresses SRA-potentiated steroid receptor
transcription activity. Accordingly, SHARP has the capacity to modulate both
liganded and nonliganded nuclear receptors. Surprisingly, the expression of SHARP
is itself steroid inducible, suggesting a simple feedback mechanism for
attenuation of the hormonal response.

PMCID: PMC312688
PMID: 11331609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Mol Biol. 2001 Apr 20;308(1):27-38.

Homo-oligomerisation and nuclear localisation of mouse histone deacetylase 1.

Taplick J(1), Kurtev V, Kroboth K, Posch M, Lechner T, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Division of Molecular Biology, Vienna
Biocenter, University of Vienna, Austria.

Reversible histone acetylation changes the chromatin structure and can modulate
gene transcription. Mammalian histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is a nuclear protein 
that belongs to a growing family of evolutionarily conserved enzymes catalysing
the removal of acetyl residues from core histones and other proteins. Previously,
we have identified murine HDAC1 as a growth factor-inducible protein in murine
T-cells. Here, we characterise the molecular function of mouse HDAC1 in more
detail. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments with epitope-tagged HDAC1 protein
reveal the association with endogenous HDAC1 enzyme. We show that HDAC1 can
homo-oligomerise and that this interaction is dependent on the N-terminal HDAC
association domain of the protein. Furthermore, the same HDAC1 domain is also
necessary for in vitro binding of HDAC2 and HDAC3, association with RbAp48 and
for catalytic activity of the enzyme. A lysine-rich sequence within the carboxy
terminus of HDAC1 is crucial for nuclear localisation of the enzyme. We identify 
a C-terminal nuclear localisation domain, which is sufficient for the transport
of HDAC1 and of reporter fusion proteins into the nucleus. Alternatively, HDAC1
can be shuttled into the nucleus by association with another HDAC1 molecule via
its N-terminal HDAC association domain. Our results define two domains, which are
essential for the oligomerisation and nuclear localisation of mouse HDAC1.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11302704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. FASEB J. 2001 Apr;15(6):1110-2.

Cigarette smoking reduces histone deacetylase 2 expression, enhances cytokine
expression, and inhibits glucocorticoid actions in alveolar macrophages.

Ito K(1), Lim S, Caramori G, Chung KF, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Medicine, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College School of
Medicine, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK.

PMID: 11292684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr;10(7):693-8.

Transcriptional control at regulatory checkpoints by histone deacetylases:
molecular connections between cancer and chromatin.

Wade PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Woodruff Memorial Research Building--Room 7105B, 1639 Pierce Drive,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. pwade@emory.edu

Cancer cells exhibit a set of unique properties that distinguish them from their 
normal counterparts. Among these features are increased growth rates, loss of
differentiation, escape from cell death pathways, evasion of anti-proliferative
signals, a decreased reliance on exogenous growth factors and escape from
replicative senescence. Acquisition of these features by malignant cells requires
impairment of normal cellular control mechanisms. Over the past few years, it has
become increasingly apparent that an important subset of the molecular changes
commonly found in cancer cells involves inappropriate regulation of gene
expression. This review will address regulatory pathways whose disruption
contributes to the malignant phenotype. The failure to deacetylate and thus
repress transcription by the Class I histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 due to 
disruption of the Rb family of proteins has been firmly established as a
mechanism leading to increases in growth rate and cellular proliferation. Recent 
data suggest that this regulatory circuit also executes G(1) checkpoint arrest
downstream of DNA damage, cellular senescence and contact inhibition. In contrast
to this failure to deacetylate, it now seems probable that changes in
differentiation status may result in part from inappropriate deacetylation and
concomitant transcriptional repression mediated by the Class II histone
deacetylases. This inappropriate deacetylation by HDAC4, HDAC5 and HDAC6 follows 
their relocalization from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Thus, multiple classical 
features of cancer cells can be manifested by improper histone deacetylation.

PMID: 11257101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1454-8.

CoREST is an integral component of the CoREST- human histone deacetylase complex.

You A(1), Tong JK, Grozinger CM, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford
Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Here we describe the components of a histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex that we
term the CoREST-HDAC complex. CoREST-HDAC is composed of polypeptides distinct
from previously characterized HDAC1/2-containing complexes such as the mSin3 and 
nucleosome remodeling and deacetylating (NRD, also named NURD, NuRD) complex.
Interestingly, we do not observe RbAp46 and RbAp48 in this complex, although
these proteins have been observed in all previously identified complexes and are 
thought to be part of an HDAC1/2 core. We identify the transcriptional
corepressor CoREST and a protein with homology to polyamine oxidases as
components of CoREST-HDAC. The HDAC1/2-interacting region of CoREST is mapped to 
a 179-aa region containing a SANT domain, a domain found in other
HDAC1/2-interacting proteins such as NCoR, MTA1, and MTA2. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the corepressor function of CoREST depends on this region.
Although CoREST initially was cloned as a corepressor to REST (RE1 silencing
transcription factor/neural restrictive silencing factor), we find no evidence
for the existence of the eight-zinc finger REST transcription factor as an
interacting partner in this complex; however, we do find evidence for association
of the putative oncogene ZNF 217 that contains eight zinc fingers.

PMCID: PMC29278
PMID: 11171972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Feb 1;29(3):629-37.

Leucine zipper motif of chicken histone acetyltransferase-1 is essential for in
vivo and in vitro interactions with the p48 subunit of chicken chromatin assembly
factor-1.

Ahmad A(1), Nagamatsu N, Kouriki H, Takami Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Miyazaki Medical College, 5200, Kihara, Kiyotake, 
Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

We cloned cDNA encoding chicken cytoplasmic histone acetyltransferase-1, chHAT-1,
comprising 408 amino acids including a putative initiation Met. It exhibits 80.4%
identity to the human homolog and possesses a typical leucine zipper motif. The
glutathione S:-transferase (GST) pull-down assay, involving truncated and
missense mutants of the chicken chromatin assembly factor-1 (chCAF-1)p48,
revealed not only that a region (comprising amino acids 376-405 of chCAF-1p48 and
containing the seventh WD dipeptide motif) binds to chHAT-1 in vitro, but also
that mutation of the motif has no influence on the in vitro interaction. The GST 
pull-down assay, involving truncated and missense chHAT-1 mutants, established
that a region, comprising amino acids 380-408 of chHAT-1 and containing the
leucine zipper motif, is required for its in vitro interaction with chCAF-1p48.
In addition, mutation of each of four Leu residues in the leucine zipper motif
prevents the in vitro interaction. The yeast two-hybrid assay revealed that all
four Leu residues within the leucine zipper motif of chHAT-1 are necessary for
its in vivo interaction with chCAF-1p48. These results indicate not only that the
proper leucine zipper motif of chHAT-1 is essential for its interaction with
chCAF-1p48, but also that the propeller structure of chCAF-1p48 expected to act
as a platform for protein-protein interactions may not be necessary for this
interaction of chHAT-1.

PMCID: PMC30395
PMID: 11160883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 2;276(9):6817-24. Epub 2000 Dec 1.

Stable histone deacetylase complexes distinguished by the presence of SANT domain
proteins CoREST/kiaa0071 and Mta-L1.

Humphrey GW(1), Wang Y, Russanova VR, Hirai T, Qin J, Nakatani Y, Howard BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, NICHD, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2753, USA.

Human histone deacetylases I (HDAC1) and II (HDAC2) are homologous proteins (84% 
identity) that catalyze release of acetyl groups from modified N-terminal lysines
of core histones. Histone deacetylation is correlated with both transient and
persistent states of transcriptional inactivity (i.e. silencing) in many
eukaryotes. In this study, we analyzed complexes containing HDAC1 and HDAC2 to
identify the proteins most stably associated with these deacetylases. Complex cI 
(9.5 S) contained transcriptional corepressor CoREST/kiaa0071 and a protein
homologous to FAD-dependent oxidoreductases, kiaa0601. Complex cII (15 S)
contained >/=15 proteins, including CHD3/4 (Mi-2), Mta-L1, RbAp48/46, and MBD3,
characteristic of vertebrate nucleosome-remodeling complexes. Under native
conditions, cI and cII may contain HDAC1, HDAC2 or both; these can be dissociated
to cI and cII core complexes containing only HDAC1 or HDAC2. The (m)CpG-binding
protein MBD2 was associated only with the HDAC1 cII core complex. A model is
proposed in which HDAC1 core complexes can be targeted to methylated DNA via MBD2
with recruitment of HDAC2 occurring through formation of HDAC1/2 cII dimers. We
note that the cI component CoREST/kiaa0071 and the cII component Mta-L1 share a
region of homology that includes a SANT domain; this domain may play a role in
complex assembly.

PMID: 11102443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nat Genet. 2000 Nov;26(3):349-53.

Histone deacetylase interacts directly with DNA topoisomerase II.

Tsai SC(1), Valkov N, Yang WM, Gump J, Sullivan D, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) modify nucleosomal histones, have a key role in the 
regulation of gene transcription, and may be involved in cell-cycle regulation,
differentiation and human cancer. Purified recombinant human HDAC1 protein was
used to screen a cDNA expression library, and one of the clones identified
encoded DNA topoisomerase II (Topo II), an enzyme known to have a role in
transcriptional regulation and chromatin organization. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments indicate that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are associated with Topo II in vivo
under normal physiological conditions. Complexes containing Topo II possess HDAC 
activities, and complexes containing HDAC1 or HDAC2 possess Topo II activities.
HDAC and Topo II modify each other's activity in vitro and in vivo. Our results
indicate the existence of a functionally coupled complex between these two
enzymes and offer insights into the potential mechanisms of action of both
enzymes.

PMID: 11062478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 22;275(51):40463-70.

A novel nuclear receptor corepressor complex, N-CoR, contains components of the
mammalian SWI/SNF complex and the corepressor KAP-1.

Underhill C(1), Qutob MS, Yee SP, Torchia J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Oncology, and Biochemistry, Cancer
Research Laboratories, London Regional Cancer Centre, The University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Transcriptional silencing by many transcription factors is mediated by the
nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR). The mechanism by which N-CoR represses
basal transcription involves the direct or indirect recruitment of histone
deacetylases (HDACs). We have isolated two multiprotein N-CoR complexes,
designated N-CoR-1 and N-CoR-2, which possess histone deacetylase activity that
is mediated by distinct HDACs. Based on Western blotting using antibodies against
known subunits, the only HDAC found in the N-CoR-1 complex was HDAC3. In
contrast, N-CoR-2 contained predominantly HDAC1 and HDAC2 as well as several
other subunits that are found in the Sin3A.HDAC complex. Using mass spectrometry 
and Western blotting, we have identified several novel components of the N-CoR-1 
complex including the SWI/SNF-related proteins BRG1, BAF 170, BAF 155, BAF
47/INI1, and the corepressor KAP-1 that is involved in silencing heterochromatin.
Indirect immunofluorescence has revealed that both KAP-1 and N-CoR colocalize
throughout the nucleus. These results suggest that N-CoR is found in distinct
multiprotein complexes, which are involved in multiple pathways of
transcriptional repression.

PMID: 11013263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(18):6891-903.

Glucocorticoid receptor recruitment of histone deacetylase 2 inhibits
interleukin-1beta-induced histone H4 acetylation on lysines 8 and 12.

Ito K(1), Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Medicine, Imperial College School of Medicine at the National Heart &
Lung Institute, London, United Kingdom.

We have investigated the ability of dexamethasone to regulate interleukin-1beta
(IL-1beta)-induced gene expression, histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity. Low concentrations of dexamethasone (10(-10) M)
repress IL-1beta-stimulated granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) expression and fail to stimulate secretory leukocyte proteinase
inhibitor expression. Dexamethasone (10(-7) M) and IL-1beta (1 ng/ml) both
stimulated HAT activity but showed a different pattern of histone H4 acetylation.
Dexamethasone targeted lysines K5 and K16, whereas IL-1beta targeted K8 and K12. 
Low concentrations of dexamethasone (10(-10) M), which do not transactivate,
repressed IL-1beta-stimulated K8 and K12 acetylation. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we show that dexamethasone inhibits IL-1beta-enhanced
acetylated K8-associated GM-CSF promoter enrichment in a concentration-dependent 
manner. Neither IL-1beta nor dexamethasone elicited any GM-CSF promoter
association at acetylated K5 residues. Furthermore, we show that GR acts both as 
a direct inhibitor of CREB binding protein (CBP)-associated HAT activity and also
by recruiting HDAC2 to the p65-CBP HAT complex. This action does not involve de
novo synthesis of HDAC protein or altered expression of CBP or
p300/CBP-associated factor. This mechanism for glucocorticoid repression is novel
and establishes that inhibition of histone acetylation is an additional level of 
control of inflammatory gene expression. This further suggests that
pharmacological manipulation of of specific histone acetylation status is a
potentially useful approach for the treatment of inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC88765
PMID: 10958685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(18):6799-805.

Role of the LXCXE binding site in Rb function.

Dahiya A(1), Gavin MR, Luo RX, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Departments of Medicine and Cell Biology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Oncoproteins from DNA tumor viruses such as adenovirus E1a, simian virus 40 T
antigen, and human papillomavirus E7 contain an LXCXE sequence, which they use to
bind the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) and inhibit its function. Cellular proteins 
such as histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and -2) also contain an LXCXE-like
sequence, which they use to interact with Rb. The LXCXE binding site in Rb was
mutated to assess its role in Rb function. These mutations inhibited binding to
HDAC1 and -2, which each contain an LXCXE-like sequence, but had no effect on
binding to HDAC3, which lacks an LXCXE-like sequence. Mutation of the LXCXE
binding site inhibited active transcriptional repression by Rb and prevented it
from effectively repressing the cyclin E and A gene promoters. In contrast,
mutations in the LXCXE binding site did not prevent Rb from binding and
inactivating E2F. Thus, the LXCXE mutations appear to separate Rb's ability to
bind and inactivate E2F from its ability to efficiently recruit HDAC1 and -2 and 
actively repress transcription. In transient assays, several of the LXCXE binding
site mutants caused an increase in the percentage of cells in G(1) by flow
cytometry, suggesting that they can arrest cells. However, this effect was
transient, as none of the mutants affected cell proliferation in longer-term
assays examining bromodeoxyuridine incorporation or colony formation. Our results
then suggest that the LXCXE binding site is important for full Rb function.
Mutation of the LXCXE binding site does not inhibit binding of the BRG1 ATPase
component of the SWI/SNF nucleosome remodeling complex, which has been shown
previously to be important for Rb function. Indeed, overexpression of BRG1 and Rb
in cells deficient for the proteins led to stable growth inhibition, suggesting a
cooperative role for SWI/SNF and the LXCXE binding site in efficient Rb function.

PMCID: PMC86207
PMID: 10958676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Immunity. 2000 Jul;13(1):85-94.

Cabin1 represses MEF2-dependent Nur77 expression and T cell apoptosis by
controlling association of histone deacetylases and acetylases with MEF2.

Youn HD(1), Liu JO.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge 02139, USA.

TCR signaling leading to thymocyte apoptosis is mediated through the expression
of the Nur77 family of orphan nuclear receptors. MEF2 has been shown to be the
major transcription factor responsible for calcium-dependent Nur77 transcription.
Cabin1 was recently identified as a transcriptional repressor of MEF2, which can 
be released from MEF2 in a calcium-dependent fashion. The molecular basis of
repression of MEF2 by Cabin1, however, has remained unknown. We report that
Cabin1 represses MEF2 by two distinct mechanisms. Cabin1 recruits mSin3 and its
associated histone deacetylases 1 and 2; Cabin1 also competes with p300 for
binding to MEF2. Thus, activation of MEF2 and the consequent transcription of
Nur77 are controlled by the association of MEF2 with the histone deacetylases via
the calcium-dependent repressor Cabin1.

PMID: 10933397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. FEBS Lett. 2000 Jul 28;478(1-2):77-83.

Cloning and characterization of human histone deacetylase 8.

Van den Wyngaert I(1), de Vries W, Kremer A, Neefs J, Verhasselt P, Luyten WH,
Kass SU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Bio-Technologies, Jansen Research Foundation,
Turnhoutseweg 30, 2340 Beerse, Belgium.

To date, seven different human histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been identified,
which fall into two distinct classes. We have isolated and characterized a cDNA
encoding a novel human HDAC, which we name HDAC8. HDAC8 shows a high degree of
sequence similarity to HDAC1 and HDAC2 and thus belongs to the class I of HDACs. 
HDAC8 is expressed in a variety of tissues. Human cells overexpressing HDAC8
localize the protein in sub-nuclear compartments whereas HDAC1 shows an even
nuclear distribution. In addition, the HDAC8 gene is localized on the X
chromosome at position q13, which is close to the XIST gene and chromosomal
breakpoints associated with preleukemia.

PMID: 10922473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):269-77.

DNMT1 binds HDAC2 and a new co-repressor, DMAP1, to form a complex at replication
foci.

Rountree MR(1), Bachman KE, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Tumor Biology Laboratory, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. rountree@jhmi.edu

DNA methylation can contribute to transcriptional silencing through several
transcriptionally repressive complexes, which include methyl-CpG binding domain
proteins (MBDs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs). We show here that the chief
enzyme that maintains mammalian DNA methylation, DNMT1, can also establish a
repressive transcription complex. The non-catalytic amino terminus of DNMT1 binds
to HDAC2 and a new protein, DMAP1 (for DNMT1 associated protein), and can mediate
transcriptional repression. DMAP1 has intrinsic transcription repressive
activity, and binds to the transcriptional co-repressor TSG101. DMAP1 is targeted
to replication foci through interaction with the far N terminus of DNMT1
throughout S phase, whereas HDAC2 joins DNMT1 and DMAP1 only during late S phase,
providing a platform for how histones may become deacetylated in heterochromatin 
following replication. Thus, DNMT1 not only maintains DNA methylation, but also
may directly target, in a heritable manner, transcriptionally repressive
chromatin to the genome during DNA replication.

PMID: 10888872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 20;97(13):7202-7.

The histone deacetylase-3 complex contains nuclear receptor corepressors.

Wen YD(1), Perissi V, Staszewski LM, Yang WM, Krones A, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG,
Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Acetylation and deacetylation of nucleosomal histones have profound effects on
gene transcription in all eukaryotes. In humans, three highly homologous class I 
and four class II histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes have been identified to
date. The class I deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 are components of multisubunit
complexes, one of which could associate with the nuclear hormone receptor
corepressor, N-CoR. N-CoR also interacts with class II deacetylases HDAC4, HDAC5,
and HDAC7. In comparison with HDAC1 and HDAC2, HDAC3 remains relatively
uncharacterized, and very few proteins have been shown to interact with HDAC3.
Using an affinity purification approach, we isolated an enzymatically active
HDAC3 complex that contained members of the nuclear receptor corepressor family. 
Deletion analysis of N-CoR revealed that HDAC3 binds multiple N-CoR regions in
vitro and that all of these regions are required for maximal binding in vivo. The
N-CoR domains that interact with HDAC3 are distinct from those that bind other
HDACs. Transient overexpression of HDAC3 and microinjection of Abs against HDAC3 
showed that a component of transcriptional repression mediated by N-CoR depends
on HDAC3. Interestingly, data suggest that interaction with a region of N-CoR
augments the deacetylase activity of HDAC3. These results provide a possible
molecular mechanism for HDAC3 regulation and argue that N-CoR is a platform in
which distinct domains can interact with most of the known HDACs.

PMCID: PMC16523
PMID: 10860984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 May 15;28(10):2201-6.

Histone deacetylase-independent transcriptional repression by methyl-CpG-binding 
protein 2.

Yu F(1), Thiesen J, Strätling WH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie,
Universitäts-Krankenhaus Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) contains a transcriptional repression domain
(TRD), which can act by recruitment of a large transcriptional co-repressor
complex containing histone deacetylases HDAC1 and 2. We demonstrate here that
transient transcription from the SV40 enhancer/promoter or the SV40 promoter is
strongly repressed in a histone deacetylase-independent manner, since repression 
is not alleviated by Trichostatin A (TSA). In a mutational analysis, repression
depends on a conserved 30 residue sequence containing two clusters of basic amino
acids. Mutation of the first of these clusters inhibits in vitro interaction
between TRD and mSin3A. Furthermore, a subdomain of the TRD containing the
conserved 30-residue sequence and 16 flanking amino acids was sufficient to
compromise VP16-activated transcription. In summary, our results indicate an
alternative, histone deacetylase-independent pathway of transcriptional
repression by MeCP2.

PMCID: PMC105362
PMID: 10773092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Dec 23;1489(2-3):365-73.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the mouse histone deacetylase 1 gene:
integration of a retrovirus in 129SV mice.

Khier H(1), Bartl S, Schuettengruber B, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Vienna Biocenter, University of Vienna,
Austria.

Reversible histone acetylation plays an important role for chromatin structure
and gene expression. The acetylation state of core histones is controlled by
histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases. Here we report the cloning
and characterization of the mouse histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) gene. The mouse
genome contains several HDAC1-related structures representing the HDAC1 gene and 
at least three pseudogenes. The HDAC1 gene comprises 14 exons ranging from 49 to 
539 bp. Interestingly the murine HDAC1 gene strongly resembles the previously
published mouse HDAC2 gene (Zeng et al., J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 28921-28930). 
The sizes of ten of the 14 exons are identical for both genes and the splicing
sites for 11 introns align in identical positions suggesting a gene duplication
event. The HDAC1 gene is located only 128 bp downstream from the MARCKS-related
protein (MRP) gene in a tail-to-tail orientation. The murine MRP gene was
previously mapped to a conserved gene cluster on chromosome 4 sharing linkage
homology to human chromosome 1p32-36. The genes for HDAC1 and MRP are
co-expressed in a variety of cell types. In the genome of 129SV mice the largest 
intervening sequence of the HDAC1 gene, intron 3, harbors a complete copy of the 
endogenous retrovirus MuERV-L. In contrast the HDAC1 gene in other mouse strains 
such as C57B16, C3H/An and C-RY lacks the retrovirus. Our study provides useful
tools for future targeted gene disruption studies.

PMID: 10673037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Virol. 2000 Feb;74(4):1939-47.

A role for SKIP in EBNA2 activation of CBF1-repressed promoters.

Zhou S(1), Fujimuro M, Hsieh JJ, Chen L, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

EBNA2 is essential for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) immortalization of B lymphocytes.
EBNA2 functions as a transcriptional activator and targets responsive promoters
through interaction with the cellular DNA binding protein CBF1. We have examined 
the mechanism whereby EBNA2 overcomes CBF1-mediated transcriptional repression. A
yeast two-hybrid screen performed using CBF1 as the bait identified a protein,
SKIP, which had not previously been recognized as a CBF1-associated protein.
Protein-protein interaction assays demonstrated contacts between SKIP and the
SMRT, CIR, Sin3A, and HDAC2 proteins of the CBF1 corepressor complex.
Interestingly, EBNA2 also interacted with SKIP in glutathione S-transferase
affinity and mammalian two-hybrid assays and colocalized with SKIP in
immunofluorescence assays. Interaction with SKIP was not affected by mutation of 
EBNA2 conserved region 6, the CBF1 interaction region, but was abolished by
mutation of conserved region 5. Mutation of conserved region 5 also severely
impaired EBNA2 activation of a reporter containing CBF1 binding sites. Thus,
interaction with both CBF1 and SKIP is necessary for efficient promoter
activation by EBNA2. A model is presented in which EBNA2 competes with the
SMRT-corepressor complex for contacts on SKIP and CBF1.

PMCID: PMC111672
PMID: 10644367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 12;274(46):32750-6.

A 13-amino acid amphipathic alpha-helix is required for the functional
interaction between the transcriptional repressor Mad1 and mSin3A.

Eilers AL(1), Billin AN, Liu J, Ayer DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-5330, USA.

Members of the Mad family of bHLHZip proteins heterodimerize with Max and
function to repress the transcriptional and transforming activities of the Myc
proto-oncogene. Mad:Max heterodimers repress transcription by recruiting a large 
multi-protein complex containing the histone deacetylases, HDAC1 and HDAC2, to
DNA. The interaction between Mad proteins and HDAC1/2 is mediated by the
corepressor mSin3A and requires sequences at the amino terminus of the Mad
proteins, termed the SID, for Sin3 interaction domain, and the second of four
paired amphipathic alpha-helices (PAH2) in mSin3A. To better understand the
requirements for the interaction between the SID and PAH2, we have performed
mutagenesis and structural studies on the SID. These studies show that amino
acids 8-20 of Mad1 are sufficient for SID:PAH2 interaction. Further, this minimal
13-residue SID peptide forms an amphipathic alpha-helix in solution, and residues
on the hydrophobic face of the SID helix are required for interaction with PAH2. 
Finally, the minimal SID can function as an autonomous and portable repression
domain, demonstrating that it is sufficient to target a functional mSin3A/HDAC
corepressor complex.

PMID: 10551834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochemistry. 1999 Nov 2;38(44):14711-7.

Molecular association between ATR and two components of the nucleosome remodeling
and deacetylating complex, HDAC2 and CHD4.

Schmidt DR(1), Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.
schmidt@slsiris.harvard.edu

Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)- and Rad3-related protein (ATR) is a
phosphatidylinositol-kinase (PIK)-related kinase that has been implicated in the 
response of human cells to multiple forms of DNA damage and may play a role in
the DNA replication checkpoint. The purification of an ATR complex allowed
identification of chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4) as an
ATR-associated protein by tandem mass spectrometric sequencing. CHD4 (also called
Mi-2beta) is a component of a histone-deacetylase-2 (HDAC2)-containing complex,
the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylating (NRD) complex. Endogenous ATR, CHD4, 
and HDAC2 are shown to coimmunoprecipitate, and ATR and HDAC2 coelute through two
biochemical purification steps. Other members of the NRD complex, HDAC1, MTA1,
and MTA2, are also detectable in ATR immunoprecipitates. ATR's association with
CHD4 and HDAC2 suggests that there may be a linkage between ATR's role in
mediating checkpoints induced by DNA damage and chromatin modulation via
remodeling and deacetylation.

PMID: 10545197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. EMBO J. 1999 Oct 1;18(19):5389-98.

Ligand-induced recruitment of a histone deacetylase in the negative-feedback
regulation of the thyrotropin beta gene.

Sasaki S(1), Lesoon-Wood LA, Dey A, Kuwata T, Weintraub BD, Humphrey G, Yang WM, 
Seto E, Yen PM, Howard BH, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2753,
USA.

We have investigated ligand-dependent negative regulation of the
thyroid-stimulating hormone beta (TSHbeta) gene. Thyroid hormone (T3) markedly
repressed activity of the TSHbeta promoter that had been stably integrated into
GH(3 )pituitary cells, through the conserved negative regulatory element (NRE) in
the promoter. By DNA affinity binding assay, we show that the NRE constitutively 
binds to the histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) present in GH(3 )cells. Significantly,
upon addition of T3, the NRE further recruited the thyroid hormone receptor
(TRbeta) and another deacetylase, HDAC2. This recruitment coincided with an
alteration of in vivo chromatin structure, as revealed by changes in restriction 
site accessibility. Supporting the direct interaction between TR and HDAC, in
vitro assays showed that TR, through its DNA binding domain, strongly bound to
HDAC2. Consistent with the role for HDACs in negative regulation, an inhibitor of
the enzymes, trichostatin A, attenuated T3-dependent promoter repression. We
suggest that ligand-dependent histone deacetylase recruitment is a mechanism of
the negative-feedback regulation, a critical function of the pituitary-thyroid
axis.

PMCID: PMC1171608
PMID: 10508171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 20;274(34):23977-90.

Chicken histone deacetylase-2 controls the amount of the IgM H-chain at the steps
of both transcription of its gene and alternative processing of its pre-mRNA in
the DT40 cell line.

Takami Y(1), Kikuchi H, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Miyazaki Medical College, Kihara, Kiyotake,
Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the deacetylation of core histones, 
which is an important event in transcription regulation in eukaryotes through
alterations in the chromatin structure. We cloned cDNAs and genomic DNAs encoding
two chicken HDACs (chHDAC-1 and -2), which are preferentially localized in
nuclei. Treatment with trichostatin A reduced the HDAC activities in
immunoprecipitates obtained with anti-chHDAC-1 and -2 antisera. Using gene
targeting techniques, we generated homozygous DT40 mutants, DeltachHDAC-1 and -2,
devoid of two alleles of the chHDAC-1 and -2 genes, respectively. The protein
patterns on two-dimensional PAGE definitely changed for DeltachHDAC-2, and the
amounts of the IgM H- and L-chains increased in it. Of the two IgM H-chain forms,
the secreted form mu(s) increased in DeltachHDAC-2, but the membrane-bound form
mu(m) decreased. The IgM H-chain gene was transcribed more in DeltachHDAC-2 than 
in DT40 cells. In the mutant, the alternative processing of IgM H-chain pre-mRNA 
preferentially occurred, resulting in an increase in the amount of mu(s) mRNA,
whereas the stability of the two types of mRNA, mu(s) and mu(m), was unchanged.
In DT40 cells, treatment with trichostatin A increased both the amounts of IgM
H-chain mRNAs and the switch from mu(m) to mu(s) mRNAs. Based on these results,
we propose a model for a role of chHDAC-2 in both the transcription and
alternative processing steps, resulting in control of the amount of the mu(s) IgM
H-chain in the DT40 cell line.

PMID: 10446166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Genes Dev. 1999 Aug 1;13(15):1924-35.

Analysis of the NuRD subunits reveals a histone deacetylase core complex and a
connection with DNA methylation.

Zhang Y(1), Ng HH, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Bird A, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), Division of Nucleic Acids Enzymology, 
Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling and core histone acetylation and
deacetylation represent mechanisms to alter nucleosome structure. NuRD is a
multisubunit complex containing nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase
activities. The histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 and the histone binding
proteins RbAp48 and RbAp46 form a core complex shared between NuRD and
Sin3-histone deacetylase complexes. The histone deacetylase activity of the core 
complex is severely compromised. A novel polypeptide highly related to the
metastasis-associated protein 1, MTA2, and the methyl-CpG-binding
domain-containing protein, MBD3, were found to be subunits of the NuRD complex.
MTA2 modulates the enzymatic activity of the histone deacetylase core complex.
MBD3 mediates the association of MTA2 with the core histone deacetylase complex. 
MBD3 does not directly bind methylated DNA but is highly related to MBD2, a
polypeptide that binds to methylated DNA and has been reported to possess
demethylase activity. MBD2 interacts with the NuRD complex and directs the
complex to methylated DNA. NuRD may provide a means of gene silencing by DNA
methylation.

PMCID: PMC316920
PMID: 10444591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16646-53.

WD repeats of the p48 subunit of chicken chromatin assembly factor-1 required for
in vitro interaction with chicken histone deacetylase-2.

Ahmad A(1), Takami Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Miyazaki Medical College, Kihara, Kiyotake,
Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

Chromatin assembly factor-1 (CAF-1) is essential for chromatin assembly in
eukaryotes, and comprises three subunits of 150 kDa (p150), 60 kDa (p60), and 48 
kDa (p48). We cloned and sequenced cDNA encoding the small subunit of the chicken
CAF-1, chCAF-1p48. It consists of 425 amino acid residues including a putative
initiation Met, possesses seven WD repeat motifs, and contains only one amino
acid change relative to the human and mouse CAF-1p48s. The immunoprecipitation
experiment followed by Western blotting revealed that chCAF-1p48 interacts with
chicken histone deacetylases (chHDAC-1 and -2) in vivo. The glutathione
S-transferase pulldown affinity assay revealed the in vitro interaction of
chCAF-1p48 with chHDAC-1, -2, and -3. We showed that the p48 subunit tightly
binds to two regions of chHDAC-2, located between amino acid residues 82-180 and 
245-314, respectively. We also established that two N-terminal, two C-terminal,
or one N-terminal and one C-terminal WD repeat motif of chCAF-1p48 are required
for this interaction, using deletion mutants of the respective regions. These
results suggest that chCAF-1p48 is involved in many aspects of DNA-utilizing
processes, through alterations in the chromatin structure based on both the
acetylation and deacetylation of core histones.

PMID: 10347232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Apr 27;96(9):4983-8.

BRCA1 interacts with components of the histone deacetylase complex.

Yarden RI(1), Brody LC.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Germ-line mutations in the BRCA1 tumor-suppressor gene are associated with an
increased susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1 contains a
carboxyl-terminal domain (BRCT) that is shared with several other proteins
involved in maintaining genome integrity. In an effort to understand the function
of BRCA1, we sought to isolate proteins that interact with the BRCT domain.
Purified BRCT polypeptide was used as a probe to screen a human placenta cDNA
expression library by Far Western analysis. Here we report that BRCA1 interacts
in vivo and in vitro with the Rb-binding proteins, RbAp46 and RbAp48, as well as 
with Rb. Moreover, the BRCT domain associates with the histone deacetylases HDAC1
and HDAC2. These results demonstrate that BRCA1 interacts with components of the 
histone deacetylase complex, and therefore may explain the involvement of BRCA1
in multiple processes such as transcription, DNA repair, and recombination.

PMCID: PMC21803
PMID: 10220405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Apr 27;96(9):4868-73.

Three proteins define a class of human histone deacetylases related to yeast
Hda1p.

Grozinger CM(1), Hassig CA, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Gene expression is in part controlled by chromatin remodeling factors and the
acetylation state of nucleosomal histones. The latter process is regulated by
histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases (HDACs). Previously, three
human and five yeast HDAC enzymes had been identified. These can be categorized
into two classes: the first class represented by yeast Rpd3-like proteins and the
second by yeast Hda1-like proteins. Human HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 proteins are
members of the first class, whereas no class II human HDAC proteins had been
identified. The amino acid sequence of Hda1p was used to search the
GenBank/expressed sequence tag databases to identify partial sequences from three
putative class II human HDAC proteins. The corresponding full-length cDNAs were
cloned and defined as HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC6. These proteins possess certain
features present in the conserved catalytic domains of class I human HDACs, but
also contain additional sequence domains. Interestingly, HDAC6 contains an
internal duplication of two catalytic domains, which appear to function
independently of each other. These class II HDAC proteins have differential mRNA 
expression in human tissues and possess in vitro HDAC activity that is inhibited 
by trichostatin A. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicate that these HDAC
proteins are not components of the previously identified HDAC1 and HDAC2 NRD and 
mSin3A complexes. However, HDAC4 and HDAC5 associate with HDAC3 in vivo. This
finding suggests that the human class II HDAC enzymes may function in cellular
processes distinct from those of HDAC1 and HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC21783
PMID: 10220385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 30;273(44):28921-30.

Cloning and characterization of the mouse histone deacetylase-2 gene.

Zeng Y(1), Tang CM, Yao YL, Yang WM, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Immunology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2) is a component of a complex that mediates
transcriptional repression in mammalian cells. A mouse HDAC2 cDNA was used to
identify several recombinant clones containing the entire mouse HDAC2 gene. The
mouse HDAC2 gene spans over 36 kilobase pairs and is composed of 14 exons
(ranging from 58 to 362 nucleotides in length) and 13 introns (ranging from 75
base pairs to 19 kilobase pairs in length). Primer extension analysis with total 
RNA from NIH3T3 cells revealed a major transcriptional start site at 221 base
pairs 5' of the ATG translational start codon. Upstream of the transcriptional
start site, no canonical TATA box was found, but binding sites for several known 
transcription factors were identified. Transient transfection studies with 5'
deletion mutants localized the promoter to no more than 76 base pairs upstream
from the major transcriptional start site. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
mapped mouse HDAC2 to chromosomal location 10B1, which is in close proximity to
the growth factor-inducible gene fisp-12. Information concerning the genomic
organization and promoter of HDAC2 will be useful in studies of the regulation of
histone deacetylase activities, which in turn are important in studies of the
regulation of transcriptional repression in mammalian cells.

PMID: 9786895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Genomics. 1998 Sep 1;52(2):245-6.

Human histone deacetylase 2, HDAC2 (Human RPD3), is localized to 6q21 by
radiation hybrid mapping.

Betz R(1), Gray SG, Ekström C, Larsson C, Ekström TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Experimental Alcohol and Drug Addiction Research Section, Karolinska Hospital,
CMM, L8:01, Stockholm, S-171 76, Sweden.

PMID: 9782097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. EMBO J. 1998 Sep 1;17(17):4905-8.

CpG methylation, chromatin structure and gene silencing-a three-way connection.

Razin A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School Jerusalem, 91120 Israel.

The three-way connection between DNA methylation, gene activity and chromatin
structure has been known for almost two decades. Nevertheless, the molecular link
between methyl groups on the DNA and the positioning of nucleosomes to form an
inactive chromatin configuration was missing. This review discusses recent
experimental data that may, for the first time, shed light on this molecular
link. MeCP2, which is a known methylcytosine-binding protein, has been shown to
possess a transcriptional repressor domain (TRD) that binds the corepressor
mSin3A. This corepressor protein constitutes the core of a multiprotein complex
that includes histone deacetylases (HDAC1 and HDAC2). Transfection and injection 
experiments with methylated constructs have revealed that the silenced state of a
methylated gene, which is associated with a deacetylated nucleosomal structure,
could be relieved by the deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A. Thus, methylation
plays a pivotal role in establishing and maintaining an inactive state of a gene 
by rendering the chromatin structure inaccessible to the transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC1170819
PMID: 9724627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Cell. 1998 Jul;2(1):33-42.

SAP30, a component of the mSin3 corepressor complex involved in N-CoR-mediated
repression by specific transcription factors.

Laherty CD(1), Billin AN, Lavinsky RM, Yochum GS, Bush AC, Sun JM, Mullen TM,
Davie JR, Rose DW, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG, Ayer DE, Eisenman RN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

The transcriptional corepressor mSin3 is found in a large multiprotein complex
containing the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2, in addition to at least five
tightly associated polypeptides. We have cloned and characterized a novel
component of the mSin3 complex, SAP30, SAP30 binds to mSin3 and is capable of
mediating transcriptional repression via histone deacetylases. SAP30 also binds
the N-CoR corepressor and is required for N-CoR-mediated repression by
antagonist-bound estrogen receptor and the homeodomain protein Rpx, as well as
N-CoR suppression of transactivation by the POU domain protein Pit-1. However,
SAP30 is not required for N-CoR-mediated repression by unliganded retinoic acid
receptor or thyroid hormone receptor, suggesting that SAP30 is involved in the
functional recruitment of the mSin3-histone deacetylase complex to a specific
subset of N-CoR corepressor complexes.

PMID: 9702189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Cell. 1998 Jun;1(7):1021-31.

SAP30, a novel protein conserved between human and yeast, is a component of a
histone deacetylase complex.

Zhang Y(1), Sun ZW, Iratni R, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Hampsey M, Reinberg 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Histone acetylation plays a key role in the regulation of eukaryotic gene
expression. Recently, histone acetylation and deacetylation were found to be
catalyzed by structurally distinct, multisubunit complexes that mediate,
respectively, activation and repression of transcription. Here, we identify SAP30
as a novel component of the human histone deacetylase complex that includes Sin3,
the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2, histone binding proteins RbAp46 and
RbAp48, as well as other polypeptides. Moreover, we describe a SAP30 homolog in
yeast that is functionally related to Sin3 and the histone deacetylase Rpd3. The 
human SAP30 complex is active in deacetylating core histone octamers, but
inactive in deacetylating nucleosomal histones due to the inability of the
histone binding proteins RbAp46 and RbAp48 to gain access to nucleosomal
histones. These results define SAP30 as a component of a histone deacetylase
complex conserved among eukaryotic organisms.

PMID: 9651585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3519-24.

A role for histone deacetylase activity in HDAC1-mediated transcriptional
repression.

Hassig CA(1), Tong JK, Fleischer TC, Owa T, Grable PG, Ayer DE, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry, Harvard University, 
12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Treatment of mammalian cells with small molecule histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors induces changes in the transcription of specific genes. These changes 
correlate directly with an increase in the acetylation levels of all four core
histones in vivo. Antibodies directed against endogenous HDAC1, HDAC2, or HDAC3
immunoprecipitate histone deacetylase activity that is inhibited in vitro by the 
small molecule trapoxin (TPX), and all three HDACs are retained by a TPX-affinity
matrix. HDAC1 and HDAC2 are associated in HeLa cells in a complex that is
predominantly separate from an HDAC3 immune complex. Both Jurkat HDAC1 and HeLa
HDAC1/2 immune complexes deacetylate all four core histones and recombinant HDAC1
deacetylates free and nucleosomal histones in vitro. Purified recombinant HDAC1
deacetylates core histones in the absence of protein cofactors. Site-directed
mutagenesis was used to identify residues required for the enzymatic and
structural integrity of HDAC1. Mutation of any one of four conserved residues
causes deleterious effects on deacetylase activity and a reduced ability to bind 
a TPX-affinity matrix. A subset of these mutations also cause a decreased
interaction with the HDAC1-associated proteins RbAp48 and mSin3A. Disruption of
histone deacetylase activity either by TPX or by direct mutation of a histidine
presumed to be in the active site abrogates HDAC1-mediated transcriptional
repression of a targeted reporter gene in vivo.

PMCID: PMC19868
PMID: 9520398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 31;272(44):28001-7.

Isolation and characterization of cDNAs corresponding to an additional member of 
the human histone deacetylase gene family.

Yang WM(1), Yao YL, Sun JM, Davie JR, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, the Department of Medical
Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of South Florida,
Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Several human cDNAs encoding a histone deacetylase protein, HDAC3, have been
isolated. Analysis of the predicted amino acid sequence of HDAC3 revealed an open
reading frame of 428 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 49 kDa. The
HDAC3 protein is 50% identical in DNA sequence and 53% identical in protein
sequence compared with the previously cloned human HDAC1. Comparison of the HDAC3
sequence with human HDAC2 also yielded similar results, with 51% identity in DNA 
sequence and 52% identity in protein sequence. The expressed HDAC3 protein is
functionally active because it possesses histone deacetylase activity, represses 
transcription when tethered to a promoter, and binds transcription factor YY1.
Similar to HDAC1 and HDAC2, HDAC3 is ubiquitously expressed in many different
cell types.

PMID: 9346952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cell. 1997 May 2;89(3):357-64.

Histone deacetylases and SAP18, a novel polypeptide, are components of a human
Sin3 complex.

Zhang Y(1), Iratni R, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway 08854, USA.

An important event in gene expression is the covalent modification of histone
proteins. We have found that the mammalian transcriptional repressor Sin3 (mSin3)
exists in a complex with histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. Consistent with
the observation that mSin3-mediated repression of transcription involves the
modification of histone polypeptides, we found that the mSin3-containing complex 
includes polypeptides that tether the mSin3 complex to core histone proteins. In 
addition, two novel mSin3-associated polypeptides, SAP18 and SAP30, were
identified. We isolated a cDNA encoding human SAP18 and found that SAP18 is a
component of an mSin3-containing complex in vivo. Moreover, we demonstrate a
direct interaction between SAP18 and mSin3. SAP18 represses transcription in vivo
when tethered to the promoter, consistent with the ability of SAP18 to interact
with mSin3.

PMID: 9150135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Cell. 1997 May 2;89(3):349-56.

Histone deacetylases associated with the mSin3 corepressor mediate mad
transcriptional repression.

Laherty CD(1), Yang WM, Sun JM, Davie JR, Seto E, Eisenman RN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

Transcriptional repression by Mad-Max heterodimers requires interaction of Mad
with the corepressors mSin3A/B. Sin3p, the S. cerevisiae homolog of mSin3,
functions in the same pathway as Rpd3p, a protein related to two recently
identified mammalian histone deacetylases, HDAC1 and HDAC2. Here, we demonstrate 
that mSin3A and HDAC1/2 are associated in vivo. HDAC2 binding requires a
conserved region of mSin3A capable of mediating transcriptional repression. In
addition, Mad1 forms a complex with mSin3 and HDAC2 that contains histone
deacetylase activity. Trichostatin A, an inhibitor of histone deacetylases,
abolishes Mad repression. We propose that Mad-Max functions by recruiting the
mSin3-HDAC corepressor complex that deacetylates nucleosomal histones, producing 
alterations in chromatin structure that block transcription.

PMID: 9150134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


