
61. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2006;1:6233-6.

Instrumentation system upgrade supports mobile personalized healthcare delivery.

Ellingson RM(1), Helt WJ, Kelt PV, Fausti SA.

Author information: 
(1)Nat. Center for Rehabilitative Auditory Res., Portland, OR 97207, USA.
Roger.Ellingson@med.va.gov

Clinicians and patients need mobile tools to detect ototoxic change early and
prevent hearing loss. We report on the development of an upgrade of our existing 
desktop-based clinical-audiological instrumentation into a mobile instrument
platform which efficiently supports personalized ototoxicity monitoring on the
hospital wards as well as clinic by a trained clinician. Our new wireless-enabled
system also serves as the instrumentation platform for the next phase of our work
which is remote healthcare delivery with patient-guided at-home ototoxicity
monitoring using an evidence-based individualized SRO protocol.

PMID: 17945947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Phys Biol. 2007 May 18;4(2):R1-17.

Oscillations and temporal signalling in cells.

Tiana G(1), Krishna S, Pigolotti S, Jensen MH, Sneppen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Milano and INFN, Milano, Italy.

The development of new techniques to quantitatively measure gene expression in
cells has shed light on a number of systems that display oscillations in protein 
concentration. Here we review the different mechanisms which can produce
oscillations in gene expression or protein concentration using a framework of
simple mathematical models. We focus on three eukaryotic genetic regulatory
networks which show 'ultradian' oscillations, with a time period of the order of 
hours, and involve, respectively, proteins important for development (Hes1),
apoptosis (p53) and immune response (NF-kappaB). We argue that underlying all
three is a common design consisting of a negative feedback loop with time delay
which is responsible for the oscillatory behaviour.

PMID: 17664651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2002 Sep-Oct;39(5):567-74.

An efficient test protocol for identification of a limited, sensitive frequency
test range for early detection of ototoxicity.

Vaughan NE(1), Fausti SA, Chelius S, Phillips D, Helt W, Henry JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Rehabilitation Research and Development
National Center for Rehabilitative Auditory Research, Portland Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Portland, OR 97207, USA. vaughann@ohsu.edu

A primary focus of research at the National Center for Rehabilitative Auditory
Research (NCRAR) has been to develop methodology for rapid and efficient early
detection of ototoxicity. It has been shown that an individualized, limited
frequency range can be identified, which is sensitive to early ototoxic changes
in the auditory system. In this study, a rapid identification protocol for
identifying the uppermost target frequency within this sensitive range of
ototoxicity (SRO) was investigated. In 36 of 42 ears, the target frequency found 
with the rapid identification protocol was the same as that found with the
full-frequency baseline testing. Where differences occurred, target frequencies
obtained by the two methods did not differ by more than one-half octave. This
rapid identification protocol results in considerable time savings in ototoxicity
monitoring, which will result in the capability to include more patients in a
monitoring program.

PMID: 17642021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Oncol. 2007 Aug;31(2):461-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on HES/HEY family: Notch-independent HES1, HES3
transcription in undifferentiated ES cells, and Notch-dependent HES1, HES5, HEY1,
HEY2, HEYL transcription in fetal tissues, adult tissues, or cancer.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Notch signaling pathway maintains stem cells through transcriptional activation
of HES/HEY family members to repress tissue-specific transcription factors. Here,
comparative integromic analyses on HES/HEY family members were carried out. HES3 
gene encodes two isoforms due to alternative promoters. Complete coding sequence 
of HES3 variant 2 was determined by curating CX755241.1 EST. Refined phylogenetic
analysis using HES3 variant 2 instead of variant 1 revealed that mammalian bHLH
transcription factors with Orange domain were grouped into HES subfamily (HES1,
HES2, HES3, HES4, HES5, HES6, HES7) and HEY subfamily (HEY1, HEY2, HEYL,
HESL/HELT, DEC1/BHLHB2, DEC2/BHLHB3). Eight amino-acid residues were added to the
C-terminal WRPW motif in human HES3 due to lineage specific T to G nucleotide
change at stop codon of chimpanzee, rat, and mouse HES3 orthologs. HES1 and HES3 
were expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. HES1 was also
expressed in fetal tissues, and regenerating liver. HES1, HEY1 and HEY2 were
expressed in endothelial cells. HES1, HES4 and HES6 were expressed in gastric
cancer, HES1 and DEC1 in pancreatic cancer, HES1, HES2, HES4, HES6 and DEC2 in
colorectal cancer. HES6 was also expressed in other tumors, such as brain tumors,
melanoma, small cell lung cancer, retinoblastoma, ovarian cancer, and breast
cancer. Double NANOG-binding sites, CSL/RBPSUH-binding site and TATA-box in HES1 
promoter, NANOG-, SOX2-, POU5F1/OCT3/OCT4-binding sites and TATA-box in HES3
promoter, double CSL-binding sites in HES5 promoter, SOX2-, POU-binding sites and
TATA-box in HES6 promoter, and CSL-binding site in HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL promoters 
were evolutionarily conserved. However, double CSL-binding sites in mouse Hes7
promoter were not conserved in human HES7 promoter. Together these facts indicate
that HES1 and HES3 were target genes of the ES cell-specific network of
transcription factors, and that HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL were target genes
of Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 17611704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2783-93. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Helt determines GABAergic over glutamatergic neuronal fate by repressing Ngn
genes in the developing mesencephalon.

Nakatani T(1), Minaki Y, Kumai M, Ono Y.

Author information: 
(1)KAN Research Institute Inc., KobeMI R&D Center, 6-7-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, 
Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The mechanism underlying the determination of neurotransmitter phenotype in the
developing mesencephalon, particularly GABAergic versus glutamatergic fate,
remains largely unknown. Here, we show in mice that the basic helix-loop-helix
transcriptional repressor gene Helt (also known as Megane and Heslike) functions 
as a selector gene that determines GABAergic over glutamatergic fate in the
mesencephalon. Helt was coincidently expressed in all the progenitor domains for 
mesencephalic GABAergic neurons. In the mesencephalon of Helt-deficient embryos, 
GABAergic neurons were mostly absent and glutamatergic neurons emerged instead.
Conversely, ectopically expressed Helt suppressed glutamatergic formation and
induced GABAergic neurogenesis. However, the Helt mutants showed normal
progenitor domain formation. In consequence, postmitotic expression of the
homeodomain factor Nkx2.2, which was specifically expressed by GABAergic
populations in wild-type embryos, was maintained despite the transmitter
phenotype conversion from GABAergic to glutamatergic in the Helt mutants,
suggesting that Helt is not involved in neuronal identity specification.
Furthermore, we identified proneural genes Ngn1 and Ngn2, which were selectively 
expressed in glutamatergic progenitors in the developing mesencephalon and had
the ability to confer the glutamatergic fate, as downstream target genes of Helt.
These results suggest that Helt determines GABAergic over glutamatergic fate, at 
least in part, by repressing Ngn (Neurog) genes and that basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor networks involving Helt and Ngns are commonly used in the
mesencephalon for determination of the GABAergic versus glutamatergic transmitter
phenotype.

PMID: 17611227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Science. 2007 Jun 8;316(5830):1484-8. Epub 2007 May 17.

RNA maps reveal new RNA classes and a possible function for pervasive
transcription.

Kapranov P(1), Cheng J, Dike S, Nix DA, Duttagupta R, Willingham AT, Stadler PF, 
Hertel J, Hackermüller J, Hofacker IL, Bell I, Cheung E, Drenkow J, Dumais E,
Patel S, Helt G, Ganesh M, Ghosh S, Piccolboni A, Sementchenko V, Tammana H,
Gingeras TR.

Author information: 
(1)Affymetrix Laboratory, Affymetrix, Inc., 3420 Central Expressway, Santa Clara,
CA, 95051, USA.

Significant fractions of eukaryotic genomes give rise to RNA, much of which is
unannotated and has reduced protein-coding potential. The genomic origins and the
associations of human nuclear and cytosolic polyadenylated RNAs longer than 200
nucleotides (nt) and whole-cell RNAs less than 200 nt were investigated in this
genome-wide study. Subcellular addresses for nucleotides present in detected RNAs
were assigned, and their potential processing into short RNAs was investigated.
Taken together, these observations suggest a novel role for some unannotated RNAs
as primary transcripts for the production of short RNAs. Three potentially
functional classes of RNAs have been identified, two of which are syntenically
conserved and correlate with the expression state of protein-coding genes. These 
data support a highly interleaved organization of the human transcriptome.

PMID: 17510325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2006;71:101-10.

Transcriptional landscape of the human and fly genomes: nonlinear and
multifunctional modular model of transcriptomes.

Willingham AT(1), Dike S, Cheng J, Manak JR, Bell I, Cheung E, Drenkow J, Dumais 
E, Duttagupta R, Ganesh M, Ghosh S, Helt G, Nix D, Piccolboni A, Sementchenko V, 
Tammana H, Kapranov P; ENCODE Genes And Transcripts Group, Gingeras TR.

Author information: 
(1)Affymetrix, Inc., Santa Clara, California 95051, USA.

Regions of the genome not coding for proteins or not involved in cis-acting
regulatory activities are frequently viewed as lacking in functional value.
However, a number of recent large-scale studies have revealed significant
regulated transcription of unannotated portions of a variety of plant and animal 
genomes, allowing a new appreciation of the widespread transcription of large
portions of the genome. High-resolution mapping of the sites of transcription of 
the human and fly genomes has provided an alternative picture of the extent and
organization of transcription and has offered insights for biological functions
of some of the newly identified unannotated transcripts. Considerable portions of
the unannotated transcription observed are developmental or cell-type-specific
parts of protein-coding transcripts, often serving as novel, alternative 5'
transcriptional start sites. These distal 5' portions are often situated at
significant distances from the annotated gene and alternatively join with or
ignore portions of other intervening genes to comprise novel unannotated
protein-coding transcripts. These data support an interlaced model of the genome 
in which many regions serve multifunctional purposes and are highly modular in
their utilization. This model illustrates the underappreciated organizational
complexity of the genome and one of the functional roles of transcription from
unannotated portions of the genome.

PMID: 17480199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2007 Sep;10(3):253-74.

Theoretical models of affectionate versus affectionless control in anxious
families: a critical examination based on observations of parent-child
interactions.

DiBartolo PM(1), Helt M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clark Science Center, Smith College, Northampton, MA
01063, USA. pdibarto@email.smith.edu

Psychosocial theories focused on the intrafamilial transmission of anxiety often 
concentrate on specific parenting behaviors that increase risk of anxiety
disorders in children. Two such theories--affectionate versus affectionless
control--both implicate parenting, although differently, in the pathogenesis of
childhood anxiety. The present article reviews observational studies that focus
on interactions between parents and children in anxious families in order to
examine critically each of these two models. We divide these observational
studies into two groups: those that seek to characterize the behavior of anxious 
parents (top-down studies) versus parents of anxious children (bottom-up
studies). This approach reveals that there is a consistent relationship between
controlling parental behavior in families with anxiety-disordered children as
well as a consistent relationship between parental behavior low in warmth and
families with anxiety-disordered parents. The present article discusses the
implications of the pattern that unfolds from the observational studies of the
last decade and provides suggestions for future research in the area.

PMID: 17394060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Psychon Bull Rev. 2006 Oct;13(5):813-9.

Stereotype susceptibility narrows the gender gap in imagined self-rotation
performance.

Wraga M(1), Duncan L, Jacobs EC, Helt M, Church J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Smith College, Northampton, MA 01063, USA.
mwraga@smith.edu

Erratum in
    Psychon Bull Rev. 2007 Feb;14(1):184.

Three studies examined the impact of stereotype messages on men's and women's
performance of a mental rotation task involving imagined self-rotations.
Experiment 1 established baseline differences between men and women; women made
12% more errors than did men. Experiment 2 found that exposure to a positive
stereotype message enhanced women's performance in comparison with that of
another group of women who received neutral information. In Experiment 3, men who
were exposed to the same stereotype message emphasizing a female advantage made
more errors than did male controls, and the magnitude of error was similar to
that for women from Experiment 1. The results suggest that the gender gap in
mental rotation performance is partially caused by experiential factors,
particularly those induced by sociocultural stereotypes.

PMID: 17328378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Transl Oncogenomics. 2007 Dec 10;2:107-20. Print 2007.

bHLH-Orange Transcription Factors in Development and Cancer.

Sun H(1), Ghaffari S, Taneja R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, NY. ; Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, NYU
School of Medicine, Tuxedo, NY.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins are a large superfamily of transcription
factors that play critical roles in many physiological processes including
cellular differentiation, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Based on structural
and phylogenetic analysis, mammalian bHLH-Orange (bHLH-O) proteins, which
constitute the repressor family of bHLH factors, can be grouped into four
subfamilies: Hes, Hey, Helt and Stra13/Dec. In addition to the bHLH domain that
mediates DNA-binding and protein dimerization, all members of this family are
characterized by a distinctive motif called the "Orange domain" which is present 
exclusively in these factors. Genetic studies using targeted mutagenesis in mice 
have revealed essential roles for many bHLH-O genes in embryonic development,
cell fate decisions, differentiation of a number of cell types and in apoptosis. 
Furthermore, growing evidence of crosstalk between bHLH-O proteins with the tumor
suppressors p53 and hypoxia-inducible factor, have started to shed light on their
possible roles in oncogenesis. Consistently, deregulated expression of several
bHLH-O factors is associated with various human cancers. Here, we review the
structure and biological functions of bHLH-O factors, and discuss recent studies 
that suggest a potential role for these factors in tumorigenesis and tumor
progression.

PMCID: PMC3634620
PMID: 23641148  [PubMed]


71. Development. 2006 Oct;133(19):3847-57.

Megane/Heslike is required for normal GABAergic differentiation in the mouse
superior colliculus.

Guimera J(1), Weisenhorn DV, Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Developmental Genetics, 35/8006, Ingolstädter Landstrasse, 1, Neuherberg,
Germany. guimera@gsf.de

The mouse Mgn protein (Helt) is structurally related to the neurogenic Drosophila
hairy and Enhancer of split [h/E(spl)] proteins, but its unique structural
properties distinguish it from other members of the family. Mgn expression shows 
a spatiotemporal correlation with GABAergic markers in several brain regions. We 
report here that homozygous Mgn-null mice die between the second and the fifth
postnatal week of age, and show a complete depletion of Gad65 and Gad67
expression in the superior colliculus and a reduction in the inferior colliculus.
Other brain regions, as well as other neural systems, are not affected. The
progenitor GABAergic cells appear to be generated in right numbers but fail to
become GABAergic neurons. The phenotype of the mice is consistent with reduced
GABAergic activity. Thus, our in vivo study provides evidence that Mgn is the key
regulator of GABAergic neurons, controlling their specification in the dorsal
midbrain. Another conclusion from our results is that the function of Mgn shows a
previously unrecognized role for h/E(spl)-related transcription factors in the
dorsal midbrain GABAergic cell differentiation. Vertebrate h/E(spl)-related genes
can no longer be regarded solely as a factors that confer generic neurogenic
properties, but as key components for the subtype-neuronal identity in the
mammalian CNS.

PMID: 16968817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Aug 15;41(4):601-9. Epub 2006 May 23.

p21(Cip1/Waf1/Sdi1) protects against hyperoxia by maintaining expression of
Bcl-X(L).

Staversky RJ(1), Vitiello PF, Gehen SC, Helt CE, Rahman A, Keng PC, O'Reilly MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642,
USA.

p21(Cip1/WAF1/Sdi1) is a major transcriptional target of p53 that promotes
survival of cells exposed to continuous oxidative stress caused by hyperoxia.
Because p21 can protect against genotoxic stress by reducing p53-dependent
transcription of the proapoptotic proteins PUMA and Bax, the current study uses
genetically modified lines of HCT116 colon carcinoma cells to investigate whether
p21-mediated protection against hyperoxia involves attenuation of the p53
apoptotic pathway. Hyperoxia stimulated p53-dependent expression of p21 and Bax. 
Genetic ablation of p21 increased cell death, and loss of Bax or PUMA increased
cell survival. Unlike damage caused by adriamycin, whereby p21 sensitivity could 
be rescued by removal of p53, PUMA, or Bax, increased sensitivity of
p21-deficient cells to hyperoxia could not be rescued by additional loss of these
genes. Instead, expression of the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-X(L) declined in
p21-deficient cells exposed to hyperoxia, but when genetically restored,
increased their survival. Conversely, siRNA knockdown of Bcl-X(L) in parental
HCT116 cells increased hyperoxia-induced cell death. These findings reveal that
p21-mediated protection against hyperoxia does not involve attenuation of
p53-dependent apoptosis, but rather functions to maintain Bcl-X(L) expression
during periods of persistent oxidative stress.

PMID: 16863993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jul 26;128(29):9371-7.

Stamping patterns of insulated gold nanowires with self-organized ultrathin
polymer films.

Helt JM(1), Drain CM, Bazzan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Staten Island and the Graduate Center of
the City University of New York, 2800 Victory Boulevard, Staten Island, New York 
10314, USA. cdrain@hunter.cuny.edu

A thermal contact transfer technique is presented for the fabrication of
nanoscaled to microscaled patterns of polymer-insulated metal structures on
ceramic surfaces using metal-coated, thermoplastic stamps. The thermally
activated formation of polymer-metal-polymer (PMP) heterostructures occurs
spontaneously when a metal-coated thermoplastic stamp is compressed against a
ceramic substrate and subsequently heated. The presented technique exploits the
dynamics of ultrathin polymer films localized at interfaces and interfacial
forces to prompt local reorganization of polymer stamp materials during
processing. Intercalation of polymer stamp materials into the metal-substrate
interface yields a cohesive polymer layer that binds the metal layer to the
substrate. Disproportionate adhesion between the bulk polymer and the polymer
layer at the stamp-metal interface leaves a capping layer upon separation of the 
stamp from the substrate. Here we demonstrate this technique with single use,
bilevel polymer stamps which afford transfer of two distinct general products.
The transfer of insulated submicrometer wide wires from the raised stamp features
affords patterns of trilayered PMP structures with uniform wire dimensions.
Concomitant transfer from the recessed stamp features allows fabrication of
multilayered PMP architectures with sub-100 nm spacing from microstructured
polymer stamps. Thus, patterns with two different insulated nanowire widths are
readily fabricated in a single stamping process. A variety of ceramic substrates,
thermoplastic materials, and metals can be used; e.g., inexpensive gold-coated CD
or DVD media can be used as stamps, where the combination of materials dictates
the relative interfacial forces and the processing parameters.

PMID: 16848472  [PubMed]


74. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Aug 18;347(1):232-7. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

The Rad9 protein enhances survival and promotes DNA repair following exposure to 
ionizing radiation.

Brandt PD(1), Helt CE, Keng PC, Bambara RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine and Dentistry,
The University of Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Following DNA damage cells initiate cell cycle checkpoints to allow time to
repair sustained lesions. Rad9, Rad1, and Hus1 proteins form a toroidal complex, 
termed the 9-1-1 complex, that is involved in checkpoint signaling. 9-1-1 shares 
high structural similarity to the DNA replication protein proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) and 9-1-1 has been shown in vitro to stimulate steps of
the repair process known as long patch base excision repair. Using a system that 
allows conditional repression of the Rad9 protein in human cell culture, we show 
that Rad9, and by extension, the 9-1-1 complex, enhances cell survival, is
required for efficient exit from G2-phase arrest, and stimulates the repair of
damaged DNA following ionizing radiation. These data provide in vivo evidence
that the human 9-1-1 complex participates in DNA repair in addition to its
previously described role in DNA damage sensing.

PMID: 16814252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Langmuir. 2006 Jul 4;22(14):6130-41.

Implications of the contact radius to line step (CRLS) ratio in AFM for
nanotribology measurements.

Helt JM(1), Batteas JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Staten Island and the Graduate Center of
The City University of New York, Staten Island, New York 10314, USA.

Investigating the mechanisms of defect generation and growth at surfaces on the
nanometer scale typically requires high-resolution tools such as the atomic force
microscope (AFM). To accurately assess the kinetics and activation parameters of 
defect production over a wide range of loads (F(z)), the AFM data should be
properly conditioned. Generally, AFM wear trials are performed over an area
defined by the length of the slow (L(sscan)) and fast scan axes. The ratio of
L(sscan) to image resolution (res, lines per image) becomes an important
experimental parameter in AFM wear trials because it defines the magnitude of the
line step (LS = L(sscan)/res), the distance the AFM tip steps along the slow scan
axis. Comparing the contact radius (a) to the line step (LS) indicates that the
overlap of successive scans will result unless the contact radius-line step ratio
(CRLS) is < or =(1)/(2). If this relationship is not considered, then the scan
history (e.g., contact frequency) associated with a single scan is not equivalent
at different loads owing to the scaling of contact radius with load (a
proportional variant F(z)(1/3)). Here, we present a model in conjunction with
empirical wear tests on muscovite mica to evaluate the effects of scan overlap on
surface wear. Using the Hertz contact mechanics definition of a, the CRLS model
shows that scan overlap pervades AFM wear trials even under low loads. Such
findings indicate that simply counting the number of scans (N(scans)) in an
experiment underestimates the full history conveyed to the surface by the tip and
translates into an error in the actual extent to which a region on the surface is
contacted. Utilizing the CRLS method described here provides an approach to
account for image scan history accurately and to predict the extent of surface
wear. This general model also has implications for any AFM measurement where one 
wishes to correlate scan-dependent history to image properties as well as feature
resolution in scanned probe lithographies.

PMID: 16800668  [PubMed]


76. Gene. 2006 Aug 1;377:65-76. Epub 2006 Mar 18.

Molecular characterization, structure and developmental expression of Megane bHLH
factor.

Guimera J(1), Vogt Weisenhorn D, Echevarría D, Martínez S, Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Developmental Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany. guimera@gsf.de

We report here the full-length sequence identification, molecular
characterization, detailed demarcation expression analysis relevant to
morphological marker genes and mapping of a bHLH transcription gene, referred to 
as Megane (Mgn). Mgn protein is structurally related to the neurogenic Drosophila
hairy and Enhancer of split (h/E(spl)) proteins. The unique structural properties
of Mgn factor in several characteristic residues define the gene as related to
h/E(spl), but distinguish it from previously identified mammalian members of the 
family. Mgn is a single copy gene on mouse chromosome 8 and encodes a 27kDa
protein that functions in the nucleus. First expression of Mgn is detected at
mouse embryonic day 9.5 within the most rostral part of the cephalic flexure of
the developing midbrain. Later, Mgn expression extends into other alar areas of
the midbrain and forebrain, developmentally controlled in a regional specific
pattern.

PMID: 16644143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2005 Jul-Aug;42(4 Suppl 2):45-62.

Hearing health and care: the need for improved hearing loss prevention and
hearing conservation practices.

Fausti SA(1), Wilmington DJ, Helt PV, Helt WJ, Konrad-Martin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Rehabilitation Research and Development
Service, National Center for Rehabilitative Auditory Research, Portland VA
Medical Center, Portland, OR 97239, USA. stephen.fausti@med.va.gov

Hearing loss affects 31 million Americans, particularly veterans who were exposed
to harmful levels of noise during military functions. Many veterans also receive 
treatment with ototoxic medications, which may exacerbate preexisting hearing
loss. Thus, hearing loss is the most common and tinnitus the third most common
service-connected disability among veterans. Poor implementation of hearing
protection programs and a lack of audiometric testing during medical treatment
leave veterans vulnerable to unrecognized and untreated hearing loss until speech
communication is impaired. Individualized audiometric testing techniques,
including assessment of high frequencies, can be used in clinical and
occupational settings to detect early hearing loss. Antioxidants also may
alleviate cochlear damage caused by noise and ototoxicity. Ultimately, hearing
loss prevention requires education on reducing occupational and recreational
noise exposure and counseling on the risks and options available to patients.
Technological advances will improve monitoring, allow better noise engineering
controls, and lead to more effective hearing protection.

PMID: 16470464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Virol. 2005 Nov;79(21):13218-30.

S-phase-dependent enhancement of dengue virus 2 replication in mosquito cells,
but not in human cells.

Helt AM(1), Harris E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, School of Public Health, University of
California, Berkeley, 140 Warren Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-7360, USA.

Dengue virus (DEN) is the most prevalent cause of arthropod-borne viral illness
in humans. We determined the influence of cellular growth state on DEN type 2
(DEN2) replication in mosquito and human cells, based on the hypothesis that
manipulation of cellular growth state will facilitate identification of viral and
cellular determinants of productive infection. Comparison of density-arrested and
cycling C6/36 Aedes albopictus cells infected with a low-passage DEN2 isolate
revealed that cycling cells generated higher virus titers per cell. When C6/36
cells were stalled in S-phase via a thymidine (THY) block, titers of low-passage 
DEN2 isolates and a high-passage strain, 16681, were increased approximately
30-fold and 10-fold, respectively. Moreover, virus release was earlier in
THY-treated cells than in asynchronously cycling cells. Adsorption, entry, genome
uncoating, and translation were not responsible for increased titers of virus
from S-phase C6/36 cells. In contrast to the 30-fold increase in virus titers,
intracellular levels of viral RNA were increased approximately 2-fold, suggesting
that the S-phase-responsive step is late in the DEN2 replication cycle. Analysis 
of viral RNA and protein released from the cells indicated that enhanced DEN2
assembly is largely responsible for increased virus titers produced during
S-phase. In contrast to C6/36 cells, DEN2 titers from S-phase human hepatoma
cells or primary human fibroblasts were not increased. These results demonstrate 
a differential response of DEN2 to the mosquito and human cell cycle and provide 
a framework for detailed studies into the mechanisms mediating virus assembly.

PMCID: PMC1262621
PMID: 16227245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2005 May-Jun;42(3):353-61.

Evaluation of insert earphones for high-frequency bedside ototoxicity monitoring.

Gordon JS(1), Phillips DS, Helt WJ, Konrad-Martin D, Fausti SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Rehabilitation Research and Development
National Center for Rehabilitative Auditory Research, Portland VA Medical Center,
Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Ototoxic hearing loss is usually detected earliest through monitoring of the
highest audible frequencies in individuals administered ototoxic medications.
Conducting ototoxicity monitoring may require testing patients in the hospital
room. This study evaluated the use of insert earphones for obtaining reliable
threshold responses at bedside. Twenty adult subjects were tested during two
different sessions in the sound booth and on the ward. Thresholds were obtained
for frequencies from 5 to 16 kHz and at 2 kHz with the use of the KOSS Pro/4X
Plus earphones and Etymotic ER-4B MicroPro insert earphones. Results indicate
that ER-4B insert earphones are as reliable as KOSS earphones for testing on the 
ward for high-frequency ototoxicity monitoring.

PMID: 16187247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Genome Res. 2005 Jul;15(7):987-97.

Examples of the complex architecture of the human transcriptome revealed by RACE 
and high-density tiling arrays.

Kapranov P(1), Drenkow J, Cheng J, Long J, Helt G, Dike S, Gingeras TR.

Author information: 
(1)Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, California 95051, USA.
philipp_kapranov@affymetrix.com

Recently, we mapped the sites of transcription across approximately 30% of the
human genome and elucidated the structures of several hundred novel transcripts. 
In this report, we describe a novel combination of techniques including the rapid
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and tiling array technologies that was used to 
further characterize transcripts in the human transcriptome. This technical
approach allows for several important pieces of information to be gathered about 
each array-detected transcribed region, including strand of origin, start and
termination positions, and the exonic structures of spliced and unspliced coding 
and noncoding RNAs. In this report, the structures of transcripts from 14
transcribed loci, representing both known genes and unannotated transcripts taken
from the several hundred randomly selected unannotated transcripts described in
our previous work are represented as examples of the complex organization of the 
human transcriptome. As a consequence of this complexity, it is not unusual that 
a single base pair can be part of an intricate network of multiple isoforms of
overlapping sense and antisense transcripts, the majority of which are
unannotated. Some of these transcripts follow the canonical splicing rules,
whereas others combine the exons of different genes or represent other types of
noncanonical transcripts. These results have important implications concerning
the correlation of genotypes to phenotypes, the regulation of complex interlaced 
transcriptional patterns, and the definition of a gene.

PMCID: PMC1172043
PMID: 15998911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Virol. 2005 Jun;79(12):7291-9.

Dendritic cell precursors are permissive to dengue virus and human
immunodeficiency virus infection.

Kwan WH(1), Helt AM, Marañón C, Barbaroux JB, Hosmalin A, Harris E, Fridman WH,
Mueller CG.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U255, IFR58 Centre de Recherches Biomédicales des Cordeliers,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6, 15 Rue de l'Ecole de Médecine, 75006
Paris, France.

CD14(+) interstitial cells reside beneath the epidermis of skin and mucosal
tissue and may therefore play an important role in viral infections and the
shaping of an antiviral immune response. However, in contrast to dendritic cells 
(DC) or blood monocytes, these antigen-presenting cells (APC) have not been well 
studied. We have previously described long-lived CD14(+) cells generated from
CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitors, which may represent model cells for
interstitial CD14(+) APC. Here, we show that these cells carry DC-SIGN and
differentiate into immature DC in the presence of granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor. We have compared the CD14(+) cells and the DC derived 
from these cells with respect to dengue virus and human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) infection. Both cell types are permissive to dengue virus
infection, but the CD14(+) cells secrete the anti-inflammatory cytokine
interleukin 10 and no tumor necrosis factor alpha. Regarding HIV, the CD14(+)
cells are permissive to HIV-1, release higher p24 levels than the derived DC, and
more efficiently activate HIV Pol-specific CD8(+) memory T cells. The CD14(+) DC 
precursors infected with either virus retain their DC differentiation potential. 
The results suggest that interstitial CD14(+) APC may contribute to HIV-1 and
dengue virus infection and the shaping of an antiviral immune response.

PMCID: PMC1143643
PMID: 15919883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cell Cycle. 2005 Apr;4(4):529-32. Epub 2005 Apr 10.

Evidence that DNA damage detection machinery participates in DNA repair.

Helt CE(1), Wang W, Keng PC, Bambara RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, School of Medicine and Dentistry, The
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The toroidal Rad9-Rad1-Hus1 checkpoint complex (9-1-1) is structurally similar to
the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), which serves as a sliding clamp
platform for DNA replication and repair. 9-1-1 has been characterized as a sensor
of DNA damage that functions in concert with the checkpoint control proteins ATM 
and ATR. However, recent data suggest that the 9-1-1 complex and its individual
Rad9 component serve different and multiple functions in cells by sensing DNA
damage, stimulating apoptosis, and regulating gene transcription. Recently it was
reported that 9-1-1 interacts with and/or stimulates components of the base
excision repair (BER) pathway including the S. pombe MutY homolog (MYH), human
polymerase beta (Polbeta), and flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1). Furthermore,
preliminary results indicate a stimulation of DNA ligase I. In this review, the
likely direct participation of 9-1-1 in DNA repair is discussed.

PMID: 15876866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc IEEE Comput Soc Bioinform Conf. 2002;1:321-6.

Visualization techniques for genomic data.

Loraine AE(1), Helt GA.

Author information: 
(1)Affymetrix, Inc., Emeryville, CA 94608, USA. ann_loraine@affymetrix.com

In order to take full advantage of the newly available public human genome
sequence data and associated annotations, biologists require visualization tools 
that can accommodate the high frequency of alternative splicing in human genes
and other complexities. In this article, we describe techniques for presenting
human genomic sequence data and annotations in an interactive, graphical format, 
with the aim of providing developers with a guide to what features are most
likely to meet biologists' needs. These techniques include: one-dimensional
semantic zooming to show sequence data alongside gene structures; moveable,
adjustable tiers; visual encoding of translation frame to show how alternative
transcript structure affects encoded proteins; and display of protein domains in 
the context of genomic sequence to show how alternative splicing impacts protein 
structure and function.

PMID: 15838148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc IEEE Comput Soc Bioinform Conf. 2002;1:118-24.

Protein-based analysis of alternative splicing in the human genome.

Loraine AE(1), Helt GA, Cline MS, Siani-Rose MA.

Author information: 
(1)Affymetrix, Inc., Emeryville, CA 94608, USA. ann_loraine@affymetrix.com

Understanding the functional significance of alternative splicing and other
mechanisms that generate RNA transcript diversity is an important challenge
facing modern-day molecular biology. Using homology-based, protein sequence
analysis methods, it should be possible to investigate how transcript diversity
impacts protein structure and function. To test this, a data mining technique
("DiffHit") was developed to identify and catalog genes producing protein
isoforms which exhibit distinct profiles of conserved protein motifs. We found
that out of a test set of over 1,300 alternatively spliced genes with solved
genomic structure, over 30% exhibited a differential profile of conserved
InterPro and/or Blocks protein motifs across distinct isoforms. These results
suggest that motif databases such as Blocks and InterPro are potentially useful
tools for investigating how alternative transcript structure affects gene
function.

PMID: 15838129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Science. 2005 May 20;308(5725):1149-54. Epub 2005 Mar 24.

Transcriptional maps of 10 human chromosomes at 5-nucleotide resolution.

Cheng J(1), Kapranov P, Drenkow J, Dike S, Brubaker S, Patel S, Long J, Stern D, 
Tammana H, Helt G, Sementchenko V, Piccolboni A, Bekiranov S, Bailey DK, Ganesh
M, Ghosh S, Bell I, Gerhard DS, Gingeras TR.

Author information: 
(1)Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95051, USA.

Sites of transcription of polyadenylated and nonpolyadenylated RNAs for 10 human 
chromosomes were mapped at 5-base pair resolution in eight cell lines.
Unannotated, nonpolyadenylated transcripts comprise the major proportion of the
transcriptional output of the human genome. Of all transcribed sequences, 19.4,
43.7, and 36.9% were observed to be polyadenylated, nonpolyadenylated, and
bimorphic, respectively. Half of all transcribed sequences are found only in the 
nucleus and for the most part are unannotated. Overall, the transcribed portions 
of the human genome are predominantly composed of interlaced networks of both
poly A+ and poly A- annotated transcripts and unannotated transcripts of unknown 
function. This organization has important implications for interpreting
genotype-phenotype associations, regulation of gene expression, and the
definition of a gene.

PMID: 15790807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Clin Oncol. 2005 Feb;28(1):43-50.

p53 modulates radiation sensitivity independent of p21 transcriptional
activation.

Mazzatti DJ(1), Lee YJ, Helt CE, O'Reilly MA, Keng PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, USA.

Cellular sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR) treatment is a complex biologic
phenomenon that is affected by several processes, namely the ability of the cell 
to detect and repair DNA damage, regulate cell cycle division, and execute
apoptosis. Because the p53 tumor suppressor protein is implicated in the
regulation of each of these processes, radiation sensitivity of H1299 p53-null
human lung carcinoma cells was evaluated after restoration of wild-type p53.
Expression of wild-type p53 in radiation-resistant H1299 cells reinstated a
radiation-sensitive phenotype that was not fully explained by cell death
resulting from p53-mediated apoptosis. In addition, we show that p53 alters
radiation sensitivity only in the G1 phase of the cell cycle, whereas S- and
G2/M-phase cells were unaffected by p53 status. To determine the mechanism of
p53-induced G1-phase radiation sensitivity, we investigated the G1/S checkpoint
response to IR in H1299/p53 cells. We show that H1299/p53 cells arrest in the G1 
phase in a p53-dependent manner as a result of transcriptional activation of
p21WAF1/Cip1. To determine if p53-induced radiation sensitivity was the result of
a reproductive death from accumulated p21 protein expression, p21 was
independently induced in H1299 parental cells. However, induction of p21 was not 
sufficient to account for the enhanced radiation sensitivity in H1299/p53 cells. 
Together, these data indicate that p53 modulates radiation sensitivity in the G1 
phase of the cell cycle through mechanisms independent of p53-mediated
transcriptional activation of p21 and cell cycle arrest.

PMID: 15685034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Langmuir. 2005 Jan 18;21(2):633-9.

Wear of mica under aqueous environments:direct observation of defect nucleation
by AFM.

Helt JM(1), Batteas JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The City University of New York, College of Staten
Island and The Graduate Center, 2800 Victory Boulevard, Staten Island, New York
10314, USA.

The generation of defects at surfaces in sliding contacts is the catalyst for the
eventual wear of the materials. Here, the wear of muscovite mica has been
investigated under aqueous environments using atomic force microscopy (AFM).
Through concomitant acquisition of topography, friction, and adhesion data under 
controlled pH conditions, defect nucleation on the atomic scale prior to gross
wear may be directly observed. Nucleation is found to present itself initially as
charging of the surface due to stress-induced tribochemical bond scission as OH- 
breaks open the surface terminating Si-O-Si or Si-O-Al bonds. As the surface
bonds are continually cleaved, an ensemble of defects (e.g., Si-OH/Al-OH and
Si-O-) contribute to a crystal lattice reconstruction (from approximately 5.2 to 
approximately 3 A), as observed in AFM topographic and frictional force
micrographs. Following lattice restructuring, displacement/abstraction of mica
surface materials ensues, yielding readily discernible wear scars ranging from
approximately 2 to 10 A in depth. The environmental OH- concentration profoundly 
affects the efficacy of this sequence of events leading to wear and is
illustrated by the acceleration or inhibition of wear with adjustment of pH under
identical load and scan conditions.

PMID: 15641833  [PubMed]


88. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1186-92. Epub 2004 Nov 8.

Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ATM and Rad3-related protein exhibit
selective target specificities in response to different forms of DNA damage.

Helt CE(1), Cliby WA, Keng PC, Bambara RA, O'Reilly MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, School of Medicine and Dentistry, the
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ATR (ATM and Rad3-related) protein
kinases exert cell cycle delay, in part, by phosphorylating Checkpoint kinase
(Chk) 1, Chk2, and p53. It is well established that ATR is activated following UV
light-induced DNA damage such as pyrimidine dimers and the
6-(1,2)-dihydro-2-oxo-4-pyrimidinyl-5-methyl-2,4-(1H,3H)-pyrimidinediones,
whereas ATM is activated in response to double strand DNA breaks. Here we clarify
the activation of these kinases in cells exposed to IR, UV, and hyperoxia, a
condition of chronic oxidative stress resulting in clastogenic DNA damage.
Phosphorylation on Chk1(Ser-345), Chk2(Thr-68), and p53(Ser-15) following
oxidative damage by IR involved both ATM and ATR. In response to ultraviolet
radiation-induced stalled replication forks, phosphorylation on Chk1 and p53
required ATR, whereas Chk2 required ATM. Cells exposed to hyperoxia exhibited
growth delay in G1, S, and G2 that was disrupted by wortmannin. Consistent with
ATM or ATR activation, hyperoxia induced wortmannin-sensitive phosphorylation of 
Chk1, Chk2, and p53. By using ATM- and ATR-defective cells, phosphorylation on
Chk1, Chk2, and p53 was found to be ATM-dependent, whereas ATR also contributed
to Chk1 phosphorylation. These data reveal activated ATM and ATR exhibit
selective substrate specificity in response to different genotoxic agents.

PMID: 15533933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Oct;14(4):747-51.

Identification and characterization of human HESL, rat Hesl and rainbow trout
hesl genes in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to nuclear translocation of Notch
intracellular domain (NIC), and transcriptional activation of target genes
through the interaction between CSL proteins (RBPSUH or RBPSUHL) and NIC. HES1,
HES5, HEY1 and HEY2 are Notch target genes. Mammalian HES/HEY family proteins as 
well as Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split are implicated in the cell fate
determination. We have previously identified and characterized human HES2, HES3
and HES5 genes. Here, we identified and characterized human HES-like (HESL), rat 
Fesl, and rainbow trout fesl genes by using bioinformatics. Human HESL gene,
located within AC093824.3 genome sequence, was mapped to human chromosome 4q35.1 
between ACSL1 and SLC25A4 genes. Rat Fesl gene, located within AC111303.4 genome 
sequence, was mapped to rat chromosome 16q11. EST BX875070.2 was the
representative rainbow trout fesl cDNA. HESL-ACSL1 locus was conserved among
human, rat, mouse, and zebrafish genomes. Human HESL (241 aa) showed 92.9%
total-amino-acid identity with rat Hesl (240 aa), 92.1% total-amino-acid identity
with mouse Hesl (240 aa), and 68.0% total-amino-acid identity with rainbow trout 
hesl (235 aa). HESL orthologs consist of basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
ORANGE domain. C-terminal region of HESL orthologs were divergent from that of
HES, HEY, and DEC homologs. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that bHLH
transcription factors with ORANGE domain were classified into the following three
groups: (group I) HES1, HES2, HES4 and HES6 orthologs; (group II) HESL, HES5,
HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL orthologs; (group III) HES3, DEC1/BHLHB2 and
DEC2/BHLHB3 orthologs.

PMID: 15375612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2003 Jul;1(2):289-306.

Exploring alternative transcript structure in the human genome using blocks and
InterPro.

Loraine AE(1), Helt GA, Cline MS, Siani-Rose MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Department, Affymetrix, 6550 Vallejo St, Emeryville, CA 94530
USA. ann_loraine@affymetrix.com

Understanding how alternative splicing affects gene function is an important
challenge facing modern-day molecular biology. Using homology-based, protein
sequence analysis methods, it should be possible to investigate how transcript
diversity impacts protein function. To test this, high-quality exon-intron
structures were deduced for over 8000 human genes, including over 1300 (17
percent) that produce multiple transcript variants. A data mining technique
(DiffMotif) was developed to identify genes in which transcript variation
coincides with changes in conserved motifs between variants. Applying this
method, we found that 30 percent of the multi-variant genes in our test set
exhibited a differential profile of conserved InterPro and/or BLOCKS motifs
across different mRNA variants. To investigate these, a visualization tool
(ProtAnnot) that displays amino acid motifs in the context of genomic sequence
was developed. Using this tool, genes revealed by the DiffMotif method were
analyzed, and when possible, hypotheses regarding the potential role of
alternative transcript structure in modulating gene function were developed.
Examples of these, including: MEOX1, a homeobox-containing protein; AIRE,
involved in auto-immune disease; PLAT, tissue type plasminogen activator; and
CD79b, a component of the B-cell receptor complex, are presented. These results
demonstrate that amino acid motif databases like BLOCKS and InterPro are useful
tools for investigating how alternative transcript structure affects gene
function.

PMID: 15290774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Neurosci. 2004 Apr 7;24(14):3672-82.

Identification of a novel basic helix-loop-helix gene, Heslike, and its role in
GABAergic neurogenesis.

Miyoshi G(1), Bessho Y, Yamada S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Neuronal subtype specification depends on multiple transcription factors such as 
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors. However, transcription factor codes for
most neurons remain to be determined. Here, we report identification of a novel
mouse bHLH factor, termed Heslike, that has Hes1-like bHLH domain and
transcriptional repressor activity. Heslike is coexpressed with the bHLH factor
Mash1 in brain regions that give rise to GABAergic neurons. In the mesencephalon 
and the caudal diencephalon, coexpression of Heslike and Mash1 is initially
restricted to small regions but expanded dorsally from embryonic day 9.5 onward, 
and this expansion of coexpression is followed by GABAergic neurogenesis.
Misexpression of Heslike in mouse embryos generates ectopic GABAergic neurons
only from the Mash1(+) region. In contrast, in the mesencephalon and the caudal
diencephalon of Mash1-null mice, GABAergic neurons are almost completely missing 
and, instead, other neurons are generated, although Heslike is still expressed.
Furthermore, coexpression of Heslike and Mash1 significantly promotes formation
of GABAergic neurons, compared with each gene alone, in neural precursor cell
culture. Thus, Heslike or Mash1 alone is not sufficient, but their coexpression
may be important for generation of GABAergic neurons. These results suggest that 
combinations of distinct bHLH factors promote formation of distinct neuronal
subtypes, thereby increasing neuronal diversity.

PMID: 15071116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Genome Res. 2004 Mar;14(3):331-42.

Novel RNAs identified from an in-depth analysis of the transcriptome of human
chromosomes 21 and 22.

Kampa D(1), Cheng J, Kapranov P, Yamanaka M, Brubaker S, Cawley S, Drenkow J,
Piccolboni A, Bekiranov S, Helt G, Tammana H, Gingeras TR.

Author information: 
(1)Affymetrix, Santa Clara, California 95051, USA. dione_kampa@affymetrix.com

In this report, we have achieved a richer view of the transcriptome for
Chromosomes 21 and 22 by using high-density oligonucleotide arrays on cytosolic
poly(A)(+) RNA. Conservatively, only 31.4% of the observed transcribed
nucleotides correspond to well-annotated genes, whereas an additional 4.8% and
14.7% correspond to mRNAs and ESTs, respectively. Approximately 85% of the known 
exons were detected, and up to 21% of known genes have only a single isoform
based on exon-skipping alternative expression. Overall, the expression of the
well-characterized exons falls predominately into two categories, uniquely or
ubiquitously expressed with an identifiable proportion of antisense transcripts. 
The remaining observed transcription (49.0%) was outside of any known annotation.
These novel transcripts appear to be more cell-line-specific and have lower and
less variation in expression than the well-characterized genes. Novel transcripts
were further characterized based on their distance to annotations, transcript
size, coding capacity, and identification as antisense to intronic sequences. By 
RT-PCR, 126 novel transcripts were independently verified, resulting in a 65%
verification rate. These observations strongly support the argument for a
re-evaluation of the total number of human genes and an alternative term for
"gene" to encompass these growing, novel classes of RNA transcripts in the human 
genome.

PMCID: PMC353210
PMID: 14993201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell. 2004 Feb 20;116(4):499-509.

Unbiased mapping of transcription factor binding sites along human chromosomes 21
and 22 points to widespread regulation of noncoding RNAs.

Cawley S(1), Bekiranov S, Ng HH, Kapranov P, Sekinger EA, Kampa D, Piccolboni A, 
Sementchenko V, Cheng J, Williams AJ, Wheeler R, Wong B, Drenkow J, Yamanaka M,
Patel S, Brubaker S, Tammana H, Helt G, Struhl K, Gingeras TR.

Author information: 
(1)Affymetrix, 3380 Central Expressway, Santa Clara, CA 95051, USA.

Using high-density oligonucleotide arrays representing essentially all
nonrepetitive sequences on human chromosomes 21 and 22, we map the binding sites 
in vivo for three DNA binding transcription factors, Sp1, cMyc, and p53, in an
unbiased manner. This mapping reveals an unexpectedly large number of
transcription factor binding site (TFBS) regions, with a minimal estimate of
12,000 for Sp1, 25,000 for cMyc, and 1600 for p53 when extrapolated to the full
genome. Only 22% of these TFBS regions are located at the 5' termini of
protein-coding genes while 36% lie within or immediately 3' to well-characterized
genes and are significantly correlated with noncoding RNAs. A significant number 
of these noncoding RNAs are regulated in response to retinoic acid, and
overlapping pairs of protein-coding and noncoding RNAs are often coregulated.
Thus, the human genome contains roughly comparable numbers of protein-coding and 
noncoding genes that are bound by common transcription factors and regulated by
common environmental signals.

PMID: 14980218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. EMBO J. 2004 Mar 10;23(5):1133-43. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

DNA damage induces downregulation of histone gene expression through the G1
checkpoint pathway.

Su C(1), Gao G, Schneider S, Helt C, Weiss C, O'Reilly MA, Bohmann D, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Activation of the G(1) checkpoint following DNA damage leads to inhibition of
cyclin E-Cdk2 and subsequent G(1) arrest in higher eucaryotes. Little, however,
is known about the molecular events downstream of cyclin E-Cdk2 inhibition. Here 
we show that, in addition to the inhibition of DNA synthesis, ionizing radiation 
induces downregulation of histone mRNA levels in mammalian cells. This
downregulation occurs at the level of transcription and requires functional p53
and p21(CIP1/WAF1) proteins. We demonstrate that DNA damage induced by ionizing
radiation results in the suppression of phosphorylation of NPAT, an in vivo
substrate of cyclin E-Cdk2 kinase and an essential regulator of histone gene
transcription, and its dissociation from histone gene clusters in a
p53/p21-dependent manner. Inhibition of Cdk2 activity by specific inhibitors in
the absence of DNA damage similarly disperses NPAT from histone gene clusters and
represses histone gene expression. Our results thus suggest that inhibition of
Cdk2 activity following DNA damage results in the downregulation of histone gene 
transcription through dissociation of NPAT from histone gene clusters.

PMCID: PMC380976
PMID: 14976556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16356-67. Epub 2004 Feb 4.

Helt, a novel basic-helix-loop-helix transcriptional repressor expressed in the
developing central nervous system.

Nakatani T(1), Mizuhara E, Minaki Y, Sakamoto Y, Ono Y.

Author information: 
(1)KAN Research Institute Inc., 93 Chudoji-Awata-cho, Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto
600-8815, Japan.

Neuronal differentiation is regulated by many basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
family transcriptional activators and repressors, and the balance of activity
between these factors is important for the differentiation process. Here, we
report the identification of a novel transcriptional repressor, designated Helt. 
Helt encoded a Hey-related bHLH protein containing the bHLH and Orange domains.
Helt could homodimerize, and heterodimerize with Hes5 or Hey2. Both the bHLH and 
Orange domains were involved in the homodimerization. In contrast, only the bHLH 
domain was required for the heterodimerization with Hey2, whereas only the Orange
domain mediated the interaction between Helt and Hes5. Thus, Helt has two
dimerization domains, and these domains independently select a partner.
Identification of preferred recognition sequences by CASTing experiments revealed
that Helt bound to the E box, which was distinct from the Hes1 optimal sequence
around the E box core. Not only the core sequence but also sequences flanking the
E box were essential for the recognition by Helt and Hes1. Furthermore, Helt
repressed transcription from an artificial promoter through binding to the
optimal E box elements, as well as transcription from its own promoter. Using in 
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, Helt expression in embryos was
investigated. Helt was mainly expressed in undifferentiated neural progenitors in
some of the developing brain regions, including the mesencephalon and
diencephalon, at the neurogenesis stage. These results suggest that Helt acts as 
a transcriptional repressor to regulate neuronal differentiation and/or identity.

PMID: 14764602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Jan 21;126(2):628-34.

A benchtop method for the fabrication and patterning of nanoscale structures on
polymers.

Helt JM(1), Drain CM, Batteas JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Staten Island and the Graduate Center of
the City University of New York, 2800 Victory Boulevard, Staten Island, New York 
10314, USA.

A benchtop method for the facile production of nanoscale metal structures on
polymers is demonstrated. This approach allows for the design and patterning of a
wide range of metallic structures on inexpensive polymer surfaces, affording the 
fabrication of nanoscaled platforms for use in the design of sensors, actuators, 
and disposable electronic and photonic devices. Numerous structures, from simple 
nanowires to multilayered metallic gratings, are demonstrated, with sizes ranging
from microns to the nanoscale. The process involves molding a malleable metal
film deposited on a rigid substrate such as mica, by the compression of a plastic
polymer stamp with the desired pattern against the metal film. While under
compression, an etchant is then used to modify the metal. Upon separation of the 
stamp from the support, micro- to nanoscaled metallic structures are found on the
stamp and/or on the substrate. The sizes of the structures formed depend on the
sizes of the features on the stamp but can be fine-tuned by about 4-fold through 
variations in both pressure and duration of etching. Also, depending on the
processing, multiple dimension metallic structures can be obtained simultaneously
in a single stamping procedure. The metallic structures formed on the stamp can
also be subsequently transferred to another surface allowing for the construction
of multilayered materials such as band gap gratings or the application of
electrical contacts. Using this approach, fabrication of both simple and complex 
micro- to nanoscaled structures can be accomplished by most any researcher as
even the grating structure of commercial compact disks may be used as stamps,
eliminating the requirement of expensive lithographic processes to form simple
structures.

PMID: 14719962  [PubMed]


97. Obes Res. 2003 Dec;11(12):1449-55.

Effects of different dietary fat types on postprandial appetite and energy
expenditure.

Flint A(1), Helt B, Raben A, Toubro S, Astrup A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition, Center for Advanced Food Studies, The Royal
Veterinary and Agricultrual University, Frederiksberg C, Denmark. afl@kvl.dk

OBJECTIVE: Observational studies suggest that monounsaturated (MUFA) and trans
fatty acids (TRANS) are more fattening than polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA).
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the acute effect of intake of
PUFA, MUFA, or TRANS on appetite and energy expenditure (EE).
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Three test meals were randomly given in a
cross-over design to 19 overweight (BMI: 26.8 +/- 0.4 kg/m2), young (25.2 +/- 0.7
years) men. The fat-rich breakfasts (0.8 g fat/kg body weight, 60% energy from
fat) varied only in the source of C:18-fat. EE was measured continuously in a
respiration chamber, and appetite sensations were rated by visual analog scales
before and every 30 minutes, for 5 hours, after the meal. After 5 hours, an ad
libitum meal was served, and energy intake was registered. Sensory evaluations of
all meals were given using visual analog scales. Data were analyzed by two-way
ANOVA.
RESULTS: There were no differences in basal or postprandial values of appetite
ratings and EE, in subsequent ad libitum energy intake, or in the sensory
evaluation of the test meals among the 3 test days.
DISCUSSION: Giving acutely large amounts of MUFA, PUFA, or TRANS did not impose
any differences in appetite and EE in overweight humans. However, studies with
extended protocols and other subject groups are warranted to investigate the
long-term effect of dietary fat quality on the regulation of energy balance and
body weight.

PMID: 14694208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Am Acad Audiol. 2003 Oct;14(8):444-50.

Early detection of ototoxicity using 1/6th-octave steps.

Fausti SA(1), Helt WJ, Phillips DS, Gordon JS, Bratt GW, Sugiura KM, Noffsinger
D.

Author information: 
(1)VA RR&D National Center for Rehabilitative Auditory Research, Portland VA
Medical Center, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. Stephen.fausti@med.va.gov

The National Center for Rehabilitative Auditory Research has developed a protocol
to provide early identification of ototoxicity for patients receiving ototoxic
medications. The initial work involved patients with relatively good
high-frequency hearing and resulted in the use of an individualized, sensitive
frequency range separated by 1/6th-octave intervals. This protocol tested
pure-tone frequencies at 1/6th-octave steps above 9 kHz, but only conventional
audiometric frequencies were tested below 9 kHz. More recently, the testing
protocol was expanded to include 1/6th-octave testing below 9 kHz. The primary
question of interest was to determine whether adding 1/6th-octave test
frequencies below 9 kHz would increase the ototoxicity detection rate for
patients with poorer hearing. Results indicated 76 of the 210 (36.2%) ears that
demonstrated initial ototoxic hearing change would have been missed or detected
later if only conventional frequency testing was conducted.Therefore, for
individuals with poorer hearing, expanding the use of the 1/6th-octave test
protocol provides earlier identification of ototoxicity.

PMID: 14655957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Mar;286(3):L506-13. Epub 2003 Aug 22.

The Cdk and PCNA domains on p21Cip1 both function to inhibit G1/S progression
during hyperoxia.

Helt CE(1), Staversky RJ, Lee YJ, Bambara RA, Keng PC, O'Reilly MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Enviromental Medicine, School of Medicine and Dentistry, The
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
michael_oreilly@urmc.rochester.edu

This study investigates molecular mechanisms underlying cell cycle arrest when
cells are exposed to high levels of oxygen (hyperoxia). Hyperoxia has previously 
been shown to increase expression of the cell cycle regulators p53 and p21. In
the current study, we found that p53-deficient human lung adenocarcinoma H1299
cells failed to induce p21 or growth arrest in G(1) when exposed to 95% oxygen.
Instead, cells arrested in S and G(2). Stable expression of p53 restored
induction of p21 and G(1) arrest without affecting mRNA expression of the other
Cip or INK4 G(1) kinase inhibitors. To confirm the role of p21 in G(1) arrest, we
created H1299 cells with tetracycline-inducible expression of enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP), EGFP fused to p21 (EGFp21), or EGFP fused to p27
(EGFp27), a related cell cycle inhibitor. The amino terminus of p21 and p27 bind 
cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdk), whereas the carboxy terminus of p21 binds the
sliding clamp proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). EGFp21 or EGFp27, but
not EGFP by itself, restored G(1) arrest during hyperoxia. When separately
overexpressed, the amino-terminal Cdk and carboxy-terminal PCNA binding domains
of p21 each prevented cells from exiting G(1) during exposure. These findings
demonstrate that exposure in vitro to hyperoxia exerts G(1) arrest through
p53-dependent induction of p21 that suppresses Cdk and PCNA activity. Because
PCNA also participates in DNA repair, these results raise the possibility that
p21 also affects repair of oxidized DNA.

PMID: 12936910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Parasitol. 2003 Apr;89(2):346-50.

Phyllodistomum funduli n. sp. (Trematoda: Gorgoderidae) from Fundulus sciadicus
Cope from Cedar Creek in western Nebraska.

Helt J(1), Janovy J Jr, Ubelaker J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln,
Nebraska 68588, USA. jhelt1@bigred.unl.edu

Phyllodistomum funduli n. sp. is described from the urinary bladder and ureters
of the plains topminnow, Fundulus sciadicus, from Cedar Creek in Keith County,
Nebraska (41 degrees 11.18'N, 101 degrees 21.77'W). Phyllodistomum funduli
differs from most other Phyllodistomum species reported in possessing an oral
sucker that is larger than the acetabulum. Currently, 7 other species of
Phyllodistomum have been reported to possess this trait. A comparison of P.
funduli with these 7 other species indicates that P. funduli is a distinct
species, lacking notches, posterior body folds, caudal projections, or cephalic
glands found in some congeners. There is no published report on parasites other
than monogeneans inhabiting the plains topminnow, and there is no other report of
members from the Gorgoderidae inhabiting any members of the Fundulidae.

PMID: 12760652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Feb;24(2):159-69.

Mechanisms by which DNA tumor virus oncoproteins target the Rb family of pocket
proteins.

Helt AM(1), Galloway DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and
Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.

Small DNA tumor viruses have evolved different mechanisms to abrogate the
function of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (pRb). Studies of these viruses
have been invaluable in uncovering the central role of the Rb family of pocket
proteins in cell cycle control. While the molecular mechanisms by which the viral
oncoproteins inactivate the Rb family are still being elucidated, it is clear
that targeting of this family is required both for viral replication and for
virus-induced transformation of mammalian cells. This review compares and
contrasts the approaches DNA tumor viruses have evolved to antagonize Rb family
members--ranging from relatively simple equilibrium dissociation of pRb from
cellular pRb-binding factors to chaperone-mediated alterations in pocket protein 
stability and phosphorylation levels. The review will focus on the viral
oncoproteins adenovirus E1A, human papillomavirus E7 and the large T antigens of 
several polyomaviruses. An understanding of these mechanisms may provide further 
insight into the regulation and functions of Rb family members as well as uncover
new targets for the development of novel anti-viral agents, particularly against 
human papillomavirus, which is a significant cause of human cancer.

PMID: 12584163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Virol. 2002 Oct;76(20):10559-68.

Inactivation of both the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor and p21 by the human
papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein is necessary to inhibit cell cycle arrest
in human epithelial cells.

Helt AM(1), Funk JO, Galloway DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Avenue N., Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 E7 oncoprotein must inactivate the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (Rb) pathway to bypass G(1) arrest. However, E7
C-terminal mutants that were able to inactivate Rb were unable to bypass DNA
damage-induced G(1) arrest and keratinocyte senescence, suggesting that the E7 C 
terminus may target additional G(1) regulators. The E7 C-terminal mutant proteins
E7 CVQ68-70AAA and E7 Delta79-83 (deletion of positions 79 through 83) were
further tested in several models of cell cycle arrest associated with elevated
levels of p21. C-terminal mutations rendered E7 unable to induce S phase and
endoreduplication in differentiated keratinocytes and rendered it less efficient 
in delaying senescence of human mammary epithelial cells. Interestingly, when
cell cycle arrest was induced with a peptide form of p21, the E7 C-terminal
mutants were deficient in overcoming arrest, whereas a mutant defective in Rb
binding was competent in inhibiting G(1) arrest. These results suggest that the
inactivation of both p21 and Rb by E7 contributes to subversion of cell cycle
control in normal human epithelia but that neither p21 nor Rb inactivation alone 
is sufficient.

PMCID: PMC136576
PMID: 12239337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. BMC Bioinformatics. 2002 Jul 30;3:19.

Visualizing the genome: techniques for presenting human genome data and
annotations.

Loraine AE(1), Helt GA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Department, Affymetrix, Inc, 6550 Vallejo Street, Ste 100,
Emeryville, CA 94608, USA. ann_loraine@affymetrix.com

BACKGROUND: In order to take full advantage of the newly available public human
genome sequence data and associated annotations, biologists require visualization
tools ("genome browsers") that can accommodate the high frequency of alternative 
splicing in human genes and other complexities.
RESULTS: In this article, we describe visualization techniques for presenting
human genomic sequence data and annotations in an interactive, graphical format. 
These techniques include: one-dimensional, semantic zooming to show sequence data
alongside gene structures; color-coding exons to indicate frame of translation;
adjustable, moveable tiers to permit easier inspection of a genomic scene; and
display of protein annotations alongside gene structures to show how alternative 
splicing impacts protein structure and function. These techniques are illustrated
using examples from two genome browser applications: the Neomorphic GeneViewer
annotation tool and ProtAnnot, a prototype viewer which shows protein annotations
in the context of genomic sequence.
CONCLUSION: By presenting techniques for visualizing genomic data, we hope to
provide interested software developers with a guide to what features are most
likely to meet the needs of biologists as they seek to make sense of the rapidly 
expanding body of public genomic data and annotations.

PMCID: PMC119855
PMID: 12149135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Toxicol Sci. 2001 Oct;63(2):214-22.

p53-dependent induction of p21(Cip1/WAF1/Sdi1) protects against oxygen-induced
toxicity.

Helt CE(1), Rancourt RC, Staversky RJ, O'Reilly MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Environmental Medicine, The University of
Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The beneficial effects of supplemental oxygen delivered to patients suffering
from acute respiratory distress is offset by its reduction to genotoxic reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) that inhibit proliferation and kill pulmonary cells. Cells
respond to oxygen-induced damage by expressing the tumor suppressor p53 and the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(Cip1/WAF1/Sdi1) (p21), which limits
proliferation by blocking entry into S phase. Since preventing DNA synthesis
during genotoxic stress may enhance survival, the current study examines whether 
hyperoxia induces p21 through a p53-dependent pathway and whether p21 protects
cells from the toxic effects of oxygen. HCT116 colon carcinoma cells and clonal
lines lacking p53 or p21were used in this study because they allow direct
cytotoxic comparisons between isogenic cells, without complications arising from 
unknown genetic differences between nonhomologous cell lines. Hyperoxia (95% O2, 
5% CO2) increased p53 abundance, phosphorylation of p53 on serine 15, and p21
mRNA and protein in parental HCT116 cells that ceased proliferation. In contrast,
p21 was not detected in either p53- or p21-deficient HCT116 cells, which exited
the G1 compartment and were arrested in S and G2/M phases during hyperoxia.
Trypan blue-dye exclusion revealed that induction of p21 markedly enhanced
survival during exposure and colony survival assays showed that p21 enhanced the 
ability to resume proliferation during recovery in room air. The observation that
p53-dependent induction of p21 prevents exit from G1 and promotes survival during
hyperoxia is consistent with the importance of limiting DNA replication during
genotoxic stress caused by oxygen exposure.

PMID: 11568365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Microsc Res Tech. 2001 Sep 1;54(5):298-308.

Effects of age and GDNF on noradrenergic innervation of the hippocampal
formation: studies from intraocular grafts.

Granholm AC(1), Helt C, Srivastava N, Backman C, Gerhardt GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA. granholm@musc.edu

Recent studies have suggested that factors in the target tissue influence the
degree of plasticity and regeneration following aging and/or specific insults. We
have investigated whether young or aged targets differ in their noradrenergic
innervation from fetal locus coeruleus (LC) neurons, and also if a specific
growth factor, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) can affect this
innervation pattern. Tissue pieces of fetal brainstem and young (3 months) or old
(18 months) iris tissue were transplanted simultaneously into the anterior
chamber of the eye of adult hosts. We found that aged iris transplants became
innervated to a significantly lesser degree by the cografted LC neurons than
young iris transplants. Fetal hippocampal tissue was then grafted to adult hosts,
and a fetal brainstem graft containing LC neurons was placed adjacent to the
first graft, either at 3 or 21 months post-grafting. Thus, old/young chimeras of 
the noradrenergic coeruleo-hippocampal pathway were created. Aged hippocampal
grafts received a much less dense innervation from co-grafted LC neurons than
young hippocampal grafts. Tyrosine hydroxylase-positive-immunoreactive
innervation was only found in the outskirts of aged grafts, while the young
hippocampal grafts contained an even innervation pattern. The innervation density
of hippocampal grafts was significantly enhanced by GDNF treatment. These
findings demonstrate that target-derived factors may regulate neuronal
plasticity, and that the age of the target is more important for innervation
properties than the age of the neuron innervating a particular target.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11514986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Exp Neurol. 2001 Aug;170(2):258-69.

Neuroprotection of grafted neurons with a GDNF/caspase inhibitor cocktail.

Helt CE(1), Hoernig GR, Albeck DS, Gerhardt GA, Ickes B, Reyland ME, Quissell DO,
Strömberg I, Granholm AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

Transplantation of fetal ventral mesencephalic (VM) tissue shows great promise as
an experimental therapy for patients with Parkinson's disease. However, cell
survival in brain tissue grafts is poor, with survival rates of only 5-15%. We
have utilized a combination of the caspase inhibitor bocaspartyl
(OMe)-fluoromethylketone (BOC-ASP-CH2F) and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic 
factor (GDNF) to enhance survival of grafted dopamine neurons. The VM tissue was 
dissected from embryonic day 13-15 rat fetuses, incubated in different doses of
BOC-ASP-CH2F and GDNF, and transplanted to the anterior chamber of the eye of
adult rats. Growth of the tissue was assessed through the translucent cornea.
Doses of 50 and 100 micromolar of the general caspase inhibitor appeared to have 
detrimental effects on mesencephalic tissue, while 20 micromolar had beneficial
effects on overall transplant growth. A combination of the caspase inhibitor and 
GDNF appeared to have more prominent effects on cell survival as well as
dopaminergic fiber density than either agent by itself. The transplants doubled
in size when they were treated with a combination of BOC-ASP-CH2F and GDNF, and
cell death markers were significantly reduced at both 48 h and 4-6 days
postgrafting. This is, to our knowledge, the first combined approach using
apoptotic blockers with trophic factors, and demonstrates a viable strategy for
protection of developing neurons, since several different aspects of graft
function may be addressed simultaneously.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11476591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Virol. 2001 Aug;75(15):6737-47.

Destabilization of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor by human papillomavirus
type 16 E7 is not sufficient to overcome cell cycle arrest in human
keratinocytes.

Helt AM(1), Galloway DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

The E7 oncoprotein of human papillomavirus type 16 promotes cell proliferation in
the presence of antiproliferative signals. Mutagenesis of E7 has revealed that
this activity requires three regions, conserved regions 1 and 2 and a C-terminal 
zinc finger. Binding to the retinoblastoma tumor repressor (Rb) through an LxCxE 
motif in conserved region 2 is necessary, but not sufficient, for E7 to induce
proliferation. We tested the hypothesis that binding to Rb is not sufficient
because conserved region 1 and/or the C terminus are required for E7 to
functionally inactivate Rb and thus induce proliferation. One mechanism proposed 
for how E7 inactivates Rb is by blocking Rb-E2F binding. Either conserved region 
1 or the C terminus was necessary, in combination with the LxCxE motif, for E7 to
block Rb-E2F binding in vitro. While all full-length E7 proteins with mutations
outside of the LxCxE motif inhibited Rb-E2F binding, some failed to abrogate cell
cycle arrest, demonstrating that blocking Rb-E2F binding is not sufficient for
abrogating antiproliferative signals. Another mechanism proposed for how E7
inactivates Rb is by promoting the destabilization of Rb protein. Mutations in
conserved region 1 or the LxCxE motif prevented E7 from reducing the half-life of
Rb. Though no specific C-terminal residues of E7 were essential for destabilizing
Rb, a novel class of mutations that uncouple the destabilization of Rb from the
deregulation of keratinocyte proliferation was discovered. Destabilization of Rb 
correlated with the abrogation of Rb-induced quiescence but was not sufficient
for overriding DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest or for increasing
keratinocyte life span. Finally, the same regions of E7 required for
destabilizing Rb were required for reducing p107 and p130 levels. Together, these
results suggest that inactivation of all three Rb family members is not
sufficient to deregulate keratinocyte cell cycle control.

PMCID: PMC114400
PMID: 11435552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001 Apr;280(4):L617-26.

The role of p21(CIP1/WAF1) in growth of epithelial cells exposed to hyperoxia.

Rancourt RC(1), Keng PC, Helt CE, O'Reilly MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY
14642, USA.

Previous studies have shown that hyperoxia inhibits proliferation and increases
the expression of the tumor suppressor p53 and its downstream target, the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(CIP1/WAF1), which inhibits proliferation in
the G1 phase of the cell cycle. To determine whether growth arrest was mediated
through activation of the p21-dependent G1 checkpoint, the kinetics of cell cycle
movement during exposure to 95% O2 were assessed in the Mv1Lu and A549 pulmonary 
adenocarcinoma cell lines. Cell counts, 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation,
and cell cycle analyses revealed that growth arrest of both cell lines occurred
in S phase, with A549 cells also showing evidence of a G1 arrest. Hyperoxia
increased p21 in A549 but not in Mv1Lu cells, consistent with the activation of
the p21-dependent G1 checkpoint. The ability of p21 to exert the G1 arrest was
confirmed by showing that hyperoxia inhibited proliferation of HCT 116 colon
carcinoma cells predominantly in G1, whereas an isogenic line lacking p21
arrested in S phase. The cell cycle arrest in S phase appears to be a
p21-independent process caused by a gradual reduction in the rate of DNA strand
elongation. Our data reveal that hyperoxia inhibits proliferation in G1 and S
phase and demonstrate that p53 and p21 retain their ability to affect G1
checkpoint control during exposure to elevated O2 levels.

PMID: 11238001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol. 2000;8:239-50.

An evaluation of ontology exchange languages for bioinformatics.

McEntire R(1), Karp P, Abernethy N, Benton D, Helt G, DeJongh M, Kent R, Kosky A,
Lewis S, Hodnett D, Neumann E, Olken F, Pathak D, Tarczy-Hornoch P, Toldo L,
Topaloglou T.

Author information: 
(1)SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, King of Prussia, PA 19406, USA.
Robin_A_McEntire@sbphrd.com

Ontologies are specifications of the concepts in a given field, and of the
relationships among those concepts. The development of ontologies for
molecular-biology information and the sharing of those ontologies within the
bioinformatics community are central problems in bioinformatics. If the
bioinformatics community is to share ontologies effectively, ontologies must be
exchanged in a form that uses standardized syntax and semantics. This paper
reports on an effort among the authors to evaluate alternative ontology-exchange 
languages, and to recommend one or more languages for use within the larger
bioinformatics community. The study selected a set of candidate languages, and
defined a set of capabilities that the ideal ontology-exchange language should
satisfy. The study scored the languages according to the degree to which they
satisfied each capability. In addition, the authors performed several
ontology-exchange experiments with the two languages that received the highest
scores: OML and Ontolingua. The result of those experiments, and the main
conclusion of this study, was that the frame-based semantic model of Ontolingua
is preferable to the conceptual graph model of OML, but that the XML-based syntax
of OML is preferable to the Lisp-based syntax of Ontolingua.

PMID: 10977085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Audiol. 2000 Jun;9(1):36-49.

Computer-automated clinical technique for tinnitus quantification.

Henry JA(1), Fausti SA, Flick CL, Helt WJ, Ellingson RM.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs RR&D National Center for Rehabilitative Auditory Research,
Portland VA Medical Center, OR, USA. henryj@ohsu.edu

This study addresses the need for uniformity in techniques for clinical
quantification of tinnitus. Because automation can be an effective means to
achieve standardization, this laboratory is developing techniques to perform
computer-automated tinnitus testing. The present study was conducted to
demonstrate the feasibility of obtaining reliable tinnitus measures using a fully
automated system. A computer-controlled psychoacoustical system was developed to 
quantify tinnitus loudness and pitch using a tone-matching technique. Hearing
thresholds were also obtained as part of the procedure. The system generated test
stimuli and simultaneously controlled a notebook computer positioned in the sound
chamber facing the patient. The notebook computer displayed instructions for
responding and relayed response choices through on-screen "buttons" that the
patient touched with a pen device. Twenty individuals with tinnitus were
evaluated with the technique over two sessions, and responses were analyzed for
test-retest reliability. Analyses revealed good reliability of thresholds,
loudness matches, and pitch matches. These results demonstrate that use of a
fully automated system to obtain reliable measurements of tinnitus loudness and
pitch is feasible for clinical application.

PMID: 10943023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Science. 2000 Mar 24;287(5461):2185-95.

The genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster.

Adams MD, Celniker SE, Holt RA, Evans CA, Gocayne JD, Amanatides PG, Scherer SE, 
Li PW, Hoskins RA, Galle RF, George RA, Lewis SE, Richards S, Ashburner M,
Henderson SN, Sutton GG, Wortman JR, Yandell MD, Zhang Q, Chen LX, Brandon RC,
Rogers YH, Blazej RG, Champe M, Pfeiffer BD, Wan KH, Doyle C, Baxter EG, Helt G, 
Nelson CR, Gabor GL, Abril JF, Agbayani A, An HJ, Andrews-Pfannkoch C, Baldwin D,
Ballew RM, Basu A, Baxendale J, Bayraktaroglu L, Beasley EM, Beeson KY, Benos PV,
Berman BP, Bhandari D, Bolshakov S, Borkova D, Botchan MR, Bouck J, Brokstein P, 
Brottier P, Burtis KC, Busam DA, Butler H, Cadieu E, Center A, Chandra I, Cherry 
JM, Cawley S, Dahlke C, Davenport LB, Davies P, de Pablos B, Delcher A, Deng Z,
Mays AD, Dew I, Dietz SM, Dodson K, Doup LE, Downes M, Dugan-Rocha S, Dunkov BC, 
Dunn P, Durbin KJ, Evangelista CC, Ferraz C, Ferriera S, Fleischmann W, Fosler C,
Gabrielian AE, Garg NS, Gelbart WM, Glasser K, Glodek A, Gong F, Gorrell JH, Gu
Z, Guan P, Harris M, Harris NL, Harvey D, Heiman TJ, Hernandez JR, Houck J,
Hostin D, Houston KA, Howland TJ, Wei MH, Ibegwam C, Jalali M, Kalush F, Karpen
GH, Ke Z, Kennison JA, Ketchum KA, Kimmel BE, Kodira CD, Kraft C, Kravitz S, Kulp
D, Lai Z, Lasko P, Lei Y, Levitsky AA, Li J, Li Z, Liang Y, Lin X, Liu X, Mattei 
B, McIntosh TC, McLeod MP, McPherson D, Merkulov G, Milshina NV, Mobarry C,
Morris J, Moshrefi A, Mount SM, Moy M, Murphy B, Murphy L, Muzny DM, Nelson DL,
Nelson DR, Nelson KA, Nixon K, Nusskern DR, Pacleb JM, Palazzolo M, Pittman GS,
Pan S, Pollard J, Puri V, Reese MG, Reinert K, Remington K, Saunders RD, Scheeler
F, Shen H, Shue BC, Sidén-Kiamos I, Simpson M, Skupski MP, Smith T, Spier E,
Spradling AC, Stapleton M, Strong R, Sun E, Svirskas R, Tector C, Turner R,
Venter E, Wang AH, Wang X, Wang ZY, Wassarman DA, Weinstock GM, Weissenbach J,
Williams SM, WoodageT, Worley KC, Wu D, Yang S, Yao QA, Ye J, Yeh RF, Zaveri JS, 
Zhan M, Zhang G, Zhao Q, Zheng L, Zheng XH, Zhong FN, Zhong W, Zhou X, Zhu S, Zhu
X, Smith HO, Gibbs RA, Myers EW, Rubin GM, Venter JC.

The fly Drosophila melanogaster is one of the most intensively studied organisms 
in biology and serves as a model system for the investigation of many
developmental and cellular processes common to higher eukaryotes, including
humans. We have determined the nucleotide sequence of nearly all of the
approximately 120-megabase euchromatic portion of the Drosophila genome using a
whole-genome shotgun sequencing strategy supported by extensive clone-based
sequence and a high-quality bacterial artificial chromosome physical map. Efforts
are under way to close the remaining gaps; however, the sequence is of sufficient
accuracy and contiguity to be declared substantially complete and to support an
initial analysis of genome structure and preliminary gene annotation and
interpretation. The genome encodes approximately 13,600 genes, somewhat fewer
than the smaller Caenorhabditis elegans genome, but with comparable functional
diversity.

PMID: 10731132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Ear Hear. 1999 Dec;20(6):497-505.

An individualized, sensitive frequency range for early detection of ototoxicity.

Fausti SA(1), Henry JA, Helt WJ, Phillips DS, Frey RH, Noffsinger D, Larson VD,
Fowler CG.

Author information: 
(1)VA RR&D National Center for Rehabilitative Auditory Research, Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify auditory frequencies at which
serial threshold testing would provide the greatest sensitivity for early
detection of ototoxicity. The overall objective is to develop a more
time-efficient ototoxicity monitoring protocol.
DESIGN: Threshold data were analyzed from 370 hospitalized patients treated with 
aminoglycoside antibiotics (AMGs) or cisplatin (CDDP) who received serial
auditory monitoring before, during, and after treatment at conventional (0.25 to 
8 kHz) and high (9 to 20 kHz) frequencies.
RESULTS: For patients showing hearing changes due to ototoxicity, a frequency
range was identified for its apparent high sensitivity to initial ototoxicity.
This sensitive range is identified according to an individual's hearing threshold
configuration, and is, therefore, unique for each patient. The range consists of 
five frequencies, generally separated by 1/6 octave, e.g., 8, 9, 10, 11.2, and
12.5 kHz. To determine frequencies and combinations of frequencies that were most
often involved in ototoxicity detection, threshold data in the sensitive range
were analyzed in detail. This analysis suggests that patients receiving treatment
with AMG or CDDP can be monitored for hearing thresholds at only five
frequencies, resulting in an 84% detection rate for AMG and 94% for CDDP compared
with monitoring at all conventional and high frequencies.
CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive analysis supports earlier observations that a
sensitive, limited frequency range exists in which serial threshold monitoring
will provide early warning of ototoxicity before effects in the speech frequency 
range. This finding is now being evaluated in a prospective investigation.

PMID: 10613387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. CMAJ. 1999 May 4;160(9):1299-302.

Prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus among Swampy Cree women in Moose
Factory, James Bay.

Godwin M(1), Muirhead M, Huynh J, Helt B, Grimmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ont.
godwinm@post.queensu.ca

Comment in
    CMAJ. 1999 May 4;160(9):1315-6.

BACKGROUND: Although high rates of gestational diabetes mellitus have been
documented in native populations, few studies have examined rates of the disease 
among native Indians in Canada. The authors conducted a study to estimate the
prevalence of gestational diabetes among Swampy Cree women, to identify factors
predictive of the occurrence of gestational diabetes, and to identify delivery
and infant outcomes related to the presence of the disease.
METHODS: Information on Swampy Cree women who gave birth at Weeneebayko Hospital,
Moose Factory, James Bay, Ont., between 1987 and 1995 was obtained from medical
charts. Patients with and without gestational diabetes were compared. Logistic
regression analysis was used to identify independent predictors of gestational
diabetes. Delivery and infant outcomes that occurred secondary to gestational
diabetes were also identified by means of logistic regression.
RESULTS: A total of 1401 deliveries occurred at Weeneebayko Hospital over the
study period, of which 1298 were included in the study. Gestational diabetes was 
diagnosed in 110 (8.5% [95% confidence interval (CI) 6.9%-9.9%]) of the 1298
pregnancies. Factors predictive of gestational diabetes were age 35 years or more
(relative risk [RR] 4.1, 95% CI 1.5-11.7), a history of gestational diabetes in a
previous pregnancy (RR 6.4, 95% CI 3.5-11.7), diastolic blood pressure of 80 mm
Hg or higher at the first prenatal visit (RR 1.7, 95% CI 1.1-2.8), weight greater
than 80 kg at the first prenatal visit (RR 4.9, 95% CI 1.8-12.9) and having a
first-degree relative with diabetes (RR 3.0, 95% CI 1.4-6.1). The only delivery
outcome independently associated with the presence of gestational diabetes was an
increased likelihood of needing assisted delivery (forceps or vacuum extraction) 
(RR 2.8, 95% CI 1.1-7.0). Shoulder dystocia was indirectly associated with
gestational diabetes owing to increased infant birth weight. Infant outcomes
associated with the presence of gestational diabetes were birth weight greater
than 4500 g (RR 2.4, 95% CI 1.4-3.8), hyperbilirubinemia (RR 2.9, 95% CI
1.4-6.1), hypoglycemia (RR 7.3, 95% CI 3.7-14.4) and hypocalcemia (RR 8.9, 95% CI
2.3-33.7).
INTERPRETATION: Gestational diabetes occurred in a significant minority of Swampy
Cree women and was associated with a number of adverse outcomes.

PMCID: PMC1230311
PMID: 10333831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jan 1;27(1):85-8.

The FlyBase database of the Drosophila Genome Projects and community literature.

FlyBase Consortium(1).

Collaborators: Gelbart WM, Crosby M, Matthews B, Chillemi J, Twombly SR, Emmert
D, Bayraktaroglu L, Smutniak F, Kossida S, Ashburner M, Drysdale RA, Whitfield
EJ, Millburn GH, de Grey A, Kaufman T, Matthews K, Gilbert D, Strelets V,
Grumbling G, Tolstoshev C, Rubin GM, Lewis S, Helt G, Misra S, Harris N,
Brokstein P, Loraine A, Simas D, Benos T.

Author information: 
(1)FlyBase, The Biological Laboratories, Harvard University, 16 Divinity Avenue, 
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The FlyBase Drosophila genetics database and the public interfaces of the
Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project (BDGP) and European Drosophila Genome Project 
(EDGP) are in the process of integrating. At present, the data of these projects 
are available from independent, but hyperlinked, WWW sites (FlyBase URL,
http://flybase. bio.indiana.edu/; BDGP URL, http://fruitfly.berkeley.edu/; EDGP
URL, http://edgp.ebi.ac.uk/ ). Because of the considerable overlap of data
classes between the contributions of the Drosophila genome projects and the
Drosophila community, the new and enlarged FlyBase consortium views the
implementation of a single integrated Drosophila genomics/genetics server as
essential to the scientific community. This integration will occur in a stepwise 
fashion over the next 1-2 years. In this report, the salient features of the
current databases and how to interrogate and navigate the extensive data sets are
discussed.

PMCID: PMC148103
PMID: 9847148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Genome Res. 1998 Mar;8(3):291-305.

BioViews: Java-based tools for genomic data visualization.

Helt GA(1), Lewis S, Loraine AE, Rubin GM.

Author information: 
(1)Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project (BDGP), Department of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-3200, USA.

Visualization tools for bioinformatics ideally should provide universal access to
the most current data in an interactive and intuitive graphical user interface.
Since the introduction of Java, a language designed for distributed programming
over the Web, the technology now exists to build a genomic data visualization
tool that meets these requirements. Using Java we have developed a prototype
genome browser applet (BioViews) that incorporates a three-level graphical view
of genomic data: a physical map, an annotated sequence map, and a DNA sequence
display. Annotated biological features are displayed on the physical and
sequence-based maps, and the different views are interconnected. The applet is
linked to several databases and can retrieve features and display hyperlinked
textual data on selected features. In addition to browsing genomic data,
different types of analyses can be performed interactively and the results of
these analyses visualized alongside prior annotations. Our genome browser is
built on top of extensible, reusable graphic components specifically designed for
bioinformatics. Other groups can (and do) reuse this work in various ways. Genome
centers can reuse large parts of the genome browser with minor modifications,
bioinformatics groups working on sequence analysis can reuse components to build 
front ends for analysis programs, and biology laboratories can reuse components
to publish results as dynamic Web documents.

PMCID: PMC310693
PMID: 9521932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Radiat Res. 1996 Sep;146(3):267-75.

Radiation inactivation of human prostate cancer cells: the role of apoptosis.

Algan O(1), Stobbe CC, Helt AM, Hanks GE, Chapman JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

Radiation-induced apoptosis detected by gel electrophoresis was measured in cells
of three human prostate carcinoma cell lines (TSU, PC-3 and DU-145) and compared 
to their intrinsic radiosensitivities as measured by clonogenic assays. The
intrinsic radiosensitivities of each cell line were defined by their alpha and
beta coefficients and their surviving fraction at 2 Gy, derived from complete
survival curves. The temporal expression and kinetics of radiation-induced
apoptosis for DU-145 cells, the human prostate carcinoma cell line which
expressed the highest rate of radiation-induced apoptosis, was characterized
further by differential sedimentation and the immunofluorescence assay (Apoptag) 
which was specific for 3'-OH ends in cellular DNA. Cell viability was measured
microscopically with trypan blue staining. Cell survival after various doses was 
computer-fitted to either a simple linear or a linear-quadratic equation.
Twenty-four hours after a 10-Gy dose of 137Cs gamma rays, DNA fragmentation to
nucleosome multimers was strongly expressed in only DU-145 cells. In this cell
line, when centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min was used to separate fragmented
from large molecular weight DNA, the proportion of DNA in the supernatant
increased to a maximum of approximately 17% of the total by 10-12 h after
radiation treatment. Cell death 24 h after irradiation measured by trypan blue
exclusion assays followed single-hit kinetics up to 80 Gy. The proportion of
cells which were labeled with Apoptag displayed single-hit kinetics and yielded
the same inactivation coefficient as measured by trypan blue. Together, these
data indicate that the rapid (24 h) inactivation of irradiated DU-145 cells
results from apoptosis and accounts for about 5% of the single-hit killing
measured by clonogenic assay. Temporal studies of radiation-induced killing of
DU-145 cells distinguished this rapid mechanism of cell death from the major
mechanism (72-144 h). These may correlate with apoptosis and proliferative cell
death, respectively. Of the three prostate cancer cell lines investigated, only
DU-145 cells displayed significant levels of radiation-induced DNA fragmentation 
and rapid cell death, with characteristics of apoptosis. This mechanism of cell
death was complete by 24 h after irradiation and was well separated in time from 
the death of cells by the major mechanisms which occurred after 72 h, and
accounted for about 5% of cell inactivation by a single-hit mechanism.

PMID: 8752304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biochemistry. 1996 May 7;35(18):5719-25.

Cellular and in vitro transport of glutathione conjugates by MRP.

Shen H(1), Paul S, Breuninger LM, Ciaccio PJ, Laing NM, Helt M, Tew KD, Kruh GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

Retraction in
    Biochemistry. 1997 Nov 11;36(45):13972.

MRP is a recently identified ATP-binding cassette transporter. We previously
established that MRP confers resistance to a spectrum of natural product
cytotoxic drugs [Kruh, G.D., (1994) Cancer Res. 54, 1649-1652], that expression
of MRP is associated with enhanced drug efflux [Breuninger, L.M., (1995) Cancer
Res. 55, 5342-5347], and that MRP transcript is widely expressed in human tissues
and solid tumor cell lines [Kruh, G.D., (1995) J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 87,
1256-1258]. In the present study the relationship between MRP and drug
glutathione S-conjugates was examined. We observed that MRP was labeled by
azidophenacylglutathione (APA-SG), a photoaffinity analog of glutathione, and
that inside-out membrane vesicles prepared from MRP-overexpressing HL60/ADR cells
transported this compound. Transport into membrane vesicles was ATP-dependent,
sensitive to osmolarity, and saturable with regard to APA-SG and ATP
concentrations, with Km values of 15 and 61 microM, respectively. APA-SG
transport was competitively inhibited by the natural product cytotoxic drugs
daunorubicin, vincristine, and etoposide, with Ki values of 4.8, 3.8, and 5.5
microM, respectively. Oxidized glutathione, the drug-glutathione S-conjugate
DNP-SG, the LTD4 antagonist MK571 and arsenate were also competitive inhibitors, 
with Ki values of 9.0, 23.4, 1.1, and 15.0 microM, respectively. Analysis of the 
fate of monochlorobimane in MRP transfectants revealed reduced intracellular
concentrations of drug-glutathione S-conjugates associated with enhanced efflux
and altered intracellular distribution. These results indicate that MRP can
transport glutathione conjugates in vitro and in living cells and suggest the
possibility that the transporter may represent a link between cellular resistance
to some classes of cytotoxic drugs and glutathione-mediated mechanisms of
resistance. In addition, the observation that both mildly cationic or neutral
natural product cytotoxic drugs and anionic compounds such as DNP-SG, MK571, and 
arsenate are competitive inhibitors of MRP action suggests that the substrate
specificity of the transporter is quite broad.

PMID: 8639531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Neurourol Urodyn. 1996;15(1):17-29.

Levator ani muscle in women with genitourinary prolapse: indirect assessment by
muscle histopathology.

Helt M(1), Benson JT, Russell B, Brubaker L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Louisville, School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

The objective of this study was to assess the state of innervation in levator ani
muscle sites using muscle histopathology. Asymptomatic women and patients with
genitourinary prolapse were included. Histopathologic analysis allows indirect
assessment of a muscle's innervation. Therefore, levator ani muscle was collected
in a standardized fashion during abdominal surgery and frozen in the operating
room using isopentane slush cooled by liquid nitrogen. Serial sections of levator
ani muscle in cross-section were studied with standard histochemical and
immunohistochemical techniques. The staining patterns from these histochemical
techniques allowed quantitative determination of the ratios of fiber types I,
IIA, and IIB and their fiber diameters. Objective assessment of fiber type
grouping was performed. The distribution of both fiber type percentage and
diameter were non-parametric. Therefore, the Mann-Whitney U-test was used to
analyze the data for statistical differences between the means for these
variables. There was no statistical difference in levator ani muscle fiber type
percentage and diameter in patients with prolapse and/or urinary incontinence
when compared to asymptomatic women. Levator ani muscles have a higher proportion
of slow fibers (66%) than found in other human female muscle (48%). There was no 
evidence for denervation/reinnervation in any of the biopsy specimens. In this
study, levator ani muscle biopsies from incontinent and/or prolapse patients were
neither denervated nor reinnervated.

PMID: 8696353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cancer Lett. 1994 May 16;79(2):213-9.

A sensitive assay for taxol and other microtubule-stabilizing agent.

Smith CD(1), Mooberry SL, Zhang X, Helt AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111.

The ability of taxol to protect microtubules in cultured human ovarian carcinoma 
cells from drug- and cold-induced depolymerization was characterized as a
functional assay for microtubule stabilizing agents. Treatment of the cells with 
concentrations of vinblastine or colchicine of 50 nM or greater, or incubation at
4 degrees C resulted in complete depolymerization of cytoplasmic microtubules.
Pretreatment with taxol for 3 h enabled the cells to maintain substantial numbers
of microtubules following the application of vinblastine or colchicine. This
protective effect was easily observed at 50 nM taxol, whereas taxol-induced
microtubule bundling was observed only at concentrations of 500 nM or greater.
Concentrations of taxol as low as 10 nM stabilized microtubules against
cold-induced depolymerization. Therefore, protection of microtubules from drug-
and cold-induced depolymerization provides a sensitive functional assay for
taxol. These systems should be similarly effective in identifying novel compounds
which stabilize microtubules.

PMID: 7912646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Vasc Nurs. 1993 Jun;11(2):58.

Vertebral artery reconstruction in a setting of extensive cerebrovascular
disease.

Helt J.

PMID: 8274381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Neuropatol Pol. 1992;30(1):13-28.

Influence of short-term ischemia on the ultrastructure of hippocampal gyrus in
Mongolian gerbil. III. Synapses in late stage of the pathological process.

Gajkowska B(1), Gadamski R, Mossakowski MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Warsaw.

Electron microscope analysis of the CA1 Ammon's horn sector was performed in
Mongolian gerbils three days after an incident of short-term ischemia of the
forebrain. CA1 pyramidal neurons showed advanced disintegration. Some GABA-ergic 
interneurons revealed ultrastructural alteration of variable degree. The latter
finding contradicts the generally helt view on the relative resistance of CA1
sector interneurons to the ischemic injury. Synapses localized in all cortical
layers of the CA1 sector exhibited ultrastructural abnormalities involving both
pre- and postsynaptic parts. They consisted in marked swelling and accumulation
of unbound electron dense material, considered as calcium deposits. Presynaptic
parts revealed additionally reduced number of synaptic vesicles and their
abnormal distribution. Contrary to the early postischemic period, the most severe
synaptic alterations appeared in stratum pyramidale, radiatum and oriens,
involving both small dendritic branchings and their spines as well as large
shafts of both basal and apical pyramidal dendrites. Synaptic alterations
especially features of the postsynaptic damage correspond to those indicating
excitotoxic neuronal lesions. Presynaptic alterations may indicate both cessation
of neurotransmission function as well as direct ischemic damage. The presence of 
calcium deposition seems to favour the former possibility.

PMID: 1484606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Vasc Nurs. 1991 Dec;9(4):2-8.

Foot care and footwear to prevent amputation.

Helt J.

PMID: 1772772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Child Adolesc Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs. 1989 Jul-Sep;2(3):110-2.

Simultaneous parent and child post-discharge groups.

Roy B, Helt A.

PMID: 2769585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nurs Manage. 1988 Jun;19(6):36-8, 42, 46-8.

In the wake of cost cutting, nursing productivity and quality improve.

Helt EH, Jelinek RC.

PMID: 3380483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1985 Jun;66(6):365-8.

Deep venous thrombosis: diagnosis in spinal cord injured patients.

Chu DA, Ahn JH, Ragnarsson KT, Helt J, Folcarelli P, Ramirez A.

Because the acute spinal cord injured patient is at high risk for the development
of deep venous thrombosis (DVT), accurate diagnosis is critical. Clinical
evaluation is unreliable 50% of the time, however, and the two highly accurate
diagnostic procedures--venography and 125I-labelled fibrinogen scanning--are
invasive and present serious drawbacks. The literature concerning the
effectiveness of the two most widely used noninvasive diagnostic alternatives
(Doppler ultrasound and venous occlusion plethysmography [VOP]) is equivocal. In 
our systematic evaluation of a series of 21 patients, using clinical examination,
Doppler ultrasound and VOP, all patients who developed DVT were identified by all
three methods. Overall accuracy, sensitivity and specificity were 100%.

PMID: 3890800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Agric Food Chem. 1983 Mar-Apr;31(2):220-3.

Determination of carbosulfan and carbofuran residues in plants, soil, and water
by gas chromatography.

Leppert BC, Markle JC, Helt RC, Fujie GH.

PMID: 6853851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Public Health. 1975 May;65(3):284-90.

Quality: medical care's answer to Madison Avenue.

Helt EH, Pelikan JA.

PMCID: PMC1778038
PMID: 1115294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Int J Health Serv. 1973;3(3):475-85.

Economic determinism: a model of the political economy of medical care.

Helt EH.

PMID: 4747175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Med Chem. 1972 Oct;15(10):1024-7.

Amidines. 3. Thioureas possessing antihypertensive activity.

Loev B, Bender PE, Bowman H, Helt A, McLean R, Jen T.

PMID: 5069768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Med Chem. 1972 Jul;15(7):727-31.

Amidines. 2. A new class of antihypertensive agents.
1,2,3,5-Tetrahydroimidazo(2,1-b)quinazolines.

Jen T, Dienel B, Bowman H, Petta J, Helt A, Loev B.

PMID: 5043872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


