
1. Brain Res. 2016 Mar 24. pii: S0006-8993(16)30153-6. doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2016.03.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Hes3 expression in the adult mouse brain is regulated during demyelination and
remyelination.

Toutouna L(1), Nikolakopoulou P(1), Poser SW(1), Masjkur J(1), Arps-Forker C(1), 
Troullinaki M(2), Grossklaus S(2), Bosak V(3), Friedrich U(1), Ziemssen T(4),
Bornstein SR(1), Chavakis T(2), Androutsellis-Theotokis A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Internal Medicine III, Dresden, 
01307, Germany. (2)Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Clinical
Pathobiochemistry, Dresden, 01307, Germany. (3)Technische Universität Dresden,
Department of Internal Medicine III, Dresden, 01307, Germany; Center for
Regenerative Therapies Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (4)Zentrum für klinische 
Neurowissenschaften, Klinik und Poliklinik für Neurologie, Universitätsklinikum
Carl Gustav Carus Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden. (5)Technische
Universität Dresden, Department of Internal Medicine III, Dresden, 01307,
Germany; Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany;
Department of Stem Cell Biology, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, Division of
Cancer and Stem Cells, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 
U.K. Electronic address: Andreas.Theotokis@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

Hes3 is a component of the STAT3-Ser/Hes3 Signaling Axis controlling the growth
and survival of neural stem cells and other plastic cells. Pharmacological
activation of this pathway promotes neuronal rescue and behavioral recovery in
models of ischemic stroke and Parkinson's disease. Here we provide initial
observations implicating Hes3 in the cuprizone model of demyelination and
remyelination. We focus on the subpial motor cortex of mice because we detected
high Hes3 expression. This area is of interest as it is impacted both in human
demyelinating diseases and in the cuprizone model. We report that Hes3 expression
is reduced at peak demyelination and is partially restored within 1 week after
cuprizone withdrawal. This raises the possibility of Hes3 involvement in
demyelination/remyelination that may warrant additional research. Supporting a
possible role of Hes3 in the maintenance of oligodendrocyte markers, a Hes3 null 
mouse strain shows lower levels of myelin basic protein in undamaged adult mice, 
compared to wild-type controls. We also present a novel method for culturing the 
established oligodendrocyte progenitor cell line oli-neu in a manner that
maintains Hes3 expression as well as its self-renewal and differentiation
potential, offering an experimental tool to study Hes3. Based upon this approach,
we identify a Janus kinase inhibitor and dbcAMP as powerful inducers of Hes3 gene
expression. We provide a new biomarker and cell culture method that may be of
interest in demyelination/remyelination research.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 27018293  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Horm Metab Res. 2016 Feb;48(2):77-82. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-111699. Epub 2016 Jan
19.

STAT3-Ser/Hes3 Signaling: A New Molecular Component of the Neuroendocrine System?

Nikolakopoulou P(1), Poser SW(1), Masjkur J(1), Fernandez Rubin de Celis M(1),
Toutouna L(1), Andoniadou CL(2), McKay RD(3), Chrousos G(4), Ehrhart-Bornstein
M(1), Bornstein SR(1), Androutsellis-Theotokis A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany. (2)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's 
College London, UK. (3)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Baltimore, USA.
(4)1st Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens Medical School, Athens,
Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.

The endocrine system involves communication among different tissues in distinct
organs, including the pancreas and components of the
Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis. The molecular mechanisms underlying these
complex interactions are a subject of intense study as they may hold clues for
the progression and treatment of a variety of metabolic and degenerative
diseases. A plethora of signaling pathways, activated by hormones and other
endocrine factors have been implicated in this communication. Recent advances in 
the stem cell field introduce a new level of complexity: adult progenitor cells
appear to utilize distinct signaling pathways than the more mature cells in the
tissue they co-reside. It is therefore important to elucidate the signal
transduction requirements of adult progenitor cells in addition to those of
mature cells. Recent evidence suggests that a common non-canonical signaling
pathway regulates adult progenitors in several different tissues, rendering it as
a potentially valuable starting point to explore their biology. The
STAT3-Ser/Hes3 Signaling Axis was first identified as a major regulator of neural
stem cells and, subsequently, cancer stem cells. In the endocrine/neuroendocrine 
system, this pathway operates on several levels, regulating other types of
plastic cells: (a) it regulates pancreatic islet cell function and insulin
release; (b) insulin in turn activates the pathway in broadly distributed neural 
progenitors and possibly also hypothalamic tanycytes, cells with important roles 
in the control of the adrenal gland; (c) adrenal progenitors themselves operate
this pathway. The STAT3-Ser/Hes3 Signaling Axis therefore deserves additional
research in the context of endocrinology.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 26783739  [PubMed - in process]


3. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2015 Nov;4(11):1251-7. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2015-0105. Epub
2015 Sep 14.

Concise Review: Reprogramming, Behind the Scenes: Noncanonical Neural Stem Cell
Signaling Pathways Reveal New, Unseen Regulators of Tissue Plasticity With
Therapeutic Implications.

Poser SW(1), Chenoweth JG(2), Colantuoni C(2), Masjkur J(1), Chrousos G(3),
Bornstein SR(1), McKay RD(2), Androutsellis-Theotokis A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany. (2)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)First Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens Medical School, Athens,
Greece Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine III, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany Center
for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Dresden, Germany
andreas.theotokis@uniklinikumdresden.de.

Interest is great in the new molecular concepts that explain, at the level of
signal transduction, the process of reprogramming. Usually, transcription factors
with developmental importance are used, but these approaches give limited
information on the signaling networks involved, which could reveal new
therapeutic opportunities. Recent findings involving reprogramming by genetic
means and soluble factors with well-studied downstream signaling mechanisms,
including signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and hairy
and enhancer of split 3 (Hes3), shed new light into the molecular mechanisms that
might be involved. We examine the appropriateness of common culture systems and
their ability to reveal unusual (noncanonical) signal transduction pathways that 
actually operate in vivo. We then discuss such novel pathways and their
importance in various plastic cell types, culminating in their emerging roles in 
reprogramming mechanisms. We also discuss a number of reprogramming paradigms
(mouse induced pluripotent stem cells, direct conversion to neural stem cells,
and in vivo conversion of acinar cells to ß-like cells). Specifically for
acinar-to-ß-cell reprogramming paradigms, we discuss the common view of the
underlying mechanism (involving the Janus kinase-STAT pathway that leads to
STAT3-tyrosine phosphorylation) and present alternative interpretations that
implicate STAT3-serine phosphorylation alone or serine and tyrosine
phosphorylation occurring in sequential order. The implications for drug design
and therapy are important given that different phosphorylation sites on STAT3
intercept different signaling pathways. We introduce a new molecular perspective 
in the field of reprogramming with broad implications in basic, biotechnological,
and translational research.SIGNIFICANCE: Reprogramming is a powerful approach to 
change cell identity, with implications in both basic and applied biology. Most
efforts involve the forced expression of key transcription factors, but recently,
success has been reported with manipulating signal transduction pathways that
might intercept them. It is important to start connecting the function of the
classic reprogramming genes to signaling pathways that also mediate
reprogramming, unifying the sciences of signal transduction, stem cell biology,
and epigenetics. Neural stem cell studies have revealed the operation of
noncanonical signaling pathways that are now appreciated to also operate during
reprogramming, offering new mechanistic explanations.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4622411 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26371344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Vis. 2015 Jul 31;21:828-45. eCollection 2015.

Characterization of ex vivo cultured limbal, conjunctival, and oral mucosal
cells: A comparative study with implications in transplantation medicine.

Dhamodaran K(1), Subramani M(2), Jeyabalan N(3), Ponnalagu M(4), Chevour P(3),
Shetty R(4), Matalia H(5), Shetty R(5), Prince SE(6), Das D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Laboratory, GROW Research Laboratory, Narayana Nethralaya
Foundation, Bangalore, Karnataka, India ; School of Biosciences and Technology,
VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India. (2)Stem Cell Research Laboratory,
GROW Research Laboratory, Narayana Nethralaya Foundation, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India ; Post-graduate & Research Department of Biotechnology, Jamal Mohamed
College, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, India. (3)GROW Research
Laboratory, Narayana Nethralaya Foundation, Bangalore, Karnataka, India. (4)Stem 
Cell Research Laboratory, GROW Research Laboratory, Narayana Nethralaya
Foundation, Bangalore, Karnataka, India. (5)Department of Cornea and Refractive
surgery, Narayana Nethralaya Post Graduate Institute of Ophthalmology, Narayana
Nethralaya Foundation, Narayana Health City, Bommasandra, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India. (6)School of Biosciences and Technology, VIT University, Vellore, Tamil
Nadu, India.

PURPOSE: Limbal epithelial stem cell deficiency is caused by exposure of the
cornea to thermal, chemical, or radiation burns or by diseases (aniridia and
Stevens-Johnson syndrome). Autologous cell transplantation is a widely used
therapeutic modality for restoring the corneal surface in such pathological
conditions. Ex vivo cultured limbal, conjunctival, and oral biopsies have been
widely used to reconstruct the corneal surface with variable outcomes. Culture
characterization of the ex vivo cultured cells would provide insight and clues
into the underlying signaling mechanisms that would aid in determining the
probable transplantation outcome. Comparison of the vital proteins and genes
among the three ex vivo cultured tissues has implications in clinical practice.
To address this issue, we characterized and compared the proliferative and
differentiated properties of ex vivo cultured limbal, conjunctival, and oral
biopsies used for cell-based therapy for corneal surface restoration.
METHODS: Limbal, conjunctival, and oral biopsies were collected with informed
patient consent. Explant cultures were established on the denuded human amniotic 
membrane with corneal lineage differentiation medium. The day 14 cultures were
characterized for epithelial and corneal lineage-specific markers using reverse
transcription (RT)-PCR for cytokeratin 3, 4, 12, 13, 15, connexin 43, vimentin,
p63a, and ABCG2 markers. mRNA expression was estimated in day 14 cultures with
real-time quantitative real time (qRT)-PCR for pluripotency markers (OCT4, SOX2, 
NANOG), putative corneal stem cell markers (ABCG2 and p63a), proliferation
markers (cyclin d1, Ki-67, PCNA, and CDC20), apoptotic markers (BCL2, BAX,
caspase 3, and caspase 9), Notch signaling pathway markers (Notch1, Jagged1,
Hes1, Hes3, Hes5, and Hey1), and autophagic markers (LC3A, LC3B, ATG7, RAB7,
LAMP1, and LAMP2). Fluorescence-activated cell sorter profiling was performed for
pluripotent markers and putative corneal stem cell markers ABCG2 and p63a.
RESULTS: The protein and mRNA expression levels of the pluripotent markers were
lower, whereas those of the putative stem/progenitor markers ABCG2, <U+0394>Np63a, and
Notch signaling molecules (Notch1 and Jagged1) were elevated in limbal cultures. 
The gene expression levels of the autophagy markers (LC3A, LC3B, and LAMP1) were 
significantly increased in the limbal cultures compared to the oral and
conjunctival cultures.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the limbal epithelial cultures showed higher
expression of proliferative, limbal stem cell marker, Notch signaling, and
autophagy markers suggesting a role in stem cell maintenance and differentiation.
This implicates the probable factors that might drive a successful
transplantation. Our findings provide the initial steps toward understanding
transplantation medicine in an ex vivo model.

PMCID: PMC4522244
PMID: 26283864  [PubMed - in process]


5. Sex Dev. 2015;9(3):130-5. doi: 10.1159/000380842. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Novel Splice Site Mutation in MAMLD1 in a Patient with Hypospadias.

Igarashi M(1), Wada Y, Kojima Y, Miyado M, Nakamura M, Muroya K, Mizuno K,
Hayashi Y, Nonomura K, Kohri K, Ogata T, Fukami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

MAMLD1 is a causative gene for disorders of sex development. Several MAMLD1
mutations have been shown to cause hypospadias by generating dysfunctional
proteins and/or unstable mRNAs. Here, we identified an intronic mutation of
MAMLD1 (g.IVS4-2A>G) in 1 of 180 hypospadias patients. RT-PCR of the patient's
skin sample showed normal expression of full-length MAMLD1 and markedly reduced
expression of a known splice variant lacking exon 4. A hitherto unreported splice
variant that lacks exon 5 was similarly identified in samples of the patient and 
control individuals. The full-length transcript of the patient contained mutant
mRNA lacking the first 10 nucleotides of exon 5 (c.1822_1831delACTCATGTAG,
p.K609fsX1070). In vitro assays using cells expressing the full-length wild-type 
and mutant proteins revealed reduced expression of the mutant. The expression of 
the wild-type and mutant MAMLD1 showed parallel changes upon treatment with a
proteasome inhibitor and a translation inhibitor. The mutant-expressing cells
exerted low transactivation activity for the Hes3 promoter, which reflected
limited expression of the mutant protein. These results imply that the pathogenic
events resulting from MAMLD1 mutations include splice errors. Furthermore, this
study raises the possibility of translation failure of MAMLD1 mutants, which
deserves further investigation.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25833151  [PubMed - in process]


6. Sex Dev. 2015;9(2):80-5. doi: 10.1159/000371603. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

A novel hemizygous mutation of MAMLD1 in a patient with 46,XY complete gonadal
dysgenesis.

Ruiz-Arana IL(1), Hübner A, Cetingdag C, Krude H, Grüters A, Fukami M, Biebermann
H, Köhler B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Paediatric Endocrinology, Charité, Humboldt
University Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

MAMLD1 is suggested to play a role in the development of 46,XY disorders of
sexual development (46,XY DSD). So far, mutations in this gene have been detected
in several cases of hypospadias with normal testosterone levels at birth. From in
vitro studies it was concluded that Mamld1 might transiently affect testosterone 
synthesis during genital development. We describe the first MAMLD1 mutation in a 
46,XY patient with complete gonadal dysgenesis. The novel MAMLD1 missense
mutation (p.P677L) results in a severely reduced transactivation in vitro of the 
promoter of the MAMLD1 target gene HES3/Hes3. However, as knowledge about the
functional role of MAMLD1 in gonadal development is limited, we suggest that
additional factors (digenic or oligogenic cause) play a role in the development
of complete gonadal dysgenesis in this patient.

PMID: 25660412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jun 15;408:178-84. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.12.020. Epub
2015 Jan 6.

Adrenomedullary progenitor cells: Isolation and characterization of a
multi-potent progenitor cell population.

Vukicevic V(1), Rubin de Celis MF(1), Pellegata NS(2), Bornstein SR(3),
Androutsellis-Theotokis A(4), Ehrhart-Bornstein M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Endocrinology, Medical Clinic III, Carl Gustav Carus
University Clinic, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. 
(3)Medical Clinic III, Carl Gustav Carus University Clinic, Technische
Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany; Center for Regenerative Therapies
Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (4)Center for
Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden,
Germany; Division of Stem Cell Biology, Medical Clinic III, Carl Gustav Carus
University Clinic, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(5)Division of Molecular Endocrinology, Medical Clinic III, Carl Gustav Carus
University Clinic, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany; Center
for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307
Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: monika.bornstein@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

The adrenal is a highly plastic organ with the ability to adjust to physiological
needs by adapting hormone production but also by generating and regenerating both
adrenocortical and adrenomedullary tissue. It is now apparent that many adult
tissues maintain stem and progenitor cells that contribute to their maintenance
and adaptation. Research from the last years has proven the existence of stem and
progenitor cells also in the adult adrenal medulla throughout life. These cells
maintain some neural crest properties and have the potential to differentiate to 
the endocrine and neural lineages. In this article, we discuss the evidence for
the existence of adrenomedullary multi potent progenitor cells, their isolation
and characterization, their differentiation potential as well as their clinical
potential in transplantation therapies but also in pathophysiology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25575455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35503-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.590687. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Hes3 is expressed in the adult pancreatic islet and regulates gene expression,
cell growth, and insulin release.

Masjkur J(1), Arps-Forker C(1), Poser SW(1), Nikolakopoulou P(1), Toutouna L(1), 
Chenna R(2), Chavakis T(3), Chatzigeorgiou A(3), Chen LS(3), Dubrovska A(4),
Choudhary P(5), Uphues I(6), Mark M(6), Bornstein SR(1), Androutsellis-Theotokis 
A(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine and. (2)the Applied Bioinformatics Group,
BioInnovations Zentrum, University of Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (3)the
Department of Clinical Pathobiochemistry, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine and. (4)Department of Medicine, OncoRay National Center for
Radiation Research in Oncology, Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden
University of Technology, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (5)the Diabetes Research Group,
King's College London, London SE5 9RS, United Kingdom. (6)the Department of
CardioMetabolic Diseases Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG,
88400 Biberach, Germany, and. (7)From the Department of Medicine and the Center
for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany
andreas.theotokis@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

The transcription factor Hes3 is a component of a signaling pathway that supports
the growth of neural stem cells with profound consequences in neurodegenerative
disease models. Here we explored whether Hes3 also regulates pancreatic islet
cells. We showed that Hes3 is expressed in human and rodent pancreatic islets. In
mouse islets it co-localizes with alpha and beta cell markers. We employed the
mouse insulinoma cell line MIN6 to perform in vitro characterization and
functional studies in conditions known to modulate Hes3 based upon our previous
work using neural stem cell cultures. In these conditions, cells showed elevated 
Hes3 expression and nuclear localization, grew efficiently, and showed higher
evoked insulin release responses, compared with serum-containing conditions. They
also exhibited higher expression of the transcription factor Pdx1 and insulin.
Furthermore, they were responsive to pharmacological treatments with the GLP-1
analog Exendin-4, which increased nuclear Hes3 localization. We employed a
transfection approach to address specific functions of Hes3. Hes3 RNA
interference opposed cell growth and affected gene expression as revealed by DNA 
microarrays. Western blotting and PCR approaches specifically showed that Hes3
RNA interference opposes the expression of Pdx1 and insulin. Hes3 overexpression 
(using a Hes3-GFP fusion construct) confirmed a role of Hes3 in regulating Pdx1
expression. Hes3 RNA interference reduced evoked insulin release. Mice lacking
Hes3 exhibited increased islet damage by streptozotocin. These data suggest roles
of Hes3 in pancreatic islet function.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4271235
PMID: 25371201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:263-83. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00007-5.

Expression dynamics and functions of Hes factors in development and diseases.

Kobayashi T(1), Kageyama R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Japan Science
and Technology Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
(CREST), Saitama, Japan. Electronic address: tkobayas@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Japan Science
and Technology Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
(CREST), Saitama, Japan; World Premier International Research
Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Hes genes, encoding basic helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional repressors, are 
mammalian homologues of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split genes, both of
which are required for normal neurogenesis in Drosophila. There are seven members
in the human Hes family, Hes1-7, which are expressed in many tissues and play
various roles mainly in development. All Hes proteins have three conserved
domains: basic HLH (bHLH), Orange, and WRPW domains. The basic region binds to
target DNA sequences, while the HLH region forms homo- and heterodimers with
other bHLH proteins, the Orange domain is responsible for the selection of
partners during heterodimer formation, and the WRPW domain recruits corepressors.
Hes1, Hes5, and Hes7 are known as downstream effectors of canonical Notch
signaling, which regulates cell differentiation via cell-cell interaction. Hes
factors regulate many events in development by repressing the expression of
target genes, many of which encode transcriptional activators that promote cell
differentiation. For example, Hes1, Hes3, and Hes5 are highly expressed by neural
stem cells, and inactivation of these genes results in insufficient maintenance
of stem cell proliferation and prematurely promotes neuronal differentiation.
Recently, it was shown that the expression dynamics of Hes1 plays crucial roles
in proper developmental timings and fate-determination steps of embryonic stem
cells and neural progenitor cells. Here, we discuss some key features of Hes
factors in development and diseases.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Sep;13(2):251-61. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.05.006. Epub 2014
Jun 8.

Transgenic human ES and iPS reporter cell lines for identification and selection 
of pluripotent stem cells in vitro.

Ovchinnikov DA(1), Titmarsh DM(1), Fortuna PR(1), Hidalgo A(1), Alharbi S(1),
Whitworth DJ(2), Cooper-White JJ(1), Wolvetang EJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. (2)School of Veterinary Sciences, The 
University of Queensland, Gatton, QLD 4343, Australia. (3)Australian Institute
for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
QLD 4072, Australia. Electronic address: e.wolvetang@uq.edu.au.

Optimization of pluripotent stem cell expansion and differentiation is
facilitated by biological tools that permit non-invasive and dynamic monitoring
of pluripotency, and the ability to select for an undifferentiated input cell
population. Here we report on the generation and characterisation of clonal human
embryonic stem (HES3, H9) and human induced pluripotent stem cell lines
(UQEW01i-epifibC11) that have been stably modified with an artificial EOS(C3+)
promoter driving expression of EGFP and puromycin resistance-conferring proteins.
We show that EGFP expression faithfully reports on the pluripotency status of the
cells in these lines and that antibiotic selection allows for an efficient
elimination of differentiated cells from the cultures. We demonstrate that the
extinction of the expression of the pluripotency reporter during differentiation 
closely correlates with the decrease in expression of conventional pluripotency
markers, such as OCT4 (POU5F1), TRA-1-60 and SSEA4 when screening across
conditions with various levels of pluripotency-maintaining or
differentiation-inducing signals. We further illustrate the utility of these
lines for real-time monitoring of pluripotency in embryoid bodies and
microfluidic bioreactors.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25108530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3243-54. doi: 10.1242/dev.106245.

Notch signaling differentially regulates Atoh7 and Neurog2 in the distal mouse
retina.

Maurer KA(1), Riesenberg AN(1), Brown NL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (2)Division of Developmental Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA
Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California Davis,
School of Medicine, Davis, CA 95616, USA nlbrown@ucdavis.edu.

Notch signaling regulates basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors as an
evolutionarily conserved module, but the tissue-specific mechanisms are
incompletely elucidated. In the mouse retina, bHLH genes Atoh7 and Neurog2 have
distinct functions, with Atoh7 regulating retinal competence and Neurog2 required
for progression of neurogenesis. These transcription factors are extensively
co-expressed, suggesting similar regulation. We directly compared Atoh7 and
Neurog2 regulation at the earliest stages of retinal neurogenesis in a broad
spectrum of Notch pathway mutants. Notch1 and Rbpj normally block Atoh7 and
Neurog2 expression. However, the combined activities of Notch1, Notch3 and Rbpj
regulate Neurog2 patterning in the distal retina. Downstream of the Notch
complex, we found the Hes1 repressor mediates Atoh7 suppression, but Hes1, Hes3
and Hes5 do not regulate Neurog2 expression. We also tested Notch-mediated
regulation of Jag1 and Pax6 in the distal retina, to establish the appropriate
context for Neurog2 patterning. We found that Notch1;Notch3 and Rbpj block
co-expression of Jag1 and Neurog2, while specifically stimulating Pax6 within an 
adjacent domain. Our data suggest that Notch signaling controls the overall tempo
of retinogenesis, by integrating cell fate specification, the wave of
neurogenesis and the developmental status of cells ahead of this wave.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197552
PMID: 25100656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2014 Jul;3(7):801-8. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2013-0211. Epub
2014 May 22.

A defined, controlled culture system for primary bovine chromaffin progenitors
reveals novel biomarkers and modulators.

Masjkur J(1), Levenfus I(1), Lange S(1), Arps-Forker C(1), Poser S(1), Qin N(1), 
Vukicevic V(1), Chavakis T(1), Eisenhofer G(1), Bornstein SR(1),
Ehrhart-Bornstein M(1), Androutsellis-Theotokis A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III and Institute of Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine, University Clinic Carl-Gustav Carus, University of Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany; Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine III and Institute of Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine, University Clinic Carl-Gustav Carus, University of Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany; Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Dresden, Germany
andreas.theotokis@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

We present a method to efficiently culture primary chromaffin progenitors from
the adult bovine adrenal medulla in a defined, serum-free monolayer system.
Tissue is dissociated and plated for expansion under support by the mitogen basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). The cultures, although not homogenous, contain a
subpopulation of cells expressing the neural stem cell marker Hes3 that also
propagate. In addition, Hes3 is also expressed in the adult adrenal medulla from 
where the tissue is taken. Differentiation is induced by bFGF withdrawal and
switching to Neurobasal medium containing B27. Following differentiation, Hes3
expression is lost, and cells acquire morphologies and biomarker expression
patterns of chromaffin cells and dopaminergic neurons. We tested the effect of
different treatments that we previously showed regulate Hes3 expression and cell 
number in cultures of fetal and adult rodent neural stem cells. Treatment of the 
cultures with a combination of Delta4, Angiopoietin2, and a Janus kinase
inhibitor increases cell number during the expansion phase without significantly 
affecting catecholamine content levels. Treatment with cholera toxin does not
significantly affect cell number but reduces the ratio of epinephrine to
norepinephrine content and increases the dopamine content relative to total
catecholamines. These data suggest that this defined culture system can be used
for target identification in drug discovery programs and that the transcription
factor Hes3 may serve as a new biomarker of putative adrenomedullary chromaffin
progenitor cells.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4073824
PMID: 24855275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Radiat Biol. 2014 Aug;90(8):700-9. doi: 10.3109/09553002.2014.892228. Epub 
2014 Mar 25.

Expression of the transcription factor Hes3 in the mouse and human ocular
surface, and in pterygium.

Economopoulou M(1), Masjkur J, Raiskup F, Ebermann D, Saha S, Karl MO, Funk R,
Jaszai J, Chavakis T, Ehrhart-Bornstein M, Pillunat LE, Kunz-Schughart L, Kurth
I, Dubrovska A, Androutsellis-Theotokis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Dresden , Dresden , Germany.

PURPOSE: In this work we examined the presence of the neural stem cell biomarker 
Hairy and Enhancer of Split 3 (Hes3) in the anterior eye segment and in the
aberrant growth condition of the conjunctiva pterygium. Further, we studied the
response of Hes3 to irradiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Adult mouse and human corneoscleral junction and
conjunctiva, as well as human pterygium were prepared for immunohistochemical
detection of Hes3 and other markers. Total body irradiation was used to study the
changes in the pattern of Hes3 expression.
RESULTS: The adult rodent and human eye as well as pterygium, contain a
population of cells expressing Hes3. In the human eye, Hes3-expressing (Hes3+)
cells are found predominantly in the subconjunctival space spanning over the
limbus where they physically associate with blood vessels. The cytoarchitecture
of Hes3 + cells is similar to those previously observed in the adult central
nervous system. Furthermore, irradiation reduces the number of Hes3 + cells in
the subconjunctival space. In contrast, irradiation strongly promotes the nuclear
localization of Hes3 in the ciliary body epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that a recently identified signal transduction
pathway that regulates neural stem cells and glioblastoma cancer stem cells also 
operates in the ocular surface, ciliary body, and in pterygium.

PMID: 24512568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2014 Jan 1;19:718-26.

The STAT3-Ser/Hes3 signaling axis in cancer.

Poser SW(1), Park DM(2), Androutsellis-Theotokis A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Innate Repair Laboratory, Department of Internal Medicine III, University
Hospital Carl Gustav Carus at the Technische Universität, Dresden,
Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (2)Department of Neurological
Surgery, University of Virginia, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, University of
Dresden, Dresden, Germany and Department of Medicine, University of Dresden,
Dresden, Germany, and, Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Dresden,
Germany.

Disrupting the regenerative capacity of tumorigenic cells is a major focus in
medicine. These regenerative properties are carried by a subpopulation of cells
within the tumor, termed cancer stem cells. Current therapies don't effectively
tackle the disease suggesting these cells employ yet unidentified molecular
mechanisms allowing them to evade targeting. Recent observations in neural stem
cells reveal an extraordinary plasticity in the signaling pathways they utilize
to grow. These findings are being extended to the cancer stem cell field,
illuminating conceptually novel treatment strategies. Tumorigenic cells can make 
use of distinct, even opposing pathways, including JAK/STAT and the non-canonical
STAT3-Ser/Hes3 signaling axis. This plasticity may not be confined to the cancer 
stem cell population, but may be shared by various cell types within the tumor,
blurring the line distinguishing cancer stem cells from other tumor cell types.
The implications to anti-cancer medicine are highly significant, since these
findings demonstrate that inhibiting one cell growth pathway may actually enhance
the activity of alternative ones. Drug discovery programs will also benefit from 
these concepts.

PMID: 24389215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Front Physiol. 2013 Oct 1;4:273. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00273. eCollection 2013.

The STAT3-Ser/Hes3 signaling axis: an emerging regulator of endogenous
regeneration and cancer growth.

Poser SW(1), Park DM, Androutsellis-Theotokis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Dresden Dresden, Germany.

Stem cells, by definition, are able to both self-renew (give rise to more cells
of their own kind) and demonstrate multipotential (the ability to differentiate
into multiple cell types). To accommodate this unique dual ability, stem cells
interpret signal transduction pathways in specialized ways. Notable examples
include canonical and non-canonical branches of the Notch signaling pathway, with
each controlling different downstream targets (e.g., Hes1 vs. Hes3) and promoting
either differentiation or self-renewal. Similarly, stem cells utilize STAT3
signaling uniquely. Most mature cells studied thus far rely on tyrosine
phosphorylation (STAT3-Tyr) to promote survival and growth; in contrast,
STAT3-Tyr induces the differentiation of neural stem cells (NSCs). NSCs use an
alternative phosphorylation site, STAT3-Ser, to regulate survival and growth, a
site that is largely redundant for this function in most other cell types.
STAT3-Ser regulates Hes3, and together they form a convergence point for several 
signals, including Notch, Tie2, and insulin receptor activation. Disregulation
and manipulation of the STAT3-Ser/Hes3 signaling pathway is important in both
tumorigenesis and regenerative medicine, and worthy of extensive study.

PMCID: PMC3787304
PMID: 24101906  [PubMed]


16. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2013 Dec;6(6):989-99. doi: 10.1007/s12265-013-9510-z.
Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Electrical stimulation promotes maturation of cardiomyocytes derived from human
embryonic stem cells.

Chan YC(1), Ting S, Lee YK, Ng KM, Zhang J, Chen Z, Siu CW, Oh SK, Tse HF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

While human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can differentiate into functional
cardiomyocytes, their immature phenotypes limit their therapeutic application for
myocardial regeneration. We sought to determine whether electrical stimulation
could enhance the differentiation and maturation of hESC-derived cardiomyocytes. 
Cardiac differentiation was induced in a HES3 hESC line via embryoid bodies
formation treated with a p38 MAP kinase inhibitor. Detailed molecular and
functional analysis were performed in those hESC-derived cardiomyocytes cultured 
for 4 days in the absence or presence of electrical field stimulation (6.6 V/cm, 
1 Hz, and 2 ms pulses) using an eight-channel C-Pace stimulator (Ion-Optics Co., 
MA). Upon electrical stimulation, quantitative polymerase chain reaction
demonstrated significant upregulation of cardiac-specific gene expression
including HCN1, MLC2V, SCN5A, SERCA, Kv4.3, and GATA4; immunostaining and flow
cytometry analysis revealed cellular elongation and an increased proportion of
troponin-T positive cells (6.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.2% vs. 15.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.1%; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>3, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01).
Electrophysiological studies showed an increase in the proportion of
ventricular-like hESC-derived cardiomyocytes (48 vs. 29%, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with
lengthening of their action potential duration at 90% repolarization
(387.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>35.35; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11 vs. 291.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>20.82; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and 50%
repolarization (313.9<U+2009>±<U+2009>27.94; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11 vs. 234.0<U+2009>±<U+2009>16.10; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) after 
electrical stimulation. Nonetheless, the membrane diastolic potentials and action
potential upstrokes of different hESC-derived cardiomyocyte phenotypes, and the
overall beating rate remained unchanged (all P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Fluorescence confocal
imaging revealed that electrical stimulation significantly increased both
spontaneous and caffeine-induced calcium flux in the hESC-derived cardiomyocytes 
(approximately 1.6-fold for both cases; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). In conclusion, electrical
field stimulation increased the expression of cardiac-specific genes and the
yield of differentiation, promoted ventricular-like phenotypes, and improved the 
calcium handling of hESC-derived cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 24081385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Neurosurgery. 2013 Oct;73(4):N15-6. doi: 10.1227/01.neu.0000435115.10898.7f.

Hes3 regulates cell number in cultures from glioblastoma multiforme with stem
cell characteristics.

Parry PV, Engh JA.

Comment on
    Sci Rep. 2013;3:1095.

PMID: 24051713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biotechnol J. 2013 Jul;8(7):822-34. doi: 10.1002/biot.201200375.

Full factorial screening of human embryonic stem cell maintenance with
multiplexed microbioreactor arrays.

Titmarsh DM(1), Ovchinnikov DA, Wolvetang EJ, Cooper-White JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of 
Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD, Australia.

Use of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) in regenerative medicine applications
relies on control of cell fate decisions by exogenous factors. This control can
be hindered by the use of undefined culture components, poorly understood
autocrine/paracrine effects, spatiotemporal variations in microenvironmental
composition inherent to static culture formats, and signal cross-talk between
multiple factors. We recently described microbioreactor arrays that provide a
full factorial spectrum of exogenous factors, and allow gradual accumulation of
paracrine factors through serial culture chambers. We combined these with defined
biochemical conditions, and in situ reporter gene- and immunofluorescence-based
readouts to create an hPSC screening platform with enhanced data throughput and
microenvironmental control. HES3-EOS-C(3+)-EiP reporter hESCs were screened
against FGF-2, TGF-ß1, and retinoic acid in a modified mTeSR-1 medium background.
Differential pluripotency marker expression reflected mTeSR-1's maintenance
capacity, and differentiation in response to removal of maintenance factors or
addition of retinoic acid. Interestingly, pluripotency marker expression was
downregulated progressively through serial chambers. Since downstream chambers
are exposed to greater levels of paracrine factors under continuous flow, this
effect is thought to result from secreted factors that negatively influence
pluripotency. The microbioreactor array platform decodes factor interplay, and
has a broad application in deciphering microenvironmental control of cell fate.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23813764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1095. doi: 10.1038/srep01095. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Hes3 regulates cell number in cultures from glioblastoma multiforme with stem
cell characteristics.

Park DM(1), Jung J, Masjkur J, Makrogkikas S, Ebermann D, Saha S, Rogliano R,
Paolillo N, Pacioni S, McKay RD, Poser S, Androutsellis-Theotokis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Virginia, Virginia, USA.

Comment in
    Neurosurgery. 2013 Oct;73(4):N15-6.

Tumors exhibit complex organization and contain a variety of cell populations.
The realization that the regenerative properties of a tumor may be largely
confined to a cell subpopulation (cancer stem cell) is driving a new era of
anti-cancer research. Cancer stem cells from Glioblastoma Multiforme tumors
express markers that are also expressed in non-cancerous neural stem cells,
including nestin and Sox2. We previously showed that the transcription factor
Hes3 is a marker of neural stem cells, and that its expression is inhibited by
JAK activity. Here we show that Hes3 is also expressed in cultures from
glioblastoma multiforme which express neural stem cell markers, can differentiate
into neurons and glia, and can recapitulate the tumor of origin when transplanted
into immunocompromised mice. Similar to observations in neural stem cells, JAK
inhibits Hes3 expression. Hes3 RNA interference reduces the number of cultured
glioblastoma cells suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC3566603
PMID: 23393614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51630. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051630. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Fast, potent pharmacological expansion of endogenous hes3+/sox2+ cells in the
adult mouse and rat hippocampus.

Pacioni S(1), Rueger MA, Nisticò G, Bornstein SR, Park DM, McKay RD,
Androutsellis-Theotokis A.

Author information: 
(1)European Brain Research Institute, Rome, Italy.

The adult hippocampus is involved in learning and memory. As a consequence, it is
a brain region of remarkable plasticity. This plasticity exhibits itself both as 
cellular changes and neurogenesis. For neurogenesis to occur, a population of
local stem cells and progenitor cells is maintained in the adult brain and these 
are able to proliferate and differentiate into neurons which contribute to the
hippocampal circuitry. There is much interest in understanding the role of
immature cells in the hippocampus, in relation to learning and memory. Methods
and mechanisms that increase the numbers of these cells will be valuable in this 
research field. We show here that single injections of soluble factors into the
lateral ventricle of adult rats and mice induces the rapid (within one week)
increase in the number of putative stem cells/progenitor cells in the
hippocampus. The established progenitor marker Sox2 together with the more
recently established marker Hes3, were used to quantify the manipulation of the
Sox2/Hes3 double-positive cell population. We report that in both adult rodent
species, Sox2+/Hes3+ cell numbers can be increased within one week. The most
prominent increase was observed in the hilus of the dentate gyrus. This study
presents a fast, pharmacological method to manipulate the numbers of endogenous
putative stem cells/progenitor cells. This method may be easily modified to alter
the degree of activation (e.g. by the use of osmotic pumps for delivery, or by
repeat injections through implanted cannulas), in order to be best adapted to
different paradigms of research (neurodegenerative disease, neuroprotection,
learning, memory, plasticity, etc).

PMCID: PMC3518467
PMID: 23251599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2012 Nov 1;11(7):805-17.

Neurovascular signals suggest a propagation mechanism for endogenous stem cell
activation along blood vessels.

Masjkur J(1), Rueger MA, Bornstein SR, McKay R, Androutsellis-Theotokis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Stem cell-based therapies for central nervous system disorders are intensely
pursued. Such approaches can be divided into two categories:
Transplantation-based, and those that aim to pharmacologically target the
endogenous stem cell population in the tissue. Endogenous stem cell - based
strategies avoid the problem of immune incompatibility between the host and the
grafted cells. They also avoid the placement of a large amount of cells in
confined areas, a manipulation which alters the characteristics of the
neurovascular microenvironment. We show here that massive pharmacological
activation (increase in cell numbers) of the endogenous neural stem cell
population in the adult rodent brain maintains the cytoarchitecture of the
neurovascular niche. Distances between adjacent stem cells (identified by
expression of Hes3) are maintained above a minimum. Hes3+ cells maintain their
physical association with blood vessels. These results also suggest a mechanism
by which the activation signal from the lateral ventricle can be propagated to
areas a long distance away from the lateral ventricles, through
autocrine/paracrine actions between adjacent Hes3+ cells, along blood vessels.
Finally, powerful effects of angiopoietin 2 on Hes3+ cells help explain the
prevalence of proliferating endogenous neural stem cells close to the
subventricular zone (an area of high angiopoietin 2 concentration) and the
quiescent state of stem cells away from the ventricles and their tight physical
association with blood vessels (which express high levels of angiopoietin 1, a
cytokine that opposes angiopoietin 2 functions).

PMCID: PMC3580829
PMID: 23131162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 1;22(3):383-96. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0218. Epub 2012
Sep 17.

The generation of definitive neural stem cells from PiggyBac transposon-induced
pluripotent stem cells can be enhanced by induction of the NOTCH signaling
pathway.

Salewski RP(1), Buttigieg J, Mitchell RA, van der Kooy D, Nagy A, Fehlings MG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Development, Toronto Western Research Institute,
Toronto, Canada.

Cell-based therapies using neural stem cells (NSCs) have shown positive outcomes 
in various models of neurological injury and disease. Induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) address many problems associated with NSCs from various sources,
including the immune response and cell availability. However, due to inherent
differences between embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and iPSCs, detailed
characterization of the iPS-derived NSCs will be required before translational
experiments can be performed. Murine piggyBac transposon iPSCs were clonally
expanded in floating sphere colonies to generate primitive NSCs initially with
serum-free media (SFM) containing the leukemia inhibitory factor and followed by 
SFM with the fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2) to form colonies of definitive
NSCs (dNSCs). Primitive and definitive clonally derived neurospheres were
successfully generated using the default conditions from iPSCs and ESCs. However,
the iPSC-dNSCs expressed significantly higher levels of pluripotency and
nonectoderm lineage genes compared to equivalent ESC-dNSCs. The addition of the
bone morphogenetic proteins antagonist, Noggin, to the media significantly
increased primary neurosphere generation from the iPSC lines, but did not affect 
the dNSC sphere colonies generated. The induction of the NOTCH pathway by the
Delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4) improved the generation and quality of dNSCs, as
demonstrated by a reduction in pluripotency and nonectodermal markers, while
maintaining NSC-specific gene expression. The iPS-dNSCs (+DLL4) showed functional
neural differentiation by immuncytochemical staining and electrophysiology. This 
study suggests the intrinsic differences between ESCs and iPSCs in their ability 
to acquire a dNSC fate that can be overcome by inducing the NOTCH pathway.

PMCID: PMC3549637
PMID: 22889305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 15;18(18):5008-19. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-1379. 
Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Biomarker and pharmacologic evaluation of the <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor PF-03084014
in breast cancer models.

Zhang CC(1), Pavlicek A, Zhang Q, Lira ME, Painter CL, Yan Z, Zheng X, Lee NV,
Ozeck M, Qiu M, Zong Q, Lappin PB, Wong A, Rejto PA, Smeal T, Christensen JG.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Unit and Drug Safety, Pfizer Global Research and
Development, La Jolla, CA 92129, USA.

PURPOSE: We aimed to assess the biologic activity of PF-03084014 in breast
xenograft models. The biomarkers for mechanism and patient stratification were
also explored.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The in vitro and in vivo properties of PF-03084014 were
investigated. The mRNA expressions of 40 key Notch pathway genes at baseline or
after treatment were analyzed to link with the antitumor efficacy of PF-03084014 
in a panel of breast cancer xenograft models.
RESULTS: In vitro, PF-03084014 exhibited activity against tumor cell migration,
endothelial cell tube formation, and mammosphere formation. In vivo, we observed 
apoptosis, antiproliferation, reduced tumor cell self-renewal ability, impaired
tumor vasculature, and decreased metastasis activity after the treatment of
PF-03084014. PF-03084014 treatment displayed significant antitumor activity in 10
of the 18 breast xenograft models. However, the antitumor efficacy in most models
did not correlate with the in vitro antiproliferation results in the
corresponding cell lines, suggesting the critical involvement of tumor
microenvironment during Notch activation. In the tested breast xenograft models, 
the baseline expressions of the Notch receptors, ligands, and the cleaved Notch1 
failed to predict the antitumor response to PF-03084014, whereas several Notch
pathway target genes, including HEY2, HES4, and HES3, strongly corresponded with 
the response with a P value less than 0.01. Many of the best molecular predictors
of response were also significantly modulated following PF-03084014 treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: PF-03084014 showed antitumor and antimetastatic properties via
pleiotropic mechanisms. The Notch pathway downstream genes may be used to predict
the antitumor activity of PF-03084014 and enrich for responders among breast
cancer patients.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22806875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jul 1;125(Pt 13):3210-20. doi: 10.1242/jcs.102210. Epub 2012 Mar
27.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) promotes cell survival and
proliferation of neural stem/progenitor cells.

Ohta S(1), Misawa A, Fukaya R, Inoue S, Kanemura Y, Okano H, Kawakami Y, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Signaling, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, Keio 
University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Japan.

In a previous study, we showed that murine dendritic cells (DCs) can increase the
number of neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) in vitro and in vivo. In the
present study, we identified macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) as a
novel factor that can support the proliferation and/or survival of NSPCs in
vitro. MIF is secreted by DCs and NSPCs, and its function in the normal brain
remains largely unknown. It was previously shown that in macrophages, MIF binds
to a CD74-CD44 complex. In the present study, we observed the expression of MIF
receptors in mouse ganglionic-eminence-derived neurospheres using flow cytometry 
in vitro. We also found CD74 expression in the ganglionic eminence of E14 mouse
brains, suggesting that MIF plays a physiological role in vivo. MIF increased the
number of primary and secondary neurospheres. By contrast, retrovirally expressed
MIF shRNA and MIF inhibitor (ISO-1) suppressed primary and secondary neurosphere 
formation, as well as cell proliferation. In the neurospheres, MIF knockdown by
shRNA increased caspase 3/7 activity, and MIF increased the phosphorylation of
Akt, Erk, AMPK and Stat3 (Ser727), as well as expression of Hes3 and Egfr, the
products of which are known to support cell survival, proliferation and/or
maintenance of NSPCs. MIF also acted as a chemoattractant for NSPCs. These
results show that MIF can induce NSPC proliferation and maintenance by multiple
signaling pathways acting synergistically, and it may be a potential therapeutic 
factor, capable of activating NSPC, for the treatment of degenerative brain
disorders.

PMID: 22454509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Psychiatry. 2012 Apr;17(4):351. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.18.

Common features between chromaffin and neural progenitor cells.

Androutsellis-Theotokis A(1), Rubin de Celis MF, Ehrhart-Bornstein M, Bornstein
SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

PMID: 22446576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Development. 2012 Mar;139(6):1071-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.069070. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

The role of Hes genes in intestinal development, homeostasis and tumor formation.

Ueo T(1), Imayoshi I, Kobayashi T, Ohtsuka T, Seno H, Nakase H, Chiba T, Kageyama
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Notch signaling regulates intestinal development, homeostasis and tumorigenesis, 
but its precise downstream mechanism remains largely unknown. Here we found that 
inactivation of the Notch effectors Hes1, Hes3 and Hes5, but not Hes1 alone, led 
to reduced cell proliferation, increased secretory cell formation and altered
intestinal structures in adult mice. However, in Apc mutation-induced intestinal 
tumors, inactivation of Hes1 alone was sufficient for reducing tumor cell
proliferation and inducing differentiation of tumor cells into all types of
intestinal epithelial cells, but without affecting the homeostasis of normal
crypts owing to genetic redundancy. These results indicated that Hes genes
cooperatively regulate intestinal development and homeostasis and raised the
possibility that Hes1 is a promising target to induce the differentiation of
tumor cells.

PMID: 22318232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Pediatr Urol. 2011 Dec;7(6):585-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2011.09.005. Epub
2011 Oct 24.

Polymorphisms of MAMLD1 gene in hypospadias.

Kalfa N(1), Cassorla F, Audran F, Oulad Abdennabi I, Philibert P, Béroud C, Guys 
JM, Reynaud R, Alessandrini P, Wagner K, Bréaud J, Valla JS, Morisson Lacombe G, 
Daures JP, Baskin L, Fukami M, Ogata T, Sultan C.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hormonologie, Hôpital Lapeyronie, CHU de Montpellier et UM1,
Montpellier, France.

PURPOSE: Mastermind-like domain containing 1 (MAMLD1) is a causative gene for the
fetal development of male external genitalia. Almost 10% of patients with both
severe and non-severe hypospadias exhibit mutations of MAMLD1. The aim of this
work was to determine whether polymorphisms of MAMLD1 are a genetic risk factor
for hypospadias.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This study included 150 hypospadias with a range of
severities and 150 controls. Direct sequencing of the MAMLD1 coding exons and
their flanking splice sites was performed. In silico secondary and tertiary
structure prediction and accessibility of changed amino acids were evaluated
using JPred, Netsurf and PHYRE software. Functional studies of the
transactivation of haplotypes on Hes3 promoter were performed in vitro using
cDNAs of missense variants of MAMLD1.
RESULTS: The p.P286S polymorphism was identified in 17/150 patients and 12/150
controls (11.3% vs. 8.0%, p = 0.32). The p.N589S polymorphism was identified in
22/150 patients and 12/150 controls (14.6% vs. 8.0%, p = 0.068). The double
polymorphism (S-S haplotype) was present in 16/150 patients and 6/150 controls
(10.6% vs. 4.0%, p = 0.044, OR = 2.87, CI from 1.09 to 7.55). The association of 
polymorphisms consistently revealed a modification in the structure prediction or
amino acid accessibility in all three in silico models. The P286S, N589S and
P286S + N589S proteins did not exhibit reduced transactivating activity on Hes3
promoter.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of MAMLD1 gene are frequent in patients with
hypospadias. Although no change in transactivation was noted on Hes3 promoter,
the in silico studies and the significantly increased incidence of the S-S
haplotype in hypospadiac patients raise the hypothesis of a particular
susceptibility conferred by these variants.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 22030455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jun 10;21(9):1513-23. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0254. Epub 2011 
Nov 9.

Primitive cardiac cells from human embryonic stem cells.

Hudson J(1), Titmarsh D, Hidalgo A, Wolvetang E, Cooper-White J.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering and Microfluidics Group, Australian Institute for
Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Australia.

Pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes are currently being investigated for
in vitro human heart models and as potential therapeutics for heart failure. In
this study, we have developed a differentiation protocol that minimizes the need 
for specific human embryonic stem cell (hESC) line optimization. We first reduced
the heterogeneity that exists within the starting population of bulk cultured
hESCs by using cells adapted to single-cell passaging in a 2-dimensional (2D)
culture format. Compared with bulk cultures, single-cell cultures comprised
larger fractions of TG30(hi)/OCT4(hi) cells, corresponding to an increased
expression of pluripotency markers OCT4 and NANOG, and reduced expression of
early lineage-specific markers. A 2D temporal differentiation protocol was then
developed, aimed at reducing the inherent heterogeneity and variability of
embryoid body-based protocols, with induction of primitive streak cells using
bone morphogenetic protein 4 and activin A, followed by cardiogenesis via
inhibition of Wnt signaling using the small molecules IWP-4 or IWR-1. IWP-4
treatment resulted in a large percentage of cells expressing low amounts of
cardiac myosin heavy chain and expression of early cardiac progenitor markers
ISL1 and NKX2-5, thus indicating the production of large numbers of immature
cardiomyocytes (~65,000/cm(2) or ~1.5 per input hESC). This protocol was shown to
be effective in HES3, H9, and, to a lesser, extent, MEL1 hESC lines. In addition,
we observed that IWR-1 induced predominantly atrial myosin light chain (MLC2a)
expression, whereas IWP-4 induced expression of both atrial (MLC2a) and
ventricular (MLC2v) forms. The intrinsic flexibility and scalability of this 2D
protocol mean that the output population of primitive cardiomyocytes will be
particularly accessible and useful for the investigation of molecular mechanisms 
driving terminal cardiomyocyte differentiation, and potentially for the future
treatment of heart failure.

PMID: 21933026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Neurosurg. 2011 Sep;115(3):512-7. doi: 10.3171/2011.5.JNS11271. Epub 2011 Jun
10.

Notch receptor and effector expression in von Hippel-Lindau disease-associated
central nervous system hemangioblastomas.

Merrill MJ(1), Edwards NA, Lonser RR.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1414, USA.
merrillm@ninds.nih.gov

OBJECT: Central nervous system hemangioblastomas are the most common
manifestation of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, an autosomal dominant tumor
suppressor syndrome that results in loss of VHL protein function and continuous
upregulation of hypoxia-inducible factors. These tumors are composed of
neoplastic stromal cells and abundant vasculature. Stromal cells express markers 
consistent with multipotent embryonically arrested hemangioblasts, which are
precursors for hematopoietic and vascular lineages. Notch receptors are
transmembrane signaling molecules that regulate multiple developmental processes 
including hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis. To investigate the importance of
notch signaling in the development of VHL disease-associated CNS
hemangioblastomas, the authors examined the presence of the four notch receptors 
and downstream notch effectors in this setting.
METHODS: The authors used surgical specimens obtained from confirmed
VHL-associated hemangioblastomas. Immunohistochemical analysis for the four notch
receptors and the downstream effectors was performed on formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded sections. Western blot analysis for HES1 was performed on
frozen specimens.
RESULTS: All four notch receptors are present in hemangioblastomas. NOTCH1 and
NOTCH4 receptors were widely and prominently expressed in both the stromal and
vascular cells, NOTCH2 receptor expression was limited to primarily stromal
cells, and NOTCH3 receptor expression was limited to vascular cells. All 4
receptors displayed a nuclear presence. Immunohistochemical analysis also
demonstrated that downstream notch effectors, HES1 and HES5, were uniformly
expressed in tumor stromal and vascular cells, but HES3, HEY1, and HEY2 were not.
Strong HES1 expression was confirmed by Western blot analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of all four notch receptors and downstream effector
molecules suggests that the notch signaling pathway plays a critical role in the 
maintenance of the undifferentiated pluripotent phenotype of these tumors and in 
the associated vascular response. Moreover, the prominent expression of notch
receptors in VHL-associated CNS hemangioblastomas reveals a new and possibly
potent therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4762040
PMID: 21663414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Stem Cell Rev. 2011 Nov;7(4):976-86. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9273-3.

Calcium homeostasis in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes.

Lee YK(1), Ng KM, Lai WH, Chan YC, Lau YM, Lian Q, Tse HF, Siu CW.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

RATIONALE: Cardiomyocytes generated from human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSCs) are suggested as the most promising candidate to replenish cardiomyocyte
loss in regenerative medicine. Little is known about their calcium homeostasis,
the key process underlying excitation-contraction coupling.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the calcium handling properties of hiPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes and compared with those from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We differentiated cardiomyocytes from hiPSCs (IMR90 and KS1)
and hESCs (H7 and HES3) with established protocols. Beating outgrowths from
embryoid bodies were typically observed 2 weeks after induction. Cells in these
outgrowths were stained positively for tropomyosin and sarcomeric alpha-actinin. 
Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction studies demonstrated the
expressions of cardiac-specific markers in both hiPSC- and hESC-derived
cardiomyocytes. Calcium handling properties of 20-day-old hiPSC- and hESC-derived
cardiomyocytes were investigated using fluorescence confocal microscopy. Compared
with hESC-derived cardiomyocytes, spontaneous calcium transients from both lines 
of hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes were of significantly smaller amplitude and with 
slower maximal upstroke velocity. Better caffeine-induced calcium handling
kinetics in hESC-CMs indicates a higher sacroplasmic recticulum calcium store.
Furthermore, in contrast with hESC-derived cardiomyocytes, ryanodine did not
reduce the amplitudes, maximal upstroke and decay velocity of calcium transients 
of hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. In addition, spatial inhomogeneity in temporal
properties of calcium transients across the width of cardiomyocytes was more
pronounced in hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes than their hESC counterpart as
revealed line-scan calcium imaging. Expressions of the key calcium-handling
proteins including ryanodine recptor-2 (RyR2), sacroplasmic recticulum
calcium-ATPase (SERCA), junction (Jun) and triadin (TRDN), were significantly
lower in hiPSC than in hESCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate the calcium handling properties of
hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes are relatively immature to hESC counterparts.

PMCID: PMC3226695
PMID: 21614516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019123.

Mamld1 knockdown reduces testosterone production and Cyp17a1 expression in mouse 
Leydig tumor cells.

Nakamura M(1), Fukami M, Sugawa F, Miyado M, Nonomura K, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: MAMLD1 is known to be a causative gene for hypospadias. Although
previous studies have indicated that MAMLD1 mutations result in hypospadias
primarily because of compromised testosterone production around the critical
period for fetal sex development, the underlying mechanism(s) remains to be
clarified. Furthermore, although functional studies have indicated a
transactivation function of MAMLD1 for the non-canonical Notch target Hes3, its
relevance to testosterone production remains unknown. To examine these matters,
we performed Mamld1 knockdown experiments.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mamld1 knockdown was performed with two siRNAs,
using mouse Leydig tumor cells (MLTCs). Mamld1 knockdown did not influence the
concentrations of pregnenolone and progesterone but significantly reduced those
of 17-OH pregnenolone, 17-OH progesterone, dehydroepiandrosterone,
androstenedione, and testosterone in the culture media. Furthermore, Mamld1
knockdown significantly decreased Cyp17a1 expression, but did not affect
expressions of other genes involved in testosterone biosynthesis as well as in
insulin-like 3 production. Hes3 expression was not significantly altered. In
addition, while 47 genes were significantly up-regulated (fold change >2.0×) and 
38 genes were significantly down-regulated (fold change <0.5×), none of them was 
known to be involved in testosterone production. Cell proliferation analysis
revealed no evidence for compromised proliferation of siRNA-transfected MLTCs.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The results, in conjunction with the previous data,
imply that Mamld1 enhances Cyp17a1 expression primarily in Leydig cells and
permit to produce a sufficient amount of testosterone for male sex development,
independently of the Hes3-related non-canonical Notch signaling.

PMCID: PMC3084764
PMID: 21559465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 28;286(4):2648-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.183038. Epub 2010 
Nov 17.

HES1 (hairy and enhancer of split 1) is a determinant of bone mass.

Zanotti S(1), Smerdel-Ramoya A, Canalis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford,
Connecticut 06105, USA. szanotti@stfranciscare.org

HES1 (hairy and enhancer of split) is a transcription factor that regulates
osteoblastogenesis in vitro. The skeletal effects of HES1 misexpression were
studied. Transgenic mice where a 3.6-kilobase fragment of the collagen type 1 a1 
promoter directs HES1 overexpression were created. Transgenics were osteopenic
due to decreased osteoblast function in female and increased bone resorption in
male mice. HES1 impaired osteoblastogenesis in vitro, and transgenic osteoblasts 
enhanced the resorptive activity of co-cultured osteoclast precursors. Mice
homozygous for a Hes1 loxP-targeted allele were bred to transgenics, where the
paired-related homeobox gene enhancer or the osteocalcin promoter direct Cre
recombinase expression to inactivate Hes1 in the limb bud or in osteoblasts. To
avoid genetic compensation, Hes1 was inactivated in the context of the global
deletion of Hes3 and Hes5. Hes3 and Hes5 null mice had no skeletal phenotype.
Hes1 inactivation in the limb bud increased femoral length and trabecular number.
Hes1 inactivation in osteoblasts increased trabecular bone volume, number, and
connectivity due to increased mineral apposition rate and suppressed bone
resorption. Hes1 inactivation in vitro increased alkaline phosphatase expression 
and suppressed the resorptive activity of co-cultured osteoclast precursors. In
conclusion, by inhibiting osteoblast function and inducing bone resorption, HES1 
is an intracellular determinant of bone mass and structure.

PMCID: PMC3024760
PMID: 21084301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Stem Cell Res. 2010 Nov;5(3):173-87. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.07.001. Epub 2010
Aug 1.

Derivation, characterization, and gene expression profile of two new human ES
cell lines from India.

Mandal A(1), Bhowmik S, Patki A, Viswanathan C, Majumdar AS.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine, Reliance Life Sciences Pvt Ltd, Dhirubhai Ambani Life
Sciences Centre, R-282, TTC Industrial Area of MIDC, Thane Belapur Road, Rabale, 
Navi Mumbai 400 701, India. arundhati_mandal@relbio.com

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) offer new avenues for studying human
development and disease progression in addition to their tremendous potential
toward development of cell-replacement therapies for various cellular disorders. 
We have earlier reported the derivation and characterization of Relicell(®) hES1,
the first fully characterized hESC line generated from the Indian subcontinent.
Recent studies have demonstrated discrete differences among hESC lines, in terms 
of both their growth properties and their differentiation propensity. To address 
some of these issues in the context of hESC research in India, we have recently
generated two new hESC lines: Relicell(®) hES2 and Relicell(®)hES3. Both these
cell lines were derived using a combinatorial approach of immunosurgery followed 
by mechanical surgery for inner cell mass isolation. The cell lines exhibit the
usual hESC characteristics including their ability to differentiate both in vitro
and in vivo to yield the three germinal layers. Whole genome microarray analysis 
of these cell lines was compared with Relicell(®)hES1 and it showed that
approximately 9000 genes were expressed by these lines. As expected the
expression pattern of these new cell lines bore close resemblance to that of
Relicell(®)hES1. A majority of the pluripotency genes and the genes known to
inhibit various differentiation pathways were also expressed by these cell lines.
We also observed that each of these cell lines expressed a unique set of genes
that are mutually exclusive from each other. These results represent the first
detailed characterization of a set of hESC lines originating from India.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20826120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biomaterials. 2010 Nov;31(32):8281-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.07.037.
Epub 2010 Aug 2.

Long term culture of human embryonic stem cells on recombinant vitronectin in
ascorbate free media.

Prowse AB(1), Doran MR, Cooper-White JJ, Chong F, Munro TP, Fitzpatrick J, Chung 
TL, Haylock DN, Gray PP, Wolvetang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) are expected to provide revolutionary
therapeutic applications and drug discovery technologies. In order for this to be
achieved a reproducible, defined animal component free culture system is required
for the scale-up production of undifferentiated hESC. In this work we have
investigated the applicability of a recombinantly produced domain of human
vitronectin as an extracellular matrix alternative to the common standards
Geltrex or Matrigel. In addition we have validated an ascorbate free media
capable of supporting CD30(low) populations of hESC through a multi-factorial
analysis of bFGF and Activin A. The recombinant vitronectin domain combined with 
the ascorbate free media were capable of supporting 3 cell lines, MEL1, MEL2 and 
hES3 for 10 or more passages while maintaining hESC pluripotency markers and
differentiation capacity. The culture method outlined here provides a platform
for future investigation into growth factor and extracellular matrix effects on
hESC maintenance prior to bioreactor scale-up.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20674971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2010 May 26;5(5):e10841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010841.

Cholera toxin regulates a signaling pathway critical for the expansion of neural 
stem cell cultures from the fetal and adult rodent brains.

Androutsellis-Theotokis A(1), Walbridge S, Park DM, Lonser RR, McKay RD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
AndreasTheotokis@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: New mechanisms that regulate neural stem cell (NSC) expansion will
contribute to improved assay systems and the emerging regenerative approach that 
targets endogenous stem cells. Expanding knowledge on the control of stem cell
self renewal will also lead to new approaches for targeting the stem cell
population of cancers.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that Cholera toxin regulates two
recently characterized NSC markers, the Tie2 receptor and the transcription
factor Hes3, and promotes the expansion of NSCs in culture. Cholera toxin
increases immunoreactivity for the Tie2 receptor and rapidly induces the nuclear 
localization of Hes3. This is followed by powerful cultured NSC expansion and
induction of proliferation both in the presence and absence of mitogen.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggest a new cell biological mechanism that
regulates the self renewal and differentiation properties of stem cells,
providing a new logic to manipulate NSCs in the context of regenerative disease
and cancer.

PMCID: PMC2877108
PMID: 20520777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Stem Cell Res. 2010 May;4(3):165-79. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.03.001. Epub 2010
Mar 12.

Up-scaling single cell-inoculated suspension culture of human embryonic stem
cells.

Singh H(1), Mok P, Balakrishnan T, Rahmat SN, Zweigerdt R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology (IMB), Immunos, 138648 Singapore.
harmeet.singh@imb.a-star.edu.sg

We have systematically developed single cell-inoculated suspension cultures of
human embryonic stem cells (hESC) in defined media. Cell survival was dependent
on hESC re-aggregation. In the presence of the Rho kinase inhibitor Y-27632 (Ri) 
only approximately 44% of the seeded cells were rescued, but an optimized heat
shock treatment combined with Ri significantly increased cell survival to
approximately 60%. Mechanistically, our data suggest that E-cadherin plays a role
in hESC aggregation and that dissociation and re-aggregation upon passaging
functions as a purification step towards a pluripotency markers-enriched
population. Mass expansion of hESC was readily achieved by up-scaling 2 ml
cultures to serial passaging in 50 ml spinner flasks. A media comparison revealed
that mTeSR was superior to KnockOut-SR in supporting cell proliferation and
pluripotency. Persistent expression of pluripotency markers was achieved for two 
lines (hES2, hES3) that were used at higher passages (>86). In contrast, rapid
down regulation of Oct4, Tra-1-60, and SSEA4 was observed for ESI049, a
clinically compliant line, used at passages 20-36. The up-scaling strategy has
significant potential to provide pluripotent cells on a clinical scale.
Nevertheless, our data also highlights a significant line-to-line variability and
the need for a critical assessment of novel methods with numerous relevant cell
lines.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20363202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Neurosci. 2010 Mar 3;30(9):3489-98. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4987-09.2010.

Essential roles of Notch signaling in maintenance of neural stem cells in
developing and adult brains.

Imayoshi I(1), Sakamoto M, Yamaguchi M, Mori K, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Activation of Notch signaling induces the expression of transcriptional repressor
genes such as Hes1, leading to repression of proneural gene expression and
maintenance of neural stem/progenitor cells. However, a requirement for Notch
signaling in the telencephalon was not clear, because in Hes1;Hes3;Hes5
triple-mutant mice, neural stem/progenitor cells are depleted in most regions of 
the developing CNS, but not in the telencephalon. Here, we investigated a role
for Notch signaling in the telencephalon by generating tamoxifen-inducible
conditional knock-out mice that lack Rbpj, an intracellular signal mediator of
all Notch receptors. When Rbpj was deleted in the embryonic brain, almost all
telencephalic neural stem/progenitor cells prematurely differentiated into
neurons and were depleted. When Rbpj was deleted in the adult brain, all neural
stem cells differentiated into transit-amplifying cells and neurons. As a result,
neurogenesis increased transiently, but 3 months later all neural stem cells were
depleted and neurogenesis was totally lost. These results indicated an absolute
requirement of Notch signaling for the maintenance of neural stem cells and a
proper control of neurogenesis in both embryonic and adult brains.

PMID: 20203209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Mol Neurosci. 2010 Sep;42(1):28-34. doi: 10.1007/s12031-010-9339-8. Epub 2010
Mar 2.

The expression of neuroepithelial cell fate determinants in rat spinal cord
development.

Henley BM(1), McDermott KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, BioSciences Institute, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland. beverleyhenley@gmail.com

Lineage specification is tightly regulated by a unique combination of extrinsic
and intrinsic cues, but exactly how these cues coordinate the timing and position
of cell differentiation during spinal cord development needs further
investigation. Notch signaling has major roles in lineage specification. Recent
evidence also indicates that the combination of transcription factors of the
basic helix-loop-helix (Hes3, Hes5) and homeodomain (Pax6) families establish
molecular codes that determine both the timing and position of neurons and glia. 
The precise expression patterns of these genes in vivo in the developing spinal
cord from E13 to E18 are not fully known. In this study, the spatial and temporal
expression patterns of these genes have been investigated. RT-PCR studies reveal 
the differential expression of these genes. The dynamic changes detected in the
expression of these molecules have an important role in spinal cord cell lineage 
specification. Moreover, this study clarifies their in vivo expression during
spinal cord development, and the expression patterns observed shed light on the
generation of the rostro-caudal gradient of development. By understanding how
neural stem cells are regulated in spinal cord development in vivo, we may gain
insight of relevance to cell replacement strategies to treat spinal cord
injuries.

PMID: 20195794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 26;5(2):e9414. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009414.

Angiogenic factors stimulate growth of adult neural stem cells.

Androutsellis-Theotokis A(1), Rueger MA, Park DM, Boyd JD, Padmanabhan R,
Campanati L, Stewart CV, LeFranc Y, Plenz D, Walbridge S, Lonser RR, McKay RD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
AndreasTheotokis@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The ability to grow a uniform cell type from the adult central
nervous system (CNS) is valuable for developing cell therapies and new strategies
for drug discovery. The adult mammalian brain is a source of neural stem cells
(NSC) found in both neurogenic and non-neurogenic zones but difficulties in
culturing these hinders their use as research tools.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that NSCs can be efficiently grown
in adherent cell cultures when angiogenic signals are included in the medium.
These signals include both anti-angiogenic factors (the soluble form of the Notch
receptor ligand, Dll4) and pro-angiogenic factors (the Tie-2 receptor ligand,
Angiopoietin 2). These treatments support the self renewal state of cultured NSCs
and expression of the transcription factor Hes3, which also identifies the cancer
stem cell population in human tumors. In an organotypic slice model, angiogenic
factors maintain vascular structure and increase the density of dopamine neuron
processes.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We demonstrate new properties of adult NSCs and a
method to generate efficient adult NSC cultures from various central nervous
system areas. These findings will help establish cellular models relevant to
cancer and regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2829079
PMID: 20195471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Stem Cell Rev. 2010 Mar;6(1):86-95. doi: 10.1007/s12015-009-9107-8. Epub 2009 Dec
15.

Effect of ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 on normal and variant human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) in vitro: its benefits in hESC expansion.

Gauthaman K(1), Fong CY, Bongso A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, 5 Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore, 119074,
Singapore.

The Rho associated coiled coil protein kinase (ROCK) dependent signaling pathway 
plays an important role in numerous physiological functions such as cell
proliferation, adhesion, migration and inflammation. Human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) undergo differentiation and poor survival after single cell dissociation 
in culture thus limiting their expansion for cell based therapies. We evaluated
the role of the selective ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 on hESC colonies and
disassociated single hESCs from two different hESC lines. Karyotypically normal
hESCs (HES3) and variant hESCs (BG01V) were treated with Y-27632 at 5, 10 and 20 
muM concentrations for 72 h and its effects on hESC self renewal, colony
morphology, cell cycle and pluripotency were evaluated. Increased cell
proliferation of both HES3 and BG01V were observed for all three concentrations
compared to untreated controls following passaging of cell clusters or
dissociated single cells and some of these increases were statistically
significant. Cell cycle assay demonstrated normal cell cycle progression with no 
peaks evident of apoptosis. No morphological differentiation was evident
following treatment with the highest concentration of Y-27632 (20 muM) and the
stemness related genes continued to be highly expressed in both HES3 and BG01V
cells compared to untreated controls. The results confirmed that Y-27632 is a
useful agent that aids in the expansion of undifferentiated hESC numbers for
downstream applications in regenerative medicine.

PMID: 20013076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Br J Pharmacol. 2009 Jul;157(6):962-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00241.x.
Epub 2009 May 11.

Statins inhibit the growth of variant human embryonic stem cells and cancer cells
in vitro but not normal human embryonic stem cells.

Gauthaman K(1), Manasi N, Bongso A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Statins inhibit proliferation of various human cancer
cell lines in vitro. As human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) possess
neoplastic-like properties we have evaluated the role of various statins on
karyotypically normal hESCs (HES3 and BG01), abnormal hESCs (BG01V) and breast
adenocarcinoma cells (MCF-7) to evaluate whether the mode of action of the
statins was via a stemness pathway.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: All cell lines were treated with simvastatin, pravastatin,
lovastatin and mevastatin (1 micromol x L(-1) to 20 micromol x L(-1)) up to 7
days and their effects on cell proliferation, cell cycle, apoptosis and
pluripotency studied.
KEY RESULTS: All four statins did not inhibit HES3 and BG01 proliferation, but
BG01V and MCF-7 were inhibited by simvastatin, lovastatin and mevastatin. These
inhibitory effects were reversed by the endogenous isoprenoids,
farnesylpyrophosphate and geranylgeranylpyrophosphate. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase biotin-dUTP nick end labelling and cell cycle assay confirmed
apoptosis in BG01V and MCF-7. Stem cell surface markers [stage-specific embryonic
antigen-4, tumour rejection antigen-1-81, octamer-4 (OCT-4)] were expressed in
HES3 and BG01, but not in BG01V cells, even after prolonged treatment with
simvastatin. In BG01V and MCF-7, the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2-associated X protein
genes were up-regulated, while the antiapoptotic BCL2 and SURVIVIN genes were
down-regulated. Expression of the stemness-related genes namely, the growth
differentiation factor-3, NANOG and OCT-4 was decreased in BG01V compared with
BG01 and HES3.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Normal hESCs were resistant to prolonged exposure
to statins over a range of doses, compared with BG01V and MCF-7, probably because
of genetic and behavioural differences. The statins not only have anti-cancer
properties but can suppress abnormal hESCs thus promoting growth of normal hESCs 
in vitro.

PMCID: PMC2737655
PMID: 19438511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Horm Res. 2009;71(5):245-52. doi: 10.1159/000208797. Epub 2009 Apr 1.

MAMLD1 (CXorf6): a new gene involved in hypospadias.

Ogata T(1), Laporte J, Fukami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
tomogata@nch.go.jp

MAMLD1 (mastermind-like domain containing 1), previously known as CXorf6
(chromosome X open reading frame 6), has been shown to be a causative gene for
hypospadias. This is primarily based on the identification of nonsense mutations 
(E124X, Q197X, and R653X), which undergo nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, in
patients with penoscrotal hypospadias. Subsequent studies have shown that (1) the
mouse homolog is transiently expressed in fetal Sertoli and Leydig cells around
the critical period of sex development; (2) transient knockdown of MAMLD1 results
in significantly reduced testosterone production in murine Leydig tumor cells;
(3) MAMLD1 protein shares homology to mastermind-like 2 (MAML2) protein that
functions as a co-activator in canonical Notch signaling; (4) MAMLD1 localizes to
the nuclear bodies and transactivates the promoter activity of a non-canonical
Notch target gene hairy/enhancer of split 3 (Hes3), rather than the canonical
Notch target genes such as Hes1 and Hes5, without demonstrable DNA-binding
capacity, and (5) MAMLD1 is regulated by steroidogenic factor 1. These findings
suggest that the MAMLD1 mutations cause hypospadias primarily because of
compromised testosterone production around the critical period of sex
development, and provide useful information for the molecular network involved in
fetal testosterone production.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19339788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2008;73:403-10. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2008.73.018.
Epub 2008 Nov 6.

Signaling pathways controlling neural stem cells slow progressive brain disease.

Androutsellis-Theotokis A(1), Rueger MA, Mkhikian H, Korb E, McKay RD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The identification and characterization of multipotent neural precursors open the
possibility of transplant therapies, but this approach is complicated by the
widespread pathology of many degenerative diseases. Activation of endogenous
precursors that support regenerative mechanisms is a possible alternative. We
have previously shown that Notch ligands promote stem cell survival in vitro.
Here, we show that there is an intimate interaction between insulin and Notch
receptor signaling. Notch ligands also expand stem cell numbers in vivo with
correlated benefits in brain ischemia. We now show that insulin promotes recovery
of injured dopamine neurons in the adult brain. This response suggests that
activating survival mechanisms in neural stem cells will promote recovery from
progressive degenerative disease.

PMID: 19022746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Fertil Steril. 2010 Feb;93(3):976-85. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.10.017. Epub
2008 Nov 19.

High concentration of synthetic serum, stepwise equilibration and slow cooling as
an efficient technique for large-scale cryopreservation of human embryonic stem
cells.

Lee JY(1), Lee JE, Kim DK, Yoon TK, Chung HM, Lee DR.

Author information: 
(1)Fertility Center, CHA General Hospital, CHA Research Institute, Pochon CHA
University, Seoul 135-081, South Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To develop an efficient freezing method suitable for large-scale
cryopreservation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs).
DESIGN: Experimental study.
SETTING: Research institute.
PATIENT(S): None.
INTERVENTION(S): Two genetically modified hESC lines, H9-EF1-GFP and
CHA-hES3-EF1-GFP, were cryopreserved in cryovials using a combination of two
equilibration methods (one-step and stepwise) and two cooling vehicles
(cryo-container and program-controlled freezer). After thawing, the survival and 
differentiation rate were compared among groups.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The hESC survival was assessed by alkaline phosphatase
staining and differentiation status was determined by flow cytometry using an
SSEA-4 antibody.
RESULT(S): In both H9-EF1-GFP and CHA-hES3-EF1-GFP cells, the survival rate was
highest in the group using stepwise equilibration and program-controlled freezer,
and lowest in the group using one-step equilibration and cryo-container. In the
groups using cryo-container, the survival and the frequency of undifferentiated
cells in both cell lines was highly improved in a stepwise equilibration compared
with one-step. Thawed hESCs were positively stained with pluripotent markers
SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81, and alkaline phosphatase. The karyotypes and
expression of three germ layer markers in both cell lines were not changed after 
freezing/thawing.
CONCLUSION(S): The stepwise equilibration of Knockout Serum Replacement and
cryoprotectant during freezing and thawing resulted in higher survival rates by
reducing osmotic damage irrespective of cooling vehicles.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19022437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Sex Dev. 2008;2(4-5):244-50. doi: 10.1159/000152040. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

MAMLD1 (CXorf6): a new gene for hypospadias.

Ogata T(1), Wada Y, Fukami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. tomogata@nch.go.jp

MAMLD1 (mastermind-like domain containing 1), also known as CXorf6 (chromosome X 
open reading frame 6) has been shown to be a causative gene for hypospadias. This
is primarily based on the identification of nonsense mutations (E124X, Q197X, and
R653X) which undergo nonsense mediated mRNA decay in patients with penoscrotal
hypospadias. Subsequent molecular studies have shown that (1) the mouse homolog
is transiently expressed in fetal Sertoli and Leydig cells around the critical
period for sex development; (2) CXorf6 protein shares homology to mastermind-like
2 (MAML2) protein that functions as a co-activator in canonical Notch signaling; 
(3) CXorf6 localizes to the nuclear bodies and transactivates the promoter
activity of a non-canonical Notch target gene hairy/enhancer of split 3(Hes3)
without demonstrable DNA binding capacity; (4) transient knockdown of CXorf6
results in significantly reduced testosterone production in murine Leydig tumor
cells; and (5) CXorf6 can be regulated by steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1). These
findings suggest that the CXorf6 mutations cause hypospadias primarily because of
testicular dysfunction and resultant compromised testosterone production around
that period, and provide useful information for the molecular network involved in
fetal testosterone production.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18987498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;Chapter 1:Unit 1F.2. doi:
10.1002/9780470151808.sc01f02s2.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to cardiomyocytes by coculture with
endoderm in serum-free medium.

Mummery CL(1), Ward D, Passier R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Utrecht Medical Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Many of the applications envisaged for human embryonic stem cells (hESC)
undergoing cardiomyogenesis require that the differentiation procedure is robust 
and high yield. For many hESC lines currently available this is a challenge;
beating areas are often obtained but subsequent analysis shows only few (<1%)
cardiomyocytes actually present. Here the authors provide a protocol based on
serum-free coculture with a mouse endoderm-like cell line (END2), which yields
cultures containing on average 25% cardiomyocytes for two widely available hESC
lines, hES2 and hES3. The authors also provide a variant on the protocol based on
growth of hESC aggregates/embryoid bodies in END2-conditioned medium and a method
for dissociating beating aggregates without compromising cardiomyocyte viability 
so that they can be used for transplantation into animals or further
(electrophysiological) analysis.

Copyright 2007 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 18785170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 May;18(4):653-60. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0160.

Adipocyte differentiation in human embryonic stem cells transduced with Oct4
shRNA lentivirus.

Hannan NR(1), Wolvetang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

Oct4 is one of the master pluripotency genes that controls differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). We generated HES2 and HES3 hESC lines stably 
transduced with lentivirus carrying Oct4 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) that display
80-90% reduction of Oct4 expression. Analysis of pluripotency marker expression
shows that these Oct4 shRNA-transduced hESCs display normal wild-type expression 
levels of the pluripotency marker CD9 but an absence of GCTM2 expression. These
hESC-derived adipocyte precursor cells display a characteristic morphology and
can be propagated and cryopreserved as a standard stem cell line. Interestingly, 
Oct4 shRNA-transduced hESCs display a remarkably high lineage-specific
spontaneous differentiation toward adipocytes. After two weeks of spontaneous
differentiation under feeder-free conditions, 60-70% of cells display a mature
adipocyte morphology as well as the expression of multiple adipocyte-specific
mRNAs as assessed by RT-PCR. The upregulation of trophoblast, mesoderm, and
endoderm transcripts is, however, also detected in these spontaneously
differentiating cultures. These Oct4 shRNA hESCs will be an interesting model
system to study human fetal adipogenesis and constitutes a renewable resource for
obesity drug screening purposes.

PMID: 18764734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Development. 2008 Aug;135(15):2531-41. doi: 10.1242/dev.021535. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Hes genes and neurogenin regulate non-neural versus neural fate specification in 
the dorsal telencephalic midline.

Imayoshi I(1), Shimogori T, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

The choroid plexus in the brain is unique because it is a non-neural secretory
tissue. It secretes the cerebrospinal fluid and functions as a blood-brain
barrier, but the precise mechanism of specification of this non-neural tissue has
not yet been determined. Using mouse embryos and lineage-tracing analysis, we
found that the prospective choroid plexus region initially gives rise to
Cajal-Retzius cells, specialized neurons that guide neuronal migration.
Inactivation of the bHLH repressor genes Hes1, Hes3 and Hes5 upregulated
expression of the proneural gene neurogenin 2 (Ngn2) and prematurely depleted
Bmp-expressing progenitor cells, leading to enhanced formation of Cajal-Retzius
cells and complete loss of choroid plexus epithelial cells. Overexpression of
Ngn2 had similar effects. These data indicate that Hes genes promote
specification of the fate of choroid plexus epithelial cells rather than the fate
of Cajal-Retzius cells by antagonizing Ngn2 in the dorsal telencephalic midline
region, and thus this study has identified a novel role for bHLH genes in the
process of deciding which cells will have a non-neural versus a neural fate.

PMID: 18579678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cytotherapy. 2008;10(4):376-89. doi: 10.1080/14653240802105307.

Highly enriched cardiomyocytes from human embryonic stem cells.

Xu XQ(1), Zweigerdt R, Soo SY, Ngoh ZX, Tham SC, Wang ST, Graichen R, Davidson B,
Colman A, Sun W.

Author information: 
(1)ES Cell International Pte Ltd, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Current efforts to direct differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells (hESC) into a particular cell lineage usually lead to a heterogeneous cell 
population with only a fraction of the desired cell type present. We show the
generation of an essentially pure population of human cardiomyocytes from hESC
using lineage selection.
METHODS: A construct comprising the murine alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC)
promoter driving the neomycin-resistance gene was introduced into hES3 cells to
generate stable transgenic lines. Transgenic hESC lines were differentiated into 
cardiomyocytes and subjected to G418 selection. Both G418-selected and
non-selected cardiomyocytes were characterized by immunocytochemistry and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. The teratoma-forming
potential of differentiated cells was assessed by injection of about 2 million
cells into the hind limb muscle of SCID mice. Results After cardiac
differentiation and antibiotic selection in a suspension culture process, more
than 99% of the transgenic cells showed immunoreactivity to alpha-MHC and
alpha-actinin; this enrichment efficiency was observed for independent transgenic
cell lines. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed high levels of enrichment for
cardiac-specific messages in the selected population. Importantly, injection of
selected cells into six SCID mice resulted in no apparent teratoma formation, in 
contrast to differentiated but non-selected controls.
DISCUSSION: Our results represent a significant step toward scalable production
of pure human cardiomyocytes from stable, expandable hESC lines that will
facilitate the development of cell therapies, safety pharmacology and drug
discovery.

PMID: 18574770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):304-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.015. Epub 2008
Apr 23.

Notch signaling during larval and juvenile development in the polychaete annelid 
Capitella sp. I.

Thamm K(1), Seaver EC.

Author information: 
(1)Kewalo Marine Lab, PBRC/University of Hawaii, 41 Ahui Street, Honolulu, HI
96813, USA. Katrin.Thamm@allzool.bio.uni-giessen.de

Notch signaling is involved in a large range of developmental processes, and has 
been functionally implicated in body plan segmentation in two of the three
diverse segmented taxa, the vertebrates and arthropods. Here we investigate
expression of Notch, Delta, and hes gene homologues during larval and juvenile
development in the polychaete annelid Capitella sp. I., a member of the third
group of segmented animals. During larval stages, CapI-Notch, CapI-Delta,
CapI-hes2, and CapI-hes3 transcripts are initially detected in broad ectodermal
domains in future segments as well as in the brain and foregut; later,
CapI-Notch, CapI-Delta, and CapI-hes2 transcripts are detected in the presumptive
chaetal sacs. In contrast, CapI-hes1 has a segmentally reiterated pattern in a
restricted region of the mesoderm in each presumptive segment. CapI-Notch,
CapI-Delta, CapI-hes2, and CapI-hes3 and CapI-hes1 are all expressed in the
terminal growth zone that generates post-metamorphic segments, however, CapI-hes1
has a non-overlapping complementary expression pattern to that of CapI-Notch and 
CapI-Delta. CapI-Delta and CapI-Notch transcripts are localized to already formed
segments, with posterior boundaries that correlate with the posterior boundary of
the nascent segment, while CapI-hes1 lies posterior to CapI-Notch and CapI-Delta.
The localization of CapI-Notch, CapI-Delta, and CapI-hes transcripts correlate
with areas of rapid cell proliferation in Capitella, which include the brain,
foregut, and terminal growth zone.

PMID: 18511030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Jun;50 Suppl 1:S97-103. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.00993.x. Epub 2008 Apr 22.

Roles of Hes genes in neural development.

Kageyama R(1), Ohtsuka T, Kobayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
and Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Hes genes are mammalian homologues of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split,
which encode basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional repressors. In the
developing central nervous system, Hes1, Hes3 and Hes5 are highly expressed by
neural stem cells. Inactivation of these Hes genes leads to upregulation of
proneural genes, acceleration of neurogenesis and premature depletion of neural
stem cells. Conversely, overexpression of Hes genes leads to inhibition of
neurogenesis and maintenance of neural stem cells. At later stages of
development, Hes genes promote gliogenesis. Furthermore, Hes genes regulate
maintenance of boundaries, which partition the nervous system into many
compartments and endow the neighboring compartments with regional identities by
secreting morphogens. Boundary cells usually proliferate slowly and do not give
rise to neurons, unlike neural stem cells in compartments. Interestingly, these
different characteristics between boundary cells and compartmental neural stem
cells are regulated by different modes of Hes1 expression, which is variable in
neural stem cells in compartments and persistent and high in boundary cells.
Thus, Hes genes play an essential role in neural development by regulating
proliferation, differentiation and specification of neural stem cells.

PMID: 18430159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 29;283(9):5525-32. Epub 2007 Dec 27.

Mastermind-like domain-containing 1 (MAMLD1 or CXorf6) transactivates the Hes3
promoter, augments testosterone production, and contains the SF1 target sequence.

Fukami M(1), Wada Y, Okada M, Kato F, Katsumata N, Baba T, Morohashi K, Laporte
J, Kitagawa M, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. mfukami@nch.go.jp

Although chromosome X open reading frame 6 (CXorf6) has been shown to be a
causative gene for hypospadias, its molecular function remains unknown. To
clarify this, we first examined CXorf6 protein structure, identifying homology to
mastermind-like 2 (MAML2) protein, which functions as a co-activator in canonical
Notch signaling. Transactivation analysis for wild-type CXorf6 protein by
luciferase assays showed that CXorf6 significantly transactivated the promoter of
a noncanonical Notch target gene hairy/enhancer of split 3 (Hes3) without
demonstrable DNA-binding capacity. Transactivation analysis was also performed
for the previously described three apparently pathologic nonsense mutations,
indicating that E124X and Q197X proteins had no transactivation function, whereas
R653X protein retained a nearly normal transactivation function. Subcellular
localization analysis revealed that wild-type and R653X proteins co-localized
with MAML2 protein in nuclear bodies, whereas E124X and Q197X proteins were
incapable of localizing to nuclear bodies. Thus, further studies were performed
for R653X, revealing the occurrence of nonsense mediated mRNA decay in vivo.
Next, transient knockdown of CXorf6 was performed using small interfering RNA,
showing reduced testosterone production in mouse Leydig tumor cells. Furthermore,
steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1) protein bound to a specific sequence in the upstream
of the CXorf6 coding region and exerted a transactivation activity. These results
suggest that CXorf6 transactivates the Hes3 promoter, augments testosterone
production, and contains the SF1 target sequence, thereby providing the first
clue to clarify the biological role of CXorf6. We designate CXorf6 as MAMLD1
(mastermind-like domain-containing 1) based on its characteristic structure.

PMID: 18162467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Reprod Biomed Online. 2007 Nov;15(5):566-81.

Comparative evaluation of the effects of statins on human stem and cancer cells
in vitro.

Gauthaman K(1), Richards M, Wong J, Bongso A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, 5 Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore 119074.

Anticancer effects of statins were studied using karyotypically normal human
embryonic stem cells (hESC) (HES3), karyotypically abnormal hESC (BG0IV),
embryonal carcinoma (NTERA-2), ovarian (TOV-112D) and colorectal cancer (HT-29)
cells. The cells were treated with simvastatin, pravastatin, mevastatin and
lovastatin in vitro at different concentrations (1-20 mumol/l) and their effects 
on cell proliferation, apoptosis and stemness-related gene expression were
studied. BG01V, NTERA-2 and TOV-112D contained duplications of chromosome 12 and 
17. All four statins did not show any inhibition of HES3 proliferation. However, 
BG01V, NTERA-2, TOV-112D and HT-29 were inhibited by simvastatin, lovastatin and 
mevastatin. The inhibitory effects were reversed by farnesylpyrophosphate and
geranylgeranylpyrophosphate. TUNEL and cell cycle assay revealed evidence of
apoptosis in karyotypically abnormal cancer and stem cell types exposed to
simvastatin and lovastatin. In addition, following simvastatin treatment, some of
the apoptotic and stemness-related genes showed differential expression for the
BG01V, NTERA-2, TOV-112D and HT-29 cells in comparison to HES3. In conclusion,
the statins inhibit cell proliferation in karyotypically abnormal stem and cancer
cells, probably via an increase in activity of key apoptotic genes and the
suppression of stemness-related genes on chromosomes 12 and 17.

PMID: 18028750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Aug;16(4):561-78.

Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into the pancreatic
endocrine lineage.

Phillips BW(1), Hentze H, Rust WL, Chen QP, Chipperfield H, Tan EK, Abraham S,
Sadasivam A, Soong PL, Wang ST, Lim R, Sun W, Colman A, Dunn NR.

Author information: 
(1)ES Cell International Pte, Ltd., Singapore 138667.

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells represent a potentially unlimited source of
transplantable beta-cells for the treatment of diabetes. Here we describe a
differentiation strategy that reproducibly directs HES3, an National Institutes
of Health (NIH)-registered hES cell line, into cells of the pancreatic endocrine 
lineage. HES3 cells are removed from their feeder layer and cultured as embryoid 
bodies in a three-dimensional matrix in the presence of Activin A and Bmp4 to
induce definitive endoderm. Next, growth factors known to promote the
proliferation and differentiation of pancreatic ductal epithelial cells to
glucose-sensing, insulin-secreting beta-cells are added. Pdx1 expression, which
identifies pancreatic progenitors, is detected as early as day 12 of
differentiation. By day 34, Pdx1+ cells comprise between 5% and 20% of the total 
cell population and Insulin gene expression is up-regulated, with release of
C-peptide into the culture medium. Unlike another recent report of the induction 
of insulin+ cells in differentiated hES cell populations, we are unable to detect
the expression of other pancreatic hormones in insulin+ cells. When transplanted 
into severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, differentiated cell
populations retain their endocrine identity and synthesize insulin.

PMID: 17784830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2007 Oct;43(4):504-16. Epub 2007 Jul 14.

Survival and maturation of human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes in
rat hearts.

Dai W(1), Field LJ, Rubart M, Reuter S, Hale SL, Zweigerdt R, Graichen RE, Kay
GL, Jyrala AJ, Colman A, Davidson BP, Pera M, Kloner RA.

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute, Good Samaritan Hospital, University of Southern
California, 1225 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90017-2395, USA.

Human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived cardiomyocytes are a promising cell
source for cardiac repair. Whether these cells can be transported long distance, 
survive, and mature in hearts subjected to ischemia/reperfusion with minimal
infarction is unknown. Taking advantage of a constitutively GFP-expressing hESC
line we investigated whether hESC-derived cardiomyocytes could be shipped and
subsequently form grafts when transplanted into the left ventricular wall of
athymic nude rats subjected to ischemia/reperfusion with minimal infarction.
Co-localization of GFP-epifluorescence and cardiomyocyte-specific marker staining
was utilized to analyze hESC-derived cardiomyocyte fate in a rat
ischemia/reperfused myocardium. Differentiated, constitutively green fluorescent 
protein (GFP)-expressing hESCs (hES3-GFP; Envy) containing about 13%
cardiomyocytes were differentiated in Singapore, and shipped in culture medium at
4 degrees C to Los Angeles (shipping time approximately 3 days). The cells were
dissociated and a cell suspension (2 x 10(6) cells for each rat, n=10) or medium 
(n=10) was injected directly into the myocardium within the ischemic risk area 5 
min after left coronary artery occlusion in athymic nude rats. After 15 min of
ischemia, the coronary artery was reperfused. The hearts were harvested at
various time points later and processed for histology, immunohistochemical
staining, and fluorescence microscopy. In order to assess whether the
hESC-derived cardiomyocytes might evade immune surveillance, 2 x 10(6) cells were
injected into immune competent Sprague-Dawley rat hearts (n=2), and the hearts
were harvested at 4 weeks after cell injection and examined as in the previous
procedures. Even following 3 days of shipping, the hESC-derived cardiomyocytes
within embryoid bodies (EBs) showed active and rhythmic contraction after
incubation in the presence of 5% CO(2) at 37 degrees C. In the nude rats,
following cell implantation, H&E, immunohistochemical staining and GFP
epifluorescence demonstrated grafts in 9 out of 10 hearts. Cells that
demonstrated GFP epifluorescence also stained positive (co-localized) for the
muscle marker alpha-actinin and exhibited cross striations (sarcomeres).
Furthermore, cells that stained positive for the antibody to GFP
(immunohistochemistry) also stained positive for the muscle marker sarcomeric
actin and demonstrated cross striations. At 4 weeks engrafted hESCs expressed
connexin 43, suggesting the presence of nascent gap junctions between donor and
host cells. No evidence of rejection was observed in nude rats as determined by
inspection for lymphocytic infiltrate and/or giant cells. In contrast,
hESC-derived cardiomyocytes injected into immune competent Sprague-Dawley rats
resulted in an overt lymphocytic infiltrate. hESCs-derived cardiomyocytes can
survive several days of shipping. Grafted cells survived up to 4 weeks after
transplantation in hearts of nude rats subjected to ischemia/reperfusion with
minimal infarction. They continued to express cardiac muscle markers and exhibit 
sarcomeric structure and they were well interspersed with the endogenous
myocardium. However, hESC-derived cells did not escape immune surveillance in the
xenograft setting in that they elicited a rejection phenomenon in immune
competent rats.

PMCID: PMC2796607
PMID: 17707399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int J Oncol. 2007 Aug;31(2):461-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on HES/HEY family: Notch-independent HES1, HES3
transcription in undifferentiated ES cells, and Notch-dependent HES1, HES5, HEY1,
HEY2, HEYL transcription in fetal tissues, adult tissues, or cancer.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Notch signaling pathway maintains stem cells through transcriptional activation
of HES/HEY family members to repress tissue-specific transcription factors. Here,
comparative integromic analyses on HES/HEY family members were carried out. HES3 
gene encodes two isoforms due to alternative promoters. Complete coding sequence 
of HES3 variant 2 was determined by curating CX755241.1 EST. Refined phylogenetic
analysis using HES3 variant 2 instead of variant 1 revealed that mammalian bHLH
transcription factors with Orange domain were grouped into HES subfamily (HES1,
HES2, HES3, HES4, HES5, HES6, HES7) and HEY subfamily (HEY1, HEY2, HEYL,
HESL/HELT, DEC1/BHLHB2, DEC2/BHLHB3). Eight amino-acid residues were added to the
C-terminal WRPW motif in human HES3 due to lineage specific T to G nucleotide
change at stop codon of chimpanzee, rat, and mouse HES3 orthologs. HES1 and HES3 
were expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. HES1 was also
expressed in fetal tissues, and regenerating liver. HES1, HEY1 and HEY2 were
expressed in endothelial cells. HES1, HES4 and HES6 were expressed in gastric
cancer, HES1 and DEC1 in pancreatic cancer, HES1, HES2, HES4, HES6 and DEC2 in
colorectal cancer. HES6 was also expressed in other tumors, such as brain tumors,
melanoma, small cell lung cancer, retinoblastoma, ovarian cancer, and breast
cancer. Double NANOG-binding sites, CSL/RBPSUH-binding site and TATA-box in HES1 
promoter, NANOG-, SOX2-, POU5F1/OCT3/OCT4-binding sites and TATA-box in HES3
promoter, double CSL-binding sites in HES5 promoter, SOX2-, POU-binding sites and
TATA-box in HES6 promoter, and CSL-binding site in HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL promoters 
were evolutionarily conserved. However, double CSL-binding sites in mouse Hes7
promoter were not conserved in human HES7 promoter. Together these facts indicate
that HES1 and HES3 were target genes of the ES cell-specific network of
transcription factors, and that HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL were target genes
of Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 17611704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nature. 2006 Aug 17;442(7104):823-6. Epub 2006 Jun 25.

Notch signalling regulates stem cell numbers in vitro and in vivo.

Androutsellis-Theotokis A(1), Leker RR, Soldner F, Hoeppner DJ, Ravin R, Poser
SW, Rueger MA, Bae SK, Kittappa R, McKay RD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The hope of developing new transplantation therapies for degenerative diseases is
limited by inefficient stem cell growth and immunological incompatibility with
the host. Here we show that Notch receptor activation induces the expression of
the specific target genes hairy and enhancer of split 3 (Hes3) and Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) through rapid activation of cytoplasmic signals, including the
serine/threonine kinase Akt, the transcription factor STAT3 and mammalian target 
of rapamycin, and thereby promotes the survival of neural stem cells. In both
murine somatic and human embryonic stem cells, these positive signals are opposed
by a control mechanism that involves the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase.
Transient administration of Notch ligands to the brain of adult rats increases
the numbers of newly generated precursor cells and improves motor skills after
ischaemic injury. These data indicate that stem cell expansion in vitro and in
vivo, two central goals of regenerative medicine, may be achieved by Notch
ligands through a pathway that is fundamental to development and cancer.

PMID: 16799564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i132-7.

Notch1 expression is spatiotemporally correlated with neurogenesis and negatively
regulated by Notch1-independent Hes genes in the developing nervous system.

Hatakeyama J(1), Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

In the developing nervous system, neural stem cells initially proliferate by a
symmetric cell division and then undergo an asymmetric cell division, which makes
one neuron (or neuronal precursor) and one progenitor. It remains to be
determined how the switch from the symmetric to asymmetric cell divisions is
regulated. Here, we found that Notch1 is expressed in the regions where
neurogenesis occurs actively but not in the regions where neurogenesis does not
yet occur. Furthermore, in Hes-mutant mice where neurogenesis is accelerated,
Notch1 expression is also accelerated. Thus, Notch1 expression is negatively
regulated by Hes genes and is spatiotemporally correlated with neurogenesis,
suggesting that the neural stem cells that undergo asymmetric cell divisions
express Notch1, whereas those that undergo symmetric cell divisions do not. We
propose that initiation of Notch1 expression is one of the key features for
switch from the symmetric to asymmetric cell divisions of neural stem cells and
that this process is negatively regulated by Notch1-independent Hes genes.

PMID: 16766699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2006 Jul;133(13):2467-76. Epub 2006 May 25.

Persistent and high levels of Hes1 expression regulate boundary formation in the 
developing central nervous system.

Baek JH(1), Hatakeyama J, Sakamoto S, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

The developing central nervous system is partitioned into compartments by
boundary cells, which have different properties than compartment cells, such as
forming neuron-free zones, proliferating more slowly and acting as organizing
centers. We now report that in mice the bHLH factor Hes1 is persistently
expressed at high levels by boundary cells but at variable levels by non-boundary
cells. Expression levels of Hes1 display an inverse correlation to those of the
proneural bHLH factor Mash1, suggesting that downregulation of Hes1 leads to
upregulation of Mash1 in non-boundary regions, whereas persistent and high Hes1
expression constitutively represses Mash1 in boundary regions. In agreement with 
this notion, in the absence of Hes1 and its related genes Hes3 and Hes5,
proneural bHLH genes are ectopically expressed in boundaries, resulting in
ectopic neurogenesis and disruption of the organizing centers. Conversely,
persistent Hes1 expression in neural progenitors prepared from compartment
regions blocks neurogenesis and reduces cell proliferation rates. These results
indicate that the mode of Hes1 expression is different between boundary and
non-boundary cells, and that persistent and high levels of Hes1 expression
constitutively repress proneural bHLH gene expression and reduce cell
proliferation rates, thereby forming boundaries that act as the organizing
centers.

PMID: 16728479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Stem Cells Dev. 2006 Feb;15(1):61-9.

Derivation of three clones from human embryonic stem cell lines by FACS sorting
and their characterization.

Sidhu KS(1), Tuch BE.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Group, Diabetes Transplant Unit, Prince of Wales Hospital and
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2031 Australia. k.sidhu@unsw.edu.au

Here we describe the first report of three human embryonic stem cell (hESC)
clones, hES 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, derived from the parent line hES3 by sorting of
single-cell preparations by flow cytometry. The viability of single-cell
preparations before and after cell sorting remained >98%. The hESC were selected 
by size gating and forward-angle light scatter and were dispersed directly as
single cell/ well into 96-well plates containing human fetal fibroblasts as
feeder layers. Single stem cell dispersion into 96-well plates was confirmed by
using cells from a hES3 line that constitutively expressed green fluorescence
protein (eGFP) under similar conditions of flow cytometry. Three clones were
obtained from the parent line hES3 -- hES3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 -- and they have been 
in continuous culture for more than 1 year. The cloning efficiency was less than 
<0.5%. These hESC clones show normal stem cell characteristics, such as
undifferentiated growth, high nucleocytoplasmic ratio, the same karyotype as that
of the parent line (46 XX), stem cell surface markers (i.e., SSEA3, SSEA4, OCT4, 
TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81), and gene expression for pluripotency (Oct-4 and nanog). 
They all formed embryoid bodies in suspension cultures, and after seeding in
culture plates they showed pluripotency in vitro by forming cell lineages derived
from all three germ layers as indicated by expression of the ectodermal marker
nestin, the mesodermal marker renin, and the endodermal markers alpha-fetoprotein
and GATA6. All clones showed normal expression of alkaline phosphatase activity, 
a marker of in vitro pluripotency. When hESC clones (1-2 x 10(6) total) were
injected into nonobese diabetic-severe combined immunodeficiency (NOD-SCID) mice 
under the kidney capsule, all formed teratomas within 6-8 weeks. Analysis of the 
stem cell surface marker TRA-1-160 by flow cytometry showed nonsignificant (p <
0.05) differences between the clones and the parent line. The clones also
differed in their expression of genes, with only one, hES 3.2, expressing the
endodermal markers, i.e., alpha-fetoprotein and GATA6. The ability to produce
clones from a parent hESC line rapidly by FACS sorting will help provide a
homogeneous population of cells for achieving uniformed lineage specifications
for future transplantation therapies and biomedical research.

PMID: 16522163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Feb;17(2):391-5.

Comparative genomics on HHIP family orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog, FGF, VEGF, and Notch signaling pathways network together for vascular
remodeling during embryogenesis and carcinogenesis. HHIP1 (HHIP) is an endogenous
antagonist for SHH, IHH, and DHH. Here, comparative integromics analyses on HHIP 
family members were performed by using bioinformatics and human intelligence.
HHIP1, HHIP2 (HHIPL1 or KIAA1822) and HHIP3 (HHIPL2 or KIAA1822L) constitute
human HHIP gene family. Rat Hhip1, Hhip2, and Hhip3 genes were identified within 
AC107504.4, AC094820.6, and AC134264.2 genome sequences, respectively.
HHIP-homologous (HIPH) domain with conserved 18 Cys residues was identified as
the novel domain conserved among mammalian HHIP1, HHIP2, and HHIP3 orthologs.
HHIP1 mRNA was expressed in coronary artery endothelial cells, prostate, and
rhabdomyosarcoma. HHIP2 mRNA was expressed in trabecular bone cells. HHIP3 mRNA
was expressed in testis, thyroid gland, osteoarthritic cartilarge, pancreatic
cancer, and lung cancer. Promoters of HHIP family genes were not well conserved
between human and rodents. Although GLI-, CSL-, and HES/HEY-binding sites were
not identified, eleven bHLH-binding sites were identified within human HHIP1
promoter. Expression of HES/HEY family members, including HES1, HES2, HES3, HES4,
HES5, HES6, HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL, in coronary artery endothelial cells was
not detected in silico. Up-regulation of HHIP1 due to down-regulation of
Notch-CSL-HES/HEY signaling cascade repressing bHLH transcription factors results
in down-regulation of the Hedgehog-VEGF-Notch signaling cascade. On the other
hand, down-regulation of HHIP1 due to up-regulation of Notch signaling in
vascular endothelial cells during angiogenesis results in up-regulation of the
Hedgehog-VEGF-Notch signaling cascade. Because HHIP1 is the key molecule for
vascular remodeling, HHIP1 is the pharmacogenomics target in the fields of
oncology and vascular medicine.

PMID: 16391842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Reprod Biomed Online. 2005 Oct;11(4):476-85.

Human embryonic stem cells: towards therapies for cardiac disease. Derivation of 
a Dutch human embryonic stem cell line.

van de Stolpe A(1), van den Brink S, van Rooijen M, Ward-van Oostwaard D, van
Inzen W, Slaper-Cortenbach I, Fauser B, van den Hout N, Weima S, Passier R, Smith
N, Denning C, Mummery C.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cell transplantation is being discussed as a potential therapy for multiple
disorders caused by loss or malfunction of single or at most a few cell types.
These include diabetes, Parkinson's disease and myocardial infarction or cardiac 
failure. However, it is not yet clear whether cells from adult tissues ('adult
stem cells') or embryos ('embryonic stem cells') will prove to be the most
appropriate replacement cells; most likely, each disease will have its own
preferred source. This study presents the background to this discussion and the
current state of research in replacement of cardiac tissue, with focus on recent 
developments using human embryonic stem cells. It also describes a new human
embryonic stem cell (HESC) line, NL-HESC1, the first to be derived in the
Netherlands, and shows that it forms cardiac cells in a manner comparable with
that of hES2 and hES3 cells grown in the same laboratory.

PMID: 16274613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jun 10;306(2):343-8. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Roles of bHLH genes in neural stem cell differentiation.

Kageyama R(1), Ohtsuka T, Hatakeyama J, Ohsawa R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Neural stem cells change their characteristics over time during development: they
initially proliferate only and then give rise to neurons first and glial cells
later. In the absence of the repressor-type basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes
Hes1, Hes3 and Hes5, neural stem cells do not proliferate sufficiently but
prematurely differentiate into neurons and become depleted without making the
later born cell types such as astrocytes and ependymal cells. Thus, Hes genes are
essential for maintenance of neural stem cells to make cells not only in correct 
numbers but also in full diversity. Hes genes antagonize the activator-type bHLH 
genes, which include Mash1, Math and Neurogenin. The activator-type bHLH genes
promote the neuronal fate determination and induce expression of Notch ligands
such as Delta. These ligands activate Notch signaling and upregulate Hes1 and
Hes5 expression in neighboring cells, thereby maintaining these cells
undifferentiated. Thus, the activator-type and repressor-type bHLH genes regulate
each other, allowing only subsets of cells to undergo differentiation while
keeping others to stay neural stem cells. This regulation is essential for
generation of complex brain structures of appropriate size, shape and cell
arrangement.

PMID: 15925590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Proteomics. 2005 Mar;5(4):978-89.

A proteome analysis of conditioned media from human neonatal fibroblasts used in 
the maintenance of human embryonic stem cells.

Prowse AB(1), McQuade LR, Bryant KJ, Van Dyk DD, Tuch BE, Gray PP.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Centre, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
andrew.prowse@student.unsw.edu.au

The pathways involved in the maintenance of human embryonic stem (hES) cells
remain largely unknown, although some signaling pathways have been identified in 
mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells. Fibroblast feeder layers are used to maintain
the undifferentiated growth of hES cells and an examination of the conditioned
media (CM) of human neonatal fibroblasts (HNFs) could provide insights into the
maintenance of hES cells. The neonatal foreskin fibroblast line (HNF02) used in
this study was shown to have a normal 2n = 46, XY chromosomal complement and to
support the undifferentiated growth of the Embryonic Stem Cell International Pte.
Ltd.-hES3 cell line. The CM of HNF02 was examined using two-dimensional liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2-D LCMS) and two-dimensional
electrophoresis (2-DE) followed by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization-time of flight tandem mass spectrometry (2-DE/MALDI). A
total of 102 proteins were identified, 19 by 2-DE/MALDI, 53 by 2-D LCMS and 30 by
both techniques. These proteins were classified into 15 functional groups.
Proteins identified in the extracellular matrix and differentiation and growth
factor functional categories were considered most likely to be involved in the
maintenance of hES cell growth, differentiation and pluripotency as these groups 
contained proteins involved in a variety of events including cell adhesion, cell 
proliferation and inhibition of cell proliferation, Wnt signaling and inhibition 
of bone morphogenetic proteins.

PMID: 15712233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5539-50. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Hes genes regulate size, shape and histogenesis of the nervous system by control 
of the timing of neural stem cell differentiation.

Hatakeyama J(1), Bessho Y, Katoh K, Ookawara S, Fujioka M, Guillemot F, Kageyama 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Radial glial cells derive from neuroepithelial cells, and both cell types are
identified as neural stem cells. Neural stem cells are known to change their
competency over time during development: they initially undergo self-renewal only
and then give rise to neurons first and glial cells later. Maintenance of neural 
stem cells until late stages is thus believed to be essential for generation of
cells in correct numbers and diverse types, but little is known about how the
timing of cell differentiation is regulated and how its deregulation influences
brain organogenesis. Here, we report that inactivation of Hes1 and Hes5, known
Notch effectors, and additional inactivation of Hes3 extensively accelerate cell 
differentiation and cause a wide range of defects in brain formation. In
Hes-deficient embryos, initially formed neuroepithelial cells are not properly
maintained, and radial glial cells are prematurely differentiated into neurons
and depleted without generation of late-born cells. Furthermore, loss of radial
glia disrupts the inner and outer barriers of the neural tube, disorganizing the 
histogenesis. In addition, the forebrain lacks the optic vesicles and the
ganglionic eminences. Thus, Hes genes are essential for generation of brain
structures of appropriate size, shape and cell arrangement by controlling the
timing of cell differentiation. Our data also indicate that embryonic neural stem
cells change their characters over time in the following order: Hes-independent
neuroepithelial cells, transitory Hes-dependent neuroepithelial cells and
Hes-dependent radial glial cells.

PMID: 15496443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Oct;14(4):747-51.

Identification and characterization of human HESL, rat Hesl and rainbow trout
hesl genes in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to nuclear translocation of Notch
intracellular domain (NIC), and transcriptional activation of target genes
through the interaction between CSL proteins (RBPSUH or RBPSUHL) and NIC. HES1,
HES5, HEY1 and HEY2 are Notch target genes. Mammalian HES/HEY family proteins as 
well as Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split are implicated in the cell fate
determination. We have previously identified and characterized human HES2, HES3
and HES5 genes. Here, we identified and characterized human HES-like (HESL), rat 
Fesl, and rainbow trout fesl genes by using bioinformatics. Human HESL gene,
located within AC093824.3 genome sequence, was mapped to human chromosome 4q35.1 
between ACSL1 and SLC25A4 genes. Rat Fesl gene, located within AC111303.4 genome 
sequence, was mapped to rat chromosome 16q11. EST BX875070.2 was the
representative rainbow trout fesl cDNA. HESL-ACSL1 locus was conserved among
human, rat, mouse, and zebrafish genomes. Human HESL (241 aa) showed 92.9%
total-amino-acid identity with rat Hesl (240 aa), 92.1% total-amino-acid identity
with mouse Hesl (240 aa), and 68.0% total-amino-acid identity with rainbow trout 
hesl (235 aa). HESL orthologs consist of basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
ORANGE domain. C-terminal region of HESL orthologs were divergent from that of
HES, HEY, and DEC homologs. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that bHLH
transcription factors with ORANGE domain were classified into the following three
groups: (group I) HES1, HES2, HES4 and HES6 orthologs; (group II) HESL, HES5,
HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL orthologs; (group III) HES3, DEC1/BHLHB2 and
DEC2/BHLHB3 orthologs.

PMID: 15375612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Oncol. 2004 Aug;25(2):529-34.

Identification and characterization of human HES2, HES3, and HES5 genes in
silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan.

MMTV induces the mouse mammary tumor through the dysregulation of Notch, Wnt, or 
Fgf signaling pathway. Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to
transcriptional activation of Hes family genes through the interaction between
Notch intracellular domain and RBPSUH (CSL). Hes family proteins are mammalian
homologs of Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split. Hes family of transcriptional
repressors with basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and Orange domains are implicated
in the cell fate determination of stem cells (or precursor cells) by suppressing 
the expression of tissue-specific transcriptional activators. Human HES1, HES4,
HES6, and HES7 genes have been reported by other groups. Here, we identified and 
characterized human HES2, HES3 and HES5 genes by using bioinformatics. FLJ33803
(AK091122.1) was the representative human HES2 cDNA. HES2 gene, encoding a 173-aa
protein, was located within human genome sequence AL031848.11. HES3 gene,
encoding a 186-aa protein, was identified within human genome sequence
AL031847.17. HES5 gene, encoding a 166-aa protein, was identified within human
genome sequence AL139246.20. HES2 and HES3 genes were mapped to human chromosome 
1p36.31, while HES5 gene to 1p36.32. HES2 mRNA was expressed in placenta,
pancreatic cancer, colon cancer with RER, cervical cancer, and in head and neck
tumors. HES5 mRNA was expressed in fetal heart, and brain tumors. Human HES
family proteins were found consisting of bHLH, Orange, Proline-rich domains, and 
WRPW motif. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that HES family proteins were
distantly related except a paralog pair of HES1 and HES4. HES family genes are
pharmacogenomic targets in the field of regenerative medicine and oncology.

PMID: 15254753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Stem Cells. 2004;22(1):51-64.

The transcriptome profile of human embryonic stem cells as defined by SAGE.

Richards M(1), Tan SP, Tan JH, Chan WK, Bongso A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National University of Singapore,
National University Hospital, Singapore.

Human embryonic stem (ES) cell lines that have the ability to self-renew and
differentiate into specific cell types have been established. The molecular
mechanisms for self-renewal and differentiation, however, are poorly understood. 
We determined the transcriptome profiles for two proprietary human ES cell lines 
(HES3 and HES4, ES Cell International), and compared them with murine ES cells
and other human tissues. Human and mouse ES cells appear to share a number of
expressed gene products although there are numerous notable differences,
including an inactive leukemia inhibitory factor pathway and the high
preponderance of several important genes like POU5F1 and SOX2 in human ES cells. 
We have established a list of genes comprised of known ES-specific genes and new 
candidates that can serve as markers for human ES cells and may also contribute
to the "stemness" phenotype. Of particular interest was the downregulation of
DNMT3B and LIN28 mRNAs during ES cell differentiation. The overlapping
similarities and differences in gene expression profiles of human and mouse ES
cells provide a foundation for a detailed and concerted dissection of the
molecular and cellular mechanisms governing their pluripotency, directed
differentiation into specific cell types, and extended ability for self-renewal.

PMID: 14688391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biol Reprod. 2003 Dec;69(6):2007-14. Epub 2003 Aug 20.

Establishment and maintenance of human embryonic stem cells on STO, a permanently
growing cell line.

Park JH(1), Kim SJ, Oh EJ, Moon SY, Roh SI, Kim CG, Yoon HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Biology, Medical Research Center, MizMedi Hospital,
Kangseo-ku, Seoul 157-280, Korea.

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells have been traditionally cultured on primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (PMEFs). However, though STO cells have some
advantages over PMEFs and human embryonic fibroblasts (hEFs) as feeder cells,
they have never been used as feeder cells to establish hES cell lines. In this
study, three hES cell lines (Miz-hES1, Miz-hES2, and Miz-hES3) were established
from inner cell masses (ICM), using STO as feeder cells. The three hES cell lines
had normal karyotypes and expressed high levels of alkaline phosphatase (AP),
cell surface markers (SSEA-3, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81), and transcription 
factor Oct-4. After culture on STO cells for 2 yr, hES cells maintained the
potential to form derivatives of all three embryonic germ layers. Our results
show that STO feeder cells have the potential to support the establishment and
maintenance of hES cell lines. In addition, our results suggest that laminin may 
play an important role in maintaining the undifferentiated proliferation of hES
cells.

PMID: 12930726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mech Dev. 2002 Jun;114(1-2):153-9.

Notch1 and its ligands Delta-like and Jagged are expressed and active in distinct
cell populations in the postnatal mouse brain.

Stump G(1), Durrer A, Klein AL, Lütolf S, Suter U, Taylor V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

Notch signaling plays a pivotal role in the regulation of vertebrate
neurogenesis. However, in vitro experiments suggest that Notch1 may also be
involved in the regulation of later stages of brain development. We have
addressed putative roles in the central nervous system by examining the
expression of Notch signaling cascade components in the postnatal mouse brain. In
situ mRNA hybridization revealed that Notch1 is associated with cells in the
subventricular zone, the dentate gyrus and the rostromigratory stream, all
regions of continued neurogenesis in the postnatal brain. In addition, Notch1 is 
expressed at low levels throughout the cortex and olfactory bulb and shows
striking expression in the cerebellar Purkinje cell layer. The Notch ligands,
including Delta-like1 and 3 and Jagged1 and Jagged2, show distinct expression
patterns in the developing and adult brain overlapping that of Notch1. In
addition, the downstream targets of the Notch signaling cascade Hes1, Hes3, Hes5 
and the intrinsic Notch regulatory proteins Numb and Numblike also show active
signaling in distinct brain regions. Hes5 coincides with the majority of Notch1
expression and can be detected in the cerebral cortex, cerebellum and putative
germinal zones. Hes3, on the other hand, shows a restricted expression in
cerebellar Purkinje cells. The distribution of Notch1 and its putative ligands
suggest distinct roles in specific subsets of cells in the postnatal brain
including putative stem cells and differentiated neurons.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12175503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. EMBO J. 2001 Aug 15;20(16):4454-66.

Hes1 and Hes3 regulate maintenance of the isthmic organizer and development of
the mid/hindbrain.

Hirata H(1), Tomita K, Bessho Y, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

The isthmic organizer, which is located at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary, plays
an essential role in development of the midbrain and anterior hindbrain. It has
been shown that homeobox genes regulate establishment of the isthmic organizer,
but the mechanism by which the organizer is maintained is not well understood.
Here, we found that, in mice doubly mutant for the basic helix-loop-helix genes
Hes1 and Hes3, the midbrain and anterior hindbrain structures are missing without
any significant cell death. In these mutants, the isthmic organizer cells
prematurely differentiate into neurons and terminate expression of secreting
molecules such as Fgf8 and Wnt1 and the paired box genes Pax2/5, all of which are
essential for the isthmic organizer function. These results indicate that Hes1
and Hes3 prevent premature differentiation and maintain the organizer activity of
the isthmic cells, thereby regulating the development of the midbrain and
anterior hindbrain.

PMCID: PMC125583
PMID: 11500373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 23;275(25):19083-9.

Generation of structurally and functionally distinct factors from the basic
helix-loop-helix gene Hes3 by alternative first exons.

Hirata H(1), Ohtsuka T, Bessho Y, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix gene Hes3 is expressed by differentiating and mature
Purkinje cells in the cerebellum and by neural precursor cells in the embryonal
nervous system. We here found that the transcript of cerebellar Hes3, designated 
Hes3a, has a distinct 5'-terminal structure from that of embryonal Hes3,
designated Hes3b, and that the two types of Hes3 transcripts are generated from
different first exons. Hes3a lacks the amino-terminal half of the basic region
and thus does not bind to the DNA, whereas Hes3b contains a complete basic region
and binds to the N box sequence with a high affinity like Hes1, another member of
the Hes family. Both types of Hes3 proteins functionally antagonize the neuronal 
determination factor Mash1, but only Hes3b represses transcription from the N
box-containing promoter like Hes1. Furthermore, misexpression of Hes3b with
retrovirus in neural precursor cells inhibits neuronal differentiation like Hes1,
whereas Hes3a does not. Thus, alternative promoters and first exons that are
differentially utilized during neural development generate structurally and
functionally distinct proteins from a single Hes3 gene locus.

PMID: 10858455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):687-708.

A comparison of Notch, Hes and Grg expression during murine embryonic and
post-natal development.

Allen T(1), Lobe CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Sunnybrook and
Women's College Health Science Centre, ON, Canada.

Mammalian Hairy/Enhancer-of-split-like (Hes) proteins interact with
transcriptional corepressors encoded by the Groucho-related genes (Grg in mice). 
We have examined the embryonic and postnatal expression of the Hes1 and Hes3
genes as well as all four murine Grgs in order to determine where spatial and
temporal overlaps of Hes and Grg corepressors may occur. Both within and between 
gene families, expression was found to occur in unique but overlapping patterns
during embryonic and postnatal development. Areas where the members of these gene
families are coexpressed also overlap with areas where Notch signaling is thought
to maintain cells in undifferentiated or "precursor" states. Our data suggest
that the coordinated transcriptional control of these genes occurs during
development and that precise Hes and Grg pairings may play a role in mediating
the morphogenesis of CNS and epithelialized structures.

PMID: 10512199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell Tissue Res. 1998 Jul;293(1):23-9.

Regulated expression of neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
during differentiation of the immortalized neuronal progenitor cell line HC2S2
into neurons.

Ohtsuka T(1), Asahi M, Matsuura N, Kikuchi H, Hojo M, Kageyama R, Ohkubo H,
Hoshimaru M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 54
Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606, Japan.

Expression of nine neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
was examined in an immortalized neuronal progenitor cell line HC2S2, which
differentiates into neurons after suppression of the v-myc expression with
tetracycline. Expression of MASH-1, NeuroD, NeuroD-related factor (NDRF) and
HES-1 was demonstrated in HC2S2 cells by Northern blot analysis using total RNA. 
Expression of MASH-1 mRNA was downregulated upon differentiation of HC2S2 cells
into mature neurons. In contrast, NeuroD and NDRF mRNA expression was maintained 
all through the differentiation. The expression of HES-1, a negative regulator of
the neuronal differentiation, was upregulated temporarily in accordance with the 
suppression of the v-myc expression and was downregulated upon the
differentiation of HC2S2 cells into neurons. The reduced expression of HES-1 mRNA
in undifferentiated HC2S2 cells may be explained by the transcriptional
suppression of HES-1 by the myc oncoprotein. The above data imply that both HES-1
and MASH-1 need to be downregulated at the time of accomplishment of the terminal
differentiation into mature neurons and that NeuroD and NDRF participate in the
regulatory process of the terminal differentiation in combination.

PMID: 9634594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Genomics. 1998 Apr 1;49(1):69-75.

Structure, chromosomal locus, and promoter of mouse Hes2 gene, a homologue of
Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split.

Nishimura M(1), Isaka F, Ishibashi M, Tomita K, Tsuda H, Nakanishi S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine,
Japan.

Hes2 encodes a mammalian basic helix-loop-helix transcriptional repressor
homologous to the products of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split. Here, we
isolated and characterized the mouse Hes2 gene. This gene consists of four exons,
and all the introns are located within the protein-coding region at positions
homologous to those of other Hes genes. On the inter-specific backcross analyses,
mouse Hes2 is mapped to the distal region of Chromosome 4 near the Hes3 and Hes5 
loci, which are different from the Hes1 locus on Chromosome 16. Upstream of the
transcription initiation site, there are GC-rich regions, but a typical TATA box 
is not present. Transient transfection analyses demonstrated that, while Hes1 and
Hes5 promoter activities are significantly upregulated by the active form of
Notch, a key regulator of cellular differentiation, Hes2 and Hes3 promoter
activities are not. These results suggest that Hes genes are functionally
classified into two groups: those that are regulated by Notch and those that are 
not.

PMID: 9570950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mech Dev. 1997 Mar;62(2):227-37.

Expression of the helix-loop-helix factor, Hes3, during embryo development
suggests a role in early midbrain-hindbrain patterning.

Lobe CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, LSB 425, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
Canada. lobe@mcmail.cis.mcmaster.ca

The Hes gene family members are mammalian homologues of the Drosophila hairy and 
Enhancer of split genes. hairy and Enhancer of split function in both
segmentation and in the Notch neurogenic pathway during Drosophila embryo
development. Previous expression data suggested a conserved role for the Hes
genes in the Notch signalling pathway, but not in segmentation. Here, Hes3
expression during mouse embryogenesis is described. During early development of
the central nervous system, Hes3 is expressed specifically in the region of the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary, and in rhombomeres 2, 4, 6 and 7. This pattern
suggests that Hes3 may have a conserved role as a segmentation gene. Later in
development, Hes3 is co-expressed with other neurogenic gene homologues in the
developing central nervous system and epithelial cells undergoing mesenchyme
induction.

PMID: 9152013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Aug 30;203(1):594-601.

Structure and chromosomal locus of the mouse gene encoding a cerebellar Purkinje 
cell-specific helix-loop-helix factor Hes-3.

Sakagami T(1), Sakurada K, Sakai Y, Watanabe T, Nakanishi S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

HES-3 is a cerebellar Purkinje cell-specific helix-loop-helix factor structurally
related to the products of the Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split genes.
Here, we report the nucleotide sequence and chromosomal locus of the mouse Hes-3 
gene. This gene consists of four exons and the exon-intron boundaries are well
conserved when compared with those of the mouse Hes-1 and Drosophila hairy genes.
Southern blot and interspecies backcross analyses show that the mouse Hes-3 gene 
is a single-copy gene and is located around position 80 on chromosome 4. Further 
analysis indicates that this locus is close to the Hes-5 locus, which is
different from the Hes-1 locus (position 26 on chromosome 16). These results
suggest that the Hes-3 and Hes-5 genes may be clustered on chromosome 4 while the
Hes-1 gene is not.

PMID: 8074710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Genes Dev. 1992 Dec;6(12B):2620-34.

Two mammalian helix-loop-helix factors structurally related to Drosophila hairy
and Enhancer of split.

Sasai Y(1), Kageyama R, Tagawa Y, Shigemoto R, Nakanishi S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

We report the molecular characterization of two novel rat helix-loop-helix (HLH) 
proteins, designated HES-1 and HES-3, that show structural homology to the
Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split [E(spl)] proteins, both of which are
required for normal neurogenesis. HES-1 mRNA, expressed in various tissues of
both embryos and adults, is present at a high level in the epithelial cells,
including the embryonal neuroepithelial cells, as well as in the mesoderm-derived
tissues such as the embryonal muscle. In contrast, HES-3 mRNA is produced
exclusively in cerebellar Purkinje cells. HES-1 represses transcription by
binding to the N box, which is a recognition sequence of E(spl) proteins.
Interestingly, neither HES-1 nor HES-3 alone interacts efficiently with the E
box, but each protein decreases the transcription induced by E-box-binding HLH
activators such as E47. Furthermore, HES-1 also inhibits the functions of MyoD
and MASH1 and effectively diminishes the myogenic conversion of C3H10T1/2 cells
induced by MyoD. These results suggest that HES-1 may play an important role in
mammalian development by negatively acting on the two different sequences while
HES-3 acts as a repressor in a specific type of neurons.

PMID: 1340473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


