
1. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Nov 24. doi: 10.1002/mc.22440. [Epub ahead of print]

Multiple myeloma cells modify VEGF/IL-6 levels and osteogenic potential of bone
marrow stromal cells via Notch/miR-223.

Berenstein R(1), Nogai A(1), Waechter M(1), Blau O(1), Kuehnel A(1),
Schmidt-Hieber M(2), Kunitz A(1), Pezzutto A(1), Dörken B(1), Blau IW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumourimmunology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology, Oncology and
Tumourimmunology, Helios Clinic Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells (BMMSCs) represent a crucial component of
multiple myeloma (MM) microenvironment supporting its progression and
proliferation. Recently, microRNAs have become an important point of interest for
research on micro-environmental interactions in MM with some evidence of tumor
supportive roles in MM. In this study, we examined the role of miR-223 for MM
support in BMMSCs of 56 patients with MM (MM-BMMSCs). miR-223 expression in
MM-BMMSCs was reduced by the presence of MM cells in vitro in a cell-contact
dependent manner compared to mono-cultured MM-BMMSCs. Co-cultivation of MM cells 
and MM-BMMSCs induced activation of notch amongst others via jagged-2/notch-2
leading to increased expression of Hes1, Hey2, or Hes5 in both cell types.
Cultivation of MM-BMMSCs with increasing levels of recombinant jagged-2 reduced
miR-223 and increased Hes1 levels in a concentration-dependent manner. Transient 
reduction of miR-223 levels increased VEGF and IL-6 expression and secretion by
MM-BMMSCs. In addition, reduction of miR-223 degraded the osteogenic
differentiation potential of MM-BMMSCs. Inhibition of notch signaling induced
apoptosis in both MM cells and MM-BMMSCs. Furthermore, it increased miR-223
levels and reduced expression of VEGF and IL-6 by both cell types. These data
provide first evidence that miR-223 participates in different MM supporting
pathways in MM-BMMSCs inlcuding regulation of cytokine secretion and expression
as well as osteogenic differentiation of MM-BMMSCs. More insights on the role of 
miR-223 in MM-BMMSCs and in cellular interactions between MM cells and MM-BMMSCs 
could provide starting points for a more efficient anti-myeloma treatment by
targeting of notch signaling. ©2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 27023728  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Mar 4. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25366. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of Notch Signaling During Osteogenic Differentiation in Human
Osteosarcoma Cell Line MG63.

Ongaro A(1), Pellati A(1), Bagheri L(1), Rizzo P(1), Caliceti C(2), Massari L(1),
De Mattei M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (2)Department of Chemistry "Giacomo Ciamician", Alma
Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Osteogenic differentiation is a multi-step process controlled by a complex
molecular framework. Notch is an evolutionarily conserved intercellular signaling
pathway playing a prominent role in cell fate and differentiation, although the
mechanisms by which this pathway regulates osteogenesis remain controversial.
This study aimed to investigate, in vitro, the involvement of Notch pathway
during all the developmental stages of osteogenic differentiation in human
osteosarcoma cell line MG63. Cells were cultured in basal condition (control) and
in osteoinductive medium (OM). Notch inhibitors were also added in OM to block
Notch pathway. During osteogenic differentiation, early (alkaline phosphatase
activity and collagen type I) and late osteogenic markers (osteocalcin levels and
matrix mineralization), as well as the gene expression of the main osteogenic
transcription factors (Runx2, Osterix and Dlx5) increased. Time dependent changes
in the expression of specific Notch receptors were identified in OM versus
control with a significant reduction in the expression of Notch1 and Notch3
receptors in the early phase of differentiation, and an increase of Notch2 and
Notch4 receptors in the late phase. Among Notch nuclear target genes, Hey1
expression was significantly higher in OM than control, whilst Hes5 expression
decreased. Osteogenic markers were reduced and Hey1 was significantly inhibited
by Notch inhibitors, suggesting a role for Notch through the canonical pathway.
In conclusion, Notch pathway might be involved with a dual role in osteogenesis
of MG63, through the activation of Notch2, Notch4 and Hey1, inducing osteoblast
differentiation and the depression of Notch1, Notch3 and Hes5, maintaining an
undifferentiated status. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26946465  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Development. 2016 Mar 1;143(5):841-50. doi: 10.1242/dev.129320.

Selection of cell fate in the organ of Corti involves the integration of Hes/Hey 
signaling at the Atoh1 promoter.

Abdolazimi Y(1), Stojanova Z(2), Segil N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine of the University of Southern California, Eli and Edythe Broad Center
for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology at USC, 1425 San Pablo St., Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA GMCB Graduate Program, Keck School of Medicine of the
University of Southern California, Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative
Medicine and Stem Cell Biology at USC, 1425 San Pablo St., Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA. (2)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine of the University of Southern California, Eli and Edythe Broad Center
for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology at USC, 1425 San Pablo St., Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (3)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Eli
and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology at USC,
1425 San Pablo St., Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA Caruso Department of
Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of the University
of Southern California, 1450 San Pablo St., Suite 5100, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA nsegil@med.usc.edu.

Determination of cell fate within the prosensory domain of the developing
cochlear duct relies on the temporal and spatial regulation of the bHLH
transcription factor Atoh1. Auditory hair cells and supporting cells arise in a
wave of differentiation that patterns them into discrete rows mediated by
Notch-dependent lateral inhibition. However, the mechanism responsible for
selecting sensory cells from within the prosensory competence domain remains
poorly understood. We show in mice that rather than being upregulated in rows of 
cells, Atoh1 is subject to transcriptional activation in groups of prosensory
cells, and that highly conserved sites for Hes/Hey repressor binding in the Atoh1
promoter are needed to select the hair cell and supporting cell fate. During
perinatal supporting cell transdifferentiation, which is a model of hair cell
regeneration, we show that derepression is sufficient to induce Atoh1 expression,
suggesting a mechanism for priming the 3' Atoh1 autoregulatory enhancer needed
for hair cell expression.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26932672  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Neurosci. 2016 Feb 24;36(8):2391-405. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3145-15.2016.

Lhx2 Is an Essential Factor for Retinal Gliogenesis and Notch Signaling.

de Melo J(1), Zibetti C(1), Clark BS(1), Hwang W(2), Miranda-Angulo AL(3), Qian
J(2), Blackshaw S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience. (2)Department of Ophthalmology. 
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, Columbia 050010.
(4)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Department of Ophthalmology,
Department of Neurology, High-Throughput Biology Center, and Institute for Cell
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21205, and sblack@jhmi.edu.

Müller glia (MG) are the only glial cell type produced by the neuroepithelial
progenitor cells that generate the vertebrate retina. MG are required to maintain
retinal homeostasis and support the survival of retinal neurons. Furthermore, in 
certain vertebrate classes, MG function as adult stem cells, mediating retinal
regeneration in response to injury. However, the mechanisms that regulate MG
development are poorly understood because there is considerable overlap in gene
expression between retinal progenitor cells and differentiated MG. We show that
the LIM homeodomain transcription factor Lhx2 is required for the development of 
MG in the mouse retina. Temporally controlled knock-out studies reveal a
requirement for Lhx2 during all stages of MG development, ranging from the
proliferation of gliocompetent retinal progenitors, activation of Müller-specific
gene expression, and terminal differentiation of MG morphological features. We
show that Lhx2 regulates gliogenesis in part by regulating directly the
expression of Notch pathway genes including Notch1, Dll1, and Dll3 and gliogenic 
transcription factors such as Hes1, Hes5, Sox8, and Rax. Conditional knock-out of
Lhx2 resulted in a rapid downregulation of Notch pathway genes and loss of Notch 
signaling. We further demonstrate that Müller gliogenesis induced by
misexpression of the potently gliogenic Notch pathway transcriptional effector
Hes5 requires Lhx2 expression. These results indicate that Lhx2 not only directly
regulates expression of Notch signaling pathway components, but also acts
together with the gliogenic Notch pathway to drive MG specification and
differentiation.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Müller glia (MG) are radial glial cells
located in the vertebrate retina that are essential for the function and survival
of retinal neurons. We found the LIM homeodomain transcription factor Lhx2 to be 
expressed in both retinal progenitor cells and MG. Using conditional knock-outs, 
we show that Lhx2 is required during all stages of MG development. We also show
that Lhx2 regulates directly the expression of components of the Notch signaling 
pathway, which promotes retinal Müller gliogenesis, as well as multiple gliogenic
transcription factors. We further demonstrate that Lhx2 is required for
Hes5-dependent gliogenesis. This study identifies Lhx2 as a central
transcriptional regulator of both Notch-dependent and Notch-independent
components of retinal gliogenesis.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/362391-15$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4764661 [Available on 2016-08-24]
PMID: 26911688  [PubMed - in process]


5. Andrology. 2016 Mar;4(2):314-27. doi: 10.1111/andr.12144. Epub 2016 Jan 29.

Notch signaling in the epididymal epithelium regulates sperm motility and is
transferred at a distance within epididymosomes.

Murta D(1,)(2), Batista M(1), Silva E(1), Trindade A(1,)(3), Henrique D(4),
Duarte A(1,)(3), Lopes-da-Costa L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Development, CIISA, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. (2)CBIOS - Research Centre for
Biosciences and Health Technologies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Lusófona
University of Humanities and Technologies, Lisboa, Portugal. (3)Gulbenkian
Institute of Science, Oeiras, Portugal. (4)Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

Spermatozoa undergo sequential maturation changes during their transit along the 
epididymis. These changes are modulated by the epididymal epithelium and require 
a finely tuned gene expression. The Notch cell signaling pathway is a major
regulator of cell fate decisions in several tissues, including the testis. Here, 
we evaluated the transcription and expression patterns of Notch components
(Notch1-3, Dll1, Dll4, and Jagged1) and effectors (Hes1-2 and Hes5) in the adult 
mouse epididymis, and evaluated the role of Notch signaling in the epididymis
through its in vivo blockade following administration of an inhibitor (DAPT).
Notch components and effectors were dynamically transcribed and expressed in the 
epididymis and vas deferens, each segment exhibiting a specific combination of
epithelial receptor/ligand/effector expression patterns. Nuclear detection of
Notch effectors indicates that Notch signaling was active. Notch components (but 
not effectors) were identified in the cytoplasmic droplet of spermatozoa, in a
dynamic and specific pattern along the epididymis. In addition, Notch components 
were identified within large and small vesicles in the epididymal lumen. A
purified population of these membranous vesicles from different epididymal
segments was obtained, and through dot blot analysis, it was confirmed that Notch
components were carried within these vesicles in a dynamic pattern along the
epididymal lumen. We hypothesize that these vesicles (epididymosomes) allow Notch
signaling at distance from epididymal epithelial cells to spermatozoa.
DAPT-induced in vivo Notch signaling blockade, although showing a low efficiency,
disrupted the expression patterns of Notch components and effectors in the
epididymal epithelium and in spermatozoa, and significantly decreased sperm
motility, although not affecting male fertility. These results prompt for a
regulatory role of Notch signaling in epididymal epithelial function and sperm
maturation.

© 2016 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 26825631  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cancer Cell. 2015 Dec 14;28(6):730-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.10.008. Epub
2015 Dec 5.

A Tumor Suppressor Function for Notch Signaling in Forebrain Tumor Subtypes.

Giachino C(1), Boulay JL(2), Ivanek R(3), Alvarado A(4), Tostado C(2), Lugert
S(3), Tchorz J(5), Coban M(3), Mariani L(2), Bettler B(5), Lathia J(4), Frank
S(6), Pfister S(7), Kool M(7), Taylor V(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28, 4058 Basel, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: claudio.giachino@unibas.ch. (2)Department of
Biomedicine, University Hospital Basel, Spitalstrasse 21, 4031 Basel,
Switzerland. (3)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28,
4058 Basel, Switzerland. (4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner
Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, NC 10, Cleveland, OH
44195, USA. (5)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Kingelbergstrasse 
50-70, 4056 Basel, Switzerland. (6)Division of Neuropathology, Institute of
Pathology, University of Basel, Schoenbeinstrasse 40, 4031 Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69121 Heidelberg, Germany. (8)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel,
Mattenstrasse 28, 4058 Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address:
verdon.taylor@unibas.ch.

In the brain, Notch signaling maintains normal neural stem cells, but also brain 
cancer stem cells, indicating an oncogenic role. Here, we identify an unexpected 
tumor suppressor function for Notch in forebrain tumor subtypes. Genetic
inactivation of RBP-J<U+03BA>, a key Notch mediator, or Notch1 and Notch2 receptors
accelerates PDGF-driven glioma growth in mice. Conversely, genetic activation of 
the Notch pathway reduces glioma growth and increases survival. In humans, high
Notch activity strongly correlates with distinct glioma subtypes, increased
patient survival, and lower tumor grade. Additionally, simultaneous inactivation 
of RBP-J<U+03BA> and p53 induces primitive neuroectodermal-like tumors in mice. Hence,
Notch signaling cooperates with p53 to restrict cell proliferation and tumor
growth in mouse models of human brain tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26669487  [PubMed - in process]


7. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Dec 9. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22370. [Epub ahead of print]

Wnt/ßcatenin-signaling and the formation of Müller glia-derived progenitors in
the chick retina.

Gallina D(1), Palazzo I(1), Steffenson L(1), Todd L(1), Fischer AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Wexner Medical Center, The
Ohio State University.

Müller glia can be stimulated to de-differentiate, proliferate and form Müller
glia-derived progenitor cells (MGPCs) that are capable of producing retinal
neurons. The signaling pathways that influence the de-differentiation of mature
Müller glia and proliferation of MGPCs may include the Wnt-pathway. The purpose
of this study was to investigate how Wnt-signaling influences the formation of
MGPCs in the chick retina in vivo. In NMDA-damaged retinas where MGPCs are known 
to form, we find dynamic changes in retinal levels of potential readouts of
Wnt-signaling, including dkk1, dkk3, axin2, c-myc, tcf-1 and cd44. We find
accumulations of nuclear ß-catenin in MGPCs that peaks at 3 days and rapidly
declines by 5 days after NMDA-treatment. Inhibition of Wnt-signaling with XAV939 
in damaged retinas suppressed the formation of MGPCs, increased expression of
ascl1a and decreased hes5, but had no effect upon the differentiation of progeny 
produced by MGPCs. Activation of Wnt-signaling, with GSK3ß-inhibitors, in the
absence of retinal damage, failed to stimulate the formation of MGPCs, whereas
activation of Wnt-signaling in damaged retinas stimulated the formation of MGPCs.
In the absence of retinal damage, FGF2/MAPK-signaling stimulated the formation of
MGPCs by activating a signaling network that includes Wnt/ß-catenin. In
FGF2-treated retinas, inhibition of Wnt-signaling reduced numbers of
proliferating MGPCs, whereas activation of Wnt-signaling failed to influence the 
formation of proliferating MGPCs. Our findings indicate that Wnt-signaling is
part of a network initiated by FGF2/MAPK or retinal damage, and activation of
canonical Wnt-signaling is required for the formation of proliferating MGPCs.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26663639  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Feb;37(2):398-406. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2422. Epub 2015 Dec
1.

EGCG attenuates atherosclerosis through the Jagged-1/Notch pathway.

Yin J(1), Huang F(2), Yi Y(1), Yin L(1), Peng D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology, The 
First Hospital of Changsha, Changsha, Hunan 410011, P.R. China.

Atherosclerosis is the most common cause of cardiovascular diseases worldwide.
Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) is a particularly important risk factor
in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Accumulating evidence has indicated that 
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG; a catechin found in the popular beverage,
greent tea) protects against ox-LDL-induced atherosclerosis. However, the
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In the present study, ox-LDL (100 mg/l)
induced damage to, and the apoptosis of human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) by reducing endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) expression
and promoting inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expression; these effects
were abrogated by the addition of 50 µM EGCG. Furthermore, ox-LDL rapidly
activated the membrane translocation of p22phox, and altered the protein
expression of Jagged-1 and Notch pathway-related proteins [Math1, hairy and
enhancer of split (HES)1 and HES5]; these effects were also prevented by
pre-treatment with 50 µM EGCG. In addition, Jagged-1 played a significant role in
the EGCG-mediated protection against ox-LDL-induced apoptosis and
ox-LDL-diminished cell adhesion in the HUVECs. Finally, EGCG inhibited high-fat
diet (HFD)-induced atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E (ApoE) knockout (ApoE-KO) 
mice through the Jagged-1/Notch pathway. Taken together, these findings
demonstrate that 50 µM EGCG protects against ox-LDL-induced endothelial
dysfunction through the Jagged-1/Notch signaling pathway. Moreover, our data
provide insight into the possible molecular mechanisms through which EGCG
attenuates ox-LDL-induced vascular endothelial dysfunction.

PMID: 26648562  [PubMed - in process]


9. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;37(6):2311-22. doi: 10.1159/000438586. Epub 2015 Dec
4.

The Expression of Markers Related to Ovarian Germline Stem Cells in the Mouse
Ovarian Surface Epithelium and the Correlation with Notch Signaling Pathway.

Pan Z, Sun M, Li J, Zhou F, Liang X, Huang J, Zheng T, Zheng L, Zheng Y.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Ovarian germline stem cells (OGSCs) have been shown to mainly
exist in the ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), but the activity changes of
germline stem cells during different reproductive stages and the potential
regulatory signaling pathway are still unknown. The Notch signaling pathway plays
a key role in cell development, primordial follicles and stem cell proliferation.
However, whether it plays a role in the proliferation of OGSCs is unknown. Here, 
we analyzed the activity changes of germline stem cells and the correlation
between germline stem cells and the Notch signaling pathway.
METHODS: The expression of germline stem cell markers Mvh, Ooc4 and the Notch
molecules Notch1, Hes1, and Hes5 were detected during 3 days (3d), and 2, 12, 20 
months (2m, 12m, 20m) mouse ovarian surface epithelium samples. DAPT, a specific 
inhibitor of the Notch pathway, was used to observe the influence of Notch
signaling in the germline stem cells.
RESULTS: The results showed that the levels of MVH and OCT4 decreased
substantially with reproductive age in ovarian surface epithelium, and the same
tendency was detected in the Notch signaling molecules Notch1, Hes1 and Hes5.
Dual-IF results showed that the germline stem cell markers were co-expressed with
Notch molecules in the ovarian surface epithelium. While, the expression of MVH
and OCT4 were reduced when the ovaries were treated with DAPT and the levels were
attenuated with increasing dose of DAPT.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results indicate that the viability of OGSCs
decreased with the age of the mouse ovaries, and the activity of OGSCs in the
ovarian surface epithelium may be related to the Notch signaling pathway.

© 2015 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26645720  [PubMed - in process]


10. Exp Eye Res. 2015 Nov 23;145:75-87. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.11.002. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Tracking the fate of her4 expressing cells in the regenerating retina using
her4:Kaede zebrafish.

Wilson SG(1), Wen W(1), Pillai-Kastoori L(1), Morris AC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 40506-0225, KY, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 40506-0225, KY, USA.
Electronic address: ann.morris@uky.edu.

The Basic-Helix-Loop-Helix-Orange (bHLH-O) transcription factor Hairy-related 4
(her4) is a downstream effector of Notch-Delta signaling that represses
expression of typically pro-neural genes in proliferative domains of the central 
nervous system. Notch-Delta signaling in the retina has been shown to increase in
response to injury and influences neuroprotective properties of Müller glia. In
contrast to mammals, teleost fish are able to regenerate retinal neurons in
response to injury. In zebrafish, her4 is upregulated in the regenerating neural 
retina in response to both acute and chronic photoreceptor damage, but the
contribution of her4 expressing cells to neurogenesis following acute or chronic 
retinal damage has remained unexplored. Here we investigate the role of her4 in
the regenerating retina in a background of chronic, rod-specific degeneration as 
well as following acute light damage. We demonstrate that her4 is expressed in
the persistently neurogenic ciliary marginal zone (CMZ), as well as in small
subsets of slowly proliferating Müller glia in the inner nuclear layer (INL) of
the central retina. We generated a transgenic line of zebrafish that expresses
the photoconvertible Kaede reporter driven by a her4 promoter and validated that 
expression of the transgene faithfully recapitulates endogenous her4 expression. 
Lineage tracing analysis revealed that her4-expressing cells in the INL
contribute to the rod lineage, and her4 expressing cells in the CMZ are capable
of generating any retinal cell type except rod photoreceptors. Our results
indicate that her4 is involved in a replenishing pathway that maintains
populations of stem cells in the central retina, and that the magnitude of the
her4-associated proliferative response mirrors the extent of retinal damage.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26616101  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Brain Res. 2016 Mar 1;1634:34-44. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.11.029. Epub 2015 
Nov 24.

Lingo-1 shRNA and Notch signaling inhibitor DAPT promote differentiation of
neural stem/progenitor cells into neurons.

Wang J(1), Ye Z(2), Zheng S(3), Chen L(4), Wan Y(5), Deng Y(6), Yang R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun 
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China; Department of Pathology, The First
Affiliated Hospital and Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, China. (2)Department of Rheumatology, The Futian Affiliated
Hospital, Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan 518000, China. (3)Research Center
of Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, China. (4)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. (5)Department of Spine
Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510080,
China. (6)Research Center of Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. Electronic address:
dengyub@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Determination of the exogenous factors that regulate differentiation of neural
stem/progenitor cells into neurons, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes is an
important step in the clinical therapy of spinal cord injury (SCI). The Notch
pathway inhibits the differentiation of neural stem/progenitor cells and Lingo-1 
is a strong negative regulator for myelination and axon growth. While Lingo-1
shRNA and N-[N-(3, 5-difluorophenacetyl)-1-alanyl]-S-Phenylglycinet-butylester
(DAPT), a Notch pathway inhibitor, have been used separately to help repair SCI, 
the results have been unsatisfactory. Here we investigated and elucidated the
preliminary mechanism for the effect of Lingo-1 shRNA and DAPT on neural
stem/progenitor cells differentiation. We found that neural stem/progenitor cells
from E14 rat embryos expressed Nestin, Sox-2 and Lingo-1, and we optimized the
transduction of neural stem/progenitor cells using lentiviral vectors encoding
Lingo-1 shRNA. The addition of DAPT decreased the expression of Notch
intracellular domain (NICD) as well as the downstream genes Hes1 and Hes5.
Expression of NeuN, CNPase and GFAP in DAPT treated cells and expression of NeuN 
in Lingo-1 shRNA treated cells confirmed differentiation of neural
stem/progenitor cells into neurons, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes. These
results revealed that while Lingo-1 shRNA and Notch signaling inhibitor DAPT both
promoted differentiation of neural stem cells into neurons, only DAPT was capable
of driving neural stem/progenitor cells differentiation into oligodendrocytes and
astrocytes. Since we were able to show that both Lingo-1 shRNA and DAPT could
drive neural stem/progenitor cells differentiation, our data might aid the
development of more effective SCI therapies using Lingo-1 shRNA and DAPT.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26607252  [PubMed - in process]


12. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2015 Oct;23(10):765-70. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2015.10.011.

[Role of the Notch signaling pathway in development of acute liver failure in a
mouse model].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao W(1), Zhao C, Wang W, Zhao X, Su M, Wang Y, Shen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Third Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang 050051, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of the Notch signaling pathway, and the
underlying mechanism, in development of acute liver failure (ALF) in a mouse
model.
METHODS: For in vivo analysis of the role of Notch signaling in ALF, a mouse
model of ALF was generated by intraperitoneal injection of 3.0 g/kg
D-galactosamine. Histological specimens were stained by hematoxylin-eosin, and
then studied microscopically.Expression level of Jaggedl, Notchl, NICD, and Hes5 
was measured by western blotting (for protein) and real time-PCR (for mRNA). The 
level of CD68 protein was detected by immunohistochemical staining. Serum levels 
of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), IL-10, high 
mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) chromatin protein, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were
measured by standard methods. For in vitro analysis of the molecular mechanism,
the RAW264.7 macrophage cell line was cultured with LPS in the absence or
presence of the Notch inhibitor DAPT, and the intracellular levels of Notch1,
NICD, and Hes5 were measured by western blotting and real time-PCR and the
extracellular levels of IL-10 and HMGB1 were detected in the supematant.
RESULTS: Compared with unmodeled (normal control) mice, the ALF modeled mice
showed higher levels of serum ALT (848.40+/-94.83 U/L vs. 38.99+/-9.63 U/L), AST 
(911.49+/-67.65 U/L vs. 55.28+/-7.50 U/L), HMGB1 (101.91+/-12.43 µg/L vs.
20.73+/-5.37 µg/L), 1L-10 (4 627.88+/-842.45 pg/mL vs. 1 064.92+/-238.46 pg/mL)
and LPS (11.80+/-0.89 EU/mL vs. 0.58+/-0.12 EU/mL), as well as higher expression 
of Jagged1 (mRNA: 7.63+/-1.41 vs. 1.00+/-0.00; protein: 0.71+/-0.07 vs.
0.34+/-0.07), Notch1 (mRNA: 7.10+/-0.66 vs. 1.00+/-0.00; protein: 0.66+/-0.11 vs.
0.27+/-0.08), NICD (protein: 0.76+/-0.08 vs. 0.27+/-0.08), Hes5 (mRNA:
7.95+/-0.71 vs. 1.00+/-0.00; protein: 1.20+/-0.07 vs. 0.76+/-0.07), and CD68
(protein: 7 685.05+/-417.34 vs. 2 294.01+/-392.93) (all P<0.01). In vitro, LPS
increased the extracellular levels of HMGB1 (7.44+/-0.63 vs. 0.21+/-0.05), IL-10 
(315.19+/-79.13 vs. 59.19+/-23.30) and the intracellular expression of Notch1
(mRNA: 6.49+/-0.73 vs. 1.00+/-0.00), NICD (protein: 0.65+/-0.10 vs. 0.23+/-0.07),
and Hes5 (mRNA: 7.30+/-0.85 vs. 1.00+/-0.00; protein: 0.96+/-0.10 vs.
0.54+/-0.07) (all P<0.01). DAPT treatment led to a decrease above the index serum
levels of HMGB1 (6.22+/-0.71) and IL-10 (252.06+/-57.63), and of expression of
Notch 1 (mRNA: 3.20+/-0.68), NICD (protein: 0.42+/-0.05), and Hes5 (mRNA:
4.72+/-0.67; protein: 0.84+/-0.09) (P<0.01 or <0.05).
CONCLUSION: The Notch signaling pathway may plan an important role in the
development of ALF upon activation of the pathway in macrophages by LPS and
leading to promoted secretion of HMGB 1 and IL-10, with a greater effect on the
former.

PMID: 26573194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Aging (Albany NY). 2015 Nov;7(11):928-36.

OTX2 regulates the expression of TAp63 leading to macular and cochlear
neuroepithelium development.

Palombo R(1), Porta G(2), Bruno E(3), Provero P(4), Serra V(1), Neduri K(1),
Viziano A(3), Alessandrini M(3), Micarelli A(3), Ottaviani F(3), Melino G(1,)(5),
Terrinoni A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome "Tor
Vergata", 00133 Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine,
Università dell'Insubria, via Dunant 5, 21100 Varese, Italy. (3)Department of
Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata,"
00133 Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, 
University of Turin, 10126 Turin, Italy. (5)Medical Research Council, Toxicology 
Unit, Hodgkin Building, Leicester University, Lancaster Road, P.O. Box 138,
Leicester LE1 9HN, UK. (6)Biochemistry Laboratory, IDI-IRCCS-FLMM, c/o Department
of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", 00133
Rome, Italy.

OTX proteins, homologs of the Drosophila orthodenticle (Otd), are important for
the morphogenesis of the neuroectoderm, and for the central nervous system
formation. OTX1 and OTX2 are important for the cochlea and macula development,
indeed when OTX1 is knocked down, these organs undergo developmental failure.
Moreover OTX2 transfection revert this effect in OTX1(-/-) mice. The TA isoform
of TP63, involved in Notch regulation pathway, has a critical function in the
cochlear neuroepithelium differentiation. TAp63 positively regulates Hes5 and
Atoh1 transcription. This pathway has been also demonstrated in p63(-/-) mice,
and in patients p63 mutated, affected by Ectodermal Dysplasia (ED, OMIM 129810). 
These patients are affected by mild sensorineural deafness, most likely related
to the mutation in p63 gene impairing the Notch pathway. We demonstrated the role
of OTX2 on TAp63 regulation necessary for the correct formation of macular
neuroepithelium and we confirmed the impairment of vestibular function caused by 
p63 mutations. Although the abnormalities found in our patient were still at a
subclinical extent, aging could exacerbate this impairment and cause a decrease
in quality of life.

PMCID: PMC4694063
PMID: 26554466  [PubMed - in process]


14. Mol Cell Biochem. 2016 Jan;411(1-2):307-15. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2593-x. Epub 
2015 Oct 17.

Inhibition of perillyl alcohol on cell invasion and migration depends on the
Notch signaling pathway in hepatoma cells.

Ma Y(1), Bian J(1), Zhang F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, 210006, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road,
Nanjing, 210029, China. fengzhangfzf@163.com.

Cell metastasis, especially the process of invasion and migration, is considered 
as the main cause for the high mortality rate of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 
which has become the sixth most common cancer worldwide and the third leading
cause of cancer death. In this present study, we aimed to exploit the effects of 
perillyl alcohol on cell invasion and migration and the underlying molecular
mechanisms in HCC. According to the transwell assays, cell invasiveness and
migratory capacity were markedly higher in hepatoma cells (HepG2, SMMC-7721 and
MHCC97H) than those in normal liver cells (HL-7702), and then significantly
suppressed by perillyl alcohol treatment (P < 0.05). Meanwhile, the mRNA levels
of Notch signaling pathway downstream target genes, HES1, HES5, and HEY1, were
notably higher in hepatoma cells detected with real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (P < 0.05). After treated with perillyl
alcohol, these mRNA levels were significantly decreased in hepatoma cells
(P < 0.05). In addition, compared with the normal liver cells, the protein
expression levels of Notch1 intracellular domain (N1ICD) and Snail were
significantly increased, while E-cadherin protein expression was significantly
decreased in hepatoma cells (P < 0.05). However, perillyl alcohol treatment
significantly decreased N1ICD and Snail protein expressions and increased
E-cadherin protein expression in hepatoma cells (P < 0.05). In conclusion,
perillyl alcohol might play an important role in the process of hepatoma cell
invasion and migration via decreasing the activity of Notch signaling pathway and
increasing E-cadherin expression regulated by Snail.

PMID: 26475687  [PubMed - in process]


15. Oncol Res. 2015;22(4):185-91. doi: 10.3727/096504015X14343704124340.

Doxorubicin Inhibits Proliferation of Osteosarcoma Cells Through Upregulation of 
the Notch Signaling Pathway.

Ji P(1), Yu L, Guo WC, Mei HJ, Wang XJ, Chen H, Fang S, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Doxorubicin plays a major role in the treatment of osteosarcoma disorders. The
Notch signaling pathway exerts various biological functions, including cell
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. In the present study, we
investigated the effects of different doses of doxorubicin on proliferation and
apoptosis of osteosarcoma cells with or without Notch signaling. Results found
that cellular viability was downregulated while caspase 3 activity and expression
were promoted in osteosarcoma cells following treatment with various doses of
doxorubicin for 24, 48, and 72 h, and the effects showed a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Furthermore, it was found that various doses of
doxorubicin activated the Notch signaling pathway, shown by the elevated
expression of Notch target genes NOTCH1, HEY1, HES1, AND HES5. It was further
proved that, after small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of Notch, the
effects of doxorubicin on the viability and apoptosis of osteosarcoma cells were 
significantly reduced. It was indicated that doxorubicin treatment reduced the
proliferation and promoted the apoptosis of osteosarcoma cells, and this effect
was mediated by the Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 26351207  [PubMed - in process]


16. Brain Res. 2015 Nov 2;1625:206-17. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.08.045. Epub 2015
Sep 6.

Hes1 and Hes5 are required for differentiation of pituicytes and formation of the
neurohypophysis in pituitary development.

Goto M(1), Hojo M(2), Ando M(1), Kita A(1), Kitagawa M(1), Ohtsuka T(3), Kageyama
R(3), Miyamoto S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 54
Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Institute for Virus
Research, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, 54 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Department
of Neurosurgery, Shiga Medical Center for Adults, 5-4-30 Moriyama, Moriyama,
Shiga 524-8524, Japan. Electronic address: mhojo@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp. (3)Institute
for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The pituitary gland is a critical endocrine organ regulating diverse
physiological functions, including homeostasis, metabolism, reproduction, and
growth. It is composed of two distinct entities: the adenohypophysis, including
the anterior and intermediate lobes, and the neurohypophysis known as the
posterior lobe. The neurohypophysis is composed of pituicytes (glial cells) and
axons projected from hypothalamic neurons. The adenohypophysis derives from
Rathke's pouch, whereas the neurohypophysis derives from the infundibulum, an
evagination of the ventral diencephalon. Molecular mechanisms of adenohypophysis 
development are much better understood, but little is known about mechanisms that
regulate neurohypophysis development. Hes genes, known as Notch effectors, play a
crucial role in specifying cellular fates during the development of various
tissues and organs. Here, we report that the ventral diencephalon fails to
evaginate resulting in complete loss of the posterior pituitary lobe in
Hes1(-/-); Hes5(+/-) mutant embryos. In these mutant mice, progenitor cells are
differentiated into neurons at the expense of pituicytes in the ventral
diencephalon. In the developing neurohypophysis, the proliferative zone is
located at the base of the infundibulum. Thus, Hes1 and Hes5 modulate not only
maintenance of progenitor cells but also pituicyte versus neuron fate
specification during neurohypophysis development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26348989  [PubMed - in process]


17. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Dec;99(3):474-84. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.09.002. Epub
2015 Sep 3.

HES5 promotes cell proliferation and invasion through activation of STAT3 and
predicts poor survival in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhu G(1), Shi W(2), Fan H(2), Zhang X(2), Xu J(2), Chen Y(2), Xu Z(1), Tao T(3), 
Cheng C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical College, Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory for
Inflammation and Molecular Drug Target, Nantong University, 19 Qixiu Road,
Nantong 226001, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Medical Oncology, Nantong Second Peoples Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, 43 Xinglong Road, Nantong 226001, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic
of China. (3)Department of Medical College, Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory for
Inflammation and Molecular Drug Target, Nantong University, 19 Qixiu Road,
Nantong 226001, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
taotao19840324@163.com. (4)Department of Medical College, Jiangsu Province Key
Laboratory for Inflammation and Molecular Drug Target, Nantong University, 19
Qixiu Road, Nantong 226001, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: chengchun201309@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: HES5 is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of
transcription factors, and involved in cell differentiation and proliferation in 
a variety of tissues other than HCC. Therefore, we have characterized HES5 and
investigated its role during hepatocarcinogenesis.
METHODS: We first examined the expression of HES5 in eight paired frozen HCC and 
adjacent noncancerous liver tissues by Western blot. Immunohistochemistry was
performed to confirm our results in 58 HCC samples and evaluated the relativity
between the expression of HES5 and clinicopathological variables and estimated
the prognostic significance. Moreover, Western blot examined the expression of
downstream proteins by siRNA HES5. Flow cytometer assay was performed to
investigate the role of HES5 in the process of HCC.
RESULTS: We found that HES5 was upregulated in HCC specimens. The data showed
that high expression of HES5 was tightly associated with histological grade
(P<0.01) and metastasis (P<0.01), and positively correlated with proliferation
marker Ki-67 (P<0.01). Moreover, the results show that abnormal expression of
HES5 influences cell growth and cell cycle of HCC cell lines. Furthermore, HES5
knockdown resulted in the reduction of p-STAT3.
CONCLUSION: These results suggested that suppression of the HES5 leading to
inhibition of proliferation may be one of the mechanisms against HCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26342546  [PubMed - in process]


18. Pathol Oncol Res. 2016 Jan;22(1):87-94. doi: 10.1007/s12253-015-9983-y. Epub 2015
Sep 5.

Characterization of Notch Signalling Pathway Members in Normal Prostate,
Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia (PIN) and Prostatic Adenocarcinoma.

Soylu H(1), Acar N(1), Ozbey O(1), Unal B(2), Koksal IT(3), Bassorgun I(2),
Ciftcioglu A(2), Ustunel I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz
University, Antalya, 07070, Turkey. (2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, 07070, Turkey. (3)Department of Urology,
Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, 07070, Turkey. (4)Department of
Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya,
07070, Turkey. iustunel@akdeniz.edu.tr.

Prostate Cancer (PCa) holds the second place in terms of cancer-related mortality
rate among men. The Notch signalling pathway regulates the proliferation and
differentiation in embryonic and adult tissues and determines the cell fate. The 
body of knowledge in the present literature is currently controversial about the 
effect of the Notch pathway on prostatic cancer. Therefore, the present study
aimed to examine the immunolocalization and expression levels of Notch1-4,
Jagged1-2, Delta, HES1 and HES5 from among the members of the Notch signalling
pathway in tissues of normal, prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and
malignant prostate. The current study included a sample of 20 patients with
localised prostatic adenocarcinoma, 18 patients with high grade PIN (H-PIN) and
18 normal prostatic tissue. Immunolocalisations of Notch1, 2, 3, 4, Jagged1, 2,
Delta, HES1 and HES5 were identified through the immunohistochemical method. The 
findings of the present study showed that all in-scope members of the Notch
signalling pathway were localised in PIN structures to a greater extent than in
other tissues and from amongst these members, specifically Notch1, Notch4,
Jagged1 and HES1 were at more significant levels. Consequently, the findings of
the present study may indicate that the Notch signalling pathway can play a role 
especially in the formation of PIN structures.

PMID: 26341090  [PubMed - in process]


19. Mol Vis. 2015 Jul 31;21:828-45. eCollection 2015.

Characterization of ex vivo cultured limbal, conjunctival, and oral mucosal
cells: A comparative study with implications in transplantation medicine.

Dhamodaran K(1), Subramani M(2), Jeyabalan N(3), Ponnalagu M(4), Chevour P(3),
Shetty R(4), Matalia H(5), Shetty R(5), Prince SE(6), Das D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Laboratory, GROW Research Laboratory, Narayana Nethralaya
Foundation, Bangalore, Karnataka, India ; School of Biosciences and Technology,
VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India. (2)Stem Cell Research Laboratory,
GROW Research Laboratory, Narayana Nethralaya Foundation, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India ; Post-graduate & Research Department of Biotechnology, Jamal Mohamed
College, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, India. (3)GROW Research
Laboratory, Narayana Nethralaya Foundation, Bangalore, Karnataka, India. (4)Stem 
Cell Research Laboratory, GROW Research Laboratory, Narayana Nethralaya
Foundation, Bangalore, Karnataka, India. (5)Department of Cornea and Refractive
surgery, Narayana Nethralaya Post Graduate Institute of Ophthalmology, Narayana
Nethralaya Foundation, Narayana Health City, Bommasandra, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India. (6)School of Biosciences and Technology, VIT University, Vellore, Tamil
Nadu, India.

PURPOSE: Limbal epithelial stem cell deficiency is caused by exposure of the
cornea to thermal, chemical, or radiation burns or by diseases (aniridia and
Stevens-Johnson syndrome). Autologous cell transplantation is a widely used
therapeutic modality for restoring the corneal surface in such pathological
conditions. Ex vivo cultured limbal, conjunctival, and oral biopsies have been
widely used to reconstruct the corneal surface with variable outcomes. Culture
characterization of the ex vivo cultured cells would provide insight and clues
into the underlying signaling mechanisms that would aid in determining the
probable transplantation outcome. Comparison of the vital proteins and genes
among the three ex vivo cultured tissues has implications in clinical practice.
To address this issue, we characterized and compared the proliferative and
differentiated properties of ex vivo cultured limbal, conjunctival, and oral
biopsies used for cell-based therapy for corneal surface restoration.
METHODS: Limbal, conjunctival, and oral biopsies were collected with informed
patient consent. Explant cultures were established on the denuded human amniotic 
membrane with corneal lineage differentiation medium. The day 14 cultures were
characterized for epithelial and corneal lineage-specific markers using reverse
transcription (RT)-PCR for cytokeratin 3, 4, 12, 13, 15, connexin 43, vimentin,
p63a, and ABCG2 markers. mRNA expression was estimated in day 14 cultures with
real-time quantitative real time (qRT)-PCR for pluripotency markers (OCT4, SOX2, 
NANOG), putative corneal stem cell markers (ABCG2 and p63a), proliferation
markers (cyclin d1, Ki-67, PCNA, and CDC20), apoptotic markers (BCL2, BAX,
caspase 3, and caspase 9), Notch signaling pathway markers (Notch1, Jagged1,
Hes1, Hes3, Hes5, and Hey1), and autophagic markers (LC3A, LC3B, ATG7, RAB7,
LAMP1, and LAMP2). Fluorescence-activated cell sorter profiling was performed for
pluripotent markers and putative corneal stem cell markers ABCG2 and p63a.
RESULTS: The protein and mRNA expression levels of the pluripotent markers were
lower, whereas those of the putative stem/progenitor markers ABCG2, <U+0394>Np63a, and
Notch signaling molecules (Notch1 and Jagged1) were elevated in limbal cultures. 
The gene expression levels of the autophagy markers (LC3A, LC3B, and LAMP1) were 
significantly increased in the limbal cultures compared to the oral and
conjunctival cultures.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the limbal epithelial cultures showed higher
expression of proliferative, limbal stem cell marker, Notch signaling, and
autophagy markers suggesting a role in stem cell maintenance and differentiation.
This implicates the probable factors that might drive a successful
transplantation. Our findings provide the initial steps toward understanding
transplantation medicine in an ex vivo model.

PMCID: PMC4522244
PMID: 26283864  [PubMed - in process]


20. Cell Tissue Res. 2015 Dec;362(3):611-21. doi: 10.1007/s00441-015-2235-3. Epub
2015 Aug 13.

The roles of nanocarriers on pigment epithelium-derived factor in the
differentiation of human cardiac stem cells.

Liang H(1), Duan W(1), Hou H(2), Yi W(1), Zhang J(1), Jin Z(1), Zhai M(1), Yu
S(1), Liu J(3), Yi D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Institute of Cardiovascular Disease of
Chinese PLA, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, No.169 West
Changle Road, Xi'an, 710032, Shanxi, China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye
Institute of Chinese PLA, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, 710032, China. (3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
Institute of Cardiovascular Disease of Chinese PLA, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth
Military Medical University, No.169 West Changle Road, Xi'an, 710032, Shanxi,
China. jinchengliu11@163.com. (4)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Institute 
of Cardiovascular Disease of Chinese PLA, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military
Medical University, No.169 West Changle Road, Xi'an, 710032, Shanxi, China.
dinghuayi1@163.com.

Over the past decade, adult stem cells have attracted great attention because of 
their ability to potentially regenerate desired tissues or entire organs. With
the emergence of nanomaterial-based gene therapy, adult stem cells have been
considered as a proper tool for the biomedical field. In this study, we utilized 
organically modified silica (ORMOSIL) nanoparticles to deliver small interfering 
RNA (siRNA) against pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) and induce the
differentiation of human cardiac stem cells (CSCs). We found that the
down-regulation of PEDF can inhibit the proliferation of human CSCs and induce
cell differentiation. To further study the mechanism, we have tested the Notch
signalling pathway genes, Hes1 and Hes5, and found that their expressions were
inhibited by the PEDF down-regulation. Furthermore, with the restoration of PEDF,
both the proliferation of human CSCs and expressions of Hes1 and Hes5 were
recovered. Our results suggest for the first time the use of ORMOSIL as
nanocarriers for the delivery of PEDF siRNA in human CSCs, and demonstrated the
cooperation between PEDF and the Notch signalling pathway in maintaining the
self-renewal and pluripotency of stem cells. PEDF as the essential controller in 
differentiation may be a promising target for the regulation of cardiac
homeostasis and damage repair, which opens new treatment strategies using
nanomaterials for heart disease therapy.

PMID: 26267220  [PubMed - in process]


21. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 Aug 1;19(2). pii: pyv088. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyv088.

Quetiapine Ameliorates Schizophrenia-Like Behaviors and Protects Myelin Integrity
in Cuprizone Intoxicated Mice: The Involvement of Notch Signaling Pathway.

Wang HN(1), Liu GH(1), Zhang RG(1), Xue F(1), Wu D(1), Chen YC(1), Peng Y(1),
Peng ZW(2), Tan QR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, China (Drs Wang, Liu, Zhang, Xue, Wu, Chen, Y. Peng, Z.-w. Peng, and Tan);
Air Force General Hospital of PLA, Beijing, China (Dr Y. Peng); Department of
Toxicology, Shaanxi Key Lab of Free Radical Biology and Medicine, School of
Public Health, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China (Dr Z-w. Peng).
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, China (Drs Wang, Liu, Zhang, Xue, Wu, Chen, Y. Peng, Z.-w. Peng, and Tan);
Air Force General Hospital of PLA, Beijing, China (Dr Y. Peng); Department of
Toxicology, Shaanxi Key Lab of Free Radical Biology and Medicine, School of
Public Health, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China (Dr Z-w. Peng).
pengzhengwu1446@163.com tanqingr@fmmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: White matter disturbances and myelin impairment are key features of
schizophrenia. The antipsychotic drug quetiapine can promote the maturation of
oligodendrocytes, but the molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown.
METHODS: The schizophrenia-like behaviors, degrees of demyelination, and levels
of Notch signaling molecules in forebrains of adult male C57BL/6 mice were
examined after fed with cuprizone (0.2% wt/wt) in the presence or absence of
10mg/kg/d quetiapine for 6 weeks. These parameters were also observed after the
transcranial injection of Notch signaling inhibitor MW167 (1mM) daily during the 
last week of the treatment period.
RESULTS: Quetiapine ameliorated the schizophrenia-like behaviors and decreased
expression of myelin basic protein and inhibition of Notch signaling molecules,
such as Notch1, Hes1, and Hes5, in the forebrain that induced by cuprizone. These
beneficial effects of quetiapine were abolished by MW167.
CONCLUSIONS: The antipsychotic and myelin protective effects of quetiapine are
mediated by Notch signaling in a mouse model of cuprizone-induced demyelination
associated with schizophrenia-like behaviors. The Notch pathway might therefore
be a novel target for the development of antipsychotic drugs.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

PMCID: PMC4772821
PMID: 26232790  [PubMed - in process]


22. Hear Res. 2015 Sep;327:209-17. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2015.07.012. Epub 2015 Jul
22.

In vivo overactivation of the Notch signaling pathway in the developing cochlear 
epithelium.

Tateya T(1), Sakamoto S(2), Imayoshi I(3), Kageyama R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; The
Hakubi Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8302, Japan. Electronic address:
t_tateya@ent.kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp. (2)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck
Surgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(3)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; The
Hakubi Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8302, Japan; Japan Science and
Technology Agency, PRESTO, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (4)Institute for Virus
Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; World Premier International
Research Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), 
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Japan Science and Technology Agency,
CREST, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Notch signaling is thought to play important roles in both prosensory domain
specification and cell fate determination during inner ear development.
Inhibition of the Notch signaling pathway in prosensory cells results in
excessive hair cell formation, while activation of the Notch signaling pathway by
overexpression of activated Notch1 (Notch1-intercellular domain, NICD) in the
cochlear epithelium results in ectopic sensory patches where NICD is expressed.
However, the effect of Notch activation on the prosensory domain is not fully
understood. To elucidate the precise roles of Notch signaling in cochlear
prosensory epithelium we examined the effects of Notch overactivation on cochlear
prosensory cells of transgenic mice with conditional NICD expression. The
histology of the cochlear epithelium was investigated in these mice. The cochlear
duct of conditional NICD embryos was wide and short, and the epithelium formed an
abnormal tubular structure. Hair cell numbers were reduced though some hair cells
developed where NICD was overexpressed. The decrease in hair cells was not
accompanied by Hes5-positive and Prox1-positive supporting cell overproduction.
Ectopic expression of early prosensory markers, such as Jag1 and Hes/Hey genes,
was observed but no expression of Hes5 was found. Our data shows that NICD
overexpression disrupts the extension of cochlear epithelium, and reduces the
total numbers of hair cells and supporting cells in the sensory epithelium. Thus,
an appropriate level of Notch signaling is needed for the normal extension of the
cochlear epithelium and for differentiation of both hair cells and supporting
cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26209882  [PubMed - in process]


23. Development. 2015 Aug 15;142(16):2810-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.123091. Epub 2015 Jul 
24.

Neurog1 can partially substitute for Atoh1 function in hair cell differentiation 
and maintenance during organ of Corti development.

Jahan I(1), Pan N(2), Kersigo J(2), Fritzsch B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts & Sciences, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA israt-jahan@uiowa.edu bernd-fritzsch@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts & Sciences, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Atoh1, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor (TF), is essential
for the differentiation of hair cells (HCs), mechanotransducers that convert
sound into auditory signals in the mammalian organ of Corti (OC). Previous work
demonstrated that replacing mouse Atoh1 with the fly ortholog atonal rescues HC
differentiation, indicating functional replacement by other bHLH genes. However, 
replacing Atoh1 with Neurog1 resulted in reduced HC differentiation compared with
transient Atoh1 expression in a 'self-terminating' Atoh1 conditional null mouse
(Atoh1-Cre; Atoh1(f/f)). We now show that combining Neurog1 in one allele with
removal of floxed Atoh1 in a self-terminating conditional mutant (Atoh1-Cre;
Atoh1(f/kiNeurog1)) mouse results in significantly more differentiated inner HCs 
and outer HCs that have a prolonged longevity of 9 months compared with Atoh1
self-terminating littermates. Stereocilia bundles are partially disorganized,
disoriented and not HC type specific. Replacement of Atoh1 with Neurog1 maintains
limited expression of Pou4f3 and Barhl1 and rescues HCs quantitatively, but not
qualitatively. OC patterning and supporting cell differentiation are also
partially disrupted. Diffusible factors involved in patterning are reduced (Fgf8)
and factors involved in cell-cell interactions are affected (Jag1, Hes5). Despite
the presence of many HCs with stereocilia these mice are deaf, possibly owing to 
HC and OC patterning defects. This study provides a novel approach to disrupt OC 
development through modulating the HC-specific intracellular TF network. The
resulting disorganized OC indicates that normally differentiated HCs act as
'self-organizers' for OC development and that Atoh1 plays a crucial role to
initiate HC stereocilia differentiation independently of HC viability.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4550966 [Available on 2016-08-15]
PMID: 26209643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Development. 2015 Aug 1;142(15):2610-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.121616. Epub 2015 Jun
26.

Hedgehog signaling stimulates the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived 
progenitor cells in the chick retina.

Todd L(1), Fischer AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
4190 Graves Hall, 333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of
Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 4190 Graves Hall,
333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA fischer.412@osu.edu.

Müller glia can be stimulated to de-differentiate and become proliferating
progenitor cells that regenerate neurons in the retina. The signaling pathways
that regulate the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived progenitor cells
(MGPCs) are beginning to be revealed. The purpose of this study was to
investigate whether Hedgehog (Hh) signaling influences the formation of MGPCs in 
the chick retina. We find that Hh signaling is increased in damaged retinas where
MGPCs are known to form. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is normally present in the axons of
ganglion cells, but becomes associated with Müller glia and MGPCs following
retinal damage. Activation of Hh signaling with recombinant human SHH (rhShh) or 
smoothened agonist (SAG) increased levels of Ptch1, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, Hes1 and
Hes5, and stimulated the formation of proliferating MGPCs in damaged retinas. In 
undamaged retinas, SAG or rhShh had no apparent effect upon the Müller glia.
However, SAG combined with FGF2 potentiated the formation of MGPCs, whereas SAG
combined with IGF1 stimulated the nuclear migration of Müller glia, but not the
formation of MGPCs. Conversely, inhibition of Hh signaling with KAAD-cyclopamine,
Gli antagonists or antibody to Shh reduced numbers of proliferating MGPCs in
damaged and FGF2-treated retinas. Hh signaling potentiates Pax6, Klf4 and cFos
expression in Müller glia during the formation of MGPCs. We find that FGF2/MAPK
signaling recruits Hh signaling into the signaling network that drives the
formation of proliferating MGPCs. Our findings implicate Hh signaling as a key
component of the network of signaling pathways that promote the
de-differentiation of Müller glia and proliferation of MGPCs.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4529028 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26116667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2015 Aug;74(8):778-90. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0000000000000216.

Disrupting NOTCH Slows Diffuse Intrinsic Pontine Glioma Growth, Enhances
Radiation Sensitivity, and Shows Combinatorial Efficacy With Bromodomain
Inhibition.

Taylor IC(1), Hütt-Cabezas M, Brandt WD, Kambhampati M, Nazarian J, Chang HT,
Warren KE, Eberhart CG, Raabe EH.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Neuropathology and Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center (ICT, MH-C, WB, CGE, EHR) and Division of Pediatric Oncology (ICT, EHR),
Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg Children's Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland;
Children's National Medical Center and George Washington University School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, District of Columbia (MK, JN);
Department of Neurology and Ophthalmology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing (HTC); and Sparrow Health System, Lansing (HTC), Michigan; and Pediatric 
Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland (KEW).

NOTCH regulates stem cells during normal development and stemlike cells in
cancer, but the roles of NOTCH in the lethal pediatric brain tumor diffuse
intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) remain unknown. Because DIPGs express stem cell
factors such as SOX2 and MYCN, we hypothesized that NOTCH activity would be
critical for DIPG growth. We determined that primary DIPGs expressed high levels 
of NOTCH receptors, ligands, and downstream effectors. Treatment of the DIPG cell
lines JHH-DIPG1 and SF7761 with the <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor MRK003 suppressed the
level of the NOTCH effectors HES1, HES4, and HES5; inhibited DIPG growth by 75%; 
and caused a 3-fold induction of apoptosis. Short hairpin RNAs targeting the
canonical NOTCH pathway caused similar effects. Pretreatment of DIPG cells with
MRK003 suppressed clonogenic growth by more than 90% and enhanced the efficacy of
radiation therapy. The high level of MYCN in DIPG led us to test sequential
therapy with the bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 and MRK003, and we found that JQ1 and 
MRK003 inhibited DIPG growth and induced apoptosis. Together, these results
suggest that dual targeting of NOTCH and MYCN in DIPG may be an effective
therapeutic strategy in DIPG and that adding a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor during
radiation therapy may be efficacious initially or during reirradiation.

PMCID: PMC4596247 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26115193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0131054. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131054.
eCollection 2015.

Molecular Characterization of Notch1 Positive Progenitor Cells in the Developing 
Retina.

Dvoriantchikova G(1), Perea-Martinez I(1), Pappas S(1), Barry AF(1), Danek D(1), 
Dvoriantchikova X(1), Pelaez D(2), Ivanov D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America. (2)Bascom
Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America; Department of
Biomedical Engineering, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida, United States
of America. (3)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of
America; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

The oscillatory expression of Notch signaling in neural progenitors suggests that
both repressors and activators of neural fate specification are expressed in the 
same progenitors. Since Notch1 regulates photoreceptor differentiation and
contributes (together with Notch3) to ganglion cell fate specification, we
hypothesized that genes encoding photoreceptor and ganglion cell fate activators 
would be highly expressed in Notch1 receptor-bearing (Notch1+) progenitors,
directing these cells to differentiate into photoreceptors or into ganglion cells
when Notch1 activity is diminished. To identify these genes, we used microarray
analysis to study expression profiles of whole retinas and isolated from them
Notch1+ cells at embryonic day 14 (E14) and postnatal day 0 (P0). To isolate
Notch1+ cells, we utilized immunomagnetic cell separation. We also used Notch3
knockout (Notch3KO) animals to evaluate the contribution of Notch3 signaling in
ganglion cell differentiation. Hierarchical clustering of 6,301 differentially
expressed genes showed that Notch1+ cells grouped near the same developmental
stage retina cluster. At E14, we found higher expression of repressors (Notch1,
Hes5) and activators (Dll3, Atoh7, Otx2) of neuronal differentiation in Notch1+
cells compared to whole retinal cell populations. At P0, Notch1, Hes5, and Dll1
expression was significantly higher in Notch1+ cells than in whole retinas. Otx2 
expression was more than thirty times higher than Atoh7 expression in Notch1+
cells at P0. We also observed that retinas of wild type animals had only 14% (P <
0.05) more ganglion cells compared to Notch3KO mice. Since this number is
relatively small and Notch1 has been shown to contribute to ganglion cell fate
specification, we suggested that Notch1 signaling may play a more significant
role in RGC development than the Notch3 signaling cascade. Finally, our findings 
suggest that Notch1+ progenitors--since they heavily express both pro-ganglion
cell (Atoh7) and pro-photoreceptor cell (Otx2) activators--can differentiate into
either ganglion cells or photoreceptors.

PMCID: PMC4474692
PMID: 26091508  [PubMed - in process]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 10;10(6):e0126928. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126928.
eCollection 2015.

Zebrafish Bone and General Physiology Are Differently Affected by Hormones or
Changes in Gravity.

Aceto J(1), Nourizadeh-Lillabadi R(2), Marée R(3), Dardenne N(4), Jeanray N(1),
Wehenkel L(3), Aleström P(2), van Loon JJ(5), Muller M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regeneration, GIGA- Research, University of
Liège, B-4000, Liège, Sart-Tilman, Belgium. (2)BasAM, Norwegian University of
Life Sciences, Vetbio, 0033 Dep, Oslo, Norway. (3)GIGA & Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium. (4)Unité
de soutien méth. en Biostatistique et Epidémiologie, University of Liège, B23,
Sart Tilman, Liège, Belgium. (5)DESC (Dutch Experiment Support Center),
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery / Oral Pathology, VU University
Medical Center & Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam (ACTA), Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; ESA-ESTEC, TEC-MMG, NL-2200 AG, Noordwijk, The Netherlands.

Teleost fish such as zebrafish (Danio rerio) are increasingly used for
physiological, genetic and developmental studies. Our understanding of the
physiological consequences of altered gravity in an entire organism is still
incomplete. We used altered gravity and drug treatment experiments to evaluate
their effects specifically on bone formation and more generally on whole genome
gene expression. By combining morphometric tools with an objective scoring system
for the state of development for each element in the head skeleton and specific
gene expression analysis, we confirmed and characterized in detail the decrease
or increase of bone formation caused by a 5 day treatment (from 5dpf to 10 dpf)
of, respectively parathyroid hormone (PTH) or vitamin D3 (VitD3). Microarray
transcriptome analysis after 24 hours treatment reveals a general effect on
physiology upon VitD3 treatment, while PTH causes more specifically developmental
effects. Hypergravity (3g from 5dpf to 9 dpf) exposure results in a significantly
larger head and a significant increase in bone formation for a subset of the
cranial bones. Gene expression analysis after 24 hrs at 3g revealed differential 
expression of genes involved in the development and function of the skeletal,
muscular, nervous, endocrine and cardiovascular systems. Finally, we propose a
novel type of experimental approach, the "Reduced Gravity Paradigm", by keeping
the developing larvae at 3g hypergravity for the first 5 days before returning
them to 1g for one additional day. 5 days exposure to 3g during these early
stages also caused increased bone formation, while gene expression analysis
revealed a central network of regulatory genes (hes5, sox10, lgals3bp, egr1,
edn1, fos, fosb, klf2, gadd45ba and socs3a) whose expression was consistently
affected by the transition from hyper- to normal gravity.

PMCID: PMC4465622
PMID: 26061167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Immunol. 2015 Jul 1;195(1):61-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400803. Epub 2015 Jun 
1.

Bruton's Tyrosine Kinase Synergizes with Notch2 To Govern Marginal Zone B Cells
in Nonobese Diabetic Mice.

Case JB(1), Bonami RH(2), Nyhoff LE(3), Steinberg HE(2), Sullivan AM(2), Kendall 
PL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232; and Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232. (2)Department of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232; and. (3)Department
of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232. (4)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232; and Department of Pathology,
Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232 peggy.kendall@vanderbilt.edu.

Expansion of autoimmune-prone marginal zone (MZ) B cells has been implicated in
type 1 diabetes. To test disease contributions of MZ B cells in NOD mice, Notch2 
haploinsufficiency (Notch2(+/-)) was introduced but failed to eliminate the MZ,
as it does in C57BL/6 mice. Notch2(+/-)/NOD have MZ B cell numbers similar to
those of wild-type C57BL/6, yet still develop diabetes. To test whether BCR
signaling supports Notch2(+/-)/NOD MZ B cells, Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk)
deficiency was introduced. Surprisingly, MZ B cells failed to develop in
Btk-deficient Notch2(+/-)/NOD mice. Expression of Notch2 and its transcriptional 
target, Hes5, was increased in NOD MZ B cells compared with C57BL/6 MZ B cells.
Btk deficiency reduced Notch2(+/-) signaling exclusively in NOD B cells,
suggesting that BCR signaling enhances Notch2 signaling in this autoimmune model.
The role of BCR signaling was further investigated using an anti-insulin
transgenic (Tg) BCR (125Tg). Anti-insulin B cells in 125Tg/Notch2(+/-)/NOD mice
populate an enlarged MZ, suggesting that low-level BCR signaling overcomes
reliance on Notch2. Tracking clonotypes of anti-insulin B cells in H chain-only
VH125Tg/NOD mice showed that BTK-dependent selection into the MZ depends on
strength of antigenic binding, whereas Notch2-mediated selection does not.
Importantly, anti-insulin B cell numbers were reduced by Btk deficiency, but not 
Notch2 haploinsufficiency. These studies show that 1) Notch2 haploinsufficiency
limits NOD MZ B cell expansion without preventing type 1 diabetes, 2) BTK
supports the Notch2 pathway in NOD MZ B cells, and 3) autoreactive NOD B cell
survival relies on BTK more than Notch2, regardless of MZ location, which may
have important implications for disease-intervention strategies.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4551465 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26034172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Neurosci. 2015 May 27;35(21):8132-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0504-15.2015.

Purification of neural precursor cells reveals the presence of distinct,
stimulus-specific subpopulations of quiescent precursors in the adult mouse
hippocampus.

Jhaveri DJ(1), O'Keeffe I(2), Robinson GJ(2), Zhao QY(2), Zhang ZH(2), Nink V(2),
Narayanan RK(2), Osborne GW(2), Wray NR(2), Bartlett PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute, Brisbane 4072,
Queensland, Australia dhanisha@uq.edu.au p.bartlett@uq.edu.au. (2)The University 
of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute, Brisbane 4072, Queensland, Australia.

The activity of neural precursor cells in the adult hippocampus is regulated by
various stimuli; however, whether these stimuli regulate the same or different
precursor populations remains unknown. Here, we developed a novel cell-sorting
protocol that allows the purification to homogeneity of neurosphere-forming
neural precursors from the adult mouse hippocampus and examined the
responsiveness of individual precursors to various stimuli using a clonal assay. 
We show that within the Hes5-GFP(+)/Nestin-GFP(+)/EGFR(+) cell population, which 
comprises the majority of neurosphere-forming precursors, there are two distinct 
subpopulations of quiescent precursor cells, one directly activated by high-KCl
depolarization, and the other activated by norepinephrine (NE). We then
demonstrate that these two populations are differentially distributed along the
septotemporal axis of the hippocampus, and show that the NE-responsive precursors
are selectively regulated by GABA, whereas the KCl-responsive precursors are
selectively modulated by corticosterone. Finally, based on RNAseq analysis by
deep sequencing, we show that the progeny generated by activating NE-responsive
versus KCl-responsive quiescent precursors are molecularly different. These
results demonstrate that the adult hippocampus contains phenotypically similar
but stimulus-specific populations of quiescent precursors, which may give rise to
neural progeny with different functional capacity.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/358132-13$15.00/0.

PMID: 26019330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Aug;22(4):531-43. doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0163. Epub 2015
May 15.

Notch1 pathway in adrenocortical carcinomas: correlations with clinical outcome.

Ronchi CL(1), Sbiera S(2), Altieri B(2), Steinhauer S(2), Wild V(3), Bekteshi
M(2), Kroiss M(2), Fassnacht M(2), Allolio B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine and Diabetes UnitDepartment of Internal Medicine I, University
Hospital, University of Wuerzburg, Oberrduerrbacher-Strasse 6, 97080 Wuerzburg,
GermanyCentral LaboratoryUniversity Hospital of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
GermanyInstitute of PathologyUniversity of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
GermanyComprehensive Cancer Center MainfrankenWuerzburg, Germany Ronchi_C@ukw.de.
(2)Endocrine and Diabetes UnitDepartment of Internal Medicine I, University
Hospital, University of Wuerzburg, Oberrduerrbacher-Strasse 6, 97080 Wuerzburg,
GermanyCentral LaboratoryUniversity Hospital of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
GermanyInstitute of PathologyUniversity of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
GermanyComprehensive Cancer Center MainfrankenWuerzburg, Germany. (3)Endocrine
and Diabetes UnitDepartment of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital,
University of Wuerzburg, Oberrduerrbacher-Strasse 6, 97080 Wuerzburg,
GermanyCentral LaboratoryUniversity Hospital of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
GermanyInstitute of PathologyUniversity of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
GermanyComprehensive Cancer Center MainfrankenWuerzburg, Germany Endocrine and
Diabetes UnitDepartment of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital, University
of Wuerzburg, Oberrduerrbacher-Strasse 6, 97080 Wuerzburg, GermanyCentral
LaboratoryUniversity Hospital of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, GermanyInstitute of
PathologyUniversity of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, GermanyComprehensive Cancer Center
MainfrankenWuerzburg, Germany.

Previous SNP array analyses have revealed genomic alterations of the Notch
pathway as being the most frequent abnormality in adrenocortical tumors (ACTs).
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of components of
Notch signaling in ACTs and to correlate them with clinical outcome. The mRNA
expression of JAG1, NOTCH1, and selected target genes of NOTCH1 (HES1, HES5, and 
HEY2) was evaluated in 80 fresh frozen samples (28 normal adrenal glands (NAGs), 
24 adenomas (ACAs), and 28 carcinomas (ACCs)) by quantitative RT-PCR.
Immunohistochemistry was performed in 221 tissues on paraffin slides (16 NAGs, 27
ACAs, and 178 ACCs) for JAG1, activated NOTCH1 (aNOTCH1), and HEY2. An
independent ACC validation cohort (n=77) was then also investigated. HEY2 mRNA
expression was higher in ACCs than it was in ACAs (P<0.05). The protein
expression of all of the factors was high (H-score 2-3) in a larger proportion of
ACCs as compared to ACAs and NAGs (JAG1 in 27, 15, and 10%; aNOTCH1 in 13, 8, and
0%; HEY2 in 66, 61, and 33% respectively, all P<0.001). High JAG1 expression was 
associated with earlier tumor stages and lower numbers of metastases in ACCs
(both P=0.08) and favorably impacted overall and progression-free survival (PFS) 
(131 vs 30 months, hazard ratio (HR) 0.45, and 37 vs 9 months, HR 0.51, both
P<0.005). This impact on overall survival (OS) was confirmed in the validation
cohort. No such association was observed for aNOTCH1 or HEY2. In conclusion,
different components of the Notch1 signaling pathway are overexpressed in ACCs,
which suggests a role for the pathway in malignant transformation. However, JAG1 
is overexpressed in a subgroup of ACCs with a better clinical outcome.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25979380  [PubMed - in process]


31. Dev Dyn. 2015 Jul;244(7):839-51. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24291. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

Otic placode cell specification and proliferation are regulated by Notch
signaling in avian development.

Shida H(1,)(2), Mende M(3), Takano-Yamamoto T(2), Osumi N(1), Streit A(3),
Wakamatsu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, Center for Translational and
Advanced Animal Research, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Miyagi, 
Japan. (2)Division of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Dentistry, Miyagi, Japan. (3)Department of Craniofacial
Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's College London.

BACKGROUND: The entire inner ear including the cochlear-vestibular ganglion
arises from a simple epithelium, the otic placode. Precursors for the placode
originate from a pool of progenitors located in ectoderm next to the future
hindbrain, the pre-otic field, where they are intermingled with future
epibranchial and epidermal cells. While the importance of secreted proteins, such
as FGFs and Wnts, in imparting otic identity has been well studied, how
precursors for these different fates segregate locally is less well understood.
RESULTS: (1) The Notch ligand Delta1 and the Notch target Hes5-2 are expressed in
a part of pre-otic field before otic commitment, indicative of active Notch
signaling, and this is confirmed using a Notch reporter. (2) Loss and
gain-of-function approaches reveal that Notch signaling regulates both
proliferation and specification of pre-otic progenitors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identify a novel function of Notch signaling in cell
fate determination in the pre-otic field of avian embryos.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25970828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Cell Sci. 2015 Jun 15;128(12):2340-50. doi: 10.1242/jcs.167874. Epub 2015 May
6.

Mecp2 regulates neural cell differentiation by suppressing the Id1 to Her2 axis
in zebrafish.

Gao H(1), Bu Y(2), Wu Q(2), Wang X(2), Chang N(2), Lei L(2), Chen S(3), Liu D(4),
Zhu X(2), Hu K(5), Xiong JW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Medicinal Plant 
Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, China Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine and
State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, China. (2)Beijing Key Laboratory of
Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine and State Key Laboratory of Natural and
Biomimetic Drugs, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing,
China. (3)Research Center for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Medicinal
Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane
Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(5)Research Center for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Medicinal Plant 
Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, China kphu@implad.ac.cn jingwei_xiong@pku.edu.cn. (6)Beijing Key
Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine and State Key Laboratory of
Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University,
Beijing, China kphu@implad.ac.cn jingwei_xiong@pku.edu.cn.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a progressive neurological disorder caused by mutations in
the X-linked protein methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2). The endogenous
function of MeCP2 during neural differentiation is still unclear. Here, we report
that mecp2 is required for brain development in zebrafish. Mecp2 was broadly
expressed initially in embryos and enriched later in the brain. Either morpholino
knockdown or genetic depletion of mecp2 inhibited neuronal differentiation,
whereas its overexpression promoted neuronal differentiation, suggesting an
essential role of mecp2 in directing neural precursors into differentiated
neurons. Mechanistically, her2 (the zebrafish ortholog of mammalian Hes5) was
upregulated in mecp2 morphants in an Id1-dependent manner. Moreover, knockdown of
either her2 or id1 fully rescued neuronal differentiation in mecp2 morphants.
These results suggest that Mecp2 plays an important role in neural cell
development by suppressing the Id1-Her2 axis, and provide new evidence that
embryonic neural defects contribute to the later motor and cognitive dysfunctions
in RTT.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25948585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 May 5. doi: 10.1071/RD15029. [Epub ahead of print]

Dynamics of Notch signalling in the mouse oviduct and uterus during the oestrous 
cycle.

Murta D, Batista M, Trindade A, Silva E, Mateus L, Duarte A, Lopes-da-Costa L.

The oviduct and uterus undergo extensive cellular remodelling during the oestrous
cycle, requiring finely tuned intercellular communication. Notch is an
evolutionarily conserved cell signalling pathway implicated in cell fate
decisions in several tissues. In the present study we evaluated the quantitative 
real-time polymerase chain reaction (real-time qPCR) and expression
(immunohistochemistry) patterns of Notch components (Notch1-4, Delta-like 1
(Dll1), Delta-like 4 (Dll4), Jagged1-2) and effector (hairy/enhancer of split
(Hes) 1-2, Hes5 and Notch-Regulated Ankyrin Repeat-Containing Protein (Nrarp))
genes in the mouse oviduct and uterus throughout the oestrous cycle. Notch genes 
are differentially transcribed and expressed in the mouse oviduct and uterus
throughout the oestrous cycle. The correlated transcription levels of Notch
components and effector genes, and the nuclear detection of Notch effector
proteins, indicate that Notch signalling is active. The correlation between
transcription levels of Notch genes and progesterone concentrations, and the
association between expression of Notch proteins and progesterone receptor (PR)
activation, indicate direct progesterone regulation of Notch signalling. The
expression patterns of Notch proteins are spatially and temporally specific,
resulting in unique expression combinations of Notch receptor, ligand and
effector genes in the oviduct luminal epithelium, uterus luminal and glandular
epithelia and uterine stroma throughout the oestrous cycle. Together, the results
of the present study imply a regulatory role for Notch signalling in oviduct and 
uterine cellular remodelling occurring throughout the oestrous cycle.

PMID: 25940784  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. J Hypertens. 2015 Apr;33(4):843-50; discussion 850. doi:
10.1097/HJH.0000000000000463.

Targeting <U+03B3>-secretases protect against angiotensin II-induced cardiac
hypertrophy.

Rivera-Torres J(1), Guzmán-Martínez G, Villa-Bellosta R, Orbe J, González-Gómez
C, Serrano M, Díez J, Andrés V, Maraver A.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Atherothrombosis Imaging and Epidemiology, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC) bCardiac Imaging Unit, Cardiology
Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz, Madrid cProgram of
Cardiovascular Diseases, Centre of Applied Medical Research, University of
Navarra, Pamplona dTumor Suppression Group, Spanish National Cancer Research
Center (CNIO), Madrid eDepartment of Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery, University
Clinic of Navarra, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain fInstitute de Recherche
en Cancérologie de Montpellier (IRCM), Montpellier, France *Both Antonio Maraver 
and Vicente Andrés equally contributed to this work.

Erratum in
    J Hypertens. 2015 Aug;33(8):1717.

OBJECTIVE: The Notch pathway has been linked to pulmonary hypertension, but its
role in systemic hypertension and, in particular in left ventricular hypertrophy 
(LVH), remains poorly understood. The main objective of this work was to analyse 
the effect of inhibiting the Notch pathway on the establishment and maintenance
of angiotensin II (Ang-II)-induced arterial hypertension and LVH in adult mice
with inducible genetic deletion of <U+03B3>-secretase, and to test preclinically the
therapeutic efficacy of <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors (GSIs).
BASIC METHODS: We analysed Ang-II responses in primary cultures of vascular
smooth muscle cells obtained from a novel mouse model with inducible genetic
deletion of the <U+03B3>-secretase complex, and the effects of GSI treatment on a mouse 
cardiac cell line. We also investigated Ang-II-induced hypertension and LVH in
our novel mouse strain lacking the <U+03B3>-secretase complex and in GSI-treated
wild-type mice. Moreover, we analysed vascular tissue from hypertensive patients 
with and without LVH.
MAIN RESULTS: Vascular smooth muscle cells activate the Notch pathway in response
to Ang-II both 'in vitro' and 'in vivo'. Genetic deletion of <U+03B3>-secretase in adult
mice prevented Ang-II-induced hypertension and LVH without causing major adverse 
effects. Treatment with GSI reduced Ang-II-induced hypertrophy of a cardiac cell 
line 'in vitro' and LVH in wild-type mice challenged with Ang-II. We also report 
elevated expression of the Notch target HES5 in vascular tissue from hypertensive
patients with LVH compared with those without LVH.
CONCLUSION: The Notch pathway is activated in the vasculature of mice with
hypertension and LVH, and its inhibition via inducible genetic <U+03B3>-secretase
deletion protects against both conditions. Preliminary observations in
hypertensive patients with LVH support the translational potential of these
findings. Moreover, GSI treatment protects wild-type mice from Ang-II-induced LVH
without affecting blood pressure. Our results unveil the potential use of GSIs in
the treatment of hypertensive patients with LVH.

PMID: 25915889  [PubMed - in process]


35. Chin J Integr Med. 2015 Apr 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of acupuncture on the Notch signaling pathway in rats with brain injury.

Zhang YM(1), Chen SX, Dai QF, Jiang ST, Chen AL, Tang CZ, Zhang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, School of Medicine, Jinan
University, 510632, Guangzhou, China, jane-107@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of acupuncture on the Notch signaling pathway in
rats with traumatic brain injury and to explore the pathogenesis of acupuncture
intervention on traumatic brain injury.
METHODS: Feeney's freefall epidural impact method was used to establish a
traumatic brain injury model in rats; the rats were randomly divided into a
normal group, sham operation group, model group and acupuncture group.
Acupuncture was performed in the Baihui (DU 20), Shuigou (DU 26), Fengfu (DU 16),
Yamen (DU 15) and Hegu (LI 4) acupoints in the rat, and Yamen was punctured via
Fengfu. Then, the rats in each group were randomly divided into three subgroups, 
namely the day 3 subgroup, day 7 subgroup and day 14 subgroup according to
treatment duration. The modified neurological severity scores (mNss) method was
used to perform neurobehavioral scoring for evaluating the degree of injury in
the rats. The hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining method was used to observe the
pathological change in the brain tissue of rats in each group. Real-time
flfluorescent quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) technology was used 
to detect changes in the Notch1, Hes1 and Hes5 gene expression levels in the
cortex on the injured side. Western blot was used to detect the protein
expression changes.
RESULTS: One day after modeling, the mNss scores in the model group and in the
acupuncture group were signifificantly higher than those in the normal and sham
operation groups (P<0.01) ; there was no statistically signifificant difference
between the normal group and the sham operation group. The scores decreased with 
increased treatment time, and the scores in the acupuncture group decreased more 
signifificantly than those in the model group (P<0.01). The pathological
examination by the HE staining method demonstrated that the brain tissue of the
rats in the acupuncture and model groups relatively signifificantly changed. The 
Notch1 gene expression level in the acupuncture group was signifificantly higher 
than the level in all of the other groups (P<0.01) ; the Hes1 and Hes5 gene
expression levels were also higher in the acupuncture group. The expression
changes of the Notch1 and Hes1 protein were consistent with that of mRNA. In each
experimental group, the mNss score and the pathological results by the HE
staining method were consistent with the mRNA results.
CONCLUSION: Acupuncture could signifificantly promote high expression levels of
Notch1, Hes1 and Hes5 in the brain tissue of traumatic brain injury rats.
Therefore, acupuncture might be an important intervention for inducing endogenous
stem cell proliferation and for promoting nerve repair.

PMID: 25908217  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. Dev Dyn. 2015 Aug;244(8):921-34. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24283.

Persistent expression of activated notch in the developing hypothalamus affects
survival of pituitary progenitors and alters pituitary structure.

Aujla PK(1), Bogdanovic V(2), Naratadam GT(2), Raetzman LT(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois. (2)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois.

BACKGROUND: As the pituitary gland develops, signals from the hypothalamus are
necessary for pituitary induction and expansion. Little is known about the
control of cues that regulate early signaling between the two structures. Ligands
and receptors of the Notch signaling pathway are found in both the hypothalamus
and Rathke's pouch. The downstream Notch effector gene Hes1 is required for
proper pituitary formation; however, these effects could be due to the action of 
Hes1 in the hypothalamus, Rathke's pouch, or both. To determine the contribution 
of hypothalamic Notch signaling to pituitary organogenesis, we used mice with
loss and gain of Notch function within the developing hypothalamus.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that loss of Notch signaling by conditional deletion of
Rbpj in the hypothalamus does not affect expression of Hes1 within the posterior 
hypothalamus or expression of Hes5. In contrast, expression of activated Notch
within the hypothalamus results in ectopic Hes5 expression and increased Hes1
expression, which is sufficient to disrupt pituitary development and postnatal
expansion.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results indicate that Rbpj-dependent Notch
signaling within the developing hypothalamus is not necessary for pituitary
development, but persistent Notch signaling and ectopic Hes5 expression in
hypothalamic progenitors affects pituitary induction and expansion.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4520742 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25907274  [PubMed - in process]


37. Neurochem Res. 2015 Jun;40(6):1211-9. doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-1584-3. Epub 2015
Apr 21.

Green Tea Polyphenols Protects Cochlear Hair Cells from Ototoxicity by Inhibiting
Notch Signalling.

Gu LT(1), Yang J, Su SZ, Liu WW, Shi ZG, Wang QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Qianfo Shan Hospital
Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, 250014, People's Republic of China.

Notch signalling pathway plays an essential role in the development of cochlea,
which inhibits the proliferation of hair cells. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
is the most abundant polyphenol in green tea, which presents strong antioxidant
activation and has been applied for anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory. In this
study, we treated the cochlear explant cultures with EGCG and found that EGCG can
protect cochlear hair cells from ototoxic drug gentamicin. We demonstrated that
EGCG could down-regulate the expression of Notch signalling pathway target genes,
such as Hes1, Hes5, Hey1 and Hey5. However, the Notch pathway ligands such as
Delta1, Jag1 and Jag2 were not affected by EGCG. To further illustrate the
mechanism of recover cochlear hair cells, we demonstrated that EGCG inhibited the
activity of <U+03B3>-secrectase to suppress Notch signalling pathway and promoted the
proliferation and regeneration of hair cells in the damaged cochlea. Our results 
suggest for the first time the role of EGCG as an inhibitor of the Notch
signalling pathway, and support its potential value in hearing-impaired recovery 
in clinical therapy.

PMID: 25896296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Stem Cells. 2015 Jul;33(7):2232-42. doi: 10.1002/stem.2017. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Transcriptional Hallmarks of Heterogeneous Neural Stem Cell Niches of the
Subventricular Zone.

Azim K(1), Hurtado-Chong A(1), Fischer B(1), Kumar N(1), Zweifel S(2), Taylor
V(3), Raineteau O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich/ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. (2)Inserm U846, Stem Cell and Brain Research Institute, Université
de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, Bron, France. (3)Department of Biomedicine,
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Throughout postnatal life in mammals, neural stem cells (NSCs) are located in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles. The greatest diversity of
neuronal and glial lineages they generate occurs during early postnatal life in a
region-specific manner. In order to probe heterogeneity of the postnatal SVZ, we 
microdissected its dorsal and lateral walls at different postnatal ages and
isolated NSCs and their immediate progeny based on their expression of
Hes5-EGFP/Prominin1 and Ascl1-EGFP, respectively. Whole genome comparative
transcriptome analysis revealed transcriptional regulators as major hallmarks
that sustain postnatal SVZ regionalization. Manipulation of single genes encoding
for locally enriched transcription factors (loss-of-function or ectopic
gain-of-function in vivo) influenced NSC specification indicating that the fate
of regionalized postnatal SVZ-NSCs can be readily modified. These findings reveal
the pronounced transcriptional heterogeneity of the postnatal SVZ and provide
targets to recruit region-specific lineages in regenerative contexts. Stem Cells 
2015;33:2232-2242.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25827345  [PubMed - in process]


39. J Appl Toxicol. 2016 Jan;36(1):24-34. doi: 10.1002/jat.3140. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

Gene expression profiling of the hippocampal dentate gyrus in an adult toxicity
study captures a variety of neurodevelopmental dysfunctions in rat models of
hypothyroidism.

Shiraki A(1,)(2), Saito F(3), Akane H(1), Akahori Y(3), Imatanaka N(3), Itahashi 
M(1,)(2), Yoshida T(1), Shibutani M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwai-cho, Fuchu-shi, Tokyo, 183-8509, Japan. (2)Pathogenetic 
Veterinary Science, United Graduate School of Veterinary Sciences, Gifu
University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu-shi, Gifu, 501-1193, Japan. (3)Chemicals
Evaluation and Research Institute, Japan, 1-4-25 Koraku, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
112-0004, Japan.

We previously found that developmental hypothyroidism changed the expression of
genes in the rat hippocampal dentate gyrus, a brain region where adult
neurogenesis is known to occur. In the present study, we performed brain
region-specific global gene expression profiling in an adult rat hypothyroidism
model to see if it reflected the developmental neurotoxicity we saw in the
developmental hypothyroidism model. Starting when male rats were 5<U+2009>weeks old, we 
administered 6-propyl-2-thiouracil at a doses of 0, 0.1 and 10<U+2009>mg<U+2009>kg(-1) body
weight by gavage for 28<U+2009>days. We selected four brain regions to represent both
cerebral and cerebellar tissues: hippocampal dentate gyrus, cerebral cortex,
corpus callosum and cerebellar vermis. We observed significant alterations in the
expression of genes related to neural development (Eph family genes and Robo3) in
the cerebral cortex and hippocampal dentate gyrus and in the expression of genes 
related to myelination (Plp1 and Mbp) in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. We
observed only minor changes in the expression of these genes in the corpus
callosum and cerebellar vermis. We used real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction to confirm Chrdl1, Hes5, Mbp, Plp1, Slit1, Robo3 and
the Eph family transcript expression changes. The most significant changes in
gene expression were found in the dentate gyrus. Considering that the gene
expression profile of the adult dentate gyrus closely related to neurogenesis,
28-day toxicity studies looking at gene expression changes in adult hippocampal
dentate gyrus may also detect possible developmental neurotoxic effects.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25825206  [PubMed - in process]


40. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 May 8;460(3):639-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.03.082. Epub 2015 Mar 26.

Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7 is up-regulated during EAE and
inhibits the differentiation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells.

Tan W(1), Pu Y(1), Shao Q(1), Fang X(1), Han D(1), Zhao M(1), Cao L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology of the 
Ministry of Education, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433,
China. (2)Institute of Neuroscience and Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology 
of the Ministry of Education, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China. Electronic address: caoli@smmu.edu.cn.

Oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) differentiation failure is one of the
leading causes for remyelination defects in the demyelinating lesions of multiple
sclerosis (MS). In this study, we explored the roles of insulin-like growth
factor-binding proteins 7 (IGFBP-7) on OPCs differentiation during experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). We first investigated the expression pattern 
of IGFBP-7 by real-time PCR and immunofluorescence staining. It showed that
IGFBP-7 was expressed in astrocytes (ACs), oligodendrocytes (OLs) and neurons
both in vitro and in vivo. The mRNA and protein level of IGFBP-7 was also
increased in the spinal cord from mice at the peak of EAE disease. Next we found 
that IGFBP-7 acted as a negatively regulator of the OPCs differentiation.
Together, these data suggest that IGFBP-7 was up regulated during EAE and inhibit
the transition from OPCs to mature OLs, implying its use as a potential
therapeutic target for the treatment of inflammatory demyelinating diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25819415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0120547. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120547.
eCollection 2015.

Serum induces transcription of Hey1 and Hey2 genes by Alk1 but not Notch
signaling in endothelial cells.

Wöltje K(1), Jabs M(1), Fischer A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Signaling and Cancer (A270), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ-ZMBH
Alliance), D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Vascular Signaling and Cancer (A270),
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance), D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany;
Vascular Biology and Tumor Angiogenesis, Medical Faculty Mannheim (CBTM),
Heidelberg University, D-68167, Mannheim, Germany; Department of Medicine I and
Clinical Chemistry, Heidelberg University, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

The transcriptional repressors Hey1 and Hey2 are primary target genes of Notch
signaling in the cardiovascular system and induction of Hey gene expression is
often interpreted as activation of Notch signaling. Here we report that treatment
of primary human endothelial cells with serum or fresh growth medium led to a
strong wave of Hey1 and Hey2 transcription lasting for approximately three hours.
Transcription of other Notch target genes (Hes1, Hes5, ephrinB2, Dll4) was
however not induced by serum in endothelial cells. Gamma secretase inhibition or 
expression of dominant-negative MAML1 did not prevent the induction of Hey genes 
indicating that canonical Notch signaling is dispensable. Pretreatment with
soluble BMP receptor Alk1, but not Alk3, abolished Hey gene induction by serum.
Consequently, the Alk1 ligand BMP9 stimulated Hey gene induction in endothelial
cells. Several other cell types however did not show such a strong BMP signaling 
and consequently only a very mild induction of Hey genes. Taken together, the
experiments revealed that bone morphogenic proteins within the serum of cell
culture medium are potent inducers of endothelial Hey1 and Hey2 gene expression
within the first few hours after medium change.

PMCID: PMC4370690
PMID: 25799559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Tissue Eng Part A. 2015 Jun;21(11-12):1795-809. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2014.0340.
Epub 2015 Apr 13.

Nonviral Reprogramming of Human Wharton's Jelly Cells Reveals Differences Between
ATOH1 Homologues.

Mellott AJ(1), Devarajan K(2), Shinogle HE(3), Moore DS(3), Talata Z(4), Laurence
JS(1,)(5), Forrest ML(1,)(5), Noji S(6), Tanaka E(7), Staecker H(1,)(8), Detamore
MS(1,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)1Bioengineering Graduate Program, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas.
(2)2Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(3)3Microscopy and Analytical Imaging Lab, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
Kansas. (4)4Department of Mathematics, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas.
(5)5Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
Kansas. (6)6Department of Life Systems, Institute of Technology and Science, The 
University of Tokushima, Minami-Jyosanjima-cho, Tokushima, Japan. (7)7Department 
of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Institute of Health Biosciences, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima, Japan.
(8)8Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas. (9)9Department of Chemical and Petroleum
Engineering, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas.

The transcription factor atonal homolog 1 (ATOH1) has multiple homologues that
are functionally conserved across species and is responsible for the generation
of sensory hair cells. To evaluate potential functional differences between
homologues, human and mouse ATOH1 (HATH1 and MATH-1, respectively) were
nonvirally delivered to human Wharton's jelly cells (hWJCs) for the first time.
Delivery of HATH1 to hWJCs demonstrated superior expression of inner ear hair
cell markers and characteristics than delivery of MATH-1. Inhibition of HES1 and 
HES5 signaling further increased the atonal effect. Transfection of hWJCs with
HATH1 DNA, HES1 siRNA, and HES5 siRNA displayed positive identification of key
hair cell and support cell markers found in the cochlea, as well as a variety of 
cell shapes, sizes, and features not native to hair cells, suggesting the need
for further examination of other cell types induced by HATH1 expression. In the
first side-by-side evaluation of HATH1 and MATH-1 in human cells, substantial
differences were observed, suggesting that the two atonal homologues may not be
interchangeable in human cells, and artificial expression of HATH1 in hWJCs
requires further study. In the future, this line of research may lead to
engineered systems that would allow for evaluation of drug ototoxicity or
potentially even direct therapeutic use.

PMCID: PMC4449705 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25760435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Virology. 2015 Apr;478:50-60. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.02.002. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Human papillomavirus 16E6 and NFX1-123 potentiate Notch signaling and
differentiation without activating cellular arrest.

Vliet-Gregg PA(1), Hamilton JR(1), Katzenellenbogen RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children<U+05F3>s Research
Institute, 1900 Ninth Ave., Seattle, WA 98101, USA. (2)Center for Global
Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children<U+05F3>s Research Institute, 1900 Ninth
Ave., Seattle, WA 98101, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Division of Adolescent
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle WA, USA. Electronic address:
rkatzen@uw.edu.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HR HPV) oncoproteins bind host cell proteins to
dysregulate and uncouple apoptosis, senescence, differentiation, and growth.
These pathways are important for both the viral life cycle and cancer
development. HR HPV16 E6 (16E6) interacts with the cellular protein NFX1-123, and
they collaboratively increase the growth and differentiation master regulator,
Notch1. In 16E6 expressing keratinocytes (16E6 HFKs), the Notch canonical pathway
genes Hes1 and Hes5 were increased with overexpression of NFX1-123, and their
expression was directly linked to the activation or blockade of the Notch1
receptor. Keratinocyte differentiation genes Keratin 1 and Keratin 10 were also
increased, but in contrast their upregulation was only indirectly associated with
Notch1 receptor stimulation and was fully unlinked to growth arrest, increased
p21(Waf1/CIP1), or decreased proliferative factor Ki67. This leads to a model of 
16E6, NFX1-123, and Notch1 differently regulating canonical and differentiation
pathways and entirely uncoupling cellular arrest from increased differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4383269
PMID: 25723053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. FASEB J. 2015 Apr;29(4):1480-92. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-244442. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Defects in subventricular zone pigmented epithelium-derived factor niche
signaling in the senescence-accelerated mouse prone-8.

Castro-Garcia P(1), Díaz-Moreno M(1), Gil-Gas C(1), Fernández-Gómez FJ(1),
Honrubia-Gómez P(1), Álvarez-Simón CB(1), Sánchez-Sánchez F(1), Cano JC(1),
Almeida F(1), Blanco V(1), Jordán J(1), Mira H(1), Ramírez-Castillejo C(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratorio de Células Madre, Centro Regional de Investigaciones Biomédicas, 
Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain; Unidad Funcional de
Investigación en Enfermedades Crónicas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid,
Spain; Grupo de Neurofarmacología, Departamento de Ciencias Médicas, Area de
Genética, Facultad de Medicina de Albacete, and Instituto de Investigación en
Discapacidades Neurológicas, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain; 
and Departamento Estadística, I. O. y Computación, Universidad de La Laguna, La
Laguna, Canarias, Spain. (2)*Laboratorio de Células Madre, Centro Regional de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain;
Unidad Funcional de Investigación en Enfermedades Crónicas, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; Grupo de Neurofarmacología, Departamento de Ciencias
Médicas, Area de Genética, Facultad de Medicina de Albacete, and Instituto de
Investigación en Discapacidades Neurológicas, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, 
Albacete, Spain; and Departamento Estadística, I. O. y Computación, Universidad
de La Laguna, La Laguna, Canarias, Spain cramirezcastillejo@externos.isciii.es.

We studied potential changes in the subventricular zone (SVZ) stem cell niche of 
the senescence-accelerated mouse prone-8 (SAM-P8) aging model. Bromodeoxyuridine 
(BrdU) assays with longtime survival revealed a lower number of label-retaining
stem cells in the SAM-P8 SVZ compared with the SAM-Resistant 1 (SAM-R1) control
strain. We also found that in SAM-P8 niche signaling is attenuated and the stem
cell pool is less responsive to the self-renewal niche factor pigmented
epithelium-derived factor (PEDF). Protein analysis demonstrated stable amounts of
the PEDF ligand in the SAM-P8 SVZ niche; however, SAM-P8 stem cells present a
significant expression decrease of patatin-like phospholipase domain containing
2, a receptor for PEDF (PNPLA2-PEDF) receptor, but not of laminin receptor (LR), 
a receptor for PEDF (LR-PEDF) receptor. We observed changes in self-renewal
related genes (hairy and enhancer of split 1 (Hes1), hairy and enhancer of split 
1 (Hes5), Sox2] and report that although these genes are down-regulated in
SAM-P8, differentiation genes (Pax6) are up-regulated and neurogenesis is
increased. Finally, sheltering mammalian telomere complexes might be also
involved given a down-regulation of telomeric repeat binding factor 1 (Terf1)
expression was observed in SAM-P8 at young age periods. Differences between these
2 models, SAM-P8 and SAM-R1 controls, have been previously detected at more
advanced ages. We now describe alterations in the PEDF signaling pathway and stem
cell self-renewal at a very young age, which could be involved in the premature
senescence observed in the SAM-P8 model.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25636741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 21;35(3):1274-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2568-14.2015.

Chronic oligodendrogenesis and remyelination after spinal cord injury in mice and
rats.

Hesp ZC(1), Goldstein EZ, Miranda CJ(2), Kaspar BK, McTigue DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Studies Program. (2)Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, Ohio 43205. (3)Center for Brain and Spinal Cord Repair, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, and Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio 43205. (4)Department of Neuroscience, and Center for Brain and Spinal Cord
Repair, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, and
dana.mctigue@osumc.edu.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2015 May 6;35(18):7313. Goldstein, Evan A [Corrected to Goldstein,
Evan Z] and Kaspar, Brain K [Corrected to Kaspar, Brian K].

Adult progenitor cells proliferate in the acutely injured spinal cord and their
progeny differentiate into new oligodendrocytes (OLs) that remyelinate spared
axons. Whether this endogenous repair continues beyond the first week postinjury 
(wpi), however, is unknown. Identifying the duration of this response is
essential for guiding therapies targeting improved recovery from spinal cord
injury (SCI) by enhancing OL survival and/or remyelination. Here, we used two
PDGFRa-reporter mouse lines and rats injected with a GFP-retrovirus to assess
progenitor fate through 80 d after injury. Surprisingly, new OLs were generated
as late as 3 months after injury and their processes ensheathed axons near and
distal to the lesion, colocalized with MBP, and abutted Caspr+ profiles,
suggesting newly formed myelin. Semithin sections confirmed stereotypical thin OL
remyelination and few bare axons at 10 wpi, indicating that demyelination is
relatively rare. Astrocytes in chronic tissue expressed the pro-OL
differentiation and survival factors CNTF and FGF-2. In addition, pSTAT3+ NG2
cells were present through at least 5 wpi, revealing active signaling of the
Jak/STAT pathway in these cells. The progenitor cell fate genes Sox11, Hes5, Id2,
Id4, BMP2, and BMP4 were dynamically regulated for at least 4 wpi. Collectively, 
these data verify that the chronically injured spinal cord is highly dynamic.
Endogenous repair, including oligodendrogenesis and remyelination, continues for 
several months after SCI, potentially in response to growth factors and/or
transcription factor changes. Identifying and understanding spontaneous repair
processes such as these is important so that beneficial plasticity is not
inadvertently interrupted and effort is not exerted to needlessly duplicate
ongoing spontaneous repair.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/351274-17$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4300327
PMID: 25609641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 21;35(3):906-19. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1423-14.2015.

Oligodendroglial maturation is dependent on intracellular protein shuttling.

Göttle P(1), Sabo JK(2), Heinen A(1), Venables G(2), Torres K(1), Tzekova N(1),
Parras CM(3), Kremer D(1), Hartung HP(1), Cate HS(2), Küry P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, University of Düsseldorf, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, 3010 Victoria, Australia, and. (3)Université Pierre et
Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle
épinière, Inserm U1127, 75013 Paris, France. (4)Department of Neurology, Medical 
Faculty, University of Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany,
kuery@uni-duesseldorf.de.

Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease of the CNS resulting in degeneration 
of myelin sheaths and loss of oligodendrocytes, which means that protection and
electrical insulation of axons and rapid signal propagation are impaired, leading
to axonal damage and permanent disabilities. Partial replacement of lost
oligodendrocytes and remyelination can occur as a result of activation and
recruitment of resident oligodendroglial precursor cells. However, the overall
remyelination capacity remains inefficient because precursor cells often fail to 
generate new oligodendrocytes. Increasing evidence points to the existence of
several molecular inhibitors that act on these cells and interfere with their
cellular maturation. The p57kip2 gene encodes one such potent inhibitor of
oligodendroglial differentiation and this study sheds light on the underlying
mode of action. We found that subcellular distribution of the p57kip2 protein
changed during differentiation of rat, mouse, and human oligodendroglial cells
both in vivo and in vitro. Nuclear export of p57kip2 was correlated with promoted
myelin expression, higher morphological phenotypes, and enhanced myelination in
vitro. In contrast, nuclear accumulation of p57kip2 resulted in blocked
oligodendroglial differentiation. Experimental evidence suggests that the
inhibitory role of p57kip2 depends on specific interactions with binding proteins
such as LIMK-1, CDK2, Mash1, and Hes5 either by controlling their site of action 
or their activity. Because functional restoration in demyelinating diseases
critically depends on the successful generation of oligodendroglial cells, a
therapeutic need that is currently unmet, the regulatory mechanism described here
might be of particular interest for identifying suitable drug targets and
devising novel therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2015 Göttle et al.

PMCID: PMC4300332
PMID: 25609610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Apr;22(2):131-44. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0454. Epub 2015
Jan 5.

HES5 silencing is an early and recurrent change in prostate tumourigenesis.

Massie CE(1), Spiteri I(2), Ross-Adams H(2), Luxton H(2), Kay J(2), Whitaker
HC(2), Dunning MJ(2), Lamb AD(3), Ramos-Montoya A(2), Brewer DS(2), Cooper CS(4),
Eeles R(4); UK Prostate ICGC Group, Warren AY(2), Tavaré S(2), Neal DE(3), Lynch 
AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 
0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of
East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton,
UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge, UK charlie.massie@cruk.cam.ac.uk andy.lynch@cruk.cam.ac.uk.
(2)Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 
0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of
East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton,
UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge, UK. (3)Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of
Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and
School of MedicineUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS
Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton, UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical
OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK Cancer Research UK
Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UKDivision of
Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UKDepartment
of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, 
UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton, UKDepartments of
PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge,
UK Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 
0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of
East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton,
UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge, UK. (4)Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of
Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and
School of MedicineUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS
Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton, UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical
OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK Cancer Research UK
Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UKDivision of
Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UKDepartment
of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, 
UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton, UKDepartments of
PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge,
UK.

Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men, resulting in over
10<U+200A>000<U+200A>deaths/year in the UK. Sequencing and copy number analysis of primary
tumours has revealed heterogeneity within tumours and an absence of recurrent
founder mutations, consistent with non-genetic disease initiating events. Using
methylation profiling in a series of multi-focal prostate tumours, we identify
promoter methylation of the transcription factor HES5 as an early event in
prostate tumourigenesis. We confirm that this epigenetic alteration occurs in
86-97% of cases in two independent prostate cancer cohorts (n=49 and n=39
tumour-normal pairs). Treatment of prostate cancer cells with the demethylating
agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine increased HES5 expression and downregulated its
transcriptional target HES6, consistent with functional silencing of the HES5
gene in prostate cancer. Finally, we identify and test a transcriptional module
involving the AR, ERG, HES1 and HES6 and propose a model for the impact of HES5
silencing on tumourigenesis as a starting point for future functional studies.

© 2015 The authors.

PMCID: PMC4335379
PMID: 25560400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Gene. 2015 Mar 1;558(1):6-24. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.12.054. Epub 2014 Dec 28.

Control of hair cell development by molecular pathways involving Atoh1, Hes1 and 
Hes5.

Su YX(1), Hou CC(1), Yang WX(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Sperm Laboratory, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 
310058, China. (2)The Sperm Laboratory, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address: wxyang@spermlab.org.

Atoh1, Hes1 and Hes5 are crucial for normal inner ear hair cell development. They
regulate the expression of each other in a complex network, while they also
interact with many other genes and pathways, such as Notch, FGF, SHH, WNT, BMP
and RA. This paper summarized molecular pathways that involve Atoh1, Hes1, and
Hes5. Some of the pathways and gene regulation mechanisms discussed here were
studied in other tissues, yet they might inspire studies in inner ear hair cell
development. Thereby, we presented a complex regulatory network involving these
three genes, which might be crucial for proliferation and differentiation of
inner ear hair cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25550047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;100(3):E433-42. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-3720. Epub
2014 Dec 29.

Decreased Notch pathway signaling in the endometrium of women with endometriosis 
impairs decidualization.

Su RW(1), Strug MR, Joshi NR, Jeong JW, Miele L, Lessey BA, Young SL, Fazleabas
AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology (R.-W.S.,
M.R.S., N.R.J., J.-W.J., A.T.F.), Michigan State University, Grand Rapids,
Michigan 49503; Cancer Institute (L.M.), Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center and Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112;
Greenville Health Systems (B.A.L.), University of South Carolina, Greenville,
South Carolina 29605; and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (S.L.Y.),
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599.

CONTEXT: Endometriosis is a common gynecological disease affecting one in 10
women of reproductive age and is a major cause of pelvic pain and impaired
fertility. Endometrial stromal cells of women with endometriosis exhibit a
reduced response to in vitro decidualization. NOTCH1 is critical for
decidualization of both mouse and human uterine stromal cells.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to determine whether decidualization failure in women
with endometriosis is a consequence of impaired Notch signaling.
SETTING AND DESIGN: We investigated expression levels of Notch signaling
components in the endometrium of women and baboons with or without endometriosis.
We identified NOTCH1-regulated genes during decidualization of human uterine
fibroblast (HuF) cells by microarray and quantified their expression levels in in
vitro-decidualized endometrial stromal cells isolated from women with or without 
endometriosis.
RESULTS: Notch signaling receptors NOTCH1 and NOTCH4, ligands JAGGED2 and DLL4,
as well as direct target genes HES5 and HEY1 were decreased in the eutopic
endometrium of women and baboons with endometriosis. Notch signaling was
decreased in stromal cells isolated from women with endometriosis, which was
associated with impaired in vitro decidualization. Genes that were down-regulated
by NOTCH1 silencing in decidualized HuF cells were also decreased in decidualized
endometrial stromal cells of women with endometriosis. FOXO1 acts as a downstream
target of Notch signaling and endometriosis is associated with decreased
expression of NOTCH1-regulated, FOXO1-responsive genes during decidualization.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased Notch signaling is associated with endometriosis and
contributes to impaired decidualization through the down-regulation of FOXO1.

PMCID: PMC4333047
PMID: 25546156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Nature. 2015 Feb 19;518(7539):355-9. doi: 10.1038/nature13990. Epub 2014 Dec 24.

Dissecting neural differentiation regulatory networks through epigenetic
footprinting.

Ziller MJ(1), Edri R(2), Yaffe Y(2), Donaghey J(1), Pop R(1), Mallard W(3),
Issner R(4), Gifford CA(1), Goren A(5), Xing J(4), Gu H(4), Cacchiarelli D(4),
Tsankov AM(1), Epstein C(4), Rinn JL(1), Mikkelsen TS(4), Kohlbacher O(6), Gnirke
A(4), Bernstein BE(5), Elkabetz Y(2), Meissner A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2]
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA [3] Department
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(3)1] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2]
Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02138, USA. (4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA. (5)1] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA [3] Center 
for Systems Biology and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (6)Applied Bioinformatics, Center for
Bioinformatics and Quantitative Biology Center, University of Tübingen, Tübingen 
72076, Germany.

Models derived from human pluripotent stem cells that accurately recapitulate
neural development in vitro and allow for the generation of specific neuronal
subtypes are of major interest to the stem cell and biomedical community. Notch
signalling, particularly through the Notch effector HES5, is a major pathway
critical for the onset and maintenance of neural progenitor cells in the
embryonic and adult nervous system. Here we report the transcriptional and
epigenomic analysis of six consecutive neural progenitor cell stages derived from
a HES5::eGFP reporter human embryonic stem cell line. Using this system, we aimed
to model cell-fate decisions including specification, expansion and patterning
during the ontogeny of cortical neural stem and progenitor cells. In order to
dissect regulatory mechanisms that orchestrate the stage-specific differentiation
process, we developed a computational framework to infer key regulators of each
cell-state transition based on the progressive remodelling of the epigenetic
landscape and then validated these through a pooled short hairpin RNA screen. We 
were also able to refine our previous observations on epigenetic priming at
transcription factor binding sites and suggest here that they are mediated by
combinations of core and stage-specific factors. Taken together, we demonstrate
the utility of our system and outline a general framework, not limited to the
context of the neural lineage, to dissect regulatory circuits of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4336237
PMID: 25533951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Austin J Pharmacol Ther. 2014;2(3). pii:
www.austinpublishinggroup.com/pharmacology-therapeutics/fulltext/ajpt-v2-id1020.p
hp.

Salinomycin Suppresses PDGFRß, MYC, and Notch Signaling in Human Medulloblastoma.

Zhou S(1), Wang F(1), Zhang Y(1), Johnson MR(2), Qian S(1), Wu M(3), Wu E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, North Dakota State University, USA.
(2)Retina Consultants Ltd and University of North Dakota, USA. (3)Department of
Basic Sciences, University of North Dakota, USA.

Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common childhood brain tumor. Despite improved
therapy and management, approximately 30% of patients die of the disease. To
search for a more effective therapeutic strategy, the effects of salinomycin were
tested on cell proliferation, cell death, and cell cycle progression in human MB 
cell lines. The results demonstrated that salinomycin inhibits cell
proliferation, induces cell death , and disrupts cell cycle progression in MB
cells. Salinomycin was also tested on the expression levels of key genes involved
in proliferation and survival signaling and revealed that salinomycin
down-regulates the expression of PDGFRß, MYC, p21 and Bcl-2 as well as
up-regulates the expression of cyclin A. In addition, the results reveal that
salinomycin suppresses the expression of Hes1 and Hes5 in MB cells. Our data shed
light on the potential of using salinomycin as a novel therapeutic agent for
patients with MB.

PMCID: PMC4251667
PMID: 25478603  [PubMed]


52. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2015 Feb;40:35-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2014.11.005. Epub 
2014 Nov 20.

Increased expression of Hes5 protein in Notch signaling pathway in the
hippocampus of mice offspring of dams fed a high-fat diet during pregnancy and
suckling.

Mendes-da-Silva C(1), Lemes SF(2), Baliani Tda S(2), Versutti MD(2), Torsoni
MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience and Nutrition, Department of Biosciences, Federal
University of Sao Paulo/UNIFESP (Campus Baixada Santista), 11060-001 Santos, SP, 
Brazil; Laboratory of Metabolism Disorders, Faculty of Applied Sciences, State
University of Campinas (UNICAMP), 13484-350 Limeira, SP, Brazil. Electronic
address: cmendes11@hotmail.com. (2)Laboratory of Metabolism Disorders, Faculty of
Applied Sciences, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), 13484-350 Limeira, SP, 
Brazil.

Maternal high-fat diet (HFD) impairs hippocampal development of offspring
promoting decreased proliferation of neural progenitors, in neuronal
differentiation, in dendritic spine density and synaptic plasticity reducing
neurogenic capacity. Notch signaling pathway participates in molecular mechanisms
of the neurogenesis. The activation of Notch signaling leads to the upregulation 
of Hes5, which inhibits the proliferation and differentiation of neural
progenitors. This study aimed to investigate the Notch/Hes pathway activation in 
the hippocampus of the offspring of dams fed an HFD. Female Swiss mice were fed a
control diet (CD) and an HFD from pre-mating until suckling. The bodyweight and
mass of adipose tissue in the mothers and pups were also measured. The mRNA and
protein expression of Notch1, Hes5, Mash1, and Delta1 in the hippocampus was
assessed by RT-PCR and western blotting, respectively. Dams fed the HFD and their
pups had an increased bodyweight and amount of adipose tissue. Furthermore, the
offspring of mothers fed the HFD exhibited an increased Hes5 expression in the
hippocampus compared with CD offspring. In addition, HFD offspring also expressed
increased amounts of Notch1 and Hes5 mRNA, whereas Mash1 expression was
decreased. However, the expression of Delta1 did not change significantly. We
propose that the overexpression of Hes5, a Notch effector, downregulates the
expression of the proneural gene Mash1 in the offspring of obese mothers,
delaying cellular differentiation. These results provide further evidence that an
offspring's hippocampus is molecularly susceptible to maternal HFD and suggest
that Notch1 signaling in this brain region is important for neuronal
differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Gene. 2015 Jan 25;555(2):150-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.10.056. Epub 2014 Nov 1.

Effects of ADAM10 deletion on Notch-1 signaling pathway and neuronal maintenance 
in adult mouse brain.

Zhuang J(1), Wei Q(2), Lin Z(2), Zhou C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Genetics, School of Basic Medicine,Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou 350108, China; Prenatal Diagnosis Center, Quanzhou
Women and Children's Hospital, Quanzhou 362000, China. (2)Department of Cellular 
Biology and Genetics, School of Basic Medicine,Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 
350108, China. (3)Department of Cellular Biology and Genetics, School of Basic
Medicine,Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350108, China. Electronic address:
zhouchangwen624@sina.com.

A disintegrin and metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM10) has been demonstrated to regulate
embryonic brain development by initiating Notch signaling. However, it is still
unclear whether ADAM10 is required to activate the Notch signaling pathway in
adult brain. To investigate the physiological role of ADAM10, we generated
conditional knockout (cKO) mice lacking the Adam10 gene primarily in the cortex
and hippocampus. We found that conditional disruption of ADAM10 resulted in a
prominent decrease in the number of proliferating neuronal progenitor cells in
the subgranular zone (SGZ), and a significant increase in the number of
adult-generated postmitotic neurons in the hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) due to 
premature neuronal differentiation. Moreover, the mutant mice also displayed an
age-dependent reduction in the number of granule neurons in the hippocampal DG.
It was further showed that the activation of Notch-1 and its downstream target
genes Hes1, Hes5, Hey1, and Hey2 was impaired in ADAM10-deficient hippocampal
tissues. Finally, Adam10 cKO mice had impaired learning and memory in the Morris 
water-maze. Thus, we provided experimental evidence to demonstrate that ADAM10
plays an essential role in the activation of Notch-1 signaling and has a
remarkable effect on neuronal maintenance in adult mouse brain.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Gene Ther. 2014 Dec;21(12):518-25. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2014.57. Epub 2014 Nov
21.

Thiocoraline activates the Notch pathway in carcinoids and reduces tumor
progression in vivo.

Wyche TP(1), Dammalapati A(2), Cho H(1), Harrison AD(2), Kwon GS(1), Chen H(2),
Bugni TS(1), Jaskula-Sztul R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Sciences Division, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI, USA. (2)Department of Surgery Endocrine Research Laboratories, UW Carbone
Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

Carcinoids are slow-growing neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) that are characterized
by hormone overproduction; surgery is currently the only option for treatment.
Activation of the Notch pathway has previously been shown to have a role in tumor
suppression in NETs. The marine-derived thiodepsipeptide thiocoraline was
investigated in vitro in two carcinoid cell lines (BON and H727). Carcinoid cells
treated with nanomolar concentrations of thiocoraline resulted in a decrease in
cell proliferation and an alteration of malignant phenotype evidenced by decrease
of NET markers, achaete-scute complex like-1, chromogranin A and neurospecific
enolase. Western blotting analysis demonstrated the activation of Notch1 on the
protein level in BON cells. Additionally, thiocoraline activated downstream Notch
targets HES1, HES5 and HEY2. Thiocoraline effectively suppressed carcinoid cell
growth by promoting cell cycle arrest in BON and H727 cells. An in vivo study
demonstrated that thiocoraline, formulated with polymeric micelles, slowed
carcinoid tumor progression. Thus the therapeutic potential of thiocoraline,
which induced activation of the Notch pathway, in carcinoid tumors was
demonstrated.

PMCID: PMC4270822
PMID: 25412645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Neurosci. 2014 Nov 12;34(46):15223-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3403-14.2014.

Neurogenin3 restricts serotonergic neuron differentiation to the hindbrain.

Carcagno AL(1), Di Bella DJ(1), Goulding M(2), Guillemot F(3), Lanuza GM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Laboratory, Instituto Leloir and Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IIBBA-CONICET), Buenos Aires 1405,
Argentina. (2)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, and. (3)Division of Molecular
Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 
1AA, United Kingdom. (4)Developmental Neurobiology Laboratory, Instituto Leloir
and Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IIBBA-CONICET),
Buenos Aires 1405, Argentina, GLanuza@Leloir.org.ar.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2015 May 20;35(20):8037.

The development of the nervous system is critically dependent on the production
of functionally diverse neuronal cell types at their correct locations. In the
embryonic neural tube, dorsoventral signaling has emerged as a fundamental
mechanism for generating neuronal diversity. In contrast, far less is known about
how different neuronal cell types are organized along the rostrocaudal axis. In
the developing mouse and chick neural tube, hindbrain serotonergic neurons and
spinal glutamatergic V3 interneurons are produced from ventral p3 progenitors,
which possess a common transcriptional identity but are confined to distinct
anterior-posterior territories. In this study, we show that the expression of the
transcription factor Neurogenin3 (Neurog3) in the spinal cord controls the
correct specification of p3-derived neurons. Gain- and loss-of-function
manipulations in the chick and mouse embryo show that Neurog3 switches ventral
progenitors from a serotonergic to V3 differentiation program by repressing Ascl1
in spinal p3 progenitors through a mechanism dependent on Hes proteins. In this
way, Neurog3 establishes the posterior boundary of the serotonergic system by
actively suppressing serotonergic specification in the spinal cord. These results
explain how equivalent p3 progenitors within the hindbrain and the spinal cord
produce functionally distinct neuron cell types.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3415223-11$15.00/0.

PMID: 25392491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):703-20. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22243. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Differential regulation of Hes/Hey genes during inner ear development.

Petrovic J(1), Gálvez H(1), Neves J(1), Abelló G(1), Giraldez F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, CEXS, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca
Biomèdica de Barcelona (PRBB), Barcelona, Spain.

Notch signaling plays a crucial role during inner ear development and
regeneration. Hes/Hey genes encode for bHLH transcription factors identified as
Notch targets. We have studied the expression and regulation of Hes/Hey genes
during inner ear development in the chicken embryo. Among several Hes/Hey genes
examined, only Hey1 and Hes5 map to the sensory regions, although with salient
differences. Hey1 expression follows Jag1 expression except at early prosensory
stages while Hes5 expression corresponds well to Dl1 expression throughout otic
development. Although Hey1 and Hes5 are direct Notch downstream targets, they
differ in the level of Notch required for activation. Moreover, they also differ 
in mRNA stability, showing different temporal decays after Notch blockade. In
addition, Bmp, Wnt and Fgf pathways also modify Hey1 and Hes5 expression in the
inner ear. Particularly, the Wnt pathway modulates Hey1 and Jag1 expression.
Finally, gain of function experiments show that Hey1 and Hes5 cross-regulate each
other in a complex manner. Both Hey1 and Hes5 repress Dl1 and Hes5 expression,
suggesting that they prevent the transition to differentiation stages, probably
by preventing Atoh1 expression. In spite of its association with Jag1, Hey1 does 
not seem to be instrumental for lateral induction as it does not promote Jag1
expression. We suggest that, besides being both targets of Notch, Hey1 and Hes5
are subject to a rather complex regulation that includes the stability of their
transcripts, cross regulation and other signaling pathways.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25363712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Stem Cells. 2015 Feb;33(2):403-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.1873.

Notch signaling regulates motor neuron differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells.

Ben-Shushan E(1), Feldman E, Reubinoff BE.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney and Judy Swartz Embryonic Stem Cell Research Center of The Goldyne 
Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah University Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel.

In the pMN domain of the spinal cord, Notch signaling regulates the balance
between motor neuron differentiation and maintenance of the progenitor state for 
later oligodendrocyte differentiation. Here, we sought to study the role of Notch
signaling in regulation of the switch from the pMN progenitor state to
differentiated motor neurons in a human model system. Human embryonic stem cells 
(hESCs) were directed to differentiate to pMN-like progenitor cells by the
inductive action of retinoic acid and a Shh agonist, purmorphamine. We found that
the expression of the Notch signaling effector Hes5 was induced in hESC-derived
pMN-like progenitors and remained highly expressed when they were cultured under 
conditions favoring motor neuron differentiation. Inhibition of Notch signaling
by a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor in the differentiating pMN-like progenitor cells
decreased Hes5 expression and enhanced the differentiation toward motor neurons. 
Conversely, over-expression of Hes5 in pMN-like progenitor cells during the
differentiation interfered with retinoic acid- and purmorphamine-induced motor
neuron differentiation and inhibited the emergence of motor neurons. Inhibition
of Notch signaling had a permissive rather than an inductive effect on motor
neuron differentiation. Our results indicate that Notch signaling has a
regulatory role in the switch from the pMN progenitor to the differentiated motor
neuron state. Inhibition of Notch signaling can be harnessed to enhance the
differentiation of hESCs toward motor neurons.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25335858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Nov 11;3(5):758-73. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.08.015.
Epub 2014 Oct 3.

let-7 miRNAs can act through notch to regulate human gliogenesis.

Patterson M(1), Gaeta X(2), Loo K(3), Edwards M(4), Smale S(4), Cinkornpumin
J(1), Xie Y(1), Listgarten J(5), Azghadi S(3), Douglass SM(1), Pellegrini M(1),
Lowry WE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine, UCLA, Box 957357, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, 
UCLA, 621 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (2)Eli and
Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine, UCLA, Box 957357, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA; Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, UCLA, 621
Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology
Institute, UCLA, 611 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, UCLA, 621 Charles E. 
Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (4)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for 
Regenerative Medicine, UCLA, Box 957357, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (5)Microsoft
Research, 1100 Glendon Avenue Suite PH1, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA. (6)Eli and
Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine, UCLA, Box 957357, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA; Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, UCLA, 621
Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology
Institute, UCLA, 611 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
Electronic address: blowry@ucla.edu.

It is clear that neural differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells
generates cells that are developmentally immature. Here, we show that the let-7
plays a functional role in the developmental decision making of human neural
progenitors, controlling whether these cells make neurons or glia. Through gain- 
and loss-of-function studies on both tissue and pluripotent derived cells, our
data show that let-7 specifically regulates decision making in this context by
regulation of a key chromatin-associated protein, HMGA2. Furthermore, we provide 
evidence that the let-7/HMGA2 circuit acts on HES5, a NOTCH effector and
well-established node that regulates fate decisions in the nervous system. These 
data link the let-7 circuit to NOTCH signaling and suggest that this interaction 
serves to regulate human developmental progression.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4235151
PMID: 25316189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 9;9(10):e109860. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109860.
eCollection 2014.

The role of her4 in inner ear development and its relationship with proneural
genes and Notch signalling.

Radosevic M(1), Fargas L(1), Alsina B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

The generation of sensory neurons and hair cells of the inner ear is under tight 
control. Different members of the Hairy and Enhancer of Split genes (HES) are
expressed in the inner ear, their full array of functions still not being
disclosed. We have previously shown that zebrafish her9 acts as a patterning gene
to restrict otic neurogenesis to an anterior domain. Here, we disclose the role
of another her gene, her4, a zebrafish ortholog of Hes5 that is expressed in the 
neurogenic and sensory domains of the inner ear. The expression of her4 is highly
dynamic and spatiotemporally regulated. We demonstrate by loss of function
experiments that in the neurogenic domain her4 expression is under the regulation
of neurogenin1 (neurog1) and the Notch pathway. Moreover, her4 participates in
lateral inhibition during otic neurogenesis since her4 knockdown results in
overproduction of the number of neurog1 and deltaB-positive otic neurons. In
contrast, during sensorigenesis her4 is initially Notch-independent and induced
by atoh1b in a broad prosensory domain. At later stages her4 expression becomes
Notch-dependent in the future sensory domains but loss of her4 does not result in
hair cell overproduction, suggesting that there other her genes can compensate
its function.

PMCID: PMC4192589
PMID: 25299450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncogene. 2015 Jul 23;34(30):3935-45. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.324. Epub 2014 Sep
29.

Amplified in breast cancer 1 promotes colorectal cancer progression through
enhancing notch signaling.

Mo P(1), Zhou Q(1), Guan L(1), Wang Y(1), Wang W(1), Miao M(1), Tong Z(1), Li
M(1), Majaz S(1), Liu Y(1), Su G(2), Xu J(3), Yu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. (2)The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. (3)Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Aberrant activation of Notch signaling has an essential role in colorectal cancer
(CRC) progression. Amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1), also known as steroid
receptor coactivator 3 or NCOA3, is a transcriptional coactivator that promotes
cancer cell proliferation and invasiveness. However, AIB1 implication in CRC
progression through enhancing Notch signaling is unknown. In this study, we found
that several CRC cell lines expressed high levels of AIB1, and knockdown of AIB1 
decreased cell proliferation, colony formation and tumorigenesis of these CRC
cells. Specifically, knockdown of AIB1 inhibited cell cycle progression at G1
phase by decreasing the mRNA levels of cyclin A2, cyclin B1, cyclin E2 and hairy 
and enhancer of split (Hes) 1. Furthermore, AIB1 interacted with Notch
intracellular domain and Mastermind-like 1 and was recruited to the Hes1 promoter
to enhance Notch signaling. Downregulation of AIB1 also decreased CRC cell
invasiveness in vitro and lung metastasis in vivo. Besides that, knockout of AIB1
in mice inhibited colon carcinogenesis induced by azoxymethane/dextran sodium
sulfate treatment. The mRNA levels of cyclin B1 and Hes5 were downregulated, but 
p27, ATOH1 and MUC2 were upregulated in the colon tumors from AIB1-deficient mice
compared with those from wild-type mice. Thus, our results signify the importance
of AIB1 in CRC and demonstrate that AIB1 promotes CRC progression at least in
part through enhancing Notch signaling, suggesting that AIB1 is a potential
molecular target for CRC treatment.

PMCID: PMC4377317
PMID: 25263446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:263-83. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00007-5.

Expression dynamics and functions of Hes factors in development and diseases.

Kobayashi T(1), Kageyama R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Japan Science
and Technology Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
(CREST), Saitama, Japan. Electronic address: tkobayas@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Japan Science
and Technology Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
(CREST), Saitama, Japan; World Premier International Research
Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Hes genes, encoding basic helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional repressors, are 
mammalian homologues of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split genes, both of
which are required for normal neurogenesis in Drosophila. There are seven members
in the human Hes family, Hes1-7, which are expressed in many tissues and play
various roles mainly in development. All Hes proteins have three conserved
domains: basic HLH (bHLH), Orange, and WRPW domains. The basic region binds to
target DNA sequences, while the HLH region forms homo- and heterodimers with
other bHLH proteins, the Orange domain is responsible for the selection of
partners during heterodimer formation, and the WRPW domain recruits corepressors.
Hes1, Hes5, and Hes7 are known as downstream effectors of canonical Notch
signaling, which regulates cell differentiation via cell-cell interaction. Hes
factors regulate many events in development by repressing the expression of
target genes, many of which encode transcriptional activators that promote cell
differentiation. For example, Hes1, Hes3, and Hes5 are highly expressed by neural
stem cells, and inactivation of these genes results in insufficient maintenance
of stem cell proliferation and prematurely promotes neuronal differentiation.
Recently, it was shown that the expression dynamics of Hes1 plays crucial roles
in proper developmental timings and fate-determination steps of embryonic stem
cells and neural progenitor cells. Here, we discuss some key features of Hes
factors in development and diseases.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Glia. 2015 Feb;63(2):271-86. doi: 10.1002/glia.22750. Epub 2014 Sep 12.

Early phenotypic asymmetry of sister oligodendrocyte progenitor cells after
mitosis and its modulation by aging and extrinsic factors.

Boda E(1), Di Maria S, Rosa P, Taylor V, Abbracchio MP, Buffo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Ottolenghi
(NICO), Università degli Studi di Torino, Regione Gonzole, 10-10043, Orbassano
(Turin), Italy.

Oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) persist in the adult central nervous
system and guarantee oligodendrocyte turnover throughout life. It remains obscure
how OPCs avoid exhaustion during adulthood. Similar to stem cells, OPCs could
self-maintain by undergoing asymmetric divisions generating a mixed progeny
either keeping a progenitor phenotype or proceeding to differentiation. To
address this issue, we examined the distribution of stage-specific markers in
sister OPCs during mitosis and later after cell birth, and assessed its
correlation with distinct short-term fates. In both the adult and juvenile
cerebral cortex a fraction of dividing OPCs gives rise to sister cells with
diverse immunophenotypic profiles and short-term behaviors. Such heterogeneity
appears as cells exit cytokinesis, but does not derive from the asymmetric
segregation of molecules such as NG2 or PDGFRa expressed in the mother cell.
Rather, rapid downregulation of OPC markers and upregulation of molecules
associated with lineage progression contributes to generate early sister OPC
asymmetry. Analyses during aging and upon exposure to physiological (i.e.,
increased motor activity) and pathological (i.e., trauma or demyelination)
stimuli showed that both intrinsic and environmental factors contribute to
determine the fraction of symmetric and asymmetric OPC pairs and the phenotype of
the OPC progeny as soon as cells exit mitosis.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25213035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Stem Cells. 2015 Jan;33(1):196-210. doi: 10.1002/stem.1822.

CHD7 maintains neural stem cell quiescence and prevents premature stem cell
depletion in the adult hippocampus.

Jones KM(1), Saric N, Russell JP, Andoniadou CL, Scambler PJ, Basson MA.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell
Biology, Guy's Hospital Tower Wing, London, UK.

Neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs) in the hippocampus produce new neurons
throughout adult life. NSCs are maintained in a state of reversible quiescence
and the failure to maintain the quiescent state can result in the premature
depletion of the stem cell pool. The epigenetic mechanisms that maintain this
quiescent state have not been identified. Using an inducible knockout mouse
model, we show that the chromatin remodeling factor
chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 7 (CHD7) is essential for maintaining
NSC quiescence. CHD7 inactivation in adult NSCs results in a loss of stem cell
quiescence in the hippocampus, a transient increase in cell divisions, followed
by a significant decline in neurogenesis. This loss of NSC quiescence is
associated with the premature loss of NSCs in middle-aged mice. We find that CHD7
represses the transcription of several positive regulators of cell cycle
progression and is required for full induction of the Notch target gene Hes5 in
quiescent NSCs. These findings directly link CHD7 to pathways involved in NSC
quiescence and identify the first chromatin-remodeling factor with a role in NSC 
quiescence and maintenance. As CHD7 haplo-insufficiency is associated with a
range of cognitive disabilities in CHARGE syndrome, our observations may have
implications for understanding the basis of these deficits.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25183173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3243-54. doi: 10.1242/dev.106245.

Notch signaling differentially regulates Atoh7 and Neurog2 in the distal mouse
retina.

Maurer KA(1), Riesenberg AN(1), Brown NL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (2)Division of Developmental Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA
Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California Davis,
School of Medicine, Davis, CA 95616, USA nlbrown@ucdavis.edu.

Notch signaling regulates basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors as an
evolutionarily conserved module, but the tissue-specific mechanisms are
incompletely elucidated. In the mouse retina, bHLH genes Atoh7 and Neurog2 have
distinct functions, with Atoh7 regulating retinal competence and Neurog2 required
for progression of neurogenesis. These transcription factors are extensively
co-expressed, suggesting similar regulation. We directly compared Atoh7 and
Neurog2 regulation at the earliest stages of retinal neurogenesis in a broad
spectrum of Notch pathway mutants. Notch1 and Rbpj normally block Atoh7 and
Neurog2 expression. However, the combined activities of Notch1, Notch3 and Rbpj
regulate Neurog2 patterning in the distal retina. Downstream of the Notch
complex, we found the Hes1 repressor mediates Atoh7 suppression, but Hes1, Hes3
and Hes5 do not regulate Neurog2 expression. We also tested Notch-mediated
regulation of Jag1 and Pax6 in the distal retina, to establish the appropriate
context for Neurog2 patterning. We found that Notch1;Notch3 and Rbpj block
co-expression of Jag1 and Neurog2, while specifically stimulating Pax6 within an 
adjacent domain. Our data suggest that Notch signaling controls the overall tempo
of retinogenesis, by integrating cell fate specification, the wave of
neurogenesis and the developmental status of cells ahead of this wave.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197552
PMID: 25100656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Oct;10(4):1739-45. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2393. Epub 2014 Jul
18.

Combined effect of nerve growth factor and brain-derived neurotrophic factor on
neuronal differentiation of neural stem cells and the potential molecular
mechanisms.

Liu F(1), Xuan A(1), Chen Y(1), Zhang J(1), Xu L(1), Yan Q(2), Long D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510182, P.R. China. (2)Kingmed Diagnostics College, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510182, P.R. China.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) are important pluripotent stem cells, which have
potential applications in cell replacement therapy. Brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) and nerve growth factor (NGF) have been demonstrated to exert a
marked impact on the proliferation and differentiation of NSCs. The effects of
NGF, BDNF, and BDNF combined with NGF on NSC neuronal differentiation and the
possible mechanisms for these effects were investigated in this study. An
adherent monolayer culture was employed to obtain highly homogeneous NSCs. The
cells were divided into four groups: Control, NGF, BDNF and combination (BDNF +
NGF) groups. Neuron differentiation was examined using immunocytochemistry and
phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (p-ERK) levels were analyzed using 
western blotting. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was used to
measure the mRNA expression levels of the HES1, HES5, MASH1, NGN1 and NeuroD
transcription factors at different time intervals following neurotrophin-induced 
differentiation. NGF and BDNF were observed to induce NSC neuronal
differentiation, and ß-tubulin III-positive cells and p-ERK expression levels
were highest in the NGF + BDNF combination group at all time points. The
proportion of ß-tubulin <U+2162>-positive neurons in each group was associated with the 
expression levels of MASH1, NGN1 and NeuroD in the group. In conclusion, BDNF
combined with NGF significantly improved NSC neuronal differentiation, which may 
provide support for the practical application of NSCs in neurodegenerative
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4148384
PMID: 25051506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Br J Cancer. 2014 Aug 12;111(4):781-9. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.337. Epub 2014 Jun
17.

DNA methylation status is more reliable than gene expression at detecting cancer 
in prostate biopsy.

Paziewska A(1), Dabrowska M(2), Goryca K(2), Antoniewicz A(3), Dobruch J(4),
Mikula M(2), Jarosz D(5), Zapala L(3), Borowka A(4), Ostrowski J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical Center for Postgraduate
Education, 01-813 Warsaw, Poland. (2)Department of Genetics, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, 02-781 Warsaw,
Poland. (3)Department of Urology, Multidisciplinary Hospital Warsaw-Miedzylesie, 
04-749 Warsaw, Poland. (4)Department of Urology, Medical Center for Postgraduate 
Education, 01-813 Warsaw, Poland. (5)1] Department of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Medical Center for Postgraduate Education, 01-813 Warsaw, Poland [2] 
Department of Genetics, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, 02-781 Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: We analysed critically the potential usefulness of RNA- and DNA-based
biomarkers in supporting conventional histological diagnostic tests for prostate 
carcinoma (PCa) detection.
METHODS: Microarray profiling of gene expression and DNA methylation was
performed on 16 benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and 32 cancerous and
non-cancerous prostate samples extracted by radical prostatectomy. The predictive
value of the selected biomarkers was validated by qPCR-based methods using tissue
samples extracted from the 58 prostates and, separately, using 227 prostate core 
biopsies.
RESULTS: HOXC6, AMACR and PCA3 expression showed the best discrimination between 
PCa and BPH. All three genes were previously reported as the most promising
mRNA-based markers for distinguishing cancerous lesions from benign prostate
lesions; however, none were sufficiently sensitive and specific to meet the
criteria for a PCa diagnostic biomarker. By contrast, DNA methylation levels of
the APC, TACC2, RARB, DGKZ and HES5 promoter regions achieved high discriminating
sensitivity and specificity, with area under the curve (AUCs) reaching 0.95-1.0. 
Only a small overlap was detected between the DNA methylation levels of
PCa-positive and PCa-negative needle biopsies, with AUCs ranging between 0.854
and 0.899.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation-based biomarkers reflect the prostate malignancy and
might be useful in supporting clinical decisions for suspected PCa following an
initial negative prostate biopsy.

PMCID: PMC4134497
PMID: 24937670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2014 May;2(3):229-39. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.58. Epub 2014 Apr 
1.

Mutations of NOTCH3 in childhood pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Chida A(1), Shintani M(2), Matsushita Y(2), Sato H(3), Eitoku T(4), Nakayama
T(5), Furutani Y(2), Hayama E(2), Kawamura Y(6), Inai K(2), Ohtsuki S(4), Saji
T(5), Nonoyama S(6), Nakanishi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Defense Medical College 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama, 359-8513, Japan ; Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Tokyo 
Women's Medical University 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Tokyo Women's Medical University 8-1
Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan. (3)Department of Preventive
Medicine and Public Health, National Defense Medical College 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama, 359-8513, Japan. (4)Division of Pediatric Cardiology,
Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama,
700-8558, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Toho University Medical Center,
Omori Hospital 6-11-1 Omori-nishi, Ota-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of
Pediatrics, National Defense Medical College 3-2 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama,
359-8513, Japan.

Mutations of BMPR2 and other TGF-ß superfamily genes have been reported in
pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). However, 60-90% of idiopathic PAH cases
have no mutations in these genes. Recently, the expression of NOTCH3 was shown to
be increased in the pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells of PAH patients. We
sought to investigate NOTCH3 and its target genes in PAH patients and clarify the
role of NOTCH3 signaling. We screened for mutations in NOTCH3, HES1, and HES5 in 
41 PAH patients who had no mutations in BMPR2, ALK1, endoglin, SMAD1/4/8, BMPR1B,
or Caveolin-1. Two novel missense mutations (c.2519 G>A p.G840E, c.2698 A>C
p.T900P) in NOTCH3 were identified in two PAH patients. We performed functional
analysis using stable cell lines expressing either wild-type or mutant NOTCH3.
The protein-folding chaperone GRP78/BiP was colocalized with wild-type NOTCH3 in 
the endoplasmic reticulum, whereas the majority of GRP78/BiP was translocated
into the nuclei of cells expressing mutant NOTCH3. Cell proliferation and
viability were higher for cells expressing mutant NOTCH3 than for those
expressing wild-type NOTCH3. We identified novel NOTCH3 mutations in PAH patients
and revealed that these mutations were involved in cell proliferation and
viability. NOTCH3 mutants induced an impairment in NOTCH3-HES5 signaling. The
results may contribute to the elucidation of PAH pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4049363
PMID: 24936512  [PubMed]


68. Stem Cells. 2015 Jan;33(1):21-34. doi: 10.1002/stem.1767.

Notch1 stimulation induces a vascularization switch with pericyte-like cell
differentiation of glioblastoma stem cells.

Guichet PO(1), Guelfi S, Teigell M, Hoppe L, Bakalara N, Bauchet L, Duffau H,
Lamszus K, Rothhut B, Hugnot JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hôpital St Eloi, Montpellier,
Cedex, France.

Glioblastoma multiforms (GBMs) are highly vascularized brain tumors containing a 
subpopulation of multipotent cancer stem cells. These cells closely interact with
endothelial cells in neurovascular niches. In this study, we have uncovered a
close link between the Notch1 pathway and the tumoral vascularization process of 
GBM stem cells. We observed that although the Notch1 receptor was activated, the 
typical target proteins (HES5, HEY1, and HEY2) were not or barely expressed in
two explored GBM stem cell cultures. Notch1 signaling activation by expression of
the intracellular form (NICD) in these cells was found to reduce their growth
rate and migration, which was accompanied by the sharp reduction in neural stem
cell transcription factor expression (ASCL1, OLIG2, and SOX2), while HEY1/2,
KLF9, and SNAI2 transcription factors were upregulated. Expression of OLIG2 and
growth were restored after termination of Notch1 stimulation. Remarkably, NICD
expression induced the expression of pericyte cell markers (NG2, PDGFRß, and
a-smooth muscle actin [aSMA]) in GBM stem cells. This was paralleled with the
induction of several angiogenesis-related factors most notably cytokines (heparin
binding epidermal growth factor [HB-EGF], IL8, and PLGF), matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP9), and adhesion proteins (vascular cell adhesion molecule
1 [VCAM1], intercellular adhesion molecule 1 [ICAM1], and integrin alpha 9
[ITGA9]). In xenotransplantation experiments, contrasting with the infiltrative
and poorly vascularized tumors obtained with control GBM stem cells, Notch1
stimulation resulted in poorly disseminating but highly vascularized grafts
containing large vessels with lumen. Notch1-stimulated GBM cells expressed
pericyte cell markers and closely associated with endothelial cells. These
results reveal an important role for the Notch1 pathway in regulating GBM stem
cell plasticity and angiogenic properties.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24898819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Tissue Res. 2015 Jan;359(1):125-33. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1888-7. Epub
2014 May 22.

Dynamic expression and roles of Hes factors in neural development.

Kageyama R(1), Shimojo H, Imayoshi I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan, rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

The basic helix-loop-helix factors Hes1 and Hes5 repress the expression of
proneural factors such as Ascl1, thereby inhibiting neuronal differentiation and 
maintaining neural progenitor cells (NPCs). Hes1 expression oscillates by
negative feedback with a period of about 2-3 h in proliferating NPCs. Induction
of sustained expression of Hes1 in NPCs inhibits their cell-cycle progression,
suggesting that the oscillatory expression of Hes1 is important for the
proliferation of NPCs. Hes1 oscillation drives the oscillatory expression of
proneural factors such as Ascl1 by periodic repression. By contrast, in
differentiating neurons, Hes1 expression disappears and the expression of
proneural factors is up-regulated and sustained. A new optogenetics approach that
induces Ascl1 expression by blue light illumination demonstrated that sustained
expression of Ascl1 induces neuronal differentiation, whereas oscillatory
expression of Ascl1 activates the proliferation of NPCs. These results together
indicate that Hes1 regulates the oscillatory versus sustained expression of the
proneural factor Ascl1, which in turn regulates the proliferation of NPCs and the
subsequent processes of cell-cycle exit and neuronal fate determination,
depending on the expression dynamics.

PMID: 24850276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 2014 Jun;141(11):2313-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.108100. Epub 2014 May 12.

Ligand-dependent Notch signaling strength orchestrates lateral induction and
lateral inhibition in the developing inner ear.

Petrovic J(1), Formosa-Jordan P(2), Luna-Escalante JC(2), Abelló G(1), Ibañes
M(3), Neves J(4), Giraldez F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, CEXS, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca
Biomèdica de Barcelona (PRBB), 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Departament
d'Estructura i Constituents de la Matèria, Facultat de Física, Universitat de
Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. (3)Departament d'Estructura i Constituents de 
la Matèria, Facultat de Física, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain 
mibanes@ub.edu jneves@buckinstitute.org fernando.giraldez@upf.edu.
(4)Developmental Biology Unit, CEXS, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca
Biomèdica de Barcelona (PRBB), 08003 Barcelona, Spain mibanes@ub.edu
jneves@buckinstitute.org fernando.giraldez@upf.edu.

During inner ear development, Notch exhibits two modes of operation: lateral
induction, which is associated with prosensory specification, and lateral
inhibition, which is involved in hair cell determination. These mechanisms depend
respectively on two different ligands, jagged 1 (Jag1) and delta 1 (Dl1), that
rely on a common signaling cascade initiated after Notch activation. In the
chicken otocyst, expression of Jag1 and the Notch target Hey1 correlates well
with lateral induction, whereas both Jag1 and Dl1 are expressed during lateral
inhibition, as are Notch targets Hey1 and Hes5. Here, we show that Jag1 drives
lower levels of Notch activity than Dl1, which results in the differential
expression of Hey1 and Hes5. In addition, Jag1 interferes with the ability of Dl1
to elicit high levels of Notch activity. Modeling the sensory epithelium when the
two ligands are expressed together shows that ligand regulation, differential
signaling strength and ligand competition are crucial to allow the two modes of
operation and for establishing the alternate pattern of hair cells and supporting
cells. Jag1, while driving lateral induction on its own, facilitates patterning
by lateral inhibition in the presence of Dl1. This novel behavior emerges from
Jag1 acting as a competitive inhibitor of Dl1 for Notch signaling. Both modeling 
and experiments show that hair cell patterning is very robust. The model suggests
that autoactivation of proneural factor Atoh1, upstream of Dl1, is a fundamental 
component for robustness. The results stress the importance of the levels of
Notch signaling and ligand competition for Notch function.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24821984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 May 6;15(5):7883-96. doi: 10.3390/ijms15057883.

The canonical Notch signaling was involved in the regulation of intestinal
epithelial cells apoptosis after intestinal ischemia/reperfusion injury.

Chen G(1), Zhang Z(2), Cheng Y(3), Xiao W(4), Qiu Y(5), Yu M(6), Sun L(7), Wang
W(8), Du G(9), Gu Y(10), Peng K(11), Xu C(12), Yang H(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China. maomaoyu1209@163.com. (2)Department of
General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400037, China. zhicao_zhang@163.com. (3)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China.
chengyingdong1964@163.com. (4)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital,
Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China. weidong.xiao@126.com.
(5)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China. qiuyuan1988@163.com. (6)Department of
General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400037, China. yumimianbao@163.com. (7)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China.
slh6260@163.com. (8)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China. happywwsh@163.com.
(9)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China. guangsheng_du@hotmail.com. (10)Department of
General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400037, China. guychao@163.com. (11)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China.
pengke620@163.com. (12)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China. xuqichao.2007@163.com.
(13)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China. huayang@tmmu.edu.cn.

Notch signaling plays a critical role in the maintenance of intestinal
homeostasis. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of Notch
signaling in the apoptosis of intestinal epithelial cells after intestinal
ischemia reperfusion (I/R) injury. Male C57BL/6 mice were subjected to sham
operation or I/R injury. Intestinal tissue samples were collected at 12 h after
reperfusion. TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin
nick end labeling) staining showed that intestinal I/R injury induced
significantly increased apoptosis of intestinal epithelial cells. Meanwhile, the 
mRNA expression of Jagged1, DLL1, Notch2, and Hes5, and protein expression of
NICD2 and Hes5 were increased significantly after I/R injury in intestinal
epithelial cells. In an in vitro IEC-6 culture model, flow cytometry analyses
showed that inhibition of Notch signaling by <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor DAPT and the
suppression of Hes5 expression using siRNA both significantly increased the
apoptosis of IEC-6 cells under the condition of hypoxia/ reoxygenation (H/R). In 
conclusion, the Notch2/Hes5 signaling pathway was activated and involved in the
regulation of intestinal epithelial cells apoptosis in intestinal I/R injury.

PMCID: PMC4057709
PMID: 24806344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Neoplasia. 2014 Feb;16(2):158-67. doi: 10.1593/neo.131870.

Tumor-suppressive activity of Lunatic Fringe in prostate through differential
modulation of Notch receptor activation.

Zhang S(1), Chung WC(1), Wu G(2), Egan SE(3), Xu K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS.
(2)Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology and Oregon
Clinical and Translational Research Institute, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR. (3)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The 
Hospital for Sick Children and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (4)Cancer Institute, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, MS; Department of Neurobiology and Anatomical Sciences,
University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS. Electronic address:
kxu@umc.edu.

Elevated Notch ligand and receptor expression has been associated with aggressive
forms of prostate cancer, suggesting a role for Notch signaling in regulation of 
prostate tumor initiation and progression. Here, we report a critical role for
Lunatic Fringe (Lfng), which encodes an O-fucosylpeptide
3-ß-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase known to modify epidermal growth factor
repeats of Notch receptor proteins, in regulation of prostate epithelial
differentiation and proliferation, as well as in prostate tumor suppression.
Deletion of Lfng in mice caused altered Notch activation in the prostate,
associated with elevated accumulation of Notch1, Notch2, and Notch4 intracellular
domains, decreased levels of the putative Notch3 intracellular fragment, as well 
as increased expression of Hes1, Hes5, and Hey2. Loss of Lfng resulted in
expansion of the basal layer, increased proliferation of both luminal and basal
cells, and ultimately, prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. The Lfng-null
prostate showed down-regulation of prostatic tumor suppressor gene NKX3.1 and
increased androgen receptor expression. Interestingly, expression of LFNG and
NKX3.1 were positively correlated in publically available human prostate cancer
data sets. Knockdown of LFNG in DU-145 prostate cancer cells led to expansion of 
CD44(+)CD24(-) and CD49f(+)CD24(-) stem/progenitor-like cell population
associated with enhanced prostatosphere-forming capacity. Taken together, these
data revealed a tumor-suppressive role for Lfng in the prostate through
differential regulation of Notch signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3978396
PMID: 24709423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Apr 3. doi: 10.1071/RD13399. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential expression of Notch component and effector genes during ovarian
follicle and corpus luteum development during the oestrous cycle.

Murta D, Batista M, Silva E, Trindade A, Mateus L, Duarte A, Lopes-da-Costa L.

Ovarian dynamics throughout the female oestrous cycle (EC) are characterised by
cyclical follicle and corpus luteum (CL) development. These events are tightly
regulated, involving extensive cell-to-cell communication. Notch is an
evolutionarily well conserved cell-signalling pathway implicated in cell-fate
decisions in several tissues. Here, we evaluated the extra-vascular expression
patterns of Notch component and effector genes during follicle and CL development
throughout the EC. Five mature CD1 female mice were killed at each EC stage.
Blood samples were collected for progesterone measurement, ovaries were processed
for immunohistochemistry and expression patterns of Notch components (Notch1, 2
and 3, Jagged1 and Delta-like1 and 4) and effectors (Hes1, Hes2 and Hes5) were
characterised. Nuclear detection of Notch effectors indicates that Notch
signalling is active in the ovary. Notch components and effectors are
differentially expressed during follicle and CL development throughout the EC.
The spatial and temporal specific expression patterns are associated with
follicle growth, selection and ovulation or atresia and CL development and
regression.

PMID: 24695060  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


74. J Neurosci. 2014 Mar 5;34(10):3523-35. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2606-13.2014.

The transcriptome of utricle hair cell regeneration in the avian inner ear.

Ku YC(1), Renaud NA, Veile RA, Helms C, Voelker CC, Warchol ME, Lovett M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Department of Otolaryngology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110.

Sensory hair cell loss is the major cause of hearing and balance disorders.
Mammals are incapable of sustained hair cell regeneration, but lower vertebrates 
can regenerate these mechano-electrical transducers. We present the first
comprehensive transcriptome (by mRNA-Seq) of hair cell regeneration in the chick 
utricle. We provide pathway and pattern annotations and correlate these with the 
phenotypic events that occur during regeneration. These patterns are surprisingly
synchronous and highly punctuated. We show how these patterns are a new resource 
for identifying components of the hair cell transcriptome and identify 494 new
putative hair-cell-specific genes and validate three of these (of three tested)
by immunohistochemical staining. We describe many surprising new components and
dynamic expression patterns, particularly within NOTCH signaling. For example, we
show that HES7 is specifically expressed during utricle hair cell regeneration
and closely parallels the expression of HES5. Likewise, the expression of ATOH1
is closely correlated with HEYL and the HLH inhibitory transcription factors ID1,
ID2, and ID4. We investigate the correlation between fibroblast growth factor
signaling and supporting cell proliferation and show that FGF20 inhibits
supporting cell proliferation. We also present an analysis of 212 differentially 
expressed transcription factor genes in the regenerative time course that fall
into nine distinct gene expression patterns, many of which correlate with
phenotypic events during regeneration and represent attractive candidates for
future analysis and manipulation of the regenerative program in sensory epithelia
and other vertebrate neuroepithelia.

PMCID: PMC3942572
PMID: 24599453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Neurosci. 2014 Feb 19;34(8):3067-78. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3832-13.2014.

Bre1a, a histone H2B ubiquitin ligase, regulates the cell cycle and
differentiation of neural precursor cells.

Ishino Y(1), Hayashi Y, Naruse M, Tomita K, Sanbo M, Fuchigami T, Fujiki R,
Hirose K, Toyooka Y, Fujimori T, Ikenaka K, Hitoshi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, and Center for Genetic Analysis
of Behavior, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki 444-8787,
Japan, Department of Physiological Sciences, School of Life Sciences, The
Graduate University for Advanced Studies, Okazaki 444-8787, Japan, Department of 
Integrative Physiology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu 520-2192,
Japan, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and Department of
Neurobiology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan, Division of
Embryology, National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki 444-8787, Japan, and
Laboratory for Animal Resources and Genetic Engineering, RIKEN Center for
Developmental Biology, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Cell cycle regulation is crucial for the maintenance of stem cell populations in 
adult mammalian tissues. During development, the cell cycle length in neural stem
cells increases, which could be associated with their capabilities for
self-renewal. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate differentiation and
cell cycle progression in embryonic neural stem cells remain largely unknown.
Here, we investigated the function of Bre1a, a histone H2B ubiquitylation factor,
which is expressed in most but not all of neural precursor cells (NPCs) in the
developing mouse brain. We found that the knockdown of Bre1a in NPCs lengthened
their cell cycle through the upregulation of p57(kip2) and the downregulation of 
Cdk2. In addition, the knockdown of Bre1a increased the expression of Hes5, an
effector gene of Notch signaling, through the action of Fezf1 and Fezf2 genes and
suppressed the differentiation of NPCs. Our data suggest that Bre1a could be a
bifunctional gene that regulates both the differentiation status and cell cycle
length of NPCs. We propose a novel model that the Bre1a-negative cells in the
ventricular zone of early embryonic brains remain undifferentiated and are
selected as self-renewing neural stem cells, which increase their cell cycle time
during development.

PMID: 24553946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 14;9(2):e88757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088757. eCollection
2014.

HMGA2, the architectural transcription factor high mobility group, is expressed
in the developing and mature mouse cochlea.

Smeti I(1), Watabe I(2), Savary E(2), Fontbonne A(2), Zine A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative and Adaptative Neurosciences, CNRS UMR 7260 AMU, Marseille, France
; Sensory Biophysics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Montpellier I University, Montpellier,
France. (2)Integrative and Adaptative Neurosciences, CNRS UMR 7260 AMU,
Marseille, France.

Hmga2 protein belongs to the non-histone chromosomal high-mobility group (HMG)
protein family. HMG proteins have been shown to function as architectural
transcription regulators, facilitating enhanceosome formation on a variety of
mammalian promoters. Hmga2 are expressed at high levels in embryonic and
transformed cells. Terminally differentiated cells, however, have been reported
to express only minimal, if any, Hmga2. Our previous affymetrix array data showed
that Hmga2 is expressed in the developing and adult mammalian cochleas. However, 
the spatio-temporal expression pattern of Hmga2 in the murine cochlea remained
unknown. In this study, we report the expression of Hmga2 in developing and adult
cochleas using immunohistochemistry and quantitative real time PCR analysis.
Immunolabeling of Hmga2 in the embryonic, postnatal, and mature cochleas showed
broad Hmga2 expression in embryonic cochlea (E14.5) at the level of the
developing organ of Corti in differentiating hair cells, supporting cells, in
addition to immature cells in the GER and LER areas. By postnatal stage (P0-P3), 
Hmga2 is predominantly expressed in the hair and supporting cells, in addition to
cells in the LER area. By P12, Hmga2 immunolabeling is confined to the hair cells
and supporting cells. In the adult ear, Hmga2 expression is maintained in the
hair and supporting cell subtypes (i.e. Deiters' cells, Hensen cells, pillar
cells, inner phalangeal and border cells) in the cochlear epithelium. Using
quantitative real time PCR, we found a decrease in transcript level for Hmga2
comparable to other known inner ear developmental genes (Sox2, Atoh1, Jagged1 and
Hes5) in the cochlear epithelium of the adult relative to postnatal ears. These
data provide for the first time the tissue-specific expression and transcription 
level of Hmga2 during inner ear development and suggest its potential dual role
in early differentiation and maintenance of both hair and supporting cell
phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3925159
PMID: 24551154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jun 15;23(12):1328-39. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0557. Epub 2014
Mar 25.

HES5 is a key mediator of Wnt-3a-induced neuronal differentiation.

Mußmann C(1), Hübner R, Trilck M, Rolfs A, Frech MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration (AKos), University of Rostock 
, Rostock, Germany .

Human neural stem/progenitor cell (hNPC)-derived neuronal progeny has been
suggested as a promising cell source in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Understanding the underlying mechanisms that regulate neuronal differentiation is
essential for efficient cell-based therapies. Wnt and Notch signaling has been
shown to be crucial in this process. However, their interactions in the process
of neuronal differentiation remain elusive. By using human fetal (ReNcell VM) and
iPS-derived hNPCs we demonstrate that Wnt-3a immediately induced a transient HES1
upregulation and a sustained HES5 repression that was accompanied by upregulation
of the proneural gene MASH1. Conversely, overexpression of HES5 resulted in
reduced MASH1 expression. Remarkably, HES5 overexpression efficiently blocked
Wnt-3a as well as <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor
N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine t-butyl ester
(DAPT)-induced neuronal differentiation that was accompanied by a strong MASH1
downregulation thus directly linking HES5 repression/MASH1 induction to the
proneurogenic effect of Wnt-3a. Stabilized ß-catenin or treatment with the
specific glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3ß) inhibitor SB-216763 failed to or
only partially mimicked these effects, suggesting a GSK3ß- and
ß-catenin-independent mechanism. Further, inhibition of
Wnt-3a-LDL-receptor-related protein 5/6 (LRP5/6) interactions using Dickkopf-1
(Dkk-1) failed to inhibit the modulatory effect of Wnt-3a on HES1/5 and neuronal 
differentiation. Taken together, these data identify HES5 as a key mediator of
the Wnt-3a proneurogenic effect occurring independently of the classical
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling cascade thus further deciphering crosstalk mechanisms of 
Wnt and Notch signaling pathways regulating cell fate of hNPCs.

PMID: 24548083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1004118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004118. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

FGFR1-Frs2/3 signalling maintains sensory progenitors during inner ear hair cell 
formation.

Ono K(1), Kita T(2), Sato S(3), O'Neill P(2), Mak SS(2), Paschaki M(2), Ito M(4),
Gotoh N(5), Kawakami K(3), Sasai Y(6), Ladher RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sensory Development, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Chuo-ku, Kobe,
Japan ; Neurogenesis and Organogenesis, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan. (2)Sensory Development, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan. (3)Division of Biology, Center for Molecular
Medicine, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan. (4)Department of 
Anatomy, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan. (5)Division of
Genetics, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Japan.
(6)Neurogenesis and Organogenesis, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

Inner ear mechanosensory hair cells transduce sound and balance information.
Auditory hair cells emerge from a Sox2-positive sensory patch in the inner ear
epithelium, which is progressively restricted during development. This
restriction depends on the action of signaling molecules. Fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) signalling is important during sensory specification: attenuation of
Fgfr1 disrupts cochlear hair cell formation; however, the underlying mechanisms
remain unknown. Here we report that in the absence of FGFR1 signaling, the
expression of Sox2 within the sensory patch is not maintained. Despite the
down-regulation of the prosensory domain markers, p27(Kip1), Hey2, and Hes5,
progenitors can still exit the cell cycle to form the zone of non-proliferating
cells (ZNPC), however the number of cells that form sensory cells is reduced.
Analysis of a mutant Fgfr1 allele, unable to bind to the adaptor protein, Frs2/3,
indicates that Sox2 maintenance can be regulated by MAP kinase. We suggest that
FGF signaling, through the activation of MAP kinase, is necessary for the
maintenance of sensory progenitors and commits precursors to sensory cell
differentiation in the mammalian cochlea.

PMCID: PMC3900395
PMID: 24465223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dev Neurobiol. 2014 Jun;74(6):643-56. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22162. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Progressive effects of N-myc deficiency on proliferation, neurogenesis, and
morphogenesis in the olfactory epithelium.

Wittmann W(1), Schimmang T, Gunhaga L.

Author information: 
(1)Umeå Centre for Molecular Medicine, Umeå University, 901 87, Umeå, Sweden.

N-myc belongs to the myc proto-oncogene family, which is involved in numerous
cellular processes such as proliferation, growth, apoptosis, and differentiation.
Conditional deletion of N-myc in the mouse nervous system disrupted brain
development, indicating that N-myc plays an essential role during neural
development. How the development of the olfactory epithelium and neurogenesis
within are affected by the loss of N-myc has, however, not been determined. To
address these issues, we examined an N-myc(Foxg1Cre) conditional mouse line, in
which N-myc is depleted in the olfactory epithelium. First changes in N-myc
mutants were detected at E11.5, with reduced proliferation and neurogenesis in a 
slightly smaller olfactory epithelium. The phenotype was more pronounced at
E13.5, with a complete lack of Hes5-positive progenitor cells, decreased
proliferation, and neurogenesis. In addition, stereological analyses revealed
reduced cell size of post-mitotic neurons in the olfactory epithelium, which
contributed to a smaller olfactory pit. Furthermore, we observed diminished
proliferation and neurogenesis also in the vomeronasal organ, which likewise was 
reduced in size. In addition, the generation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone
neurons was severely reduced in N-myc mutants. Thus, diminished neurogenesis and 
proliferation in combination with smaller neurons might explain the morphological
defects in the N-myc depleted olfactory structures. Moreover, our results suggest
an important role for N-myc in regulating ongoing neurogenesis, in part by
maintaining the Hes5-positive progenitor pool. In summary, our results provide
evidence that N-myc deficiency in the olfactory epithelium progressively
diminishes proliferation and neurogenesis with negative consequences at
structural and cellular levels.

© The Authors. Developmental Neurobiology Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4237195
PMID: 24376126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e78759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078759.
eCollection 2013.

DNA-dependent protein kinase is a context dependent regulator of Lmx1a and
midbrain specification.

Hunt CP(1), Fabb SA, Pouton CW, Haynes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Biology, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash
University (Parkville), Melbourne, Australia.

The identification of small molecules capable of directing pluripotent cell
differentiation towards specific lineages is highly desirable to both reduce
cost, and increase efficiency. Within neural progenitors, LIM homeobox
transcription factor 1 alpha (Lmx1a) is required for proper development of roof
plate and cortical hem structures of the forebrain, as well as the development of
floor plate and midbrain dopaminergic neurons. In this study we generated
homologous recombinant cell lines expressing either luciferase or ß-lactamase
under the control of the Lmx1a promoter, and used these cell lines to investigate
kinase-mediated regulation of Lmx1a activity during neuronal differentiation. A
screen of 143 small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors yielded 16 compounds that
positively or negatively modulated Lmx1a activity. Inhibition of EGF, VEGF and
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) signaling significantly upregulated Lmx1a
activity whereas MEK inhibition strongly downregulated its activity. Quantitative
FACS analysis revealed that the DNA-PK inhibitor significantly increased the
number of Lmx1a+ progenitors while subsequent qPCR showed an upregulation of
Notch effectors, the basic helix-loop-helix genes, Hes5 and Hey1. FACS further
revealed that DNA-PK-mediated regulation of Lmx1a+ cells is dependent on the
rapamycin-sensitive complex, mTORC1. Interestingly, this DNA-PK inhibitor effect 
was preserved in a co-culture differentiation protocol. Terminal differentiation 
assays showed that DNA-PK inhibition shifted development of neurons from
forebrain toward midbrain character as assessed by Pitx3/TH immunolabeling and
corresponding upregulation of midbrain (En1), but not forebrain (FoxG1)
transcripts. These studies show that Lmx1a signaling in mouse embryonic stem
cells contributes to a molecular cascade establishing neuronal specification. The
data presented here identifies a novel regulatory pathway where signaling from
DNA-PK appears to suppress midbrain-specific Lmx1a expression.

PMCID: PMC3806860
PMID: 24194952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 2013 Dec;140(23):4751-62. doi: 10.1242/dev.101378. Epub 2013 Oct 30.

Growth differentiation factor 5 is a key physiological regulator of dendrite
growth during development.

Osório C(1), Chacón PJ, Kisiswa L, White M, Wyatt S, Rodríguez-Tébar A, Davies
AM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, UK.

Dendrite size and morphology are key determinants of the functional properties of
neurons. Here, we show that growth differentiation factor 5 (GDF5), a member of
the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) subclass of the transforming growth factor ß
superfamily with a well-characterised role in limb morphogenesis, is a key
regulator of the growth and elaboration of pyramidal cell dendrites in the
developing hippocampus. Pyramidal cells co-express GDF5 and its preferred
receptors, BMP receptor 1B and BMP receptor 2, during development. In culture,
GDF5 substantially increased dendrite, but not axon, elongation from these
neurons by a mechanism that depends on activation of SMADs 1/5/8 and upregulation
of the transcription factor HES5. In vivo, the apical and basal dendritic arbours
of pyramidal cells throughout the hippocampus were markedly stunted in both
homozygous and heterozygous Gdf5 null mutants, indicating that dendrite size and 
complexity are exquisitely sensitive to the level of endogenous GDF5 synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3833432
PMID: 24173804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Feb 1;23(3):230-44. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0177. Epub 2013
Nov 4.

Notch signaling induces retinal stem-like properties in perinatal neural retina
progenitors and promotes symmetric divisions in adult retinal stem cells.

Balenci L(1), van der Kooy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Terrence Donnelly Centre for Cellular and
Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto , Toronto, Canada .

Understanding the mechanisms regulating retinal stem cell (RSC) activity is
fundamental for future stem cell-based therapeutic purposes. By combining gain
and loss of function approaches, we addressed whether Notch signaling may play a 
selective role in retinal stem versus retinal progenitor cells in both developing
and adult eyes. Inhibition of either Notch or fibroblast growth factor signaling 
reduced proliferation of retinal stem and retinal progenitor cells, and inhibited
RSC self-renewal. Conversely, exogenous Delta-like 3 and direct intrinsic Notch
activation stimulated expansionary symmetric divisions in adult RSCs with the
concomitant upregulation of Hes5. Knocking down Hes5 expression specifically
decreased the numbers, but not the diameters, of adult RSC primary spheres,
indicating that HES5 is the downstream effector of Notch receptor in controlling 
adult RSC proliferation. In addition, constitutive Notch activation induced
retinal stem-like asymmetric self-renewal properties, with no expansion (no
symmetrical division) in perinatal neural retina progenitor cells. These findings
highlight central roles of Notch signaling activity in regulating the modes of
division of retinal stem and retinal progenitor cells.

PMID: 24050115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Neurochem. 2013 Dec;127(6):819-36. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12440. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

The Notch signaling pathway: its role in focal CNS demyelination and
apotransferrin-induced remyelination.

Aparicio E(1), Mathieu P, Pereira Luppi M, Almeira Gubiani MF, Adamo AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, IQUIFIB (UBA-CONICET), School of Pharmacy 
and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires, C1113AAD, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Oligodendroglial damage and demyelination are common pathological features
characterizing white matter and neurodegenerative disorders. Identifying the
signaling pathways involved in myelin repair through oligodendroglial progenitor 
maturation is essential for the development of new therapies. This article
investigated the role of the Notch signaling pathway in CNS demyelination and
apotransferrin-induced remyelination in a focal lysolecithin-induced
demyelination model in rats. Notch was found activated in Nestin-expressing
neural progenitor cells and in NG2-expressing oligodendroglial precursor cells in
the subventricular zone and corpus callosum of lysolecithin-demyelinated rats.
Notch activation seemed to be driven by Jagged1, which led to a high expression
of downstream gene Hes5 in the subventricular zone of demyelinated rats.
Apotransferrin injection induced remyelination, while the injection of the
<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor reversed this effect. In addition, 24 h after
apotransferrin injection, evidence showed Notch activation concomitantly with an 
increase in F3/contactin levels and the up-regulation of the myelin-associated
glycoprotein gene in the subventricular zone and corpus callosum of demyelinated 
rats. Collected evidence supports the participation of both canonical and
non-canonical Notch signaling pathways in demyelination/remyelination. Notch
activation was found to trigger Hes5 expression as a consequence of focal
demyelination, which might promote oligodendroglial precursor cell proliferation.
During apotransferrin-induced remyelination, Notch activation seemed to be
mediated by the expression of F3/contactin, which might induce
apotransferrin-mediated oligodendroglial maturation. Evidence of the
participation of Notch signaling in the demyelination/remyelination process will 
help further understand demyelinating disorders such as Multiple Sclerosis and
the use of aTf should be taken into consideration as a possible therapeutic
intervention.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 24032544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 28;8(8):e72767. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072767. eCollection
2013.

Dynamics of Notch pathway expression during mouse testis post-natal development
and along the spermatogenic cycle.

Murta D(1), Batista M, Silva E, Trindade A, Henrique D, Duarte A, Lopes-da-Costa 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Obstetrics, CIISA, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Technical 
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

The transcription and expression patterns of Notch pathway components (Notch 1-3,
Delta1 and 4, Jagged1) and effectors (Hes1, Hes2, Hes5 and Nrarp) were evaluated 
(through RT-PCR and IHC) in the mouse testis at key moments of post-natal
development, and along the adult spermatogenic cycle. Notch pathway components
and effectors are transcribed in the testis and expressed in germ, Sertoli and
Leydig cells, and each Notch component shows a specific cell-type and time-window
expression pattern. This expression at key testis developmental events prompt for
a role of Notch signaling in pre-pubertal spermatogonia quiescence, onset of
spermatogenesis, and regulation of the spermatogenic cycle.

PMCID: PMC3755970
PMID: 24015274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2013 Dec;14(6):813-28. doi: 10.1007/s10162-013-0414-z.
Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Hair cell generation by notch inhibition in the adult mammalian cristae.

Slowik AD(1), Bermingham-McDonogh O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
98195, USA, slowia@uw.edu.

Balance disorders caused by hair cell loss in the sensory organs of the
vestibular system pose a significant health problem worldwide, particularly in
the elderly. Currently, this hair cell loss is permanent as there is no effective
treatment. This is in stark contrast to nonmammalian vertebrates who robustly
regenerate hair cells after damage. This disparity in regenerative potential
highlights the need for further manipulation in order to stimulate more robust
hair cell regeneration in mammals. In the utricle, Notch signaling is required
for maintaining the striolar support cell phenotype into the second postnatal
week. Notch signaling has further been implicated in hair cell regeneration after
damage in the mature utricle. Here, we investigate the role of Notch signaling in
the mature mammalian cristae in order to characterize the Notch-mediated
regenerative potential of these sensory organs. For these studies, we used the
<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor, N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine
t-butyl ester (DAPT), in conjunction with a method we developed to culture
cristae in vitro. In postnatal and adult cristae, we found that 5 days of DAPT
treatment resulted in a downregulation of the Notch effectors Hes1 and Hes5 and
also an increase in the total number of Gfi1(+) hair cells. Hes5, as reported by 
Hes5-GFP, was downregulated specifically in peripheral support cells. Using
lineage tracing with proteolipid protein (PLP)/CreER;mTmG mice, we found that
these hair cells arose through transdifferentiation of support cells in cristae
explanted from mice up to 10 weeks of age. These transdifferentiated cells arose 
without proliferation and were capable of taking on a hair cell morphology,
migrating to the correct cell layer, and assembling what appears to be a
stereocilia bundle with a long kinocilium. Overall, these data show that Notch
signaling is active in the mature cristae and suggest that it may be important in
maintaining the support cell fate in a subset of peripheral support cells.

PMCID: PMC3825023
PMID: 23989618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Metab Brain Dis. 2013 Dec;28(4):655-66. doi: 10.1007/s11011-013-9425-z. Epub 2013
Aug 17.

Exogenous and endogenous therapeutic effects of combination Sodium Ferulate and
bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) treatment enhance neurogenesis after rat focal 
cerebral ischemia.

Zhao Y(1), Lai W, Xu Y, Li L, Chen Z, Wu W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Faculty of
Chinese Medicine, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macao,
yhzhao@must.edu.mo.

Combining bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) with pharmacological therapy is an
attractive approach for neurological function recovery of stroke. Our previous
reports demonstrated that Sodium Ferulate (SF) combined with BMSCs administration
could facilitate BMSCs migration into the ischemic brain by up-regulation of
stromal cell-derived factor-1 alpha (SDF-1a)/chemokine (CXC motif) receptor-4
axis after stroke. To further investigate whether combination treatment could
enhance neurogenesis through exogenous and endogenous therapeutic effects, we
established rat permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAo) model and
measured ischemic infarct size by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning in
the present study. The results showed that combination treatment could
dramatically reduce ischemic infarction size which may be attributed to the
effects on decreasing brain edema and enhancing cerebral tissue perfusion at
3 days after stroke. Immunofluorescence staining results indicated that
combination treatment could not only promote expression of Glucose transporter
1(Glut1) and Neuron-specific class III beta-tubulin (Tuj1) in the periinfarct
area, but also improve BMSCs expression of Glut1, GFAP and Tuj1. Moreover, it
showed combination treatment could enhance the endogenous expression of Tuj-1 in 
ischemic boundary zone. These results perhaps associated with combination
treatment up-regulating bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP)2/4 expressions and
down-regulating Notch-1, Hes1 and Hes5 expressions as detected by Western Blot
analysis. Our study firstly demonstrated in vivo that combination treatment could
facilitate exogenous BMSCs differentiation into neural-and astrocytic-like cells,
as well as enhance repair capacity of brain parenchymal cells by promoting
glucose metabolism and endogenous neurogenesis after stroke. These results
illustrate that administration of SF and BMSCs is a potential pathway of
cell-based pharmacological treatment towards ischemic stroke.

PMID: 23955489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 30;8(7):e71213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071213. Print 2013.

NOTCH1 gain of function in germ cells causes failure of spermatogenesis in male
mice.

Huang Z(1), Rivas B, Agoulnik AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Herbert Wertheim College of
Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, Florida, USA.

NOTCH1 is a member of the NOTCH receptor family, a group of single-pass
trans-membrane receptors. NOTCH signaling is highly conserved in evolution and
mediates communication between adjacent cells. NOTCH receptors have been
implicated in cell fate determination, as well as maintenance and differentiation
of stem cells. In the mammalian testis expression of NOTCH1 in somatic and germ
cells has been demonstrated, however its role in spermatogenesis was not clear.
To study the significance of NOTCH1 in germ cells, we applied a cre/loxP approach
in mice to induce NOTCH1 gain- or loss-of function specifically in male germ
cells. Using a Stra8-icre transgene we produced mice with conditional activation 
of the NOTCH1 intracellular domain (NICD) in germ cells. Spermatogenesis in these
mutants was progressively affected with age, resulting in decreased testis weight
and sperm count. Analysis of downstream target genes of NOTCH1 signaling showed
an increased expression of Hes5, with a reduction of the spermatogonial
differentiation marker, Neurog3 expression in the mutant testis. Apoptosis was
significantly increased in mouse germ cells with the corresponding elevation of
pro-apoptotic Trp53 and Trp63 genes' expression. We also showed that the
conditional germ cell-specific ablation of Notch1 had no effect on
spermatogenesis or male fertility. Our data suggest the importance of NOTCH
signaling regulation in male germ cells for their survival and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3728026
PMID: 23936265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2013 Sep;140(17):3511-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.098681. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Notch/Rbpj<U+03BA> signaling regulates progenitor maintenance and differentiation of
hypothalamic arcuate neurons.

Aujla PK(1), Naratadam GT, Xu L, Raetzman LT.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 407 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, 
IL 61801, USA.

The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (Arc), containing pro-opoiomelanocortin (POMC), 
neuropeptide Y (NPY) and growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) neurons,
regulates feeding, energy balance and body size. Dysregulation of this
homeostatic mediator underlies diseases ranging from growth failure to obesity.
Despite considerable investigation regarding the function of Arc neurons,
mechanisms governing their development remain unclear. Notch signaling factors
such as Hes1 and Mash1 are present in hypothalamic progenitors that give rise to 
Arc neurons. However, how Notch signaling controls these progenitor populations
is unknown. To elucidate the role of Notch signaling in Arc development, we
analyzed conditional loss-of-function mice lacking a necessary Notch co-factor,
Rbpj<U+03BA>, in Nkx2.1-cre-expressing cells (Rbpj<U+03BA> cKO), as well as mice with
expression of the constitutively active Notch1 intracellular domain (NICD) in
Nkx2.1-cre-expressing cells (NICD Tg). We found that loss of Rbpj<U+03BA> results in
absence of Hes1 but not of Hes5 within the primordial Arc at E13.5. Additionally,
Mash1 expression is increased, coincident with increased proliferation and
accumulation of Arc neurons at E13.5. At E18.5, Rbpj<U+03BA> cKO mice have few
progenitors and show increased numbers of differentiated Pomc, NPY and Ghrh
neurons. By contrast, NICD Tg mice have increased hypothalamic progenitors, show 
an absence of differentiated Arc neurons and aberrant glial differentiation at
E18.5. Subsequently, both Rbpj<U+03BA> cKO and NICD Tg mice have changes in growth and
body size during postnatal development. Taken together, our results demonstrate
that Notch/Rbpj<U+03BA> signaling regulates the generation and differentiation of Arc
neurons, which contribute to homeostatic regulation of body size.

PMCID: PMC3742139
PMID: 23884446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mech Dev. 2013 Sep-Oct;130(9-10):458-66. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.07.001. Epub
2013 Jul 17.

Hes1 and Hes5 regulate vascular remodeling and arterial specification of
endothelial cells in brain vascular development.

Kitagawa M(1), Hojo M, Imayoshi I, Goto M, Ando M, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R,
Miyamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The vascular system is the first organ to form in the developing mammalian
embryo. The Notch signaling pathway is an evolutionarily conserved signaling
mechanism essential for proper embryonic development in almost all vertebrate
organs. The analysis of targeted mouse mutants has demonstrated essential roles
of the Notch signaling pathway in embryonic vascular development. However, Notch 
signaling-deficient mice have so far not been examined in detail in the head
region. The bHLH genes Hes1 and Hes5 are essential effectors for Notch signaling,
which regulate the maintenance of progenitor cells and the timing of their
differentiation in various tissues and organs. Here, we report that
endothelial-specific Hes1 and Hes5 mutant embryos exhibited defective vascular
remodeling in the brain. In addition, arterial identity of endothelial cells was 
partially lost in the brain of these mutant mice. These data suggest that Hes1
and Hes5 regulate vascular remodeling and arterial fate specification of
endothelial cells in the development of the brain. Hes1 and Hes5 represent
critical transducers of Notch signals in brain vascular development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23871867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Hear Res. 2013 Oct;304:91-110. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2013.06.011. Epub 2013 Jul
9.

Regeneration of mammalian cochlear and vestibular hair cells through Hes1/Hes5
modulation with siRNA.

Du X(1), Li W, Gao X, West MB, Saltzman WM, Cheng CJ, Stewart C, Zheng J, Cheng
W, Kopke RD.

Author information: 
(1)Hough Ear Institute, P.O. Box 23206, Oklahoma City, OK 73112, USA.

The Notch pathway is a cell signaling pathway determining initial specification
and subsequent cell fate in the inner ear. Previous studies have suggested that
new hair cells (HCs) can be regenerated in the inner ear by manipulating the
Notch pathway. In the present study, delivery of siRNA to Hes1 and Hes5 using a
transfection reagent or siRNA to Hes1 encapsulated within
poly(lactide-co-glycolide acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles increased HC numbers in
non-toxin treated organotypic cultures of cochleae and maculae of postnatal day 3
mouse pups. An increase in HCs was also observed in cultured cochleae and maculae
of mouse pups pre-conditioned with a HC toxin (4-hydroxy-2-nonenal or neomycin)
and then treated with the various siRNA formulations. Treating cochleae with
siRNA to Hes1 associated with a transfection reagent or siRNA to Hes1 delivered
by PLGA nanoparticles decreased Hes1 mRNA and up-regulated Atoh1 mRNA expression 
allowing supporting cells (SCs) to acquire a HC fate. Experiments using cochleae 
and maculae of p27(kip1)/-GFP transgenic mouse pups demonstrated that newly
generated HCs trans-differentiated from SCs. Furthermore, PLGA nanoparticles are 
non-toxic to inner ear tissue, readily taken up by cells within the tissue of
interest, and present a synthetic delivery system that is a safe alternative to
viral vectors. These results indicate that when delivered using a suitable
vehicle, Hes siRNAs are potential therapeutic molecules that may have the
capacity to regenerate new HCs in the inner ear and possibly restore human
hearing and balance function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4051161
PMID: 23850665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(6):e1001586. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001586. Epub 2013 Jun 
11.

Fbw7 repression by hes5 creates a feedback loop that modulates Notch-mediated
intestinal and neural stem cell fate decisions.

Sancho R(1), Blake SM, Tendeng C, Clurman BE, Lewis J, Behrens A.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, CR UK London Research Institute, Lincoln's Inn 
Fields Laboratories, London, United Kingdom.

FBW7 is a crucial component of an SCF-type E3 ubiquitin ligase, which mediates
degradation of an array of different target proteins. The Fbw7 locus comprises
three different isoforms, each with its own promoter and each suspected to have a
distinct set of substrates. Most FBW7 targets have important functions in
developmental processes and oncogenesis, including Notch proteins, which are
functionally important substrates of SCF(Fbw7). Notch signalling controls a
plethora of cell differentiation decisions in a wide range of species. A
prominent role of this signalling pathway is that of mediating lateral
inhibition, a process where exchange of signals that repress Notch ligand
production amplifies initial differences in Notch activation levels between
neighbouring cells, resulting in unequal cell differentiation decisions. Here we 
show that the downstream Notch signalling effector HES5 directly represses
transcription of the E3 ligase Fbw7ß, thereby directly bearing on the process of 
lateral inhibition. Fbw7(<U+0394>/+) heterozygous mice showed haploinsufficiency for
Notch degradation causing impaired intestinal progenitor cell and neural stem
cell differentiation. Notably, concomitant inactivation of Hes5 rescued both
phenotypes and restored normal stem cell differentiation potential. In silico
modelling suggests that the NICD/HES5/FBW7ß positive feedback loop underlies Fbw7
haploinsufficiency. Thus repression of Fbw7ß transcription by Notch signalling is
an essential mechanism that is coupled to and required for the correct
specification of cell fates induced by lateral inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3679002
PMID: 23776410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Neurosci. 2013 May 22;33(21):9122-39. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0791-13.2013.

Dynamic interactions between intermediate neurogenic progenitors and radial glia 
in embryonic mouse neocortex: potential role in Dll1-Notch signaling.

Nelson BR(1), Hodge RD, Bedogni F, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, Washington 98101,USA. bneuro@uw.edu or rhevner@uw.edu

The mammalian neocortical progenitor cell niche is composed of a diverse
repertoire of neuroepithelial cells, radial glia (RG), and intermediate
neurogenic progenitors (INPs). Previously, live-cell imaging experiments have
proved crucial in identifying these distinct progenitor populations, especially
INPs, which amplify neural output by undergoing additional rounds of
proliferation before differentiating into new neurons. INPs also provide feedback
to the RG pool by serving as a source of Delta-like 1 (Dll1), a key ligand for
activating Notch signaling in neighboring cells, a well-known mechanism for
maintaining RG identity. While much is known about Dll1-Notch signaling at the
molecular level, little is known about how this cell-cell contact dependent
feedback is transmitted at the cellular level. To investigate how RG and INPs
might interact to convey Notch signals, we used high-resolution live-cell
multiphoton microscopy (MPM) to directly observe cellular interactions and
dynamics, in conjunction with Notch-pathway specific reporters in the neocortical
neural stem cell niche in organotypic brain slices from embryonic mice. We found 
that INPs and RG interact via dynamic and transient elongate processes, some
apparently long-range (extending from the subventricular zone to the ventricular 
zone), and some short-range (filopodia-like). Gene expression profiling of RG and
INPs revealed further progenitor cell diversification, including different
subpopulations of Hes1+ and/or Hes5+ RG, and Dll1+ and/or Dll3+ INPs. Thus, the
embryonic progenitor niche includes a network of dynamic cell-cell interactions, 
using different combinations of Notch signaling molecules to maintain and likely 
diversify progenitor pools.

PMCID: PMC3716275
PMID: 23699523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2013 May 14;8(5):e64368. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064368. Print 2013.

Selective roles of normal and mutant huntingtin in neural induction and early
neurogenesis.

Nguyen GD(1), Gokhan S, Molero AE, Mehler MF.

Author information: 
(1)Roslyn and Leslie Goldstein Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative 
Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by abnormal
polyglutamine expansion in the amino-terminal end of the huntingtin protein (Htt)
and characterized by progressive striatal and cortical pathology. Previous
reports have shown that Htt is essential for embryogenesis, and a recent study by
our group revealed that the pathogenic form of Htt (mHtt) causes impairments in
multiple stages of striatal development. In this study, we have examined whether 
HD-associated striatal developmental deficits are reflective of earlier
maturational alterations occurring at the time of neurulation by assessing
differential roles of Htt and mHtt during neural induction and early neurogenesis
using an in vitro mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) clonal assay system. We
demonstrated that the loss of Htt in ESCs (KO ESCs) severely disrupts the
specification of primitive and definitive neural stem cells (pNSCs, dNSCs,
respectively) during the process of neural induction. In addition, clonally
derived KO pNSCs and dNSCs displayed impaired proliferative potential, enhanced
cell death and altered multi-lineage potential. Conversely, as observed in HD
knock-in ESCs (Q111 ESCs), mHtt enhanced the number and size of pNSC clones,
which exhibited enhanced proliferative potential and precocious neuronal
differentiation. The transition from Q111 pNSCs to fibroblast growth factor 2
(FGF2)-responsive dNSCs was marked by potentiation in the number of dNSCs and
altered proliferative potential. The multi-lineage potential of Q111 dNSCs was
also enhanced with precocious neurogenesis and oligodendrocyte progenitor
elaboration. The generation of Q111 epidermal growth factor (EGF)-responsive
dNSCs was also compromised, whereas their multi-lineage potential was unaltered. 
These abnormalities in neural induction were associated with differential
alterations in the expression profiles of Notch, Hes1 and Hes5. These cumulative 
observations indicate that Htt is required for multiple stages of neural
induction, whereas mHtt enhances this process and promotes precocious
neurogenesis and oligodendrocyte progenitor cell elaboration.

PMCID: PMC3653864
PMID: 23691206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2013 May 17;8(5):e63947. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063947. Print 2013.

Myosin VI reduces proliferation, but not differentiation, in pluripotent P19
cells.

Takarada T(1), Kou M, Nakamichi N, Ogura M, Ito Y, Fukumori R, Kokubo H, Acosta
GB, Hinoi E, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We have previously shown marked upregulation of the mRNA and
corresponding protein for the cellular motor molecule myosin VI (Myo6) after an
extremely traumatic stress experience, along with a delayed decrease in
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation in the murine hippocampus, a brain
structure believed to undergo adult neurogenesis. In this study, we investigated 
the role of Myo6 in both proliferation and differentiation in pluripotent P19
cells by using stable transfection and RNA interference techniques.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Stable overexpression of Myo6 not only led to
significant inhibition of the reducing activity of
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) and the
size of clustered aggregates in P19 cells, but also resulted in selectively
decreased mRNA expression of the repressor type proneural gene Hes5 without
affecting the expression of neuronal and astroglial marker proteins. In P19 cells
transfected with Myo6 siRNA, by contrast, a significant increase was found in the
size of aggregate and MTT reduction along with increased Sox2 protein levels, in 
addition to marked depletion of the endogenous Myo6 protein. In C6 glioma cells, 
however, introduction of Myo6 siRNA induced a drastic decrease in endogenous Myo6
protein levels without significantly affecting MTT reduction. The Ca(2+)
ionophore A23187 drastically increased the luciferase activity in P19 cells
transfected with a Myo6 promoter reporter plasmid, but not in HEK293, Neuro2A and
C6 glioma cells transfected with the same reporter.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that Myo6 may play a predominant 
pivotal role in the mechanism underlying proliferation without affecting
differentiation to progeny lineages in pluripotent P19 cells.

PMCID: PMC3656852
PMID: 23691122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 26;8(4):e61807. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061807. Print 2013.

Epigenetic inactivation of Notch-Hes pathway in human B-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia.

Kuang SQ(1), Fang Z, Zweidler-McKay PA, Yang H, Wei Y, Gonzalez-Cervantes EA,
Boumber Y, Garcia-Manero G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

The Notch pathway can have both oncogenic and tumor suppressor roles, depending
on cell context. For example, Notch signaling promotes T cell differentiation and
is leukemogenic in T cells, whereas it inhibits early B cell differentiation and 
acts as a tumor suppressor in B cell leukemia where it induces growth arrest and 
apoptosis. The regulatory mechanisms that contribute to these opposing roles are 
not understood. Aberrant promoter DNA methylation and histone modifications are
associated with silencing of tumor suppressor genes and have been implicated in
leukemogenesis. Using methylated CpG island amplification (MCA)/DNA promoter
microarray, we identified Notch3 and Hes5 as hypermethylated in human B cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We investigated the methylation status of
other Notch pathway genes by bisulfite pyrosequencing. Notch3, JAG1, Hes2, Hes4
and Hes5 were frequently hypermethylated in B leukemia cell lines and primary
B-ALL, in contrast to T-ALL cell lines and patient samples. Aberrant methylation 
of Notch3 and Hes5 in B-ALL was associated with gene silencing and was
accompanied by decrease of H3K4 trimethylation and H3K9 acetylation and gain of
H3K9 trimethylation and H3K27 trimethylation. 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment
restored Hes5 expression and decreased promoter hypermethylation in most leukemia
cell lines and primary B-ALL samples. Restoration of Hes5 expression by
lentiviral transduction resulted in growth arrest and apoptosis in Hes5 negative 
B-ALL cells but not in Hes5 expressing T-ALL cells. These data suggest that
epigenetic modifications are implicated in silencing of tumor suppressor of
Notch/Hes pathway in B-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3637323
PMID: 23637910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Neuropharmacology. 2013 Sep;72:58-65. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.04.009. Epub
2013 Apr 23.

The retinoic acid receptor agonist Am80 increases hippocampal ADAM10 in aged
SAMP8 mice.

Kitaoka K(1), Shimizu N, Ono K, Chikahisa S, Nakagomi M, Shudo K, Ishimura K, Séi
H, Yoshizaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.
Electronic address: kitaoka@tokushima-u.ac.jp.

The retinoic acid (RA, a vitamin A metabolite) receptor (RAR) is a transcription 
factor. Vitamin A/RA administration improves the Alzheimer's disease (AD)- and
age-related attenuation of memory/learning in mouse models. Recently, a
disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10 (ADAM10) was
identified as a key molecule in RA-mediated anti-AD mechanisms. We investigated
the effect of chronic administration of the RAR agonist Am80 (tamibarotene) on
ADAM10 expression in senescence-accelerated mice (SAMP8). Moreover, we estimated 
changes in the expression of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), amyloid beta
(Aß), and hairy/enhancer of split (Hes), which are mediated by ADAM10. Spatial
working memory and the levels of a hippocampal proliferation marker (Ki67) were
also assessed in these mice. ADAM10 mRNA and protein expression was significantly
reduced in the hippocampus of 13-month-old SAMP8 mice; their expression improved 
significantly after Am80 administration. Further, after Am80 administration, the 
expression levels of Hes5 and Ki67 were restored and the deterioration of working
memory was suppressed, whereas APP and Aß levels remained unchanged. Our results 
suggest that Am80 administration effectively improves dementia by activating the 
hippocampal ADAM10-Notch-Hes5 proliferative pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23624141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013 Apr 18;4(2):43. doi: 10.1186/scrt190.

Oxidative stress-induced Notch1 signaling promotes cardiogenic gene expression in
mesenchymal stem cells.

Boopathy AV, Pendergrass KD, Che PL, Yoon YS, Davis ME.

Comment in
    Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013;4(3):63.

INTRODUCTION: Administration of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
after myocardial infarction (MI) results in modest functional improvements.
However; the effect of microenvironment changes after MI, such as elevated levels
of oxidative stress on cardiogenic gene expression of MSCs, remains unclear.
METHODS: MSCs were isolated from the bone marrow of adult rats and treated for 1 
week with H2O2 (0.1 to 100 µM) or 48 hours with glucose oxidase (GOX; 0 to 5
mU/ml) to mimic long-term pulsed or short-term continuous levels of H2O2,
respectively.
RESULTS: In 100 µM H2O2 or 5 mU/ml GOX-treated MSCs, mRNA expression of selected 
endothelial genes (Flt1, vWF, PECAM1), and early cardiac marker (nkx2-5, aMHC)
increased significantly, whereas early smooth muscle markers (smooth muscle
a-actin and sm22a) and fibroblast marker vimentin decreased, as measured with
real-time PCR. Interestingly, mRNA expression and activity of the cell-surface
receptor Notch1 were significantly increased, as were its downstream targets,
Hes5 and Hey1. Co-treatment of MSCs with 100 µM H2O2 and a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor 
that prevents Notch signaling abrogated the increase in cardiac and endothelial
genes, while augmenting the decrease in smooth muscle markers. Further, on GOX
treatment, a significant increase in Wnt11, a downstream target of Notch1, was
observed. Similar results were obtained with adult rat cardiac-derived progenitor
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that H2O2- or GOX-mediated oxidative stress
upregulates Notch1 signaling, which promotes cardiogenic gene expression in adult
stem/progenitor cells, possibly involving Wnt11. Modulating the balance between
Notch activation and H2O2-mediated oxidative stress may lead to improved adult
stem cell-based therapies for cardiac repair and regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3706823
PMID: 23597145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 30;110(18):7300-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214498110. Epub 2013 Apr 15.

Role of p63 and the Notch pathway in cochlea development and sensorineural
deafness.

Terrinoni A(1), Serra V, Bruno E, Strasser A, Valente E, Flores ER, van Bokhoven 
H, Lu X, Knight RA, Melino G.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Laboratory Istituto Dermopatico Dell'Immacolata, c/o Department
of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 00133 Rome,
Italy. alessandro.terrinoni@uniroma2.it

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2854.

The ectodermal dysplasias are a group of inherited autosomal dominant syndromes
associated with heterozygous mutations in the Tumor Protein p63 (TRP63) gene.
Here we show that, in addition to their epidermal pathology, a proportion of
these patients have distinct levels of deafness. Accordingly, p63 null mouse
embryos show marked cochlea abnormalities, and the transactivating isoform of p63
(TAp63) protein is normally found in the organ of Corti. TAp63 transactivates
hairy and enhancer of split 5 (Hes5) and atonal homolog 1 (Atoh1), components of 
the Notch pathway, known to be involved in cochlear neuroepithelial development. 
Strikingly, p63 null mice show morphological defects of the organ of Corti, with 
supernumerary hair cells, as also reported for Hes5 null mice. This phenotype is 
related to loss of a differentiation property of TAp63 and not to loss of its
proapoptotic function, because cochleas in mice lacking the critical Bcl-2
homology domain (BH-3) inducers of p53- and p63-mediated apoptosis--Puma, Noxa,
or both--are normal. Collectively, these data demonstrate that TAp63, acting via 
the Notch pathway, is crucial for the development of the organ of Corti,
providing a molecular explanation for the sensorineural deafness in ectodermal
dysplasia patients with TRP63 mutations.

PMCID: PMC3645580
PMID: 23589895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Dyn. 2013 Jun;242(6):678-86. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23965. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Jagged1 is the major regulator of Notch-dependent cell fate in proximal airways.

Zhang S(1), Loch AJ, Radtke F, Egan SE, Xu K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson,
Mississippi 39216, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Notch signaling pathway plays complex roles in developing lungs, 
including regulation of proximodistal fates, airway cell specification and
differentiation. However, the specific Notch-mediated signals involved in lung
development remain unclear.
RESULTS: Here we report that Jagged1 is expressed in a subset of bronchial and
bronchiolar epithelial cells, where it controls proximal airway cell fate and
differentiation. In agreement with previous studies involving disruption of all
Notch signaling, we found that deletion of Jagged1 in airway epithelium increased
the number of ciliated cells at the expense of Clara cells, a phenotype
associated with downregulation of Hes1. Deletion of Jagged1 also led to an
increased number of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells (PNEC), suggesting that
Jagged1/Notch signaling inhibits PNEC cell fate. As expected, Jagged1 deletion
did not affect alveolar cell differentiation, although alveolar septation was
impaired, likely an indirect effect of proximal airway defects. Finally, in the
postnatal lung, Jagged1 deletion induced mucous metaplasia, accompanied by
downregulation of Hes1 and Hes5.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that Jagged1-mediated Notch signaling
regulates multiple cell fate decisions as well as differentiation in the
respiratory system to coordinate lung development and to maintain a balance of
airway cell types in adult life.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23526493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Curr Drug Deliv. 2014;11(5):552-60.

PEDF & stem cells: niche vs. nurture.

Fitchev P, Chung C, Plunkett BA, Brendler CB, Crawford SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)NorthShore Univ. Research Institute, Affiliate of University of Chicago, 1001 
University Place, 3rd Floor, Evanston, IL 60201, USA. scrawford@northwestern.edu.

Anti-angiogenic pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) is a multifunctional
50kD secreted glycoprotein emerging as a key factor in stem cell renewal.
Characteristics of the stem cell niche can be highly dependent on location,
access to the vasculature, oxygen tension and neighboring cells. In the neural
stem cell (NSC) niche, specifically the subventricular zone, PEDF actively
participates in the self renewal process and promotes stemness by upregulating
Notch signaling effectors Hes1 and Hes5. The local vascular endothelial cells and
ependymal cells are the likely sources of PEDF for the NSC while mesenchymal and 
retinal stem cells can actually produce PEDF. The opposing actions of PEDF and
VEGF on various cells are recapitulated in the NSC niche. Intraventricular
injection of PEDF promotes stem cell renewal, while injection of VEGF prompts
differentiation and neurogenesis in the subventricular zone. Enhancing the
expression of PEDF in stem cells has promising therapeutic implications. Bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells overexpressing PEDF effectively inhibited
pathologic angiogenesis in the murine eye and these same cells suppressed
hepatocellular carcinoma growth. As a protein with bioactivities in nearly all
normal organ systems, it is likely that PEDF will continue to gain visibility as 
an essential component in the development and delivery of novel stem cell-based
therapies to combat disease.

PMID: 23517628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Mar;5(3):384-96. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201201623.

Reactive astrocytes promote the metastatic growth of breast cancer stem-like
cells by activating Notch signalling in brain.

Xing F(1), Kobayashi A, Okuda H, Watabe M, Pai SK, Pandey PR, Hirota S, Wilber A,
Mo YY, Moore BE, Liu W, Fukuda K, Iiizumi M, Sharma S, Liu Y, Wu K, Peralta E,
Watabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA.

Brain metastasis of breast cancer profoundly affects the cognitive and sensory
functions as well as morbidity of patients, and the 1 year survival rate among
these patients remains less than 20%. However, the pathological mechanism of
brain metastasis is as yet poorly understood. In this report, we found that
metastatic breast tumour cells in the brain highly expressed IL-1ß which then
'activated' surrounding astrocytes. This activation significantly augmented the
expression of JAG1 in the astrocytes, and the direct interaction of the
reactivated astrocytes and cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) significantly stimulated
Notch signalling in CSCs. We also found that the activated Notch signalling in
CSCs up-regulated HES5 followed by promoting self-renewal of CSCs. Furthermore,
we have shown that the blood-brain barrier permeable Notch inhibitor, Compound E,
can significantly suppress the brain metastasis in vivo. These results represent 
a novel paradigm for the understanding of how metastatic breast CSCs re-establish
their niche for their self-renewal in a totally different microenvironment, which
opens a new avenue to identify a novel and specific target for the brain
metastatic disease.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3598079
PMID: 23495140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Jun;65(6):1457-67. doi: 10.1002/art.37923.

Rheumatoid arthritis in Latin Americans enriched for Amerindian ancestry is
associated with loci in chromosomes 1, 12, and 13, and the HLA class II region.

López Herráez D(1), Martínez-Bueno M, Riba L, García de la Torre I, Sacnún M,
Goñi M, Berbotto GA, Paira S, Musuruana JL, Graf CE, Alvarellos AJ, Messina OD,
Babini AM, Strusberg I, Marcos JC, Scherbarth H, Spindler AJ, Quinteros A, Toloza
SM, Moreno JL, Catoggio LJ, Tate G, Eimon A, Citera G, Catalán Pellet A,
Nasswetter GG, Cardiel MH, Miranda P, Ballesteros F, Esquivel-Valerio JA,
Maradiaga-Ceceña MA, Acevedo-Vásquez EM, García García C, Pons-Estel BA,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucía de Genómica e
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Granada, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To identify susceptibility loci for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in Latin
American individuals with admixed European and Amerindian genetic ancestry.
METHODS: Genotyping was performed in 1,475 patients with RA and 1,213 control
subjects, using a customized BeadArray containing 196,524 markers covering loci
previously associated with various autoimmune diseases. Principal components
analysis (EigenSoft package) and Structure software were used to identify
outliers and define the population substructure. REAP software was used to define
cryptic relatedness and duplicates, and genetic association analyses were
conducted using Plink statistical software.
RESULTS: A strong genetic association between RA and the major histocompatibility
complex region was observed, localized within BTNL2/DRA-DQB1- DQA2 (P = 7.6 ×
10(-10) ), with 3 independent effects. We identified an association in the
PLCH2-HES5-TNFRSF14-MMEL1 region of chromosome 1 (P = 9.77 × 10(-6) ), which was 
previously reported in Europeans, Asians, and Native Canadians. We identified one
novel putative association in ENOX1 on chromosome 13 (P = 3.24 × 10(-7) ).
Previously reported associations were observed in the current study, including
PTPN22, SPRED2, STAT4, IRF5, CCL21, and IL2RA, although the significance was
relatively moderate. Adjustment for Amerindian ancestry improved the association 
of a novel locus in chromosome 12 at C12orf30 (NAA25) (P = 3.9 × 10(-6) ).
Associations with the HLA region, SPRED2, and PTPN22 improved in individuals
positive for anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies.
CONCLUSION: Our data define, for the first time, the contribution of Amerindian
ancestry to the genetic architecture of RA in an admixed Latin American
population by confirming the role of the HLA region and supporting the
association with a locus in chromosome 1. In addition, we provide data for novel 
putative loci in chromosomes 12 and 13.

Copyright © 2013 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 23460240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Ther. 2013 Apr;21(4):834-41. doi: 10.1038/mt.2013.18. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

siRNA targeting Hes5 augments hair cell regeneration in aminoglycoside-damaged
mouse utricle.

Jung JY(1), Avenarius MR, Adamsky S, Alpert E, Feinstein E, Raphael Y.

Author information: 
(1)KHRI, Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, The University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-5648, USA.

Notch signaling is active during the development of mosaic epithelial sheets and 
during their turnover and regeneration. After the loss of hair cells in the
mosaic sheet of the vestibular sensory epithelium, new hair cells can be
spontaneously generated by transdifferentiation of supporting cells. This
regenerative process involves downregulation of the Hes5 gene and is known to be 
limited and incomplete, especially when the lesion is severe. Here, we test
whether further downregulation of Hes5 gene accomplished by the use of siRNA
after a severe lesion induced by an aminoglycoside in the mouse utricle can
enhance the transdifferentiation of supporting cells and lead to the increased
production of new hair cells. We demonstrate that Hes5 levels in the utricle
decreased after the application of siRNA and that the number of hair cells in
these utricles was significantly larger than following control treatment. The
data suggest that siRNA technology may be useful for inducing repair and
regeneration in the inner ear and that the Notch signaling pathway is a
potentially useful target for specific gene expression inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3616538
PMID: 23439501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Rep. 2013 Mar 28;3(3):796-807. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.01.035. Epub 2013 
Feb 21.

A positive feedback loop between ATOH7 and a Notch effector regulates cell-cycle 
progression and neurogenesis in the retina.

Chiodini F(1), Matter-Sadzinski L, Rodrigues T, Skowronska-Krawczyk D, Brodier L,
Schaad O, Bauer C, Ballivet M, Matter JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Sciences II, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva,
Switzerland.

The HES proteins are known Notch effectors and have long been recognized as
important in inhibiting neuronal differentiation. However, the roles that they
play in the specification of neuronal fate remain largely unknown. Here, we show 
that in the differentiating retinal epithelium, the proneural protein ATOH7
(ATH5) is required for the activation of the transcription of the Hes5.3 gene
before the penultimate mitosis of progenitor cells. We further show that the
HES5.3 protein slows down the cell-cycle progression of Atoh7-expressing cells,
thereby establishing conditions for Atoh7 to reach a high level of expression in 
S phase and induce neuronal differentiation prior to the ultimate mitosis. Our
study uncovers how a proneural protein recruits a protein known to be a component
of the Notch signaling pathway in order to regulate the transition between an
initial phase of selection among uncommitted progenitors and a later phase
committing the selected progenitors to neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23434507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54809. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054809. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Regulation of progenitor cell proliferation and neuronal differentiation in
enteric nervous system neurospheres.

Theocharatos S(1), Wilkinson DJ, Darling S, Wilm B, Kenny SE, Edgar D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Enteric nervous system (ENS) progenitor cells isolated from mouse and human bowel
can be cultured in vitro as neurospheres which are aggregates of the
proliferating progenitor cells, together with neurons and glial cells derived
from them. To investigate the factors regulating progenitor cell proliferation
and differentiation, we first characterised cell proliferation in mouse ENS
neurospheres by pulse chase experiments using thymidine analogs. We demonstrate
rapid and continuous cell proliferation near the neurosphere periphery, after
which postmitotic cells move away from the periphery to become distributed
throughout the neurosphere. While many proliferating cells expressed glial
markers, expression of the neuronal markers ß-tubulin III (Tuj1) and nitric oxide
synthase was detected in increasing numbers of post-mitotic cells after a delay
of several days. Treatment of both mouse and human neurospheres with the
<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor N-[N-(3,5-Difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine
t-butyl ester (DAPT) reduced expression of the transcription factors Hes1 and
Hes5, demonstrating inhibition of Notch signaling. DAPT treatment also inhibited 
progenitor cell proliferation and increased the numbers of differentiating
neurons expressing Tuj1 and nitric oxide synthase. To confirm that the cellular
effects of DAPT treatment were due to inhibition of Notch signaling, siRNA
knockdown of RBPj<U+03BA>, a key component of the canonical Notch signaling pathway, was
demonstrated both to reduce proliferation and to increase neuronal
differentiation in neurosphere cells. These observations indicate that Notch
signaling promotes progenitor cell proliferation and inhibits neuronal
differentiation in ENS neurospheres.

PMCID: PMC3553067
PMID: 23372773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Mar 14;537:44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.01.021. Epub 2013
Jan 26.

ADAM17 regulates self-renewal and differentiation of U87 glioblastoma stem cells.

Chen X(1), Chen L, Zhang R, Yi Y, Ma Y, Yan K, Jiang X, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510282, Guangdong Province, China.

Erratum in
    Neurosci Lett. 2013 Aug 26;548:306.

Glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) play an important role in the progression and
recurrence of malignant glioblastoma because of their potential for self-renewal,
multilineage differentiation and tumor initiation. A disintegrin and
metalloproteinase 17 (ADAM17) is responsible for the proteolytic cleavage of
Notch within its extracellular domain leading to the activation of Notch
signaling, which is involved in the formation and maintenance of GSCs. Here, we
show that glioma cells expressing the stem cell marker CD133 coexpress higher
levels of ADAM17 than matched CD133-glioma cells. Knockdown of the ADAM17 gene in
U87 GSCs down-regulated the expression of CD133, inhibited secondary neurosphere 
formation and induced multi-lineage differentiation. Furthermore, knockdown of
ADAM17 inhibited Hes1 and Hes5 and activated Notch1 expression, which may explain
the ADAM17 shRNA-induced suppression of self-renewal and differentiation of U87
GSCs. Our results suggest that ADAM17 may maintain the stemness of GSCs by
promoting their self-renewal and inhibiting their differentiation via Notch
signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23356982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Brain Res. 2013 Mar 7;1499:136-44. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.12.045. Epub 2013
Jan 16.

Rs6295 promoter variants of the serotonin type 1A receptor are differentially
activated by c-Jun in vitro and correlate to transcript levels in human epileptic
brain tissue.

Pernhorst K(1), van Loo KM, von Lehe M, Priebe L, Cichon S, Herms S, Hoffmann P, 
Helmstaedter C, Sander T, Schoch S, Becker AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Sigmund-Freud
Str. 25, Bonn 53105, Germany.

Erratum in
    Brain Res. 2014 Mar 25;1555:97-8.

Many brain disorders, including epilepsy, migraine and depression, manifest with 
episodic symptoms that may last for various time intervals. Transient alterations
of neuronal function such as related to serotonin homeostasis generally underlie 
this phenomenon. Several nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in gene promoters
associated with these diseases have been described. For obvious reasons, their
regulatory roles on gene expression particularly in human brain tissue remain
largely enigmatic. The rs6295 G-/C-allelic variant is located in the promoter
region of the human HTR1a gene, encoding the G-protein-coupled receptor for
5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT1AR). In addition to reported transcriptional repressor
binding, our bioinformatic analyses predicted a reduced binding affinity of the
transcription factor (TF) c-Jun for the G-allele. In vitro luciferase
transfection assays revealed c-Jun to (a) activate the rs6295 C- significantly
stronger than the G-allelic variant and (b) antagonize efficiently the repressive
effect of Hes5 on the promoter. The G-allele of rs6295 is known to be associated 
with aspects of major depression and migraine. In order to address a potential
role of rs6295 variants in human brain tissue, we have isolated DNA and mRNA from
fresh frozen hippocampal tissue of pharmacoresistant temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE)
patients (n=140) after epilepsy surgery for seizure control. We carried out SNP
genotyping studies and mRNA analyses in order to determine HTR1a mRNA expression 
in human hippocampal samples stratified according to the rs6295 allelic variant. 
The mRNA expression of HTR1a was significantly more abundant in hippocampal mRNA 
of TLE patients homozygous for the rs6295 C-allele as compared to those with the 
GG-genotype. These data may point to a novel, i.e., rs6295 allelic variant and
c-Jun dependent transcriptional 5HT1AR 'receptoropathy'.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Exp Med. 2013 Jan 14;210(1):71-84. doi: 10.1084/jem.20120993. Epub 2012 Dec 24.

Hes repressors are essential regulators of hematopoietic stem cell development
downstream of Notch signaling.

Guiu J(1), Shimizu R, D'Altri T, Fraser ST, Hatakeyama J, Bresnick EH, Kageyama
R, Dzierzak E, Yamamoto M, Espinosa L, Bigas A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cancer Research, Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute, IMIM,
Barcelona Biomedical Research Park, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Previous studies have identified Notch as a key regulator of hematopoietic stem
cell (HSC) development, but the underlying downstream mechanisms remain unknown. 
The Notch target Hes1 is widely expressed in the aortic endothelium and
hematopoietic clusters, though Hes1-deficient mice show no overt hematopoietic
abnormalities. We now demonstrate that Hes is required for the development of HSC
in the mouse embryo, a function previously undetected as the result of functional
compensation by de novo expression of Hes5 in the aorta/gonad/mesonephros (AGM)
region of Hes1 mutants. Analysis of embryos deficient for Hes1 and Hes5 reveals
an intact arterial program with overproduction of nonfunctional hematopoietic
precursors and total absence of HSC activity. These alterations were associated
with increased expression of the hematopoietic regulators Runx1, c-myb, and the
previously identified Notch target Gata2. By analyzing the Gata2 locus, we have
identified functional RBPJ-binding sites, which mutation results in loss of Gata2
reporter expression in transgenic embryos, and functional Hes-binding sites,
which mutation leads to specific Gata2 up-regulation in the hematopoietic
precursors. Together, our findings show that Notch activation in the AGM triggers
Gata2 and Hes1 transcription, and next HES-1 protein represses Gata2, creating an
incoherent feed-forward loop required to restrict Gata2 expression in the
emerging HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3549704
PMID: 23267012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Apr;87(4):721-33. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0984-2. Epub 2012
Dec 2.

A 3-dimensional human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived model to detect
developmental neurotoxicity of nanoparticles.

Hoelting L(1), Scheinhardt B, Bondarenko O, Schildknecht S, Kapitza M, Tanavde V,
Tan B, Lee QY, Mecking S, Leist M, Kadereit S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitaetsstrasse 10, 78457 
Konstanz, Germany.

Nanoparticles (NPs) have been shown to accumulate in organs, cross the
blood-brain barrier and placenta, and have the potential to elicit developmental 
neurotoxicity (DNT). Here, we developed a human embryonic stem cell
(hESC)-derived 3-dimensional (3-D) in vitro model that allows for testing of
potential developmental neurotoxicants. Early central nervous system PAX6(+)
precursor cells were generated from hESCs and differentiated further within 3-D
structures. The 3-D model was characterized for neural marker expression
revealing robust differentiation toward neuronal precursor cells, and gene
expression profiling suggested a predominantly forebrain-like development.
Altered neural gene expression due to exposure to non-cytotoxic concentrations of
the known developmental neurotoxicant, methylmercury, indicated that the 3-D
model could detect DNT. To test for specific toxicity of NPs, chemically inert
polyethylene NPs (PE-NPs) were chosen. They penetrated deep into the 3-D
structures and impacted gene expression at non-cytotoxic concentrations. NOTCH
pathway genes such as HES5 and NOTCH1 were reduced in expression, as well as
downstream neuronal precursor genes such as NEUROD1 and ASCL1. FOXG1, a
patterning marker, was also reduced. As loss of function of these genes results
in severe nervous system impairments in mice, our data suggest that the 3-D
hESC-derived model could be used to test for Nano-DNT.

PMCID: PMC3604581
PMID: 23203475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Hear Res. 2013 Mar;297:30-41. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.11.008. Epub 2012 Nov
27.

Beyond generalized hair cells: molecular cues for hair cell types.

Jahan I(1), Pan N, Kersigo J, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts and
Sciences, 143 BB, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors (TFs) are crucial for inner
ear neurosensory development. The proneural TF Atoh1 regulates the
differentiation of hair cells (HCs) whereas Neurog1 and Neurod1 regulate
specification and differentiation of neurons, respectively, but also affect HC
development. Expression of Delta and Jagged ligands in nascent HCs and Notch
receptors in supporting cells induce supporting cell differentiation through the 
regulation of neurogenic bHLH TFs (such as Hes1, Hes5) and suppression of limited
Atoh1 expression. In sensorineural hearing loss, HCs are lost followed by
supporting cells and progressive degeneration of neurons, at least in rodents.
Regaining complete hearing may require reconstituting the organ of Corti from
scratch, including the two types of HCs, inner and outer hair cells with the
precise sorting of two types of afferent (type I and II) and efferent (lateral
and medial olivo-cochlear) innervation. We review effects of bHLH TF dosage and
their cross-regulation to differentiate HC types in the organ of Corti. We
categorize findings of specific gene expressions in HCs: 1. as markers without
meaning for the regeneration task, 2. as stabilizers who are needed to maintain
or complete differentiation, and 3. as decision-making genes, expressed and
acting early enough to be useful in this process. Only one TF has been
characterized that fits the last aspect: Atoh1. We propose that temporal and
intensity variations of Atoh1 are naturally modulated to differentiate specific
types of HCs. Importantly, the molecular means to modify the Atoh1 expression are
at least partially understood and can be readily implemented in the attempts to
regenerate specific types of HCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3624765
PMID: 23201032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Nat Neurosci. 2012 Dec;15(12):1627-35. doi: 10.1038/nn.3264. Epub 2012 Nov 18.

BCL6 controls neurogenesis through Sirt1-dependent epigenetic repression of
selective Notch targets.

Tiberi L(1), van den Ameele J, Dimidschstein J, Piccirilli J, Gall D, Herpoel A, 
Bilheu A, Bonnefont J, Iacovino M, Kyba M, Bouschet T, Vanderhaeghen P.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institute for Interdisciplinary Research, ULB
Neuroscience Institute, Brussels, Belgium.

During neurogenesis, neural stem/progenitor cells (NPCs) undergo an irreversible 
fate transition to become neurons. The Notch pathway is important for this
process, and repression of Notch-dependent Hes genes is essential for triggering 
differentiation. However, Notch signaling often remains active throughout
neuronal differentiation, implying a change in the transcriptional responsiveness
to Notch during the neurogenic transition. We identified Bcl6, an oncogene, as
encoding a proneurogenic factor that is required for proper neurogenesis of the
mouse cerebral cortex. BCL6 promoted the neurogenic conversion by switching the
composition of Notch-dependent transcriptional complexes at the Hes5 promoter.
BCL6 triggered exclusion of the co-activator Mastermind-like 1 and recruitment of
the NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase Sirt1, which was required for BCL6-dependent
neurogenesis. The resulting epigenetic silencing of Hes5 led to neuronal
differentiation despite active Notch signaling. Our findings suggest a role for
BCL6 in neurogenesis and uncover Notch-BCL6-Sirt1 interactions that may affect
other aspects of physiology and disease.

PMID: 23160044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cell Signal. 2013 Feb;25(2):561-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.11.003. Epub 2012 
Nov 13.

Notch1-mediated signaling regulates proliferation of porcine satellite cells
(PSCs).

Qin L(1), Xu J, Wu Z, Zhang Z, Li J, Wang C, Long Q.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science/Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-animal Genomics
and Molecular Breeding, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510642, People's Republic of China.

Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved cell-cell communication mechanism 
involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and fate
decisions of mammalian cells. In the present study, we investigated the possible 
requirement for Notch signaling in the proliferation and differentiation of
porcine satellite cells. We show that Notch1, 2 and 3 are expressed in cultured
porcine satellite cells. Knock-down of NOTCH1, but not NOTCH2 and NOTCH3,
decreases the proliferation of porcine satellite cells. In contrast, enhancement 
of NOTCH1 expression via treatment of porcine satellite cells with recombinant
NF-<U+03BA>B increases the proliferation of porcine satellite cells. The alteration of
porcine satellite cell proliferation is associated with significant changes in
the expression of cell cycle related genes (cyclin B1, D1, D2, E1 and p21),
myogenic regulatory factors (MyoD and myogenin) and the Notch effector Hes5. In
addition, alteration of Notch1 expression in porcine satellite cells causes
changes in the expression of GSK3ß-3. Taken together, these findings suggest that
of the four notch-related genes, Notch1is likely to be required for regulating
the proliferation and therefore the maintenance of porcine satellite cells in
vivo, and do so through activation of the Notch effector gene Hes5.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23160004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 1;22(3):345-58. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0299. Epub 2012
Dec 7.

The matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor marimastat promotes neural progenitor cell
differentiation into neurons by gelatinase-independent TIMP-2-dependent
mechanisms.

Sinno M(1), Biagioni S, Ajmone-Cat MA, Pafumi I, Caramanica P, Medda V, Tonti G, 
Minghetti L, Mannello F, Cacci E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology Charles Darwin, Sapienza, University
of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors (TIMPs), produced in
the brain by cells of non-neural and neural origin, including neural progenitors 
(NPs), are emerging as regulators of nervous system development and adult brain
functions. In the present study, we explored whether MMP-2, MMP-9, and TIMP-2,
abundantly produced in the brain, modulate NP developmental properties. We found 
that treatment of NPs, isolated from the murine fetal cerebral cortex or adult
subventricular zone, with the clinically tested broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor
Marimastat profoundly affected the NP differentiation fate. Marimastat treatment 
allowed for an enrichment of our cultures in neuronal cells, inducing NPs to
generate higher percentage of neurons and a lower percentage of astrocytes,
possibly affecting NP commitment. Consistently with its proneurogenic effect,
Marimastat early downregulated the expression of Notch target genes, such as Hes1
and Hes5. MMP-2 and MMP-9 profiling on proliferating and differentiating NPs
revealed that MMP-9 was not expressed under these conditions, whereas MMP-2
increased in the medium as pro-MMP-2 (72<U+2009>kDa) during differentiation; its active 
form (62<U+2009>kDa) was not detectable by gel zymography. MMP-2 silencing or
administration of recombinant active MMP-2 demonstrated that MMP-2 does not
affect NP neuronal differentiation, nor it is involved in the Marimastat
proneurogenic effect. We also found that TIMP-2 is expressed in NPs and increases
during late differentiation, mainly as a consequence of astrocyte generation.
Endogenous TIMP-2 did not modulate NP neurogenic potential; however, the
proneurogenic action of Marimastat was mediated by TIMP-2, as demonstrated by
silencing experiments. In conclusion, our data exclude a major involvement of
MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the regulation of basal NP differentiation, but highlight the 
ability of TIMP-2 to act as key effector of the proneurogenic response to an
inducing stimulus such as Marimastat.

PMID: 23098139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Comp Neurol. 2013 May 1;521(7):1561-84. doi: 10.1002/cne.23242.

Loss of Gsx1 and Gsx2 function rescues distinct phenotypes in Dlx1/2 mutants.

Wang B(1), Long JE, Flandin P, Pla R, Waclaw RR, Campbell K, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

Mice lacking the Dlx1 and Dlx2 homeobox genes (Dlx1/2 mutants) have severe
deficits in subpallial differentiation, including overexpression of the Gsx1 and 
Gsx2 homeobox genes. To investigate whether Gsx overexpression contributes to the
Dlx1/2 mutant phenotypes, we made compound loss-of-function mutants. Eliminating 
Gsx2 function from the Dlx1/2 mutants rescued the increased expression of Ascl1
and Hes5 (Notch signaling mediators) and Olig2 (oligodendrogenesis mediator). In 
addition, Dlx1/2;Gsx2 mutants, like Dlx1/2;Ascl1 mutants, exacerbated the Gsx2
and Dlx1/2 patterning and differentiation phenotypes, particularly in the lateral
ganglionic eminence (LGE) caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE), and septum, including
loss of GAD1 expression. On the other hand, eliminating Gsx1 function from the
Dlx1/2 mutants (Dlx1/2;Gsx1 mutants) did not severely exacerbate their phenotype;
on the contrary, it resulted in a partial rescue of medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) properties, including interneuron migration to the cortex. Thus, despite
their redundant properties, Gsx1 and -2 have distinct interactions with Dlx1 and 
-2. Gsx2 interaction is strongest in the LGE, CGE, and septum, whereas the Gsx1
interaction is strongest in the MGE. From these studies, and earlier studies, we 
present a model of the transcriptional network that regulates early steps of
subcortical development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3615175
PMID: 23042297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Feb;31(1):30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2012.09.004.
Epub 2012 Sep 29.

Caveolin-1 regulates neural differentiation of rat bone mesenchymal stem cells
into neurons by modulating Notch signaling.

Wang S(1), Kan Q, Sun Y, Han R, Zhang G, Peng T, Jia Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou 450052, China.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are known to differentiate into neurons
in vitro. However, the mechanism underlying MSC differentiation remains
controversial. A recent analysis has shown that Notch signaling is involved in
regulating the differentiation of MSCs. This study examines the potential
mechanism of the differentiation of MSCs into neurons, and it considers the role 
of caveolin-1 in this process. We investigated neuron differentiation and Notch
signaling by detecting the expression levels of microtubule-associated protein 2 
(MAP-2), Neuron-specific Enolase (NSE), Notch-1, Notch intracellular domain
(NICD) and hairy enhancer of split 5 (Hes5). We found that by down-regulating
caveolin-1 during induction, MSCs were prone to neural differentiation and
expressed high levels of neuronal markers. Meanwhile, the expression levels of
Notch-1, NICD and Hes5 decreased. Our results indicate that down-regulation of
caveolin-1 promotes the neuronal differentiation of MSCs by modulating the Notch 
signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2012 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23031836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Acta Otolaryngol. 2012 Oct;132(10):1028-35.

Jagged1-mediated Notch signaling regulates mammalian inner ear development
independent of lateral inhibition.

Hao J(1), Koesters R, Bouchard M, Gridley T, Pfannenstiel S, Plinkert PK, Zhang
L, Praetorius M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, PR China.

CONCLUSION: Jagged1-mediated Notch signaling regulates hair cell (HC) production 
in a distinct way rather than lateral inhibition mediated by Hes1 and Hes5.
Jagged1 may interact with Notch3, probably via candidate downstream mediators
Hesr1 and Hesr2, regulating the prosensory formation in the early stage.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the function of the Jagged1-mediated Notch signaling
pathway in mammalian inner ear development and its possible mechanism.
METHODS: Using conditional gene targeting, a novel Jagged1 conditional knockout
(Jag1-cko), Pax8(cre/+); Jag1(flox/flox), was established. The auditory brainstem
response and swim ability test were utilized to identify functional disability.
The expression of Jagged1, Notch3, Hes1, Hesr1, and Hesr2 was detected by
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Our Jag1-cko model was established and survived well. It presented
hearing impairment and balance disturbance with 'waltzing' behavior. Cochleae and
vestibular apparatus were all found in our Jag1-cko model. Patch deficiency of
outer hair cells (OHCs) was found on the apical and middle turns of the auditory 
epithelium. OHCs were totally missing on the basal turn. The stereociliary
bundles were disorientated on the cristae. Unlike Hes1, no expression of Notch3, 
Hesr1, and Hesr2 was found on embryonic day 13.5 of the Jag1-cko model.

PMID: 22998557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Development. 2012 Oct;139(20):3764-74.

Delta-like 1 and lateral inhibition during hair cell formation in the chicken
inner ear: evidence against cis-inhibition.

Chrysostomou E(1), Gale JE, Daudet N.

Author information: 
(1)University College London, The Ear Institute, 332 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X
8EE, UK.

The formation of the salt-and-pepper mosaic of hair cells and supporting cells in
the sensory epithelia of the inner ear is regulated by Notch signalling and
lateral inhibition, but the dynamics of this process and precise mode of action
of delta-like 1 (Dll1) in this context are unclear. Here, we transfected the
chicken inner ear with a fluorescent reporter that includes elements of the
mammalian Hes5 promoter to monitor Notch activity in the developing sensory
patches. The Hes5 reporter was active in proliferating cells and supporting
cells, and Dll1 expression was highest in prospective hair cells with low levels 
of Notch activity, which occasionally contacted more differentiated hair cells.
To investigate Dll1 functions we used constructs in which Dll1 expression was
either constitutive, regulated by the Hes5 promoter, or induced by doxycycline.
In support of the standard lateral inhibition model, both continuous and
Hes5-regulated expression of Dll1 promoted hair cell differentiation
cell-autonomously (in cis) and inhibited hair cell formation in trans. However,
some hair cells formed despite contacting Dll1-overexpressing cells, suggesting
that some progenitor cells are insensitive to lateral inhibition. This is not due
to the cis-inhibition of Notch activity by Dll1 itself, as induction of Dll1 did 
not cell-autonomously reduce the activity of the Hes5 reporter in progenitor and 
supporting cells. Altogether, our results show that Dll1 functions primarily in
trans to regulate hair cell production but also that additional mechanisms
operate downstream of lateral inhibition to eliminate patterning errors in the
sensory epithelia of the inner ear.

PMID: 22991441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Eur J Neurosci. 2012 Dec;36(12):3643-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08279.x.
Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Experimental epilepsy affects Notch1 signalling and the stem cell pool in the
dentate gyrus.

Sibbe M(1), Häussler U, Dieni S, Althof D, Haas CA, Frotscher M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany. Mirjam.Sibbe@anat.uni-freiburg.de

Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most frequent form of epilepsy in adults. In 
addition to recurrent focal seizures, patients suffer from memory loss and
depression. The factors contributing to these symptoms are unknown. In recent
years, adult hippocampal neurogenesis has been implicated in certain aspects of
learning and memory, as well as in depression and anhedonia. Here we investigated
whether the adult hippocampal stem cell niche is affected by status epilepticus
in a mouse model of TLE using unilateral intrahippocampal kainic acid injection. 
Eight days after status epilepticus, we found a strong diminution in Notch
signalling, a key pathway involved in stem cell maintenance, as assayed by hes5
reporter gene activity. In particular, hes5-GFP expression in the subgranular
zone of the dentate gyrus was diminished. Furthermore, Sox2-positive cells as
well as stem cell proliferation were reduced, thus pointing to a disruption of
the stem cell niche in epilepsy under the present experimental conditions.

© 2012 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing
Ltd.

PMID: 22978624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012 Sep 12;13:232. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-232.

Ranked retrieval of segmented nuclei for objective assessment of cancer gene
repositioning.

Cukierski WJ(1), Nandy K, Gudla P, Meaburn KJ, Misteli T, Foran DJ, Lockett SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA. wcuk@eden.rutgers.edu

BACKGROUND: Correct segmentation is critical to many applications within
automated microscopy image analysis. Despite the availability of advanced
segmentation algorithms, variations in cell morphology, sample preparation, and
acquisition settings often lead to segmentation errors. This manuscript
introduces a ranked-retrieval approach using logistic regression to automate
selection of accurately segmented nuclei from a set of candidate segmentations.
The methodology is validated on an application of spatial gene repositioning in
breast cancer cell nuclei. Gene repositioning is analyzed in patient tissue
sections by labeling sequences with fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),
followed by measurement of the relative position of each gene from the nuclear
center to the nuclear periphery. This technique requires hundreds of
well-segmented nuclei per sample to achieve statistical significance. Although
the tissue samples in this study contain a surplus of available nuclei, automatic
identification of the well-segmented subset remains a challenging task.
RESULTS: Logistic regression was applied to features extracted from candidate
segmented nuclei, including nuclear shape, texture, context, and gene copy
number, in order to rank objects according to the likelihood of being an
accurately segmented nucleus. The method was demonstrated on a tissue microarray 
dataset of 43 breast cancer patients, comprising approximately 40,000 imaged
nuclei in which the HES5 and FRA2 genes were labeled with FISH probes. Three
trained reviewers independently classified nuclei into three classes of
segmentation accuracy. In man vs. machine studies, the automated method
outperformed the inter-observer agreement between reviewers, as measured by area 
under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Robustness of gene
position measurements to boundary inaccuracies was demonstrated by comparing 1086
manually and automatically segmented nuclei. Pearson correlation coefficients
between the gene position measurements were above 0.9 (p < 0.05). A preliminary
experiment was conducted to validate the ranked retrieval in a test to detect
cancer. Independent manual measurement of gene positions agreed with automatic
results in 21 out of 26 statistical comparisons against a pooled normal (benign) 
gene position distribution.
CONCLUSIONS: Accurate segmentation is necessary to automate quantitative image
analysis for applications such as gene repositioning. However, due to
heterogeneity within images and across different applications, no segmentation
algorithm provides a satisfactory solution. Automated assessment of segmentations
by ranked retrieval is capable of reducing or even eliminating the need to select
segmented objects by hand and represents a significant improvement over binary
classification. The method can be extended to other high-throughput applications 
requiring accurate detection of cells or nuclei across a range of biomedical
applications.

PMCID: PMC3484015
PMID: 22971117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 5;32(36):12543-57.

Sox21 promotes hippocampal adult neurogenesis via the transcriptional repression 
of the Hes5 gene.

Matsuda S(1), Kuwako K, Okano HJ, Tsutsumi S, Aburatani H, Saga Y, Matsuzaki Y,
Akaike A, Sugimoto H, Okano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Despite the importance of the production of new neurons in the adult hippocampus,
the transcription network governing this process remains poorly understood. The
High Mobility Group (HMG)-box transcription factor, Sox2, and the cell surface
activated transcriptional regulator, Notch, play important roles in CNS stem
cells. Here, we demonstrate that another member of the SoxB (Sox1/Sox2/Sox3)
transcription factor family, Sox21, is also a critical regulator of adult
neurogenesis in mouse hippocampus. Loss of Sox21 impaired transition of
progenitor cells from type 2a to type 2b, thereby reducing subsequent production 
of new neurons in the adult dentate gyrus. Analysis of the Sox21 binding sites in
neural stem/progenitor cells indicated that the Notch-responsive gene, Hes5, was 
a target of Sox21. Sox21 repressed Hes5 gene expression at the transcriptional
level. Simultaneous overexpression of Hes5 and Sox21 revealed that Hes5 was a
downstream effector of Sox21 at the point where the Notch and Sox pathways
intersect to control the number of neurons in the adult hippocampus. Therefore,
Sox21 controls hippocampal adult neurogenesis via transcriptional repression of
the Hes5 gene.

PMID: 22956844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Anesthesiology. 2012 Nov;117(5):996-1005. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31826cb469.

Activation of canonical notch signaling pathway is involved in the ischemic
tolerance induced by sevoflurane preconditioning in mice.

Yang Q(1), Yan W, Li X, Hou L, Dong H, Wang Q, Dong H, Wang S, Zhang X, Xiong L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China.

Comment in
    Anesthesiology. 2012 Nov;117(5):942-4.

BACKGROUND: A wealth of evidence has demonstrated that sevoflurane
preconditioning induces brain ischemic tolerance, but the mechanism remains
poorly understood. This study was designed to investigate the role of canonical
Notch signaling in the neuroprotection induced by sevoflurane preconditioning in 
a mouse model.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were pretreated with 1-h sevoflurane exposure at a dose of 
2.5% for 5 consecutive days. Twenty-four hours after the last exposure, all mice 
were subjected to focal cerebral ischemia by right middle cerebral artery
occlusion for 60 min. Neurobehavioral scores, brain infarct volumes, and cellular
apoptosis were determined at 72 h after reperfusion (n = 10 per group). The
activation of Notch signaling was evaluated (n = 5 per group), and its role in
ischemic tolerance was assessed by intraperitoneal administration of <U+03B3>-secretase 
inhibitor DAPT (100 mg/kg, n = 10 per group) and conditional Notch-RBP-J knockout
technique (n = 8 per group).
RESULTS: Sevoflurane preconditioning reduced brain infarct volumes (42.5%),
improved neurologic outcomes (P < 0.01 vs. control), and attenuated neuronal cell
apoptosis (cells positive for terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
2'-deoxyuridine 5'-triphosphate nick-end labeling reduced to 21.2%). The
expression of Notch1 intracellular domain (1.35 folds) and the transcriptions of 
Hes1 (1.95 times) and Hes5 (1.48 times) were up-regulated. DAPT augmented the
brain infarcts (1.64-fold) and decreased neurologic scores (P = 0.43 vs.
sevoflurane) in sevoflurane-preconditioned mice. Brain infarct volumes,
neurobehavioral scores, and apoptotic cell numbers showed no significance between
Notch knockout mice with sevoflurane preconditioning and wild-type mice without
preconditioning.
CONCLUSIONS: Sevoflurane preconditioning-induced protective effects against
transient cerebral ischemic injuries are mediated by the activation of canonical 
Notch signaling pathway in mice.

PMID: 22929735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Glia. 2012 Dec;60(12):1944-53. doi: 10.1002/glia.22410. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Histone deacetylase activity is required for human oligodendrocyte progenitor
differentiation.

Conway GD(1), O'Bara MA, Vedia BH, Pol SU, Sim FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14214, USA.

The molecular mechanisms controlling human oligodendrocyte development are poorly
characterized. Microarray analysis of human oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
(OPCs) and immature oligodendrocytes revealed that specific-class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) target genes were actively repressed during oligodendrocyte
commitment. Although epigenetic regulation of oligodendrocyte differentiation has
been established in rodent development, the role of HDACs in human OPCs remains
undefined. We used HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) trichostatin A (TSA) and sodium
butyrate to determine the importance of HDAC activity in human primary OPC
differentiation. Treatment with either drug resulted in significant
dose-dependent inhibition of O4(+) oligodendrocyte cell differentiation,
reduction of oligodendrocyte morphological maturation, and downregulation of
myelin basic protein mRNA. High dose TSA treatment was also associated with
reduction in OPC proliferation. HDACi treatment prevented downregulation of SOX2,
ID4, and TCF7L2 mRNAs but did not regulate HES5, suggesting that targets of HDAC 
repression may differ between species. These results predict that HDACi treatment
would impair proliferation and differentiation by parenchymal oligodendrocyte
progenitors, and thereby degrade their potential for endogenous repair in human
demyelinating disease. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22927334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cytometry A. 2012 Sep;81(9):743-54. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.22097. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Automatic segmentation and supervised learning-based selection of nuclei in
cancer tissue images.

Nandy K(1), Gudla PR, Amundsen R, Meaburn KJ, Misteli T, Lockett SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Optical Microscopy and Analysis Laboratory, Advanced Technology Program,
SAIC-Frederick, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research,
Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA. nandyk@mail.nih.gov

Analysis of preferential localization of certain genes within the cell nuclei is 
emerging as a new technique for the diagnosis of breast cancer. Quantitation
requires accurate segmentation of 100-200 cell nuclei in each tissue section to
draw a statistically significant result. Thus, for large-scale analysis, manual
processing is too time consuming and subjective. Fortuitously, acquired images
generally contain many more nuclei than are needed for analysis. Therefore, we
developed an integrated workflow that selects, following automatic segmentation, 
a subpopulation of accurately delineated nuclei for positioning of fluorescence
in situ hybridization-labeled genes of interest. Segmentation was performed by a 
multistage watershed-based algorithm and screening by an artificial neural
network-based pattern recognition engine. The performance of the workflow was
quantified in terms of the fraction of automatically selected nuclei that were
visually confirmed as well segmented and by the boundary accuracy of the
well-segmented nuclei relative to a 2D dynamic programming-based reference
segmentation method. Application of the method was demonstrated for
discriminating normal and cancerous breast tissue sections based on the
differential positioning of the HES5 gene. Automatic results agreed with manual
analysis in 11 out of 14 cancers, all four normal cases, and all five
noncancerous breast disease cases, thus showing the accuracy and robustness of
the proposed approach.

Published 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22899462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Nov;23(11):2632-43. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs252. Epub 2012 Aug 
14.

POU-III transcription factors (Brn1, Brn2, and Oct6) influence neurogenesis,
molecular identity, and migratory destination of upper-layer cells of the
cerebral cortex.

Dominguez MH(1), Ayoub AE, Rakic P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine and Kavli
Institute for Neuroscience, 06510 New Haven, CT, USA.

The upper layers (II-IV) are the most prominent distinguishing feature of
mammalian neocortex compared with avian or reptilian dorsal cortex, and are
vastly expanded in primates. Although the time-dependent embryonic generation of 
upper-layer cells is genetically instructed within their parental progenitors,
mechanisms governing cell-intrinsic fate transitions remain obscure.
POU-homeodomain transcription factors Pou3f3 and Pou3f2 (Brn1 and Brn2) are known
to label postmitotic upper-layer cells, and are redundantly required for their
production. We find that the onset of Pou3f3/2 expression actually occurs in
ventricular zone (VZ) progenitors, and that Pou3f3/2 subsequently label neural
progeny switching from deep-layer Ctip2(+) identity to Satb2(+) upper-layer fate 
as they migrate to proper superficial positions. By using an Engrailed
dominant-negative repressor, we show that sustained neurogenesis after the deep- 
to upper-layer transition requires the proneual action of Pou3fs in VZ
progenitors. Conversely, single-gene overexpression of any Pou3f in early neural 
progenitors is sufficient to specify the precocious birth of Satb2(+) daughter
neurons that extend axons to the contralateral hemisphere, as well as exhibit
robust pia-directed migration that is characteristic of upper-layer cells.
Finally, we demonstrate that Pou3fs influence multiple stages of neurogenesis by 
suppressing Notch effector Hes5, and promoting the expression of proneural
transcription factors Tbr2 and Tbr1.

PMCID: PMC3792741
PMID: 22892427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):36814-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.356048. Epub
2012 Aug 10.

Wnt5a controls Notch1 signaling through CaMKII-mediated degradation of the SMRT
corepressor protein.

Ann EJ(1), Kim HY, Seo MS, Mo JS, Kim MY, Yoon JH, Ahn JS, Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Serine-threonine Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is the
key component in noncanonical Wnt5a signaling and has been shown to regulate its 
signaling. In this study, we found that CaMKII induced by Wnt5a remarkably
reduced the protein stability of the silencing mediator of retinoic acid and
thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT), a co-repressor of Notch signaling, through
proteasomal degradation. Wnt5a was found to enhance Notch1 intracellular domain
(Notch1-IC) transcription activity, which could be inhibited by treatment with
KN93, a CaMKII inhibitor. The kinase activity of CaMKII was essential for the
activation of Notch signaling. We also determined that CaMKII could enhance the
association between Notch1-IC and RBP-Jk. Furthermore, the physical association
between RBP-Jk and SMRT was substantially suppressed by CaMKII. We demonstrated
that CaMKII directly bound and phosphorylated SMRT at Ser-1407, thereby
facilitating SMRT translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and
proteasome-dependent degradation. These results suggest that CaMKII
down-regulated the protein stability of SMRT through proteasomal degradation.

PMCID: PMC3481284
PMID: 22888005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Methods. 2012 Sep;58(1):69-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.07.008. Epub 2012 Jul
27.

Generation of anti-Notch antibodies and their application in blocking Notch
signalling in neural stem cells.

Falk R(1), Falk A, Dyson MR, Melidoni AN, Parthiban K, Young JL, Roake W,
McCafferty J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Biochemistry, Tennis Court Road, CB2
1QW Cambridge, UK.

Notch signalling occurs via direct cell-cell interactions and plays an important 
role in linking the fates of neighbouring cells. There are four different
mammalian Notch receptors that can be activated by five cell surface ligands. The
ability to inhibit specific Notch receptors would help identify the roles of
individual family members and potentially provide a means to study and control
cell differentiation. Anti-Notch antibodies in the form of single chain Fvs were 
generated from an antibody phage display library by selection on either the
ligand binding domain or the negative regulatory region (NRR) of Notch1 and
Notch2. Six antibodies targeting the NRR of Notch1 and four antibodies
recognising the NRR of Notch2 were found to prevent receptor activation in
cell-based luciferase reporter assays. These antibodies were potent, highly
specific inhibitors of individual Notch receptors and interfered with endogenous 
signalling in stem cell systems of both human and mouse origin. Antibody-mediated
inhibition of Notch efficiently down-regulated transcription of the immediate
Notch target gene hairy and enhancer of split 5 (Hes5) in both mouse and human
neural stem cells and revealed a redundant regulation of Hes5 in these cells as
complete down-regulation was seen only after simultaneous blocking of Notch1 and 
Notch2. In addition, these antibodies promoted differentiation of neural stem
cells towards a neuronal fate. In contrast to the widely used small molecule
<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors, which block all 4 Notch receptors (and a multitude of
other signalling pathways), antibodies allow blockade of individual Notch family 
members in a highly specific way. Specific inhibition will allow examination of
the effect of individual Notch receptors in complex differentiation schemes
regulated by the co-ordinated action of multiple signalling pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3502869
PMID: 22842086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Dec 10;21(18):3351-62. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0232. Epub 2012
Sep 10.

Single-cell mRNA profiling identifies progenitor subclasses in neurospheres.

Narayanan G(1), Poonepalli A, Chen J, Sankaran S, Hariharan S, Yu YH, Robson P,
Yang H, Ahmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Stem Cell Laboratory, Institute of Medical Biology, Singapore,
Singapore.

Neurospheres are widely used to propagate and investigate neural stem cells
(NSCs) and neural progenitors (NPs). However, the exact cell types present within
neurospheres are still unknown. To identify cell types, we used single-cell mRNA 
profiling of 48 genes in 187 neurosphere cells. Using a clustering algorithm, we 
identified 3 discrete cell populations within neurospheres. One cell population
[cluster unsorted (US) 1] expresses high Bmi1 and Hes5 and low Myc and Klf12.
Cluster US2 shows intermediate expression of most of the genes analyzed. Cluster 
US3 expresses low Bmi1 and Hes5 and high Myc and Klf12. The mRNA profiles of
these 3 cell populations correlate with a developmental timeline of early,
intermediate, and late NPs, as seen in vivo from the mouse brain. We enriched the
cell population for neurosphere-forming cells (NFCs) using morphological criteria
of forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC). FSC/SSC(high) cells generated
2.29-fold more neurospheres than FSC/SSC(low) cells at clonal density.
FSC/SSC(high) cells were enriched for NSCs and Lewis-X(+ve) cells, possessed
higher phosphacan levels, and were of a larger cell size. Clustering of both
FSC/SSC(high) and FSC/SSC(low) cells identified an NFC cluster. Significantly,
the mRNA profile of the NFC cluster drew close resemblance to that of early NPs. 
Taken together, data suggest that the neurosphere culture system can be used to
model central nervous system development, and that early NPs are the cell
population that gives rise to neurospheres. In future work, it may be possible to
further dissect the NFCs and reveal the molecular signature for NSCs.

PMCID: PMC4733327
PMID: 22834539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2012 Sep 5;367(1601):2402-15. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2011.0376.

Transcriptional regulation of the 5-HT1A receptor: implications for mental
illness.

Albert PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Neuroscience), University of Ottawa, , 451
Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON, Canada , K1H 8M5. palbert@uottawa.ca

The serotonin-1A (5-HT(1A)) receptor is an abundant post-synaptic 5-HT receptor
(heteroreceptor) implicated in regulation of mood, emotion and stress responses
and is the major somatodendritic autoreceptor that negatively regulates 5-HT
neuronal activity. Based on animal models, an integrated model for opposing roles
of pre- and post-synaptic 5-HT(1A) receptors in anxiety and depression phenotypes
and response to antidepressants is proposed. Understanding differential
transcriptional regulation of pre- versus post-synaptic 5-HT(1A) receptors could 
provide better tools for their selective regulation. This review examines the
transcription factors that regulate brain region-specific basal and
stress-induced expression of the 5-HT(1A) receptor gene (Htr1a). A functional
polymorphism, rs6295 in the Htr1a promoter region, blocks the function of
specific repressors Hes1, Hes5 and Deaf1, resulting in increased 5-HT(1A)
autoreceptor expression in animal models and humans. Its association with altered
5-HT(1A) expression, depression, anxiety and antidepressant response are related 
to genotype frequency in different populations, sample homogeneity, disease
outcome measures and severity. Preliminary evidence from gene × environment
studies suggests the potential for synergistic interaction of stress-mediated
repression of 5-HT(1A) heteroreceptors, and rs6295-induced upregulation of
5-HT(1A) autoreceptors. Targeted therapeutics to inhibit 5-HT(1A) autoreceptor
expression and induce 5-HT(1A) heteroreceptor expression may ameliorate treatment
of anxiety and major depression.

PMCID: PMC3405675
PMID: 22826341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Glia. 2012 Nov;60(11):1696-708. doi: 10.1002/glia.22388. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 regulates Schwann cell
differentiation.

Heinen A(1), Tzekova N, Graffmann N, Torres KJ, Uhrberg M, Hartung HP, Küry P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

Epigenetic control is crucial for the differentiation of a variety of cells
including oligodendrocytes, the myelinating glial cells of the central nervous
system. However, studies about the implication of epigenetic factors in
peripheral nervous system maturation are just emerging. Here, we demonstrate for 
the first time the impact of a histone methyltransferase, encoded by the enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene, on Schwann cell differentiation. In sciatic
nerves, EZH2 expression was found in Schwann cells and to peak perinatally.
Suppression of EZH2 expression in cultured primary rat Schwann cells reduced the 
length of cell processes. These morphological changes were accompanied by
widespread alterations in the gene expression pattern, including downregulation
of myelin genes and induction of p57kip2, which we have recently identified as an
intrinsic inhibitory regulator of Schwann cell maturation. In addition, we show
that EZH2 suppression in dorsal root ganglion cocultures interferes with in vitro
myelination. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed binding of EZH2 at
the p57kip2 promoter and reduction of histone H3K27 trimethylation upon gene
suppression. EZH2 suppression-dependent effects on morphology and myelin genes
could be reversed by concomitant suppression of p57kip2, indicating that p57kip2 
is a downstream effector of EZH2. Furthermore, we describe Hes5 as
transcriptional repressor of myelin genes in Schwann cells, which was induced
upon EZH2 suppression and downregulated in p57kip2-suppressed Schwann cells.
Therefore, we have identified a molecular link between histone methylation and
control of Schwann cell differentiation and demonstrate that this epigenetic
mechanism is crucial for glial differentiation to proceed.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22821416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Glia. 2012 Oct;60(10):1579-89. doi: 10.1002/glia.22377. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

P53 is required for the developmental restriction in Müller glial proliferation
in mouse retina.

Ueki Y(1), Karl MO, Sudar S, Pollak J, Taylor RJ, Loeffler K, Wilken MS, Reardon 
S, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

Müller glia are normally mitotically quiescent cells, but in certain pathological
states they can re-enter the mitotic cell cycle. While several cell cycle
regulators have been shown to be important in this process, a role for the tumor 
suppressor, p53, has not been demonstrated. Here, we investigated a role for p53 
in limiting the ability of Müller glia to proliferate in the mature mouse retina.
Our data demonstrate that Müller glia undergo a developmental restriction in
their potential to proliferate. Retinal explants or dissociated cultures treated 
with EGF become mitotically quiescent by the end of the second postnatal week. In
contrast, Müller glia from adult trp53-/+ or trp53-/- mice displayed a greater
ability to proliferate in response to EGF stimulation in vitro. The enhanced
proliferative ability of trp53 deficient mice correlates with a decreased
expression of the mitotic inhibitor Cdkn1a/p21(cip) and an increase in c-myc, a
transcription factor that promotes cell cycle progression. These data show that
p53 plays an essential role in limiting the potential of Müller glia to re-enter 
the mitotic cycle as the retina matures during postnatal development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3422417
PMID: 22777914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Sep;33(9):1674-83. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs221. Epub 2012 Jul
4.

Anti-tumor effects of the Notch pathway in gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Dumont AG(1), Yang Y, Reynoso D, Katz D, Trent JC, Hughes DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, University of Texas-MD Anderson Cancer
Center Houston, TX, USA.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are driven by gain-of-function mutations 
of KIT or PDGFRa. The introduction of imatinib has significantly extended
survival for patients. However, most patients develop resistances. Notch
signaling is a conserved developmental pathway known to play a critical role in
the development of several cancers, functioning as a tumor promoter or a tumor
suppressor. Given that the normal progenitor cell for GIST, the interstitial cell
of Cajal, has characteristics similar to those of cells of neuroendocrine origin,
we hypothesized that Notch pathway impacts the biology of GIST cells. In this
study, we retrovirally and pharmacologically manipulated the Notch pathway in
human GIST cells. We also performed a retrospective analysis of a cohort on 15
primary tumors to determine the role of Hes1, a major target gene of Notch, as a 
prognostic marker for GIST. Constitutively, active intracellular domain of Notch1
(ICN1) expression potently induced growth arrest and downregulated KIT expression
in vitro. Additionally, treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid caused dose-dependent upregulation of Notch1
expression and a parallel decrease in viability in these cells. Retroviral
silencing of downstream targets of Notch (dominant-negative Hes1) and
pharmacological inhibition of Notch activation (<U+03B3>-secretase inhibition) partially
rescued GIST cells from suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid treatment. GIST patients 
with high Hes1 mRNA levels have a significantly longer relapse-free survival.
These results identify a novel anti-tumor effect of Notch1 and cross talk between
the Notch and KIT pathways. Thus, activation of this pathway by treatment with
histone deacetylase inhibitors is an appealing potential therapeutic strategy for
GISTs. Précis: This study is the first report of the tumor suppressor effects of 
Notch pathway in gastrointestinal stromal tumors via a negative feedback with the
oncogene KIT and may lead the development of new therapeutic strategies for GISTs
patients.

PMCID: PMC3514902
PMID: 22764137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Clin Invest. 2012 Aug;122(8):2928-39. doi: 10.1172/JCI58767. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Identification of embryonic stem cell-derived midbrain dopaminergic neurons for
engraftment.

Ganat YM(1), Calder EL, Kriks S, Nelander J, Tu EY, Jia F, Battista D, Harrison
N, Parmar M, Tomishima MJ, Rutishauser U, Studer L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Biology, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research,
New York, NY, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) represent a promising source of midbrain dopaminergic
(DA) neurons for applications in Parkinson disease. However, ESC-based
transplantation paradigms carry a risk of introducing inappropriate or
tumorigenic cells. Cell purification before transplantation may alleviate these
concerns and enable identification of the specific DA neuron stage most suitable 
for cell therapy. Here, we used 3 transgenic mouse ESC reporter lines to mark DA 
neurons at 3 stages of differentiation (early, middle, and late) following
induction of differentiation using Hes5::GFP, Nurr1::GFP, and Pitx3::YFP
transgenes, respectively. Transplantation of FACS-purified cells from each line
resulted in DA neuron engraftment, with the mid-stage and late-stage neuron
grafts being composed almost exclusively of midbrain DA neurons. Mid-stage neuron
cell grafts had the greatest amount of DA neuron survival and robustly induced
recovery of motor deficits in hemiparkinsonian mice. Our data suggest that the
Nurr1+ stage (middle stage) of neuronal differentiation is particularly suitable 
for grafting ESC-derived DA neurons. Moreover, global transcriptome analysis of
progeny from each of the ESC reporter lines revealed expression of known midbrain
DA neuron genes and also uncovered previously uncharacterized midbrain genes.
These data demonstrate remarkable fate specificity of ESC-derived DA neurons and 
outline a sequential stage-specific ESC reporter line paradigm for in vivo gene
discovery.

PMCID: PMC3408729
PMID: 22751106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Sep 15;21(18):4104-14. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds239. Epub 2012 Jun
20.

Epigenetic changes and disturbed neural development in a human embryonic stem
cell-based model relating to the fetal valproate syndrome.

Balmer NV(1), Weng MK, Zimmer B, Ivanova VN, Chambers SM, Nikolaeva E, Jagtap S, 
Sachinidis A, Hescheler J, Waldmann T, Leist M.

Author information: 
(1)Doerenkamp-Zbinden Chair for In Vitro Toxicology and Biomedicine, University
of Konstanz, D-78457 Konstanz, Germany.

Exposure to the antiepileptic drug valproic acid (VPA) during gestation causes
neurofunctional and anatomic deficits in later life. At present, there are little
human data on how early neural development is affected by chemicals. We used
human embryonic stem cells, differentiating to neuroectodermal precursors, as a
model to investigate the modes of action of VPA. Microarray expression profiling,
qPCR of specific marker genes, immunostaining and the expression of green
fluorescent protein under the control of the promoter of the canonical neural
precursor cell marker HES5 were used as readouts. Exposure to VPA resulted in
distorted marker gene expression, characterized by a relative increase in NANOG
and OCT4 and a reduction in PAX6. A similar response pattern was observed with
trichostatin A, a potent and specific histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), but 
not with several other toxicants. Differentiation markers were disturbed by
prolonged, but not by acute treatment with HDACi, and the strongest disturbance
of differentiation was observed by toxicant exposure during early neural fate
decision. The increased acetylation of histones observed in the presence of HDACi
may explain the up-regulation of some genes. However, to understand the
down-regulation of PAX6 and the overall complex transcript changes, we examined
further epigenetic markers. Alterations in the methylation of lysines 4 and 27 of
histone H3 were detected in the promoter region of PAX6 and OCT4. The changes in 
these activating and silencing histone marks provide a more general mechanistic
rational for the regulation of developmentally important genes at non-cytotoxic
drug concentrations.

PMID: 22723015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Glia. 2012 Oct;60(10):1495-505. doi: 10.1002/glia.22369. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

The identification of transcriptional targets of Ascl1 in oligodendrocyte
development.

Ueno T(1), Ito J, Hoshikawa S, Ohori Y, Fujiwara S, Yamamoto S, Ohtsuka T,
Kageyama R, Akai M, Nakamura K, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation for the Movement Functions, Research Institute,
National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with Disabilities, Saitama, Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Ascl1 plays crucial roles 
in both oligodendrocyte development and neuronal development; however, the
molecular target of Ascl1 in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) remains
elusive. To identify the downstream targets of Ascl1 in OPCs, we performed gene
expression microarray analysis and identified Hes5 as a putative downstream
target of Ascl1. In vivo analysis revealed that Ascl1 and Hes5 were coexpressed
in early developmental oligodendrocytes in both the telencephalon and the ventral
spinal cord. We also found that Hes5 expression was reduced in the OPCs of Ascl1 
mutant mice. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Ascl1 directly binds to an E-box
region within the Hes5 promoter and regulates Hes5 expression at the
transcriptional level. Taken together, these in vivo and in vitro data suggest
that Ascl1 induces Hes5 expression in a cell-autonomous manner. Considering the
previously known function of Hes5 as a repressor of Ascl1, our data indicate that
Hes5 is involved in the negative feedback regulation of Ascl1.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22714260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 20;21(17):3233-43. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0678. Epub 2012
Aug 10.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 inhibition promotes proliferation and neuronal
differentiation of human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural
progenitors.

Esfandiari F(1), Fathi A, Gourabi H, Kiani S, Nemati S, Baharvand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology, Cell Science Research
Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran,
Iran.

Human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural progenitors (hiPSC-NPs) have
the ability to self-renew and differentiate into glial and neuronal lineages,
which makes them an invaluable source in cell replacement therapy for
neurological diseases. Therefore, their enhanced proliferation and neuronal
differentiation are pivotal features that can be used in repairing neurological
injuries. One of the main regulators of neural development is Wnt signaling,
which results in the inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3). Here, we
assess the impact of GSK-3 inhibition by the small molecule CHIR99021 on the
expansion and differentiation of hiPSC-NPs in an adherent condition and a defined
medium. Cell proliferation analyses have revealed that inhibition of GSK-3 in the
presence of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF) increased the proliferation of hiPSC-NPs across 10 passages. The
inhibition of ß-catenin signaling by XAV and NOTCH signaling by DAPT reversed
CHIR impact on hiPSC-NPs proliferation. The target genes of ß-catenin, C-MYC and 
CYCLIN D1 as well as NOTCH target genes, HES1 and HES5 were upregulated. The
treatment of NPs by CHIR in the absence of bFGF and EGF resulted in an increase
of neuronal differentiation rather than proliferation by stabilization of
ß-catenin regardless of the NOTCH pathway. Thus, GSK-3 inhibition has been shown 
to promote proliferation of the NPs by activating ß-catenin and NOTCH-related
cell cycle genes in the presence of bFGF and EGF. Additionally, during GSK-3
inhibition, an absence of these growth factors allows for the switch to neuronal 
differentiation with a bias toward a dopaminergic fate. This may provide desired 
cells that can be used in therapeutic applications and offer insights into the
etiology of some neurological disorders.

PMID: 22642687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Neurosci. 2012 May 9;32(19):6651-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4876-11.2012.

Differential modulation of the oligodendrocyte transcriptome by sonic hedgehog
and bone morphogenetic protein 4 via opposing effects on histone acetylation.

Wu M(1), Hernandez M, Shen S, Sabo JK, Kelkar D, Wang J, O'Leary R, Phillips GR, 
Cate HS, Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) into mature
oligodendrocytes is regulated by the interplay between extrinsic signals and
intrinsic epigenetic determinants. In this study, we analyze the effect that the 
extracellular ligands sonic hedgehog (Shh) and bone morphogenetic protein 4
(BMP4), have on histone acetylation and gene expression in cultured OPCs. Shh
treatment favored the progression toward oligodendrocytes by decreasing histone
acetylation and inducing peripheral chromatin condensation. BMP4 treatment, in
contrast, inhibited the progression toward oligodendrocytes and favored
astrogliogenesis by favoring global histone acetylation and retaining
euchromatin. Pharmacological treatment or silencing of histone deacetylase 1
(Hdac1) or histone deacetylase 2 (Hdac2) in OPCs did not affect BMP4-dependent
astrogliogenesis, while it prevented Shh-induced oligodendrocyte differentiation 
and favored the expression of astrocytic genes. Transcriptional profiling of
treated OPCs, revealed that BMP4-inhibition of oligodendrocyte differentiation
was accompanied by increased levels of Wnt (Tbx3) and Notch-target genes (Jag1,
Hes1, Hes5, Hey1, and Hey2), decreased recruitment of Hdac and increased histone 
acetylation at these loci. Similar upregulation of Notch-target genes and
increased histone acetylation were observed in the corpus callosum of mice
infused with BMP4 during cuprizone-induced demyelination. We conclude that Shh
and Bmp4 differentially regulate histone acetylation and chromatin structure in
OPCs and that BMP4 acts as a potent inducer of gene expression, including Notch
and Wnt target genes, thereby enhancing the crosstalk among signaling pathways
that are known to inhibit myelination and repair.

PMCID: PMC3412138
PMID: 22573687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cell Transplant. 2012;21(11):2471-86. doi: 10.3727/096368912X638874. Epub 2012
Apr 10.

Differentiation of chromaffin progenitor cells to dopaminergic neurons.

Vukicevic V(1), Schmid J, Hermann A, Lange S, Qin N, Gebauer L, Chunk KF, Ravens 
U, Eisenhofer G, Storch A, Ader M, Bornstein SR, Ehrhart-Bornstein M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology, Medical Clinic III, University Clinic Dresden,
Dresden University of Technology, Fetscherstrasse 74, Dresden, Germany.

The differentiation of dopamine-producing neurons from chromaffin progenitors
might represent a new valuable source for replacement therapies in Parkinson's
disease. However, characterization of their differentiation potential is an
important prerequisite for efficient engraftment. Based on our previous studies
on isolation and characterization of chromaffin progenitors from adult adrenals, 
this study investigates their potential to produce dopaminergic neurons and means
to enhance their dopaminergic differentiation. Chromaffin progenitors grown in
sphere culture showed an increased expression of nestin and Mash1, indicating an 
increase of the progenitor subset. Proneurogenic culture conditions induced the
differentiation into neurons positive for neural markers ß-III-tubulin, MAP2, and
TH accompanied by a decrease of Mash1 and nestin. Furthermore, Notch2 expression 
decreased concomitantly with a downregulation of downstream effectors Hes1 and
Hes5 responsible for self-renewal and proliferation maintenance of progenitor
cells. Chromaffin progenitor-derived neurons secreted dopamine upon stimulation
by potassium. Strikingly, treatment of differentiating cells with retinoic and
ascorbic acid resulted in a twofold increase of dopamine secretion while
norepinephrine and epinephrine were decreased. Initiation of dopamine synthesis
and neural maturation is controlled by Pitx3 and Nurr1. Both Pitx3 and Nurr1 were
identified in differentiating chromaffin progenitors. Along with the gained
dopaminergic function, electrophysiology revealed features of mature neurons,
such as sodium channels and the capability to fire multiple action potentials. In
summary, this study elucidates the capacity of chromaffin progenitor cells to
generate functional dopaminergic neurons, indicating their potential use in cell 
replacement therapies.

PMID: 22507143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;30(4):791-803. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-112183.

Changes in brain transcripts related to Alzheimer's disease in a model of HFE
hemochromatosis are not consistent with increased Alzheimer's disease risk.

Johnstone DM(1), Graham RM, Trinder D, Riveros C, Olynyk JK, Scott RJ, Moscato P,
Milward EA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, NSW, Australia.

Iron abnormalities are observed in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD)
patients, but it is unclear whether common disorders of systemic iron overload
such as hemochromatosis alter risks of AD. We used microarrays and real-time
reverse transcription-PCR to investigate changes in the brain transcriptome of
adult Hfe-/- mice, a model of hemochromatosis, relative to age- and
gender-matched wildtype controls. Classification by functional pathway analysis
revealed transcript changes for various genes important in AD. There were
decreases of up to 9-fold in transcripts for amyloid-ß protein precursor, tau,
apolipoprotein E, presenilin 1, and various other <U+03B3>-secretase components, as well
as Notch signaling pathway molecules. This included decreased transcripts for
'hairy and enhancer of split' Hes1 and Hes5, downstream targets of Notch
canonical signaling. The reductions in Hes1 and Hes5 transcripts provide evidence
that the changes in levels of transcripts for <U+03B3>-secretase components and Notch
signaling genes have functional consequences. The effects appeared relatively
specific for AD in that few genes pertaining to other important neurodegenerative
diseases, notably Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease, or to
inflammation, oxidative stress, or apoptosis, showed altered transcript levels.
The observed effects on AD-related gene transcripts do not appear to be
consistent with increased AD risk in HFE hemochromatosis and might, if anything, 
be predicted to protect against AD to some extent. As Hfe-/- mice did not have
higher brain iron levels than wildtype controls, these studies highlight the need
for further research in models of more severe hemochromatosis with brain iron
loading.

PMID: 22466002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Neurotrauma. 2012 Jun 10;29(9):1758-69. doi: 10.1089/neu.2011.2139. Epub 2012
May 21.

Endothelial progenitor cells promote astrogliosis following spinal cord injury
through Jagged1-dependent Notch signaling.

Kamei N(1), Kwon SM, Ishikawa M, Ii M, Nakanishi K, Yamada K, Hozumi K, Kawamoto 
A, Ochi M, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Vascular Regeneration, Institute of Biomedical Research and
Innovation, Hyogo, Japan.

Interactions between endothelial and neural stem cells are believed to play a
critical role in the kinetics of neural stem cells in the central nervous system.
Here we demonstrate that endothelial progenitor cells promote the repair of
injured spinal cord through the induction of Notch-dependent astrogliosis and
vascular regulation. The transplantation of Jagged1(+/+) endothelial progenitor
cells, but not Jagged1(-/-) endothelial progenitor cells, increased the number of
reactive astrocytes during the acute phase, and improved functional recovery
following spinal cord injury. Expression of the Notch effector Hes5 was
upregulated in the injured spinal cord after Jagged1(+/+) endothelial progenitor 
cell transplantation. Furthermore, we found that the Notch ligand Delta-like-1
was highly expressed in Jagged1(-/-) endothelial progenitor cells.
Transplantation of Delta-like-1, as well as Jagged1-overexpressing 3T3 cells,
revealed that only Jagged1-overexpressing 3T3 stromal cells enhanced astrogliosis
following spinal cord injury. In addition, Jagged1(+/+) endothelial progenitor
cells exhibited not only dramatic pro-angiogenic effects, but also
morphologically abnormal vessel stabilization, compared with
Jagged1(-/-)endothelial progenitor cells in injured spinal cord. Thus,
transplanted endothelial progenitor cells promote astrogliosis, vascular
regulation, and spinal cord regeneration through activation of Jagged1-Notch
signaling.

PMID: 22452482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Epigenetics. 2012 Apr;7(4):400-8. doi: 10.4161/epi.19463. Epub 2012 Apr 1.

Genome-wide DNA methylation studies suggest distinct DNA methylation patterns in 
pediatric embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas.

Mahoney SE(1), Yao Z, Keyes CC, Tapscott SJ, Diede SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA, USA.

Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in children. While
cytogenetic abnormalities have been well characterized in this disease, aberrant 
epigenetic events such as DNA hypermethylation have not been described in
genome-wide studies. We have analyzed the methylation status of 25,500 promoters 
in normal skeletal muscle, and in cell lines and tumor samples of embryonal and
alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma from pediatric patients. We identified over 1,900 CpG
islands that are hypermethylated in rhabdomyosarcomas relative to skeletal
muscle. Genes involved in tissue development, differentiation, and oncogenesis
such as DNAJA4, HES5, IRX1, BMP8A, GATA4, GATA6, ALX3, and P4HTM were
hypermethylated in both RMS cell lines and primary samples, implicating aberrant 
DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of rhabdomyosarcoma. Furthermore, cluster
analysis revealed embryonal and alveolar subtypes had distinct DNA methylation
patterns, with the alveolar subtype being enriched in DNA hypermethylation of
polycomb target genes. These results suggest that DNA methylation signatures may 
aid in the diagnosis and risk stratification of pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma and
help identify new targets for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3368822
PMID: 22419069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nutr Neurosci. 2012 Mar;15(2):55-61. doi: 10.1179/1476830511Y.0000000025. Epub
2012 Jan 13.

Folic acid enhances Notch signaling, hippocampal neurogenesis, and cognitive
function in a rat model of cerebral ischemia.

Zhang X(1), Huang G, Liu H, Chang H, Wilson JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin, China.

Increasing neurogenesis may restore cognitive functions that are impaired in
ischemia stroke. Folic acid has been reported to play an important role in
neuronal development and reduce the risk of ischemic stroke in primary
prevention. Folic acid supplementation stimulates Notch signaling and cell
proliferation in neural progenitor cells cultured from neonatal brain. The
present study determined whether folic acid supplementation stimulates Notch
signaling and neurogenesis and improves cognitive function after ischemic stroke 
in adult brain. Rats were randomly assigned to four groups: sham operation plus
vehicle (Sham), middle cerebral artery occlusion plus vehicle (MCAO), MCAO plus
low-dose folic acid (4 mg/(kg day)), and MCAO plus high folic acid (12 mg/(kg
day)). The vehicle and folic acid were administered by oral gavage for 28 days
prior to sham or MCAO operation and up to 14 days after surgery. Newborn
hippocampal neurons were detected at 3, 7, and 14 days post-MCAO. Cognitive
function (learning and memory in Y-maze tests) and the protein expression levels 
of components of the Notch signaling system (Notch1, Hes1, and Hes5) were
measured at 7 days post-MCAO. The results showed that MCAO impaired Y-maze
performance and stimulated Notch signaling and hippocampal neurogenesis in brain.
Folic acid prevented the impairment of Y-maze performance. The nutrient also
increased further the expression of Notch1, Hes1, and Hes5 and the number of the 
newborn hippocampal neurons. Folic acid enhances the stimulation by ischemia of
Notch signaling and hippocampal neurogenesis in adult brain and lessens the
impairment of cognitive function that occurs after experimental stroke.

PMID: 22334042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Stem Cells. 2012 May;30(5):946-55. doi: 10.1002/stem.1059.

NOTCH1 is required for regeneration of Clara cells during repair of airway
injury.

Xing Y(1), Li A, Borok Z, Li C, Minoo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Will Rogers Institute
Pulmonary Research Center, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1579.

The airways of the mammalian lung are lined with highly specialized epithelial
cell types that are the targets of airborne toxicants and injury. Notch signaling
plays an important role in the ontogeny of airway epithelial cells, but its
contributions to recruitment, expansion or differentiation of resident
progenitor/stem cells, and repair and re-establishment of the normal composition 
of airway epithelium following injury have not been addressed. In this study, the
role of a specific Notch receptor, Notch1, was investigated by targeted
inactivation in the embryonic lung epithelium using the epithelial-specific
Gata5-Cre driver line. Notch1-deficient mice are viable without discernible
defects in pulmonary epithelial cell-fate determination and differentiation.
However, in an experimental model of airway injury, activity of Notch1 is found
to be required for normal repair of the airway epithelium. Absence of Notch1
reduced the ability of a population of cells distinguished by expression of
PGP9.5, otherwise a marker of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, which appears to
serve as a reservoir for regeneration of Clara cells. Hairy/enhancer of split-5
(Hes5) and paired-box-containing gene 6 (Pax6) were found to be downstream
targets of Notch1. Both Hes5 and Pax6 expressions were significantly increased in
association with Clara cell regeneration in wild-type lungs. Ablation of Notch1
reduced Hes5 and Pax6 and inhibited airway epithelial repair. Thus, although
dispensable in developmental ontogeny of airway epithelial cells, normal activity
of Notch1 is required for repair of the airway epithelium. The signaling pathway 
by which Notch1 regulates the repair process includes stimulation of Hes5 and
Pax6 gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4005608
PMID: 22331706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Development. 2012 Mar;139(6):1071-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.069070. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

The role of Hes genes in intestinal development, homeostasis and tumor formation.

Ueo T(1), Imayoshi I, Kobayashi T, Ohtsuka T, Seno H, Nakase H, Chiba T, Kageyama
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Notch signaling regulates intestinal development, homeostasis and tumorigenesis, 
but its precise downstream mechanism remains largely unknown. Here we found that 
inactivation of the Notch effectors Hes1, Hes3 and Hes5, but not Hes1 alone, led 
to reduced cell proliferation, increased secretory cell formation and altered
intestinal structures in adult mice. However, in Apc mutation-induced intestinal 
tumors, inactivation of Hes1 alone was sufficient for reducing tumor cell
proliferation and inducing differentiation of tumor cells into all types of
intestinal epithelial cells, but without affecting the homeostasis of normal
crypts owing to genetic redundancy. These results indicated that Hes genes
cooperatively regulate intestinal development and homeostasis and raised the
possibility that Hes1 is a promising target to induce the differentiation of
tumor cells.

PMID: 22318232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Integr Biol (Camb). 2012 Apr;4(4):391-400. doi: 10.1039/c2ib00070a. Epub 2012 Feb
6.

High-throughput clonal analysis of neural stem cells in microarrayed artificial
niches.

Roccio M(1), Gobaa S, Lutolf MP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Institute of Bioengineering and Laboratory of Stem
Cell Bioengineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Switzerland.

To better understand the extrinsic signals that control neural stem cell (NSC)
fate, here we applied a microwell array platform which allows high-throughput
clonal analyses of NSCs, cultured either as neurospheres or as adherent clones,
exposed to poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) hydrogel substrates functionalized with
selected signaling molecules. We analyzed by time-lapse microscopy and
retrospective immunostaining the role of integrin and Notch ligands, two key NSC 
niche components, in altering the behavior of several hundred single stem cells
isolated from a previously described Hes5::GFP reporter mouse. NSC self-renewal
was increased by 1.5-fold upon exposure to covalently tethered Laminin-1 and
fibronectin fragment 9-10 (FN(9-10)), where 60-65% of single cells proliferated
extensively and remained Nestin positive. Tethering of the Notch ligand Jagged-1 
induced activation of Notch signaling. While Jagged-1 alone increased cell
survival and proliferation, no further increase in the clonogenic potential of
Hes5::GFP cells was observed upon co-stimulation with Laminin-1 and Jagged-1. We 
believe that the bioengineering of such in vitro niche analogues is a powerful
approach to elucidate single stem cell fate regulation in a well-controlled
fashion.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22307554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 24;287(9):6208-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.310375. Epub 2011 
Dec 28.

Notch signal suppresses Toll-like receptor-triggered inflammatory responses in
macrophages by inhibiting extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2-mediated
nuclear factor <U+03BA>B activation.

Zhang Q(1), Wang C, Liu Z, Liu X, Han C, Cao X, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)From the National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of
Immunology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Multiple signaling pathways are involved in the tight regulation of Toll-like
receptor (TLR) signaling, which is important for the tailoring of inflammatory
response to pathogens in macrophages. It is widely accepted that TLR signaling
can activate Notch pathway; however, whether full activation of Notch signaling
can feedback modulate TLR signaling pathway so as to control inflammation
response remains unclear. Here, we demonstrated that stimulation with TLR ligands
up-regulated Notch1 and Notch2 expression in macrophages. The expression of Notch
target genes including Hes1 and Hes5 was also induced in macrophages by LPS,
suggesting that TLR4 signaling enhances the activation of Notch pathway.
Importantly, overexpression of constituted active form of Notch1 (NICD1) and
Notch2 (NICD2) suppressed production of TLR4-triggered proinflammatory cytokines 
such as TNF-a and IL-6 but promoted production of antiinflammatory cytokine
IL-10, which is dependent on the PEST domain of NICD. In addition, NICD1 and
NICD2 suppressed TLR-triggered ERK phosphorylation, which is indispensable for
Notch-mediated inhibition of TLR4-triggered proinflammatory cytokine production. 
Furthermore, activation of Notch signaling inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B transcription activity
by MyD88/TRAF6 and TRIF pathways, which was dependent on ERK activity. Therefore,
our results showed that Notch signaling negatively regulates TLR-triggered
inflammation responses, revealing a new mechanism for negative regulation of TLR 
signaling via Notch pathway.

PMCID: PMC3307302
PMID: 22205705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26878. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026878. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

A genome-wide survey on basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors in giant
panda.

Dang C(1), Wang Y, Zhang D, Yao Q, Chen K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province,
People's Republic of China.

The giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) is a critically endangered mammalian
species. Studies on functions of regulatory proteins involved in developmental
processes would facilitate understanding of specific behavior in giant panda. The
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins play essential roles in a wide range of
developmental processes in higher organisms. bHLH family members have been
identified in over 20 organisms, including fruit fly, zebrafish, mouse and human.
Our present study identified 107 bHLH family members being encoded in giant panda
genome. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that they belong to 44 bHLH families with 
46, 25, 15, 4, 11 and 3 members in group A, B, C, D, E and F, respectively, while
the remaining 3 members were assigned into "orphan". Compared to mouse, the giant
panda does not encode seven bHLH proteins namely Beta3a, Mesp2, Sclerax, S-Myc,
Hes5 (or Hes6), EBF4 and Orphan 1. These results provide useful background
information for future studies on structure and function of bHLH proteins in the 
regulation of giant panda development.

PMCID: PMC3212526
PMID: 22096504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Oct;124(20):3394-8.

Co-culture with microglia promotes neural stem cells differentiation into
astrocytes.

Gu F(1), Wang J, Fu L, Ma YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Pathology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute
and Hospital, Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer Prevention and Therapy of the
Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy of
Tianjin, Tianjin 300060, China.

BACKGROUND: Neural stem cells (NSCs) are a self-renewing and multipotent
population of the central nervous system (CNS), which are active during
development and maintain homeostasis and tissue integrity throughout life.
Microglias are an immune cell population resident in the CNS, which have crucial 
physiological functions in the developing and adult CNS. This study aimed to
investigate that whether microglia co-cultured with NSCs could promote
astrogliogenesis from NSCs.
METHODS: Microglia and NSCs were co-cultured in 24-well insert plates. NSCs were 
plated in the bottom of the well and microglia in the insert. Fluorescent
staining, Western blotting and RT-PCR were used to determine the effect of
microglia on NSCs differentiation.
RESULTS: Co-culture of microglia and NSCs promoted astrogliogenesis from NSCs.
Several key genes, such as Notch 1, Notch 2, Notch 3, Hes 5, and NRSF were
downregulated, while the critical genes Id1 and Id2 were upregulated. BMP2 and
FGF2 were upregulated.
CONCLUSION: Microglias act as a regulator of NSCs astrogliogenesis.

PMID: 22088541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. BMC Biol. 2011 Aug 31;9:58. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-9-58.

A novel reporter of notch signalling indicates regulated and random Notch
activation during vertebrate neurogenesis.

Vilas-Boas F(1), Fior R, Swedlow JR, Storey KG, Henrique D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular and Instituto de Histologia e Biologia do
Desenvolvimento, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Av Prof, Egas
Moniz, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Building the complex vertebrate nervous system involves the regulated
production of neurons and glia while maintaining a progenitor cell population.
Neurogenesis starts asynchronously in different regions of the embryo and occurs 
over a long period of time, allowing progenitor cells to be exposed to multiple
extrinsic signals that regulate the production of different cell types.
Notch-mediated cell-cell signalling is one of the mechanisms that maintain the
progenitor pool, however, little is known about how the timing of Notch
activation is related to the cell cycle and the distinct modes of cell division
that generate neurons. An essential tool with which to investigate the role of
Notch signalling on cell by cell basis is the development a faithful reporter of 
Notch activity.
RESULTS: Here we present a novel reporter for Notch activity based on the
promoter of the well characterised Notch target chick Hes5-1, coupled with
multiple elements that confer instability, including a destabilized nuclear Venus
fluorescent protein and the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of Hes5-1. We
demonstrate that this reporter faithfully recapitulates the endogenous expression
of Hes5-1 and that it robustly responds to Notch activation in the chick neural
tube. Analysis of the patterns of Notch activity revealed by this reporter
indicates that although Notch is most frequently activated prior to mitosis it
can be activated at any time within the cell cycle. Notch active progenitors
undergoing mitosis generate two daughters that both continue to experience Notch 
signalling. However, cells lacking Notch activity before and during mitosis
generate daughters with dissimilar Notch activity profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel Notch reporter with multiple destabilisation elements
provides a faithful read-out of endogenous Notch activity on a cell-by-cell
basis, as neural progenitors progress through the cell cycle in the chick neural 
tube. Notch activity patterns in this cell population provide evidence for
distinct Notch signalling dynamics underlying different cell division modes and
for the involvement of random initiation of Notch signalling within the
neuroepithelium. These findings highlight the importance of single-cell analysis 
in the study of the complexity of Notch activity and provide new insights into
the mechanisms underlying cell fate decisions in neural progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3201213
PMID: 21880129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22817. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022817. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Genome-wide analysis of Müller glial differentiation reveals a requirement for
Notch signaling in postmitotic cells to maintain the glial fate.

Nelson BR(1), Ueki Y, Reardon S, Karl MO, Georgi S, Hartman BH, Lamba DA, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America.

Previous studies have shown that Müller glia are closely related to retinal
progenitors; these two cell types express many of the same genes and after damage
to the retina, Müller glia can serve as a source for new neurons, particularly in
non-mammalian vertebrates. We investigated the period of postnatal retinal
development when progenitors are differentiating into Müller glia to better
understand this transition. FACS purified retinal progenitors and Müller glia
from various ages of Hes5-GFP mice were analyzed by Affymetrix cDNA microarrays. 
We found that genes known to be enriched/expressed by Müller glia steadily
increase over the first three postnatal weeks, while genes associated with the
mitotic cell cycle are rapidly downregulated from P0 to P7. Interestingly,
progenitor genes not directly associated with the mitotic cell cycle, like the
proneural genes Ascl1 and Neurog2, decline more slowly over the first 10-14 days 
of postnatal development, and there is a peak in Notch signaling several days
after the presumptive Müller glia have been generated. To confirm that Notch
signaling continues in the postmitotic Müller glia, we performed in situ
hybridization, immunolocalization for the active form of Notch, and
immunofluorescence for BrdU. Using genetic and pharmacological approaches, we
found that sustained Notch signaling in the postmitotic Müller glia is necessary 
for their maturation and the stabilization of the glial identity for almost a
week after the cells have exited the mitotic cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3149061
PMID: 21829655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Sep 10;29(26):3529-34. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.7806. Epub
2011 Aug 8.

Phase I trial of MK-0752 in children with refractory CNS malignancies: a
pediatric brain tumor consortium study.

Fouladi M(1), Stewart CF, Olson J, Wagner LM, Onar-Thomas A, Kocak M, Packer RJ, 
Goldman S, Gururangan S, Gajjar A, Demuth T, Kun LE, Boyett JM, Gilbertson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, 3333 Burnet Ave, MLC 7015, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
maryam.fouladi@cchmc.org

PURPOSE: To estimate the maximum-tolerated dose (MTD), describe dose-limiting
toxicities (DLTs), and characterize pharmacokinetic properties of MK-0752, a
gamma secretase inhibitor, in children with refractory or recurrent CNS
malignancies.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: MK-0752 was administered once daily for 3 consecutive days 
of every 7 days at escalating dosages starting at 200 mg/m(2). The modified
continual reassessment method was used to estimate the MTD. A course was 28 days 
in duration. Pharmacokinetic analysis was performed during the first course.
Expression of NOTCH and hairy enhancer of split (HES) proteins was assessed in
peripheral-blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) before and following treatment with
MK-0752.
RESULTS: Twenty-three eligible patients were enrolled: 10 males (median age, 8.1 
years; range, 2.6 to 17.7 years) with diagnoses of brainstem glioma (n = 6),
ependymoma (n = 8), medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (n = 4),
glioblastoma multiforme (n = 2), atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (n = 1),
malignant glioma (n = 1), and choroid plexus carcinoma, (n = 1). Seventeen
patients were fully evaluable for toxicity. No DLTs occurred in the three
patients enrolled at 200 mg/m(2)/dose. At 260 mg/m(2)/dose, DLTs occurred in two 
of six patients, both of whom experienced grade 3 ALT and AST. There were no
grade 4 toxicities; non-dose-limiting grade 3 toxicities included hypokalemia and
lymphopenia. Population pharmacokinetic values (% coefficient of variation) for
MK-0752 were apparent oral clearance, 0.444 (38%) L/h/m(2); apparent volume of
distribution, 7.36 (24%) L/m(2); and k(a), 0.358 (99%) hr(-1).
CONCLUSION: MK-0752 is well-tolerated in children with recurrent CNS
malignancies. The recommended phase II dose using the 3 days on followed by 4
days off schedule is 260 mg/m(2)/dose once daily.

PMCID: PMC3179253
PMID: 21825264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Development. 2011 Aug;138(16):3533-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.063727.

Notch signaling prevents mucous metaplasia in mouse conducting airways during
postnatal development.

Tsao PN(1), Wei SC, Wu MF, Huang MT, Lin HY, Lee MC, Lin KM, Wang IJ, Kaartinen
V, Yang LT, Cardoso WV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei 100,
Taiwan. tsaopn@ntu.edu.tw

Goblet cell metaplasia and mucus overproduction contribute to the pathogenesis of
chronic lung diseases, including asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Notch signaling regulates cell fate decisions and is crucial in
controlling goblet cell differentiation in the gut epithelium. Little is known,
however, about how endogenous Notch signaling influences the goblet cell
differentiation program that takes place in the postnatal lung. Using a
combination of genetic and in vitro approaches here we provide evidence of a
novel role for Notch in restricting goblet cell differentiation in the airway
epithelium during the postnatal period. Conditional inactivation of the essential
Notch pathway component Pofut1 (protein O-fucosyltransferase1) in
Tgfb3-Cre-expressing mice resulted in an aberrant postnatal airway phenotype
characterized by marked goblet cell metaplasia, decreased Clara cell number and
increase in ciliated cells. The presence of the same phenotype in mice in which
the Notch transcriptional effector Rbpjk was deleted indicated the involvement of
the canonical Notch pathway. Lineage study in vivo suggested that goblet cells
originated from a subpopulation of Clara cells largely present in proximal
airways in which Notch was disrupted. The phenotype was confirmed by a panel of
goblet cell markers, showed no changes in cell proliferation or altered
expression of proinflammatory cytokines and was associated with significant
downregulation of the bHLH transcriptional repressor Hes5. Luciferase reporter
analysis suggested that Notch directly repressed MUC5AC transcription in lung
epithelial cells. The data suggested that during postnatal life Notch is required
to prevent Clara cells from differentiating into goblet cells.

PMCID: PMC3148592
PMID: 21791528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Jul 17;14(8):957-64. doi: 10.1038/nn.2875.

Mammalian Gcm genes induce Hes5 expression by active DNA demethylation and induce
neural stem cells.

Hitoshi S(1), Ishino Y, Kumar A, Jasmine S, Tanaka KF, Kondo T, Kato S, Hosoya T,
Hotta Y, Ikenaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan. shitoshi-tky@umin.ac.jp

Signaling mediated by Notch receptors is crucial for the development of many
organs and the maintenance of various stem cell populations. The activation of
Notch signaling is first detectable by the expression of an effector gene, Hes5, 
in the neuroepithelium of mouse embryos at embryonic day (E) 8.0-8.5, and this
activation is indispensable for the generation of neural stem cells. However, the
molecular mechanism by which Hes5 expression is initiated in stem-producing cells
remains unknown. We found that mammalian Gcm1 and Gcm2 (glial cells missing 1 and
2) are involved in the epigenetic regulation of Hes5 transcription by DNA
demethylation independently of DNA replication. Loss of both Gcm genes and
subsequent lack of Hes5 upregulation in the neuroepithelium of E7.5-8.5
Gcm1(-/-); Gcm2(-/-) mice resulted in the impaired induction of neural stem
cells. Our data suggest that Hes5 expression is serially activated first by Gcms 
and later by the canonical Notch pathway.

PMID: 21765423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 May;58(5):682-9. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23202. Epub 2011 Jul
8.

Notch pathway activation induces neuroblastoma tumor cell growth arrest.

Zage PE(1), Nolo R, Fang W, Stewart J, Garcia-Manero G, Zweidler-McKay PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Children's Cancer Hospital, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Notch pathway signaling has critical roles in differentiation,
proliferation, and survival, and has oncogenic or tumor suppressor effects in a
variety of malignancies. The goal of this study was to evaluate the effects of
Notch activation on human neuroblastoma cells.
PROCEDURE: Quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblots, and immunohistochemistry were used
to determine the expression of Notch receptors (Notch1-4), cleaved Notch1 (ICN1),
and downstream targets (HES1-5) in human neuroblastoma cell lines and patient
tumor samples. Notch pathway signaling was induced using intracellular Notch
(ICN1-3) and HES gene constructs or direct culture on Notch ligands. Quantitative
methylation-specific PCR was used to quantify methylation of the HES gene
promoters, and the effects of treatment with decitabine were measured.
RESULTS: Neuroblastoma cells express varying levels of Notch receptors and low
levels of HES genes at baseline. However, no endogenous activation of the Notch
pathway was detected in neuroblastoma cell lines or patient tumor samples.
Expression of activated Notch intracellular domains and HES gene products led to 
growth arrest. The HES2 and HES5 gene promoters were found to be heavily
methylated in most neuroblastoma lines, and HES gene expression could be induced 
through treatment with decitabine.
CONCLUSIONS: We report that neuroblastoma cell lines express multiple Notch
receptors, which are inactive at baseline. Activation of the Notch pathway via
ligand binding consistently resulted in growth arrest. HES gene expression
appears to be regulated epigenetically and could be induced with decitabine.
These findings support a tumor suppressor role for Notch signaling in
neuroblastoma.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3264695
PMID: 21744479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Feb;19(2):209-19. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.84. Epub 2011 Jul
1.

Jagged2 controls the generation of motor neuron and oligodendrocyte progenitors
in the ventral spinal cord.

Rabadán MA(1), Cayuso J, Le Dréau G, Cruz C, Barzi M, Pons S, Briscoe J, Martí E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Científic de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

In the developing spinal cord, motor neurons (MNs) and oligodendrocytes arise
sequentially from a common pool of progenitors. However, the genetic network
responsible for this neurogenesis to gliogenesis switch is largely unknown. A
transcriptome analysis identified the Notch ligand Jagged2 (JAG2) as a Sonic
hedgehog-regulated factor transiently expressed in MN progenitors (pMNs). In vivo
loss- and gain-of-function experiments show that JAG2 schedules the
differentiation of the pMN progenitors. At early developmental stages, Olig2
expressing pMN progenitors that enter the differentiation pathway exclusively
generate MNs. At these times, the activation of the Notch pathway by JAG2
maintains selected pMN progenitors in an undifferentiated state by two
mechanisms; first it inhibits MN generation by reducing Olig2 proteins levels,
and second it directly inhibits the premature generation of oligodendrocyte
progenitors (OLPs) by maintaining high levels of Hes5. Later, extinction of JAG2 
from the pMN results in the loss of Hes5 expression, heralding the gliogenic
phase of pMN progenitors. Strikingly, downregulation of JAG2 in pMN progenitors
is sufficient to promote the precocious generation of OLPs. Together these data
provide evidence that JAG2 is a key regulator of the timely and ordered
generation of two of the defining cell types in the spinal cord, MNs and OLPs.

PMCID: PMC3263496
PMID: 21720386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Aug 28;205(2):203-8. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.06.007. Epub
2011 Jun 15.

Ochratoxin A at nanomolar concentration perturbs the homeostasis of neural stem
cells in highly differentiated but not in immature three-dimensional brain cell
cultures.

Zurich MG(1), Honegger P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
mzurich@unil.ch

Ochratoxin A (OTA), a fungal contaminant of basic food commodities, is known to
be highly cytotoxic, but the pathways underlying adverse effects at subcytotoxic 
concentrations remain to be elucidated. Recent reports indicate that OTA affects 
cell cycle regulation. Therefore, 3D brain cell cultures were used to study OTA
effects on mitotically active neural stem/progenitor cells, comparing highly
differentiated cultures with their immature counterparts. Changes in the rate of 
DNA synthesis were related to early changes in the mRNA expression of neural
stem/progenitor cell markers. OTA at 10nM, a concentration below the cytotoxic
level, was ineffective in immature cultures, whereas in mature cultures it
significantly decreased the rate of DNA synthesis together with the mRNA
expression of key transcriptional regulators such as Sox2, Mash1, Hes5, and Gli1;
the cell cycle activator cyclin D2; the phenotypic markers nestin, doublecortin, 
and PDGFRa. These effects were largely prevented by Sonic hedgehog (Shh) peptide 
(500ngml(-1)) administration, indicating that OTA impaired the Shh pathway and
the Sox2 regulatory transcription factor critical for stem cell self-renewal.
Similar adverse effects of OTA in vivo might perturb the regulation of stem cell 
proliferation in the adult brain and in other organs exhibiting homeostatic
and/or regenerative cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21703336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Dev Dyn. 2011 Aug;240(8):1964-76. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22680. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Aberrant expression of genes necessary for neuronal development and Notch
signaling in an epileptic mind bomb zebrafish.

Hortopan GA(1), Baraban SC.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Research Laboratory, Department of Neurological Surgery, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Mutation within an ubiquitin E3 ligase gene can lead to a failure in Notch
signaling, excessive neurons, and depletion of neural progenitor cells in mind
bomb mutants. Using mib(hi904) zebrafish, we reported seizures and a
down-regulation of <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) signaling pathway genes. A
transcriptome analysis also identified differential expression pattern of genes
related to Notch signaling and neurodevelopment. Here, we selected nine of these 
genes (her4.2, hes5, bhlhb5, hoxa5a, hoxb5b, dmbx1a, dbx1a, nxph1, and plxnd1)
and performed a more thorough analysis of expression using conventional
polymerase chain reaction, real-time polymerase chain reaction and in situ
hybridization. Transgenic reporter fish (Gfap:GFP and Dlx5a-6a:GFP) were used to 
assess early brain morphology in vivo. Down-regulation of many of these genes was
prominent throughout key structures of the developing mib(hi904) zebrafish brain 
including, but not limited to, the pallium, ventral thalamus, and optic tectum.
Brain expression of Dlx5a-6a and Gfap was also reduced. In conclusion, these
expression studies indicate a general down-regulation of Notch signaling genes
necessary for proper brain development and suggest that these mutant fish could
provide valuable insights into neurological conditions, such as Angelman
syndrome, associated with ubiquitin E3 ligase mutation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3137702
PMID: 21688347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Neurosurg. 2011 Sep;115(3):512-7. doi: 10.3171/2011.5.JNS11271. Epub 2011 Jun
10.

Notch receptor and effector expression in von Hippel-Lindau disease-associated
central nervous system hemangioblastomas.

Merrill MJ(1), Edwards NA, Lonser RR.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1414, USA.
merrillm@ninds.nih.gov

OBJECT: Central nervous system hemangioblastomas are the most common
manifestation of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, an autosomal dominant tumor
suppressor syndrome that results in loss of VHL protein function and continuous
upregulation of hypoxia-inducible factors. These tumors are composed of
neoplastic stromal cells and abundant vasculature. Stromal cells express markers 
consistent with multipotent embryonically arrested hemangioblasts, which are
precursors for hematopoietic and vascular lineages. Notch receptors are
transmembrane signaling molecules that regulate multiple developmental processes 
including hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis. To investigate the importance of
notch signaling in the development of VHL disease-associated CNS
hemangioblastomas, the authors examined the presence of the four notch receptors 
and downstream notch effectors in this setting.
METHODS: The authors used surgical specimens obtained from confirmed
VHL-associated hemangioblastomas. Immunohistochemical analysis for the four notch
receptors and the downstream effectors was performed on formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded sections. Western blot analysis for HES1 was performed on
frozen specimens.
RESULTS: All four notch receptors are present in hemangioblastomas. NOTCH1 and
NOTCH4 receptors were widely and prominently expressed in both the stromal and
vascular cells, NOTCH2 receptor expression was limited to primarily stromal
cells, and NOTCH3 receptor expression was limited to vascular cells. All 4
receptors displayed a nuclear presence. Immunohistochemical analysis also
demonstrated that downstream notch effectors, HES1 and HES5, were uniformly
expressed in tumor stromal and vascular cells, but HES3, HEY1, and HEY2 were not.
Strong HES1 expression was confirmed by Western blot analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of all four notch receptors and downstream effector
molecules suggests that the notch signaling pathway plays a critical role in the 
maintenance of the undifferentiated pluripotent phenotype of these tumors and in 
the associated vascular response. Moreover, the prominent expression of notch
receptors in VHL-associated CNS hemangioblastomas reveals a new and possibly
potent therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4762040
PMID: 21663414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Hepatology. 2011 Sep 2;54(3):979-88. doi: 10.1002/hep.24469. Epub 2011 Aug 8.

Canonical notch pathway protects hepatocytes from ischemia/reperfusion injury in 
mice by repressing reactive oxygen species production through JAK2/STAT3
signaling.

Yu HC(1), Qin HY, He F, Wang L, Fu W, Liu D, Guo FC, Liang L, Dou KF, Han H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Medical Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Xi-Jing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, China.

Hepatic ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury is initiated by reactive oxygen species
(ROS) accumulated during the early reperfusion phase after ischemia, but cellular
mechanisms controlling ROS production and scavenging have not been fully
understood. In this study, we show that blocking Notch signal by knockout of the 
transcription factor RBP-J or a pharmacological inhibitor led to aggravated
hepatic I/R injury, as manifested by deteriorated liver function and increased
apoptosis, necrosis, and inflammation, both in vitro and in vivo. Interruption of
Notch signaling resulted in increased intracellular ROS in hepatocytes, and a ROS
scavenger cured exacerbated hepatic I/R injury after Notch signaling blockade,
suggesting that Notch signal deficiency aggravated I/R injury through increased
ROS levels. Notch signal blockade resulted in down-regulation of Hes5, leading to
reduced formation of the Hes5-STAT3 complex and hypophosphorylation of STAT3,
which further attenuated manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) expression and
increased ROS and apoptosis. Indeed, overexpression of a constitutively active
STAT3 rescued MnSOD expression and I/R injury-induced apoptosis in the absence of
Notch signaling. Finally, forced Notch activation by ligand stimulation or Hes5
overexpression reduced intracellular ROS and protected hepatocytes from apoptosis
after I/R injury through the activation of STAT3 and MnSOD expression.CONCLUSION:
Notch signal protects hepatocytes from I/R injury by Hes5-dependent activation of
STAT3, which activates the expression of MnSOD, leading to the scavenging of ROS.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21633967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Brain. 2011 May 27;4:21. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-4-21.

Transcriptional dysregulation of 5-HT1A autoreceptors in mental illness.

Albert PR(1), Le François B, Millar AM.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Neuroscience), University of Ottawa, 451
Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H 8M5, Canada. palbert@uottawa.ca

The serotonin-1A (5-HT1A) receptor is among the most abundant and widely
distributed 5-HT receptors in the brain, but is also expressed on serotonin
neurons as an autoreceptor where it plays a critical role in regulating the
activity of the entire serotonin system. Over-expression of the 5-HT1A
autoreceptor has been implicated in reducing serotonergic neurotransmission, and 
is associated with major depression and suicide. Extensive characterization of
the transcriptional regulation of the 5-HT1A gene (HTR1A) using cell culture
systems has revealed a GC-rich "housekeeping" promoter that non-selectively
drives its expression; this is flanked by a series of upstream repressor elements
for REST, Freud-1/CC2D1A and Freud-2/CC2D1B factors that not only restrict its
expression to neurons, but may also regulate the level of expression of 5-HT1A
receptors in various subsets of neurons, including serotonergic neurons. A
separate set of allele-specific factors, including Deaf1, Hes1 and Hes5 repress
at the HTR1A C(-1019)G (rs6295) polymorphism in serotonergic neurons in culture, 
as well as in vivo. Pet1, an obligatory enhancer for serotonergic
differentiation, has been identified as a potent activator of 5-HT1A autoreceptor
expression. Taken together, these results highlight an integrated regulation of
5-HT1A autoreceptors that differs in several aspects from regulation of
post-synaptic 5-HT1A receptors, and could be selectively targeted to enhance
serotonergic neurotransmission.

PMCID: PMC3130656
PMID: 21619616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2011 Jul;301(1):C195-203. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00012.2011. Epub 2011 Apr 20.

Human myostatin negatively regulates human myoblast growth and differentiation.

McFarlane C(1), Hui GZ, Amanda WZ, Lau HY, Lokireddy S, Xiaojia G, Mouly V,
Butler-Browne G, Gluckman PD, Sharma M, Kambadur R.

Author information: 
(1)Growth, Development and Metabolism Program, Singapore Institute for Clinical
Sciences, Singapore.

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014 Dec 15;307(12):C1154.

Myostatin, a member of the transforming growth factor-ß superfamily, has been
implicated in the potent negative regulation of myogenesis in murine models.
However, little is known about the mechanism(s) through which human myostatin
negatively regulates human skeletal muscle growth. Using human primary myoblasts 
and recombinant human myostatin protein, we show here that myostatin blocks human
myoblast proliferation by regulating cell cycle progression through targeted
upregulation of p21. We further show that myostatin regulates myogenic
differentiation through the inhibition of key myogenic regulatory factors
including MyoD, via canonical Smad signaling. In addition, we have for the first 
time demonstrated the capability of myostatin to regulate the Notch signaling
pathway during inhibition of human myoblast differentiation. Treatment with
myostatin results in the upregulation of Hes1, Hes5, and Hey1 expression during
differentiation; moreover, when we interfere with Notch signaling, through
treatment with the <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor L-685,458, we find enhanced myotube
formation despite the presence of excess myostatin. Therefore, blockade of the
Notch pathway relieves myostatin repression of differentiation, and myostatin
upregulates Notch downstream target genes. Immunoprecipitation studies
demonstrate that myostatin treatment of myoblasts results in enhanced association
of Notch1-intracellular domain with Smad3, providing an additional mechanism
through which myostatin targets and represses the activity of the myogenic
regulatory factor MyoD. On the basis of these results, we suggest that myostatin 
function and mechanism of action are very well conserved between species, and
that myostatin regulation of postnatal myogenesis involves interactions with
numerous downstream signaling mediators, including the Notch pathway.

PMCID: PMC3129832
PMID: 21508334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mech Dev. 2011 May-Jun;128(5-6):289-302. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.04.001. Epub
2011 Apr 9.

Pax6 regulates boundary-cell specification in the rat hindbrain.

Takahashi M(1), Osumi N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neuroscience, United Centers for Advanced Research
and Translational Medicine (ART), Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku University,
Seiryo-Machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. mtaka@med.tohoku.ac.jp

The vertebrate neuroepithelium can be subdivided into non-boundary and boundary
regions. The boundary regions act as signaling centers for regional specification
and neurogenesis in the neighboring non-boundary regions. An important question
is how boundary regions are specified and maintained during brain development. In
this study, we report that Pax6, a homeodomain transcription factor, regulates
boundary-cell specification between rhombomeres of the developing rat hindbrain. 
We compared expression patterns of four boundary-cell markers, including PLZF
(Zbtb16), Ring1A (Ring1), Wnt5a, and cadherin7 (Cdh7), in wild-type and Pax6
loss-of-function mutant hindbrains and found that the expression of Zbtb16,
Ring1, and Wnt5a was down-regulated in the rhombomere boundaries, while Cdh7
expression was up-regulated in the non-boundary regions of the Pax6 mutant
hindbrain. Morphological observations revealed that the boundary regions were
larger and that the interface between the boundary and non-boundary regions was
obscured in the Pax6 mutant hindbrain. We also found ectopic neuronal
differentiation in the boundary cells of the Pax6 mutant hindbrain. In addition, 
we observed that Hes5 was down-regulated and that Neurogenin2 (Neurog2) was
up-regulated in the boundary regions of the Pax6 mutant hindbrain. Because Hes
genes have been shown to inhibit neuronal differentiation by repressing proneural
genes, Pax6 may act through this pathway to prevent neurogenesis in the boundary 
cells. Taken together, Pax6 seems to be required for coordinating boundary-cell
specification and reducing neurogenesis within the hindbrain boundary region.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21501682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2010 Oct;20(7):1109-16.

Hes1/Hes5 gene inhibits differentiation via down-regulating Hash1 and promotes
proliferation in cervical carcinoma cells.

Liu J(1), Lu WG, Ye F, Cheng XD, Hong D, Hu Y, Chen HZ, Xie X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Womens Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

INTRODUCTION: Hairy and enhancer of split 1 (Hes1) and Hes5 are target genes for 
the mammalian Notch pathway, which are highly expressed in epithelia in the
process of embryogenesis or in neural stem cells, inhibit cell differentiation
via the Notch-Hes-Hash signaling, and promote the survival of stem cells. Either 
Hes1 or Hes5 overactivation is likely to affect cell differentiation, thereby
resulting in carcinogenesis.
METHODS: We transfected the diced small interference RNA into SiHa cells and
detected cell differentiation and proliferation by immunocytochemistry, Western
blot, and methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium assay.
RESULTS: Knockdown of Hes1 and Hes5 would up-regulate the downstream gene Hash1, 
but not the upstream gene Notch1 in the Notch-Hes-Hash pathway. After Hes1/Hes5
RNA interference, expression of differentiation-associated proteins (including
Nanog, stage-specific embryonic antigen 4, and tumor rejection antigen-1-60) was 
reduced, and the cell differentiation was promoted; meanwhile, the cell
proliferation was inhibited, which was verified by detecting
proliferation-associated proteins (eg, Ki-67, proliferating cell nuclear antigen)
and methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium assay.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that Hes1/Hes5 gene would inhibit the cell
differentiation via down-regulating Hash1 and promote the cell proliferation in
cervical carcinoma cells; the cell differentiation and proliferation can be
reversed simultaneously by Hes1/Hes5 knockdown using RNA interference.

PMID: 21495212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Morphol. 2011 Jun;272(6):675-97. doi: 10.1002/jmor.10943. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

The chick optic tectum developmental stages. A dynamic table based on temporal-
and spatial-dependent histogenetic changes: A structural, morphometric and
immunocytochemical analysis.

Rapacioli M(1), Rodríguez Celín A, Duarte S, Ortalli AL, Di Napoli J, Teruel L,
Sánchez V, Scicolone G, Flores V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostructural Sciences, Interdisciplinary Group in Theoretical
Biology, Favaloro University, Argentina.

Development is often described as temporal sequences of developmental stages
(DSs). When tables of DS are defined exclusively in the time domain they cannot
discriminate histogenetic differences between different positions along a spatial
reference axis. We introduce a table of DSs for the developing chick optic tectum
(OT) based on time- and space-dependent changes in quantitative morphometric
parameters, qualitative histogenetic features and immunocytochemical pattern of
several developmentally active molecules (Notch1, Hes5, NeuroD1, ß-III-Tubulin,
synaptotagmin-I and neurofilament-M). Seven DSs and four transitional stages were
defined from ED2 to ED12, when the basic OT cortical organization is established,
along a spatial developmental gradient axis extending between a zone of maximal
and a zone of minimal development. The table of DSs reveals that DSs do not only 
progress as a function of time but also display a spatially organized propagation
along the developmental gradient axis. The complex and dynamic character of the
OT development is documented by the fact that several DSs are simultaneously
present at any ED or any embryonic stage. The table of DSs allows interpreting
how developmental cell behaviors are temporally and spatially organized and
explains how different DSs appear as a function of both time and space. The table
of DSs provides a reference system to characterize the OT corticogenesis and to
reliably compare observations made in different specimens.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21484853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 27;286(21):18708-19. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.210740. Epub
2011 Mar 31.

mSEL-1L (Suppressor/enhancer Lin12-like) protein levels influence murine neural
stem cell self-renewal and lineage commitment.

Cardano M(1), Diaferia GR, Cattaneo M, Dessì SS, Long Q, Conti L, Deblasio P,
Cattaneo E, Biunno I.

Author information: 
(1)Doctorate School of Molecular Medicine, Università degli Studi di Milano,
20100 Milan, Italy.

Murine SEL-1L (mSEL-1L) is a key component of the endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation pathway. It is essential during development as
revealed by the multi-organ dysfunction and in uterus lethality occurring in
homozygous mSEL-1L-deficient mice. Here we show that mSEL-1L is highly expressed 
in pluripotent embryonic stem cells and multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs) but 
silenced in all mature neural derivatives (i.e. astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and
neurons) by mmu-miR-183. NSCs derived from homozygous mSEL-1L-deficient embryos
(mSEL-1L(-/-) NSCs) fail to proliferate in vitro, show a drastic reduction of the
Notch effector HES-5, and reveal a significant down-modulation of the early
neural progenitor markers PAX-6 and OLIG-2, when compared with the wild type
(mSEL-1L(+/+) NSCs) counterpart. Furthermore, these cells are almost completely
deprived of the neural marker Nestin, display a significant decrease of SOX-2
expression, and rapidly undergo premature astrocytic commitment and apoptosis.
The data suggest severe self-renewal defects occurring in these cells probably
mediated by misregulation of the Notch signaling. The results reported here
denote mSEL-1L as a primitive marker with a possible involvement in the
regulation of neural progenitor stemness maintenance and lineage determination.

PMCID: PMC3099688
PMID: 21454627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 29;408(1):38-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.113. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Interaction of Hand2 and E2a is important for transcription of Phox2b in
sympathetic nervous system neuron differentiation.

Hashimoto Y(1), Tsutsumi M, Myojin R, Maruta K, Onoda F, Tashiro F, Ohtsu M,
Murakami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, Department of Biological Science
and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, 2641 Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba
278-8510, Japan.

Transcription factors play a crucial role in the development of various tissues. 
In particular, the transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
family are crucial regulators of neurodifferentiation. Previous studies suggested
that the bHLH transcription factor Hand2 is essential for sympathetic nervous
system neuron differentiation in vivo, but the molecular mechanisms involved have
not been well elucidated. It is important for understanding their mode of action 
in cellular differentiation to clarify how these bHLH factors regulate distinct
transcriptional targets in a temporally and spatially controlled manner. Recent
reports on ES cell differentiation suggested that its molecular mechanism mimics 
that of in vivo neurogenesis. However, the diverse nature of ES cell populations 
has prevented efficient analysis. To address this issue, we previously
established a cell line in P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells. Efficient
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) neuron differentiation is induced in the cell
line. Using this cell line, we succeeded in showing that the interaction of bHLH 
transcription factor Hand2 with E2a is required for transcription of Phox2b,
which is essential for autonomic nervous system neuron development, and this
binding activates this expression in SNS differentiation. Moreover, we also
demonstrated that Hes5 regulated the transcription of Phox2b as a negative
regulator and it inhibited the SNS differentiation. These findings have enabled
us to determine the novel regulatory mechanism of Phox2b in SNS differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21453680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 13;286(19):16583-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.222158. Epub
2011 Mar 14.

Notch- and transducin-like enhancer of split (TLE)-dependent histone
deacetylation explain interleukin 12 (IL-12) p70 inhibition by zymosan.

Alvarez Y(1), Municio C, Hugo E, Zhu J, Alonso S, Hu X, Fernández N, Sánchez
Crespo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, 47003-Valladolid, Spain.

The fungal analog zymosan induces IL-23 and low amounts of IL-12 p70. This study 
addresses the molecular mechanisms underlying this cytokine pattern in human
monocyte-derived dendritic cells. The transcriptional regulation of il23a, one of
the chains of IL-23, depended on the activation of c-Rel and histone H3
phosphorylation, as judged from the association of c-Rel with the il23a promoter 
and the correlation between IL-23 production and Ser-10-histone H3
phosphorylation. Consistent with its reduced ability to produce IL-12 p70,
zymosan induced a transient occupancy of the il12a promoter by c-Rel, blocked the
production of IL-12 p70 and the transcription of il12a induced by other stimuli, 
and triggered the expression and nuclear translocation of the transcriptional
repressors of the Notch family hairy and enhancer of split (Hes)-1, Hes5,
hairy/enhancer-of-split related with YRPW motif protein (Hey)-1, and
transducin-like enhancer of split (TLE). Zymosan also induced the interaction of 
Hes1 and TLE with histone H3 phosphorylated on Ser-10 and deacetylated on Lys-14.
Inhibition of class III histone deacetylases increased the production of IL-12
p70 and partially blunted the inhibitory effect of zymosan on the production of
IL-12 p70 elicited by LPS and IFN-<U+03B3>. These results indicate that the selective
induction of IL-23 by ß-glucans is explained by the activation of c-Rel
associated with Ser-10-histone H3 phosphorylation in the il23a promoter mediated 
by mitogen- and stress-activated kinase and/or protein kinase A and inhibition of
il12a transcription by a mechanism involving activation of several corepressors
with the ability to bind TLE and to promote histone deacetylation.

PMCID: PMC3089501
PMID: 21402701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Acta Neuropathol. 2011 Jun;121(6):753-61. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0810-6. Epub
2011 Feb 17.

Adult grade II diffuse astrocytomas are genetically distinct from and more
aggressive than their paediatric counterparts.

Jones DT(1), Mulholland SA, Pearson DM, Malley DS, Openshaw SW, Lambert SR, Liu
L, Bäcklund LM, Ichimura K, Collins VP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, UK. davidjones@cantab.net

Diffuse astrocytomas (WHO grade II) typically present as slow-growing tumours
showing significant cellular differentiation, but possessing a tendency towards
malignant progression. They account for ~10% of all astrocytic tumours, with a
peak incidence between 30 and 40 years of age. Median survival is reported as
around 6-8 years. Mutations of TP53 and IDH1 have been described as genetic
hallmarks, while copy number alterations are also relatively common. However,
there is some evidence to suggest that these characteristics may vary with age.
Here, we present an integrated clinicopathologic, genomic and transcriptomic
analysis suggesting that paediatric and adult tumours are associated with
distinct genetic signatures. For example, no childhood tumour showed mutation of 
IDH1/2 or TP53, virtually no copy number changes were seen, and MGMT methylation 
was absent. In contrast, adult tumours showed IDH1/2 mutation in 94% and TP53
mutation in 69% of cases, with multiple copy number alterations per case and
hypermethylation of MGMT in the majority of tumours. These differences were
associated with a worse prognosis in the adult patients. The expression array
data also revealed a significant difference in the expression of a number of
genes putatively involved in neural stem cell maintenance and CNS development,
including DLL3, HES5, BMP2, TIMP1 and BAMBI. Genes involved in DNA replication
and the cell cycle were also enriched in the adult tumours, suggesting that their
more aggressive behaviour may be due to derivation from a more rapidly dividing, 
less differentiated cell type.

PMID: 21327941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 15;352(2):329-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.038. Epub 2011 
Feb 16.

Cooperative functions of Hes/Hey genes in auditory hair cell and supporting cell 
development.

Tateya T(1), Imayoshi I, Tateya I, Ito J, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Notch-mediated lateral inhibition has been reported to regulate auditory hair
cell and supporting cell development from common precursors. While the Notch
effector genes Hes1, Hes5 and Hey1 are expressed in the developing cochlea,
inactivation of either of them causes only mild abnormality, suggesting their
functional redundancy. To explore the roles of Hes/Hey genes in cochlear
development, we examined compound heterozygous or homozygous mutant mice that
lacked Hes1, Hes5 and Hey1 alleles. We found that a reduction in Hes/Hey gene
dosage led to graded increase of hair cell formation. However, if at least one
allele of Hes1, Hes5 or Hey1 was intact, excessive hair cells were accompanied by
overproduction of supporting cells, suggesting that the hair cell increase does
not occur at the expense of supporting cells, and that each Hes/Hey gene
functions to induce supporting cells. By contrast, when all alleles of Hes1, Hes5
and Hey1 were inactivated, the number of hair cells increased more drastically,
whereas that of supporting cells was unchanged compared with control, suggesting 
that supporting cell formation was balanced by their overproduction and fate
conversion into hair cells. The increase of the cell numbers seemed to occur
after the prosensory domain formation in the mutants because the proliferation
state and the size of the prosensory domain were not affected. Thus, Hes1, Hes5
and Hey1 cooperatively inhibit hair cell formation, and one allele of Hes1, Hes5 
or Hey1 is sufficient for supporting cell production probably by lateral
inhibition in the sensory epithelium. Strikingly, Hes/Hey mutations lead to
disorganized cell alignment and polarity and to hearing loss despite hair cell
overproduction. These results suggest that Hes/Hey gene dosage is essential not
only for generation of appropriate numbers of hair cells and supporting cells by 
controlling cell proliferation and lateral inhibition but also for the hearing
ability by regulating the cell alignment and polarity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21300049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Endod. 2011 Feb;37(2):176-80. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2010.10.007.

Immunohistochemical expression of Notch signaling in the lining epithelium of
periapical cysts.

Meliou E(1), Kerezoudis N, Tosios K, Lafkas D, Kiaris H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endodontology, Dental School, University of Athens, Athens,
Greece. emeliou@dent.uoa.gr

INTRODUCTION: In this study we evaluated the immunohistochemical expression of
the receptors Notch 1 and Notch 2, the ligand Delta 1, and the transcription
factors HES 1 and HES 5 in the epithelium of well-defined periapical cysts.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was carried out on 55 formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded, well-defined periapical cysts with minimum inflammation,
obtained from the archival tissue database of the Department of Oral Pathology
and Surgery. Western blotting was performed to evaluate the specificity of the
anti-Notch antibody and the expression of Notch signaling in 5 fresh-frozen
periapical cysts. The levels of staining intensity were estimated by the
performance of a semiautomated image analysis system. Descriptive statistic of
mean values obtained by computerized image analysis method was performed.
RESULTS: Immunostaining reaction of all Notch signaling components was observed
in the cytoplasm and/or the cytoplasmic membrane in the majority of epithelial
cells of periapical cysts. Nuclear staining was observed occasionally in all
cases. Notch 2 showed strong staining in 52.83% of the cases, followed by Notch 1
(35.85%), HES 1 and HES 5 moderate staining in 72.73% and 57.69% of the cases,
respectively, and Delta 1 weak staining in 58.33% of the cases. No statistical
correlation was found between the antibodies and the sex or the age of the study 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Notch is an evolutionarily conserved signaling mechanism that
regulates cell fate decisions during development and postnatal life in organisms 
as diverse as worms, flies, and humans. The present observations indicate that
Notch pathway is active downstream in the lining epithelium of periapical cysts, 
suggesting an involvement of this pathway in periapical cyst growth and
expansion.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21238798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Vis. 2010 Dec 31;16:2850-66.

Effects of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor on cultured murine retinal
progenitor cells.

Wang J(1), Yang J, Gu P, Klassen H.

Author information: 
(1)Gavin Herbert Eye Institute and Stem Cell Research Center, University of
California, Irvine, CA 92697-1705, USA.

PURPOSE: Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is neuroprotective of
retinal neurons, and transduced retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) can deliver this 
cytokine for the treatment of retinal diseases, yet the potential effects of GDNF
on RPCs have received little attention.
METHODS: Murine RPCs were assessed under multiple conditions in the presence or
absence of epidermal growth factor (EGF, 20 ng/ml) and/or GDNF (10 ng/ml) using a
variety of techniques, including live-cell imaging, caspase-3 activity assay,
whole genome microarray, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), and
western blotting.
RESULTS: Live monitoring revealed that formation of initial aggregates resulted
largely from the collision and adherence of dissociated RPCs, as opposed to
clonal proliferation. Spheres enlarged in size and number, with more reaching the
threshold criteria for cross-sectional areas in the EGF+GDNF condition.
Proliferation was measurably augmented in association with EGF+GDNF, and K(i)-67 
expression was modestly increased (1.07 fold), as were hairy and enhancer of
split 5 (Hes5), mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1 (Mash1), and Vimentin. However,
global gene expression did not reveal a notable treatment-related response, and
the expression of the majority of progenitor and lineage markers examined
remained stable. GDNF reduced RPC apoptosis, compared to complete growth-factor
withdrawal, although it could not by itself sustain mitotic activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support the feasibility of developing GDNF-transduced
RPCs as potential therapeutic agents for use in retinal diseases.

PMCID: PMC3012652
PMID: 21203407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):496-510. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.017. Epub 2010
Dec 21.

Fgf15-mediated control of neurogenic and proneural gene expression regulates
dorsal midbrain neurogenesis.

Fischer T(1), Faus-Kessler T, Welzl G, Simeone A, Wurst W, Prakash N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Centre Munich, Technical
University Munich, Neuherberg, Germany.

The balanced proliferation and cell cycle exit of neural progenitors, by
generating the appropriate amount of postmitotic progeny at the correct time and 
in the proper location, is required for the establishment of the highly ordered
structure of the adult brain. Little is known about the extrinsic signals
regulating these processes, particularly in the midbrain. Fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) 15, the mouse ortholog of FGF19 and member of an atypical Fgf
subfamily, is prominently expressed in the dorsolateral midbrain of the
midgestational mouse embryo. In the absence of Fgf15, dorsal midbrain neural
progenitors fail to exit the cell cycle and to generate the proper amount of
postmitotic neurons. We show here that this is due to the altered expression of
inhibitory/neurogenic and proneural/neuronal differentiation helix-loop-helix
transcription factor (TF) genes. The expression of Id1, Id3, and Hes5 was
strongly increased and ectopically expanded, whereas the expression of Ascl1
(Mash1), Neurog1 (Ngn1) and Neurog2 (Ngn2) was strongly decreased and
transcription of Neurod1 (NeuroD) was completely abolished in the dorsolateral
midbrain of Fgf15(-/-) mice. These abnormalities were not caused by the
mis-expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins such as cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitors or retinoblastoma proteins. Furthermore, human FGF19 promotes cell
cycle exit of murine dorsal neural progenitors in vitro. Therefore, our data
suggest that Fgf15 is a crucial signaling molecule regulating the postmitotic
transition of dorsal neural progenitors and thus the initiation and proper
progression of dorsal midbrain neurogenesis in the mouse, by controlling the
expression of neurogenic and proneural TFs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21172336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;89(6):696-705. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.154. Epub 2010
Dec 14.

A cell autonomous role for the Notch ligand Delta-like 3 in aß T-cell
development.

Hoyne GF(1), Chapman G, Sontani Y, Pursglove SE, Dunwoodie SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of T Cell Development and Regulation, John Curtin School of
Medical Research, Australian National University Canberra, Canberra, Australian
Capital Territory, Australia. ghoyne@nd.edu.au

Notch signalling is critical to help direct T-cell lineage commitment in early
T-cell progenitors and in the development of aß T-cells. Epithelial and stromal
cell populations in the thymus express the Notch DSL (Delta, Serrate and
Lag2)ligands Delta-like 1 (Dll1), Delta-like 4 (Dll4), Jagged 1 and Jagged 2, and
induce Notch signalling in thymocytes that express the Notch receptor. At present
there is nothing known about the role of the Delta-like 3 (Dll3) ligand in the
immune system. Here we describe a novel cell autonomous role for Dll3 in aß
T-cell development. We show that Dll3 cannot activate Notch when expressed in
trans but like other Notch ligands it can inhibit Notch signalling when expressed
in cis with the receptor. The loss of Dll3 leads to an increase in Hes5
expression in double positive thymocytes and their increased production of mature
CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. Studies using competitive irradiation chimeras proved 
that Dll3 acts in a cell autonomous manner to regulate positive selection but not
negative selection of autoreactive T cells. Our results indicate that Dll3 has a 
unique function during T-cell development that is distinct from the role played
by the other DSL ligands of Notch and is in keeping with other recent studies
indicating that Dll1 and Dll3 ligands have non-overlapping roles during embryonic
development.

PMID: 21151194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 28;286(4):2648-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.183038. Epub 2010 
Nov 17.

HES1 (hairy and enhancer of split 1) is a determinant of bone mass.

Zanotti S(1), Smerdel-Ramoya A, Canalis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford,
Connecticut 06105, USA. szanotti@stfranciscare.org

HES1 (hairy and enhancer of split) is a transcription factor that regulates
osteoblastogenesis in vitro. The skeletal effects of HES1 misexpression were
studied. Transgenic mice where a 3.6-kilobase fragment of the collagen type 1 a1 
promoter directs HES1 overexpression were created. Transgenics were osteopenic
due to decreased osteoblast function in female and increased bone resorption in
male mice. HES1 impaired osteoblastogenesis in vitro, and transgenic osteoblasts 
enhanced the resorptive activity of co-cultured osteoclast precursors. Mice
homozygous for a Hes1 loxP-targeted allele were bred to transgenics, where the
paired-related homeobox gene enhancer or the osteocalcin promoter direct Cre
recombinase expression to inactivate Hes1 in the limb bud or in osteoblasts. To
avoid genetic compensation, Hes1 was inactivated in the context of the global
deletion of Hes3 and Hes5. Hes3 and Hes5 null mice had no skeletal phenotype.
Hes1 inactivation in the limb bud increased femoral length and trabecular number.
Hes1 inactivation in osteoblasts increased trabecular bone volume, number, and
connectivity due to increased mineral apposition rate and suppressed bone
resorption. Hes1 inactivation in vitro increased alkaline phosphatase expression 
and suppressed the resorptive activity of co-cultured osteoclast precursors. In
conclusion, by inhibiting osteoblast function and inducing bone resorption, HES1 
is an intracellular determinant of bone mass and structure.

PMCID: PMC3024760
PMID: 21084301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Nov;17(11):1312-7. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1938. Epub 2010
Oct 24.

Structural and mechanistic insights into cooperative assembly of dimeric Notch
transcription complexes.

Arnett KL(1), Hass M, McArthur DG, Ilagan MX, Aster JC, Kopan R, Blacklow SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Ligand-induced proteolysis of Notch produces an intracellular effector domain
that transduces essential signals by regulating the transcription of target
genes. This function relies on the formation of transcriptional activation
complexes that include intracellular Notch, a Mastermind co-activator and the
transcription factor CSL bound to cognate DNA. These complexes form higher-order 
assemblies on paired, head-to-head CSL recognition sites. Here we report the
X-ray structure of a dimeric human Notch1 transcription complex loaded on the
paired site from the human HES1 promoter. The small interface between the Notch
ankyrin domains could accommodate DNA bending and untwisting to allow a range of 
spacer lengths between the two sites. Cooperative dimerization occurred on the
human and mouse Hes5 promoters at a sequence that diverged from the CSL-binding
consensus at one of the sites. These studies reveal how promoter organizational
features control cooperativity and, thus, the responsiveness of different
promoters to Notch signaling.

PMCID: PMC3024583
PMID: 20972443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2010 Sep;47(2):174-80. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.10-47. Epub 2010
Aug 20.

Folic Acid supplementation stimulates notch signaling and cell proliferation in
embryonic neural stem cells.

Liu H(1), Huang GW, Zhang XM, Ren DL, X Wilson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China.

The present study investigated the effect of folic acid supplementation on the
Notch signaling pathway and cell proliferation in rat embryonic neural stem cells
(NSCs). The NSCs were isolated from E14-16 rat brain and grown as neurospheres in
serum-free suspension culture. Individual cultures were assigned to one of 3
treatment groups that differed according to the concentration of folic acid in
the medium: Control (baseline folic acid concentration of 4 mg/l), low folic acid
supplementation (4 mg/l above baseline, Folate-L) and high folic acid
supplementation (40 mg/l above baseline, Folate-H). NSCs were identified by their
expression of immunoreactive nestin and proliferating cells by incorporation of
5'bromo-2'deoxyuridine. Cell proliferation was also assessed by methyl thiazolyl 
tetrazolium assay. Notch signaling was analyzed by real-time PCR and western blot
analyses of the expression of Notch1 and hairy and enhancer of split 5 (Hes5).
Supplementation of NSCs with folic acid increased the mRNA and protein expression
levels of Notch1 and Hes5. Folic acid supplementation also stimulated NSC
proliferation dose-dependently. Embryonic NSCs respond to folic acid
supplementation with increased Notch signaling and cell proliferation. This
mechanism may mediate the effects of folic acid supplementation on neurogenesis
in the embryonic nervous system.

PMCID: PMC2935158
PMID: 20838574  [PubMed]


176. Differentiation. 2010 Nov-Dec;80(4-5):213-27. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.07.001.
Epub 2010 Sep 1.

EGF and bFGF pre-treatment enhances neural specification and the response to
neuronal commitment of MIAMI cells.

Delcroix GJ(1), Curtis KM, Schiller PC, Montero-Menei CN.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U646, 10 rue André Boquel, Angers F49100, France.
delcroix.gaetan@gmail.com

AIMS: Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells raise great interest for regenerative
medicine studies. Some MSC subpopulations have the potential to undergo neural
differentiation, including marrow isolated adult multilineage inducible (MIAMI)
cells, which differentiate into neuron-like cells in a multi-step neurotrophin
3-dependent manner. Epidermal and basic fibroblast growth factors are often used 
in neuronal differentiation protocols for MSCs, but with a limited understanding 
of their role. In this study, we thoroughly assessed for the first time the
capacity of these factors to enhance the neuronal differentiation of MSCs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We have characterized MIAMI cell neuronal differentiation 
program in terms of stem cell molecule expression, cell cycle modifications,
acquisition of a neuronal morphology and expression of neural and neuronal
molecules in the absence and presence of an EGF-bFGF pre-treatment.
RESULTS: EGF-bFGF pre-treatment down-regulated the expression of stemness markers
Oct4A, Notch1 and Hes5, whereas neural/neuronal molecules Nestin, Pax6, Ngn2 and 
the neurotrophin receptor tyrosine kinase 1 and 3 were up-regulated. During
differentiation, a sustained Erk phosphorylation in response to NT3 was observed,
cells began to exit from the cell cycle and exhibit increased neurite-like
extensions. In addition, neuronal ß3-tubulin and neurofilament expression was
increased; an effect mediated via the Erk pathway. A slight pre-oligodendrocyte
engagement was noted, and no default neurotransmitter phenotype was observed.
Overall, mesodermal markers were unaffected or decreased, while
neurogenic/adipogenic PPAR<U+03B3>2 was increased.
CONCLUSION: EGF and bFGF pre-treatment enhances neural specification and the
response to neuronal commitment of MIAMI cells, further increasing their
potential use in adult cell therapy of the nervous system.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Differentiation. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20813449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Gastroenterology. 2010 Dec;139(6):2113-23. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.08.040.
Epub 2010 Aug 27.

NOTCH1 and NOTCH3 coordinate esophageal squamous differentiation through a
CSL-dependent transcriptional network.

Ohashi S(1), Natsuizaka M, Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Kalman RA, Nakagawa M, Wu L,
Klein-Szanto AJ, Herlyn M, Diehl JA, Katz JP, Pear WS, Seykora JT, Nakagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The Notch receptor family regulates cell fate through
cell-cell communication. CSL (CBF-1/RBP-j<U+03BA>, Su(H), Lag-1) drives canonical
Notch-mediated gene transcription during cell lineage specification,
differentiation, and proliferation in the hematopoietic system, the intestine,
the pancreas, and the skin. However, the functional roles of Notch in esophageal 
squamous epithelial biology are unknown.
METHODS: Normal esophageal keratinocytes were stimulated with calcium chloride to
induce terminal differentiation. The squamous epithelia were reconstituted in
organotypic 3-dimensional culture, a form of human tissue engineering. Notch was 
inhibited in culture with a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor or dominant negative
mastermind-like 1 (DNMAML1). The roles of Notch receptors were evaluated by in
vitro gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments. Additionally, DNMAML1
was targeted to the mouse esophagus by cytokeratin K14 promoter-driven Cre
(K14Cre) recombination of Lox-STOP-Lox-DNMAML1. Notch-regulated gene expression
was determined by reporter transfection, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting,
immunofluorescence, and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: NOTCH1 (N1) was activated at the onset of squamous differentiation in
the esophagus. Intracellular domain of N1 (ICN1) directly activated NOTCH3 (N3)
transcription, inducing HES5 and early differentiation markers such as involucrin
(IVL) and cytokeratin CK13 in a CSL-dependent fashion. N3 enhanced ICN1 activity 
and was required for squamous differentiation. Loss of Notch signaling in
K14Cre;DNMAML1 mice perturbed esophageal squamous differentiation and resulted in
N3 loss and basal cell hyperplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: Notch signaling is important for esophageal epithelial homeostasis. 
In particular, the cross talk of N3 with N1 during differentiation provides
novel, mechanistic insights into Notch signaling and squamous epithelial biology.

Copyright © 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2997138
PMID: 20801121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Aust Endod J. 2010 Aug;36(2):54-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-4477.2009.00188.x.

Expression of Notch signalling-related genes in normal and differentiating rat
dental pulp cells.

Sun H(1), Kawashima N, Xu J, Takahashi S, Suda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Operative Dentistry and Endodontics, School of Stomatology, the 
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

Notch signalling is of fundamental importance to various processes during
embryonic development and in adults. The possible role of Hey1, an important
Notch signalling component, in odontoblast differentiation was evaluated in this 
study. Primary cultured dental pulp cells, derived from upper incisors of
5-week-old Wistar rats, were placed in alpha-modification of Eagle's minimal
essential medium supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), and ascorbic
acid (AA) and beta-glycerophosphate (beta-GP), with or without dexamethasone, and
cultured on dishes coated with collagen type IA for 7 days. Conventional and
real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) was performed to determine the
expression of Notch-related genes and dentin sialophosphoprotein as a marker of
odontoblast differentiation. Dentin sialophosphoprotein and Hey1 expression was
significantly increased and decreased in the presence of AA + beta-GP compared
with controls, respectively. These findings suggest that Hey1 may be a negative
regulator in odontoblast differentiation.

PMID: 20666749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Schizophr Res. 2010 Jul;120(1-3):150-8. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2010.04.012. Epub
2010 May 23.

Gene expression abnormalities and oligodendrocyte deficits in the internal
capsule in schizophrenia.

Kerns D(1), Vong GS, Barley K, Dracheva S, Katsel P, Casaccia P, Haroutunian V,
Byne W.

Author information: 
(1)J.J. Peters VA Medical Center, 130 West Kingsbridge Ave., Bronx, New York, NY 
10468, USA.

Deficits in the expression of oligodendrocyte (Ol) and myelin genes have been
described in numerous brain regions in schizophrenia (SZ) in association with
abnormalities of cell cycle markers. We have previously reported a SZ-associated 
decrease in the expression of genes expressed after, but not prior to, the
terminal differentiation of Ols in the posterior limb of the internal capsule
(ICp). This pattern of deficits could reflect a failure of Ol precursors to exit 
the cell cycle and differentiate to meet the demands imposed by the high rate of 
apoptosis among myelinating Ols. Here we explore this hypothesis using
quantitative real time PCR to examine the mRNA expression of additional genes in 
the ICp of the previously examined sample of 14 subjects with SZ and 15 normal
controls (NCs). The genes examined in the present study were chosen because they 
are associated with particular phases of the cell cycle (CCND1, CCND2, p21(Cip1),
p27(Kip1), and p57(Kip2)), with DNA replication and repair (PCNA), apoptosis
(CASP3), or the Notch signaling pathway (JAG1, HES1, HES5, andDTX1). The Notch
pathway influences whether Ol precursors continue to proliferate or exit the cell
cycle. We also determined the densities of Ols in the ICp. Genes associated with 
maintenance of the cell cycle tended to exhibit increased expression levels in SZ
relative to NCs and to be negatively correlated with the expression levels of the
previously assessed mature Ol genes. In contrast, genes associated with cell
cycle arrest tended to show the opposite pattern (decreased expression in SZ and 
positive correlations with mature Ol genes). CASP3 and PCNA expression levels
were significantly decreased in SZ and positively correlated with mature Ol
genes, suggesting that myelinating Ols may turnover more rapidly in normal
controls than in subjects with SZ. JAG1 expression was significantly increased in
SZ and exhibited positive correlations with mediators of the canonical Notch
pathway but negative correlations with mature Ol genes. Ol densities were
significantly decreased in SZ. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that
Ol and myelin deficits in SZ involve a failure of Ol precursors to appropriately 
exit the cell cycle in order to differentiate and mature into myelinating Ols.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20580881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 1;285(40):30814-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.142869. Epub 2010
Jun 14.

ZFP423 coordinates Notch and bone morphogenetic protein signaling, selectively
up-regulating Hes5 gene expression.

Masserdotti G(1), Badaloni A, Green YS, Croci L, Barili V, Bergamini G, Vetter
ML, Consalez GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan,
Italy.

Zinc finger protein 423 encodes a 30 Zn-finger transcription factor involved in
cerebellar and olfactory development. ZFP423 is a known interactor of SMAD1-SMAD4
and of Collier/Olf-1/EBF proteins, and acts as a modifier of retinoic
acid-induced differentiation. In the present article, we show that ZFP423
interacts with the Notch1 intracellular domain in mammalian cell lines and in
Xenopus neurula embryos, to activate the expression of the Notch1 target
Hes5/ESR1. This effect is antagonized by EBF transcription factors, both in
cultured cells and in Xenopus embryos, and amplified in vitro by BMP4, suggesting
that ZFP423 acts to integrate BMP and Notch signaling, selectively promoting
their convergence onto the Hes5 gene promoter.

PMCID: PMC2945575
PMID: 20547764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 May 7;6(5):445-56. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.03.017.

Quiescent and active hippocampal neural stem cells with distinct morphologies
respond selectively to physiological and pathological stimuli and aging.

Lugert S(1), Basak O, Knuckles P, Haussler U, Fabel K, Götz M, Haas CA,
Kempermann G, Taylor V, Giachino C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stubeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2010 May 7;6(5):401-2.

New neurons are generated in the adult hippocampus throughout life by neural
stem/progenitor cells (NSCs), and neurogenesis is a plastic process responsive to
external stimuli. We show that canonical Notch signaling through RBP-J is
required for hippocampal neurogenesis. Notch signaling distinguishes
morphologically distinct Sox2(+) NSCs, and within these pools subpopulations can 
shuttle between mitotically active or quiescent. Radial and horizontal NSCs
respond selectively to neurogenic stimuli. Physical exercise activates the
quiescent radial population whereas epileptic seizures induce expansion of the
horizontal NSC pool. Surprisingly, reduced neurogenesis correlates with a loss of
active horizontal NSCs in aged mice rather than a total loss of stem cells, and
the transition to a quiescent state is reversible to rejuvenate neurogenesis in
the brain. The discovery of multiple NSC populations with Notch dependence but
selective responses to stimuli and reversible quiescence has important
implications for the mechanisms of adaptive learning and also for regenerative
therapy.

PMID: 20452319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 2010 Jul 1;29(26):3865-72. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.142. Epub 2010 May 3.

Notch signaling is not essential in sonic hedgehog-activated medulloblastoma.

Hatton BA(1), Villavicencio EH, Pritchard J, LeBlanc M, Hansen S, Ulrich M,
Ditzler S, Pullar B, Stroud MR, Olson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA.

Dysregulated signal transduction through the notch pathway has been noted in
human and mouse medulloblastoma studies. Gamma secretase inhibitors (GSIs) impair
notch signaling by preventing the cleavage of transmembrane notch proteins into
their active intracellular domain fragments. Previous studies have shown that GSI
treatment caused apoptosis and impaired medulloblastoma cell engraftment in
xenograft systems. In this study, we used in vivo genetic and pharmacologic
approaches to quantify the contribution of notch signaling to sonic hedgehog
(shh)-activated mouse medulloblastoma models. In contrast to prior in vitro
studies, pharmacologic inhibition of notch pathways did not reduce the efficiency
of medulloblastoma xenotransplantation nor did systemic therapy impact tumor
size, proliferation, or apoptosis in genetically engineered mouse medulloblastoma
models. The incidence and pathology of medulloblastomas driven by the SmoA1
transgene was unchanged by the bi-allelic absence of Notch1, Notch2, or Hes5
genes. These data show that notch signaling is not essential for the initiation, 
engraftment, or maintenance of sonic hedgehog pathway-driven medulloblastomas.

PMCID: PMC2896441
PMID: 20440271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Hear Res. 2010 Aug;267(1-2):61-70. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2010.03.085. Epub 2010
Apr 28.

Notch signaling and Atoh1 expression during hair cell regeneration in the mouse
utricle.

Wang GP(1), Chatterjee I, Batts SA, Wong HT, Gong TW, Gong SS, Raphael Y.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The mammalian vestibular epithelium has a limited capacity for spontaneous hair
cell regeneration. The mechanism underlying the regeneration is not well
understood. Because the Notch signaling pathway mediates the formation of the
sensory epithelial mosaic patterning during ear development, it may also play a
role in hair cell regeneration in the mature mammalian vestibular epithelium
after a lesion. To investigate the process of spontaneous regeneration in the
vestibular epithelium vis-à-vis changes in Notch signaling, we induced a
unilateral lesion by infusing streptomycin into the mouse posterior semicircular 
canal, and examined Notch signaling molecules and their mRNA expression levels by
immunohistochemistry and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRTPCR), respectively. We detected Jagged1 in supporting cells in both normal
and lesioned utricles. Atoh1, a marker for early developing hair cells, was
absent in the intact mature tissue, but re-appeared after the lesion. Many cells 
were either positive for both Atoh1 and myosin VIIa, or for one of them. qRTPCR
data showed a post trauma decrease of Hes5 and an increase in Atoh1. Atoh1
up-regulation may either be a result of Hes5 down-regulation or mediated by
another signaling pathway.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2902641
PMID: 20433915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Development. 2010 Jun;137(11):1875-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.047167. Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Zinc finger genes Fezf1 and Fezf2 control neuronal differentiation by repressing 
Hes5 expression in the forebrain.

Shimizu T(1), Nakazawa M, Kani S, Bae YK, Shimizu T, Kageyama R, Hibi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vertebrate Axis Formation, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Precise control of neuronal differentiation is necessary for generation of a
variety of neurons in the forebrain. However, little is known about
transcriptional cascades, which initiate forebrain neurogenesis. Here we show
that zinc finger genes Fezf1 and Fezf2, which encode transcriptional repressors, 
are expressed in the early neural stem (progenitor) cells and control
neurogenesis in mouse dorsal telencephalon. Fezf1- and Fezf2-deficient forebrains
display upregulation of Hes5 and downregulation of neurogenin 2, which is known
to be negatively regulated by Hes5. We show that FEZF1 and FEZF2 bind to and
directly repress the promoter activity of Hes5. In Fezf1- and Fezf2-deficient
telencephalon, the differentiation of neural stem cells into early-born cortical 
neurons and intermediate progenitors is impaired. Loss of Hes5 suppresses
neurogenesis defects in Fezf1- and Fezf2-deficient telencephalon. Our findings
reveal that Fezf1 and Fezf2 control differentiation of neural stem cells by
repressing Hes5 and, in turn, by derepressing neurogenin 2 in the forebrain.

PMID: 20431123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 9;394(3):843-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.092. Epub 2010 Mar 18.

Conditional deletion of Stat3 promotes neurogenesis and inhibits astrogliogenesis
in neural stem cells.

Cao F(1), Hata R, Zhu P, Nakashiro K, Sakanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Histology, Ehime University Graduate School of
Medicine, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan.

Although signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) plays crucial
roles in the determination of neural stem cell (NSC) fate, Stat3 has multiple
roles in NSC function. Moreover, Stat3 plays important roles in neuronal survival
and tumorigenesis. To investigate the overall effects of Stat3 on NSC fate, NSC
were isolated from Stat3(flox/flox) mouse embryos (E14-15d), in which both Stat3 
alleles are flanked by LoxP sites. Isolated NSC was inoculated with an adenovirus
vector expressing Cre recombinase (Ad.nCre) or a control adenovirus vector
expressing beta-galactosidase (Ad.nLz). Three days later, quantitative real-time 
PCR (qPCR) analysis revealed that treatment with Ad.nCre eliminated stat3 mRNA
expression in NSC. Promoter assay confirmed that overexpression of nCre inhibited
transactivation of acute responsive element (APRE) and blocked Stat3 function in 
NSC. Moreover, Western blot analysis and immunocytochemical analysis revealed
that elimination of Stat3 in NSC promoted neurogenesis and inhibited
astrogliogenesis. In addition, we investigated the effects of Stat3 elimination
in NSC on the mRNA expression of Notch family members and bHLH factors.
Consequently, qPCR analysis showed that elimination of Stat3 in NSC promoted
neurogenesis and inhibited astrogliogenesis through down-regulation of notch1,
notch2 and hes5, but not hes1 mRNA expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20303333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;88(7):746-53. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.30. Epub 2010 Mar
16.

Inhibition of proteolysis of Delta-like-1 does not promote or reduce T-cell
developmental potential.

Gravano DM(1), Manilay JO.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural Sciences, University of California at Merced, Merced, CA,
USA.

Notch signaling is critical for T-cell generation in the thymus. Notch signaling 
is linear in nature and is highly regulated through differential gene expression 
and post-translational modification. Upon ligand binding, the Notch receptor is
sequentially cleaved, first via extracellular ADAM protease-mediated cleavage,
followed by an intracellular presenilin-dependent cleavage to release the Notch
intracellular domain and activate transcription. Delta-like-1 (Dll1) is a Notch
ligand that positively regulates T-cell development. Dll1 is proteolytically
processed in a similar manner to the Notch receptor, and it has been speculated
to participate in bidirectional signaling. We hypothesized that inhibition of
Dll1 processing in Notch signal sending cells would lead to changes in their
ability to support thymopoiesis. We used the OP9 in vitro co-culture system, and 
transduced OP9s with full length, cleavable Dll1 or a non-cleavable mutant
(NC-Dll1) lacking the ADAM protease cleavage site. OP9-NC-Dll1 cells were able to
support T-cell development with similar efficacy to OP9-Dll1 cells.
Interestingly, expression of the Notch target gene Hes5 was more highly induced
in T-cell progenitors by NC-Dll1, whereas expression of Hes1, Deltex1, and pre-Ta
were similar to controls. Furthermore, a reduced ability of hematopoietic
progenitors to assume the granulocyte cell fate in OP9-NC-Dll1 cultures was
noted. Taken together, these findings show that proteolytic cleavage of Dll1 in
Notch signal sending cells is dispensable for murine T-cell development,
differentially affects expression of Notch target genes, and might be a mechanism
that regulates myelopoiesis.

PMID: 20231851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Neuron. 2010 Mar 11;65(5):612-26. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.02.018.

MicroRNA-mediated control of oligodendrocyte differentiation.

Zhao X(1), He X, Han X, Yu Y, Ye F, Chen Y, Hoang T, Xu X, Mi QS, Xin M, Wang F, 
Appel B, Lu QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for
Basic Neuroscience Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010 May;11(5):298.
    Neuron. 2010 Mar 11;65(5):577-9.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate various biological processes, but evidence for miRNAs
that control the differentiation program of specific neural cell types has been
elusive. To determine the role of miRNAs in the formation of myelinating
oligodendrocytes, we selectively deleted a miRNA-processing enzyme, Dicer1, in
oligodendrocyte lineage cells. Mice lacking Dicer1 display severe myelinating
deficits despite an expansion of the oligodendrocyte progenitor pool. To search
for miRNAs responsible for the induction of oligodendrocyte maturation, we
identified miR-219 and miR-338 as oligodendrocyte-specific miRNAs in spinal cord.
Overexpression of these miRNAs is sufficient to promote oligodendrocyte
differentiation. Additionally, blockage of these miRNA activities in
oligodendrocyte precursor culture and knockdown of miR-219 in zebrafish inhibit
oligodendrocyte maturation. miR-219 and miR-338 function in part by directly
repressing negative regulators of oligodendrocyte differentiation, including
transcription factors Sox6 and Hes5. These findings illustrate that miRNAs are
important regulators of oligodendrocyte differentiation, providing new targets
for myelin repair.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2855245
PMID: 20223198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Neurosci. 2010 Mar 3;30(9):3489-98. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4987-09.2010.

Essential roles of Notch signaling in maintenance of neural stem cells in
developing and adult brains.

Imayoshi I(1), Sakamoto M, Yamaguchi M, Mori K, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Activation of Notch signaling induces the expression of transcriptional repressor
genes such as Hes1, leading to repression of proneural gene expression and
maintenance of neural stem/progenitor cells. However, a requirement for Notch
signaling in the telencephalon was not clear, because in Hes1;Hes3;Hes5
triple-mutant mice, neural stem/progenitor cells are depleted in most regions of 
the developing CNS, but not in the telencephalon. Here, we investigated a role
for Notch signaling in the telencephalon by generating tamoxifen-inducible
conditional knock-out mice that lack Rbpj, an intracellular signal mediator of
all Notch receptors. When Rbpj was deleted in the embryonic brain, almost all
telencephalic neural stem/progenitor cells prematurely differentiated into
neurons and were depleted. When Rbpj was deleted in the adult brain, all neural
stem cells differentiated into transit-amplifying cells and neurons. As a result,
neurogenesis increased transiently, but 3 months later all neural stem cells were
depleted and neurogenesis was totally lost. These results indicated an absolute
requirement of Notch signaling for the maintenance of neural stem cells and a
proper control of neurogenesis in both embryonic and adult brains.

PMID: 20203209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Mol Neurosci. 2010 Sep;42(1):28-34. doi: 10.1007/s12031-010-9339-8. Epub 2010
Mar 2.

The expression of neuroepithelial cell fate determinants in rat spinal cord
development.

Henley BM(1), McDermott KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, BioSciences Institute, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland. beverleyhenley@gmail.com

Lineage specification is tightly regulated by a unique combination of extrinsic
and intrinsic cues, but exactly how these cues coordinate the timing and position
of cell differentiation during spinal cord development needs further
investigation. Notch signaling has major roles in lineage specification. Recent
evidence also indicates that the combination of transcription factors of the
basic helix-loop-helix (Hes3, Hes5) and homeodomain (Pax6) families establish
molecular codes that determine both the timing and position of neurons and glia. 
The precise expression patterns of these genes in vivo in the developing spinal
cord from E13 to E18 are not fully known. In this study, the spatial and temporal
expression patterns of these genes have been investigated. RT-PCR studies reveal 
the differential expression of these genes. The dynamic changes detected in the
expression of these molecules have an important role in spinal cord cell lineage 
specification. Moreover, this study clarifies their in vivo expression during
spinal cord development, and the expression patterns observed shed light on the
generation of the rostro-caudal gradient of development. By understanding how
neural stem cells are regulated in spinal cord development in vivo, we may gain
insight of relevance to cell replacement strategies to treat spinal cord
injuries.

PMID: 20195794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Neurosci. 2010 Feb 24;30(8):3101-12. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4919-09.2010.

Notch signaling influences neuroprotective and proliferative properties of mature
Müller glia.

Ghai K(1), Zelinka C, Fischer AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210,
USA.

Notch signaling is known to play important roles during retinal development.
Recently, Notch signaling has been shown to be active in proliferating Müller
glia in acutely damaged chick retina (Hayes et al., 2007). However, the roles of 
Notch in mature, undamaged retina remain unknown. Thus, the purpose of this study
was to determine the role of the Notch-signaling pathway in the postnatal retina.
Here we show that components of the Notch-signaling pathway are expressed in most
Müller glia at low levels in undamaged retina. The expression of Notch-related
genes varies during early postnatal development and across regions, with higher
expression in peripheral versus central retina. Blockade of Notch activity with a
small molecule inhibitor before damage was protective to retinal interneurons
(amacrine and bipolar cells) and projection neurons (ganglion cells). In the
absence of damage, Notch is upregulated in retinas treated with insulin and FGF2;
the combination of these factors is known to stimulate the proliferation and
dedifferentiation of Müller glia (Fischer et al., 2002b). Inhibition of Notch
signaling during FGF2 treatment reduces levels of the downstream effectors of the
MAPK-signaling pathway-p38 MAPK and pCREB in Müller glia. Further, inhibition of 
Notch activity potently inhibits FGF2-induced proliferation of Müller glia.
Together, our data indicate that Notch signaling is downstream of, and is
required for, FGF2/MAPK signaling to drive the proliferation of Müller glia. In
addition, our data suggest that low levels of Notch signaling in Müller glia
diminish the neuroprotective activities of these glial cells.

PMCID: PMC2834965
PMID: 20181607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Neurosci. 2010 Feb 17;30(7):2795-806. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3780-09.2010.

Norepinephrine directly activates adult hippocampal precursors via
beta3-adrenergic receptors.

Jhaveri DJ(1), Mackay EW, Hamlin AS, Marathe SV, Nandam LS, Vaidya VA, Bartlett
PF.

Author information: 
(1)The Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia.

Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is a critical form of cellular plasticity that is 
greatly influenced by neural activity. Among the neurotransmitters that are
widely implicated in regulating this process are serotonin and norepinephrine,
levels of which are modulated by stress, depression and clinical antidepressants.
However, studies to date have failed to address a direct role for either
neurotransmitter in regulating hippocampal precursor activity. Here we show that 
norepinephrine but not serotonin directly activates self-renewing and multipotent
neural precursors, including stem cells, from the hippocampus of adult mice.
Mechanistically, we provide evidence that beta(3)-adrenergic receptors, which are
preferentially expressed on a Hes5-expressing precursor population in the
subgranular zone (SGZ), mediate this norepinephrine-dependent activation.
Moreover, intrahippocampal injection of a selective beta(3)-adrenergic receptor
agonist in vivo increases the number of proliferating cells in the SGZ.
Similarly, systemic injection of the beta-adrenergic receptor agonist
isoproterenol not only results in enhancement of proliferation in the SGZ but
also leads to an increase in the percentage of nestin/glial fibrillary acidic
protein double-positive neural precursors in vivo. Finally, using a novel ex vivo
"slice-sphere" assay that maintains an intact neurogenic niche, we demonstrate
that antidepressants that selectively block the reuptake of norepinephrine, but
not serotonin, robustly increase hippocampal precursor activity via
beta-adrenergic receptors. These findings suggest that the activation of
neurogenic precursors and stem cells via beta(3)-adrenergic receptors could be a 
potent mechanism to increase neuronal production, providing a putative target for
the development of novel antidepressants.

PMCID: PMC2837927
PMID: 20164362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 8;5(2):e9094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009094.

Characterization of Notch1 antibodies that inhibit signaling of both normal and
mutated Notch1 receptors.

Aste-Amézaga M(1), Zhang N, Lineberger JE, Arnold BA, Toner TJ, Gu M, Huang L,
Vitelli S, Vo KT, Haytko P, Zhao JZ, Baleydier F, L'Heureux S, Wang H, Gordon WR,
Thoryk E, Andrawes MB, Tiyanont K, Stegmaier K, Roti G, Ross KN, Franlin LL, Wang
H, Wang F, Chastain M, Bett AJ, Audoly LP, Aster JC, Blacklow SC, Huber HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologics Research, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Notch receptors normally play a key role in guiding a variety of cell
fate decisions during development and differentiation of metazoan organisms. On
the other hand, dysregulation of Notch1 signaling is associated with many
different types of cancer as well as tumor angiogenesis, making Notch1 a
potential therapeutic target.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we report the in vitro activities of inhibitory Notch1
monoclonal antibodies derived from cell-based and solid-phase screening of a
phage display library. Two classes of antibodies were found, one directed against
the EGF-repeat region that encompasses the ligand-binding domain (LBD), and the
second directed against the activation switch of the receptor, the Notch negative
regulatory region (NRR). The antibodies are selective for Notch1, inhibiting
Jag2-dependent signaling by Notch1 but not by Notch 2 and 3 in reporter gene
assays, with EC(50) values as low as 5+/-3 nM and 0.13+/-0.09 nM for the LBD and 
NRR antibodies, respectively, and fail to recognize Notch4. While more potent,
NRR antibodies are incomplete antagonists of Notch1 signaling. The antagonistic
activity of LBD, but not NRR, antibodies is strongly dependent on the activating 
ligand. Both LBD and NRR antibodies bind to Notch1 on human tumor cell lines and 
inhibit the expression of sentinel Notch target genes, including HES1, HES5, and 
DTX1. NRR antibodies also strongly inhibit ligand-independent signaling in
heterologous cells transiently expressing Notch1 receptors with diverse NRR
"class I" point mutations, the most common type of mutation found in human T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). In contrast, NRR antibodies failed to
antagonize Notch1 receptors bearing rare "class II" or "class III" mutations, in 
which amino acid insertions generate a duplicated or constitutively sensitive
metalloprotease cleavage site. Signaling in T-ALL cell lines bearing class I
mutations is partially refractory to inhibitory antibodies as compared to
cell-penetrating gamma-secretase inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Antibodies that compete with Notch1 ligand binding or
that bind to the negative regulatory region can act as potent inhibitors of
Notch1 signaling. These antibodies may have clinical utility for conditions in
which inhibition of signaling by wild-type Notch1 is desired, but are likely to
be of limited value for treatment of T-ALLs associated with aberrant Notch1
activation.

PMCID: PMC2817004
PMID: 20161710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Jul;340(1-2):7-14. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0394-9. Epub
2010 Feb 16.

Notch signaling maintains proliferation and survival of the HL60 human
promyelocytic leukemia cell line and promotes the phosphorylation of the Rb
protein.

Li GH(1), Fan YZ, Liu XW, Zhang BF, Yin DD, He F, Huang SY, Kang ZJ, Xu H, Liu Q,
Wu YL, Niu XL, Zhang L, Liu L, Hao MW, Han H, Liang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an 710038, China.

The Notch signaling pathway has been implicated in the development of several
leukemia and lymphoma. In order to investigate the relationship between Notch
signaling and acute myeloid leukemia (AML), in this study, we expressed a
recombinant Notch ligand protein, the DSL domain of the human Jagged1 fused with 
GST (GST-Jag1). GST-Jag1 could activate Notch signaling in the human
promyelocytic leukemia cell line HL60, as shown by a reporter assay and the
induced expression of Notch effector gene Hes1 and Hes5. However, GST-Jag1 had no
effect on the proliferation and survival of HL60 cells. HL60 cells expressed both
Notch ligands and receptors, and had a potential of reciprocal stimulation of
Notch signaling between cells. We, therefore, blocked Notch signaling in cultured
HL60 cells using a gamma-secretase inhibitor (GSI). We found that GSI inhibited
the proliferation of HL60 cells significantly by blocking the cell-cycle
progression in the G1 phase. Furthermore, GSI induced remarkably apoptosis of
HL60 cells. These changes in GSI-treated HL60 cells correlated with the
down-regulation of c-Myc and Bcl2, and the low phosphorylation of the Rb protein.
These results suggested that reciprocal Notch signaling might be necessary for
the proliferation and survival of AML cells, possibly through the maintenance of 
the expression of c-Myc and Bcl2, as well as the phosphorylation of the Rb
protein.

PMID: 20157766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cells Tissues Organs. 2010;192(1):17-27. doi: 10.1159/000280416. Epub 2010 Feb 4.

HES1 and HES5 are dispensable for cartilage and endochondral bone formation.

Karlsson C(1), Brantsing C, Kageyama R, Lindahl A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Laboratory Medicine, Department of Clinical Chemistry and
Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
camilla.karlsson@medic.gu.se

Notch signalling, via its downstream mediators HES1 and HES5, regulates
development of several different tissues. In vitro studies suggest that these
genes are also involved in chondrogenesis and endochondral bone formation. In
order to investigate the importance of HES1 and HES5 for these developmental
processes, mice lacking chondrogenic expression of HES1 and HES5 were constructed
by interbreeding HES5(-/-) mice homozygous for the floxed HES1 allele
(HES1(flox/flox)) with COL2A1-Cre transgenic mice, creating conditional HES1;HES5
double mutant mice. The formation of cartilage and endochondral bone was studied 
in these mice using histological and immunohistochemical stainings, including
Alcian Blue van Gieson, Safranin-O, modified Mallory Aniline Blue,
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase and collagen type II stainings. The mice were
also studied using several different morphometrical analyses and the
differentiation potential of the chondrocytes was evaluated in vitro.
Unexpectedly, the conditional HES1;HES5 double mutant mice did not display
impaired development of cartilage or endochondral bone. Lack of altered phenotype
in the conditional HES1;HES5 double mutant mice can be explained either by the
HES1 and HES5 genes not being involved in cartilage and endochondral bone
development or by functional redundancy between the genes belonging to the family
of HES genes: that is, disruption of one gene could be compensated for by the
activity of another. Our results further shed light on the compensatory reserves 
available during the developing cartilage and bone.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20134146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Jul;136(7):989-96. doi: 10.1007/s00432-009-0744-8. 
Epub 2009 Dec 20.

The expressions of bHLH gene HES1 and HES5 in advanced ovarian serous
adenocarcinomas and their prognostic significance: a retrospective clinical
study.

Wang X(1), Fu Y, Chen X, Ye J, Lü B, Ye F, Lü W, Xie X.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Reproductive Health Laboratory of Zhejiang Province, Department of
Gynecologic Oncology, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
310006 Hangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Notch signaling was recently found to be associated with prognosis of
some cancers. The aim of the study is to investigate significance of the
expression of HES1/HES5 protein, downstream effectors of Notch, in prognosis of
the patients with advanced ovarian epithelial cancers.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissues and clinic-pathological
parameters from 61 patients with FIGO stage IIIc-IV ovarian serous adenocarcinoma
were collected, the expression of HES1 and HES5 protein were
immunohistochemically detected, and the association of HES1 and HES5 expression
with survival of the patients were analyzed.
RESULTS: The expressions of both HES1 and HES5 in adenocarcinoma were
significantly higher than those in adenoma and normal control (chi(2) = 32.915, P
= 0.000 and chi(2) = 46.863, P = 0.000 respectively). Overall survival and
disease-free period were longer in HES1 low-expression patients (median 43.0 and 
22.0 months) than those in high-expression patients (median 24.0 and 14.5
months). Of those, Overall survival period of patients with HES1 low-expression
was significantly longer than that of those with high-expression (chi(2) = 4.049,
P = 0.044). Univariate analysis and multivariate Cox regression model did not
show that HES1 or HES5 expression was a factor associated with survival of
advanced ovarian serous adenocarcinoma patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The expressions of bHLH gene HES1 and HES5 are increased in advanced
ovarian serous adenocarcinomas, and HES1 high-expression probably is a potential 
poor prognostic factor for the patients.

PMCID: PMC2874490
PMID: 20091184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cancer. 2009 Dec 23;8:128. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-128.

Cooperation of Notch and Ras/MAPK signaling pathways in human breast
carcinogenesis.

Mittal S(1), Subramanyam D, Dey D, Kumar RV, Rangarajan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, Karnataka, India.
suruchi.mittal@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have implicated aberrant Notch signaling in breast
cancers. Yet, relatively little is known about the pattern of expression of
various components of the Notch pathway, or its mechanism of action. To better
understand the role of the Notch pathway in breast cancer, we have undertaken a
detailed expression analysis of various Notch receptors, their ligands, and
downstream targets at different stages of breast cancer progression.
RESULTS: We report here that there is a general increase in the expression levels
of Notch 1, 2, 4, Jagged1, Jagged2, and Delta-like 4 proteins in breast cancers, 
with simultaneous upregulation of multiple Notch receptors and ligands in a given
cancer tissue. While Notch3 and Delta-like1 were undetectable in normal tissues, 
moderate to high expression was detected in several cancers. We detected the
presence of active, cleaved Notch1, along with downstream targets of the Notch
pathway, Hes1/Hes5, in approximately 75% of breast cancers, clearly indicating
that in a large proportion of breast cancers Notch signaling is aberrantly
activated. Furthermore, we detected cleaved Notch1 and Hes1/5 in early precursors
of breast cancers - hyperplasia and ductal carcinoma in situ - suggesting that
aberrant Notch activation may be an early event in breast cancer progression.
Mechanistically, while constitutively active Notch1 alone failed to transform
immortalized breast cells, it synergized with the Ras/MAPK pathway to mediate
transformation. This cooperation is reflected in vivo, as a subset of cleaved
Notch positive tumors additionally expressed phopsho-Erk1/2 in the nuclei. Such
cases exhibited high node positivity, suggesting that Notch-Ras cooperation may
lead to poor prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: High level expression of Notch receptors and ligands, and its
increased activation in several breast cancers and early precursors, places Notch
signaling as a key player in breast cancer pathogenesis. Its cooperation with the
Ras/MAPK pathway in transformation offers combined inhibition of the two pathways
as a new modality for breast cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC2809056
PMID: 20030805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Nat Med. 2009 Nov;15(11):1289-97. doi: 10.1038/nm.2021. Epub 2009 Oct 25.

Notch3 signaling promotes the development of pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Li X(1), Zhang X, Leathers R, Makino A, Huang C, Parsa P, Macias J, Yuan JX,
Jamieson SW, Thistlethwaite PA.

Author information: 
(1)University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Notch receptor signaling is implicated in controlling smooth muscle cell
proliferation and in maintaining smooth muscle cells in an undifferentiated
state. Pulmonary arterial hypertension is characterized by excessive vascular
resistance, smooth muscle cell proliferation in small pulmonary arteries, leading
to elevation of pulmonary vascular resistance, right ventricular failure and
death. Here we show that human pulmonary hypertension is characterized by
overexpression of NOTCH3 in small pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells and that
the severity of disease in humans and rodents correlates with the amount of
NOTCH3 protein in the lung. We further show that mice with homozygous deletion of
Notch3 do not develop pulmonary hypertension in response to hypoxic stimulation
and that pulmonary hypertension can be successfully treated in mice by
administration of N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine t-butyl
ester (DAPT), a gamma-secretase inhibitor that blocks activation of Notch3 in
smooth muscle cells. We show a mechanistic link from NOTCH3 receptor signaling
through the Hairy and enhancer of Split-5 (HES-5) protein to smooth muscle cell
proliferation and a shift to an undifferentiated smooth muscle cell phenotype.
These results suggest that the NOTCH3-HES-5 signaling pathway is crucial for the 
development of pulmonary arterial hypertension and provide a target pathway for
therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC2780347
PMID: 19855400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009 Oct;32(10):1776-82.

The function of Notch1 signaling was increased in parallel with neurogenesis in
rat hippocampus after chronic fluoxetine administration.

Sui Y(1), Zhang Z, Guo Y, Sun Y, Zhang X, Xie C, Li Y, Xi G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.

Chronic fluoxetine administration can increase neurogenesis in the adult
hippocampus, but the molecular mechanisms remain unclear. The Notch1 signaling
pathway is expressed highly in the hippocampus and could be a target for diverse 
environmental modulators of adult neurogenesis. This prompted us to investigate
whether the effect of fluoxetine on hippocampal neurogenesis involves Notch1
signaling. In this study, the function of Notch1 signaling was investigated by
real time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blot at different time
points (14 d or 28 d) after fluoxetine administration. Simultaneously,
hippocampal neurogenesis was determined by assessing cell proliferation, survival
and differentiation. mRNA and protein expression of Notch1 signaling components
(including Jag1, NICD, Hes1 and Hes5) in the hippocampus increased after
fluoxetine administration, accompanied by cell proliferation and survival. These 
results indicate that chronic fluoxetine administration activates Notch1
signaling in the hippocampus, and the up-regulation of the Notch1 pathway brought
about by chronic fluoxetine administration might partly contribute to increased
neurogenesis in hippocampus. The findings may provide new insights into the
regulatory mechanisms of neurogenesis induced by fluoxetine.

PMID: 19801843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Dev Dyn. 2009 Oct;238(10):2564-74. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22088.

Neural stem cell self-renewal requires the Mrj co-chaperone.

Watson ED(1), Mattar P, Schuurmans C, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

The Mrj co-chaperone is expressed throughout the mouse conceptus, yet its
requirement for placental development has prohibited a full understanding of its 
embryonic function. Here, we show that Mrj(-/-) embryos exhibit neural tube
defects independent of the placenta phenotype, including exencephaly and
thin-walled neural tubes. Molecular analyses revealed fewer proliferating cells
and a down-regulation of early neural progenitor (Pax6, Olig2, Hes5) and neuronal
(Nscl2, SCG10) cell markers in Mrj(-/-) neuroepithelial cells. Furthermore,
Mrj(-/-) neurospheres are significantly smaller and form fewer secondary
neurospheres indicating that Mrj is necessary for self-renewal of neural stem
cells. However, the molecular function of Mrj in this context remains elusive
because Mrj does not colocalize with Bmi-1, a self-renewal protein. Furthermore, 
unlike in Mrj(-/-) placentas, intermediate filament-containing aggregates do not 
accumulate in Mrj(-/-) neuroepithelium, ruling out nestin as a substrate for Mrj.
Regardless, Mrj plays an important role in neural stem cell self-renewal.

PMID: 19777589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2009 Aug;55(4):326-31.

Effects of soybean isoflavone on the notch signal pathway of the brain in rats
with cerebral ischemia.

Huang G(1), Cao X, Zhang X, Chang H, Yang Y, Du W, Wilson JX.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety, College of Food
Engineering and Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology,
Tianjin, China. guoweihuang@yahoo.com.cn

The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that gastric lavage with soybean
isoflavone activates the Notch signaling pathway and prevents apoptosis in the
cerebral cortex during experimental strokes. Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly
assigned to four groups of 10 rats each: sham operation plus vehicle (Sham),
middle cerebral artery occlusion plus vehicle (MCAO), MCAO plus low dose soybean 
isoflavone (10 mg/(kg.d)) and MCAO plus high dose soybean isoflavone (50
mg/(kg.d)). The vehicle (saline, 10 mL/(kg.d)) and soybean isoflavone were
administered by gastric lavage for 28 d prior to sham or MCAO operation and for 7
d afterward. The mRNA and protein expression levels of components of the Notch
signaling system (Notch1 and Hes5) were measured by in situ hybridization and
western blotting, respectively, whereas apoptosis was quantified by TUNEL assay. 
The results showed that MCAO stimulated expression of Notch1 and Hes5, at both
the mRNA and protein levels, and also increased apoptosis. Soybean isoflavone
dose-dependently augmented the stimulatory effect of MCAO on Notch1 and Hes5
expression levels but decreased apoptosis. These results identify a possible
mechanism by which soybean isoflavone confers neuroprotection in strokes.

PMID: 19763033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Jun;19(6):831-41. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0093.

Id proteins facilitate self-renewal and proliferation of neural stem cells.

Jung S(1), Park RH, Kim S, Jeon YJ, Ham DS, Jung MY, Kim SS, Lee YD, Park CH,
Suh-Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Ajou University, School of Medicine, Suwon,
Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

Members of helix-loop-helix (HLH) protein family of Id (inhibitor of
differentiation) dimerize with bHLH transcription factors and function as
negative regulators of differentiation during development. Most of inhibitory
roles of Id proteins have been demonstrated in non-neural tissues, and their
roles in the developing nervous system are not clearly demonstrated. In this
study, we show that Id1, Id2, and Id3 increase self-renewing and proliferation
potential of cortical neural stem cells (NSCs) while inhibiting neuronal
differentiation. In electrophoretic mobility gel shift and luciferase assays, Id 
proteins interfered with binding of NeuroD/E47 complexes to the E-box sequences
and inhibited E-box-mediated gene expression. Overexpression of Id proteins in
NSCs increased both the number and the size of neurospheres in colony-forming
assays. Expression of Hes1 and Hes5 was not increased by overexpression of Id
proteins under the condition in which Nestin expression was increased. In utero
electroporation of Id yielded higher numbers of Ki67-positive and Sox2-positive
cells in the mouse embryonic brain. The study suggests Id proteins play
independent roles in the maintenance of neural stem properties.

PMID: 19757990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 25;390(4):1114-20. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.08.154. Epub 2009 Aug 31.

SOX1 links the function of neural patterning and Notch signalling in the ventral 
spinal cord during the neuron-glial fate switch.

Genethliou N(1), Panayiotou E, Panayi H, Orford M, Mean R, Lapathitis G, Gill H, 
Raoof S, De Gasperi R, Elder G, Kessaris N, Richardson WD, Malas S.

Author information: 
(1)The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Airport Avenue, No. 6, Agios
Dometios, 2370 Nicosia, Cyprus.

During neural development the transition from neurogenesis to gliogenesis, known 
as the neuron-glial (Nu/G) fate switch, requires the coordinated function of
patterning factors, pro-glial factors and Notch signalling. How this process is
coordinated in the embryonic spinal cord is poorly understood. Here, we
demonstrate that during the N/G fate switch in the ventral spinal cord (vSC) SOX1
links the function of neural patterning and Notch signalling. We show that, SOX1 
expression in the vSC is regulated by PAX6, NKX2.2 and Notch signalling in a
domain-specific manner. We further show that SOX1 regulates the expression of
Hes1 and that loss of Sox1 leads to enhanced production of oligodendrocyte
precursors from the pMN. Finally, we show that Notch signalling functions
upstream of SOX1 during this fate switch and is independently required for the
acquisition of the glial fate perse by regulating Nuclear Factor I A expression
in a PAX6/SOX1/HES1/HES5-independent manner. These data integrate functional
roles of neural patterning factors, Notch signalling and SOX1 during gliogenesis.

PMID: 19723505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. BMC Neurosci. 2009 Aug 17;10:97. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-10-97.

Notch signaling is required for maintaining stem-cell features of neuroprogenitor
cells derived from human embryonic stem cells.

Woo SM(1), Kim J, Han HW, Chae JI, Son MY, Cho S, Chung HM, Han YM, Kang YK.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, 111 Gwahangno,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, South Korea. wsm1959@hanmail.net

BACKGROUND: Studies have provided important findings about the roles of Notch
signaling in neural development. Unfortunately, however, most of these studies
have investigated the neural stem cells (NSCs) of mice or other laboratory
animals rather than humans, mainly owing to the difficulties associated with
obtaining human brain samples. It prompted us to focus on neuroectodermal spheres
(NESs) which are derived from human embryonic stem cell (hESC) and densely
inhabited by NSCs. We here investigated the role of Notch signaling with the
hESC-derived NESs.
RESULTS: From hESCs, we derived NESs, the in-vitro version of brain-derived
neurospheres. NES formation was confirmed by increased levels of various NSC
marker genes and the emergence of rosette structures in which neuroprogenitors
are known to reside. We found that Notch signaling, which maintains stem cell
characteristics of in-vivo-derived neuroprogenitors, is active in these
hESC-derived NESs, similar to their in-vivo counterpart. Expression levels of
Notch signaling molecules such as NICD, DLLs, JAG1, HES1 and HES5 were increased 
in the NESs. Inhibition of the Notch signaling by a gamma-secretase inhibitor
reduced rosette structures, expression levels of NSC marker genes and
proliferation potential in the NESs, and, if combined with withdrawal of growth
factors, triggered differentiation toward neurons.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that the hESC-derived NESs, which share
biochemical features with brain-derived neurospheres, maintain stem cell
characteristics mainly through Notch signaling, which suggests that the
hESC-derived NESs could be an in-vitro model for in-vivo neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3224699
PMID: 19682396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Brain Nerve. 2009 Jul;61(7):741-51.

[Common mechanism underlying oligodendrocyte development and
oligodendrogliomagenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)RIKKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Laboratory for Cell Lineage
Modulation, 2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

A number of extrinsic factors and intracellular mechanisms have been revealed to 
be involved in oligodendrocyte development. For instance, sonic hedgehog induces 
the expression of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, Olig1 and 
Olig2, and a homeobox transcription factor Nkx2.2, both of which induce neural
stem cells (NSCs) to differentiate into oligodendrocyte precursor cells when the 
factors work together. In contrast, Notch and bone morphogenic proteins (BMP)
block oligodendrocyte differentiation by inducing the expression of the
transcription inhibitors Hes5 and Id4, respectively. Moreover, it was shown that 
other extrinsic and intrinsic factors, including platelet derived growth factor, 
thyroid hormone (TH), TH receptors, p53, and Wnt, are also involved in the
development, positively or negatively. It has been thought that
oligodendroglioma, one of brain tumors, is generated from oligodendrocyte lineage
cells as the tumor cells share characteristics of oligodendrocyte, such as the
honeycomb structure, and the expression of oligodendrocyte-related factors,
including Olig2 and NG2 proteoglycan. However, recent progress in the field
revealed that oligodendroglioma might be generated from NSCs and astrocytes as
well as oligodendrocyte lineage cells. Therefore, it is crucial to investigate
the cell-of-origin of oligodendroglioma and to identify target genes and markers 
for the therapy. In this review, I summarize the mechanism of oligodendrocyte
development and present how the oligodendrocyte research can help to understand
and to investigate the mechanism of oligodendroglioma development.

PMID: 19618851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Neurosci Res. 2009 Dec;87(16):3521-34. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22169.

Notch-Hes1 pathway contributes to the cochlear prosensory formation potentially
through the transcriptional down-regulation of p27Kip1.

Murata J(1), Ohtsuka T, Tokunaga A, Nishiike S, Inohara H, Okano H, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Sensory Organ Surgery, Osaka University
School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan. jmurata@ent.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

The Notch signaling pathway has a crucial role in the differentiation of hair
cells and supporting cells by mediating "lateral inhibition" via the ligands
Delta-like1 (Dll1) and Jagged2 (Jag2) and the effectors Hes1 and Hes5 during
mammalian inner ear development. Recently, another Notch ligand, Jagged1
(Jag1)-dependent Notch activation, has been revealed to be important for the
determination of the prosensory region in the earlier stage before cell
differentiation. However, little is known about the effectors of the Notch
pathway in this context. P27(Kip1), a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, is also 
known to demarcate the prosensory region in the cochlear primordium, which
consists of the sensory progenitors that have completed their terminal mitoses.
Hes1 reportedly promotes precursor cell proliferation through the transcriptional
down-regulation of p27(Kip1) in the thymus, liver, and brain. In this study, we
observed Hes1 as a mediator between the Notch signaling pathway and the
regulation of proliferation of sensory precursor cells by p27(Kip1) in the
developing cochlea. We showed that Hes1, but not Hes5, was weakly expressed at
the time of onset of p27(Kip1). The expression pattern of Hes1 prior to cell
differentiation was similar to that of activated Notch1. P27(Kip1) was
up-regulated and BrdU-positive S-phase cells were reduced in the developing
cochlear epithelium of Hes1 null mice. These results suggest that the Notch-Hes1 
pathway may contribute to the adequate proliferation of sensory precursor cells
via the potential transcriptional down-regulation of p27(Kip1) expression and
play a pivotal role in the correct prosensory determination.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19598246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2009 Aug;19(8):600-12. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32832ee573.

Some molecular effectors of antidepressant action of quetiapine revealed by DNA
microarray in the frontal cortex of anhedonic rats.

Orsetti M(1), Di Brisco F, Rinaldi M, Dallorto D, Ghi P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Alimentari, Farmaceutiche e Farmacologiche
(DiSCAFF), Università del Piemonte Orientale A. Avogadro, Novara, Italy.
orsetti@pharm.unipmn.it

OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: We have previously demonstrated that quetiapine (QTP) had
antidepressant-like action by using the chronic mild stress (CMS) paradigm, an
animal model of human depression. The aim of this study was to investigate the
molecular mechanism(s) of QTP antidepressant effect by coupling the CMS protocol 
with Affymetrix microarray technology to screen the entire rat genome for gene
changes in the frontal cortex.
RESULTS: The genes regulated by the administration of CMS whose transcription was
reversed by chronic QTP treatment (2 mg/kg/day) were 42 (23 upregulated and 19
downregulated). The transcripts that showed no significant altered expression
levels in anhedonic rats but were regulated by the administration of QTP were 19 
(nine upregulated and 10 downregulated). On the whole, the action of QTP
prevented the stress-induced impairment of some processes involved in central
nervous system development or having a crucial role for viability of neural cells
and cell-cell communications, like regulation of signal transduction, inorganic
cation transport, membrane organization, and neurite morphogenesis. For 11 genes 
(Ptgs2, Gad1, Plcb1, Camk2a, Homer1, Senp2, Junb, Nfib, Hes5, Capon, and Marcks),
significant differential expressions were confirmed by real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
CONCLUSION: We have shown that chronic QTP treatment prevented anhedonia and
reversed, at least in part, the changes of gene expression induced by CMS in the 
rat frontal cortex. We have also identified and confirmed by two different
methods that 11 genes, representing molecular targets of QTP, are presumably the 
effectors of its clinical efficacy.

PMID: 19587612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Neurosci. 2009 Jul 1;29(26):8578-85. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0958-09.2009.

Reelin and Notch1 cooperate in the development of the dentate gyrus.

Sibbe M(1), Förster E, Basak O, Taylor V, Frotscher M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, D-79104
Freiburg, Germany. Mirjam.Sibbe@anat.uni-freiburg.de

The development of the hippocampal dentate gyrus is a complex process in which
several signaling pathways are involved and likely interact with each other. The 
extracellular matrix molecule Reelin is necessary both for normal development of 
the dentate gyrus radial glia and neuronal migration. In Reelin-deficient Reeler 
mice, the hippocampal radial glial scaffold fails to form, and granule cells are 
dispersed throughout the dentate gyrus. Here, we show that both formation of the 
radial glia scaffold and lamination of the dentate gyrus depend on intact Notch
signaling. Inhibition of Notch signaling in organotypic hippocampal slice
cultures induced a phenotype reminiscent of the Reelin-deficient hippocampus,
i.e., a reduced density of radial glia fibers and granule cell dispersion.
Moreover, a Reelin-dependent rescue of the Reeler phenotype was blocked by
inhibition of Notch activation. In the Reeler dentate gyrus, we found reduced
Notch1 signaling; the activated Notch intracellular domain as well as the
transcriptional targets, brain lipid-binding protein, and Hes5 are decreased.
Disabled1, a component of the Reelin-signaling pathway colocalizes with Notch1,
thus indicating a direct interaction between the Reelin- and Notch1-signaling
pathways. These results suggest that Reelin enhances Notch1 signaling, thereby
contributing to the formation of the radial glial scaffold and the normal
development of the dentate gyrus.

PMID: 19571148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Dec;50(12):5901-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3067.
Epub 2009 Jun 24.

Molecular characterization of human retinal progenitor cells.

Schmitt S(1), Aftab U, Jiang C, Redenti S, Klassen H, Miljan E, Sinden J, Young
M.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

PURPOSE: To examine the molecular profile of fetal human retinal progenitor cells
(hRPCs) expanded in vitro and those grown in a co-culture system with mouse
retina through the analysis of protein and gene expression and
neurotransmitter-stimulated calcium dynamics.
METHODS: hRPCS were isolated from human retina of 14 to 18 weeks gestational age 
(GA) and expanded in vitro. Immunoblot, microarray, and immunocytochemistry (ICC)
assays were performed on undifferentiated hRPCs and those co-cultured with mouse 
retinas for 2 weeks. Cell function was assessed by using calcium imaging.
RESULTS: The ICC results showed a gradual decrease in the percentages of KI67-,
SOX2-, and vimentin-positive cells from passages (P) 1 to P6, whereas a sustained
expression of nestin and PAX6 was observed through P6. Microarray analysis of P1 
hRPCs showed the expression of early retinal developmental genes: VIM (vimentin),
KI67, NES (nestin), PAX6, SOX2, HES5, GNL3, OTX2, DACH1, SIX6, and CHX10 (VSX2). 
At P6, hRPCs continued to express VIM, KI67, NES, PAX6, SOX2, GNL3, and SIX6. On 
co-culture, there was a significant increase in the expression of MKI67, PAX6,
SOX2, GNL3, SIX3, and RHO (rhodopsin). Calcium imaging showed a functional
response to excitatory neurotransmitters.
CONCLUSIONS: Fetal-derived hRPCs show molecular characteristics indicative of a
retinal progenitor state up to P6 (latest passage studied). They show a
progressive decrease in the expression of immature markers as they reach P6.
These cells are functional, respond to excitatory neurotransmitters, and exhibit 
changes in expression patterns in response to co-culture with mouse retina.

PMID: 19553622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Exp Eye Res. 2009 Oct;89(4):549-58. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2009.05.006. Epub 2009
May 31.

The group E Sox genes Sox8 and Sox9 are regulated by Notch signaling and are
required for Müller glial cell development in mouse retina.

Muto A(1), Iida A, Satoh S, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokane-dai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639,
Japan.

Although Müller glial cells play pivotal roles in the vertebrate retina, the
regulation of their development is poorly understood. While Notch-Hes5 signaling 
has been shown to be involved in this developmental process, the presence of
Müller glial cells in Hes5-deficient mice suggests the involvement of other
molecules. We found that two group E Sox genes, Sox8 and Sox9, are expressed in
proliferating progenitors and then exclusively in Müller glial cells in mouse
retina. Knocking-down Sox8 and Sox9 by shRNA significantly reduced the population
of Müller glial cells and relatively increased the proportion of rod
photoreceptors, suggesting that the Sox genes play roles in the specification of 
Müller glial cells. Using an activated form of Notch and the gamma-secretase
inhibitor DAPT, we also found that Notch signaling regulates the transcription of
Sox8 and Sox9. This is the first evidence that group E Sox genes play important
roles in the developing vertebrate retina.

PMID: 19490914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Dev Biol. 2009 Aug 1;332(1):166-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.566. Epub 2009
May 27.

Notch signaling is required for lateral induction of Jagged1 during FGF-induced
lens fiber differentiation.

Saravanamuthu SS(1), Gao CY, Zelenka PS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Previous studies of the developing lens have shown that Notch signaling regulates
differentiation of lens fiber cells by maintaining a proliferating precursor pool
in the anterior epithelium. However, whether Notch signaling is further required 
after the onset of fiber cell differentiation is not clear. This work
investigates the role of Notch2 and Jagged1 (Jag1) in secondary fiber cell
differentiation using rat lens epithelial explants undergoing FGF-2 dependent
differentiation in vitro. FGF induced Jag1 expression and Notch2 signaling (as
judged by the appearance of activated Notch2 Intracellular Domain (N2ICD)) within
12-24 h. These changes were correlated with induction of the Notch effector,
Hes5, upregulation of N-cadherin (N-cad), and downregulation of E-cadherin
(E-cad), a cadherin switch characteristic of fiber cell differentiation.
Induction of Jag1 was efficiently blocked by U0126, a specific inhibitor of
MAPK/ERK signaling, indicating a requirement for signaling through this pathway
downstream of the FGF receptor. Other growth factors that activate MAPK/ERK
signaling (EGF, PDGF, IGF) did not induce Jag1. Inhibition of Notch signaling
using gamma secretase inhibitors DAPT and L-685,458 or anti-Jag1 antibody
markedly decreased FGF-dependent expression of Jag1 demonstrating Notch-dependent
lateral induction. In addition, inhibition of Notch signaling reduced expression 
of N-cad, and the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor, p57Kip2, indicating a direct
role for Notch signaling in secondary fiber cell differentiation. These results
demonstrate that Notch-mediated lateral induction of Jag1 is an essential
component of FGF-dependent lens fiber cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2730671
PMID: 19481073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Glia. 2009 Dec;57(16):1741-53. doi: 10.1002/glia.20887.

Jagged1 regulates the activation of astrocytes via modulation of NFkappaB and
JAK/STAT/SOCS pathways.

Morga E(1), Mouad-Amazzal L, Felten P, Heurtaux T, Moro M, Michelucci A, Gabel S,
Grandbarbe L, Heuschling P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie, Life Sciences, Université du Luxembourg,
Luxembourg, 1511 Luxembourg. eleonora.morga@uni.lu

Retraction in
    Glia. 2014 Mar;62(3):491.

The Notch pathway is implicated in many aspects of the central nervous system
(CNS) development and functions. Recently, we and others identified the Notch
pathway to be involved in inflammatory events of the CNS. To understand the
implication of this pathway on astrocytes, we have studied the Jagged-Notch-Hes
pathway under inflammatory conditions. LPS exposure induced an upregulation of
Jagged1 expression on cultured astrocytes. To address the role of Jagged1 in the 
modulation of inflammation, we used a siRNA mediated silencing of Jagged1 (siRNA 
J1). Jagged1 inhibition induced important variations on the Notch pathway
components like Hes1, Hes5, Notch3, and RBP-Jkappa. siRNA J1 repressed the mRNA
expression of genes known as hallmarks of the gliosis like GFAP and endothelin(B)
receptor. On activated astrocytes, the inhibition of Jagged1 had antiinflammatory
effects and resulted in a decrease of LPS-induced proinflammatory cytokines
(IL1beta, IL1alpha, and TNFalpha) as well as the iNOS expression. The inhibition 
of Jagged1 induced a modulation of the JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathway. Most
interestingly, the siRNA J1 decreased the LPS-induced translocation of NFkappaB
p65 and this could be correlated to the phosphorylation of IkappaBalpha. These
results suggest that during inflammatory and gliotic events of the CNS,
Jagged1/Notch signaling sustains the inflammation mainly through NFkappaB and in 
part through JAK/STAT/SOCS signaling pathways.

PMID: 19455581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jun;238(6):1617-25. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21966.

Dynamic expression of neurogenic markers in the developing chick olfactory
epithelium.

Maier E(1), Gunhaga L.

Author information: 
(1)Umeå Center for Molecular Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

Neurogenesis in the olfactory epithelium begins in early embryos and proceeds
throughout life. A comparison of neurogenic marker expression at different
developmental stages and at different axes of the olfactory epithelium has not
been reported in a coordinated way. In this study, we have in detail compared the
temporal and spatial expression patterns of the precursor markers Hes5, Cash1,
Ngn1, and the neuronal markers Gap43, HuC/D, Lhx2 in the developing olfactory
placode and epithelium in chick embryos from HH10 to HH34. We show that Hes5
starts to be expressed in cells of the prospective olfactory placode at HH10,
earlier then previously reported. During olfactory pit stages, the expression of 
Hes5, Cash1, Ngn1, Gap43, HuC/D, and Lhx2 varies throughout the
anterior-posterior and superior-inferior axis of the olfactory epithelium. By
HH34, expression of the precursor and neuronal markers show the first signs of
apical-basal stratification of the epithelium. Developmental Dynamics
238:1617-1625, 2009. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19441054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Prog Neurobiol. 2009 May;88(1):17-31. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2009.01.009. Epub 
2009 Feb 7.

5-HT(1A) receptor function in major depressive disorder.

Savitz J(1), Lucki I, Drevets WC.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Neuroimaging in Mood and Anxiety Disorders, Mood and Anxiety
Disorders Program, NIH/NIMH, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States.
savitzj@mail.nih.gov

Dysfunction of the serotonin 1A receptor (5-HT(1A)) may play a role in the
genesis of major depressive disorder (MDD). Here we review the pharmacological,
post-mortem, positron emission tomography (PET), and genetic evidence in support 
of this statement. We also touch briefly on two MDD-associated phenotypes,
cognitive impairment and somatic pain. The results of pharmacological challenge
studies with 5-HT(1A) receptor agonists are indicative of blunted endocrine
responses in depressed patients. Lithium, valproate, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and other treatment, such
as electroconvulsive shock therapy (ECT), all increase post-synaptic 5-HT(1A)
receptor signaling through either direct or indirect effects. Reduced
somatodendritic and postsynaptic 5-HT(1A) receptor numbers or affinity have been 
reported in some post-mortem studies of suicide victims, a result consistent with
well-replicated PET analyses demonstrating reduced 5-HT(1A) receptor binding
potential in diverse regions such as the dorsal raphe, medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC), amygdala and hippocampus. 5-HT(1A) receptor knockout (KO) mice display
increased anxiety-related behavior, which, unlike in their wild-type
counterparts, cannot be rescued with antidepressant drug (AD) treatment. In
humans, the G allele of a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 5-HT(1A)
receptor gene (HTR1A; rs6295), which abrogates a transcription factor binding
site for deformed epidermal autoregulatory factor-1 (Deaf-1) and Hes5, has been
reported to be over-represented in MDD cases. Conversely, the C allele has been
associated with better response to AD drugs. We raise the possibility that
5-HT(1A) receptor dysfunction represents one potential mechanism underpinning MDD
and other stress-related disorders.

PMCID: PMC2736801
PMID: 19428959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Neurosci Res. 2009 Aug 15;87(11):2406-17. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22087.

Possible promotion of neuronal differentiation in fetal rat brain neural
progenitor cells after sustained exposure to static magnetism.

Nakamichi N(1), Ishioka Y, Hirai T, Ozawa S, Tachibana M, Nakamura N, Takarada T,
Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Kanazawa, Japan.

We have previously shown significant potentiation of Ca(2+) influx mediated by
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, along with decreased microtubules-associated
protein-2 (MAP2) expression, in hippocampal neurons cultured under static
magnetism without cell death. In this study, we investigated the effects of
static magnetism on the functionality of neural progenitor cells endowed to
proliferate for self-replication and differentiate into neuronal, astroglial, and
oligodendroglial lineages. Neural progenitor cells were isolated from embryonic
rat neocortex and hippocampus, followed by culture under static magnetism at 100 
mT and subsequent determination of the number of cells immunoreactive for a
marker protein of particular progeny lineages. Static magnetism not only
significantly decreased proliferation of neural progenitor cells without
affecting cell viability, but also promoted differentiation into cells
immunoreactive for MAP2 with a concomitant decrease in that for an astroglial
marker, irrespective of the presence of differentiation inducers. In neural
progenitors cultured under static magnetism, a significant increase was seen in
mRNA expression of several activator-type proneural genes, such as Mash1, Math1, 
and Math3, together with decreased mRNA expression of the repressor type Hes5.
These results suggest that sustained static magnetism could suppress
proliferation for self-renewal and facilitate differentiation into neurons
through promoted expression of activator-type proneural genes by progenitor cells
in fetal rat brain.

PMID: 19382241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(7):947-53. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.092869nr.

Activated Notch1 is a stronger astrocytic stimulus than leukemia inhibitory
factor for rat neural stem cells.

Rodríguez-Rivera NS(1), Molina-Hernández A, Sánchez-Cruz E, Escalante-Alcalde D, 
Velasco I.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurociencias, Instituto de Fisiologia Celular, Universidad
Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico.

Neural stem cells (NSC) self-renew and generate specialized cell types. There are
reports indicating that Notch and Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LIF) signaling are 
involved in cell determination of NSC, either preventing differentiation or
promoting astrocytic fate. In this work, we aimed to compare the astrocytogenic
effect of activated Notch with that induced by LIF. To this end, rat cerebral
cortex neural progenitors/NSC were transduced with retroviral vectors in order to
express green fluorescent protein (GFP), or a fusion protein of GFP with the
active Notch1 intracellular domain (NICD). In parallel, other cultures were
treated with increasing concentrations of LIF. We confirmed, in proliferating
NSC, that LIF activated intracellular effectors by measuring STAT3
phosphorylation and Socs3 transcription. In NICD-expressing cells, Hes5 mRNA was 
induced, an effect not present in GFP-transduced NSC. We quantified the
proportion of cells expressing Nestin in the presence of Fibroblast Growth
Factor-2 (FGF-2) with LIF or NICD treatments. LIF significantly increased the
proportion of cells co-expresssing Nestin and Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein
(GFAP), an effect absent in cells with activated Notch. After FGF2 withdrawal to 
promote differentiation, Nestin was markedly down-regulated, and neuronal and
glial markers appeared in control cultures. LIF treatment caused a significant
increase in the proportion of GFAP-positive cells, but cells expressing NICD
showed a significantly higher percentage of astrocytes than control and
LIF-treated cultures. These experiments show that cells stimulated with NICD
differentiate more readily to astrocytes than LIF-treated NSC.

PMID: 19378247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2009 Sep;10(3):321-40. doi: 10.1007/s10162-009-0162-2.
Epub 2009 Apr 17.

Hes5 expression in the postnatal and adult mouse inner ear and the drug-damaged
cochlea.

Hartman BH(1), Basak O, Nelson BR, Taylor V, Bermingham-McDonogh O, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway is known to have multiple roles during development of
the inner ear. Notch signaling activates transcription of Hes5, a homologue of
Drosophila hairy and enhancer of split, which encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
transcriptional repressor. Previous studies have shown that Hes5 is expressed in 
the cochlea during embryonic development, and loss of Hes5 leads to
overproduction of auditory and vestibular hair cells. However, due to technical
limitations and inconsistency between previous reports, the precise spatial and
temporal pattern of Hes5 expression in the postnatal and adult inner ear has
remained unclear. In this study, we use Hes5-GFP transgenic mice and in situ
hybridization to report the expression pattern of Hes5 in the inner ear. We find 
that Hes5 is expressed in the developing auditory epithelium of the cochlea
beginning at embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5), becomes restricted to a particular
subset of cochlear supporting cells, is downregulated in the postnatal cochlea,
and is not present in adults. In the vestibular system, we detect Hes5 in
developing supporting cells as early as E12.5 and find that Hes5 expression is
maintained in some adult vestibular supporting cells. In order to determine the
effect of hair cell damage on Notch signaling in the cochlea, we damaged cochlear
hair cells of adult Hes5-GFP mice in vivo using injection of kanamycin and
furosemide. Although outer hair cells were killed in treated animals and
supporting cells were still present after damage, supporting cells did not
upregulate Hes5-GFP in the damaged cochlea. Therefore, absence of Notch-Hes5
signaling in the normal and damaged adult cochlea is correlated with lack of
regeneration potential, while its presence in the neonatal cochlea and adult
vestibular epithelia is associated with greater capacity for plasticity or
regeneration in these tissues; which suggests that this pathway may be involved
in regulating regenerative potential.

PMCID: PMC2757554
PMID: 19373512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Horm Res. 2009;71(5):245-52. doi: 10.1159/000208797. Epub 2009 Apr 1.

MAMLD1 (CXorf6): a new gene involved in hypospadias.

Ogata T(1), Laporte J, Fukami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
tomogata@nch.go.jp

MAMLD1 (mastermind-like domain containing 1), previously known as CXorf6
(chromosome X open reading frame 6), has been shown to be a causative gene for
hypospadias. This is primarily based on the identification of nonsense mutations 
(E124X, Q197X, and R653X), which undergo nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, in
patients with penoscrotal hypospadias. Subsequent studies have shown that (1) the
mouse homolog is transiently expressed in fetal Sertoli and Leydig cells around
the critical period of sex development; (2) transient knockdown of MAMLD1 results
in significantly reduced testosterone production in murine Leydig tumor cells;
(3) MAMLD1 protein shares homology to mastermind-like 2 (MAML2) protein that
functions as a co-activator in canonical Notch signaling; (4) MAMLD1 localizes to
the nuclear bodies and transactivates the promoter activity of a non-canonical
Notch target gene hairy/enhancer of split 3 (Hes3), rather than the canonical
Notch target genes such as Hes1 and Hes5, without demonstrable DNA-binding
capacity, and (5) MAMLD1 is regulated by steroidogenic factor 1. These findings
suggest that the MAMLD1 mutations cause hypospadias primarily because of
compromised testosterone production around the critical period of sex
development, and provide useful information for the molecular network involved in
fetal testosterone production.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19339788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2009 Jun 15;33(4):688-94. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2009.03.022. Epub 2009 Mar 29.

Notch1 signaling, hippocampal neurogenesis and behavioral responses to chronic
unpredicted mild stress in adult ischemic rats.

Guo YJ(1), Zhang ZJ, Wang SH, Sui YX, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Institution of Cerebral Vascular Disease,
Affiliated ZhongDa Hospital of Southeast University, No.87, Dingjiaqiao Road,
Nanjing, China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that the Notch signaling pathway fulfills
important roles in ischemia-stimulated neurogenesis, which may be regarded as an 
etiological factor in post-stroke depression. Here we explored Notch(1)
signaling, hippocampal neurogenesis and behavioral responses to chronic
unpredicted mild stress (CUMS) in adult ischemic rats. Animals were treated with 
permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion followed by an 18 day CUMS procedure. 
Proliferating cells in the hippocampus and their cell fate were investigated on
days 19 and 28 after ischemic surgery. Additionally, expression of the Notch(1)
intracellular domain (NICD) and its downstream targets Hes1 and Hes5 was
examined. A sucrose preference test and forced swim test were used to assess
behavioral responses. CUMS produced depressive-like behaviors and decreased the
number of proliferating cells on day 19 (both p<0.001), accompanied by a
decreased expression of both Hes1 and Hes5 in the hippocampus of ischemic animals
(p<0.001). On day 28, CUMS resulted in a decreased number of
neurogenically-differentiating cells in the subgranular zone (p<0.001) while
permitting differentiation into astrocytes in the hilus (p<0.05). Hes1 and Hes5
protein expression levels were increased. The expression of the NICD was
significantly decreased at both time-points. CUMS led to expression changes in
the Notch(1) signaling cascade in ischemic rats, most of which concerned
hippocampal neurogenesis. This suggests that variation in Notch(1) activity and
subsequent expression of its downstream targets, including Hes1 and Hes5, may, at
least in part, contribute to modulation of ischemia-related hippocampal
neurogenesis by CUMS.

PMID: 19336246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Biol. 2009 May 15;329(2):400-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.023. Epub 2009
Mar 3.

Cyclical expression of the Notch/Wnt regulator Nrarp requires modulation by Dll3 
in somitogenesis.

Sewell W(1), Sparrow DB, Smith AJ, Gonzalez DM, Rappaport EF, Dunwoodie SL,
Kusumi K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

Delta-like 3 (Dll3) is a divergent ligand and modulator of the Notch signaling
pathway only identified so far in mammals. Null mutations of Dll3 disrupt cycling
expression of Notch targets Hes1, Hes5, and Lfng, but not of Hes7. Compared with 
Dll1 or Notch1, the effects of Dll3 mutations are less severe for gene expression
in the presomitic mesoderm, yet severe segmentation phenotypes and vertebral
defects result in both human and mouse. Reasoning that Dll3 specifically disrupts
key regulators of somite cycling, we carried out functional analysis to identify 
targets accounting for the segmental phenotype. Using microdissected embryonic
tissue from somitic and presomitic mesodermal tissue, we identified new genes
enriched in these tissues, including Limch1, Rhpn2, and A130022J15Rik.
Surprisingly, we only identified a small number of genes disrupted by the Dll3
mutation. These include Uncx, a somite gene required for rib and vertebral
patterning, and Nrarp, a regulator of Notch/Wnt signaling in zebrafish and a
cycling gene in mouse. To determine the effects of Dll3 mutation on Nrarp, we
characterized the cycling expression of this gene from early (8.5 dpc) to late
(10.5 dpc) somitogenesis. Nrarp displays a distinct pattern of cycling phases
when compared to Lfng and Axin2 (a Wnt pathway gene) at 9.5 dpc but appears to be
in phase with Lfng by 10.5 dpc. Nrarp cycling appears to require Dll3 but not
Lfng modulation. In Dll3 null embryos, Nrarp displayed static patterns. However, 
in Lfng null embryos, Nrarp appeared static at 8.5 dpc but resumed cycling
expression by 9.5 and dynamic expression at 10.5 dpc stages. By contrast, in
Wnt3a null embryos, Nrarp expression was completely absent in the presomitic
mesoderm. Towards identifying the role of Dll3 in regulating somitogenesis, Nrarp
emerges as a potentially important regulator that requires Dll3 but not Lfng for 
normal function.

PMCID: PMC2697309
PMID: 19268448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Hear Res. 2009 Mar;249(1-2):15-22. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2008.12.008. Epub 2009
Jan 11.

Notch signaling and Hes labeling in the normal and drug-damaged organ of Corti.

Batts SA(1), Shoemaker CR, Raphael Y.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, University of Michigan Medical School,
MSRB-3, 1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5648, USA.

During the development of the inner ear, the Notch cell signaling pathway is
responsible for the specification of the pro-sensory domain and influences cell
fate decisions. It is assumed that Notch signaling ends during maturity and
cannot be reinitiated to alter the fate of new or existing cells in the organ of 
Corti. This is in contrast to non-mammalian species which reinitiate Delta
1-Notch1 signaling in response to trauma in the auditory epithelium, resulting in
hair cell regeneration through transdifferentiation and/or mitosis. We report
immunohistochemical data and Western protein analysis showing that in the
aminoglycoside-damaged guinea pig organ of Corti, there is an increase in
proteins involved in Notch activation occurring within 24h of a chemical hair
cell lesion. The signaling response is characterized by the increased presence of
Jagged1 ligand in pillar and Deiters cells, Notch1 signal in surviving supporting
cell nuclei, and the absence of Jagged2 and Delta-like1. The pro-sensory bHLH
protein Atoh1 was absent at all time points following an ototoxic lesion, while
the repressor bHLH transcription factors Hes1 and Hes5 were detected in surviving
supporting cell nuclei in the former inner and outer hair cell areas,
respectively. Notch pathway proteins peaked at 2 weeks, decreased at 1 month, and
nearly disappeared by 2 months. These results indicate that the mammalian
auditory epithelium retains the ability to regulate Notch signaling and
Notch-dependent Hes activity in response to cellular trauma and that the
signaling is transient. Additionally, since Hes activity antagonizes the
transcription of pro-sensory Atoh1, the presence of Hes after a lesion may
prohibit the occurrence of transdifferentiation in the surviving supporting
cells.

PMCID: PMC2796274
PMID: 19185606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4264. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004264. Epub 2009 Jan 23.

Lkb1 deficiency alters goblet and paneth cell differentiation in the small
intestine.

Shorning BY(1), Zabkiewicz J, McCarthy A, Pearson HB, Winton DJ, Sansom OJ,
Ashworth A, Clarke AR.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One.2009;4(2). doi: 10.1371/annotation/7750701a-2069-4810-820b-b0a02b674a06.

The Lkb1 tumour suppressor is a multitasking kinase participating in a range of
physiological processes. We have determined the impact of Lkb1 deficiency on
intestinal homeostasis, particularly focussing on secretory cell differentiation 
and development since we observe strong expression of Lkb1 in normal small
intestine Paneth and goblet cells. We crossed mice bearing an Lkb1 allele flanked
with LoxP sites with those carrying a Cyp1a1-specific inducible Cre recombinase. 
Lkb1 was efficiently deleted from the epithelial cells of the mouse intestine
after intraperitoneal injection of the inducing agent beta-naphthoflavone.
Bi-allelic loss of Lkb1 led to the perturbed development of Paneth and goblet
cell lineages. These changes were characterised by the lack of Delta ligand
expression in Lkb1-deficient secretory cells and a significant increase in the
levels of the downstream Notch signalling effector Hes5 but not Hes1. Our data
show that Lkb1 is required for the normal differentiation of secretory cell
lineages within the intestine, and that Lkb1 deficiency modulates Notch
signalling modulation in post-mitotic cells.

PMCID: PMC2626247
PMID: 19165340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2009 May;29(3):423-38. doi: 10.1007/s10571-008-9338-2. Epub
2009 Jan 7.

Gene expression profiling of human neural progenitor cells following the
serum-induced astrocyte differentiation.

Obayashi S(1), Tabunoki H, Kim SU, Satoh J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, 2-522-1 Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo, 204-8588, Japan.

Neural stem cells (NSC) with self-renewal and multipotent properties could
provide an ideal cell source for transplantation to treat spinal cord injury,
stroke, and neurodegenerative diseases. However, the majority of transplanted NSC
and neural progenitor cells (NPC) differentiate into astrocytes in vivo under
pathological environments in the central nervous system, which potentially cause 
reactive gliosis. Because the serum is a potent inducer of astrocyte
differentiation of rodent NPC in culture, we studied the effect of the serum on
gene expression profile of cultured human NPC to identify the gene signature of
astrocyte differentiation of human NPC. Human NPC spheres maintained in the
serum-free culture medium were exposed to 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) for 72 h, 
and processed for analyzing on a Whole Human Genome Microarray of 41,000 genes,
and the microarray data were validated by real-time RT-PCR. The serum elevated
the levels of expression of 45 genes, including ID1, ID2, ID3, CTGF, TGFA, METRN,
GFAP, CRYAB and CSPG3, whereas it reduced the expression of 23 genes, such as
DLL1, DLL3, PDGFRA, SOX4, CSPG4, GAS1 and HES5. Thus, the serum-induced astrocyte
differentiation of human NPC is characterized by a counteraction of ID family
genes on Delta family genes. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis identified ID1 as a
direct binding partner of a proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor MASH1. Luciferase assay indicated that activation of the DLL1 promoter by 
MASH1 was counteracted by ID1. Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) elevated the
levels of ID1 and GFAP expression in NPC under the serum-free culture conditions.
Because the serum contains BMP4, these results suggest that the serum factor(s), 
most probably BMP4, induces astrocyte differentiation by upregulating the
expression of ID family genes that repress the proneural bHLH protein-mediated
Delta expression in human NPC.

PMID: 19130216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Cell Biol. 2009 Jan 12;184(1):101-12. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200805155. Epub 2009 Jan
5.

Progenitor cell proliferation in the retina is dependent on Notch-independent
Sonic hedgehog/Hes1 activity.

Wall DS(1), Mears AJ, McNeill B, Mazerolle C, Thurig S, Wang Y, Kageyama R,
Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is an indispensable, extrinsic cue that regulates progenitor
and stem cell behavior in the developing and adult mammalian central nervous
system. Here, we investigate the link between the Shh signaling pathway and Hes1,
a classical Notch target. We show that Shh-driven stabilization of Hes1 is
independent of Notch signaling and requires the Shh effector Gli2. We identify
Gli2 as a primary mediator of this response by showing that Gli2 is required for 
Hh (Hedgehog)-dependent up-regulation of Hes1. We also show using chromatin
immunoprecipitation that Gli2 binds to the Hes1 promoter, which suggests that
Hes1 is a Hh-dependent direct target of Gli2 signaling. Finally, we show that Shh
stimulation of progenitor proliferation and cell diversification requires Gli2
and Hes1 activity. This paper is the first demonstration of the mechanistic and
functional link between Shh, Gli, and Hes1 in the regulation of progenitor cell
behavior.

PMCID: PMC2615087
PMID: 19124651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Mar 15;179(6):457-66. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200705-795OC. Epub 2008 Dec 23.

Down-regulation of the notch pathway in human airway epithelium in association
with smoking and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tilley AE(1), Harvey BG, Heguy A, Hackett NR, Wang R, O'Connor TP, Crystal RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

RATIONALE: The airway epithelium of smokers is subject to a variety of mechanisms
of injury with consequent modulation of epithelial regeneration and disordered
differentiation. Several signaling pathways, including the Notch pathway, control
epithelial differentiation in lung morphogenesis, but little is known about the
role of these pathways in adults.
OBJECTIVES: We tested the hypotheses that Notch-related genes are expressed in
the normal nonsmoker small airway epithelium of human adults, and that
Notch-related gene expression is down-regulated in healthy smokers and smokers
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: We used microarray technology to evaluate the expression of 55
Notch-related genes in the small airway epithelium of nonsmokers. We used TaqMan 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to confirm the expression of key
genes and we used immunohistochemistry to assess the expression of Notch-related 
proteins in the airway epithelium. Changes in expression of Notch genes in
healthy smokers and smokers with COPD compared with nonsmokers were evaluated by 
PCR.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Microarray analysis demonstrated that 45 of 55
Notch-related genes are expressed in the small airway epithelium of adults.
TaqMan PCR confirmed the expression of key genes with highest expression of the
ligand DLL1, the receptor NOTCH2, and the downstream effector HES1.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the expression of Jag1, Notch2, Hes1, and Hes5 
in airway epithelium. Several Notch ligands, receptors, and downstream effector
genes were down-regulated in smokers, with more genes down-regulated in smokers
with COPD than in healthy smokers.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that the Notch
pathway likely plays a role in the human adult airway epithelium, with
down-regulation of Notch pathway gene expression in association with smoking and 
COPD.

PMCID: PMC2654975
PMID: 19106307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 20;284(8):5107-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807745200. Epub 2008
Dec 19.

Cdc42-mTOR signaling pathway controls Hes5 and Pax6 expression in retinoic
acid-dependent neural differentiation.

Endo M(1), Antonyak MA, Cerione RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

The conditional knockout of the small GTPase Cdc42 from neuroepithelial (NE) and 
radial glial (RG) cells in the mouse telencephalon has been shown to have a
significant impact on brain development by causing these neural progenitor cells 
to detach from the apical/ventricular surface and to lose their cell identity.
This has been attributed to the requirement for Cdc42 in establishing proper
apical/basal cell polarity and cell-cell adhesions. In the present study, we
provide new insights into the role played by Cdc42 in the maintenance of neural
progenitor cells, using the mouse embryonal carcinoma P19 cell line as a model
system. We show that the ability of P19 cells to undergo the transition from an
Oct3/4-positive, undifferentiated status to microtubule-associated protein
2-positive neurons and glial fibrillary acidic protein-positive astrocytes, upon 
treatment with retinoic acid (RA), requires RA-induced activation of Cdc42 during
the neural cell lineage specification phase. Experiments using chemical
inhibitors and RNA interference suggest that the actions of Cdc42 are mediated
through signaling pathways that start with fibroblast growth factors and
Delta/Notch proteins and lead to Cdc42-dependent mTOR activation, culminating in 
the up-regulation of Hes5 and Pax6, two transcription factors that are essential 
for the maintenance of NE and RG cells. The constitutively active Cdc42(F28L)
mutant was sufficient to up-regulate Hes5 and Pax6 in P19 cells, even in the
absence of RA treatment, ultimately promoting their transition to neural
progenitor cells. The ectopic Cdc42 expression also significantly augmented the
RA-dependent up-regulation of these transcription factors, resulting in P19 cells
maintaining their neural progenitor status but being unable to undergo terminal
differentiation. These findings shed new light on how Cdc42 influences neural
progenitor cell fate by regulating gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3837441
PMID: 19097998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Stem Cells. 2009 Mar;27(3):521-32. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0884.

BAC transgenesis in human embryonic stem cells as a novel tool to define the
human neural lineage.

Placantonakis DG(1), Tomishima MJ, Lafaille F, Desbordes SC, Jia F, Socci ND,
Viale A, Lee H, Harrison N, Tabar V, Studer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, New
York, New York, USA. dip9011@nyp.org

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have enormous potential for applications in
basic biology and regenerative medicine. However, harnessing the potential of
hESCs toward generating homogeneous populations of specialized cells remains
challenging. Here we describe a novel technology for the genetic identification
of defined hESC-derived neural cell types using bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC) transgenesis. We generated hESC lines stably expressing Hes5::GFP,
Dll1::GFP, and HB9::GFP BACs that yield green fluorescent protein (GFP)(+) neural
stem cells, neuroblasts, and motor neurons, respectively. Faithful reporter
expression was confirmed by cell fate analysis and appropriate transgene
regulation. Prospective isolation of HB9::GFP(+) cells yielded purified human
motor neurons with proper marker expression and electrophysiological activity.
Global mRNA and microRNA analyses of Hes5::GFP(+) and HB9::GFP(+) populations
revealed highly specific expression signatures, suggesting that BAC transgenesis 
will be a powerful tool for establishing expression libraries that define the
human neural lineage and for accessing defined cell types in applications of
human disease.

PMID: 19074416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. DNA Res. 2009 Feb;16(1):45-58. doi: 10.1093/dnares/dsn030. Epub 2008 Nov 11.

Database for mRNA half-life of 19 977 genes obtained by DNA microarray analysis
of pluripotent and differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells.

Sharova LV(1), Sharov AA, Nedorezov T, Piao Y, Shaik N, Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genomics and Aging Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Suite 100, Baltimore, MD 21224,
USA.

Degradation of mRNA is one of the key processes that control the steady-state
level of gene expression. However, the rate of mRNA decay for the majority of
genes is not known. We successfully obtained the rate of mRNA decay for 19 977
non-redundant genes by microarray analysis of RNA samples obtained from mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells. Median estimated half-life was 7.1 h and only <100
genes, including Prdm1, Myc, Gadd45 g, Foxa2, Hes5 and Trib1, showed half-life
less than 1 h. In general, mRNA species with short half-life were enriched among 
genes with regulatory functions (transcription factors), whereas mRNA species
with long half-life were enriched among genes related to metabolism and structure
(extracellular matrix, cytoskeleton). The stability of mRNAs correlated more
significantly with the structural features of genes than the function of genes:
mRNA stability showed the most significant positive correlation with the number
of exon junctions per open reading frame length, and negative correlation with
the presence of PUF-binding motifs and AU-rich elements in 3'-untranslated region
(UTR) and CpG di-nucleotides in the 5'-UTR. The mRNA decay rates presented in
this report are the largest data set for mammals and the first for ES cells.

PMCID: PMC2644350
PMID: 19001483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Immunol. 2009 Feb;46(5):969-77. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.09.023. Epub 2008 
Oct 31.

Reduced notch activity is associated with an impaired marginal zone B cell
development and function in Sly1 mutant mice.

Scheikl T(1), Reis B, Pfeffer K, Holzmann B, Beer S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, TU Munich, Ismaninger Strasse 22, 81675 Munich,
Germany.

MZ B cells represent a distinct lineage of naive B lymphocytes, apart from FO B
cells and peritoneal B1 cells, and mediate humoral immune responses against
blood-borne type 2 T-independent antigens. Regulation of MZ B cell development
involves the Notch receptor signaling, the intensity of B cell receptor signals, 
and cell compartmentalization by adhesion and chemokine receptors. Our previous
work showed that gene-targeted mice expressing a truncated form of the putative
signaling adapter protein SLy1 exhibit reduced numbers of a splenic B cell
population enriched in MZ B cells. Here, we demonstrate that Sly1(d/d) mice
exhibit a partial, but selective, block in the transition from pre-MZ to mature
MZ B cells. Development of both T1 and T2 precursor subsets and FO B cells was
normal in Sly1(d/d) mice. Consistent with the loss of MZ B cells, the production 
of antigen-specific IgM antibodies following immunization with pneumococcal
polysaccharides was severely impaired in Sly1(d/d) mice. Importantly, expression 
of the Notch signaling mediator RBP-J and the Notch target genes Hes-1 and Hes-5 
was markedly reduced in MZ but not FO B cells of Sly1(d/d) mice. In contrast, B
cell receptor signaling, expression and function of LFA-1 and alpha4-integrins,
and expression of chemokine receptors appeared intact in Sly1(d/d) cells.
Collectively, these results provide strong evidence that SLy1 is important for
the generation and function of MZ B cells and suggest a novel link between SLy1
and the activity of the Notch pathway in the development of MZ B cells.

PMID: 18950867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Stem Cells. 2009 Jan;27(1):165-74. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0580.

Gli2 is a novel regulator of sox2 expression in telencephalic neuroepithelial
cells.

Takanaga H(1), Tsuchida-Straeten N, Nishide K, Watanabe A, Aburatani H, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN, Kobe, Japan.

Multipotential neural stem cells (NSCs) in the central nervous system (CNS)
proliferate indefinitely and give rise to neurons, astrocytes, and
oligodendrocytes. As NSCs hold promise for CNS regeneration, it is important to
understand how their proliferation and differentiation are controlled. We show
here that the expression of sox2 gene, which is essential for the maintenance of 
NSCs, is regulated by the Gli2 transcription factor, a downstream mediator of
sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling: Gli2 binds to an enhancer that is vital for sox2 
expression in telencephalic neuroepithelial (NE) cells, which consist of NSCs and
neural precursor cells. Overexpression of a truncated form of Gli2 (Gli2DeltaC)
or Gli2-specific short hairpin RNA (Gli2 shRNA) in NE cells in vivo and in vitro 
inhibits cell proliferation and the expression of Sox2 and other NSC markers,
including Hes1, Hes5, Notch1, CD133, and Bmi1. It also induces premature neuronal
differentiation in the developing NE cells. In addition, we show evidence that
Sox2 expression decreases significantly in the developing neuroepithelium of
Gli2-deficient mice. Finally, we demonstrate that coexpression of Gli2DeltaC and 
Sox2 can rescue the expression of Hes5 and prevent premature neuronal
differentiation in NE cells but cannot rescue its proliferation. Thus these data 
reveal a novel transcriptional cascade, involving Gli2 --> Sox2 --> Hes5, which
maintains the undifferentiated state of telencephalic NE cells.

PMID: 18927476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Int J Oncol. 2008 Oct;33(4):881-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on GLI2: mechanism of Hedgehog priming through basal
GLI2 expression, and interaction map of stem cell signaling network with P53.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Hedgehog-binding to Patched family receptors results in Smoothened-mediated
activation of MAP3K10 (MST) and inactivation of SUFU. MAP3K10-induced DYRK2
phosphorylation combined with SUFU inhibition results in the stabilization and
nuclear accumulation of GLI2 for transcriptional activation of GLI1, CCND1,
CCND2, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXP3, FOXQ1, RUNX2, and JAG2. Here, integrative genomic
analyses on GLI2 orthologs were carried out. Rat Gli2 complete coding sequence
was determined by assembling nucleotide sequences of exons 1, 2, and 5'-truncated
rat Gli2 RefSeq (NM_001107169.1). GLI2 orthologs were more related to GLI3
orthologs than to GLI1 orthologs lacking the N-terminal repressor domain.
betaTRCP1 (FBXW1)-binding DSYxxxS motif was conserved in GLI2 and GLI3 orthologs,
while betaTRCP2 (FBXW11)-binding DSGxxxxxxxxxS motif in GLI2 and GLI1 orthologs. 
Human GLI2 mRNA was expressed in ES cells, NT2 cells, fetal lung, fetal heart,
regenerating liver, gastric cancer, and other tumors. Mouse Gli2 mRNA was
expressed in unfertilized egg, ES cells, and EG cells. Tandem RRRCWWGYYY motifs
for P53, P63 or P73, and also four conserved bHLH-binding sites were identified
within GLI2 proximal promoter region. Interaction map of P53 and stem cell
signaling network were then constructed. P53-induced NOTCH1 upregulation leads to
HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 or HEYL upregulation for the repression of tissue specific
bHLH transcriptional activators. DYRK2 functions as a positive regulator of
P53-mediated apoptosis, and also as a negative regulator of the Hedgehog
signaling cascade. GLI2 expression is regulated based on the balance of P53,
Notch, and TGF-beta signaling, and Hedgehog signaling activation results in cell 
survival and proliferation due to transcriptional activation of Hedgehog-target
genes, and also partly due to perturbation of P53-mediated transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 18813803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Neuropharmacology. 2008 Nov;55(6):977-85. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2008.06.046. 
Epub 2008 Jun 29.

Transcriptional regulation at a HTR1A polymorphism associated with mental
illness.

Le François B(1), Czesak M, Steubl D, Albert PR.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute (Neuroscience), University of Ottawa, 451
Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1H 8M5.

The serotonin-1A (5-HT1A) receptor serves as a hub to regulate the activity and
actions of the serotonin system, and is expressed both as a presynaptic
autoreceptor on raphe neurons, and as a major postsynaptic receptor in
hippocampal, cortical, and hypothalamic regions involved in mood, emotion and
stress response. As such, the level of expression of 5-HT1A receptors is
implicated in the development of anxiety and depression phenotypes. This review
focuses on the C(-1019)G (rs6295) promoter polymorphism of the 5-HT1A receptor
gene (HTR1A) and its effect on the activity of transcription factors that
recognize the C-allele, including Deaf-1, Hes1 and Hes5; its effects on 5-HT1A
receptor expression in pre- and postsynaptic areas; as well as its implication in
early postnatal development and adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus and cortex.
Although several studies have now replicated the association of the G-allele with
depression, panic disorder, neuroticism, and reduced response to antidepressant
or antipsychotic treatment, ethnic, disease and genetic heterogeneity among
subjects in different studies may obscure such associations. Gene-gene
interaction studies suggest that the 5-HT1A receptor G(-1019) allele is a risk
allele which could be used as a marker for depression and related mood disorders.
Finally, association of the G(-1019) allele with increased raphe 5-HT1A binding
potential, increased amygdala reactivity to emotional stimuli, and reduced
amygdala volume, particularly in disease states, suggests a functional role for
the C(-1019)G site in 5-HT1A receptor dys-regulation and predisposition to mental
illness.

PMID: 18639564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Sep 1;231(2):179-96. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2008.04.023. Epub 2008 May 6.

Gene expression profiles following exposure to a developmental neurotoxicant,
Aroclor 1254: pathway analysis for possible mode(s) of action.

Royland JE(1), Kodavanti PR.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Toxicology Branch, Neurotoxicology Division, NHEERL,
ORD, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

Comment in
    Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009 Apr 15;236(2):254-6; author reply 257-60.

Epidemiological studies indicate that low levels of polychlorinated biphenyl
(PCB) exposure can adversely affect neurocognitive development. In animal models,
perturbations in calcium signaling, neurotransmitters, and thyroid hormones have 
been postulated as potential mechanisms for PCB-induced developmental
neurotoxicity. In order to understand the role of these proposed mechanisms and
to identify other mechanisms in PCB-induced neurotoxicity, we have chosen a
global approach utilizing oligonucleotide microarrays to examine gene expression 
profiles in the brain following developmental exposure to Aroclor 1254 (0 or 6
mg/kg/day from gestation day 6 through postnatal day (PND) 21) in Long-Evans
rats. Gene expression levels in the cerebellum and hippocampus from PNDs 7 and 14
animals were determined on Affymetrix rat 230A_2.0 chips. In the cerebellum, 87
transcripts were altered at PND7 compared to 27 transcripts at PND14 by Aroclor
1254 exposure, with only one transcript affected at both ages. In hippocampus,
175 transcripts and 50 transcripts were altered at PND7 and PND14, respectively, 
by Aroclor 1254 exposure with five genes commonly affected. Functional analysis
suggests that pathways related to calcium homeostasis (Gng3, Ryr2, Trdn,
Cacna1a), intracellular signaling (Camk2d, Stk17b, Pacsin2, Ryr2, Trio, Fert2,
Ptk2b), axonal guidance (Lum, Mxd3, Akap11, Gucy1b3), aryl hydrocarbon receptor
signaling (Nfia, Col1a2), and transcripts involved in cell proliferation (Gspt2, 
Cdkn1c, Ptk2b) and differentiation (Ifitm31, Hpca, Zfp260, Igsf4a, Hes5) leading 
to the development of nervous system were significantly altered by Aroclor 1254
exposure. Of the two brain regions examined, Aroclor 1254-induced genomic changes
were greater in the hippocampus than the cerebellum. The genomic data suggests
that PCB-induced neurotoxic effects were due to disruption of normal ontogenetic 
pattern of nervous system growth and development by altering intracellular
signaling pathways but not by endocrine disruption.

PMID: 18602130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Development. 2008 Aug;135(15):2531-41. doi: 10.1242/dev.021535. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Hes genes and neurogenin regulate non-neural versus neural fate specification in 
the dorsal telencephalic midline.

Imayoshi I(1), Shimogori T, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

The choroid plexus in the brain is unique because it is a non-neural secretory
tissue. It secretes the cerebrospinal fluid and functions as a blood-brain
barrier, but the precise mechanism of specification of this non-neural tissue has
not yet been determined. Using mouse embryos and lineage-tracing analysis, we
found that the prospective choroid plexus region initially gives rise to
Cajal-Retzius cells, specialized neurons that guide neuronal migration.
Inactivation of the bHLH repressor genes Hes1, Hes3 and Hes5 upregulated
expression of the proneural gene neurogenin 2 (Ngn2) and prematurely depleted
Bmp-expressing progenitor cells, leading to enhanced formation of Cajal-Retzius
cells and complete loss of choroid plexus epithelial cells. Overexpression of
Ngn2 had similar effects. These data indicate that Hes genes promote
specification of the fate of choroid plexus epithelial cells rather than the fate
of Cajal-Retzius cells by antagonizing Ngn2 in the dorsal telencephalic midline
region, and thus this study has identified a novel role for bHLH genes in the
process of deciding which cells will have a non-neural versus a neural fate.

PMID: 18579678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Vis. 2008 Jun 5;14:1041-9.

Down-regulation of Notch signaling during corneal epithelial proliferation.

Djalilian AR(1), Namavari A, Ito A, Balali S, Afshar A, Lavker RM, Yue BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL
60612, USA. adjalili@uic.edu <adjalili@uic.edu>

PURPOSE: We evaluated the expression and activation of Notch pathway genes in the
adult human and murine corneal epithelium during proliferation.
METHODS: The expression of Notch pathway genes in the limbal and central human
corneal epithelium was compared by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Their expression pattern was examined by immunofluorescence
and in situ hybridization. The temporal expression of Notch1 during murine wound 
healing was assessed by RT-PCR. Notch activity was determined using western blot 
for the Notch intracellular domain (NotchIC). The expression of Hes1 was
evaluated in cell culture.
RESULTS: The expression of Notch1 and Jagged1 was higher in the human limbal
epithelium while the expression of Hes1 and Hes5 was higher in the central
cornea. Expression of Notch1, Jagged1, and Hes1 was found predominantly in the
basal and immediate suprabasal cells. During neonatal corneal development,
NotchIC was detected in occasional cells at P10 while at P15 and P90, it was
found in the basal and early suprabasal layers. NotchIC was found to be lower in 
the limbal compared to central corneal epithelium. The expression of Notch1 was
lower at 24 h post-wounding but was completely restored in six days. The levels
of NotchIC were decreased at 24 h post-wounding and after application of topical 
phorbol myristate. In vitro, the expression of Hes1 was higher in confluent cells
maintained under high calcium conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: The inverse correlation between Notch signaling and the
proliferative status of the corneal epithelium is consistent with the idea that
Notch plays a role in corneal epithelial differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2426716
PMID: 18552977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Jul 25;440(1):27-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.05.053. Epub 
2008 May 18.

Folic acid supplementation affects apoptosis and differentiation of embryonic
neural stem cells exposed to high glucose.

Jia DY(1), Liu HJ, Wang FW, Liu SM, Ling EA, Liu K, Hao AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Experimental Teratology,
Department of Histology and Embryology, Shandong University School of Medicine,
No. 44, Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, PR China.

Folic acid (FA) supplementation has been shown to be extremely effective in
reducing the occurrence of neural tube defects (NTDs), one of the most common
birth defects associated with diabetic pregnancy. However, the antiteratogenic
mechanism of FA in diabetes-induced NTDs is unclear. This study investigated the 
neuroprotective mechanism of FA in neural stem cells (NSCs) exposed to high
glucose in vitro. The undifferentiated or differentiated NSCs were cultured in
normal D-glucose concentration (NG) or high D-glucose concentration (HG) with or 
without FA. FA supplementation significantly decreased apoptosis induced by HG
and lowered the expression of p53 in the nucleus of undifferentiated NSCs exposed
to HG. Administration of FA in differentiated NSCs did not alter their precocious
differentiation induced by HG. The increased mRNA expression levels of the basic 
helix-loop-helix factors including Neurog1, Neurog2, NeuroD2, Mash1, Id1, Id2,
and Hes5 in the presence of HG were not significantly affected by FA. The present
results provided a cellular mechanism by which FA supplementation may have a
potential role in prevention of NTDs in diabetic pregnancies. On the other hand, 
FA increased the mRNA expression levels of the above transcription factors and
accelerated the differentiation of NSCs in the NG medium, suggesting that it may 
adversely affect the normal differentiation of NSCs. Therefore, the timing and
dose of FA would be critical factors in considering FA supplementation in normal 
maternal pregnancy.

PMID: 18541378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Jul;38(3):349-58. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.03.007. Epub
2008 Apr 1.

HES1 regulates 5-HT1A receptor gene transcription at a functional polymorphism:
essential role in developmental expression.

Jacobsen KX(1), Vanderluit JL, Slack RS, Albert PR.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute (Neuroscience) and Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON Canada.

Mammalian HES1 and HES5 are abundant in developing CNS and inhibit neurogenesis, 
while HES6 promotes neurogenesis. An early serotonergic differentiation marker,
the 5-HT1A receptor, is repressed by HES5 and DEAF1 which recognize the C(-1019),
but not G(-1019) allele of a human 5-HT1A promoter polymorphism associated with
mood disorders. We tested whether HES1 and HES6 regulate transcriptional activity
at this element. HES1 strongly repressed 5-HT1A transcription in neuronal and
non-neuronal cells, while HES6 reversed HES1- and HES5-mediated repression.
Mutation of a putative HES consensus site blocked HES1 and HES5, but, unlike
HES5, HES1 repressed at the G(-1019) allele. To address its role in vivo, the
temporal expression of 5-HT1A receptor RNA and protein was examined in HES1-/-
mice, and elevated levels in E12.5 hindbrain and midbrain were observed. Thus,
HES1 and HES6 oppositely regulate 5-HT1A receptor transcription and HES1 is
required for its correct developmental expression.

PMID: 18499474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Oncogene. 2008 Aug 28;27(37):5019-32. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.149. Epub 2008 May
12.

ErbB-2 inhibition activates Notch-1 and sensitizes breast cancer cells to a
gamma-secretase inhibitor.

Osipo C(1), Patel P, Rizzo P, Clementz AG, Hao L, Golde TE, Miele L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cardinal Bernardin Cancer Center, Loyola University
Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, USA. cosipo@lumc.edu

ErbB-2 overexpression in breast tumors is associated with poor survival.
Expression of Notch-1 and its ligand, Jagged-1, is associated with the poorest
survival, including ErbB-2-positive tumors. Trastuzumab plus chemotherapy is the 
standard of care for ErbB-2-positive breast cancer. A proportion of tumors are
initially resistant to trastuzumab and acquired resistance to trastuzumab occurs 
in metastatic breast cancer and is associated with poor prognosis. Thus, we
investigated whether Notch-1 contributes to trastuzumab resistance.
ErbB-2-positive cells have low Notch transcriptional activity compared to
non-overexpressing cells. Trastuzumab or a dual epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR)/ErbB-2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) increased Notch activity by 2- to
6-fold in SKBr3, BT474 and MCF-7/HER2-18 cells. The increase in activity was
abrogated by a Notch inhibitor, gamma-secretase inhibitor (GSI) or Notch-1
small-interfering RNA (siRNA). Trastuzumab decreased Notch-1trade mark precursor,
increased amount and nuclear accumulation of active Notch-1(IC) and increased
expression of targets, Hey1 and Deltex1 mRNAs, and Hes5, Hey1, Hes1 proteins.
Importantly, trastuzumab-resistant BT474 cells treated with trastuzumab for 6
months expressed twofold higher Notch-1, twofold higher Hey1, ninefold higher
Deltex1 mRNAs and threefold higher Notch-1 and Hes5 proteins, compared to
trastuzumab-sensitive BT474 cells. The increase in Hey1 and Deltex1 mRNAs in
resistant cells was abrogated by a Notch-1 siRNA. Cell proliferation was
inhibited more effectively by trastuzumab or TKI plus a GSI than either agent
alone. Decreased Notch-1 by siRNA increased efficacy of trastuzumab in BT474
sensitive cells and restored sensitivity in resistant cells. Trastuzumab plus a
GSI increased apoptosis in sensitive cells by 20-30%. A GSI alone was sufficient 
to increase apoptosis in trastuzumab-resistant BT474 cells by 20%, which
increased to 30% with trastuzumab. Notch-1 siRNA alone decreased cell growth by
30% in sensitive and more than 50% in resistant BT474 cells. Furthermore, growth 
of both trastuzumab sensitive and resistant cells was completely inhibited by
combining trastuzumab plus Notch-1 siRNA. More importantly, Notch-1 siRNA or a
GSI resensitized trastuzumab-resistant BT474 cells to trastuzumab. These results 
demonstrate that ErbB-2 overexpression suppresses Notch-1 activity, which can be 
reversed by trastuzumab or TKI. These results suggest that Notch-1 might play a
novel role in resistance to trastuzumab, which could be prevented or reversed by 
inhibiting Notch-1.

PMID: 18469855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Jun;50 Suppl 1:S97-103. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.00993.x. Epub 2008 Apr 22.

Roles of Hes genes in neural development.

Kageyama R(1), Ohtsuka T, Kobayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
and Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Hes genes are mammalian homologues of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split,
which encode basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional repressors. In the
developing central nervous system, Hes1, Hes3 and Hes5 are highly expressed by
neural stem cells. Inactivation of these Hes genes leads to upregulation of
proneural genes, acceleration of neurogenesis and premature depletion of neural
stem cells. Conversely, overexpression of Hes genes leads to inhibition of
neurogenesis and maintenance of neural stem cells. At later stages of
development, Hes genes promote gliogenesis. Furthermore, Hes genes regulate
maintenance of boundaries, which partition the nervous system into many
compartments and endow the neighboring compartments with regional identities by
secreting morphogens. Boundary cells usually proliferate slowly and do not give
rise to neurons, unlike neural stem cells in compartments. Interestingly, these
different characteristics between boundary cells and compartmental neural stem
cells are regulated by different modes of Hes1 expression, which is variable in
neural stem cells in compartments and persistent and high in boundary cells.
Thus, Hes genes play an essential role in neural development by regulating
proliferation, differentiation and specification of neural stem cells.

PMID: 18430159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cells Tissues Organs. 2008;188(3):287-98. doi: 10.1159/000121610. Epub 2008 Mar
20.

Notch1, Jagged1, and HES5 are abundantly expressed in osteoarthritis.

Karlsson C(1), Brantsing C, Egell S, Lindahl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden.
camilla.karlsson@medic.gu.se

BACKGROUND: Notch signalling controls differentiation and proliferation in
various cell types and is associated with several diseases. We investigated the
localization and regulation of several Notch markers in human osteoarthritic (OA)
cartilage as well as identified genes controlled by Notch signalling.
METHODS: Immunolocalization and real-time PCR analysis of Notch markers in
healthy and OA articular cartilage were performed. Genes regulated by Notch
signalling were studied using microarray. Cytokine-induced transcription of Notch
markers was analyzed using real-time PCR and its effect on cellular localization 
of the intracellular domain of Notch1 (NICD1) was investigated using
immunohistochemistry, subcellular fractionation, and transfection. The effect of 
NFkappaB activation on HES5 transcription was studied using the NFkappaB
inhibitor pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate.
RESULTS: Notch signalling was activated in OA cartilage and Notch1, Jagged1, and 
HES5 were abundantly expressed compared to healthy cartilage. Notch signalling
regulated the expression of several genes associated with OA, like interleukin-8,
lubricin, CD10, matrix metalloproteinase-9, and bone morphogenetic protein-2.
Cytokines significantly affected the expression of several Notch markers and
repressed expression of HES5, but did not affect the cellular localization of
NICD1.
CONCLUSION: Notch signalling is dysregulated in OA, inducing and repressing
transcription of genes that could potentially partly contribute to the OA
phenotype.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18354251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Feb 26;8:20. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-20.

Hey2 functions in parallel with Hes1 and Hes5 for mammalian auditory sensory
organ development.

Li S(1), Mark S, Radde-Gallwitz K, Schlisner R, Chin MT, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. sli24@emory.edu

BACKGROUND: During mouse development, the precursor cells that give rise to the
auditory sensory organ, the organ of Corti, are specified prior to embryonic day 
14.5 (E14.5). Subsequently, the sensory domain is patterned precisely into one
row of inner and three rows of outer sensory hair cells interdigitated with
supporting cells. Both the restriction of the sensory domain and the patterning
of the sensory mosaic of the organ of Corti involve Notch-mediated lateral
inhibition and cellular rearrangement characteristic of convergent extension.
This study explores the expression and function of a putative Notch target gene.
RESULTS: We report that a putative Notch target gene, hairy-related basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional factor Hey2, is expressed in the cochlear
epithelium prior to terminal differentiation. Its expression is subsequently
restricted to supporting cells, overlapping with the expression domains of two
known Notch target genes, Hairy and enhancer of split homolog genes Hes1 and
Hes5. In combination with the loss of Hes1 or Hes5, genetic inactivation of Hey2 
leads to increased numbers of mis-patterned inner or outer hair cells,
respectively. Surprisingly, the ectopic hair cells in Hey2 mutants are
accompanied by ectopic supporting cells. Furthermore, Hey2-/-;Hes1-/- and
Hey2-/-;Hes1+/- mutants show a complete penetrance of early embryonic lethality.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that Hey2 functions in parallel with Hes1 and
Hes5 in patterning the organ of Corti, and interacts genetically with Hes1 for
early embryonic development and survival. Our data implicates expansion of the
progenitor pool and/or the boundaries of the developing sensory organ to account 
for patterning defects observed in Hey2 mutants.

PMCID: PMC2277407
PMID: 18302773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Apr;37(4):820-31. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.01.011. Epub
2008 Jan 26.

Instability of Notch1 and Delta1 mRNAs and reduced Notch activity in vertebrate
neuroepithelial cells undergoing S-phase.

Cisneros E(1), Latasa MJ, García-Flores M, Frade JM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, CSIC, Avda Dr Arce 37, E-28002 Madrid, Spain.

Vertebrate neurogenesis is controlled through lateral inhibitory signals
triggered by the Notch receptor and its ligand Delta. In the E4 chick embryo, the
capacity of neural precursors to express the neurogenic genes Notch1 and Delta1
becomes reduced during S-phase, suggesting that their competence to trigger
lateral inhibitory signals varies at different stages of the cell cycle. Here we 
show that the reduction of neurogenic gene expression during S-phase is extensive
to later developmental stages and to other species; and it correlates with lower 
expression of lunatic Fringe and diminished capability to induce the expression
of cHairy1/Hes1 and Hes5-1. We also show that the cell cycle-dependence of Notch1
and Delta1 expression is due to a remarkable decrease of mRNA stability during
S-phase. These results provide evidence that the capacity of vertebrate neural
precursors to express neurogenic genes and trigger lateral inhibitory signals is 
functionally coordinated with the cell cycle.

PMID: 18289870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Neurodegener. 2008 Jan 8;3:2. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-3-2.

Presenilins are required for maintenance of neural stem cells in the developing
brain.

Kim WY(1), Shen J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Program in
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
jshen@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

The early embryonic lethality of mutant mice bearing germ-line deletions of both 
presenilin genes precluded the study of their functions in neural development. We
therefore employed the Cre-loxP technology to generate presenilin conditional
double knockout (PS cDKO) mice, in which expression of both presenilins is
inactivated in neural progenitor cells (NPC) or neural stem cells and their
derivative neurons and glia beginning at embryonic day 11 (E11). In PS cDKO mice,
dividing NPCs labeled by BrdU are decreased in number beginning at E13.5. By
E15.5, fewer than 20% of NPCs remain in PS cDKO mice. The depletion of NPCs is
accompanied by severe morphological defects and hemorrhages in the PS cDKO
embryonic brain. Interkinetic nuclear migration of NPCs is also disrupted in PS
cDKO embryos, as evidenced by displacement of S-phase and M-phase nuclei in the
ventricular zone of the telencephalon. Furthermore, the depletion of neural
progenitor cells in PS cDKO embryos is due to NPCs exiting cell cycle and
differentiating into neurons rather than reentering cell cycle between E13.5 and 
E14.5 following PS inactivation in most NPCs. The length of cell cycle, however, 
is unchanged in PS cDKO embryos. Expression of Notch target genes, Hes1 and Hes5,
is significantly decreased in PS cDKO brains, whereas Dll1 expression is
up-regulated, indicating that Notch signaling is effectively blocked by PS
inactivation. These findings demonstrate that presenilins are essential for
neural progenitor cells to re-enter cell cycle and thus ensure proper expansion
of neural progenitor pool during embryonic neural development.

PMCID: PMC2235867
PMID: 18182109  [PubMed]


243. Blood. 2008 Mar 1;111(5):2615-20. Epub 2007 Nov 29.

Notch target Hes5 ensures appropriate Notch induced T- versus B-cell choices in
the thymus.

Varnum-Finney B(1), Dallas MH, Kato K, Bernstein ID.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Avenue N., Seattle, WA 98109, USA. bvarnumf@fhcrc.org

Notch signaling establishes boundaries in the thymus by inducing T-cell
commitment and inhibiting a B-cell choice. Here, we show a significant 1.6-fold
increased generation of B-cell precursors in thymuses from mice deficient for
Notch target Hes5 compared with wild-type littermates. We further show that
culture of bone marrow-derived progenitors with increasing densities of purified 
immobilized Notch ligand (Delta1(ext-IgG)) induced increased expression of Notch 
targets Hes1 and Hes5, and that although Hes5-deficient progenitors responded
appropriately to high densities of ligand, they misread intermediate and low
densities. Together, our results suggest that to ensure an appropriate outcome in
the thymus in response to a lower threshold of induced Notch signaling, induction
of the additional target Hes5 is required.

PMCID: PMC2254545
PMID: 18048645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. BMC Neurosci. 2007 Nov 16;8:95.

Gene expression profiling in a mouse model of infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis reveals upregulation of immediate early genes and mediators of the
inflammatory response.

Qiao X(1), Lu JY, Hofmann SL.

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research and the Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
xingwen.qiao@utsouthwestern.edu

BACKGROUND: The infantile form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (also known as
infantile Batten disease) is caused by hereditary deficiency of a lysosomal
enzyme, palmitoyl-protein thioesterase-1 (PPT1), and is characterized by severe
cortical degeneration with blindness and cognitive and motor dysfunction. The
PPT1-deficient knockout mouse recapitulates the key features of the disorder,
including seizures and death by 7-9 months of age. In the current study, we
compared gene expression profiles of whole brain from PPT1 knockout and normal
mice at 3, 5 and 8 months of age to identify temporal changes in molecular
pathways implicated in disease pathogenesis.
RESULTS: A total of 267 genes were significantly (approximately 2-fold) up- or
downregulated over the course of the disease. Immediate early genes (Arc, Cyr61, 
c-fos, jun-b, btg2, NR4A1) were among the first genes upregulated during the
presymptomatic period whereas immune response genes dominated at later time
points. Chemokine ligands and protease inhibitors were among the most
transcriptionally responsive genes. Neuronal survival factors (IGF-1 and CNTF)
and a negative regulator of neuronal apoptosis (DAP kinase-1) were upregulated
late in the course of the disease. Few genes were downregulated; these included
the alpha2 subunit of the GABA-A receptor, a component of cortical and
hippocampal neurons, and Hes5, a transcription factor important in neuronal
differentiation.
CONCLUSION: A molecular description of gene expression changes occurring in the
brain throughout the course of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis suggests distinct
phases of disease progression, provides clues to potential markers of disease
activity, and points to new targets for therapy.

PMCID: PMC2204004
PMID: 18021406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 1;311(1):53-68. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Six1 is essential for early neurogenesis in the development of olfactory
epithelium.

Ikeda K(1), Ookawara S, Sato S, Ando Z, Kageyama R, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 
Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

The olfactory epithelium (OE) is derived from the olfactory placode (OP) during
mouse development. At embryonic day (E) 10.0-E10.5, "early neurogenesis" occurs
in the OE, which includes production of pioneer neurons that emigrate out of the 
OE and other early-differentiated neurons. Around E12.5, the OE becomes organized
into mature pseudostratified epithelium and shows "established neurogenesis," in 
which olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) are differentiated from basal
progenitors. Little is known about the molecular pathway of early neurogenesis.
The homeodomain protein Six1 is expressed in all OP cells and neurogenic
precursors in the OE. Here we show that early neurogenesis is severely disturbed 
despite the unaltered expression of Mash1 at E10.5 in the Six1-deficient mice
(Six1-/-). Expression levels of neurogenin1 (Ngn1) and NeuroD are reduced and
those of Hes1 and Hes5 are augmented in the OE of Six1-/- at E10.5. Pioneer
neurons and cellular aggregates, which are derived from the OP/OE and situated in
the mesenchyme between the OE and forebrain, are completely absent in Six1-/-.
Moreover, ORN axons and the gonadotropin-releasing hormone-positive neurons fail 
to extend and migrate to the forebrain, respectively. Our study indicates that
Six1 plays critical roles in early neurogenesis by regulating Ngn1, NeuroD, Hes1,
and Hes5.

PMID: 17880938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Jan;307(1-2):101-8. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Notch activation promotes cell proliferation and the formation of neural stem
cell-like colonies in human glioma cells.

Zhang XP(1), Zheng G, Zou L, Liu HL, Hou LH, Zhou P, Yin DD, Zheng QJ, Liang L,
Zhang SZ, Feng L, Yao LB, Yang AG, Han H, Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Developmental Biology, State Key Laboratory
of Cancer Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xian, PR China.

Since Notch signaling plays a critical role in stem cells and oncogenesis, we
hypothesized that Notch signaling might play roles in cancer stem cells and
cancer cells with a stem cell phenotype. In this study, we accessed potential
functions of the Notch pathway in the formation of cancer stem cells using human 
glioma. Using RT-PCR, we found that most human astrogliomas of different grades
expressed moderate to high level of Notch receptors and ligands. mRNA of Hes5 but
not Hes1, both of which are major downstream molecules of the Notch pathway, was 
also detected. In human glioma cell lines BT325, U251, SHG-44, and U87, mRNA
encoding different types of Notch receptors were detected, but active form of
Notch1 (NIC) was only detected in SHG-44 and U87 by Western blot. Interestingly, 
proliferation of these two glioma cell lines appeared faster than that of the
other two lines in which NIC was not detected. We have over-expressed NIC of
Notch1 in SHG-44 cells by constitutive transfection to evaluate the effects of
Notch signaling on glioma cells. Our results showed that over-expression of NIC
in SHG-44 cells promoted the growth and the colony-forming activity of SHG-44
cells. Interestingly, over-expression of NIC increased the formation
neurosphere-like colonies in the presence of growth factors. These colonies
expressed nestin, and could be induced to cells expressing neuron-, astrocyte-,
or oligodendrocyte-specific markers, consistent with phenotypes of neural stem
cells. These data suggest that Notch signaling promote the formation of cancer
stem cell-like cells in human glioma.

PMID: 17849174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Int J Oncol. 2007 Aug;31(2):461-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on HES/HEY family: Notch-independent HES1, HES3
transcription in undifferentiated ES cells, and Notch-dependent HES1, HES5, HEY1,
HEY2, HEYL transcription in fetal tissues, adult tissues, or cancer.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Notch signaling pathway maintains stem cells through transcriptional activation
of HES/HEY family members to repress tissue-specific transcription factors. Here,
comparative integromic analyses on HES/HEY family members were carried out. HES3 
gene encodes two isoforms due to alternative promoters. Complete coding sequence 
of HES3 variant 2 was determined by curating CX755241.1 EST. Refined phylogenetic
analysis using HES3 variant 2 instead of variant 1 revealed that mammalian bHLH
transcription factors with Orange domain were grouped into HES subfamily (HES1,
HES2, HES3, HES4, HES5, HES6, HES7) and HEY subfamily (HEY1, HEY2, HEYL,
HESL/HELT, DEC1/BHLHB2, DEC2/BHLHB3). Eight amino-acid residues were added to the
C-terminal WRPW motif in human HES3 due to lineage specific T to G nucleotide
change at stop codon of chimpanzee, rat, and mouse HES3 orthologs. HES1 and HES3 
were expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. HES1 was also
expressed in fetal tissues, and regenerating liver. HES1, HEY1 and HEY2 were
expressed in endothelial cells. HES1, HES4 and HES6 were expressed in gastric
cancer, HES1 and DEC1 in pancreatic cancer, HES1, HES2, HES4, HES6 and DEC2 in
colorectal cancer. HES6 was also expressed in other tumors, such as brain tumors,
melanoma, small cell lung cancer, retinoblastoma, ovarian cancer, and breast
cancer. Double NANOG-binding sites, CSL/RBPSUH-binding site and TATA-box in HES1 
promoter, NANOG-, SOX2-, POU5F1/OCT3/OCT4-binding sites and TATA-box in HES3
promoter, double CSL-binding sites in HES5 promoter, SOX2-, POU-binding sites and
TATA-box in HES6 promoter, and CSL-binding site in HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL promoters 
were evolutionarily conserved. However, double CSL-binding sites in mouse Hes7
promoter were not conserved in human HES7 promoter. Together these facts indicate
that HES1 and HES3 were target genes of the ES cell-specific network of
transcription factors, and that HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL were target genes
of Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 17611704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):543-53. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Notch1 expression and ligand interactions in progenitor cells of the mouse
olfactory epithelium.

Schwarting GA(1), Gridley T, Henion TR.

Author information: 
(1)Shriver Center/UMMS, 200 Trapelo Road, Waltham, MA 02452, USA.
gerald.schwarting@umassmed.edu

Despite the relatively simplified organization of the olfactory epithelium (OE), 
our understanding of the factors that regulate its cellular diversity is limited.
Genetic and localization studies suggest that Notch signaling may be important in
this process. We characterize here a population of Notch1 (+) olfactory basal
cells in embryonic mice that coordinately express both the Notch effector Hes5
and the glycosyltransferase Lfng. These cells are distinct from Mash1(+) neuronal
precursors, but give rise to sensory neurons, suggesting that Notch1 signals may 
in part function to maintain a neurogenic progenitor pool. Furthermore, Lfng(+)
cells also generate a population of cells in the migratory mass that appear to be
ensheathing glial precursors, indicating potential multipotency in these
progenitors. The Notch ligand Dll4 is expressed by basal OE cells that are
interspersed with Notch1(+) progenitors during later OE neurogenesis. In
contrast, mice deficient in Dll1 exhibit a smaller OE and a loss of Hes5
expression, indicating an earlier function in olfactory progenitor cell
development. Taken together, these results further support a role for Notch
signaling in the regulation of olfactory neurogenesis and cell diversity.

PMID: 17605079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):195-200.

Synergism between NF-kappa B1/p50 and Notch2 during the development of marginal
zone B lymphocytes.

Moran ST(1), Cariappa A, Liu H, Muir B, Sgroi D, Boboila C, Pillai S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical Scool, 13th
Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

NF-kappaB1 and Notch2 are both required for the development of marginal zone (MZ)
B cells. Analysis of B lymphocyte development in mice that are doubly
heterozygous at the Notch2 and NF-kappaB1 loci revealed synergism between Notch2 
and NF-kappaB1 during MZ B cell development. Two known transcriptional targets of
the Notch pathway, Hes-5 and Deltex-1, were found to be preferentially expressed 
in MZ B cells and regulated by NF-kappaB1. These studies provide in vivo evidence
for a genetic interaction between the Notch and NF-kappaB pathways.

PMID: 17579038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 7;7:63.

Preservation of proliferating pancreatic progenitor cells by Delta-Notch
signaling in the embryonic chicken pancreas.

Ahnfelt-Rønne J(1), Hald J, Bødker A, Yassin H, Serup P, Hecksher-Sørensen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels
Steensensvej 6, Gentofte, Denmark. jonr@hagedorn.dk <jonr@hagedorn.dk>

BACKGROUND: Genetic studies have shown that formation of pancreatic endocrine
cells in mice is dependent on the cell autonomous action of the bHLH
transcription factor Neurogenin3 and that the extent and timing of endocrine
differentiation is controlled by Notch signaling. To further understand the
mechanism by which Notch exerts this function, we have investigated pancreatic
endocrine development in chicken embryos.
RESULTS: In situ hybridization showed that expression of Notch signaling
components and pro-endocrine bHLH factors is conserved to a large degree between 
chicken and mouse. Cell autonomous inhibition of Notch signal reception results
in significantly increased endocrine differentiation demonstrating that these
early progenitors are prevented from differentiating by ongoing Notch signaling. 
Conversely, activated Notch1 induces Hes5-1 expression and prevents endocrine
development. Notably, activated Notch also prevents Ngn3-mediated induction of a 
number of downstream targets including NeuroD, Hes6-1, and MyT1 suggesting that
Notch may act to inhibit both Ngn3 gene expression and protein function.
Activated Notch1 could also block endocrine development and gene expression
induced by NeuroD. Nevertheless, Ngn3- and NeuroD-induced delamination of
endodermal cells was insensitive to activated Notch under these conditions.
Finally, we show that Myt1 can partially overcome the repressive effect of
activated Notch on endocrine gene expression.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that pancreatic endocrine development in the chicken
relies on a conserved bHLH cascade under inhibitory control of Notch signaling.
This lays the ground for further studies that take advantage of the ease at which
chicken embryos can be manipulated. Our results also demonstrate that Notch can
repress Ngn3 and NeuroD protein function and stimulate progenitor proliferation. 
To determine whether Notch in fact does act in Ngn3-expressing cells in vivo will
require further studies relying on conditional mutagenesis. Lastly, our results
demonstrate that expression of differentiation markers can be uncoupled from the 
process of delamination of differentiating cells from the epithelium.

PMCID: PMC1906762
PMID: 17555568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Jun 21;421(1):27-32. Epub 2007 May 16.

Interaction of fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and notch signaling components
in inhibition of oligodendrocyte progenitor (OP) differentiation.

Zhou YX(1), Armstrong RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, United States.

Oligodendrocyte progenitor (OP) cell differentiation is a critical process of
developmental myelination, tumor formation, and remyelination in the CNS.
Activation of the fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) or notch pathway can inhibit 
differentiation of OP cells. The current study examines the interaction of FGF2
and notch signaling components in regulating OP differentiation. Cultured
neonatal rat brain OP cells were used for transfection-based promoter assays and 
for infection with retroviruses expressing a GFP reporter to monitor OP
differentiation into oligodendrocytes or astrocytes. FGF2 treatment resulted in a
four-fold increase of transcriptional activity from the promoter region of Hes5, 
a notch pathway target gene. FGF2 inhibition of OP differentiation into
oligodendrocytes was perturbed by retroviral expression of a dominant negative
construct for mastermind-like 1, which is an important co-activator of
transcription for notch target genes. OP differentiation into oligodendrocytes
was reduced by co-culture with fibroblasts expressing Jagged1, a ligand for notch
receptors. This Jagged1 inhibition of OP differentiation was not altered by
retroviral expression of a dominant negative FGF receptor construct. Constitutive
activation of notch signaling, by retroviral expression of the Notch1
intracellular domain, greatly reduced OP differentiation into either
oligodendrocytes or astrocytes and did not require FGF2 signaling. These findings
indicate that inhibition of OP differentiation through the Notch1 pathway was not
influenced by FGF2 signaling. However, FGF2 signaling may interact with down
stream components of the notch signaling pathway, including mastermind-like1 and 
Hes5, to inhibit OP differentiation into oligodendrocytes.

PMCID: PMC1986784
PMID: 17548161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mech Dev. 2007 Aug;124(7-8):631-45. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Early regionalization of the otic placode and its regulation by the Notch
signaling pathway.

Abelló G(1), Khatri S, Giráldez F, Alsina B.

Author information: 
(1)DCEXS-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, C/Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Otic neuronal precursors are the first cells to be specified and do so in the
anterior domain of the otic placode, the proneural domain. In the present study, 
we have explored the early events of otic proneural regionalization in relation
to the activity of the Notch signaling pathway. The proneural domain was
characterized by the expression of Sox3, Fgf10 and members of the Notch pathway
such as Delta1, Hes5 and Lunatic Fringe. The complementary non-neural domain
expressed two patterning genes, Lmx1b and Iroquois1, and the members of the Notch
pathway, Serrate1 and Hairy1. Fate map studies and double injections with DiI/DiO
showed that labeled cells remained confined to anterior or posterior territories 
with limited cell intermingling. To explore whether Notch signaling pathway plays
a role in the initial regionalization of the otic placode, Notch activity was
blocked by a gamma-secretase inhibitor (DAPT). Notch blockade induced the
expansion of non-neural genes, Lmx1 and Iroquois1, into the proneural domain.
Combined gene expression and DiI experiments showed that these effects were not
due to migration of non-neural cells into the proneural domain, suggesting that
Notch activity regulates the expression of non-neural genes. This was further
confirmed by the electroporation of a dominant-negative form of the
Mastermind-like1 gene that caused the up-regulation of Lmx1 within the proneural 
domain. In addition, Notch pathway was involved in neuronal precursor selection, 
probably by a classical mechanism of lateral inhibition. We propose that the
regionalization of the otic domain into a proneural and a non-neural territory is
a very early event in otic development, and that Notch signaling activity is
required to exclude the expression of non-neural genes from the proneural
territory.

PMID: 17532192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Dev Dyn. 2007 Jun;236(6):1595-601.

Expression of Notch pathway genes in mammalian epidermis and modulation by
beta-catenin.

Ambler CA(1), Watt FM.

Author information: 
(1)Keratinocyte Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, London,
United Kingdom.

The Notch pathway is required for hair follicle maintenance and is activated
through beta-catenin induced transcription of the Notch ligand Jagged1. We show
that hair follicles in the resting phase express low levels of Jagged1 and Hes1, 
and other Notch target genes are undetectable. In growing (anagen) follicles,
Jagged1 and Hes1 expression increases, Hes5 and HeyL are expressed in distinct
cell layers, and Hey2 is expressed in the dermal papilla. When beta-catenin is
activated by means of an inducible transgene, Jagged1, Hes1, Hes5, HeyL, and Hey2
are up-regulated, the sites of expression being the same in beta-catenin induced 
ectopic follicles as in anagen follicles. beta-Catenin also induces Hey1 in
dermal papilla cells. beta-Catenin-induced up-regulation of Jagged1 precedes
induction of other Notch target genes. The different sites of expression of Hes
and Hey genes suggest input from additional signaling pathways.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17474126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Jun;21(6):1458-66. Epub 2007 Apr 10.

Hes1 and Hes5 control the progenitor pool, intermediate lobe specification, and
posterior lobe formation in the pituitary development.

Kita A(1), Imayoshi I, Hojo M, Kitagawa M, Kokubu H, Ohsawa R, Ohtsuka T,
Kageyama R, Hashimoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 54
Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The pituitary gland is composed of two distinct entities: the adenohypophysis,
including the anterior and intermediate lobes, and the neurohypophysis, known as 
the posterior lobe. This critical endocrine organ is essential for homeostasis,
metabolism, reproduction, and growth. The pituitary development requires the
control of proliferation and differentiation of progenitor cells. Although
multiple signaling molecules and transcription factors are required for the
proper pituitary development, the mechanisms that regulate the fate of progenitor
cells remain to be elucidated. Hes genes, known as Notch effectors, play a
crucial role in specifying cellular fates during the development of various
tissues and organs. Here, we report that mice deficient for Hes1 and Hes5 display
severe pituitary hypoplasia caused by accelerated differentiation of progenitor
cells. In addition, this hypoplastic pituitary gland (adenohypophysis) lacks the 
intermediate lobe and exhibits the features of the anterior lobe only. Hes1 and
Hes5 double-mutant mice also lack the neurohypophysis (the posterior lobe),
probably due to incomplete evagination of the diencephalon. Thus, Hes genes
control not only maintenance of progenitor cells but also intermediate vs.
anterior lobe specification during the adenohypophysis development. Hes genes are
also essential for the formation of the neurohypophysis.

PMID: 17426285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2007 Nov-Dec;17(6):1293-9. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Expression of differentiation associated protein Hes1 and Hes5 in cervical
squamous carcinoma and its precursors.

Liu J(1), Ye F, Chen H, Lü W, Zhou C, Xie X.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Reproductive Health Key Laboratory of Zhejiang Province, China.

Hairy and Enhancer-of-split homologues 1 and 5 (Hes1 and Hes5) are the basic
helix-loop-helix transcriptional factors that negatively regulate the cell
differentiation during embryogenesis. It has been reported that they may be
involved in carcinogenesis in some tumors. The roles of Hes1 and Hes5 in
development and progression of cervical carcinoma are not well documented todate.
In the study, the expression of Hes1 and Hes5 were detected by
immunohistochemistry in 295 cases with various degrees of cervical epithelial
lesions, including 78 normal cervical epithelia, 31 mild dysplasia (CIN I), 77
moderate-severe dysplasia (CIN II-III), and 109 squamous cervical carcinomas
(SCCs), and their association with various clinical pathologic prognostic
variables were analyzed in 73 early-stage SCC patients who underwent surgery.
Hes1 and Hes5 expression were found to be significantly higher in SCC compared
with CIN as well as higher in CIN than normal cervical epithelia, and positively 
correlated with various prognostic factors in early-stage cervical carcinoma. Our
findings suggest that Hes1 and Hes5 may be involved in carcinogenesis of the
cervix and progression of cervical carcinoma. Hes1 and Hes5 overexpression are
probably variables to predict poor prognosis of the patients with early-stage
cervical carcinoma.

PMID: 17388915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Feb;25(4):1006-22.

Identification of self-replicating multipotent progenitors in the embryonic
nervous system by high Notch activity and Hes5 expression.

Basak O(1), Taylor V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stubeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Discrimination of neural stem cells from other progenitors in the developing
mammalian brain has been hampered by the lack of specific markers. Identifying
the progenitor pools and signalling pathways that guide mammalian neurogenesis
are central to understanding the complex mechanisms that govern development of
the nervous system. Notch signalling plays a pivotal role in the development of
the mammalian nervous system by maintaining multipotent neural stem cells and
regulating their fate. In order to identify putative neural stem cells in situ,
we generated transgenic mice that express Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) and
report Notch signalling activity in the developing CNS. Here we show the
subdivision of progenitors within the neural tube of these mice. We purify
progenitors from the neural tube and show that cells with the highest levels of
Notch-reporter activity have self-renewal capability and multipotency, whereas
those lacking Hes5 expression do not form neurospheres in vitro. Using marker
protein co-expression and cell sorting, we show that both neuroepithelial cells
as well as some radial glia at all axial levels of the embryonic neural tube
display active Notch signalling. However, Tbr2-positive basal progenitors of the 
developing telencephalon and differentiating Islet1/2- and Lim1-positive motor
neurons outside the ventricular zone do not express Hes5-GFP. Quantitative
analysis showed that Hes5 expression correlates better with neural stem cell
potential than expression of the related gene Hes1. Thus, Notch activity through 
Hes5 identifies multipotent progenitors with stem cell properties and subdivides 
the different progenitors into defined pools.

PMID: 17331197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Neurochem. 2007 Mar;100(6):1531-42. Epub 2007 Jan 15.

Serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase1 enhances contextual fear memory
formation through down-regulation of the expression of Hes5.

Lee CT(1), Ma YL, Lee EH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase plays an
important role in memory formation and directly phosphorylates serum- and
glucocorticoid-inducible kinase1 (SGK1) at Ser78. In this study, we examined the 
role and mechanism of SGK1 Ser78 activation involved in contextual fear memory
formation in rats. Results revealed that SGK1 Ser78 phosphorylation was increased
30 min, 1 h and 3 h after training. Transient transfection of the dominant
negative mutant of sgk, sgkS78A, to hippocampal neurons impaired, whereas
transfection of the constitutively active sgk, sgkS78D, enhanced fear retention. 
Microarray analysis identified 14 genes that showed more than threefold
alteration in their gene expression in sgkS78A-transfected animals 6 h after
training. One of them is Hairy and Enhancer of split 5 (Hes5). The expression
level of Hes5 is approximately 4.4-fold higher in sgkS78A-transfected animals.
Further analyses revealed that Hes5 level is markedly decreased after training in
control animals, but sgkS78A markedly increased Hes5 level after training. RNA
interference experiment showed that shHes5 dose-dependently enhanced fear
retention, whereas over-expression of Hes5 impaired fear retention. Moreover,
shHes5 at a lower concentration completely blocked the memory-impairing effect of
sgkS78A. These results together suggest that Hes5 negatively regulates contextual
fear memory formation and SGK activation down-regulates Hes5 expression to
enhance fear retention.

PMID: 17241237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Feb 1;313(3):572-87. Epub 2006 Nov 10.

Canonical Wnt signaling transiently stimulates proliferation and enhances
neurogenesis in neonatal neural progenitor cultures.

Hirsch C(1), Campano LM, Wöhrle S, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University
Freiburg Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Canonical Wnt signaling triggers the formation of heterodimeric transcription
factor complexes consisting of beta-catenin and T cell factors, and thereby
controls the execution of specific genetic programs. During the expansion and
neurogenic phases of embryonic neural development canonical Wnt signaling
initially controls proliferation of neural progenitor cells, and later neuronal
differentiation. Whether Wnt growth factors affect neural progenitor cells
postnatally is not known. Therefore, we have analyzed the impact of Wnt signaling
on neural progenitors isolated from cerebral cortices of newborn mice. Expression
profiling of pathway components revealed that these cells are fully equipped to
respond to Wnt signals. However, Wnt pathway activation affected only a subset of
neonatal progenitors and elicited a limited increase in proliferation and
neuronal differentiation in distinct subsets of cells. Moreover, Wnt pathway
activation only transiently stimulated S-phase entry but did not support
long-term proliferation of progenitor cultures. The dampened nature of the Wnt
response correlates with the predominant expression of inhibitory pathway
components and the rapid actuation of negative feedback mechanisms.
Interestingly, in differentiating cell cultures activation of canonical Wnt
signaling reduced Hes1 and Hes5 expression suggesting that during postnatal
neural development, Wnt/beta-catenin signaling enhances neurogenesis from
progenitor cells by interfering with Notch pathway activity.

PMID: 17198701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Neurobiol Aging. 2008 Mar;29(3):452-63. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Epigenetic memory loss in aging oligodendrocytes in the corpus callosum.

Shen S(1), Liu A, Li J, Wolubah C, Casaccia-Bonnefil P.

Author information: 
(1)Department Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
UMDNJ, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

In this study, we address the hypothesis that aging modifies the intrinsic
properties of oligodendrocytes, the myelin-forming cells of the brain. According 
to our model, an "epigenetic memory" is stored in the chromatin of the
oligodendrocyte lineage cells and is responsible for the maintenance of a mature 
phenotype, characterized by low levels of expression of transcriptional
inhibitors. We report here an age-related decline of histone deacetylation and
methylation, the molecular mechanisms responsible for the establishment and
maintenance of this "epigenetic memory" of the differentiated state. We further
show that lack of histone methylation and increased acetylation in mature
oligodendrocytes are associated with global changes in gene expression, that
include the re-expression of bHLH inhibitors (i.e. Hes5 and Id4) and precursor
markers (i.e. Sox2). These changes characteristic of the "aging" oligodendrocytes
can be recapitulated in vitro, by treating primary oligodendrocyte cultures with 
histone deacetylase inhibitors. Thus, we conclude that the "epigenetic memory
loss" detected in white matter tracts of older mice induces global changes of
gene expression that modify the intrinsic properties of aged oligodendrocytes and
may functionally modulate the responsiveness of these cells to external stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2323437
PMID: 17182153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Neuron. 2006 Dec 21;52(6):953-68.

The transcription factor NFIA controls the onset of gliogenesis in the developing
spinal cord.

Deneen B(1), Ho R, Lukaszewicz A, Hochstim CJ, Gronostajski RM, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, 1201 East
California Boulevard, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

The mechanisms controlling the transition from neurogenesis to gliogenesis in the
vertebrate CNS are incompletely understood. We identified a family of
transcription factors, called NFI genes, which are induced throughout the spinal 
cord ventricular zone (VZ) concomitantly with the induction of GLAST, an early
marker of gliogenesis. NFIA is both necessary and sufficient for GLAST induction 
in the VZ. Unexpectedly, NFIA is also essential for the continued inhibition of
neurogenesis in VZ progenitors. This function is mediated by the requirement of
NFIA for the expression of HES5, a Notch effector. However, Notch effectors are
unable to promote glial-fate specification in the absence of NFIA. Thus, NFIA
links the abrogation of neurogenesis to a generic program of gliogenesis, in both
astrocyte and oligodendrocyte VZ progenitors. At later stages, NFIA promotes
migration and differentiation of astrocyte precursors, a function that is
antagonized in oligodendrocyte precursors by Olig2.

PMID: 17178400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Jan;19(1):197-201.

WNT antagonist, DKK2, is a Notch signaling target in intestinal stem cells:
augmentation of a negative regulation system for canonical WNT signaling pathway 
by the Notch-DKK2 signaling loop in primates.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Notch and WNT signaling pathways are key components of the stem cell signaling
network. Canonical WNT signaling to intestinal progenitor cells leads to
transcriptional activation of the JAG1 gene, encoding Serrate-type Notch ligand. 
JAG1 then binds to the Notch receptor on adjacent stem cells to induce Notch
receptor proteolyses for the release of Notch intracellular domain (NICD). NICD
is associated with CSL/RBPSUH and Mastermind (MAML1, MAML2, or MAML3) to activate
Notch target genes, such as HES1 and HES5. Although WNT-dependent Notch signaling
activation in intestinal stem cells is clarified, the effects of Notch signaling 
activation on WNT signaling in progenitor cells remain unclear. We searched for
Notch-response element (NRE) in the promoter region of genes encoding secreted
WNT signaling inhibitors, including DKK1, DKK2, DKK3, DKK4, SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP3, 
SFRP4, SFRP5 and WIF1. Double NREs were identified within human DKK2 promoter by 
bioinformatics and human intelligence (Humint). The human DKK2 gene was
characterized as Notch signaling target in intestinal stem cells. Because DKK2 is
a key player in the stem cell signaling network, the DKK2 gene at human
chromosome 4q25 is a candidate tumor suppressor gene inactivated due to
epigenetic silencing and/or deletion. The chimpanzee DKK2 gene was identified
within the NW_105990.1 genome sequence, while the cow Dkk2 gene was identified
within the AC156664.2 and AC158038.2 genome sequences. Chimpanzee DKK2 and cow
Dkk2 showed 98.5% and 95.8% total-amino-acid identity with human DKK2,
respectively. Double NREs in human DKK2 promoter were conserved in chimpanzee
DKK2 promoter, partially in rat Dkk2 promoter, but not in cow and mouse Dkk2
promoters. The Notch-DKK2 signaling loop, created or potentiated in primates, was
complementary to WNT-DKK1 and BMP-IHH-SFRP1 signaling loops for negative
regulation of canonical WNT signaling pathway. Together, these facts indicate
that DKK2 promoter evolution resulted in the augmentation of a WNT negative
regulation system in primates.

PMID: 17143565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Int J Oncol. 2007 Jan;30(1):247-51.

Notch signaling in gastrointestinal tract (review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Notch signaling is one of key pathways constituting the stem cell signaling
network. DLL1, DLL3, DLL4, JAG1 and JAG2 with DSL domain are typical Notch
ligands, while DNER, F3/Contactin and NB-3 without DSL domain are atypical Notch 
ligands. Notch-ligand binding to NOTCH1, NOTCH2, NOTCH3 or NOTCH4 receptor
induces the receptor proteolysis by metalloprotease and gamma-secretase to
release Notch intracellular domain (NICD). Typical Notch ligands transduce
signals to the CSL-NICD-Mastermind complex for the maintenance of stem or
progenitor (transit-amplifying) cells through transcriptional activation of HES1,
HES5, HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL genes, and also to the NF-kappaB-NICD complex for
the augmentation of NF-kappaB signaling. Atypical Notch ligands transduce signals
to the CSL-NICD-Deltex complex for the differentiation of progenitor cells
through MAG transcriptional activation. Notch signals are transduced to the
canonical pathway (CSL-NICD-Mastermind signaling cascade) or the non-canonical
pathway (NF-kappaB-NICD and CSL-NICD-Deltex signaling cascades) based on the
expression profile of Notch ligands, Notch receptors, and Notch signaling
modifiers. Canonical Notch signaling is activated in the stem or progenitor
domain of gastrointestinal epithelium, such as basal layer in esophagus and lower
part of the crypt in colon. Notch signaling to inhibit secretory cell
differentiation is oncogenic in gastric cancer and colorectal cancer, while Notch
signaling to promote keratinocyte differentiation is anti-oncogenic in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), epigenetic
change, and genetic alteration of genes encoding Notch signaling-associated
molecules will be utilized as biomarkers for gastrointestinal cancer.
gamma-Secretase inhibitors, functioning as Notch signaling inhibitors, will be
applied as anti-cancer drugs for gastric cancer and colorectal cancer.

PMID: 17143535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cell Tissue Res. 2007 Mar;327(3):539-51. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Notch and HES5 are regulated during human cartilage differentiation.

Karlsson C(1), Jonsson M, Asp J, Brantsing C, Kageyama R, Lindahl A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Laboratory Medicine, Department of Clinical Chemistry and
Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

The molecular mechanisms of cartilage differentiation are poorly understood. In a
variety of tissues other than cartilage, members of the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) family of transcription factors have been demonstrated to play critical
roles in differentiation. We have characterized the human bHLH gene HES5 and
investigated its role during chondrogenesis. Blockage of the Notch signaling
pathway with a gamma-secretase inhibitor has demonstrated that the human HES5
gene is a downstream marker of Notch signaling in articular chondrocytes. Markers
for the Notch signaling pathway significantly decrease during cartilage
differentiation in vitro. Cell proliferation assayed by using BrdU has revealed
that blockage of Notch signaling is associated with significantly decreased
proliferation. Northern blot and reverse transcription/polymerase chain reaction 
of a panel of various tissues have shown that HES5 is transcribed as a 5.4-kb
mRNA that is ubiquitously expressed in diverse fetal and adult tissues. Articular
cartilage from HES5(-/-) and wild-type mice has been analyzed by using various
histological stains. No differences have been detected between the wild-type and 
HES5(-/-) mice. Our data thus indicate that the human HES5 gene is coupled to the
Notch receptor family, that expression of Notch markers (including HES5)
decreases during cartilage differentiation, and that the blockage of Notch
signaling is associated with significantly decreased cell proliferation.

PMID: 17093926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Neurochem. 2006 Nov;99(3):989-99.

TAp73 isoforms antagonize Notch signalling in SH-SY5Y neuroblastomas and in
primary neurones.

Hooper C(1), Tavassoli M, Chapple JP, Uwanogho D, Goodyear R, Melino G, Lovestone
S, Killick R.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, MRC Centre for Neurodegenerative Research, Institute of
Psychiatry, London, UK.

p73, like Notch, has been implicated in neurodevelopment and in the maintenance
of the mature central nervous system. In this study, by the use of reporter-gene 
assays, we demonstrate that C-promoter binding factor-1 (CBF-1)-dependent gene
transcription driven by the Notch-1 intracellular domain (N1(ICD)) is potently
antagonized by exogenously expressed transactivating (TA) p73 splice variants in 
SH-SY5Y neuroblastomas and in primary neurones. Time course analysis indicated
that the inhibitory effects of TAp73 are direct and are not mediated via the
product of a downstream target gene. We found that endogenous TAp73 stabilized by
either c-Abl or cisplatin treatment also potently antagonized
N1(ICD)/CBF-1-dependent gene transcription. Furthermore, western blotting
revealed that exogenous TAp73 suppressed endogenous hairy and enhancer of split-1
(HES-1) protein levels and antagonized the increase in HES-1 protein induced by
exogenous N1(ICD) expression. Evidence of a direct physical interaction between
N1(ICD) and TAp73alpha was demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation. Using Notch
deletion constructs, we demonstrate that TAp73alpha binds the N1(ICD) in a region
C-terminal of aa 2094. Interestingly, DeltaNp73alpha and TAp73alpha(R292H) also
co-purified with N1(ICD), but neither inhibited N1(ICD)/CBF-1-dependent
transcription. This suggests that an intact transactivation (TA) domain and the
ability to bind DNA are necessary for TAp73 to antagonize Notch signalling.
Finally we found that TAp73alpha reversed the N1(ICD)-mediated repression of
retinoic acid-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastomas, providing
functional evidence for an inhibitory effect of TAp73alpha on notch signalling.
Collectively, these findings may have ramifications for neurodevelopment,
neurodegeneration and oncogenesis.

PMID: 17076661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Orthop Res. 2007 Feb;25(2):152-63.

Differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells and articular chondrocytes:
analysis of chondrogenic potential and expression pattern of
differentiation-related transcription factors.

Karlsson C(1), Brantsing C, Svensson T, Brisby H, Asp J, Tallheden T, Lindahl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg University, Göteborg, Sweden.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are a candidate for replacing chondrocytes in
cell-based repair of cartilage lesions. However, it has not been clarified if
these cells can acquire the hyaline phenotype, and whether chondrocytes and MSCs 
show the same expression patterns of critical control genes in development. In
order to study this, articular chondrocytes and iliac crest derived MSCs were
allowed to differentiate in pellet mass cultures. Gene expression of markers for 
the cartilage phenotype, helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors, and
chondrogenic transcription factors were analyzed by real-time PCR. Matrix
production was assayed using biochemical analysis for hydroxyproline,
glycosaminoglycans, and immunohistochemistry for collagen types I and II.
Significantly decreased expression of collagen type I was accompanied by
increased expression of collagen types IIA and IIB during differentiation of
chondrocytes, indicating differentiation towards a hyaline phenotype.
Chondrogenesis in MSCs on the other hand resulted in up-regulation of collagen
types I, IIA, IIB, and X, demonstrating differentiation towards cartilage of a
mixed phenotype. Expression of HES1 increased significantly during chondrogenesis
in chondrocytes while expression in MSCs was maintained at a low level. The HLH
gene HES5 on the other hand was only detected in chondrocytes. Expression of ID1 
decreased significantly in chondrocytes while the opposite was seen in MSCs.
These findings suggest that chondrocytes and MSCs differentiated and formed
different subtypes of cartilage, the hyaline and a mixed cartilage phenotype,
respectively. Differentially regulated HLH genes indicated the possibility for
HLH proteins in regulating chondrogenic differentiation. This information is
important to understand the potential use of MSCs in cartilage repair.

PMID: 17072841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Chin J Physiol. 2006 Aug 31;49(4):182-91.

Comparative proteomic analysis of human leukemic cells with and without inducible
expression of leukemogenic AML1-ETO protein.

Zhang L(1), Wang LS, Xu Y, Xia L, Chen WL, Zheng Y, Chen GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and
Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao-Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, P. R. China.

AML1-ETO is a leukemogenic fusion protein generated by chromosomal translocation 
t(8; 21) (q22; q22), one of the most frequent chromosomal abnormalities in acute 
myeloid leukemia. The fusion protein has been shown to present dichotomous
functions on leukemic cells: growth arrest versus differentiation block. However,
their precise molecular mechanisms are not completely clear. In this work, we try
to explore potential AML1-ETO-targeted proteins through comparing two-dimensional
electrophoresis (2DE)-based global protein expression profiles of leukemic U937
cells with and without inducible expression of AML1-ETO. As a result, we
identified 14 unique proteins deregulated in AML1-ETO-carrying leukemic cells,
including 3 up-regulated such as hairy and enhancer of split 5 (HES5) and 11
down-regulated such as MAT1 (menage a trois-1) and mitogen-activated protein
kinase organizer 1 (MORG1). These proteins were widely involved in stem cell
maintenance, cell cycle, signal transduction and transcription. The further
investigation on their roles in leukemic cells will uncover new clues to
understanding leukemogenic effects of AML1-ETO fusion protein.

PMID: 17058450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Neurosci Res. 2006 Dec;84(8):1682-91.

Effect of neurosphere size on the growth rate of human neural stem/progenitor
cells.

Mori H(1), Ninomiya K, Kino-oka M, Shofuda T, Islam MO, Yamasaki M, Okano H, Taya
M, Kanemura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Research, Osaka National Hospital, National Hospital
Organization, Osaka, Japan.

Neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) proliferate as aggregates in vitro, but the 
mechanism of aggregation is not fully understood. Here, we report that
aggregation promotes the proliferation of NSPCs. We found that the proliferation 
rate was linear and depended on the size of the aggregate; that is, the
population doubling time of the NSPCs gradually decreased as the diameter
approached 250 micro m and flattened to a nearly constant value beyond this
diameter. Given this finding, and with the intent of enhancing the efficiency of 
human NSPC expansion, we induced the NSPCs to form aggregates close to 250 micro 
m in diameter quickly by culturing them in plates with U-bottomed wells. The
NSPCs formed aggregates effectively in the U-bottomed wells, with cell numbers
approximately 1.5 times greater than those in the aggregates that formed
spontaneously in flat-bottomed wells. In addition, this effect of aggregation
involved cell-cell signaling molecules of the Notch1 pathway. In the U-bottomed
wells, Hes1 and Hes5, which are target genes of the Notch signal, were expressed 
at higher levels than in the control, flat-bottomed wells. The amount of cleaved 
Notch1 was also higher in the cells cultured in the U-bottomed wells. The
addition of gamma-secretase inhibitor, which blocks Notch signaling, suppressed
cell proliferation in the U-bottomed wells. These results suggest that the
three-dimensional architecture of NSPC aggregates would create a microenvironment
that promotes the proliferation of human NSPCs.

PMID: 17044035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. EMBO J. 2006 Oct 18;25(20):4833-42. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

A molecular insight of Hes5-dependent inhibition of myelin gene expression: old
partners and new players.

Liu A(1), Li J, Marin-Husstege M, Kageyama R, Fan Y, Gelinas C, Casaccia-Bonnefil
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, UMDNJ, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

This study identifies novel mechanisms of Hes5 function in developmental
myelination. We report here upregulation of myelin gene expression in Hes5-/-
mice compared to wild-type siblings and downregulation in overexpressing
progenitors. This effect was only partially explained by the ability to regulate 
the levels of Mash1 and bind to N boxes in myelin promoters, as deletion of the
DNA-binding domain of Hes5 did not suppress its inhibitory role on myelin gene
expression. Novel mechanisms of Hes5 function in the oligodendrocyte lineage
include the regulation of feedback loops with the cell-specific transcriptional
activator Sox10. In progenitors with low levels of Sox10, Hes5 further decreases 
the bioavailability of this protein by transcriptional inhibition and direct
sequestration of this activator. Increasing levels of Sox10 in progenitors, in
turn, bind to Hes5 and titrate out its inhibitory effect by sequestration and
displacement of the repressive complexes from myelin promoters. Thus,
Hes5-dependent modulation of myelin gene expression involves old players (i.e.
Mash1) and novel mechanisms of transcriptional regulation that include
cell-specific regulatory loops with transcriptional activators (i.e. Sox10).

PMCID: PMC1618116
PMID: 17006542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Stem Cells. 2007 Jan;25(1):39-45. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Production of green fluorescent protein transgenic embryonic stem cells using the
GENSAT bacterial artificial chromosome library.

Tomishima MJ(1), Hadjantonakis AK, Gong S, Studer L.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10021, USA. tomishim@mskcc.org

Transgenic green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter embryonic stem (ES) cells are
powerful tools for studying gene regulation and lineage choice during
development. Here we present a rapid method for the generation of ES cells
expressing GFP under the control of selected genes. Bacterial artificial
chromosomes (BACs) from a previously constructed GFP transcriptional fusion
library (Gene Expression Nervous System Atlas [GENSAT]) were modified for use in 
ES cells, and multiple BAC transgenic ES cell lines were generated. Specific GFP 
expression in transgenic cell lines was confirmed during neural differentiation
marking neural stem cells, neuronal precursors, and glial progeny by Hes5, Dll1, 
and GFAP, respectively. GFP was dynamically regulated in ES cell progeny in
response to soluble factors that inhibit Notch signaling and a factor that
directs astroglial fate choice. Our protocols provide a simple and efficient
strategy to utilize the whole GENSAT BAC library to create hundreds of novel
fluorescent cell lines for use in ES cell biology.

PMCID: PMC2881625
PMID: 16990587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Dec;20(12):3293-307. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

The notch signaling system is present in the postnatal pituitary: marked
expression and regulatory activity in the newly discovered side population.

Chen J(1), Crabbe A, Van Duppen V, Vankelecom H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Pharmacology, Department of Molecular Cell Biology,
University of Leuven (K.U.Leuven), Campus Gasthuisberg O&N1, Herestraat 49,
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Recently, we discovered in the adult anterior pituitary a subset of cells with
side population (SP) phenotype, enriched for expression of stem/progenitor
cell-associated factors like Sca1, and of Notch1 and Hes (hairy and enhancer of
split) 1, components of the classically developmental Notch pathway. In the
present study, we elaborated the expression of the Notch signaling system in the 
postnatal pituitary, and examined its functional significance within the SP
compartment. Using RT-PCR, we detected in the anterior pituitary of adult mouse
the expression of all four vertebrate Notch receptors, as well as of Hes1, 5, and
6, key downstream targets and effectors of Notch. All Notch receptors, Hes1 and
Hes5 were measured at higher mRNA levels in the Sca1(high) SP than in the main
population (MP) of differentiated hormonal cells. In contrast, Hes6, known as an 
inhibitor of Hes1, was more abundant in the MP. Cells with SP phenotype, enriched
for Sca1(high) expression, were detected throughout postnatal life. Their
proportion was higher in immature mice, but did not change from adult (8 wk old) 
to much older age (1 yr old). Notch pathway expression was higher in the
Sca1(high) SP than in the MP at all postnatal ages analyzed. Functional
implication of Notch signaling in the SP was investigated in reaggregate cultures
of adult mouse anterior pituitary cells. Treatment with the gamma-secretase
inhibitor DAPT down-regulated Notch activity and reduced the proportion of SP
cells. Activation of Notch signaling with the conserved DSL motif of Notch
ligands, or with a soluble ligand, caused a rise in SP cell number, at least in
part due to a proliferative effect. The SP also expanded in proportion when
aggregates were treated with leukemia-inhibitory factor, basic fibroblast growth 
factor, and epidermal growth factor, again at least partly accounted for by a
mitogenic action. These intrapituitary growth factors all activated Notch
signaling, and DAPT abrogated the expansion of the SP by basic fibroblast growth 
factor and leukemia-inhibitory factor, thus exposing a possible cross talk. In
conclusion, we show that the Notch pathway, typically situated in embryogenesis, 
is also present and active in the postnatal pituitary, that it is particularly
expressed within the SP independent of age, and that it plays a role in the
regulation of SP abundance. Whether our data indicate that Notch regulates
renewal and fate decisions of putative stem/progenitor cells within the pituitary
SP as found in other tissues, remains open for further exploration.

PMID: 16959876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Development. 2006 Sep;133(18):3683-93. Epub 2006 Aug 16.

COUP-TFI controls Notch regulation of hair cell and support cell differentiation.

Tang LS(1), Alger HM, Pereira FA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck
Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The orphan nuclear receptor COUP-TFI (Nr2f1) regulates many aspects of mammalian 
development, but little is known about its role in cochlear hair cell and
Deiter's support cell development. The COUP-TFI knockout (COUP-TFI(-/-)) has a
significant increase in hair cell (HC) number in the mid-to-apical turns. The
total number of hair cells is not increased over wild type, perhaps because of
displaced hair cells and a shortened cochlear duct. This implicates a defect of
convergent-extension in the COUP-TFI(-/-) duct. In addition, excess proliferation
in the COUP-TFI(-/-) sensory epithelium indicates that the origin of the extra
HCs in the apex is complex. Because loss-of-function studies of Notch signaling
components have similar phenotypes, we investigated Notch regulation of hair cell
differentiation in COUP-TFI(-/-) mice and confirmed misregulation of Notch
signaling components, including Jag1, Hes5 and in a manner consistent with
reduced Notch signaling, and correlated with increases in hair cell and support
cell differentiation. The disruption of Notch signaling by a gamma-secretase
inhibitor in an in vitro organ culture system of wild-type cochleae resulted in a
reduction in expression of the Notch target gene Hes5 and an increase in hair
cell differentiation. Importantly, inhibition of Notch activity resulted in a
greater increase in hair cell differentiation in COUP-TFI(-/-) cochlear cultures 
than in wild-type cultures, suggesting a hypersensitivity to Notch inactivation
in COUP-TFI(-/-) cochlea, particularly at the apical turn. Thus, we present
evidence that reduced Notch signaling contributes to increases in hair cell and
support cell differentiation in COUP-TFI(-/-) mice, and suggest that COUP-TFI is 
required for Notch regulation of hair cell and support cell differentiation.

PMID: 16914494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Neurochem. 2006 Jul;98(2):459-70.

Overexpression of SOCS3 inhibits astrogliogenesis and promotes maintenance of
neural stem cells.

Cao F(1), Hata R, Zhu P, Ma YJ, Tanaka J, Hanakawa Y, Hashimoto K, Niinobe M,
Yoshikawa K, Sakanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Histology, Ehime Graduate University School of
Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan.

To investigate the effects of suppressors of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) on
neural stem cell fate, stem cells were infected with an adenoviral vector
expressing SOCS3. Three days later, western blot analysis and immunocytochemical 
analysis revealed that the protein level of MAP2 and the number of MAP2-positive 
cells were significantly increased in SOCS3-transfected cells, whereas the
protein level of GFAP and the number of GFAP-positive cells were significantly
decreased. Furthermore, promoter assay revealed a significant reduction in the
transcriptional level of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(Stat3) in the transfected cells. In addition, the mRNA levels of Notch family
member (notch1) and inhibitory basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors (hes5 and
id3) were significantly up-regulated 1 day after overexpression of SOCS3. Three
days after transfection, the mRNA level of hes5 was significantly decreased,
whereas that of notch1 was still up-regulated. Moreover, all of SOCS3-positive
cells expressed Nestin protein but did not express MAP2 or GFAP proteins. These
data indicate that overexpression of SOCS3 induced neurogenesis and inhibited
astrogliogenesis in neural stem cells. Our data also show that SOCS3 promoted
maintenance of neural stem cells.

PMID: 16805839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i132-7.

Notch1 expression is spatiotemporally correlated with neurogenesis and negatively
regulated by Notch1-independent Hes genes in the developing nervous system.

Hatakeyama J(1), Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

In the developing nervous system, neural stem cells initially proliferate by a
symmetric cell division and then undergo an asymmetric cell division, which makes
one neuron (or neuronal precursor) and one progenitor. It remains to be
determined how the switch from the symmetric to asymmetric cell divisions is
regulated. Here, we found that Notch1 is expressed in the regions where
neurogenesis occurs actively but not in the regions where neurogenesis does not
yet occur. Furthermore, in Hes-mutant mice where neurogenesis is accelerated,
Notch1 expression is also accelerated. Thus, Notch1 expression is negatively
regulated by Hes genes and is spatiotemporally correlated with neurogenesis,
suggesting that the neural stem cells that undergo asymmetric cell divisions
express Notch1, whereas those that undergo symmetric cell divisions do not. We
propose that initiation of Notch1 expression is one of the key features for
switch from the symmetric to asymmetric cell divisions of neural stem cells and
that this process is negatively regulated by Notch1-independent Hes genes.

PMID: 16766699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Development. 2006 Jul;133(13):2467-76. Epub 2006 May 25.

Persistent and high levels of Hes1 expression regulate boundary formation in the 
developing central nervous system.

Baek JH(1), Hatakeyama J, Sakamoto S, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

The developing central nervous system is partitioned into compartments by
boundary cells, which have different properties than compartment cells, such as
forming neuron-free zones, proliferating more slowly and acting as organizing
centers. We now report that in mice the bHLH factor Hes1 is persistently
expressed at high levels by boundary cells but at variable levels by non-boundary
cells. Expression levels of Hes1 display an inverse correlation to those of the
proneural bHLH factor Mash1, suggesting that downregulation of Hes1 leads to
upregulation of Mash1 in non-boundary regions, whereas persistent and high Hes1
expression constitutively represses Mash1 in boundary regions. In agreement with 
this notion, in the absence of Hes1 and its related genes Hes3 and Hes5,
proneural bHLH genes are ectopically expressed in boundaries, resulting in
ectopic neurogenesis and disruption of the organizing centers. Conversely,
persistent Hes1 expression in neural progenitors prepared from compartment
regions blocks neurogenesis and reduces cell proliferation rates. These results
indicate that the mode of Hes1 expression is different between boundary and
non-boundary cells, and that persistent and high levels of Hes1 expression
constitutively repress proneural bHLH gene expression and reduce cell
proliferation rates, thereby forming boundaries that act as the organizing
centers.

PMID: 16728479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Acta Otolaryngol. 2006 May;126(5):498-502.

Expression of Notch1 and Hes5 in the developing olfactory epithelium.

Orita Y(1), Nagatsuka H, Tsujigiwa H, Yoshinobu J, Maeda Y, Kakiuchi M, Orita S, 
Takeuchi A, Takeda Y, Fukushima K, Nagai N, Nishizaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Okayama School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Okayama, Japan. y-orita@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp

CONCLUSION: Notch signaling pathway may play an important role in the development
of the olfactory epithelium (OE). Objectives. To elucidate whether the Notch
signaling pathway mediates the developmental processes in the developing OE.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of Notch1 and Hes5 in the developing OE of 
mice with ages ranging from embryonic day (E) 11 to postnatal day (PN) 14 was
examined.
RESULTS: As detected by in situ hybridization, Notch1 was expressed in scattered 
cells located in the basal portion of the embryonic OE and later in the cell
layer adjacent to the basal lamina from E11 to PN14. Hes5 was expressed in
scattered cells located in the basal portion of the embryonic OE from E11.
However, at the late embryonic stage, the number of Hes5-positive cells decreased
and after birth distinct Hes5-positive cells were not observed in the OE.

PMID: 16698699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Mol Neurosci. 2006;28(2):211-29.

Math1 target genes are enriched with evolutionarily conserved clustered E-box
binding sites.

Krizhanovsky V(1), Soreq L, Kliminski V, Ben-Arie N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Animal Biology, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Math1 and its orthologs
are fundamental for proper development of various neuronal subpopulations, such
as cerebellar granule cells, D1 interneurons in the spinal cord, and inner ear
hair cells. Although crucial for neurogenesis, the mechanisms by which Math1
specifically recognizes its direct targets are not fully understood. To search
for direct and indirect target genes and signaling pathways controlled by Math1, 
we analyzed the effect of Math1 knockout on the expression profile of multiple
genes in the embryonic cerebellum. Eighteen differentially expressed transcripts 
were identified and found to belong to a few developmentally-related functional
groups, such as transcriptional regulation, proliferation, organogenesis, signal 
transduction, and apoptosis. Importantly, genomic analysis of E-box motifs has
identified a significant enrichment and clustering of MATH1-binding E-boxes only 
in a subset of differentially expressed genes (Nr2f6, Hras1, and Hes5) in both
mouse and man. Moreover, Math1 was shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) 
to bind, and by a luciferase reporter assay to activate transcription, of an
upstream genomic fragment of Nr2f6. Taken together, we propose that when putative
direct targets of Math1 are being selected for detailed studies on DNA microarray
hybridization, the enrichment and clustering of binding E-boxes in multiple
species may be helpful criteria. Our findings may be useful to the study of other
bHLH transcription factors, many of which control the development of the nervous 
system.

PMID: 16679559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):52-66. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

Role of Sox2 in the development of the mouse neocortex.

Bani-Yaghoub M(1), Tremblay RG, Lei JX, Zhang D, Zurakowski B, Sandhu JK, Smith
B, Ribecco-Lutkiewicz M, Kennedy J, Walker PR, Sikorska M.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenesis and Brain Repair Group, Neurobiology Program, Institute for
Biological Sciences, National Research Council of Canada, 1200 Montreal Rd.,
Bldg. M-54, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1A 0R6. mahmud.bani@nrc.ca

The mammalian neocortex is established from neural stem and progenitor cells that
utilize specific transcriptional and environmental factors to create functional
neurons and astrocytes. Here, we examined the mechanism of Sox2 action during
neocortical neurogenesis and gliogenesis. We established a robust Sox2 expression
in neural stem and progenitor cells within the ventricular zone, which persisted 
until the cells exited the cell cycle. Overexpression of constitutively active
Sox2 in neural progenitors resulted in upregulation of Notch1, recombination
signal-sequence binding protein-J (RBP-J) and hairy enhancer of split 5 (Hes5)
transcripts and the Sox2 high mobility group (HMG) domain seemed sufficient to
confer these effects. While Sox2 overexpression permitted the differentiation of 
progenitors into astroglia, it inhibited neurogenesis, unless the Notch pathway
was blocked. Moreover, neuronal precursors engaged a serine protease(s) to
eliminate the overexpressed Sox2 protein and relieve the repression of
neurogenesis. Glial precursors and differentiated astrocytes, on the other hand, 
maintained Sox2 expression until they reached a quiescent state. Sox2 expression 
was re-activated by signals that triggered astrocytic proliferation (i.e.,
injury, mitogenic and gliogenic factors). Taken together, Sox2 appears to act
upstream of the Notch signaling pathway to maintain the cell proliferative
potential and to ensure the generation of sufficient cell numbers and phenotypes 
in the developing neocortex.

PMID: 16631155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Neurosci. 2006 Apr 19;26(16):4359-69.

Neural stem/progenitor cells participate in the regenerative response to
perinatal hypoxia/ischemia.

Felling RJ(1), Snyder MJ, Romanko MJ, Rothstein RP, Ziegler AN, Yang Z, Givogri
MI, Bongarzone ER, Levison SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Perinatal hypoxia/ischemia (H/I) is the leading cause of neurologic injury
resulting from birth complications. Recent advances in critical care have
dramatically improved the survival rate of infants suffering this insult, but
approximately 50% of survivors will develop neurologic sequelae such as cerebral 
palsy, epilepsy or cognitive deficits. Here we demonstrate that tripotential
neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPs) participate in the regenerative response to
perinatal H/I as their numbers increase 100% by 3 d and that they alter their
intrinsic properties to divide using expansive symmetrical cell divisions. We
further show that production of new striatal neurons follows the expansion of
NSPs. Increased proliferation within the NSP niche occurs at 2 d after perinatal 
H/I, and the proliferating cells express nestin. Of those stem-cell related genes
that change, the membrane receptors Notch1, gp-130, and the epidermal growth
factor receptor, as well as the downstream transcription factor Hes5, which
stimulate NSP proliferation and regulate stem cellness are induced before NSP
expansion. The mechanisms for the reactive expansion of the NSPs reported here
reveal potential therapeutic targets that could be exploited to amplify this
response, thus enabling endogenous precursors to restore a normal pattern of
brain development after perinatal H/I.

PMID: 16624956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Apr;17(4):681-5.

Notch ligand, JAG1, is evolutionarily conserved target of canonical WNT signaling
pathway in progenitor cells.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

WNT, Notch, FGF, and Hedgehog signaling pathways network together during
embryogenesis, tissue regeneration, and carcinogenesis. Association of Notch
ligands with Notch receptors on neighboring cells leads to cleavage of Notch
receptors by metalloprotease and gamma-secretase to induce nuclear translocation 
of Notch intracellular domain (NICD). Nuclear complex, consisting of CSL
(RBPSUH), NICD, Mastermind (MAML), p300 and histone acetyltransferase (HAT), then
induces transcriptional activation of Notch target genes, such as HES1, HES5,
HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL. Here, we searched for TCF/LEF-binding site within the 
promoter region of Notch ligand genes, including DLL1, DLL3, DLL4, JAG1 and JAG2.
Because TCF/LEF-binding sites were identified within human JAG1 promoter based on
bioinformatics and human intelligence, comparative genomics analyses on JAG1
orthologs were further performed. Chimpanzee JAG1 gene, consisting of 26 exons,
was identified within NW_120319.1 genome sequence. XM_525264.1 and XM_514517.1
were not the correct coding sequences for chimpanzee JAG1. Chimpanzee JAG1 gene
was found to encode a 1218-amino-acid protein showing 99.5% and 96.2%
total-amino-acid identity with human JAG1 and mouse Jag1, respectively.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that JAG1 orthologs were more conserved than those
of other Notch ligands. JAG1 gene was identified as evolutionarily conserved
target of WNT/beta-catenin signaling pathway based on the conservation of double 
TCF/LEF-binding sites within 5'-promoter region of mammalian JAG1 orthologs.
Human JAG1 mRNA was expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells, neural tissues, lung 
carcinoid, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and also in squamous 
cell carcinoma (SCC) of skin, oral cavity, esophagus, head and neck. JAG1
expression on progenitor cells due to canonical WNT signaling activation induces 
self-renewal of stem cells due to Notch signaling activation. JAG1, functioning
as WNT-dependent Notch signaling activator, is the key molecule maintaining the
homeostasis of stem and progenitor cells.

PMID: 16525728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Diabetologia. 2006 May;49(5):1027-38. Epub 2006 Mar 1.

High glucose alters the expression of genes involved in proliferation and
cell-fate specification of embryonic neural stem cells.

Fu J(1), Tay SS, Ling EA, Dheen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School 
of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maternal diabetes induces neural tube defects during
embryogenesis. Since the neural tube is derived from neural stem cells (NSCs), it
is hypothesised that in diabetic pregnancy neural tube defects result from
altered expression of developmental control genes, leading to abnormal
proliferation and cell-fate choice of NSCs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell viability, proliferation index and apoptosis of NSCs 
and differentiated cells from mice exposed to physiological or high glucose
concentration medium were examined by a tetrazolium salt assay,
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation, terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labelling and immunocytochemistry. Expression 
of developmental genes, including sonic hedgehog (Shh), bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (Bmp4), neurogenin 1/2 (Neurog1/2), achaete-scute complex-like 1
(Ascl1), oligodendrocyte transcription factor 1 (Olig1), oligodendrocyte lineage 
transcription factor 2 (Olig2), hairy and enhancer of split 1/5 (Hes1/5) and
delta-like 1 (Dll1), was analysed by real-time RT-PCR. Proliferation index and
neuronal specification in the forebrain of embryos at embryonic day 11.5 were
examined histologically.
RESULTS: High glucose decreased the proliferation of NSCs and differentiated
cells. The incidence of apoptosis was increased in NSCs treated with high
glucose, but not in the differentiated cells. High glucose also accelerated
neuronal and glial differentiation from NSCs. The decreased proliferation index
and early differentiation of neurons were evident in the telencephalon of embryos
derived from diabetic mice. Exposure to high glucose altered the mRNA expression 
levels of Shh, Bmp4, Neurog1/2, Ascl1, Hes1, Dll1 and Olig1 in NSCs and Shh,
Dll1, Neurog1/2 and Hes5 in differentiated cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The changes in proliferation and differentiation of
NSCs exposed to high glucose are associated with altered expression of genes that
are involved in cell-cycle progression and cell-fate specification during
neurulation. These changes may form the basis for the defective neural tube
patterning observed in embryos of diabetic pregnancies.

PMID: 16508779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Dev Neurosci. 2006;28(1-2):128-41.

Notch activity is downregulated just prior to retinal ganglion cell
differentiation.

Nelson BR(1), Gumuscu B, Hartman BH, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway is important at several stages of retinal development
including the differentiation of retinal ganglion cells and Muller glia. The
downstream effectors of Notch signaling, Hes1 and Hes5, have been shown to be
critical in the retina as well. While Notch activity directly regulates Hes1 and 
Hes5 elsewhere in the nervous system, it has been unclear whether Hes1 and/or
Hes5 are directly regulated by Notch activity in the developing retina. Here, we 
report that both Hes1 and Hes5 are directly regulated by Notch activity during
retinal development. Using fluorescence-based Hes1 and Hes5 reporter constructs, 
we can monitor Notch activity in progenitor cells in the intact retina, and we
find that Notch activity is downregulated just prior to retinal ganglion cell
differentiation.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16508310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Dev Neurosci. 2006;28(1-2):102-17.

Notch1 signaling influences v2 interneuron and motor neuron development in the
spinal cord.

Yang X(1), Tomita T, Wines-Samuelson M, Beglopoulos V, Tansey MG, Kopan R, Shen
J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Program in
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway plays a variety of roles in cell fate decisions
during development. Previous studies have shown that reduced Notch signaling
results in premature differentiation of neural progenitor cells, while increased 
Notch activities promote apoptotic death of neural progenitor cells in the
developing brain. Whether Notch signaling is involved in the specification of
neuronal subtypes is unclear. Here we examine the role of Notch1 in the
development of neuronal subtypes in the spinal cord using conditional knockout
(cKO) mice lacking Notch1 specifically in neural progenitor cells. Notch1
inactivation results in accelerated neuronal differentiation in the ventral
spinal cord and gradual disappearance of the ventral central canal. These changes
are accompanied by reduced expression of Hes1 and Hes5 and increased expression
of Mash1 and Neurogenin 1 and 2. Using markers (Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Olig2, Pax6 and
Dbx1) for one or multiple progenitor cell types, we found reductions of all
subtypes of progenitor cells in the ventral spinal cord of Notch1 cKO mice.
Similarly, using markers (Islet1/2, Lim3, Sim1, Chox10, En1 and Evx1/2) specific 
for motor neurons and distinct classes of interneurons, we found increases in the
number of V0-2 interneurons in the ventral spinal cord of Notch1 cKO mice.
Specifically, the number of Lim3+/Chox10+ V2 interneurons is markedly increased
while the number of Lim3+/Islet+motor neurons is decreased in the Notch1 cKO
spinal cord, suggesting that V2 interneurons are generated at the expense of
motor neurons in the absence of Notch1. These results provide support for a role 
of Notch1 in neuronal subtype specification in the ventral spinal cord.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16508308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Dev Neurosci. 2006;28(1-2):92-101.

Hes1 and Hes5 regulate the development of the cranial and spinal nerve systems.

Hatakeyama J(1), Sakamoto S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix genes Hes1 and Hes5, known Notch effectors, regulate
the maintenance of neural stem cells and the development of the central nervous
system (CNS). In the absence of Hes1 and Hes5, the size, shape and
cytoarchitecture of the CNS are severely disorganized, but the development of the
peripheral nervous system remains to be analyzed. Here, we found that in
Hes1;Hes5 double-mutant mice, the cranial and spinal nerve systems are also
severely disorganized. In these mutant mice, axonal projections from the
mesencephalic neurons to the trigeminal (V) ganglion become aberrant and the
proximal parts of the glossopharyngeal (IX) and vagus (X) nerves are fused. The
hypoglossal (XII) nerve is also formed poorly. Furthermore, the dorsal root
ganglia are fused with the spinal cord, and the dorsal and ventral roots of the
spinal nerves are lacking in many segments. These results indicate that Hes1 and 
Hes5 play an important role in the formation of the cranial and spinal nerve
systems.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16508307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Dev Neurosci. 2006;28(1-2):58-69.

Notch3 signaling promotes radial glial/progenitor character in the mammalian
telencephalon.

Dang L(1), Yoon K, Wang M, Gaiano N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway is known to influence cell fate in the developing
mammalian nervous system. Previous work in the mouse telencephalon has shown that
activated Notch1 promotes radial glial and astrocytic character in vivo, and
fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-responsive neural progenitor character in vitro.
In light of studies suggesting that Notch3 can antagonize Notch1, we tested the
effects of activated Notch3 (NICD3) in the mouse telencephalon. Infection of
embryonic day 9.5 telencephalic progenitors in vivo with NICD3 promoted radial
glial/progenitor character embryonically and astrocyte fate postnatally. In
addition, expression of NICD3 in telencephalic progenitors in vitro increased
neurosphere frequency in FGF2, but was incompatible with neurosphere growth in
epidermal growth factor (EGF). Thus, in the developing telencephalon, Notch1 and 
Notch3 function similarly, and may activate similar signaling cascades.
Consistent with this notion, expression of an activated form of the Notch
effector CBF1 (CBF1-VP16), or of the pathway target Hes5 promoted radial
glial/progenitor character in vivo. Interestingly, unlike NICD1 and NICD3,
CBF1-VP16 and Hes5 did not inhibit neurosphere growth in EGF, suggesting that
this effect may be mediated at least in part by CBF1/Hes-independent signaling.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16508304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Neurosci. 2006 Feb 8;26(6):1864-71.

Cell-specific repressor or enhancer activities of Deaf-1 at a serotonin 1A
receptor gene polymorphism.

Czesak M(1), Lemonde S, Peterson EA, Rogaeva A, Albert PR.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute (Neuroscience), Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, K1H 8M5, Canada.

The serotonin-1A (5-HT1A) receptor is the primary somatodendritic autoreceptor
that inhibits the activity of serotonergic raphe neurons and is also expressed in
nonserotonergic cortical and limbic neurons. Alterations in 5-HT1A receptor
levels are implicated in mood disorders, and a functional C(-1019)G 5-HT1A
promoter polymorphism has been associated with depression, suicide, and panic
disorder. We examined the cell-specific activity of identified transcription
factors, human nuclear deformed epidermal autoregulatory factor-1
(DEAF-1)-related (NUDR)/Deaf-1 and Hes5, at the 5-HT1A C(-1019) site. In
serotonergic raphe RN46A cells, Deaf-1 and Hes5 repressed the 5-HT1A receptor
gene at the C(-1019)-allele but not the G(-1019)-allele. However, in
nonserotonergic cells that express 5-HT1A receptors (septal SN48, neuroblastoma
SKN-SH, and neuroblastoma/glioma NG108-15 cells), Deaf-1 enhanced 5-HT1A promoter
activity at the C(-1019)-allele but not the G-allele, whereas Hes5 repressed in
all cell types. The enhancer activity of Deaf-1 was orientation independent and
competed out Hes5 repression. To test whether Deaf-1 activity is intrinsic, the
activity of a Gal4DBD (DNA binding domain)-Deaf-1 fusion protein at a
heterologous Gal4 DNA element was examined. Gal4DBD-Deaf-1 repressed
transcription in RN46A cells but enhanced transcription in SN48 cells, indicating
that these opposite activities are intrinsic to Deaf-1. Repressor or enhancer
activities of Deaf-1 or Gal4DBD-Deaf-1 were blocked by histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A. Thus, the intrinsic activity of Deaf-1 at the 5-HT1A
promoter is opposite in presynaptic versus postsynaptic neuronal cells and
requires deacetylation. Cell-specific regulation by Deaf-1 could underlie
region-specific alterations in 5-HT1A receptor expression in different mood
disorders.

PMID: 16467535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 May;45(5):470-81.

Molecular classification of mucoepidermoid carcinomas-prognostic significance of 
the MECT1-MAML2 fusion oncogene.

Behboudi A(1), Enlund F, Winnes M, Andrén Y, Nordkvist A, Leivo I, Flaberg E,
Szekely L, Mäkitie A, Grenman R, Mark J, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, Göteborg
University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden.

Mucoepidermoid carcinomas (MECs) of the salivary and bronchial glands are
characterized by a recurrent t(11;19)(q21;p13) translocation resulting in a
MECT1-MAML2 fusion in which the CREB-binding domain of the CREB coactivator MECT1
(also known as CRTC1, TORC1 or WAMTP1) is fused to the transactivation domain of 
the Notch coactivator MAML2. To gain further insights into the molecular
pathogenesis of MECs, we cytogenetically and molecularly characterized a series
of 29 MECs. A t(11;19) and/or an MECT1-MAML2 fusion was detected in more than 55%
of the tumors. Several cases with cryptic rearrangements that resulted in gene
fusions were detected. In fusion-negative MECs, the most common aberration was a 
single or multiple trisomies. Western blot and immunohistochemical studies
demonstrated that the MECT1-MAML2 fusion protein was expressed in all
MEC-specific cell types. In addition, cotransfection experiments showed that the 
fusion protein colocalized with CREB in homogeneously distributed nuclear
granules. Analyses of potential downstream targets of the fusion revealed
differential expression of the cAMP/CREB (FLT1 and NR4A2) and Notch (HES1 and
HES5) target genes in fusion-positive and fusion-negative MECs. Moreover,
clinical follow-up studies revealed that fusion-positive patients had a
significantly lower risk of local recurrence, metastases, or tumor-related death 
compared to fusion-negative patients (P = 0.0012). When considering tumor-related
deaths only, the estimated median survival for fusion-positive patients was
greater than 10 years compared to 1.6 years for fusion-negative patients. These
findings suggest that molecularly classifying MECs on the basis of an MECT1-MAML2
fusion is histopathologically and clinically relevant and that the fusion is a
useful marker in predicting the biological behavior of MECs.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 16444749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Apr;6(4):376-82. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Expression of Notch signaling pathway genes in mouse embryos lacking
beta4galactosyltransferase-1.

Chen J(1), Lu L, Shi S, Stanley P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, New York, NY 10461, USA.

A requirement for beta4galactosyltransferase-1 (beta4GalT-1) activity in the
modulation of Notch signaling by the glycosyltransferase Fringe was previously
identified in a mammalian co-culture assay. Notch signaling is necessary for the 
formation of somites in mammals. We therefore investigated the expression of
eleven Notch pathway and somitogenic genes in E9.5 mouse embryos lacking
beta4GalT-1. Four of these genes were altered in expression pattern or expression
level. The Notch target genes Hes5 and Mesp2 were affected to some degree in all 
mutant embryos. The Notch ligand genes Dll1 and Dll3 were reduced or altered in
expression in a significant proportion of mutants. While there were no
differences in the number or morphology of somites in E9.5 B4galt1 null embryos, 
the number of lumbar vertebrae in mutant embryos differed from control
littermates (P < or = 0.01). The subtlety of the in vivo phenotype may be due to 
redundancy since several B4galt genes related to B4galt1 are expressed during
embryogenesis.

PMID: 16412699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Feb;17(2):391-5.

Comparative genomics on HHIP family orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog, FGF, VEGF, and Notch signaling pathways network together for vascular
remodeling during embryogenesis and carcinogenesis. HHIP1 (HHIP) is an endogenous
antagonist for SHH, IHH, and DHH. Here, comparative integromics analyses on HHIP 
family members were performed by using bioinformatics and human intelligence.
HHIP1, HHIP2 (HHIPL1 or KIAA1822) and HHIP3 (HHIPL2 or KIAA1822L) constitute
human HHIP gene family. Rat Hhip1, Hhip2, and Hhip3 genes were identified within 
AC107504.4, AC094820.6, and AC134264.2 genome sequences, respectively.
HHIP-homologous (HIPH) domain with conserved 18 Cys residues was identified as
the novel domain conserved among mammalian HHIP1, HHIP2, and HHIP3 orthologs.
HHIP1 mRNA was expressed in coronary artery endothelial cells, prostate, and
rhabdomyosarcoma. HHIP2 mRNA was expressed in trabecular bone cells. HHIP3 mRNA
was expressed in testis, thyroid gland, osteoarthritic cartilarge, pancreatic
cancer, and lung cancer. Promoters of HHIP family genes were not well conserved
between human and rodents. Although GLI-, CSL-, and HES/HEY-binding sites were
not identified, eleven bHLH-binding sites were identified within human HHIP1
promoter. Expression of HES/HEY family members, including HES1, HES2, HES3, HES4,
HES5, HES6, HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL, in coronary artery endothelial cells was
not detected in silico. Up-regulation of HHIP1 due to down-regulation of
Notch-CSL-HES/HEY signaling cascade repressing bHLH transcription factors results
in down-regulation of the Hedgehog-VEGF-Notch signaling cascade. On the other
hand, down-regulation of HHIP1 due to up-regulation of Notch signaling in
vascular endothelial cells during angiogenesis results in up-regulation of the
Hedgehog-VEGF-Notch signaling cascade. Because HHIP1 is the key molecule for
vascular remodeling, HHIP1 is the pharmacogenomics target in the fields of
oncology and vascular medicine.

PMID: 16391842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):5106-19. Epub 2005 Dec 19.

Target selectivity of vertebrate notch proteins. Collaboration between discrete
domains and CSL-binding site architecture determines activation probability.

Ong CT(1), Cheng HT, Chang LW, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R, Stormo GD, Kopan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Division of Dermatology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

All four mammalian Notch proteins interact with a single DNA-binding protein
(RBP-jkappa), yet they are not equivalent in activating target genes. Parallel
assays of three Notch-responsive promoters in several cell lines revealed that
relative activation strength is dependent on protein module and promoter context 
more than the cellular context. Each Notch protein reads binding site orientation
and distribution on the promoter differently; Notch1 performs extremely well on
paired sites, and Notch3 prefers single sites in conjunction with a proximal zinc
finger transcription factor. Although head-head sites can elicit a Notch response
on their own, use of CBS (CSL binding site) in tail-tail orientation is
context-dependent. Bias for specific DNA elements is achieved by interplay
between the N-terminal RAM (RBP-jkappa-associated molecule/ankyrin region), which
interprets CBS proximity and orientation, and the C-terminal transactivation
domain that interacts specifically with the transcription machinery or nearby
factors. To confirm the prediction that modular design underscores the evolution 
of functional divergence between Notch proteins, we generated a synthetic Notch
protein (Notch1 ankyrin with Notch3 transactivation domain) that displayed
superior signaling strength on the hes5 promoter. Consistent with the prediction 
that "preferred" targets (Hes1) should respond faster and at lower Notch
concentration than other targets, we showed that Hes5-GFP was extinguished fast
and recovered slowly, whereas Hes1-GFP was inhibited late and recovered quickly
after a pulse of DAPT in metanephroi cultures.

PMID: 16365048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. FEBS Lett. 2006 Jan 9;580(1):27-33. Epub 2005 Dec 6.

Expression of Musashi-1 in the rat stomach and changes during mucosal injury and 
restitution.

Nagata H(1), Akiba Y, Suzuki H, Okano H, Hibi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Keio University, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. nagtata@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

Musashi-1 is involved in maintenance of neural stem cells. In the rat stomach, we
found some cells in the luminal compartment of the mucosa that stained positively
for Musashi-1. These cells were distinct from other cells of epithelial lineage, 
except for parietal cells, and coexpressed HES5. The Musashi-1-positive cells
exfoliated after damage, while Musashi-1 expression in neck cells were
upregulated, and proliferating cells diminished before reappearing and increasing
in number thereafter. We conclude that a subpopulation of parietal cells acts as 
a source of Musashi-1, which contributes to rapid re-epithelization by
restoration of stem cells and regulation of cell differentiation.

PMID: 16360154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;40(9):664-6.

[Expression of three kinds of transcription factors in greater epithelial ridge
cells of rat cochlear].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Hu YY, Song W, Guo WW, Zhai SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, General Hospital of Chinese People's
Liberation Army, Beijing 100853, China. zhaisq@plagh.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression of Math1, Hes1 and Hes5 in greater epithelial
ridge (GER) cells of rat cochlear and explore their influence on hair cell
differentiation.
METHODS: Postnatal day 0 (P0), day 1 (P1) , day 3 (P3) day 4 (P4) and day 5 (P5) 
rat cochlear were dissected respectively and then pure GER cells were separated
by a combinatorial approach of attachment and mechanical separation. The total
RNA of GER cells was extracted by Trizol one step method and the expression of
Math1, Hes1 and Hes5 in GER cells was detected with reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Math1 was expressed in P0 - P5 rat GER cells and Hes1 was expressed only
in PO - P3 rat GER cells, while there was no expression of Hes5 in P0 - P5 rat
GER cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Probably only when the expression of Math1 reaches a certain level
can it induce GER cells to differentiate into hair cells. Meanwhile this process 
might controlled by Hes1 to some extent.

PMID: 16335396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Mol Med (Berl). 2006 Jan;84(1):37-45. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

Inhibition of Notch/RBP-J signaling induces hair cell formation in neonate mouse 
cochleas.

Yamamoto N(1), Tanigaki K, Tsuji M, Yabe D, Ito J, Honjo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Mammalian inner ear hair cells in cochleas are believed to be incapable of
regeneration after birth, which hampers treatment of sensorineural hearing
impairment mainly caused by hair cell loss. Sensory epithelia of cochleas are
composed of hair cells and supporting cells, both of which originate from common 
progenitors. Notch/RBP-J signaling is an evolutionally conserved pathway involved
in specification of various cell types in developmental stage and even in some of
postnatal mammalian organs. The specification of hair cell fate from the
progenitors is inhibited by Notch/RBP-J signaling in embryonic inner ears.
However, its function in postnatal inner ears is unknown. We showed that
inhibition of Notch/RBP-J signaling, by either conditional disruption of the
Rbpsuh gene or treatment with a gamma-secretase inhibitor, could give rise to
ectopic hair cells in the supporting cell region in organs of Corti from neonatal
mouse cochleas where hair cells have not been considered to regenerate after
birth. We also showed that down-regulation of Hes5 and up-regulation of Math1
were associated with ectopic hair cell induction. These results suggest that
Notch/RBP-J signaling inhibits supporting cells from differentiation into hair
cells even in postnatal days, implying that inhibitors of Notch/RBP-J signaling
can be used to help regenerating hair cells after birth and thus serve for
potential treatment of intractable sensorineural hearing impairment caused by
hair cell loss without genetical manipulation.

PMID: 16283144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 Jan;31(1):109-22. Epub 2005 Oct 7.

Visualization of embryonic neural stem cells using Hes promoters in transgenic
mice.

Ohtsuka T(1), Imayoshi I, Shimojo H, Nishi E, Kageyama R, McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305-5020, USA. tohtsuka@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

In the central nervous system, neural stem cells proliferate in the ventricular
zone (VZ) and sequentially give rise to both neurons and glial cells in a
temporally and spatially regulated manner, suggesting that stem cells may differ 
from one another in different brain regions and at different developmental
stages. For the purpose of marking and purifying neural stem cells to ascertain
whether such differences exist, we generated transgenic mice using promoters from
Hes genes (pHes1 or pHes5) to drive expression of destabilized enhanced green
fluorescent protein. In the developing brains of these transgenic mice, GFP
expression was restricted to undifferentiated cells in the VZ, which could
asymmetrically produce a Numb-positive neuronal daughter and a GFP-positive
progenitor cell in clonal culture, indicating that they retain the capacity to
self-renew. Our results suggest that pHes-EGFP transgenic mice can be used to
explore similarities and differences among neural stem cells during development.

PMID: 16214363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Exp Eye Res. 2006 Mar;82(3):471-8. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Properties of growth and molecular profiles of rat progenitor cells from ciliary 
epithelium.

Yanagi Y(1), Inoue Y, Kawase Y, Uchida S, Tamaki Y, Araie M, Okochi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Research Institute, International Medical
Center of Japan, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.
yanagi-tky@umin.ac.jp

Recent studies have demonstrated that multipotent retinal stem or progenitor
cells can be isolated from the ciliary epithelium (CE) of the eye using a
neurosphere culture. In this study, we investigated the properties of growth and 
differentiation, and molecular profiles of rat adult ciliary epithelium
(CE)-derived retinal progenitors and forebrain (FB) derived neurospheres. Under
clonogenic culture conditions, we found that the CE-derived neurospheres
contained fewer undifferentiated cells compared with the FB-derived neurospheres,
and that CE-derived neurospheres initially expressed the set of Notch pathway
molecules genes including Notch 1 and Delta 1, HES-1 and HES-5, but partially
lose their expression after passaging. Furthermore, we found that the CE-derived 
neurospheres did not express several markers for in vivo embryonic retinal
progenitors. Additionally, when the eye was divided into four subregions along
its dorsoventral and nasotemporal axes and progenitor cells were obtained from
the subregions, the progenitor cells did not express the subregion specific
transcription factors, suggesting that subregional specificity is not maintained 
in vitro. Together, our results demonstrate that CE-derived progenitor cells may 
have intrinsic limitations in the production of cell types.

PMID: 16198338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Neurobiol. 2005 Dec;65(3):282-93.

Isolation and culture of hair cell progenitors from postnatal rat cochleae.

Zhai S(1), Shi L, Wang BE, Zheng G, Song W, Hu Y, Gao WQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Otolaryngology, General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China.

Cochlear hair cells are a terminally differentiated cell population that is
crucial for hearing. Although recent work suggests that there are hair cell
progenitors in postnatal mammalian cochleae, isolation and culture of pure hair
cell progenitors from a well-defined cochlear area have not been reported. Here
we present an experimental method that allows isolation and culture of hair cell 
progenitors from postnatal rat cochleae. These progenitor cells are isolated from
the lesser epithelial ridge (LER, or outer spiral sulcus cell) area of pre-plated
neonatal rat cochlear segments. They express the same markers as LER cells in
vivo, including ZO1, Islet1, Hes1, and Hes5. When these cells are induced to
express Hath1, they show the potential to differentiate into hair cell-like
cells. Interestingly, these cells can be lifted from monolayer cultures and
maintained in aggregate cultures in which spheres can be formed. Hair cell
progenitors in the spheres display their proliferating capability and express
only epithelial markers. Furthermore, when these spheres are mixed with
dissociated mesenchymal cells prepared from postnatal rat utricular whole mounts,
and replated onto a collagen substratum, the epithelial progenitor cells are able
to differentiate into cells expressing markers of hair cells and supporting cells
in epithelial islands, which mirrors the inner ear sensory epithelium in vivo.
Successful isolation and culture of hair cell progenitors from the mammalian
cochlea will facilitate studies on gene expression profiling and mechanism of
differentiation/regeneration of hair cells, which are crucial for repairing
hearing loss.

PMID: 16155904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Development. 2005 Aug;132(16):3619-30.

The Notch targets Esr1 and Esr10 are differentially regulated in Xenopus neural
precursors.

Lamar E(1), Kintner C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. lamar@salk.edu

The HES family of bHLH repressors plays a key role in regulating the
differentiation of neural precursors in the vertebrate embryo. Members of the HES
gene family are expressed in neural precursors as targets of the Notch signaling 
pathway, but how this occurs in the context of neurogenesis is not known. Here,
we address this issue by identifying enhancers driving Notch-dependent gene
expression of two Hes5-like genes expressed in Xenopus called Esr1 and Esr10.
Using frog transgenesis, we identify enhancer elements driving expression of Esr1
and Esr10 in neural precursors or in response to ectopic expression of the
proneural protein, Xngnr1. Using deletion and mutation analysis, we define motifs
required for enhancer activity of both genes, namely Notch-responsive elements
and, in the case of Esr10, E-box motifs. We find that Esr1 and Esr10 are
differentially regulated both in terms of Notch input and its interaction with
heterologous factors. These studies reveal inputs required for proneural
expression of genes encoding bHLH repressors in the developing vertebrate nervous
system.

PMID: 16077089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mech Dev. 2005 Oct;122(10):1106-17.

Mind bomb1 is a ubiquitin ligase essential for mouse embryonic development and
Notch signaling.

Barsi JC(1), Rajendra R, Wu JI, Artzt K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology (MBB 2.124), Section of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712,
USA.

The Notch-Delta signaling pathway controls many conserved cell determination
events. While the Notch end is fairly well characterized, the Delta end remains
poorly understood. Mind bomb1 (MIB1) is one of two E3 ligases known to
ubiquitinate Delta. We report here that a targeted mutation of Mib1 in mice
results in embryonic lethality by E10.5. Mutants exhibit multiple defects due to 
their inability to modulate Notch signaling. As histopathology revealed a strong 
neurogenic phenotype, this study concentrates on characterizing the Mib1 mutant
by analyzing Notch pathway components in embryonic neuroepithelium prior to
developmental arrest. Premature neurons were observed to undergo apoptosis soon
after differentiation. Aberrant neurogenesis is a direct consequence of lowered
Hes1 and Hes5 expression resulting from the inability to generate Notch1
intracellular domain (NICD1). We conclude that MIB1 activity is required for S3
cleavage of the Notch1 receptor. These results have direct implications for
manipulating the differentiation of neuronal stem cells and provide a putative
target for the modulation of specific tumors.

PMID: 16061358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Eur J Oral Sci. 2005 Aug;113(4):312-7.

Activation of the Notch signaling pathway in response to pulp capping of rat
molars.

Løvschall H(1), Tummers M, Thesleff I, Füchtbauer EM, Poulsen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Pathology, Operative Dentistry and Endodontics, Royal
Dental College, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Aarhus, Denmark.
loev@odont.au.dk

Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved pathway that controls the
developmental choices made by individual cells. Cells communicate via Notch
receptors and their ligands, which direct decisions on the fate of stem cells
according to the states of their neighbors. In this study we explored Notch
signaling after the pulp capping of adult first upper rat molars. The wound was
capped with calcium hydroxide. In situ hybridization revealed an increased
expression of Notch signaling genes on day 1, which showed a tendency to decrease
on day 3. Notch1 increased in the subodontoblast zone and close to the lesion
limited to a few cells. Notch2 increased in pulp stroma surrounded by coronal
odontoblasts. Notch1 and, especially, Notch3 expression increased, corresponding 
to perivascular cell groups. A low increase of ligand expression was observed
near the injury with Delta1 expression along the dentin wall and Jagged1 in the
stroma. Expression of the downstream target, Hes1, was observed along the lesion 
and adjacent dentin walls. Hes5 expression was not observed. The results indicate
that Notch signaling is activated in response to injury and associated with the
differentiation of pulp cells into perivascular cells and odontoblasts. The
findings are consistent with the concept that the Notch pathway controls stem
cell fate during pulp regeneration.

PMID: 16048523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3459-70. Epub 2005 Jul 6.

Mind bomb 1 is essential for generating functional Notch ligands to activate
Notch.

Koo BK(1), Lim HS, Song R, Yoon MJ, Yoon KJ, Moon JS, Kim YW, Kwon MC, Yoo KW,
Kong MP, Lee J, Chitnis AB, Kim CH, Kong YY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and
Technology, Pohang, Kyungbuk, 790-784, South Korea.

The Delta-Notch signaling pathway is an evolutionarily conserved intercellular
signaling mechanism essential for cell fate specification. Mind bomb 1 (Mib1) has
been identified as a ubiquitin ligase that promotes the endocytosis of Delta. We 
now report that mice lacking Mib1 die prior to embryonic day 11.5, with pan-Notch
defects in somitogenesis, neurogenesis, vasculogenesis and cardiogenesis. The
Mib1-/- embryos exhibit reduced expression of Notch target genes Hes5, Hey1, Hey2
and Heyl, with the loss of N1icd generation. Interestingly, in the Mib1-/-
mutants, Dll1 accumulated in the plasma membrane, while it was localized in the
cytoplasm near the nucleus in the wild types, indicating that Mib1 is essential
for the endocytosis of Notch ligand. In accordance with the pan-Notch defects in 
Mib1-/- embryos, Mib1 interacts with and regulates all of the Notch ligands,
jagged 1 and jagged 2, as well as Dll1, Dll3 and Dll4. Our results show that Mib1
is an essential regulator, but not a potentiator, for generating functional Notch
ligands to activate Notch signaling.

PMID: 16000382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Neurosci Res. 2005 Jul 15;81(2):163-71.

Suppression of Stat3 promotes neurogenesis in cultured neural stem cells.

Gu F(1), Hata R, Ma YJ, Tanaka J, Mitsuda N, Kumon Y, Hanakawa Y, Hashimoto K,
Nakajima K, Sakanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Ehime University School of Medicine, Shitsukawa, Toon, 
Ehime, Japan.

To investigate the effects of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
(Stat3) on neural stem cell fate, stem cells were inoculated with an adenovirus
vector expressing dominant negative form of Stat3 (Stat3F). One day later, a
promoter assay revealed significant reduction of the transcriptional level in the
transfected cells. Three days later, Western blot analysis and immunocytochemical
analysis revealed that the protein level of microtubule-associated protein (MAP)2
and the number of MAP2-positive cells were increased significantly in the
transfected cells whereas the protein level of glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) and the number of GFAP-positive cells were decreased significantly. In
addition, mRNA levels of Notch family members (Notch1, 2, and 3) and of
inhibitory basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors (Hes5, Id2, and Id3) were
significantly downregulated at 3 days after viral inoculation with Stat3F;
however, mRNA levels of bHLH determination factors (Math1 and Neurogenin3) and
bHLH differentiation factors (NeuroD1 and NeuroD2) were significantly
upregulated. These data indicated that suppression of Stat3 directly induced
neurogenesis and inhibited astrogliogenesis in neural stem cells.

PMID: 15948155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jun 10;306(2):343-8. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Roles of bHLH genes in neural stem cell differentiation.

Kageyama R(1), Ohtsuka T, Hatakeyama J, Ohsawa R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Neural stem cells change their characteristics over time during development: they
initially proliferate only and then give rise to neurons first and glial cells
later. In the absence of the repressor-type basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes
Hes1, Hes3 and Hes5, neural stem cells do not proliferate sufficiently but
prematurely differentiate into neurons and become depleted without making the
later born cell types such as astrocytes and ependymal cells. Thus, Hes genes are
essential for maintenance of neural stem cells to make cells not only in correct 
numbers but also in full diversity. Hes genes antagonize the activator-type bHLH 
genes, which include Mash1, Math and Neurogenin. The activator-type bHLH genes
promote the neuronal fate determination and induce expression of Notch ligands
such as Delta. These ligands activate Notch signaling and upregulate Hes1 and
Hes5 expression in neighboring cells, thereby maintaining these cells
undifferentiated. Thus, the activator-type and repressor-type bHLH genes regulate
each other, allowing only subsets of cells to undergo differentiation while
keeping others to stay neural stem cells. This regulation is essential for
generation of complex brain structures of appropriate size, shape and cell
arrangement.

PMID: 15925590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Biol. 2005 May 15;281(2):318-33.

A novel hes5/hes6 circuitry of negative regulation controls Notch activity during
neurogenesis.

Fior R(1), Henrique D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Av. Prof.
Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal.

HES transcriptional repressors are important components of the Notch pathway that
regulates neurogenesis from Drosophila to vertebrates. These proteins are
normally induced by Notch activity and inhibit neural commitment by antagonizing 
the activity of proneural genes. We describe here four chick hes genes that are
expressed during neurogenesis: three hes5-like genes (hes5-1, hes5-2 and hes5-3) 
and one hes6-like (hes6-2). We show that hes6-2 represses transcription of the
hes5 genes, thus functioning as a negative regulator of Notch signaling.
Conversely, hes6-2 may be repressed by hes5 activity. In cells committing to
differentiation, we find that hes6-2 is up-regulated by proneural genes and
contributes to the proneural program of neuronal commitment by preventing Notch
activity in these cells. In neural progenitors, Notch signaling produces an
initial burst of hes5 activity, which represses hes6-2. However, as hes5
transcription declines due to negative auto-regulation, hes6-2 may become active 
and inhibit the remaining hes5 activity to end Notch signaling. These cells can
then enter a new cycle of fate decisions and will be kept as progenitors if a new
pulse of Notch activity occurs. Maintenance of progenitors during vertebrate
neurogenesis therefore requires that these cells go through successive cycles of 
Notch activity. We propose that the hes5/hes6 circuitry of negative
cross-regulations is a conserved feature of the Notch pathway that underlies
these cycles in neural progenitors.

PMID: 15893982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2005 Apr 21;156(1):13-22.

Maternal thyroid hormone increases HES expression in the fetal rat brain: an
effect mimicked by exposure to a mixture of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).

Bansal R(1), You SH, Herzig CT, Zoeller RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts-Amherst, Morrill Science
Center, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Thyroid hormone is known to be essential for normal brain development both before
and after birth, but much less is known about the role of thyroid hormone
development before birth. In rodents, thyroid hormone of maternal origin can
selectively regulate gene expression in the fetal cortex; HES1 was identified as 
a putative thyroid hormone responsive gene in the fetal cortex. Using in situ
hybridization, we now confirm that thyroid hormone administration to pregnant
rats can increase the abundance of HES1 mRNA in the fetal cortex on gestational
day 16 (G16). In separate experiments, we found that maternal exposure to
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) increases HES expression similarly. Western
analysis of proteins extracted from fetal cortex did not confirm that Notch-1 or 
Notch-3 activation was associated with treatment effects on HES expression.
However, considering the role of HES proteins in fate specification of cortical
neurons, these findings suggest that thyroid hormone, and PCB exposure, may
influence fate specification of cortical neurons.

PMID: 15862623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Neurosci Lett. 2005 May 20-27;380(1-2):17-20. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Changes in the expression of Hes5 and Mash1 mRNA in the adult rat dentate gyrus
after transient forebrain ischemia.

Kawai T(1), Takagi N, Nakahara M, Takeo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Tokyo University of
Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, Japan.

Accumulating evidence indicates that neurogenesis in the adult brain occurs in
restricted brain regions, including the hippocampal dentate gyrus and is promoted
by ischemia. The mechanism responsible for ischemia-induced neurogenesis in the
adult brain, however, remains unclear. Notch pathway plays a pivotal role in the 
regulation of the timing for differentiation and determination of the fate of
neural progenitor cells in the developing nervous system. To elucidate the
mechanism underlying ischemia-induced neurogenesis, we investigated changes in
the expression of mRNAs of Hes5, which is a downstream target of Notch, and
Mash1, a neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix factor, which is negatively regulated 
by Hes5, in the adult hippocampal dentate gyrus after transient forebrain
ischemia. Transient forebrain ischemia was produced by four-vessel occlusion
procedure in rats. The levels of Hes5 mRNA decreased on days 1 and 3 after the
start of reperfusion and the decreased levels of the mRNA returned to the basal
level by 5 days after ischemia. In contrast, the level of Mash1 mRNA increased on
day 1 and then returned to the basal level by 3 days after ischemia. These
results suggest that an inhibition of Notch activity and subsequent expression of
neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix factors, including Mash1, may, at least in
part, contribute to ischemia-induced neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus.

PMID: 15854743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):F939-52.

Segmental expression of Notch and Hairy genes in nephrogenesis.

Chen L(1), Al-Awqati Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia
University, 630 W 168th St., New York, NY 10032, USA.

Notch signaling pathway genes are required for nephrogenesis, raising the
possibility that Notch effector Hairy-related genes should also control nephron
formation. We performed in situ hybridization of Hairy transcription factors with
segment-specific lectins and/or antibodies during early nephrogenesis to identify
their possible roles in segment identity of the nephron. We found that among all 
of Notch downstream Hairy genes, only Hes1, Hes5, Hey1, and HeyL were expressed
in a segment-specific manner in early nephrons and their expression pattern
changed dynamically during metanephric development. Based on these patterns of
expression, it was possible to propose a pairwise association of specific ligand 
and receptor and to suggest that the effector of this association is one of the
Hairy transcription factors. We found that Hes5 is specifically expressed in the 
anlage of the loop of Henle, suggesting that it might be involved in the
determination of its cell identity. We also examined the morphological appearance
of kidneys from mice where the Hes1 or Hes5 genes were deleted and found that at 
least at the gross morphological level, there was little difference from
wild-type kidneys. Because Hairy genes associate with other transcription factors
to exert their effect, it is necessary to examine a more complete array of
genetic deletions before a conclusion can be reached regarding their role in
kidney development. These studies provide the basis for the future development of
strategies to examine the role of individual effector molecules in the
determination of the differentiation pattern of the nephron.

PMID: 15821257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Anat Sci Int. 2004 Dec;79(4):226-34.

Molecular mechanisms for morphogenesis of the central nervous system in mammals.

Ishibashi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. ishibash@anat1.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The mammalian central nervous system (CNS) is a highly organized structure. In
the beginning of CNS development, neural precursor/stem cells are dividing in the
neuroepithelium. After a while, these precursors gradually start to differentiate
into neurons and glial cells. Various factors are involved in the proliferation
and differentiation of neural precursors. Recent studies have demonstrated that
the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors play important roles in
differentiation processes. Hairy and Enhancer of split homolog (HES) 1 and HES5
are bHLH-type repressors and inhibit neural differentiation. Mammalian
achaete-scute complex homolog (MASH) 1 and mammalian atonal homolog (MATH) 1 are 
positive bHLH regulators expressed in neural precursors. A balance between
positive and negative regulators may determine whether differentiation proceeds
or not. The data suggest that this balance is controlled by Notch signaling.
Other extracellular signals also govern CNS morphogenesis. To elaborate the
primary shape of the CNS, proliferation of neural precursors should be strictly
regulated in a spatial and temporal manner. A recent study suggests that a Sonic 
hedgehog-dependent signaling relay controls growth of the diencephalon and
midbrain. Nutrition is another critical factor for development. Expression
analysis of Folate binding protein 1 implied the close association between folate
uptake and anterior neural tube closure.

PMID: 15633461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4929-39. Epub 2004 Nov 24.

Notch signals inhibit the development of erythroid/megakaryocytic cells by
suppressing GATA-1 activity through the induction of HES1.

Ishiko E(1), Matsumura I, Ezoe S, Gale K, Ishiko J, Satoh Y, Tanaka H, Shibayama 
H, Mizuki M, Era T, Enver T, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The effects of Notch signals on the erythroid/megakaryocytic differentiation of
hematopoietic cells were examined. Activation of Notch signals by the
intracellular Notch1 or an estradiol-inducible form of Notch1/ER suppressed the
expression of the erythroid marker glycophorin A in an erythroid/megakaryocytic
cell line K562. Although Mock-transfected K562 cells underwent megakaryocytic
differentiation in response to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA),
estradiol-activated Notch1/ER induced apoptosis during TPA treatment in the
transfectant, which was accompanied by the reduced expression of an antiapoptotic
molecule Bcl-XL. Even when apoptosis was prevented by the overexpression of
Bcl-XL, activated Notch signals still inhibited TPA-induced megakaryocytic
differentiation. As for this mechanism, Notch1/recombination signal binding
protein J-kappa-induced HES1 but not HES5 was found to inhibit the function of an
erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage-specific transcription factor GATA-1. Although
HES1 did not affect the DNA binding activity of GATA-1 in gel shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, it directly bound to GATA-1 and dissociated a
critical transcriptional cofactor, p300, from GATA-1. Furthermore, overexpressed 
HES1 inhibited the development of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells in colony
assays. Also, the Notch ligand Jagged1 expressed on NIH3T3 cells suppressed the
development of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells from cocultured Lin-Sca-1+
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. These results suggest that Notch1 inhibits
the development of erythroid/megakaryocytic cells by suppressing GATA-1 activity 
through HES1.

PMID: 15563463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Neuroscientist. 2004 Dec;10(6):575-93.

5-HT1A receptors, gene repression, and depression: guilt by association.

Albert PR(1), Lemonde S.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute, Neuroscience University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Canada.

The serotonin system is implicated in major depression and suicide and is
negatively regulated by somatodendritic 5-HT1A autoreceptors. Desensitization of 
5-HT1A autoreceptors is implicated in the 2- to 3-week latency for antidepressant
treatments. Alterations in 5-HT1A receptor levels are reported in depression and 
suicide, and gene knockout of the 5-HT1A receptor results in an anxiety
phenotype, suggesting that abnormal transcriptional regulation of this receptor
gene may underlie these disorders. The 5-HT1A receptor gene is negatively
regulated in neurons by repressors including REST/NRSF, Freud-1, NUDR/Deaf-1, and
Hes5. The association with major depression, suicide, and panic disorder of a new
functional 5-HT1A polymorphism at C(-1019)G that selectively blocks repression of
the 5-HT1A autoreceptor by NUDR further suggests a causative role for altered
regulation of this receptor in predisposition to mental illness. The authors
review evidence that altered transcription of the 5-HT1A receptor can affect the 
serotonin system and limbic and cortical areas, leading to predisposition to
depression.

PMID: 15534042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7794-800.

The SmoA1 mouse model reveals that notch signaling is critical for the growth and
survival of sonic hedgehog-induced medulloblastomas.

Hallahan AR(1), Pritchard JI, Hansen S, Benson M, Stoeck J, Hatton BA, Russell
TL, Ellenbogen RG, Bernstein ID, Beachy PA, Olson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

To develop a genetically faithful model of medulloblastoma with increased tumor
incidence compared with the current best model we activated the Sonic Hedgehog
(Shh) pathway by transgenically expressing a constitutively active form of
Smoothened in mouse cerebellar granule neuron precursors (ND2:SmoA1 mice). This
resulted in early cerebellar granule cell hyper-proliferation and a 48% incidence
of medulloblastoma formation. Gene expression studies showed an increase in the
known Shh targets Gli1 and Nmyc that correlated with increasing hyperplasia and
tumor formation. Notch2 and the Notch target gene, HES5, were also significantly 
elevated in Smoothened-induced tumors showing that Shh pathway activation is
sufficient to induce Notch pathway signaling. In human medulloblastomas reverse
transcription-PCR for Shh and Notch targets revealed activation of both of these 
pathways in most tumors when compared with normal cerebellum. Notch pathway
inhibition with soluble Delta ligand or gamma secretase inhibitors resulted in a 
marked reduction of viable cell numbers in medulloblastoma cell lines and primary
tumor cultures. Treatment of mice with D283 medulloblastoma xenografts with a
gamma secretase inhibitor resulted in decreased proliferation and increased
apoptosis, confirming that Notch signaling contributes to human medulloblastoma
proliferation and survival. Medulloblastomas in ND2:SmoA1 mice and humans have
concomitant increase in Shh and Notch pathway activities, both of which
contribute to tumor survival.

PMID: 15520185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Jan;16(1):339-47. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

NGF controls dendrite development in hippocampal neurons by binding to p75NTR and
modulating the cellular targets of Notch.

Salama-Cohen P(1), Arévalo MA, Meier J, Grantyn R, Rodríguez-Tébar A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal de Neurobiología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, E28002 Madrid, Spain.

Notch and neurotrophins control neuronal shape, but it is not known whether their
signaling pathways intersect. Here we report results from hippocampal neuronal
cultures that are in support of this possibility. We found that low cell density 
or blockade of Notch signaling by a soluble Delta-Fc ligand decreased the mRNA
levels of the nuclear targets of Notch, the homologues of enhancer-of-split 1 and
5 (Hes1/5). This effect was associated with enhanced sprouting of new dendrites
or dendrite branches. In contrast, high cell density or exposure of low-density
cultures to NGF increased the Hes1/5 mRNA, reduced the number of primary
dendrites and promoted dendrite elongation. The NGF effects on both Hes1/5
expression and dendrite morphology were prevented by p75-antibody (a
p75NTR-blocking antibody) or transfection with enhancer-of-split 6 (Hes6), a
condition known to suppress Hes activity. Nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB was 
identified as a link between p75NTR and Hes1/5 because it was required for the
up-regulation of these two genes. The convergence of the Notch and p75NTR
signaling pathways at the level of Hes1/5 illuminates an unexpected mechanism
through which a diffusible factor (NGF) could regulate dendrite growth when
cell-cell interaction via Notch is not in action.

PMCID: PMC539177
PMID: 15496460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5539-50. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Hes genes regulate size, shape and histogenesis of the nervous system by control 
of the timing of neural stem cell differentiation.

Hatakeyama J(1), Bessho Y, Katoh K, Ookawara S, Fujioka M, Guillemot F, Kageyama 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Radial glial cells derive from neuroepithelial cells, and both cell types are
identified as neural stem cells. Neural stem cells are known to change their
competency over time during development: they initially undergo self-renewal only
and then give rise to neurons first and glial cells later. Maintenance of neural 
stem cells until late stages is thus believed to be essential for generation of
cells in correct numbers and diverse types, but little is known about how the
timing of cell differentiation is regulated and how its deregulation influences
brain organogenesis. Here, we report that inactivation of Hes1 and Hes5, known
Notch effectors, and additional inactivation of Hes3 extensively accelerate cell 
differentiation and cause a wide range of defects in brain formation. In
Hes-deficient embryos, initially formed neuroepithelial cells are not properly
maintained, and radial glial cells are prematurely differentiated into neurons
and depleted without generation of late-born cells. Furthermore, loss of radial
glia disrupts the inner and outer barriers of the neural tube, disorganizing the 
histogenesis. In addition, the forebrain lacks the optic vesicles and the
ganglionic eminences. Thus, Hes genes are essential for generation of brain
structures of appropriate size, shape and cell arrangement by controlling the
timing of cell differentiation. Our data also indicate that embryonic neural stem
cells change their characters over time in the following order: Hes-independent
neuroepithelial cells, transitory Hes-dependent neuroepithelial cells and
Hes-dependent radial glial cells.

PMID: 15496443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2004 Aug;24(4):181-5.

[Priming of neuronal differentiation of cultured neural stem cells by
neutrophins].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito H(1), Furukawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 5-6-1,
Mitahora-higashi Gifu, 502-8585 Japan.

Neurogenesis is promoted by basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
Mash1, Math1 and/or NeuroD but suppressed by another set, Hes1 and Hes5. It is
still unknown what kinds of extracellular signals are involved in their
regulation. Therefore, the effects of neurotrophins on the expression of bHLH
factors and neuronal differentiation were investigated by the use of cultured
mouse neural stem cells. Each neurotrophin increased Mash1 and Math1 mRNAs of the
stem cells growing in the presence of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2), but did
not alter Hes1, Hes5 or NeuroD mRNA levels. Simultaneously, most of the cells
expressed nestin, but not microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), and still
remained undifferentiated. FGF-2 removal from the medium reduced the levels of
Hes1 and Hes5 mRNAs and increased those of Mash1, Math1, and NeuroD mRNAs,
resulting in substantial neuronal differentiation. However, when the cells were
pretreated with a neurotrophin, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, FGF-2 removal 
enhanced earlier NeuroD expression and generated many more MAP2-positive cells.
The high level of Mash1 and Math1 that had been elevated at FGF-2 withdrawal
accelerated NeuroD expression in cooperation with the reduced Hes1 and Hes5
expression. Our present results suggest that neurotrophins stimulate neuronal
differentiation via altering the balance of expression of various bHLH
transcription factors.

PMID: 15484817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Oct;4(6):707-11.

Expression of Hairy/Enhancer of Split genes, Hes1 and Hes5, during murine nephron
morphogenesis.

Piscione TD(1), Wu MY, Quaggin SE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Ave., Toronto, Ont., Canada M5G 1X8. tdpisc@sickkids.ca

Hairy/Enhancer of Split (Hes) genes encode transcriptional repressors that
function as downstream targets of activated Notch receptors in cell fate
decisions during tissue development. During nephrogenesis, multiple Notch pathway
genes are co-expressed in multi-potent epithelial progenitors (i.e. pre-tubular
aggregates), but demonstrate distinct expression patterns in early nephrons (i.e.
S-shaped bodies), suggesting that Notch signaling functions in patterning
epithelial cell fate during nephron morphogenesis. To define the spatial
activation of the Notch pathway in developing nephrons, we analyzed the
expression of Hes1 and Hes5 by mRNA in situ hybridization in cryosections of
developing kidneys, and compared their spatiotemporal expression with the
expression of other Notch pathway genes in nephron progenitors. Hes1, and to a
lesser extent Hes5, were expressed in pre-tubular aggregates and comma-shaped
bodies of embryonic day (E) 13.5 and newborn kidneys. In S-shaped bodies, Hes1
expression was detected in the middle part which gives rise to the proximal
tubule, but also extended into the lower and upper parts which give rise to the
glomerulus and distal tubule, respectively, and was similar to the
proximal-distal expression patterns for Notch1 and Jagged1 in these nephrogenic
structures. In contrast, strong Hes5 expression was restricted to the middle
segment of S-shaped bodies, and resembled Delta-like 1 expression. These data
show that Hes1 and Hes5 expression are independently regulated along the
proximal-distal axis of the developing nephron. Consequently, the differential,
spatial regulation of Hes1 and Hes5 gene expression by the Notch signaling
pathway in developing nephrons may be a mechanism for patterning cell fate
decisions during nephron morphogenesis.

PMID: 15465493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Nov 8;479(2):216-33.

Expression patterns of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors define
subsets of olfactory progenitor cells.

Manglapus GL(1), Youngentob SL, Schwob JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Direct damage to the olfactory epithelium by inhalation of the olfactotoxin
methyl bromide activates a population of multipotent globose basal cells, which
reconstitute all depleted cell populations. Because members of the basic
helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors are known to regulate
neurogenesis and cell production, we performed in situ hybridization to examine
the expression of several members of that family during the recovery of the rat
olfactory epithelium after methyl bromide lesion. The numbers of basal cells
expressing the proneural transcriptional activators Mash1, Neurogenin1, and
NeuroD all fall precipitously 1 day after lesion. Mash1 levels begin to recover
by 2 days, Neurogenin1 and NeuroD by 3 days, and substantial numbers of neurons
reappear by 4 days. The antineurogenic factor Hes1 is limited to the
sustentacular cells of the unlesioned olfactory epithelium and to the adjoining
respiratory epithelium. Immediately after methyl bromide lesion, but not at any
time after bulbectomy, a large fraction of residual, marker-confirmed globose
basal cells initiate expression of Hes1. Subsequently, the Hes1-positive cells
lose their association with the basal lamina, shift apically, and differentiate
into sustentacular cells. In contrast, Hes5 is expressed by a small subset of
globose basal cells and by olfactory ensheathing glia in the normal mucosa; Hes5 
label disappears from both transiently after lesion. In sum, the recovery of the 
neuronal population after peripheral lesion recapitulates the sequence of
transcription factor expression observed during embryonic development of the
epithelium. Moreover, expression of Hes1 marks that population of globose basal
cells committed to making sustentacular cells after methyl bromide lesion.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15452857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Oct;14(4):747-51.

Identification and characterization of human HESL, rat Hesl and rainbow trout
hesl genes in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to nuclear translocation of Notch
intracellular domain (NIC), and transcriptional activation of target genes
through the interaction between CSL proteins (RBPSUH or RBPSUHL) and NIC. HES1,
HES5, HEY1 and HEY2 are Notch target genes. Mammalian HES/HEY family proteins as 
well as Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split are implicated in the cell fate
determination. We have previously identified and characterized human HES2, HES3
and HES5 genes. Here, we identified and characterized human HES-like (HESL), rat 
Fesl, and rainbow trout fesl genes by using bioinformatics. Human HESL gene,
located within AC093824.3 genome sequence, was mapped to human chromosome 4q35.1 
between ACSL1 and SLC25A4 genes. Rat Fesl gene, located within AC111303.4 genome 
sequence, was mapped to rat chromosome 16q11. EST BX875070.2 was the
representative rainbow trout fesl cDNA. HESL-ACSL1 locus was conserved among
human, rat, mouse, and zebrafish genomes. Human HESL (241 aa) showed 92.9%
total-amino-acid identity with rat Hesl (240 aa), 92.1% total-amino-acid identity
with mouse Hesl (240 aa), and 68.0% total-amino-acid identity with rainbow trout 
hesl (235 aa). HESL orthologs consist of basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
ORANGE domain. C-terminal region of HESL orthologs were divergent from that of
HES, HEY, and DEC homologs. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that bHLH
transcription factors with ORANGE domain were classified into the following three
groups: (group I) HES1, HES2, HES4 and HES6 orthologs; (group II) HESL, HES5,
HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL orthologs; (group III) HES3, DEC1/BHLHB2 and
DEC2/BHLHB3 orthologs.

PMID: 15375612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Int J Oncol. 2004 Aug;25(2):529-34.

Identification and characterization of human HES2, HES3, and HES5 genes in
silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan.

MMTV induces the mouse mammary tumor through the dysregulation of Notch, Wnt, or 
Fgf signaling pathway. Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to
transcriptional activation of Hes family genes through the interaction between
Notch intracellular domain and RBPSUH (CSL). Hes family proteins are mammalian
homologs of Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split. Hes family of transcriptional
repressors with basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and Orange domains are implicated
in the cell fate determination of stem cells (or precursor cells) by suppressing 
the expression of tissue-specific transcriptional activators. Human HES1, HES4,
HES6, and HES7 genes have been reported by other groups. Here, we identified and 
characterized human HES2, HES3 and HES5 genes by using bioinformatics. FLJ33803
(AK091122.1) was the representative human HES2 cDNA. HES2 gene, encoding a 173-aa
protein, was located within human genome sequence AL031848.11. HES3 gene,
encoding a 186-aa protein, was identified within human genome sequence
AL031847.17. HES5 gene, encoding a 166-aa protein, was identified within human
genome sequence AL139246.20. HES2 and HES3 genes were mapped to human chromosome 
1p36.31, while HES5 gene to 1p36.32. HES2 mRNA was expressed in placenta,
pancreatic cancer, colon cancer with RER, cervical cancer, and in head and neck
tumors. HES5 mRNA was expressed in fetal heart, and brain tumors. Human HES
family proteins were found consisting of bHLH, Orange, Proline-rich domains, and 
WRPW motif. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that HES family proteins were
distantly related except a paralog pair of HES1 and HES4. HES family genes are
pharmacogenomic targets in the field of regenerative medicine and oncology.

PMID: 15254753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dev Growth Differ. 2004 Jun;46(3):219-27.

Possible role of Hes5 for the rostrocaudal polarity formation of the tectum.

Kimura J(1), Katahira T, Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vertebrate Body Plan, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN
Kobe, 2-2-3 Minatojima, Minami-machi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The alar plate of the mesencephalon differentiates into the optic tectum. Retinal
fibers project to the tectum topographically in a retinotopic manner. Engrailed
(En) is responsible for the tectum polarity formation and regionalization. Former
study indicated the presence of the molecule whose expression is repressed by En 
and that represses the isthmus-related gene expression. To isolate such
molecules, we constructed a subtracted library between cDNA population of the
normal rostral mesencephalon and of the rostral mesencephalon that misexpresses
En2. From the library, we isolated cHes5, a chicken homolog of Drosophila
hairy/Enhancer of split. cHes5 begins to be expressed in the rostral part of the 
E2 mesencephalon, and spreads to caudal mesencephalon by E3. To our expectation, 
cHes5 expression was repressed by En2. Furthermore, misexpression of cHes5 in the
mesencephalon inhibited expression of ephrinA2, a marker of caudal mesencephalon.
An active repressor form of Hes5, which is a chimeric molecule of Hes5 and
repressor domain of En2, showed a similar but more severe phenotype. The results 
indicate that Hes5 is regulated by En and is responsible for rostral identity of 
mesencephalon by repressing ephrinA2.

PMID: 15206953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nat Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;6(6):547-54. Epub 2004 May 23.

Hes binding to STAT3 mediates crosstalk between Notch and JAK-STAT signalling.

Kamakura S(1), Oishi K, Yoshimatsu T, Nakafuku M, Masuyama N, Gotoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Although the Notch and JAK-STAT signalling pathways fulfill overlapping roles in 
growth and differentiation regulation, no coordination mechanism has been
proposed to explain their relationship. Here we show that STAT3 is activated in
the presence of active Notch, as well as the Notch effectors Hes1 and Hes5. Hes
proteins associate with JAK2 and STAT3, and facilitate complex formation between 
JAK2 and STAT3, thus promoting STAT3 phosphorylation and activation. Furthermore,
suppression of endogenous Hes1 expression reduces growth factor induction of
STAT3 phosphorylation. STAT3 seems to be essential for maintenance of radial
glial cells and differentiation of astrocytes by Notch in the developing central 
nervous system. These results suggest that direct protein-protein interactions
coordinate cross-talk between the Notch-Hes and JAK-STAT pathways.

PMID: 15156153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2004 Feb;49(3 Suppl):234-40.

[Mechanisms for maintenance and differentiation of neural stem cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohtsuka T(1), Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)tohtsuka@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

PMID: 14976735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dev Biol. 2004 Mar 1;267(1):119-34.

FGF signaling is required for determination of otic neuroblasts in the chick
embryo.

Alsina B(1), Abelló G, Ulloa E, Henrique D, Pujades C, Giraldez F.

Author information: 
(1)Biologia del Desenvolupament, Departament de Ciéncies Experimentals i de la
Salut (DCEXS), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003, Barcelona, Spain.
berta.alsina@upf.edu

The interplay between intrinsic and extrinsic factors is essential for the
transit into different cell states during development. We have analyzed the
expression and function of FGF10 and FGF-signaling during the early stages of the
development of otic neurons. FGF10 is expressed in a highly restricted domain
overlapping the presumptive neurogenic region of the chick otic placode. A
detailed study of the expression pattern of FGF10, proneural, and neurogenic
genes revealed the following temporal sequence for the onset of gene expression: 
FGF10>Ngn1/Delta1/Hes5>NeuroD/NeuroM. FGF10 and FGF receptor inhibition cause
opposed effects on cell determination and cell proliferation. Ectopic expression 
of FGF10 in vivo promotes an increase in NeuroD and NeuroM expression. BrdU
incorporation experiments showed that the increase in NeuroD-expressing cells is 
not due to an increase in cell proliferation. Inhibition of FGF receptor
signaling in otic explants causes a severe reduction in Neurogenin1, NeuroD,
Delta1, and Hes5 expression with no change in non-neural genes like Lmx1.
However, it does not interfere with NeuroD expression within the CVG or with
neuroblast delamination. The loss of proneural gene expression caused by FGF
inhibition is not caused by decreased cell proliferation or by increased cell
death. We suggest that FGF signaling in the otic epithelium is required for
neuronal precursors to withdraw from cell division and irreversibly commit to
neuronal fate.

PMID: 14975721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Development. 2004 Mar;131(6):1221-33. Epub 2004 Feb 11.

Specification of vertebral identity is coupled to Notch signalling and the
segmentation clock.

Cordes R(1), Schuster-Gossler K, Serth K, Gossler A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

To further analyse requirements for Notch signalling in patterning the paraxial
mesoderm, we generated transgenic mice that express in the paraxial mesoderm a
dominant-negative version of Delta1. Transgenic mice with reduced Notch activity 
in the presomitic mesoderm as indicated by loss of Hes5 expression were viable
and displayed defects in somites and vertebrae consistent with known roles of
Notch signalling in somite compartmentalisation. In addition, these mice showed
with variable expressivity and penetrance alterations of vertebral identities
resembling homeotic transformations, and subtle changes of Hox gene expression in
day 12.5 embryos. Mice that carried only one functional copy of the endogenous
Delta1 gene also showed changes of vertebral identities in the lower cervical
region, suggesting a previously unnoticed haploinsufficiency for Delta1.
Likewise, in mice carrying a null allele of the oscillating Lfng gene, or in
transgenic mice expressing Lfng constitutively in the presomitic mesoderm,
vertebral identities were changed and numbers of segments in the cervical and
thoracic regions were reduced, suggesting anterior shifts of axial identity.
Together, these results provide genetic evidence that precisely regulated levels 
of Notch activity as well as cyclic Lfng activity are critical for positional
specification of the anteroposterior body axis in the paraxial mesoderm.

PMID: 14960495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16356-67. Epub 2004 Feb 4.

Helt, a novel basic-helix-loop-helix transcriptional repressor expressed in the
developing central nervous system.

Nakatani T(1), Mizuhara E, Minaki Y, Sakamoto Y, Ono Y.

Author information: 
(1)KAN Research Institute Inc., 93 Chudoji-Awata-cho, Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto
600-8815, Japan.

Neuronal differentiation is regulated by many basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
family transcriptional activators and repressors, and the balance of activity
between these factors is important for the differentiation process. Here, we
report the identification of a novel transcriptional repressor, designated Helt. 
Helt encoded a Hey-related bHLH protein containing the bHLH and Orange domains.
Helt could homodimerize, and heterodimerize with Hes5 or Hey2. Both the bHLH and 
Orange domains were involved in the homodimerization. In contrast, only the bHLH 
domain was required for the heterodimerization with Hey2, whereas only the Orange
domain mediated the interaction between Helt and Hes5. Thus, Helt has two
dimerization domains, and these domains independently select a partner.
Identification of preferred recognition sequences by CASTing experiments revealed
that Helt bound to the E box, which was distinct from the Hes1 optimal sequence
around the E box core. Not only the core sequence but also sequences flanking the
E box were essential for the recognition by Helt and Hes1. Furthermore, Helt
repressed transcription from an artificial promoter through binding to the
optimal E box elements, as well as transcription from its own promoter. Using in 
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, Helt expression in embryos was
investigated. Helt was mainly expressed in undifferentiated neural progenitors in
some of the developing brain regions, including the mesencephalon and
diencephalon, at the neurogenesis stage. These results suggest that Helt acts as 
a transcriptional repressor to regulate neuronal differentiation and/or identity.

PMID: 14764602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Development. 2004 Feb;131(4):903-13.

Math1 controls cerebellar granule cell differentiation by regulating multiple
components of the Notch signaling pathway.

Gazit R(1), Krizhanovsky V, Ben-Arie N.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Animal Biology, The Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University
of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

Cerebellar granule cells (CGC) are the most abundant neurons in the mammalian
brain, and an important tool for unraveling molecular mechanisms underlying
neurogenesis. Math1 is a bHLH transcription activator that is essential for the
genesis of CGC. To delineate the effects of Math1 on CGC differentiation, we
generated and studied primary cultures of CGC progenitors from Math1/lacZ
knockout mice. Rhombic lip precursors appeared properly positioned, expressed
CGC-specific markers, and maintained Math1 promoter activity in vivo and in
vitro, suggesting that Math1 is not essential for the initial stages of
specification or survival of CGC. Moreover, the continuous activity of Math1
promoter in the absence of MATH1, indicated that MATH1 was not necessary for the 
activation of its own expression. After 6, but not 3, days in culture, Math1
promoter activity was downregulated in control cultures, but not in cells from
Math1 null mice, thus implying that Math1 participates in a negative regulatory
feedback loop that is dependent on increased levels of MATH1 generated through
the positive autoregulatory feedback loop. In addition, Math1 null CGC did not
differentiate properly in culture, and were unable to extend processes. All Notch
signaling pathway receptors and ligands tested were expressed in the rhombic lip 
at embryonic date 14, with highest levels of Notch2 and Jag1. However, Math1-null
rhombic lip cells presented conspicuous downregulation of Notch4 and Dll1.
Moreover, of the two transcriptional repressors known to antagonize Math1, Hes5
(but not Hes1) was downregulated in Math1-null rhombic lip tissue and primary
cultures, and was shown to bind MATH1, thus revealing a negative regulatory
feedback loop. Taken together, our data demonstrate that CGC differentiation, but
not specification, depends on Math1, which acts by regulating the level of
multiple components of the Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 14757642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Di Yi Jun Yi Da Xue Xue Bao. 2004 Jan;24(1):35-8, 41.

[Blocking with double- stranded RNA of the expression of Hes5 in rat bone
marrow-derived neural stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HY(1), Xu RX, Jiang XD, Luo SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuromedicine of PLA, Zhujiang Hospital, First Military Medical
University, Guangzhou 510282,China. haiyanwang838@msn.com

OBJECTIVE: To examine the efficiency of exogenous small double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA) in knocking down the gene expression at the post-transcription level, and
investigate the factors that may influence the transfection.
METHOD: The bone marrow stromal cells of SD rat were separated and cultured in
vitro, followed by induction of the cells to evolve into neural stem cells using 
special culture medium prepared by our laboratory. Synthetic dsRNA was then
transferred into the cells at varied concentrations, and the results were
analyzed by Western blotting.
RESULTS: The concentrations ranging from 200 to 300 nmol/L were optimal for
specifically blocking the expression of Hes5, whereas the suitable concentrations
for the cell survival were between 50 and 200 nmol/L.
CONCLUSION: dsRNA is capable of triggering RNA interference in neural stem cells,
and at appropriate concentration, it may specifically and effectively knock down 
endogenous gene expression without sacrificing the viability of the cells.

PMID: 14724091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Jan 1;292(1):21-8.

Altered Notch signaling resulting from expression of a WAMTP1-MAML2 gene fusion
in mucoepidermoid carcinomas and benign Warthin's tumors.

Enlund F(1), Behboudi A, Andrén Y, Oberg C, Lendahl U, Mark J, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Göteborg University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
SE-413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.

Chromosome translocations in neoplasia commonly result in fusion genes that may
encode either novel fusion proteins or normal, but ectopically expressed
proteins. Here we report the cloning of a novel fusion gene in a common type of
salivary and bronchial gland tumor, mucoepidermoid carcinomas (MEC), as well as
in benign Warthin's tumors (WATs). The fusion, which results from a
t(11;19)(q21-22;p13) translocation, creates a chimeric gene in which exon 1 of a 
novel gene of unknown function, designated WAMTP1, is linked to exons 2-5 of the 
recently identified Mastermind-like Notch coactivator MAML2. In the fusion
protein, the N-terminal basic domain of MAML2, which is required for binding to
intracellular Notch (Notch ICD), is replaced by an unrelated N-terminal sequence 
from WAMTP1. Mutation analysis of the N-terminus of WAMTP1-MAML2 identified two
regions of importance for nuclear localization (amino acids 11-20) and for
colocalization with MAML2 and Notch1 ICD in nuclear granules (amino acids 21-42).
Analyses of the Notch target genes HES5 and MASH1 in MEC tumors with and without 
the WAMTP1-MAML2 fusion revealed upregulation of HES5 and downregulation of MASH1
in fusion positive MECs compared to normal salivary gland tissue and MECs lacking
the fusion. These findings suggest that altered Notch signaling plays an
important role in the genesis of benign and malignant neoplasms of salivary and
bronchial gland origin.

PMID: 14720503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Neurosci Res. 2003 Dec 1;74(5):676-87.

Inhibition of NMDA receptors induces delayed neuronal maturation and sustained
proliferation of progenitor cells during neocortical development.

Hirasawa T(1), Wada H, Kohsaka S, Uchino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Neuroscience, Tokyo,
Japan.

To elucidate the role of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors during the early
stage of cerebral neocortical development, we investigated the effect of an NMDA 
receptor antagonist, D(-)-2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid (D-APV), on cell
migration and proliferation in slice cultures and dissociated primary cultures
prepared from rat cerebral neocortex at embryonic Day 17. Pulse-labeling
experiments with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) showed that chronic exposure to
D-APV in slices delayed neuronal migration. Calcium imaging experiments revealed 
that functional NMDA receptors were expressed in neurons and the treatment with
D-APV delayed neuronal maturation judging from the subunit composition of NMDA
receptor subtypes. The results using pulse-labeling with BrdU indicated that
exposure to D-APV for 3 days induced a clear increase in the number of
proliferating progenitor cells in the ventricular zone in neocortical slices.
Exposure to D-APV in primary cultures also increased the proliferation of
progenitor cells. The effect of D-APV on progenitor cell proliferation was
possibly mediated through neuronal cells. To elucidate the mechanism of enhanced 
progenitor cell proliferation induced by D-APV, we investigated expression of
Hes1 and Hes5 mRNA in the ventricular zone of neocortical slices by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Tissue exposed to D-APV for 3 days
showed higher expression of Hes1 and Hes5 mRNA than did unexposed control tissue.
These results suggest that NMDA receptors expressed in neurons function in
neuronal migration and maturation and in the proliferation of progenitor cells.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14635219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Neurochem. 2003 Oct;87(2):333-43.

Regulatory roles of presenilin-1 and nicastrin in neuronal differentiation during
in vitro neurogenesis.

Sarkar SN(1), Das HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth, 76107, USA.

Presenilin (PS) in association with nicastrin (NICA) forms a gamma-secretase
complex that plays a crucial role in facilitating intramembranous processing of
Notch, a signaling receptor that is essential for neuronal fate specification and
differentiation. Loss of function studies have implicated a role for PS1 in
regulating neuronal differentiation in association with the down-regulation of
Notch signaling during neurogenesis. By using a system for stable, as well as
tetracycline-inducible expression of interfering RNAs (RNAi), we studied the
functions of PS1 during neuronal differentiation in the murine pluripotent p19
embryonic carcinoma cell line. After retinoic acid (RA) treatment and in the
absence of doxycycline, neuronal progenitor cells in the p19 clone were found to 
extend their processes towards the neighboring colony to form network-like
connections, as revealed by neuron-specific microtubule-associated protein 2
staining and laser scanning confocal microscopy. However, doxycycline-induced
expression of PS1 small interfering RNA (siRNA) in the p19 clone resulted in a
severe defect in the formation of network-like connections. Expression of the
NICA and Notch down-stream effector genes Hes1 and Hes5 was unaffected in p19
cells expressing doxycycline-induced PS1 siRNA. In contrast to PS1, constitutive 
inactivation of NICA by siRNA in p19 cells resulted in premature and partial
differentiation without RA treatment. In these NICA siRNA-expressing p19 cells
the expression of the Notch1 down-stream effector Hes1 gene was substantially
reduced. After RA treatment the NICA siRNA clone failed to differentiate
completely into networks of neurons. These results taken together provide direct 
evidence that PS1 and NICA may participate in neuronal differentiation during
neurogenesis in vitro.

PMID: 14511111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Neurosci. 2003 Sep 24;23(25):8788-99.

Impaired repression at a 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor gene polymorphism
associated with major depression and suicide.

Lemonde S(1), Turecki G, Bakish D, Du L, Hrdina PD, Bown CD, Sequeira A, Kushwaha
N, Morris SJ, Basak A, Ou XM, Albert PR.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute (Neuroscience), University of Ottawa,
Department of Medicine, Ottawa, Canada, K1H 8M5.

Inhibition of serotonergic raphe neurons is mediated by somatodendritic 5-HT1A
autoreceptors, which may be increased in depressed patients. We report an
association of the C(-1019)G 5-HT1A promoter polymorphism with major depression
and suicide in separate cohorts. In depressed patients, the homozygous G(-1019)
allele was enriched twofold versus controls (p = 0.0017 and 0.0006 for G/G
genotype and G allele distribution, respectively), and in completed suicide cases
the G(-1019) allele was enriched fourfold (p = 0.002 and 0.00008 for G/G genotype
and G allele distribution, respectively). The C(-1019) allele was part of a 26 bp
imperfect palindrome that bound transcription factors nuclear NUDR [nuclear
deformed epidermal autoregulatory factor (DEAF-1)]/suppressin and
Hairy/Enhancer-of-split-5 (Drosophila) (Hes5) to repress 5-HT1A or heterologous
promoters, whereas the G(-1019) allele abolished repression by NUDR, but only
partially impaired Hes5-mediated repression. Recombinant NUDR bound specifically 
to the 26 bp palindrome, and endogenous NUDR was present in the major protein-DNA
complex from raphe nuclear extracts. Stable expression of NUDR in raphe cells
reduced levels of endogenous 5-HT1A protein and binding. NUDR protein was
colocalized with 5-HT1A receptors in serotonergic raphe cells, hippocampal and
cortical neurons, and adult brain regions including raphe nuclei, indicating a
role in regulating 5-HT1A autoreceptor expression. Our data indicate that NUDR is
a repressor of the 5-HT1A receptor in raphe cells the function of which is
abrogated by a promoter polymorphism. We suggest a novel transcriptional model in
which the G(-1019) allele derepresses 5-HT1A autoreceptor expression to reduce
serotonergic neurotransmission, predisposing to depression and suicide.

PMID: 14507979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Oct 1;31(19):5723-31.

Enhanced gene activation by Notch and BMP signaling cross-talk.

Takizawa T(1), Ochiai W, Nakashima K, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The signaling systems of Notch and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) are highly
conserved from flies to mammals and have been shown to be important in the
development of multiple organs. For instance, in the fate determination of mouse 
neuroepithelial cells, Notch signaling plays a role in keeping the progenitors
from differentiating into neurons. BMP is also known to inhibit neuronal
differentiation. In this paper, we show that BMP2 enhances Notch-induced
transcriptional activation of Hes-5 and Hesr-1 in mouse neuroepithelial cells.
BMP2 stimulation, in addition to the introduction of the intracellular domain of 
Notch (NIC), resulted in enhanced activation of the Hes-5 gene promoter.
RBP-Jkappa binding to its target sequence is important not only for Notch
signaling, but also for BMP2 signaling, to activate the Hes-5 gene promoter.
Smad1, a Smad species that is activated by BMP2, barely interacted with NIC, but 
did form a complex with NIC in the simultaneous presence of the coactivators
P/CAF and p300. Recruitment of p300 to the NIC-containing complex was facilitated
by activated Smad1, which is suggested to contribute to BMP2-mediated enhancement
of Notch-induced Hes-5 expression. These data suggest a novel functional
cooperation between Notch signaling and BMP signaling.

PMCID: PMC206475
PMID: 14500836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Chem Senses. 2003 Mar;28(3):197-205.

Expression of Hes6 and NeuroD in the olfactory epithelium, vomeronasal organ and 
non-sensory patches.

Suzuki Y(1), Mizoguchi I, Nishiyama H, Takeda M, Obara N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry, Health Sciences University of
Hokkaido, Ishikari-Tobetsu 061-0293, Japan. suzuki@hoku-iryo-u.ac.jp

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors NeuroD and Hes6 promote neuronal
differentiation. The expression of their genes in the olfactory epithelium (OE), 
vomeronasal organ (VNO) and the non-sensory patches of the posterior nasal cavity
of mice was examined. As detected by in situ hybridization, Hes6 was expressed in
a basal progenitor layer of the embryonic OE. After birth, the expression of Hes6
was detected in a cell layer above the basement membrane, globose basal cells
(GBCs). Expression of NeuroD in the embryonic OE was in agreement with that
previously described; and in the postnatal OE, it was detected in cells of GBC
layer and cells upper to GBCs. In the VNO, Hes6 was expressed throughout the
sensory epithelium (S-VNO) at embryonic day 12, and later became restricted to a 
single layer of cells in the basal region of the S-VNO, where Hes5-expressing
undifferentiated cells were present. NeuroD was expressed throughout the S-VNO
during the embryonic stage. After birth, Hes6 and NeuroD expressions were
observed in the border between the S-VNO and non-sensory VNO.
Immunohistochemistry using anti-NeuroD antibody revealed that NeuroD-positive
cells were still present not only at the edges but also in the center of the
S-VNO until P3. These findings suggest that Hes6 and NeuroD are expressed in
progenitors of chemoreceptor neurons and that the expression of Hes6 precedes
that of NEUROD: Moreover, in the regenerating VNO of bulbectomized mice,
NeuroD-positive cells were observed both at the edges and in the center of the
S-VNO, suggesting that neuronal turnover occurred in both regions. Moreover, in
the dorsal fossa of the posterior nasal cavity, several non-sensory patches are
formed between postnatal (P) days 10 and 21 because of programmed death of ORNs
and GBCs. During embryonic stages, the expression of Hes6 and NeuroD in the OE
showed no regional differences. At P3-P7, expression of NeuroD and Hes6
disappeared in the region corresponding to the presumptive non-sensory patches.
The loss of these genes may stop the differentiation and may cause apoptosis of
GBCs and ORNs.

PMID: 12714442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Dev Dyn. 2003 Apr;226(4):675-89.

Hes1 but not Hes5 regulates an astrocyte versus oligodendrocyte fate choice in
glial restricted precursors.

Wu Y(1), Liu Y, Levine EM, Rao MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

To determine the role of Hes genes in the differentiation process of
neuroepithelial (NEP) cells to glial restricted precursor cells (GRPs) and
subsequently GRPs to oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, we have examined the
effects of Hes1 and Hes5 on glial differentiation. We find that both Hes1 and
Hes5 are expressed by GRPs and that Hes1 can drive GRPs to an astrocyte cell fate
at the expense of oligodendrocyte differentiation. Overexpression of Hes1 in GRPs
results in the up-regulation of the astrocyte markers glial fibrillary acidic
protein and CD44 and the down-regulation of oligodendrocyte markers myelin
proteolipid protein/DM20, GalC, and CNPase. Transcription factors involved in
oligodendrocyte differentiation, such as Nkx2.2, Olig1, and Mash1, are also
down-regulated in Hes1-overexpressing cells. The effect of Hes1 on gliogenesis is
stage-specific as Hes1 does not direct NEP cells to an astrocytic fate. In
contrast to Hes1, Hes5 does not promote astrocyte differentiation. Instead, it
inhibits both astrocyte and oligodendrocyte differentiation. Overexpression of
Notch1 has an effect on gliogenesis similar to that of Hes1 and the mRNA levels
of Hes1 are up-regulated in cells overexpressing Notch1, suggesting that Notch1
could be an upstream activator of Hes1.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12666205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Neurosci. 2003 Mar 1;23(5):1730-41.

Glycoprotein 130 signaling regulates Notch1 expression and activation in the
self-renewal of mammalian forebrain neural stem cells.

Chojnacki A(1), Shimazaki T, Gregg C, Weinmaster G, Weiss S.

Author information: 
(1)Genes & Development Research Group, Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy,
University of Calgary, Faculty of Medicine, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Glycoprotein130 (gp130) and Notch signaling are thought to participate in neural 
stem cell (NSC) self-renewal. We asked whether gp130 regulates Notch activity in 
forebrain epidermal growth factor (EGF)-responsive NSCs. Disruption of Notch1
using antisense or a gamma-secretase inhibitor demonstrated a requirement for
Notch1 in the maintenance and proliferation of NSCs. Ciliary neurotrophic factor 
(CNTF) activation of gp130 in NSCs rapidly increased Notch1 expression. NOTCH1
activation, indicated by tumor necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme (TACE)-
and presenilin-mediated processing, also increased. Infusion of EGF+CNTF into
adult forebrain lateral ventricles increased periventricular NOTCH1 compared with
EGF alone. Neither Hes1 (hairy and enhancer of split) nor Hes5 appeared to
mediate gp130-enhanced NOTCH1 signaling that regulates NSC maintenance. This is
the first example of a link between gp130 signaling and NOTCH1 in regulating NSC 
self-renewal.

PMID: 12629177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Neurosci Res. 2003 Mar 1;71(5):648-58.

Neurotrophins facilitate neuronal differentiation of cultured neural stem cells
via induction of mRNA expression of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors 
Mash1 and Math1.

Ito H(1), Nakajima A, Nomoto H, Furukawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, Japan.

Neurogenesis is promoted by basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
Mash1, Math1, or NeuroD but suppressed by another set, Hes1 and Hes5. It remains 
unknown what kinds of extracellular signals are involved in their regulation;
therefore, the effects of neurotrophins on the expression of bHLH factors and
neuronal differentiation were investigated by the use of cultured mouse neural
stem cells. Each neurotrophin increased Mash1 and Math1 mRNAs of the stem cells
growing in the presence of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2), but did not alter 
Hes1, Hes5, or NeuroD mRNA levels. Simultaneously, most of the cells expressed
nestin but not microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), and remained
undifferentiated. FGF-2 removal from the medium reduced the levels of Hes1 and
Hes5 mRNAs and increased those of Mash1, Math1, and NeuroD mRNAs, resulting in
substantial neuronal differentiation. When the cells were pretreated with
brain-derived neurotrophic factor, a neurotrophin, FGF-2 removal enhanced earlier
NeuroD expression and generated many more MAP2-positive cells. The high level of 
Mash1 and Math1 that had been elevated at FGF-2 withdrawal accelerated NeuroD
expression in cooperation with the reduced Hes1 and Hes5 expression. Our present 
results suggest that neurotrophins stimulate neuronal differentiation by altering
the balance of expression of various bHLH transcription factors.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12584723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Exp Mol Med. 2002 Dec 31;34(6):401-10.

Neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) promotes the differentiation of hippocampal 
precursor cells to a neuronal lineage, especially to a glutamatergic neural cell 
type.

Shin MH(1), Lee EG, Lee SH, Lee YS, Son H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hanyang University College of Medicine, 17
Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Korea.

Rat hippocampal precursor cells isolated from hippocampi of embryonic day 16.5
(E16.5) rat embryos were found to proliferate in the presence of basic fibroblast
growth factor. Addition of soluble neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) to these 
precursor cells reduced cell proliferation in a dose dependent manner and
enhanced the induction of precursor cells' differentiation to the neuronal
lineage. Given these findings that NCAM induces the differentiation of
hippocampal precursor cells, we investigated possible effects of NCAM on the
expression of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors during the
differentiation. Soluble NCAM upregulated the transcription of bHLH transcription
factors, neurogenin1 and NeuroD, but decreased HES5. Western blot analysis showed
that NCAM increased the expression levels of CaMKII, p-MAPK, GluR1 and NR1 but
decreased p-STAT3. These results support a role for NCAM in the inhibition of
proliferation and the induction of neural differentiation of hippocampal neural
precursor cells, and act as developmental regulators of the bHLH families,
ultimately leading to the generation of glutamatergic neural cell types in the
differentiation of hippocampal precursor cells.

PMID: 12526081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Neuroreport. 2002 Dec 20;13(18):2385-8.

Neuronal injury affects expression of helix-loop-helix transcription factors.

Kabos P(1), Kabosova A, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute, CSMC Burns and
Allen Research Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of medicine,
8700 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. kabosp@cshs.org

Helix-loop-helix transcription (HLH) factors regulate several stages of neuronal 
development including differentiation of individual populations of neurons and
neurite growth. Here we demonstrate that axonal injury of corticospinal and
dorsal root ganglion neurons induces changes in the expression of several HLH
transcription factors that function as negative regulators of neurogenesis and
neurite outgrowth. However, the expression of HLH transcription factors that
stimulate neurogenesis is not affected by the axonal injury. Expression of HES,
SHARP and Id family members is suppressed shortly after axonal injury and
expression returns to normal levels after 14 days. We hypothesize that
down-regulation of these HLH transcription factors is required for initiation of 
regenerative response to axonal injury.

PMID: 12499834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5241-53.

The role of Phox2b in synchronizing pan-neuronal and type-specific aspects of
neurogenesis.

Dubreuil V(1), Hirsch MR, Jouve C, Brunet JF, Goridis C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Département de Biologie, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46, rue
d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Within the developing vertebrate nervous system, specific subclasses of neurons
are produced in vastly different numbers at defined times and locations. This
implies the concomitant activation of a program that controls pan-neuronal
differentiation and of a program that specifies neuronal subtype identity, but
how these programs are coordinated in time and space is not well understood. Our 
previous loss- and gain-of-function studies have defined Phox2b as a homeodomain 
transcription factor that coordinately regulates generic and type-specific
neuronal properties. It is necessary and sufficient to impose differentiation
towards a branchio- and viscero-motoneuronal phenotype and at the same time
promotes generic neuronal differentiation. We have examined the underlying
genetic interactions. We show that Phox2b has a dual action on pan-neuronal
differentiation. It upregulates the expression of proneural genes (Ngn2) when
expressed alone and upregulates the expression of Mash1 when expressed in
combination with Nkx2.2. By a separate pathway, Phox2b represses expression of
the inhibitors of neurogenesis Hes5 and Id2. The role of Phox2b in the
specification of neuronal subtype identity appears to depend in part on its
capacity to act as a patterning gene in the progenitor domain. Phox2b
misexpression represses the Pax6 and Olig2 genes, which should inhibit a
branchiomotor fate, and induces Nkx6.1 and Nkx6.2, which are expressed in
branchiomotor progenitors. We further show that Phox2b behaves like a
transcriptional activator in the promotion of both, generic neuronal
differentiation and expression of the motoneuronal marker Islet1. These results
provide insights into the mechanisms by which a homeodomain transcription factor 
through interaction with other factors controls both generic and type-specific
features of neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 12399315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Nat Med. 2002 Oct;8(10):1115-21. Epub 2002 Sep 23.

Multiple sclerosis: re-expression of a developmental pathway that restricts
oligodendrocyte maturation.

John GR(1), Shankar SL, Shafit-Zagardo B, Massimi A, Lee SC, Raine CS, Brosnan
CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (Neuropathology), Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, USA. gljohn@aecom.yu.edu

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2002 Oct;8(10):1075-6.

During mammalian central nervous system (CNS) development, contact-mediated
activation of Notch1 receptors on oligodendrocyte precursors by the ligand
Jagged1 induces Hes5, which inhibits maturation of these cells. Here we tested
whether the Notch pathway is re-expressed in the adult CNS in multiple sclerosis 
(MS), an inflammatory demyelinating disease in which remyelination is typically
limited. We found that transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta 1), a cytokine
upregulated in MS, specifically re-induced Jagged1 in primary cultures of human
astrocytes. Within and around active MS plaques lacking remyelination, Jagged1
was expressed at high levels by hypertrophic astrocytes, whereas Notch1 and Hes5 
localized to cells with an immature oligodendrocyte phenotype, and TGF-beta 1 was
associated with perivascular extracellular matrix in the same areas. In contrast,
there was negligible Jagged1 expression in remyelinated lesions. Experiments in
vitro showed that Jagged1 signaling inhibited process outgrowth from primary
human oligodendrocytes. These data are the first to implicate the Notch pathway
in the limited remyelination in MS. Thus, Notch may represent a potential target 
for therapeutic intervention in this disease.

PMID: 12357247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Br Med Bull. 2002;63:39-57.

Sensory organ development in the inner ear: molecular and cellular mechanisms.

Bryant J(1), Goodyear RJ, Richardson GP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.

The molecular mechanisms underlying the specification of sensory organs in the
inner ear and the development of hair and supporting cells within these organs
are described. The different organs are all derived from a common pro-sensory
region, and may be specified by their proximity to the boundaries between
compartments - broad domains within the otocyst defined by the asymmetric
expression patterns of transcription factors. Activation of Notch may specify the
pro-sensory region, and lateral inhibition mediated by Notch signalling
influences whether cells of common lineage in a sensory patch differentiate as
either hair cells or supporting cells. The transcription factors Math1 and Brn3.1
are required for hair cell differentiation, and supporting cells express negative
regulators of neurogenesis, Hes1 and Hes5. Retinoic acid and thyroid hormone
influence early aspects and timing of hair cell differentiation, respectively.
Development of the hair cell's mechanosensory hair bundle involves interactions
between the cytoskeleton, cell-surface adhesion molecules, receptors and
associated extracellular matrix.

PMID: 12324383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Hear Res. 2002 Aug;170(1-2):22-31.

Notch/Notch ligands and Math1 expression patterns in the organ of Corti of
wild-type and Hes1 and Hes5 mutant mice.

Zine A(1), de Ribaupierre F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Lausanne, 7 Rue du Bugnon, CH-1005,
Lausanne, Switzerland. azel.zine@iphysiol.unil.ch

The sensory epithelium of the mammalian cochlea (the organ of Corti) represents
an excellent developmental system. The organ of Corti contains two main cell
types: the sensory hair cells and the supporting cells which are organized in a
defined mosaic pattern. Previous results have demonstrated the participation of
Notch signaling in the regulation of the pattern of hair cell differentiation
within this sensory mosaic. It has also been shown that the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Math1 is a positive regulator of
hair cell differentiation. We demonstrated that Hes1 and Hes5, two members of the
inhibitory bHLH transcription factors, act as negative regulators of hair cell
differentiation. Loss-of-function studies implicating the neurogenic genes
Notch1, Jag2, Hes1 and Hes5 generated a significant increase in the number of
hair cells. However, their functional interplay within the organ of Corti has not
been determined. To clarify the mechanisms that regulate hair cell
differentiation, we examined the expression of Notch/Notch ligand system and
Math1 in the developing organ of Corti of Hes1- and Hes5-deficient mice. Our
study suggests complex specific relationships between Notch signaling, Math1 and 
Hes1/Hes5 in the control of hair cell differentiation in the developing organ of 
Corti.

PMID: 12208538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mech Dev. 2002 Jun;114(1-2):153-9.

Notch1 and its ligands Delta-like and Jagged are expressed and active in distinct
cell populations in the postnatal mouse brain.

Stump G(1), Durrer A, Klein AL, Lütolf S, Suter U, Taylor V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

Notch signaling plays a pivotal role in the regulation of vertebrate
neurogenesis. However, in vitro experiments suggest that Notch1 may also be
involved in the regulation of later stages of brain development. We have
addressed putative roles in the central nervous system by examining the
expression of Notch signaling cascade components in the postnatal mouse brain. In
situ mRNA hybridization revealed that Notch1 is associated with cells in the
subventricular zone, the dentate gyrus and the rostromigratory stream, all
regions of continued neurogenesis in the postnatal brain. In addition, Notch1 is 
expressed at low levels throughout the cortex and olfactory bulb and shows
striking expression in the cerebellar Purkinje cell layer. The Notch ligands,
including Delta-like1 and 3 and Jagged1 and Jagged2, show distinct expression
patterns in the developing and adult brain overlapping that of Notch1. In
addition, the downstream targets of the Notch signaling cascade Hes1, Hes3, Hes5 
and the intrinsic Notch regulatory proteins Numb and Numblike also show active
signaling in distinct brain regions. Hes5 coincides with the majority of Notch1
expression and can be detected in the cerebral cortex, cerebellum and putative
germinal zones. Hes3, on the other hand, shows a restricted expression in
cerebellar Purkinje cells. The distribution of Notch1 and its putative ligands
suggest distinct roles in specific subsets of cells in the postnatal brain
including putative stem cells and differentiated neurons.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12175503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 15;248(2):281-93.

Lunatic fringe, FGF, and BMP regulate the Notch pathway during epithelial
morphogenesis of teeth.

Mustonen T(1), Tümmers M, Mikami T, Itoh N, Zhang N, Gridley T, Thesleff I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, University of Helsinki, Helsinki
FIN-00014, Finland.

Teeth develop as epithelial appendages, and their morphogenesis is regulated by
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions and conserved signaling pathways common to
many developmental processes. A key event during tooth morphogenesis is the
transition from bud to cap stage when the epithelial bud is divided into specific
compartments distinguished by morphology as well as gene expression patterns. The
enamel knot, a signaling center, forms and regulates the shape and size of the
tooth. Mesenchymal signals are necessary for epithelial patterning and for the
formation and maintenance of the epithelial compartments. We studied the
expression of Notch pathway molecules during the bud-to-cap stage transition of
the developing mouse tooth. Lunatic fringe expression was restricted to the
epithelium, where it formed a boundary flanking the enamel knot. The Lunatic
fringe expression domains overlapped only partly with the expression of Notch1
and Notch2, which were coexpressed with Hes1. We examined the regulation of
Lunatic fringe and Hes1 in cultured explants of dental epithelium. The expression
of Lunatic fringe and Hes1 depended on mesenchymal signals and both were
positively regulated by FGF-10. BMP-4 antagonized the stimulatory effect of
FGF-10 on Lunatic fringe expression but had a synergistic effect with FGF-10 on
Hes1 expression. Recombinant Lunatic fringe protein induced Hes1 expression in
the dental epithelium, suggesting that Lunatic fringe can act also
extracellularly. Lunatic fringe mutant mice did not reveal tooth abnormalities,
and no changes were observed in the expression patterns of other Fringe genes. We
conclude that Lunatic fringe may play a role in boundary formation of the enamel 
knot and that Notch-signaling in the dental epithelium is regulated by
mesenchymal FGFs and BMP.

PMID: 12167404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Science. 2002 Jul 19;297(5580):365-9.

Regulation of cerebral cortical size by control of cell cycle exit in neural
precursors.

Chenn A(1), Walsh CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Jul 19;297(5580):328.

Transgenic mice expressing a stabilized beta-catenin in neural precursors develop
enlarged brains with increased cerebral cortical surface area and folds
resembling sulci and gyri of higher mammals. Brains from transgenic animals have 
enlarged lateral ventricles lined with neuroepithelial precursor cells,
reflecting an expansion of the precursor population. Compared with wild-type
precursors, a greater proportion of transgenic precursors reenter the cell cycle 
after mitosis. These results show that beta-catenin can function in the decision 
of precursors to proliferate or differentiate during mammalian neuronal
development and suggest that beta-catenin can regulate cerebral cortical size by 
controlling the generation of neural precursor cells.

PMID: 12130776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 16;277(33):29399-405. Epub 2002 Jun 5.

The nephroblastoma overexpressed gene (NOV/ccn3) protein associates with Notch1
extracellular domain and inhibits myoblast differentiation via Notch signaling
pathway.

Sakamoto K(1), Yamaguchi S, Ando R, Miyawaki A, Kabasawa Y, Takagi M, Li CL,
Perbal B, Katsube K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.

We demonstrate a novel interaction of the nephroblastoma overexpressed gene
(NOV), a member of the CCN gene family, with the Notch signaling pathway. NOV
associates with the epidermal growth factor-like repeats of Notch1 by the CT
(C-terminal cysteine knot) domain. The promoters of HES1 and HES5, which are the 
downstream transducers of Notch signaling, were activated by NOV. Expressions of 
NOV and Notch1 were concomitant in the presomitic mesoderm and later in the
myocytes and chondrocytes, suggesting their synergistic effects in mesenchymal
cell differentiation. In C2/4 myogenic cells, elevated expression of NOV led to
down-regulation of MyoD and myogenin, resulting in inhibition of myotube
formation. These results indicate that NOV-Notch1 association exerts a positive
effect on Notch signaling and consequently suppresses myogenesis.

PMID: 12050162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Oncogene. 2002 May 30;21(24):3855-63.

Overexpression of the Notch target genes Hes in vivo induces lymphoid and myeloid
alterations.

Kawamata S(1), Du C, Li K, Lavau C.

Author information: 
(1)SyStemix Inc. 3155 Porter Dr., Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

To examine the effects of Notch signaling on hematopoiesis, we transplanted mice 
with progenitors transduced with a constitutively active form of Notch1
(Notch1IC) or the Notch1 target genes Hes. Notch1IC-transduced cells induce T
cell tumors and cannot generate B lymphocytes in vivo. Hes-transplanted mice
remained healthy but cells transduced with Hes1 or Hes5 were partially impaired
in their ability to differentiate into B cells. Both Hes1 and Hes5 were
upregulated in the BM of Notch1IC mice and their ability to interfere with the
transcriptional activity of E2A in a reporter assay was comparable to that of
Notch1IC. This suggests that the inhibition of B cell development in the
Notch1IC-transduced cells could be mediated by the interference of HES1/HES5
proteins with E2A. Hes1-, Hes5- and Notch1IC-transduced bone marrow cells
cultured ex vivo in a colony forming assay in the presence of cytokines that
promote myeloid differentiation remained very immature, indicating that the
myeloid potential of these bone marrow cells was altered. Thymocytes
overexpressing Hes1, Hes5 or Notch1IC matured normally into CD4 and CD8 single
positive cells in vivo. Altogether our data suggest that Notch1IC induces T cell 
tumors independently of Hes genes but that its interference with lymphoid B and
myeloid maturation is partly mediated by Hes1 and Hes5. DOI:

PMID: 12032823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Neurosci. 2002 May 1;22(9):3445-53.

Neuronal deficiency of presenilin 1 inhibits amyloid plaque formation and
corrects hippocampal long-term potentiation but not a cognitive defect of amyloid
precursor protein [V717I] transgenic mice.

Dewachter I(1), Reversé D, Caluwaerts N, Ris L, Kuipéri C, Van den Haute C,
Spittaels K, Umans L, Serneels L, Thiry E, Moechars D, Mercken M, Godaux E, Van
Leuven F.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Genetics Group, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, B-3000 Leuven,
Belgium, Laboratory of Neuroscience, University of Mons-Hainaut, 7000 Mons,
Belgium.

In the brain of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, neurotoxic amyloid peptides
accumulate and are deposited as senile plaques. A major therapeutic strategy aims
to decrease production of amyloid peptides by inhibition of gamma-secretase.
Presenilins are polytopic transmembrane proteins that are essential for
gamma-secretase activity during development and in amyloid production. By
loxP/Cre-recombinase-mediated deletion, we generated mice with postnatal,
neuron-specific presenilin-1 (PS1) deficiency, denoted PS1(n-/-), that were
viable and fertile, with normal brain morphology. In adult PS1(n-/-) mice, levels
of endogenous brain amyloid peptides were strongly decreased, concomitant with
accumulation of amyloid precursor protein (APP) C-terminal fragments. In the
cross of APP[V717I]xPS1 (n-/-) double transgenic mice, the neuronal absence of
PS1 effectively prevented amyloid pathology, even in mice that were 18 months
old. This contrasted sharply with APP[V717I] single transgenic mice that all
develop amyloid pathology at the age of 10-12 months. In APP[V717I]xPS1 (n-/-)
mice, long-term potentiation (LTP) was practically rescued at the end of the 2 hr
observation period, again contrasting sharply with the strongly impaired LTP in
APP[V717I] mice. The findings demonstrate the critical involvement of amyloid
peptides in defective LTP in APP transgenic mice. Although these data open
perspectives for therapy of AD by gamma-secretase inhibition, the neuronal
absence of PS1 failed to rescue the cognitive defect, assessed by the object
recognition test, of the parent APP[V717I] transgenic mice. This points to
potentially detrimental effects of accumulating APP C99 fragments and demands
further study of the consequences of inhibition of gamma-secretase activity. In
addition, our data highlight the complex functional relation of APP and PS1 to
cognition and neuronal plasticity in adult and aging brain.

PMID: 11978821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1795-806.

Axial skeletal defects caused by mutation in the spondylocostal dysplasia/pudgy
gene Dll3 are associated with disruption of the segmentation clock within the
presomitic mesoderm.

Dunwoodie SL(1), Clements M, Sparrow DB, Sa X, Conlon RA, Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. s.dunwoodie@victorchang.unsw.edu.au

A loss-of-function mutation in the mouse delta-like3 (Dll3) gene has been
generated following gene targeting, and results in severe axial skeletal defects.
These defects, which consist of highly disorganised vertebrae and costal defects,
are similar to those associated with the Dll3-dependent pudgy mutant in mouse and
with spondylocostal dysplasia (MIM 277300) in humans. This study demonstrates
that Dll3(neo) and Dll3(pu) are functionally equivalent alleles with respect to
the skeletal dysplasia, and we suggest that the three human DLL3 mutations
associated with spondylocostal dysplasia are also functionally equivalent to the 
Dll3(neo) null allele. Our phenotypic analysis of Dll3(neo)/Dll3(neo) mutants
shows that the developmental origins of the skeletal defects lie in delayed and
irregular somite formation, which results in the perturbation of anteroposterior 
somite polarity. As the expression of Lfng, Hes1, Hes5 and Hey1 is disrupted in
the presomitic mesoderm, we suggest that the somitic aberrations are founded in
the disruption of the segmentation clock that intrinsically oscillates within
presomitic mesoderm.

PMID: 11923214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 8;291(4):775-9.

Functional diversity among Notch1, Notch2, and Notch3 receptors.

Shimizu K(1), Chiba S, Saito T, Kumano K, Hamada Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

To clarify functional diversities among the Notch receptors, we generated
truncated forms of Notch1, Notch2, and Notch3 comprising the intracellular domain
(aN1, aN2, and aN3) and investigated their transcriptional activities for HES1
and HES5 promoters driving the luciferase reporter gene (HES1-Luc and HES5-Luc). 
The reporter assays demonstrated that the transcriptional activities of aNs were 
markedly different from each other and dependent on the promoters examined.
Furthermore, relative activities between some aN and another for each promoter
were altered by the expression level of RBP-J kappa. We also found that the
activities of aN1 and aN3 were reduced by coexpression of aN2. These observations
suggest that each Notch receptor has a diverse role in the downstream gene
expression and that the levels of HES1 and HES5 gene expression are complexly
determined by various factors, such as the type and combination of the Notch
receptors which confer the downstream signals and the expression level of RBP-J
kappa.

PMID: 11866432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Neurosci Res. 2002 Feb 1;67(3):309-20.

Central nervous system myelination in mice with deficient expression of Notch1
receptor.

Givogri MI(1), Costa RM, Schonmann V, Silva AJ, Campagnoni AT, Bongarzone ER.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiochemistry Group, Mental Retardation Research Center, School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90024, USA.

Activity of the Notch1 gene is known to inhibit oligodendrocyte (OL)
differentiation in vitro. We tested the hypothesis that the Notch1 pathway
regulates in vivo myelin formation, by examining brain myelination of Notch1
receptor null heterozygotes mutant animals (Notch1(+/-)). We show that a
deficiency in Notch1 expression leads to increased abundance of products of
specific myelin genes in myelinated areas of the brain during the first 2 weeks
of postnatal life. We observed increased numbers of myelinated axons in optic
nerves and the presence of myelinated fibers in the molecular layer (ML) of the
Notch1(+/-) cerebella. These findings were accompanied by up-regulation of Mash1 
and down-regulation of Hes5 proteins. In addition, we found expression of
Jagged1, one of the Notch1 activators, in unmyelinated axons of the cerebellar ML
during normal development. Our findings indicate that the Jagged/Notch signaling 
pathway might actively participate in the regulation of myelination during
central nervous system development and suggest that certain neuronal populations 
might regulate whether their axons are myelinated by the expression of inhibitory
signals such as Jagged1.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11813235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Neuron. 2001 Sep 13;31(5):713-26.

APP processing and synaptic plasticity in presenilin-1 conditional knockout mice.

Yu H(1), Saura CA, Choi SY, Sun LD, Yang X, Handler M, Kawarabayashi T, Younkin
L, Fedeles B, Wilson MA, Younkin S, Kandel ER, Kirkwood A, Shen J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

We have developed a presenilin-1 (PS1) conditional knockout mouse (cKO), in which
PS1 inactivation is restricted to the postnatal forebrain. The PS1 cKO mouse is
viable and exhibits no gross abnormalities. The carboxy-terminal fragments of the
amyloid precursor protein differentially accumulate in the cerebral cortex of cKO
mice, while generation of beta-amyloid peptides is reduced. Expression of Notch
downstream effector genes, Hes1, Hes5, and Dll1, is unaffected in the cKO cortex.
Although basal synaptic transmission, long-term potentiation, and long-term
depression at hippocampal area CA1 synapses are normal, the PS1 cKO mice exhibit 
subtle but significant deficits in long-term spatial memory. These results
demonstrate that inactivation of PS1 function in the adult cerebral cortex leads 
to reduced Abeta generation and subtle cognitive deficits without affecting
expression of Notch downstream genes.

PMID: 11567612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):45031-40. Epub 2001 Sep 19.

Role of Deltex-1 as a transcriptional regulator downstream of the Notch receptor.

Yamamoto N(1), Yamamoto S, Inagaki F, Kawaichi M, Fukamizu A, Kishi N, Matsuno K,
Nakamura K, Weinmaster G, Okano H, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Intercellular signaling through the cell-surface receptor Notch plays important
roles in a variety of developmental processes as well as in pathogenesis of some 
human cancers and genetic disorders. However, the mechanisms by which Notch
signals are transduced into cells still remain elusive. Here we investigated the 
signaling mechanisms for Notch in the cell fate control of neural progenitor
cells. We show that Deltex-1 (DTX1), a mammalian homolog of Drosophila Deltex,
mediates a Notch signal to block differentiation of neural progenitor cells. We
found that a significant fraction of DTX1 proteins were localized in the nucleus 
and physically interacted with the transcriptional coactivator p300. Through its 
binding to p300, DTX1 inhibited transcriptional activation by the neural-specific
helix-loop-helix-type transcription factor MASH1, and this mechanism is likely
responsible for the differentiation inhibition of neural progenitor cells. Our
results further suggest that DTX1 regulates transcription independently of the
previously characterized Notch signaling pathway involving RBP-J and HES1/HES5.
Thus, DTX1 serves as an important signaling component downstream of Notch that
regulates transcription in the nucleus.

PMID: 11564735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Neuroscience. 2001;106(1):79-88.

Differential regulation of basic helix-loop-helix mRNAs in the dentate gyrus
following status epilepticus.

Elliott RC(1), Khademi S, Pleasure SJ, Parent JM, Lowenstein DH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Brain Plasticity and Epilepsy, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck 
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

In various chemoconvulsant models of human temporal lobe epilepsy, the induction 
of epileptogenesis by a prolonged period of continuous seizure activity is
accompanied by significant changes in hippocampal structure. These changes
include an increase in neurogenesis within the proliferative subgranular zone
(SGZ) of the dentate gyrus and induction of mossy fiber sprouting in mature
dentate granule cells. As dentate granule cell neurogenesis and axon outgrowth
are also hallmarks of hippocampal development, we hypothesized that molecules
involved in normal development may also play a role in similar changes associated
with epileptogenesis. To begin to test this hypothesis, we have analyzed the
expression patterns of multiple members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
family of transcription factors in both normal and epileptic adult rats. bHLH
protein expression has been found recently in dentate granule cells at specific
developmental stages, and analysis of developmental models suggests specific
neural differentiation functions for these molecules. We show that mRNA
expression of all seven bHLH family members examined in this study, as well as
the divergent homeobox protein Prox1, is present in the adult. Patterns of
expression varied considerably between family members, ranging from the limited
expression of Mash1 in the neurogenic SGZ of the dentate gyrus to the scattered, 
widespread profile of Hes5 throughout the dentate gyrus and the hippocampus
proper. Moreover, these varied profiles of expression were differentially
regulated following status epilepticus, with some increasing (Mash1, Id2), some
falling (Hes5, Prox1), and others remaining mostly unchanged (NeuroD/BETA2,
NeuroD2/NDRF, Id3, Rath2/Nex1). While the function of these molecules in the
adult brain remains to be characterized, our findings support the idea that
molecules controlling cell-fate decisions in the developing dentate gyrus are
also operative during seizure-induced neurogenesis and plasticity.

PMID: 11564418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Genes Dev. 2001 Sep 15;15(18):2470-82.

The murine winged helix transcription factors, Foxc1 and Foxc2, are both required
for cardiovascular development and somitogenesis.

Kume T(1), Jiang H, Topczewska JM, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The murine Foxc1/Mf1 and Foxc2/Mfh1 genes encode closely related forkhead/winged 
helix transcription factors with overlapping expression in the forming somites
and head mesoderm and endothelial and mesenchymal cells of the developing heart
and blood vessels. Embryos lacking either Foxc1 or Foxc2, and most compound
heterozygotes, die pre- or perinatally with similar abnormal phenotypes,
including defects in the axial skeleton and cardiovascular system. However,
somites and major blood vessels do form. This suggested that the genes have
similar, dose-dependent functions, and compensate for each other in the early
development of the heart, blood vessels, and somites. In support of this
hypothesis, we show here that compound Foxc1; Foxc2 homozygotes die earlier and
with much more severe defects than single homozygotes alone. Significantly, they 
have profound abnormalities in the first and second branchial arches, and the
early remodeling of blood vessels. Moreover, they show a complete absence of
segmented paraxial mesoderm, including anterior somites. Analysis of compound
homozygotes shows that Foxc1 and Foxc2 are both required for transcription in the
anterior presomitic mesoderm of paraxis, Mesp1, Mesp2, Hes5, and Notch1, and for 
the formation of sharp boundaries of Dll1, Lfng, and ephrinB2 expression. We
propose that the two genes interact with the Notch signaling pathway and are
required for the prepatterning of anterior and posterior domains in the
presumptive somites through a putative Notch/Delta/Mesp regulatory loop.

PMCID: PMC312788
PMID: 11562355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2000 Sep;1(2):161-71.

Expression of Math1 and HES5 in the cochleae of wildtype and Jag2 mutant mice.

Lanford PJ(1), Shailam R, Norton CR, Gridley T, Kelley MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Georgetown University School of Medicine,
Washington, DC 20007, USA. lanfordp@nidcd.nih.gov

The sensory epithelium within the mammalian cochlea (the organ of Corti) is a
strictly ordered cellular array consisting of sensory hair cells and nonsensory
supporting cells. Previous research has demonstrated that Notch-mediated lateral 
inhibition plays a key role in the determination of cell types within this array.
Specificallly, genetic deletion of the Notch ligand, Jagged2, results in a
significant increase in the number of hair cells that develop within the sensory 
epithelium, presumably as a result of a decrease in Notch activation. In
contrast, the downstream mediators and targets of the Notch pathway in the inner 
ear have not been determined but they may include genes encoding the proneural
gene Math1 as well as the HES family of inhibitory bHLH proteins. To determine
the potential roles of these genes in cochlear development, in situ hybridization
for Math1 and HES5 was performed on the cochleae of wild-type vs. Jagged2 mutants
(Jag2deltaDSL). Results in wild-type cochleae show that expression of Math1
transcripts in the duct begins on E13 and ultimately becomes restricted to hair
cells in the sensory epithelium. In contrast, expression of HES5 begins on E15
and becomes restricted to supporting cells in the epithelium. Results in Jag2
mutant cochleae suggest that Math1 transcripts are ultimately maintained in a
larger number of cells as compared with wild-type, while transcripts for HES5 are
dramatically reduced throughout the epithelium. These results are consistent with
the hypothesis that activation of Notch via Jagged2 acts to inhibit expression of
Math1 in cochlear progenitor cells, possibly through the activity of HES5.

PMCID: PMC2504537
PMID: 11545143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2001 Jun;46(7):821-8.

[Cell-intrinsic timer regulating oligodendrocyte development].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London.

PMID: 11431925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Neurosci. 2001 Jul 1;21(13):4712-20.

Hes1 and Hes5 activities are required for the normal development of the hair
cells in the mammalian inner ear.

Zine A(1), Aubert A, Qiu J, Therianos S, Guillemot F, Kageyama R, de Ribaupierre 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Lausanne, 1005 Lausanne, Switzerland.
azel.zine@iphysiol.unil.ch

The mammalian inner ear contains two sensory organs, the cochlea and vestibule.
Their sensory neuroepithelia are characterized by a mosaic of hair cells and
supporting cells. Cochlear hair cells differentiate in four rows: a single row of
inner hair cells (IHCs) and three rows of outer hair cells (OHCs). Recent studies
have shown that Math1, a mammalian homolog of Drosophila atonal is a positive
regulator of hair cell differentiation. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes
Hes1 and Hes5 (mammalian hairy and Enhancer-of-split homologs) can influence cell
fate determination by acting as negative regulators to inhibit the action of
bHLH-positive regulators. We show by using reverse transcription-PCR analysis
that Hes1, Hes5, and Math1 are expressed in the developing mouse cochleae. In
situ hybridization revealed a widespread expression of Hes1 in the greater
epithelial ridge (GER) and in lesser epithelial ridge (LER) regions. Hes5 is
predominantly expressed in the LER, in supporting cells, and in a narrow band of 
cells within the GER. Examination of cochleae from Hes1(-/-) mice showed a
significant increase in the number of IHCs, whereas cochleae from Hes5(-/-) mice 
showed a significant increase in the number of OHCs. In the vestibular system,
targeted deletion of Hes1 and to a lesser extent Hes5 lead to formation of
supernumerary hair cells in the saccule and utricle. The supernumerary hair cells
in the mutant mice showed an upregulation of Math1. These data indicate that Hes1
and Hes5 participate together for the control of inner ear hair cell production, 
likely through the negative regulation of Math1.

PMID: 11425898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30467-74. Epub 2001 Jun 8.

Roles of the basic helix-loop-helix genes Hes1 and Hes5 in expansion of neural
stem cells of the developing brain.

Ohtsuka T(1), Sakamoto M, Guillemot F, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Neural stem cells, which differentiate into neurons and glia, are present in the 
ventricular zone of the embryonal brain. The precise mechanism by which neural
stem cells are maintained during embryogenesis remains to be determined. Here, we
found that transient misexpression of the basic helix-loop-helix genes Hes1 and
Hes5 keeps embryonal telencephalic cells undifferentiated although they have been
shown to induce gliogenesis in the retina. These telencephalic cells later
differentiate into neurons and astroglia when Hes expression is down-regulated,
suggesting that Hes1- and Hes5- expressing cells are maintained as neural stem
cells during embryogenesis. Conversely, in the absence of Hes1 and Hes5, neural
stem cells are not properly maintained, generating fewer and smaller neurospheres
than the wild type. These results indicate that Hes1 and Hes5 play an important
role in the maintenance of neural stem cells but not in gliogenesis in the
embryonal telencephalon.

PMID: 11399758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1391-402.

The role of presenilin 1 during somite segmentation.

Koizumi K(1), Nakajima M, Yuasa S, Saga Y, Sakai T, Kuriyama T, Shirasawa T,
Koseki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The Notch signalling pathway plays essential roles during the specification of
the rostral and caudal somite halves and subsequent segmentation of the paraxial 
mesoderm. We have re-investigated the role of presenilin 1 (Ps1; encoded by
Psen1) during segmentation using newly generated alleles of the Psen1 mutation.
In Psen1-deficient mice, proteolytic activation of Notch1 was significantly
affected and the expression of several genes involved in the Notch signalling
pathway was altered, including Delta-like3, Hes5, lunatic fringe (Lfng) and
Mesp2. Thus, Ps1-dependent activation of the Notch pathway is essential for
caudal half somite development. We observed defects in Notch signalling in both
the caudal and rostral region of the presomitic mesoderm. In the caudal
presomitic mesoderm, Ps1 was involved in maintaining the amplitude of cyclic
activation of the Notch pathway, as represented by significant reduction of Lfng 
expression in Psen1-deficient mice. In the rostral presomitic mesoderm, rapid
downregulation of the Mesp2 expression in the presumptive caudal half somite
depends on Ps1 and is a prerequisite for caudal somite half specification.
Chimaera analysis between Psen1-deficient and wild-type cells revealed that
condensation of the wild-type cells in the caudal half somite was concordant with
the formation of segment boundaries, while mutant and wild-type cells
intermingled in the presomitic mesoderm. This implies that periodic activation of
the Notch pathway in the presomitic mesoderm is still latent to segregate the
presumptive rostral and caudal somite. A transient episode of Mesp2 expression
might be needed for Notch activation by Ps1 to confer rostral or caudal
properties. In summary, we propose that Ps1 is involved in the functional
manifestation of the segmentation clock in the presomitic mesoderm.

PMID: 11262239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Genes Cells. 2001 Feb;6(2):175-85.

Hes7: a bHLH-type repressor gene regulated by Notch and expressed in the
presomitic mesoderm.

Bessho Y(1), Miyoshi G, Sakata R, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Whereas Notch signalling is essential for somitogenesis, mice
deficient for the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes Hes1 and Hes5, downstream
Notch effectors, display normal somite formation, indicating that there may be an
as-yet unidentified Hes1-related bHLH gene.
RESULTS: We identified a novel bHLH gene, designated Hes7, from mouse embryos.
Hes7 has a conserved bHLH domain in the amino-terminal region and the WRPW domain
at the carboxy-terminal end, like Hes1. The mouse Hes7 gene is located next to
Aloxe3, which is mapped to a position 37.0 cM from the centromere on chromosome
11. In a transfection analysis, Hes7 represses transcription from the N box- and 
E box-containing promoters. In addition, Hes7 suppresses the E47-induced
transcriptional activation. Promoter analysis indicated that Hes7 expression is
controlled by Notch signalling. Strikingly, Hes7 is specifically expressed in the
presomitic mesoderm in a dynamic manner. We also identified two related bHLH
genes from human: one is closely related to mouse Hes7 and therefore designated
hHes7 and the other designated hHes4.
CONCLUSION: The structure, transcriptional activity and expression pattern in the
presomitic mesoderm of Hes7 are very similar to those of Hes1, suggesting that
Hes7, together with Hes1, may play a role in somite formation under the control
of Notch signalling.

PMID: 11260262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000;920:165-70.

Role of presenilin-1 in murine neural development.

Yang X(1), Handler M, Shen J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Our previous studies showed that presenilin-1 (PS1) is required for murine neural
and skeletal development. Here we report that the reduction in the neural
progenitor cells observed in the PS1-/- mouse brain is due to premature
differentiation of progenitor cells, rather than to increased apoptotic cell
death or decreased cell proliferation. In the ventricular zone of PS1-/- mice,
expression of the Notch1 downstream effector gene Hes5 is reduced, and expression
of the Notch1 ligand Dll1 is elevated, indicating reduced Notch signaling. These 
results provide direct evidence that PS1 is involved in the regulation of
neurogenesis and Notch signaling during development.

PMID: 11193146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Development. 2000 Nov;127(21):4551-60.

Hes1 is a negative regulator of inner ear hair cell differentiation.

Zheng JL(1), Shou J, Guillemot F, Kageyama R, Gao WQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080,
USA.

Hair cell fate determination in the inner ear has been shown to be controlled by 
specific genes. Recent loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments have
demonstrated that Math1, a mouse homolog of the Drosophila gene atonal, is
essential for the production of hair cells. To identify genes that may interact
with Math1 and inhibit hair cell differentiation, we have focused on Hes1, a
mammalian hairy and enhancer of split homolog, which is a negative regulator of
neurogenesis. We report here that targeted deletion of Hes1 leads to formation of
supernumerary hair cells in the cochlea and utricle of the inner ear. RT-PCR
analysis shows that Hes1 is expressed in inner ear during hair cell
differentiation and its expression is maintained in adulthood. In situ
hybridization with late embryonic inner ear tissue reveals that Hes1 is expressed
in supporting cells, but not hair cells, of the vestibular sensory epithelium. In
the cochlea, Hes1 is selectively expressed in the greater epithelial ridge and
lesser epithelial ridge regions which are adjacent to inner and outer hair cells.
Co-transfection experiments in postnatal rat explant cultures show that
overexpression of Hes1 prevents hair cell differentiation induced by Math1.
Therefore Hes1 can negatively regulate hair cell differentiation by antagonizing 
Math1. These results suggest that a balance between Math1 and negative regulators
such as Hes1 is crucial for the production of an appropriate number of inner ear 
hair cells.

PMID: 11023859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Neurocytol. 1999 Oct-Nov;28(10-11):809-19.

Expression of proneural and neurogenic genes in the embryonic mammalian
vestibular system.

Shailam R(1), Lanford PJ, Dolinsky CM, Norton CR, Gridley T, Kelley MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Georgetown University School of Medicine, 3900
Reservoir Rd, NW, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

One of the most striking aspects of all auditory and vestibular sensory epithelia
is the mosaic pattern of hair cells and supporting cells. The factors that are
required for the development of this mosaic have not been determined, however the
results of recent studies have demonstrated that components of the neurogenic
(Notch) signaling pathway are expressed in the developing inner ears of a number 
of different vertebrate species. To examine whether this signaling pathway may
play a similar role in the development of the hair cell mosaic in the mammalian
vestibular system, the expression patterns of proneural (Math1) and neurogenic
(Notch1, Jagged2, HES5) genes were examined in the developing mouse inner ear.
Results indicate that Notch1 is initially expressed throughout the developing
inner ear and becomes restricted to non-sensory cells within the developing
sensory epithelia. In contrast, initial expression of Math1 and Jagged2 is
localized to the developing sensory epithelia and ultimately becomes restricted
to hair cells. Interestingly, transcripts for HES5, a target of Notch activation,
are expressed in the developing cristae but not in the saccule or utricle. These 
results are consistent with the hypothesis that formation of the hair cell mosaic
is regulated through the neurogenic pathway. However the differential expression 
of HES5 within the ear indicates that the downstream targets of Notch1 activation
are not consistent across all of the sensory epithelia and suggests that the
effects of activation of Notch1 in the saccule and utricle must be regulated
through alternate target genes.

PMID: 10900086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Development. 2000 Jul;127(14):2989-98.

Basic helix-loop-helix proteins and the timing of oligodendrocyte
differentiation.

Kondo T(1), Raff M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Developmental Neurobiology Programme, MRC Laboratory 
for Molecular Cell Biology and the Biology Department, University College London,
London, WC1E 6BT, UK. t.kondo@ucl.ac.uk

An intracellular timer in oligodendrocyte precursor cells is thought to help
control the timing of their differentiation. We show here that the expression of 
the Hes5 and Mash1 genes, which encode neural-specific bHLH proteins, decrease
and increase, respectively, in these cells with a time course expected if the
proteins are part of the timer. We show that enforced expression of Hes5 in
purified precursor cells strongly inhibits the normal increase in the thyroid
hormone receptor protein TR(&bgr;)1, which is thought to be part of the timing
mechanism; it also strongly inhibits the differentiation induced by either
mitogen withdrawal or thyroid hormone treatment. Enforced expression of Mash1, by
contrast, somewhat accelerates the increase in TR(beta)1 protein. These findings 
suggest that Hes5 and Mash1 may be part of the cell-intrinsic timer in the
precursor cells.

PMID: 10862737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Development. 2000 Jun;127(12):2593-606.

Presenilin-1 regulates neuronal differentiation during neurogenesis.

Handler M(1), Yang X, Shen J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Mutations in Presenilin-1 (PS1) are a major cause of familial Alzheimer's
disease. Our previous studies showed that PS1 is required for murine neural
development. Here we report that lack of PS1 leads to premature differentiation
of neural progenitor cells, indicating a role for PS1 in a cell fate decision
between postmitotic neurons and neural progenitor cells. Neural proliferation and
apoptotic cell death during neurogenesis are unaltered in PS1(-/-) mice,
suggesting that the reduction in the neural progenitor cells observed in the
PS1(-/-) brain is due to premature differentiation of progenitor cells, rather
than to increased apoptotic cell death or decreased cell proliferation. In
addition, the premature neuronal differentiation in the PS1(-/-) brain is
associated with aberrant neuronal migration and disorganization of the laminar
architecture of the developing cerebral hemisphere. In the ventricular zone of
PS1(-/-) mice, expression of the Notch1 downstream effector gene Hes5 is reduced 
and expression of the Notch1 ligand Dll1 is elevated, whereas expression of
Notch1 is unchanged. The level of Dll1 transcripts is also increased in the
presomitic mesoderm of PS1(-/-) embryos, while the level of Notch1 transcripts is
unchanged, in contrast to a previous report (Wong et al., 1997, Nature 387,
288-292). These results provide direct evidence that PS1 controls neuronal
differentiation in association with the downregulation of Notch signalling during
neurogenesis.

PMID: 10821758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Development. 2000 Jun;127(12):2515-22.

Glial cell fate specification modulated by the bHLH gene Hes5 in mouse retina.

Hojo M(1), Ohtsuka T, Hashimoto N, Gradwohl G, Guillemot F, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University and Department of Neurosurgery,
Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Neurons and glial cells differentiate from common precursors. Whereas the gene
glial cells missing (gcm) determines the glial fate in Drosophila, current data
about the expression patterns suggest that, in mammals, gcm homologues are
unlikely to regulate gliogenesis. Here, we found that, in mouse retina, the bHLH 
gene Hes5 was specifically expressed by differentiating Müller glial cells and
that misexpression of Hes5 with recombinant retrovirus significantly increased
the population of glial cells at the expense of neurons. Conversely,
Hes5-deficient retina showed 30-40% decrease of Müller glial cell number without 
affecting cell survival. These results indicate that Hes5 modulates glial cell
fate specification in mouse retina.

PMID: 10821751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2323-32.

Hes genes regulate sequential stages of neurogenesis in the olfactory epithelium.

Cau E(1), Gradwohl G, Casarosa S, Kageyama R, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, BP 163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

We have characterised the functions of the bHLH transcriptional repressors HES1
and HES5 in neurogenesis, using the development of the olfactory placodes in
mouse embryos as a model. Hes1 and Hes5 are expressed with distinct patterns in
the olfactory placodes and are subject to different regulatory mechanisms. Hes1
is expressed in a broad placodal domain, which is maintained in absence of the
neural determination gene Mash1. In contrast, expression of Hes5 is restricted to
clusters of neural progenitor cells and requires Mash1 function. Mutations in
Hes1 and Hes5 also have distinct consequences on olfactory placode neurogenesis. 
Loss of Hes1 function leads both to expression of Mash1 outside of the normal
domain of neurogenesis and to increased density of MASH1-positive progenitors
within this domain, and results in an excess of neurons after a delay. A mutation
in Hes5 does not produce any apparent defect. However, olfactory placodes that
are double mutant for Hes1 and Hes5 upregulate Ngn1, a neural bHLH gene activated
downstream of Mash1, and show a strong and rapid increase in neuronal density.
Together, our results suggest that Hes1 regulates Mash1 transcription in the
olfactory placode in two different contexts, initially as a prepattern gene
defining the placodal domain undergoing neurogenesis and, subsequently, as a
neurogenic gene controlling the density of neural progenitors in this domain.
Hes5 synergizes with Hes1 and regulates neurogenesis at the level of Ngn1
expression. Therefore, the olfactory sensory neuron lineage is regulated at
several steps by negative signals acting through different Hes genes and
targeting the expression of different proneural gene homologs.

PMID: 10804175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cell Res. 1999 Sep;9(3):179-88.

The Notch-Hes pathway in mammalian neural development.

Kageyama R(1), Ohtsuka T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Japan.
rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

A wide variety of neurons and glial cells differentiate from common precursor
cells in the developing nervous system. During this process, Notch-mediated
cell-cell interaction is essential for maintenance of dividing cells and
subsequent generation of cell type diversity. Activation of Notch inhibits
cellular differentiation, and abnormality of the Notch pathway leads to premature
neuronal differentiation, the lack of some cell types, and severe defects of
tissue morphogenesis. Recent data demonstrate that Notch fails to inhibit
cellular differentiation in the absence of the bHLH genes Hes1 and Hes5, which
functionally antagonize the neuronal bHLH genes such as Mash1. These results
indicate that the two Hes genes are essential effectors for the Notch pathway and
that neuronal differentiation is controlled by the pathway
"Notch-Hes1/Hes5-|Mash1".

PMID: 10520600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):687-708.

A comparison of Notch, Hes and Grg expression during murine embryonic and
post-natal development.

Allen T(1), Lobe CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Sunnybrook and
Women's College Health Science Centre, ON, Canada.

Mammalian Hairy/Enhancer-of-split-like (Hes) proteins interact with
transcriptional corepressors encoded by the Groucho-related genes (Grg in mice). 
We have examined the embryonic and postnatal expression of the Hes1 and Hes3
genes as well as all four murine Grgs in order to determine where spatial and
temporal overlaps of Hes and Grg corepressors may occur. Both within and between 
gene families, expression was found to occur in unique but overlapping patterns
during embryonic and postnatal development. Areas where the members of these gene
families are coexpressed also overlap with areas where Notch signaling is thought
to maintain cells in undifferentiated or "precursor" states. Our data suggest
that the coordinated transcriptional control of these genes occurs during
development and that precise Hes and Grg pairings may play a role in mediating
the morphogenesis of CNS and epithelialized structures.

PMID: 10512199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Int Immunol. 1999 Jul;11(7):1017-25.

Expression pattern of notch1, 2 and 3 and Jagged1 and 2 in lymphoid and stromal
thymus components: distinct ligand-receptor interactions in intrathymic T cell
development.

Felli MP(1), Maroder M, Mitsiadis TA, Campese AF, Bellavia D, Vacca A, Mann RS,
Frati L, Lendahl U, Gulino A, Screpanti I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, Aquila 67100,
Italy.

The suggested role of Notch1 or its mutants in thymocyte differentiation and T
cell tumorigenesis raises the question of how the different members of the Notch 
family influence distinct steps in T cell development and the role played by
Notch ligands in the thymus. We report here that different Notch receptor-ligand 
partnerships may occur inside the thymus, as we observed differential expression 
of Notch1, 2 and 3 receptors, their ligands Jagged1 and 2, and downstream
intracellular effectors hairy and Enhancer of Split homolog 1 (HES-1) and hairy
and Enhancer of Split homolog 5 (HES-5), depending on ontogenetic stage and
thymic cell populations. Indeed, while Jagged2 is expressed in both stromal cells
and thymocytes, Jagged1 expression is restricted to stromal cells. Moreover, a
differential distribution of Notch3, with respect to Notch1, was observed in
distinct age-related thymocyte subsets. Finally, Notch3 was preferentially
up-regulated in thymocytes, following the induction of their differentiation by
interaction with thymic epithelial cells expressing the cognate Jagged1 and 2
ligands, suggesting that, besides Notch1, Notch3 may also be involved in distinct
steps of thymocyte development. Our results suggest that the Notch signaling
pathway is involved in a complex interplay of T cell developmental stages, as a
consequence of the heterogeneity and specific expression of members of the Notch 
receptor family and their cognate ligands, in distinct thymic cell compartments.

PMID: 10383933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Curr Biol. 1999 May 6;9(9):470-80.

Interaction between Notch signalling and Lunatic fringe during somite boundary
formation in the mouse.

Barrantes IB(1), Elia AJ, Wünsch K, Hrabe de Angelis MH, Mak TW, Rossant J,
Conlon RA, Gossler A, de la Pompa JL.

Author information: 
(1)Amgen Institute, Ontario Cancer Institute, Departments of Medical Biophysics
and Immunology University of Toronto 620 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G
2C1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The process of somitogenesis can be divided into three major events: 
the prepatterning of the mesoderm; the formation of boundaries between the
prospective somites; and the cellular differentiation of the somites. Expression 
and functional studies have demonstrated the involvement of the murine Notch
pathway in somitogenesis, although its precise role in this process is not yet
well understood. We examined the effect of mutations in the Notch pathway
elements Delta like 1 (Dll1), Notch1 and RBPJkappa on genes expressed in the
presomitic mesoderm (PSM) and have defined the spatial relationships of Notch
pathway gene expression in this region.
RESULTS: We have shown that expression of Notch pathway genes in the PSM overlaps
in the region where the boundary between the posterior and anterior halves of two
consecutive somites will form. The Dll1, Notch1 and RBPJkappa mutations disrupt
the expression of Lunatic fringe (L-fng), Jagged1, Mesp1, Mesp2 and Hes5 in the
PSM. Furthermore, expression of EphA4, mCer 1 and uncx4.1, markers for the
anterior-posterior subdivisions of the somites, is down-regulated to different
extents in Notch pathway mutants, indicating a global alteration of pattern in
the PSM.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose a model for the mechanism of somite border formation in
which the activity of Notch in the PSM is restricted by L-fng to a
boundary-forming territory in the posterior half of the prospective somite. In
this region, Notch function activates a set of genes that are involved in
boundary formation and anterior-posterior somite identity.

PMID: 10330372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. EMBO J. 1999 Apr 15;18(8):2196-207.

Hes1 and Hes5 as notch effectors in mammalian neuronal differentiation.

Ohtsuka T(1), Ishibashi M, Gradwohl G, Nakanishi S, Guillemot F, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, USA.

While the transmembrane protein Notch plays an important role in various aspects 
of development, and diseases including tumors and neurological disorders, the
intracellular pathway of mammalian Notch remains very elusive. To understand the 
intracellular pathway of mammalian Notch, the role of the bHLH genes Hes1 and
Hes5 (mammalian hairy and Enhancer-of-split homologues) was examined by
retrovirally misexpressing the constitutively active form of Notch (caNotch) in
neural precursor cells prepared from wild-type, Hes1-null, Hes5-null and
Hes1-Hes5 double-null mouse embryos. We found that caNotch, which induced the
endogenous Hes1 and Hes5 expression, inhibited neuronal differentiation in the
wild-type, Hes1-null and Hes5-null background, but not in the Hes1-Hes5
double-null background. These results demonstrate that Hes1 and Hes5 are
essential Notch effectors in regulation of mammalian neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1171303
PMID: 10205173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Development. 1999 Feb;126(3):525-34.

Mash1 regulates neurogenesis in the ventral telencephalon.

Casarosa S(1), Fode C, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, BP 163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Previous studies have shown that mice mutant for the gene Mash1 display severe
neuronal losses in the olfactory epithelium and ganglia of the autonomic nervous 
system, demonstrating a role for Mash1 in development of neuronal lineages in the
peripheral nervous system. Here, we have begun to analyse Mash1 function in the
central nervous system, focusing our studies on the ventral telencephalon where
it is expressed at high levels during neurogenesis. Mash1 mutant mice present a
severe loss of progenitors, particularly of neuronal precursors in the
subventricular zone of the medial ganglionic eminence. Discrete neuronal
populations of the basal ganglia and cerebral cortex are subsequently missing. An
analysis of candidate effectors of Mash1 function revealed that the Notch ligands
Dll1 and Dll3, and the target of Notch signaling Hes5, fail to be expressed in
Mash1 mutant ventral telencephalon. In the lateral ganglionic eminence, loss of
Notch signaling activity correlates with premature expression of a number of
subventricular zone markers by ventricular zone cells. Therefore, Mash1 is an
important regulator of neurogenesis in the ventral telencephalon, where it is
required both to specify neuronal precursors and to control the timing of their
production.

PMID: 9876181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Cell Tissue Res. 1998 Jul;293(1):23-9.

Regulated expression of neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
during differentiation of the immortalized neuronal progenitor cell line HC2S2
into neurons.

Ohtsuka T(1), Asahi M, Matsuura N, Kikuchi H, Hojo M, Kageyama R, Ohkubo H,
Hoshimaru M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 54
Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606, Japan.

Expression of nine neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
was examined in an immortalized neuronal progenitor cell line HC2S2, which
differentiates into neurons after suppression of the v-myc expression with
tetracycline. Expression of MASH-1, NeuroD, NeuroD-related factor (NDRF) and
HES-1 was demonstrated in HC2S2 cells by Northern blot analysis using total RNA. 
Expression of MASH-1 mRNA was downregulated upon differentiation of HC2S2 cells
into mature neurons. In contrast, NeuroD and NDRF mRNA expression was maintained 
all through the differentiation. The expression of HES-1, a negative regulator of
the neuronal differentiation, was upregulated temporarily in accordance with the 
suppression of the v-myc expression and was downregulated upon the
differentiation of HC2S2 cells into neurons. The reduced expression of HES-1 mRNA
in undifferentiated HC2S2 cells may be explained by the transcriptional
suppression of HES-1 by the myc oncoprotein. The above data imply that both HES-1
and MASH-1 need to be downregulated at the time of accomplishment of the terminal
differentiation into mature neurons and that NeuroD and NDRF participate in the
regulatory process of the terminal differentiation in combination.

PMID: 9634594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Genomics. 1998 Apr 1;49(1):69-75.

Structure, chromosomal locus, and promoter of mouse Hes2 gene, a homologue of
Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split.

Nishimura M(1), Isaka F, Ishibashi M, Tomita K, Tsuda H, Nakanishi S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine,
Japan.

Hes2 encodes a mammalian basic helix-loop-helix transcriptional repressor
homologous to the products of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split. Here, we
isolated and characterized the mouse Hes2 gene. This gene consists of four exons,
and all the introns are located within the protein-coding region at positions
homologous to those of other Hes genes. On the inter-specific backcross analyses,
mouse Hes2 is mapped to the distal region of Chromosome 4 near the Hes3 and Hes5 
loci, which are different from the Hes1 locus on Chromosome 16. Upstream of the
transcription initiation site, there are GC-rich regions, but a typical TATA box 
is not present. Transient transfection analyses demonstrated that, while Hes1 and
Hes5 promoter activities are significantly upregulated by the active form of
Notch, a key regulator of cellular differentiation, Hes2 and Hes3 promoter
activities are not. These results suggest that Hes genes are functionally
classified into two groups: those that are regulated by Notch and those that are 
not.

PMID: 9570950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Neurosci Lett. 1997 Mar 14;224(2):115-8.

Pretreatment with L-kynurenine, the precursor to the excitatory amino acid
antagonist kynurenic acid, suppresses epileptiform activity in combined
entorhinal/hippocampal slices.

Scharfman HE(1), Ofer A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Research Center, Helen Hayes Hospital, West Haverstraw, NY
10993-1195, USA. hes5@cunixf.cc.columbia.edu

The kynurenine pathway converts tryptophan into various compounds, including
L-kynurenine, which in turn can be converted to the excitatory amino acid
receptor antagonist kynurenic acid. The hypothesis that endogenously-produced
kynurenic acid could have physiological effects was tested in combined
entorhinal/hippocampal slices from adult rats. Specifically, perfusion with
L-kynurenine (1 mM) was examined for its ability to suppress epileptiform
activity produced by subsequent perfusion with buffer lacking added magnesium
(nominal 0 mM magnesium buffer). Importantly, treatment with L-kynurenine did not
appear to have depressant effects in itself, but it prevented spontaneous
epileptiform activity in all 64 slices subsequently perfused with 0 mM magnesium 
buffer. In contrast, 45 slices that were not pretreated with L-kynurenine
exhibited spontaneous epileptiform activity. These data support the hypothesis
that endogenously-produced kynurenic acid can be produced and released in brain
slices, where it can suppress excitatory activity in an "anticonvulsant' manner. 
Therefore, manipulation of the kynurenine pathway might constitute a useful new
direction for anticonvulsant drug development.

PMID: 9086470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 20;270(3):1342-9.

Structure and promoter analysis of the gene encoding the mouse helix-loop-helix
factor HES-5. Identification of the neural precursor cell-specific promoter
element.

Takebayashi K(1), Akazawa C, Nakanishi S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

HES-5 is a mammalian basic helix-loop-helix factor that has a distant sequence
homology to the product of the Drosophila pair-rule gene hairy. HES-5 mRNA is
present exclusively in the developing nervous system, but its level decreases as 
neural differentiation proceeds. In this study, to characterize the molecular
mechanism of the neural-specific expression of HES-5 we isolated the mouse HES-5 
gene. This gene consists of three exons, and Southern blot analysis shows that it
is a single copy gene. The transcription initiation site, determined by primer
extension and reverse transcriptase-mediated polymerase chain reaction, is
located 26 nucleotides downstream of a TATAbox. Transient transfection analysis
shows that the upstream region of the HES-5 gene can direct efficient expression 
in neural precursor cells and moderate expression in undifferentiated NCB20
neuroblastoma-brain hybrid cells but not in glioma or fibroblast cells. The
moderate level of expression in NCB20 cells decreases when differentiation into
neuron-like cells is induced. Further promoter analysis shows that this
undifferentiated neural-specific expression is mediated by the multiple GC
stretches present in the HES-5 promoter. Gel mobility shift analysis suggests the
presence of a neural precursor cell-specific protein that binds to the GC
stretches. These results raise the possibility that HES-5 expression in the
developing nervous system is regulated by the GC stretch-binding protein.

PMID: 7836401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 1992 Oct 25;267(30):21879-85.

Molecular characterization of a rat negative regulator with a basic
helix-loop-helix structure predominantly expressed in the developing nervous
system.

Akazawa C(1), Sasai Y, Nakanishi S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

We report here the cDNA cloning and characterization of a rat basic
helix-loop-helix (HLH) factor, designated HES-5. This factor has a distant
sequence homology to Drosophila hairy and Enhancer-of-split proteins, both of
which are required for normal neurogenesis. DNase I footprinting analyses show
that HES-5 binds to the sequence CACNAG (called N box), a recognition sequence of
Enhancer-of-split proteins. Although HES-5 does not bind to the sequence CANNTG
(called E box) recognized by other HLH factors, it attenuates the binding of E47,
an HLH activator, to E box by forming a hetero-oligomer. In cotransfection
analyses using NIH 3T3 cells, HES-5 significantly represses transcription
originating from the promoter containing the N box sequences. Furthermore, HES-5 
also partially inhibits the E47-induced expression from the promoter containing E
boxes. Northern blot, RNase protection, and in situ hybridization analyses
demonstrate that the HES-5 mRNA is specifically expressed in the nervous system. 
Prominent expression is observed in the ventricular zones of the embryonal brain 
vesicles and the outer nuclear layer of the neural retina. These results suggest 
that the negative regulator HES-5 may play an important role in neural
development.

PMID: 1400497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


