
1. Dev Biol. 2016 Jan 15;409(2):543-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.11.010. Epub 2015 
Nov 17.

Posterior-anterior gradient of zebrafish hes6 expression in the presomitic
mesoderm is established by the combinatorial functions of the downstream enhancer
and 3'UTR.

Kawamura A(1), Ovara H(2), Ooka Y(2), Kinoshita H(2), Hoshikawa M(2), Nakajo
K(2), Yokota D(2), Fujino Y(2), Higashijima S(3), Takada S(4), Yamasu K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama 
University, Shimo-Okubo, Sakura-ku, Saitama City, Saitama 338-8570, Japan.
Electronic address: akawamur@mail.saitama-u.ac.jp. (2)Division of Life Science,
Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, Shimo-Okubo,
Sakura-ku, Saitama City, Saitama 338-8570, Japan. (3)Okazaki Institute for
Integrative Bioscience & National Institute for Physiological Sciences, National 
Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. (4)Okazaki
Institute for Integrative Bioscience & National Institute for Basic Biology,
National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.

In vertebrates, the periodic formation of somites from the presomitic mesoderm
(PSM) is driven by the molecular oscillator known as the segmentation clock. The 
hairy-related gene, hes6/her13.2, functions as a hub by dimerizing with other
oscillators of the segmentation clock in zebrafish embryos. Although hes6
exhibits a posterior-anterior expression gradient in the posterior PSM with a
peak at the tailbud, the detailed mechanisms underlying this unique expression
pattern have not yet been clarified. By establishing several transgenic lines, we
found that the transcriptional regulatory region downstream of hes6 in
combination with the hes6 3'UTR recapitulates the endogenous gradient of hes6
mRNA expression. This downstream region, which we termed the PT enhancer,
possessed several putative binding sites for the T-box and Ets transcription
factors that were required for the regulatory activity. Indeed, the T-box
transcription factor (Tbx16) and Ets transcription factor (Pea3) bound
specifically to the putative binding sites and regulated the enhancer activity in
zebrafish embryos. In addition, the 3'UTR of hes6 is required for recapitulation 
of the endogenous mRNA expression. Furthermore, the PT enhancer with the 3'UTR of
hes6 responded to the inhibition of retinoic acid synthesis and fibroblast growth
factor signaling in a manner similar to endogenous hes6. The results showed that 
transcriptional regulation by the T-box and Ets transcription factors, combined
with the mRNA stability given by the 3'UTR, is responsible for the unique
expression gradient of hes6 mRNA in the posterior PSM of zebrafish embryos.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26596999  [PubMed - in process]


2. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul). 2015 Sep;30(3):381-8. doi: 10.3803/EnM.2015.30.3.381.
Epub 2015 May 18.

Sumoylation of Hes6 Regulates Protein Degradation and Hes1-Mediated
Transcription.

Lee J(1), Chun SK(1), Son GH(2), Kim K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Seoul National University School
of Biological Sciences, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Legal Medicine, Korea
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, Seoul National University School of Biological Sciences,
Seoul, Korea. kyungjin@dgist.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Hes6 is a transcriptional regulator that induces transcriptional
activation by binding to transcription repressor Hes1 and suppressing its
activity. Hes6 is controlled by the ubiquitin-proteosome-mediated degradation
system. Here we investigated the sumoylation of Hes6 and its functional role in
its rhythmic expression.
METHODS: Hes6, SUMO, and ubiquitin were transfected into HeLa cells and the
expression pattern was observed by Western blot and immunoprecipitation. To
confirm the effect of sumoylation on the rhythmic expression of Hes6, we
generated mouse Hes6 promoter-driven GFP-Hes6 fusion constructs and expressed
these constructs in NIH 3T3 cells.
RESULTS: Overexpression of SUMO led to sumoylation of Hes6 at both lysine 27 and 
30. Protein stability of Hes6 was decreased by sumoylation. Moreover, expression 
of a Hes6 sumoylation-defective mutant, the 2KR (K27/30R) mutant, or
co-expression of SUMO protease SUSP1 with native Hes6, strongly reduced
ubiquitination. In addition, sumoylation was associated with both the rhythmic
expression and transcriptional regulation of Hes6. Wild type Hes6 showed
oscillatory expression with about 2-hour periodicity, whereas the 2KR mutant
displayed a longer period. Furthermore, sumoylation of Hes6 derepressed
Hes1-induced transcriptional repression.
CONCLUSION: Hes6 sumoylation plays an important role in the regulation of its
stability and Hes1-mediated transcription. These results suggest that sumoylation
may be crucial for rhythmic expression of Hes6 and downstream target genes.

PMCID: PMC4595364
PMID: 26435136  [PubMed]


3. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;66:134-40. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.07.015.
Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Notch pathway promotes ovarian cancer growth and migration via CXCR4/SDF1a
chemokine system.

Chiaramonte R(1), Colombo M(1), Bulfamante G(2), Falleni M(2), Tosi D(2),
Garavelli S(1), De Simone D(1), Vigolo E(1), Todoerti K(3), Neri A(4), Platonova 
N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, via A. Di
Rudinì 8, I-20142, Milan, Italy. (2)Department of Health Sciences, Università
degli Studi di Milano, via A. Di Rudinì 8, I-20142, Milan, Italy; Unit of
Pathology, Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, A.O. 
San Paolo, via A. Di Rudinì 8, I-20142, Milan, Italy. (3)Laboratory of
Pre-Clinical and Translational Research, IRCCS-CROB, Referral Cancer Center of
Basilicata, Rionero in Vulture, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical Sciences and
Community Health, Università degli Studi di Milano, Hematology, Fondazione Cà
Granda IRCCS Policlinico, via F. Sforza,35, 20122, Milan, Italy. (5)Department of
Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, via A. Di Rudinì 8, I-20142,
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: natalia.platonova@unimi.it.

Ovarian cancer is the most deadly gynecological malignancy. Understanding the
molecular pathogenesis of ovarian cancer is critical to provide new targeted
therapeutic strategies. Recent evidence supports a role for Notch in ovarian
cancer progression and associates its dysregulation to poor overall survival.
Similarly, CXCR4/SDF1a signalling correlates with ovarian cancer progression and 
metastasis. Recent findings indicate that Notch promotes CXCR4/SDF1a signalling
and its effect on cell growth and migration; nonetheless, up to now, the
association between Notch and CXCR4/SDFa in ovarian cancer has not been reported.
Thereby, the aim of this study was to investigate if Notch and CXCR4/SDF1a
cooperate in determining ovarian cancer growth, survival and migration. To
address this issue, Notch signalling was inhibited by using <U+03B3>-secretase
inhibitors, or upregulated by forcing of Notch1 expression in ovarian cancer cell
lines. Our results indicated that Notch activity influenced tumour cell growth
and survival and positively regulated CXCR4 and SDF1a expression. CXCR4/SDF1a
signalling mediated the effect of Notch pathway on ovarian cancer cell growth and
SDF1a-driven migration. Additionally, for the first time, we demonstrated that
Notch signalling activation can be detected in ovarian cancer specimens by
immunohistochemistry analysis of the Notch transcriptional target, HES6 and is
positively correlated with high expression levels of CXCR4 and SDF1a. Our results
demonstrate that Notch affects ovarian cancer cell biology through the modulation
of CXCR4/SDF1a signalling and suggest that Notch inhibition may be a rationale
therapeutic approach to hamper ovarian cancer progression mediated by the
CXCR4/SDF1a axis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26235278  [PubMed - in process]


4. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Jan;36(1):57-67. doi: 10.1007/s10571-015-0220-8. Epub
2015 Jun 24.

Hairy and Enhancer of Split 6 (Hes6) Deficiency in Mouse Impairs Neuroblast
Differentiation in Dentate Gyrus Without Affecting Cell Proliferation and
Integration into Mature Neurons.

Nam SM(1,)(2,)(3), Kim YN(1,)(2,)(3), Kim JW(1,)(2,)(3), Kyeong DS(1,)(2,)(3),
Lee SH(1,)(2,)(3), Son Y(1,)(2,)(3), Shin JH(1,)(2,)(3), Kim J(4), Yi SS(5), Yoon
YS(6,)(7,)(8), Seong JK(9,)(10,)(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul 
National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea. (2)BK21 PLUS Program for
Creative Veterinary Science Research and Research Institute for Veterinary
Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea. (3)KMPC (Korea
Mouse Phenotyping Center), Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, South
Korea. (4)Department of Life Sciences and Ewha Research Center for Systems
Biology, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, 120-750, South Korea. (5)Department of
Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Biomedical Sciences, Soonchunhyang
University, Asan, 336-745, South Korea. (6)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul,
151-742, South Korea. ysyoon@snu.ac.kr. (7)BK21 PLUS Program for Creative
Veterinary Science Research and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul 
National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea. ysyoon@snu.ac.kr. (8)KMPC
(Korea Mouse Phenotyping Center), Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742,
South Korea. ysyoon@snu.ac.kr. (9)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College
of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea.
snumouse@snu.ac.kr. (10)BK21 PLUS Program for Creative Veterinary Science
Research and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National
University, Seoul, 151-742, South Korea. snumouse@snu.ac.kr. (11)KMPC (Korea
Mouse Phenotyping Center), Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, South
Korea. snumouse@snu.ac.kr. (12)Interdisciplinary Program for Bioinformatics,
Program for Cancer Biology and BIO-MAX Institute, Seoul National University,
Seoul, 151-742, South Korea. snumouse@snu.ac.kr.

Hes6 is a member of the hairy-enhancer of split homolog (Hes) family of
transcription factors and interacts with other Hes family genes. During
development, Hes genes are expressed in neural stem cells and progenitor cells.
However, the role of Hes6 in adult hippocampal neurogenesis remains unclear. We
therefore investigated the effects of Hes6 on adult hippocampal neurogenesis, by 
comparing Hes6 knockout and wild-type mice. To this end, we immunostained for
markers of neural stem cells and progenitor cells (nestin), proliferating cells
(Ki67), post-mitotic neuroblasts and immature neurons (doublecortin, DCX), mature
neuronal cells (NeuN), and astrocyte (S100ß). We also injected
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) to trace the fate of mitotic cells. Nestin- and
Ki67-positive proliferating cells did now show any significant differences
between wild and knockout groups. Hes6 knockout negatively affects neuroblast
differentiation based on DCX immunohistochemistry. On the contrary, the ratio of 
the BrdU and NeuN double-positive cells did not show any significance, even
though it was slightly higher in the knockout group. These results suggest that
Hes6 is involved in the regulation of neuroblast differentiation during adult
neurogenesis, but does not influence integration into mature neurons.

PMID: 26105991  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Jul;19(7):1624-36. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12537. Epub 2015 Apr
12.

HES6 promotes prostate cancer aggressiveness independently of Notch signalling.

Carvalho FL(1,)(2), Marchionni L(2), Gupta A(2), Kummangal BA(1), Schaeffer
EM(1,)(2,)(3), Ross AE(1,)(3), Berman DM(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Brady Institute of Urology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (4)Departments of Pathology
and Molecular Medicine and Cancer Biology and Genetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.

Notch signalling is implicated in the pathogenesis of a variety of cancers, but
its role in prostate cancer is poorly understood. However, selected Notch pathway
members are overrepresented in high-grade prostate cancers. We comprehensively
profiled Notch pathway components in prostate cells and found prostate
cancer-specific up-regulation of NOTCH3 and HES6. Their expression was
particularly high in androgen responsive lines. Up- and down-regulating Notch in 
these cells modulated expression of canonical Notch targets, HES1 and HEY1, which
could also be induced by androgen. Surprisingly, androgen treatment also
suppressed Notch receptor expression, suggesting that androgens can activate
Notch target genes in a receptor-independent manner. Using a Notch-sensitive
Recombination signal binding protein for immunoglobulin kappa J region (RBPJ)
reporter assay, we found that basal levels of Notch signalling were significantly
lower in prostate cancer cells compared to benign cells. Accordingly
pharmacological Notch pathway blockade did not inhibit cancer cell growth or
viability. In contrast to canonical Notch targets, HES6, a HES family member
known to antagonize Notch signalling, was not regulated by Notch signalling, but 
relied instead on androgen levels, both in cultured cells and in human cancer
tissues. When engineered into prostate cancer cells, reduced levels of HES6
resulted in reduced cancer cell invasion and clonogenic growth. By molecular
profiling, we identified potential roles for HES6 in regulating hedgehog
signalling, apoptosis and cell migration. Our results did not reveal any
cell-autonomous roles for canonical Notch signalling in prostate cancer. However,
the results do implicate HES6 as a promoter of prostate cancer progression.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4511360
PMID: 25864518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 3;10(3):e0118201. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118201.
eCollection 2015.

A combined gene signature of hypoxia and notch pathway in human glioblastoma and 
its prognostic relevance.

Irshad K(1), Mohapatra SK(2), Srivastava C(1), Garg H(1), Mishra S(3), Dikshit
B(1), Sarkar C(4), Gupta D(5), Chandra PS(5), Chattopadhyay P(1), Sinha S(6),
Chosdol K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India. (2)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, West Bengal,
India. (3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Science, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India. (4)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. (6)National Brain Research
Centre, Manesar, Gurgaon, Haryana, India.

Hypoxia is a hallmark of solid tumors including glioblastoma (GBM). Its synergism
with Notch signaling promotes progression in different cancers. However, Notch
signaling exhibits pleiotropic roles and the existing literature lacks a
comprehensive understanding of its perturbations under hypoxia in GBM with
respect to all components of the pathway. We identified the key molecular
cluster(s) characteristic of the Notch pathway response in hypoxic GBM tumors and
gliomaspheres. Expression of Notch and hypoxia genes was evaluated in primary
human GBM tissues by q-PCR. Clustering and statistical analyses were applied to
identify the combination of hypoxia markers correlated with upregulated Notch
pathway components. We found well-segregated tumor-clusters representing high and
low HIF-1a/PGK1-expressors which accounted for differential expression of Notch
signaling genes. In combination, a five-hypoxia marker set
(HIF-1a/PGK1/VEGF/CA9/OPN) was determined as the best predictor for induction of 
Notch1/Dll1/Hes1/Hes6/Hey1/Hey2. Similar Notch-axis genes were activated in
gliomaspheres, but not monolayer cultures, under moderate/severe hypoxia (2%/0.2%
O2). Preliminary evidence suggested inverse correlation between patient survival 
and increased expression of constituents of the hypoxia-Notch gene signature.
Together, our findings delineated the Notch-axis maximally associated with
hypoxia in resected GBM, which might be prognostically relevant. Its upregulation
in hypoxia-exposed gliomaspheres signify them as a better in-vitro model for
studying hypoxia-Notch interactions than monolayer cultures.

PMCID: PMC4348203
PMID: 25734817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Apr;22(2):131-44. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0454. Epub 2015
Jan 5.

HES5 silencing is an early and recurrent change in prostate tumourigenesis.

Massie CE(1), Spiteri I(2), Ross-Adams H(2), Luxton H(2), Kay J(2), Whitaker
HC(2), Dunning MJ(2), Lamb AD(3), Ramos-Montoya A(2), Brewer DS(2), Cooper CS(4),
Eeles R(4); UK Prostate ICGC Group, Warren AY(2), Tavaré S(2), Neal DE(3), Lynch 
AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 
0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of
East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton,
UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge, UK charlie.massie@cruk.cam.ac.uk andy.lynch@cruk.cam.ac.uk.
(2)Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 
0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of
East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton,
UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge, UK. (3)Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of
Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and
School of MedicineUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS
Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton, UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical
OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK Cancer Research UK
Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UKDivision of
Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UKDepartment
of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, 
UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton, UKDepartments of
PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge,
UK Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 
0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of
East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton,
UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge, UK. (4)Cancer Research UK Cambridge InstituteUniversity of
Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UKDivision of Genetics and EpidemiologyThe
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UKDepartment of Biological Sciences and
School of MedicineUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, UKRoyal Marsden NHS
Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton, UKDepartments of PathologyUrologySurgical
OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK Cancer Research UK
Cambridge InstituteUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UKDivision of
Genetics and EpidemiologyThe Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UKDepartment
of Biological Sciences and School of MedicineUniversity of East Anglia, Norwich, 
UKRoyal Marsden NHS Foundation TrustLondon and Sutton, UKDepartments of
PathologyUrologySurgical OncologyAddenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge,
UK.

Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men, resulting in over
10<U+200A>000<U+200A>deaths/year in the UK. Sequencing and copy number analysis of primary
tumours has revealed heterogeneity within tumours and an absence of recurrent
founder mutations, consistent with non-genetic disease initiating events. Using
methylation profiling in a series of multi-focal prostate tumours, we identify
promoter methylation of the transcription factor HES5 as an early event in
prostate tumourigenesis. We confirm that this epigenetic alteration occurs in
86-97% of cases in two independent prostate cancer cohorts (n=49 and n=39
tumour-normal pairs). Treatment of prostate cancer cells with the demethylating
agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine increased HES5 expression and downregulated its
transcriptional target HES6, consistent with functional silencing of the HES5
gene in prostate cancer. Finally, we identify and test a transcriptional module
involving the AR, ERG, HES1 and HES6 and propose a model for the impact of HES5
silencing on tumourigenesis as a starting point for future functional studies.

© 2015 The authors.

PMCID: PMC4335379
PMID: 25560400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Jul 8;6(9):1121-3. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404210.

DOT1L-HES6 fusion drives androgen independent growth in prostate cancer.

Annala M(1), Kivinummi K(2), Leinonen K(2), Tuominen J(2), Zhang W(3), Visakorpi 
T(2), Nykter M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Medical Technology, Tampere, Finland Department
of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology, Tampere, Finland.
(2)Institute of Biosciences and Medical Technology, Tampere, Finland.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

PMCID: PMC4197859
PMID: 25006183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genome Med. 2014 Apr 30;6(4):34. doi: 10.1186/gm551. eCollection 2014.

Early aberrant DNA methylation events in a mouse model of acute myeloid leukemia.

Sonnet M(1), Claus R(2), Becker N(3), Zucknick M(3), Petersen J(1), Lipka DB(1), 
Oakes CC(1), Andrulis M(4), Lier A(5), Milsom MD(5), Witte T(1), Gu L(6),
Kim-Wanner SZ(1), Schirmacher P(4), Wulfert M(7), Gattermann N(7), Lübbert M(8), 
Rosenbauer F(9), Rehli M(10), Bullinger L(11), Weichenhan D(1), Plass C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department of Epigenomics and
Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany ; Department of Hematology/Oncology, University Medical Center, D-79106
Freiburg, Germany. (3)Division of Biostatistics, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Department of General Pathology,
Institute of Pathology, University Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Division of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Department of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk
Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany ;
Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical
Immunology, Heinrich-Heine University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. (8)Department
of Hematology/Oncology, University Medical Center, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Institute of Molecular Tumor Biology, Westfälische Wilhelms Universität,
D-48149 Münster, Germany. (10)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University
Hospital Regensburg, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany. (11)Department of Internal
Medicine III, University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is frequently found in human malignancies
including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While most studies focus on later disease
stages, the onset of aberrant DNA methylation events and their dynamics during
leukemic progression are largely unknown.
METHODS: We screened genome-wide for aberrant CpG island methylation in three
disease stages of a murine AML model that is driven by hypomorphic expression of 
the hematopoietic transcription factor PU.1. DNA methylation levels of selected
genes were correlated with methylation levels of CD34+ cells and lineage
negative, CD127-, c-Kit+, Sca-1+ cells; common myeloid progenitors;
granulocyte-macrophage progenitors; and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors.
RESULTS: We identified 1,184 hypermethylated array probes covering 762 associated
genes in the preleukemic stage. During disease progression, the number of
hypermethylated genes increased to 5,465 in the late leukemic disease stage.
Using publicly available data, we found a significant enrichment of PU.1 binding 
sites in the preleukemic hypermethylated genes, suggesting that shortage of PU.1 
makes PU.1 binding sites in the DNA accessible for aberrant methylation. Many
known AML associated genes such as RUNX1 and HIC1 were found among the
preleukemic hypermethylated genes. Nine novel hypermethylated genes, FZD5, FZD8, 
PRDM16, ROBO3, CXCL14, BCOR, ITPKA, HES6 and TAL1, the latter four being
potential PU.1 targets, were confirmed to be hypermethylated in human normal
karyotype AML patients, underscoring the relevance of the mouse model for human
AML.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified early aberrantly methylated genes as potential 
contributors to onset and progression of AML.

PMCID: PMC4062060
PMID: 24944583  [PubMed]


10. J Comput Biol. 2014 Jul;21(7):548-67. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2014.0022. Epub 2014 May
5.

Stochastic simulation of notch signaling reveals novel factors that mediate the
differentiation of neural stem cells.

Tzou WS(1), Lo YT, Pai TW, Hu CH, Li CH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Life Sciences, National Taiwan Ocean University , Taiwan,
R.O.C.

Notch signaling controls cell fate decisions and regulates multiple biological
processes, such as cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.
Computational modeling of the deterministic simulation of Notch signaling has
provided important insight into the possible molecular mechanisms that underlie
the switch from the undifferentiated stem cell to the differentiated cell. Here, 
we constructed a stochastic model of a Notch signaling model containing Hes1,
Notch1, RBP-Jk, Mash1, Hes6, and Delta. mRNA and protein were represented as a
discrete state, and 334 reactions were employed for each biochemical reaction
using a graphics processing unit-accelerated Gillespie scheme. We employed the
tuning of 40 molecular mechanisms and revealed several potential mediators
capable of enabling the switch from cell stemness to differentiation. These
effective mediators encompass different aspects of cellular regulations,
including the nuclear transport of Hes1, the degradation of mRNA (Hes1 and
Notch1) and protein (Notch1), the association between RBP-Jk and Notch
intracellular domain (NICD), and the cleavage efficiency of the NICD. These
mechanisms overlap with many modifiers that have only recently been discovered to
modulate the Notch signaling output, including microRNA action,
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, and the competitive binding of the RBP-Jk-DNA
complex. Moreover, we identified the degradation of Hes1 mRNA and nuclear
transport of Hes1 as the dominant mechanisms that were capable of abolishing the 
cell state transition induced by other molecular mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4082354
PMID: 24798230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. EMBO Mol Med. 2014 May 1;6(5):651-61. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201303581.

HES6 drives a critical AR transcriptional programme to induce
castration-resistant prostate cancer through activation of an E2F1-mediated cell 
cycle network.

Ramos-Montoya A(1), Lamb AD, Russell R, Carroll T, Jurmeister S, Galeano-Dalmau
N, Massie CE, Boren J, Bon H, Theodorou V, Vias M, Shaw GL, Sharma NL, Ross-Adams
H, Scott HE, Vowler SL, Howat WJ, Warren AY, Wooster RF, Mills IG, Neal DE.

Author information: 
(1)Uro-Oncology Research Group Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute University 
of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, UK.

Castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is poorly characterized and
heterogeneous and while the androgen receptor (AR) is of singular importance,
other factors such as c-Myc and the E2F family also play a role in later stage
disease. HES6 is a transcription co-factor associated with stem cell
characteristics in neural tissue. Here we show that HES6 is up-regulated in
aggressive human prostate cancer and drives castration-resistant tumour growth in
the absence of ligand binding by enhancing the transcriptional activity of the
AR, which is preferentially directed to a regulatory network enriched for
transcription factors such as E2F1. In the clinical setting, we have uncovered a 
HES6-associated signature that predicts poor outcome in prostate cancer, which
can be pharmacologically targeted by inhibition of PLK1 with restoration of
sensitivity to castration. We have therefore shown for the first time the
critical role of HES6 in the development of CRPC and identified its potential in 
patient-specific therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC4023887
PMID: 24737870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Prostate. 2014 Jun;74(9):933-45. doi: 10.1002/pros.22811. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Notch signaling in prostate cancer: a moving target.

Carvalho FL(1), Simons BW, Eberhart CG, Berman DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.

INTRODUCTION: By regulating cell fate, proliferation, and survival, Notch pathway
signaling provides critical input into differentiation, organization, and
function of multiple tissues. Notch signaling is also becoming an increasingly
recognized feature in malignancy, including prostate cancer, where it may play
oncogenic or tumor suppressive roles.
METHODS: Based on an electronic literature search from 2000 to 2013 we
identified, summarized, and integrated published research on Notch signaling
dynamics in prostate homeostasis and prostate cancer.
RESULTS: In benign prostate, Notch controls the differentiation state and
architecture of the gland. In prostate cancer, similar features correlate with
lethal potential and may be influenced by Notch. Increased Notch1 can confer a
survival advantage on prostate cancer cells, and levels of Notch family members, 
such as Jagged2, Notch3, and Hes6 increase with higher cancer grade. However,
Notch signaling can also antagonize growth and survival of both benign and
malignant prostate cells, possibly through antagonistic effects of the Notch
target HEY1 on androgen receptor function.
DISCUSSION: Notch signaling can dramatically influence prostate development and
disease. Determining the cellular contexts where Notch promotes or suppresses
prostate growth could open opportunities for diagnostic and therapeutic
interventions.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4323172
PMID: 24737393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genetics. 2014 Jun;197(2):725-38. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.163642. Epub 2014 Mar
24.

Modeling the zebrafish segmentation clock's gene regulatory network constrained
by expression data suggests evolutionary transitions between oscillating and
nonoscillating transcription.

Schwendinger-Schreck J(1), Kang Y(1), Holley SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520. (2)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and
Developmental Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520
scott.holley@yale.edu.

During segmentation of vertebrate embryos, somites form in accordance with a
periodic pattern established by the segmentation clock. In the zebrafish (Danio
rerio), the segmentation clock includes six hairy/enhancer of split-related
(her/hes) genes, five of which oscillate due to negative autofeedback. The
nonoscillating gene hes6 forms the hub of a network of 10 Her/Hes protein dimers,
which includes 7 DNA-binding dimers and 4 weak or non-DNA-binding dimers. The
balance of dimer species is critical for segmentation clock function, and
loss-of-function studies suggest that the her genes have both unique and
redundant functions within the clock. However, the precise regulatory
interactions underlying the negative feedback loop are unknown. Here, we combine 
quantitative experimental data, in silico modeling, and a global optimization
algorithm to identify a gene regulatory network (GRN) designed to fit measured
transcriptional responses to gene knockdown. Surprisingly, we find that hes6, the
clock gene that does not oscillate, responds to negative feedback. Consistent
with prior in silico analyses, we find that variation in transcription,
translation, and degradation rates can mediate the gain and loss of oscillatory
behavior for genes regulated by negative feedback. Extending our study, we found 
that transcription of the nonoscillating Fgf pathway gene sef responds to her/hes
perturbation similarly to oscillating her genes. These observations suggest a
more extensive underlying regulatory similarity between the zebrafish
segmentation clock and the mouse and chick segmentation clocks, which exhibit
oscillations of her/hes genes as well as numerous other Notch, Fgf, and Wnt
pathway genes.

Copyright © 2014 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4063927
PMID: 24663100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Med. 2013 Oct;2(5):734-43. doi: 10.1002/cam4.118. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Thiocoraline alters neuroendocrine phenotype and activates the Notch pathway in
MTC-TT cell line.

Tesfazghi S(1), Eide J, Dammalapati A, Korlesky C, Wyche TP, Bugni TS, Chen H,
Jaskula-Sztul R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin.

Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is an aggressive neuroendocrine tumor (NET).
Previous research has shown that activation of Notch signaling has a tumor
suppressor role in NETs. The potential therapeutic effect of thiocoraline on the 
activation of the Notch pathway in an MTC cell line (TT) was investigated.
Thiocoraline was isolated from a marine bacterium Verrucosispora sp. MTT assay
(3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) was used to
determine the IC50 value and to measure cell proliferation. Western blot revealed
the expression of Notch isoforms, NET, and cell cycle markers. Cell cycle
progression was validated by flow cytometry. The mRNA expression of Notch
isoforms and downstream targets were measured using real-time PCR. The IC50 value
for thiocoraline treatment in TT cells was determined to be 7.6 nmol/L.
Thiocoraline treatment decreased cell proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. The mechanism of growth inhibition was found to be cell cycle arrest in
G1 phase. Thiocoraline activated the Notch pathway as demonstrated by the
dose-dependent increase in mRNA and protein expression of Notch isoforms.
Furthermore, treatment with thiocoraline resulted in changes in the expression of
downstream targets of the Notch pathway (HES1, HES2, HES6, HEY1, and HEY2) and
reduced expression of NET markers, CgA, and ASCL1. Thiocoraline is a potent Notch
pathway activator and an inhibitor of MTC-TT cell proliferation at low nanomolar 
concentrations. These results provide exciting evidence for the use of
thiocoraline as a potential treatment for intractable MTC.

© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3892805
PMID: 24403239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hepatology. 2014 May;59(5):1750-60. doi: 10.1002/hep.26699. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

All-trans-retinoic acid ameliorates hepatic steatosis in mice by a novel
transcriptional cascade.

Kim SC(1), Kim CK, Axe D, Cook A, Lee M, Li T, Smallwood N, Chiang JY, Hardwick
JP, Moore DD, Lee YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University,
Rootstown, OH.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 May;59(5):1662-4.

Mice deficient in small heterodimer partner (SHP) are protected from diet-induced
hepatic steatosis resulting from increased fatty acid oxidation and decreased
lipogenesis. The decreased lipogenesis appears to be a direct consequence of very
low expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2 (PPAR-<U+03B3>2), a
potent lipogenic transcription factor, in the SHP(-/-) liver. The current study
focused on the identification of a SHP-dependent regulatory cascade that controls
PPAR-<U+03B3>2 gene expression, thereby regulating hepatic fat accumulation. Illumina
BeadChip array (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA) and real-time polymerase chain
reaction were used to identify genes responsible for the linkage between SHP and 
PPAR-<U+03B3>2 using hepatic RNAs isolated from SHP(-/-) and SHP-overexpressing mice.
The initial efforts identify that hairy and enhancer of split 6 (Hes6), a novel
transcriptional repressor, is an important mediator of the regulation of PPAR-<U+03B3>2 
transcription by SHP. The Hes6 promoter is specifically activated by the retinoic
acid receptor (RAR) in response to its natural agonist ligand, all-trans retinoic
acid (atRA), and is repressed by SHP. Hes6 subsequently represses hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4a)-activated PPAR-<U+03B3>2 gene expression by direct
inhibition of HNF-4a transcriptional activity. Furthermore, we provide evidences 
that atRA treatment or adenovirus-mediated RAR-a overexpression significantly
reduced hepatic fat accumulation in obese mouse models, as observed in earlier
studies, and the beneficial effect is achieved by the proposed transcriptional
cascade.CONCLUSIONS: Our study describes a novel transcriptional regulatory
cascade controlling hepatic lipid metabolism that identifies retinoic acid
signaling as a new therapeutic approach to nonalcoholic fatty liver diseases.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4008145
PMID: 24038081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;33(14):2797-808. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01610-12. Epub 2013 May
20.

Interaction and antagonistic roles of NF-<U+03BA>B and Hes6 in the regulation of
cortical neurogenesis.

Methot L(1), Hermann R, Tang Y, Lo R, Al-Jehani H, Jhas S, Svoboda D, Slack RS,
Barker PA, Stifani S.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The involvement of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in several processes in the
postnatal and adult brain, ranging from neuronal survival to synaptogenesis and
plasticity, has been documented. In contrast, little is known about the functions
of NF-<U+03BA>B during embryonic brain development. It is shown here that NF-<U+03BA>B is
selectively activated in neocortical neural progenitor cells in the developing
mouse telencephalon. Blockade of NF-<U+03BA>B activity leads to premature cortical
neuronal differentiation and depletion of the progenitor cell pool. Conversely,
NF-<U+03BA>B activation causes decreased cortical neurogenesis and expansion of the
progenitor cell compartment. These effects are antagonized by the proneuronal
transcription factor Hes6, which physically and functionally interacts with
RelA-containing NF-<U+03BA>B complexes in cortical progenitor cells. In turn, NF-<U+03BA>B
exerts an inhibitory effect on the ability of Hes6 to promote cortical neuronal
differentiation. These results reveal previously uncharacterized functions and
modes of regulation for NF-<U+03BA>B and Hes6 during cortical neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3700133
PMID: 23689134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Mar-Apr;13(3-4):109-25. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.02.001. 
Epub 2013 Feb 16.

Inferring the in vivo cellular program of developing bovine skeletal muscle from 
expression data.

Hudson NJ(1), Lyons RE, Reverter A, Greenwood PL, Dalrymple BP.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology Group, CSIRO Food Futures and CSIRO Animal, 
Food and Health Sciences, 306 Carmody Road, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia.
nick.hudson@csiro.au

We outline an in vivo cellular program of bovine longissimus muscle development
inferred from expression data from 60 days post conception to 3months postnatal. 
Analytic challenges included changes in cellular composition, ambiguous
'diagnostic' markers of cell type and contrasts between cattle human and mouse
myogenesis. Nevertheless, the expression profiles of the myosin isoforms support 
slow and fast muscle fibres emanating from primary and secondary myogenesis
respectively, while expression of the prenatal myosin subunits is down regulated 
prior to birth. Of the canonical pro-myogenic transcription factors (TF), MYF6
and MYF5 are negatively co-expressed, with MYF6 displaying higher expression in
the post-natal samples and MYF5, MYOG, HES6 and PAX7 displaying higher expression
in early development. A set of TFs (SIX1, EYA2 and DACH2) considered important in
undifferentiated murine cells were equally abundant in differentiated bovine
cells. An examination of mammalian regulators of fibre composition, muscle mass
and muscle metabolism, underscored the roles of PPARGC1A, TGFß signalling and the
NHR4 Nuclear Hormone Receptors on bovine muscle development. Enriched among the
most variably expressed genes from the entire data set were molecules regulating 
mitochondrial metabolism of carbohydrate (PDK4), fat (UCP3), protein (AGXT2L1)
and high energy phosphate (CKMT2). The dramatic increase in the expression of
these transcripts, which may enable the peri-natal transition to metabolic
independence critical for new-born herbivores, provides surprising evidence for
substantial developmental remodelling of muscle mitochondria and reflects changes
in nutrient availability. Overall, despite differences in size, metabolism and
physiology, the muscle structural subunit expression program appears very similar
in ruminants, rodents and humans.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23419240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Stem Cells Int. 2013;2013:490476. doi: 10.1155/2013/490476. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Omega-3 polyunsaturated Fatty acids enhance neuronal differentiation in cultured 
rat neural stem cells.

Katakura M(1), Hashimoto M, Okui T, Shahdat HM, Matsuzaki K, Shido O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane
University, Shimane Izumo, 693-8501, Japan.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) can induce neurogenesis and recovery from
brain diseases. However, the exact mechanisms of the beneficial effects of PUFAs 
have not been conclusively described. We recently reported that docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA) induced neuronal differentiation by decreasing Hes1 expression and
increasing p27(kip1) expression, which causes cell cycle arrest in neural stem
cells (NSCs). In the present study, we examined the effect of eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA) and arachidonic acid (AA) on differentiation, expression of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors (Hes1, Hes6, and NeuroD), and the cell
cycle of cultured NSCs. EPA also increased mRNA levels of Hes1, an inhibitor of
neuronal differentiation, Hes6, an inhibitor of Hes1, NeuroD, and Map2 mRNA and
Tuj-1-positive cells (a neuronal marker), indicating that EPA induced neuronal
differentiation. EPA increased the mRNA levels of p21(cip1) and p27(kip1), a
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, which indicated that EPA induced cell cycle
arrest. Treatment with AA decreased Hes1 mRNA but did not affect NeuroD and Map2 
mRNA levels. Furthermore, AA did not affect the number of Tuj-1-positive cells or
cell cycle progression. These results indicated that EPA could be involved in
neuronal differentiation by mechanisms alternative to those of DHA, whereas AA
did not affect neuronal differentiation in NSCs.

PMCID: PMC3556893
PMID: 23365582  [PubMed]


19. Development. 2013 Jan 15;140(2):444-53. doi: 10.1242/dev.077230.

The elongation rate of RNA polymerase II in zebrafish and its significance in the
somite segmentation clock.

Hanisch A(1), Holder MV, Choorapoikayil S, Gajewski M, Özbudak EM, Lewis J.

Author information: 
(1)Vertebrate Development Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK.

A gene expression oscillator called the segmentation clock controls somite
segmentation in the vertebrate embryo. In zebrafish, the oscillatory
transcriptional repressor genes her1 and her7 are crucial for genesis of the
oscillations, which are thought to arise from negative autoregulation of these
genes. The period of oscillation is predicted to depend on delays in the
negative-feedback loop, including, most importantly, the transcriptional delay - 
the time taken to make each molecule of her1 or her7 mRNA. her1 and her7 operate 
in parallel. Loss of both gene functions, or mutation of her1 combined with
knockdown of Hes6, which we show to be a binding partner of Her7, disrupts
segmentation drastically. However, mutants in which only her1 or her7 is
functional show only mild segmentation defects and their oscillations have almost
identical periods. This is unexpected because the her1 and her7 genes differ
greatly in length. We use transgenic zebrafish to measure the RNA polymerase II
elongation rate, for the first time, in the intact embryo. This rate is
unexpectedly rapid, at 4.8 kb/minute at 28.5°C, implying that, for both genes,
the time taken for transcript elongation is insignificant compared with other
sources of delay, explaining why the mutants have similar clock periods. Our
computational model shows how loss of her1 or her7 can allow oscillations to
continue with unchanged period but with reduced amplitude and impaired synchrony,
as manifested in the in situ hybridisation patterns of the single mutants.

PMID: 23250218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Jan 1;319(1):103-12. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.08.010. Epub
2012 Sep 14.

HES6 enhances the motility of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Wickramasinghe CM(1), Domaschenz R, Amagase Y, Williamson D, Missiaglia E,
Shipley J, Murai K, Jones PH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research centre, Addenbrooke's Hospital
Cambridge, UK.

HES6, a member of the hairy-enhancer-of-split family of transcription factors,
plays multiple roles in myogenesis. It is a direct target of the myogenic
transcription factor MyoD and has been shown to regulate the formation of the
myotome in development, myoblast cell cycle exit and the organization of the
actin cytoskeleton during terminal differentiation. Here we investigate the
expression and function of HES6 in rhabdomyosarcoma, a soft tissue tumor which
expresses myogenic genes but fails to differentiate into muscle. We show that
HES6 is expressed at high levels in the subset of alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas
expressing PAX/FOXO1 fusion genes (ARMSp). Knockdown of HES6 mRNA in the ARMSp
cell line RH30 reduces proliferation and cell motility. This phenotype is rescued
by expression of mouse Hes6 which is insensitive to HES6 siRNA. Furthermore,
expression microarray analysis indicates that the HES6 knockdown is associated
with a decrease in the levels of Transgelin, (TAGLN), a regulator of the actin
cytoskeleton. Knockdown of TAGLN decreases cell motility, whilst TAGLN
overexpression rescues the motility defect resulting from HES6 knockdown. These
findings indicate HES6 contributes to the pathogenesis of ARMSp by enhancing both
proliferation and cell motility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Exp Mol Med. 2012 Nov 30;44(11):642-52. doi: 10.3858/emm.2012.44.11.073.

Circadian regulation of low density lipoprotein receptor promoter activity by
CLOCK/BMAL1, Hes1 and Hes6.

Lee YJ(1), Han DH, Pak YK, Cho SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Neurodegeneration Control Research Center,
Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Korea.

Low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) plays an important role in the
cholesterol homeostasis. We examined the possible circadian regulation of LDLR
and mechanism(s) underlying it. In mice, blood glucose and plasma triglyceride,
total and high density lipoprotein cholesterol varied distinctively throughout a 
day. In addition, LDLR mRNA oscillated in the liver in a functional
clock-dependent manner. Accordingly, analysis of human LDLR promoter sequence
revealed three putative E-boxes, raising the possible regulation of LDLR
expression by E-box-binding transcription factors. To test this possibility,
human LDLR promoter reporter constructs were transfected into HepG2 cells and the
effects of CLOCK/BMAL1, Hes1, and Hes6 expression were analyzed. It was found
that positive circadian transcription factor complex CLOCK/BMAL1 upregulated
human LDLR promoter activity in a serum-independent manner, while Hes family
members Hes1 and Hes6 downregulated it only under serum-depleted conditions. Both
effects were mapped to proximal promoter region of human LDLR, where mutation or 
deletion of well-known sterol regulatory element (SRE) abolished only the
repressive effect of Hes1. Interestingly, hes6 and hes1 mRNA oscillated in an
anti-phasic manner in the wild-type but not in the per1-/-per2 -/- mouse.
Comparative analysis of mouse, rat and human hes6 genes revealed that three
E-boxes are conserved among three species. Transfection and site-directed
mutagenesis studies with hes6 reporter constructs confirmed that the third E-box 
in the exon IV is functionally induced by CLOCK/BMAL1. Taken together, these
results suggest that LDLR expression is under circadian control involving
CLOCK/BMAL1 and Hes family members Hes1 and Hes6.

PMCID: PMC3509181
PMID: 22913986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(7):e1001364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001364. Epub 2012 Jul 
24.

Topology and dynamics of the zebrafish segmentation clock core circuit.

Schröter C(1), Ares S, Morelli LG, Isakova A, Hens K, Soroldoni D, Gajewski M,
Jülicher F, Maerkl SJ, Deplancke B, Oates AC.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2012;10(7):e1001366.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Sep;13(9):595.

During vertebrate embryogenesis, the rhythmic and sequential segmentation of the 
body axis is regulated by an oscillating genetic network termed the segmentation 
clock. We describe a new dynamic model for the core pace-making circuit of the
zebrafish segmentation clock based on a systematic biochemical investigation of
the network's topology and precise measurements of somitogenesis dynamics in
novel genetic mutants. We show that the core pace-making circuit consists of two 
distinct negative feedback loops, one with Her1 homodimers and the other with
Her7:Hes6 heterodimers, operating in parallel. To explain the observed single and
double mutant phenotypes of her1, her7, and hes6 mutant embryos in our dynamic
model, we postulate that the availability and effective stability of the dimers
with DNA binding activity is controlled in a "dimer cloud" that contains all
possible dimeric combinations between the three factors. This feature of our
model predicts that Hes6 protein levels should oscillate despite constant hes6
mRNA production, which we confirm experimentally using novel Hes6 antibodies. The
control of the circuit's dynamics by a population of dimers with and without DNA 
binding activity is a new principle for the segmentation clock and may be
relevant to other biological clocks and transcriptional regulatory networks.

PMCID: PMC3404119
PMID: 22911291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Folia Biol (Praha). 2012;58(3):98-105.

Activation of the Jak/Stat signalling pathway by leukaemia inhibitory factor
stimulates trans-differentiation of human non-endocrine pancreatic cells into
insulin-producing cells.

Koblas T(1), Leontovyc I, Zacharovová K, Berková Z, Krí J, Girman P, Saudek F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.

Differentiation of pancreatic ß-cells is regulated by a wide range of signalling 
pathways. The aim of our current work was to evaluate the effect of the Jak/Stat 
signalling pathway on the differentiation of human non-endocrine pancreatic cells
into insulin-producing cells. Activation of the Jak/Stat signalling pathway by
leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) stimulated differentiation of
C-peptide-negative human non-endocrine pancreatic cells into insulin-producing
cells in 6.3 ± 2.0 % cells (N = 5) and induced expression of pro-endocrine
transcription factor neurogenin 3, Notch signalling pathway suppressor HES6 and
stimulator of ß-cell neogenesis REG3A. The expression of the REG3A gene and
increased rate of differentiation into insulin-producing cells (10.2 ± 2.1 %)
were further stimulated by a combination of LIF with nicotinamide and
dexamethasone. Glucose-stimulated (5 vs. 20 mM) C-peptide secretion confirmed
proper insulin secretory function of trans-differentiated insulin-producing cells
(0.51 vs. 2.03 pmol C-peptide/µg DNA, P < 0.05). Our results indicate that
Jak/Stat signalling critically contributes to trans-differentiation of
non-endocrine pancreatic cells into functional insulin-producing cells. The
positive effect of the Jak/Stat signalling pathway on trans-differentiation is
mediated by the key genes that activate differentiation of pancreatic ß-cells.

PMID: 22849859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Development. 2012 Mar;139(5):940-7. doi: 10.1242/dev.073544. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

The Her7 node modulates the network topology of the zebrafish segmentation clock 
via sequestration of the Hes6 hub.

Trofka A(1), Schwendinger-Schreck J, Brend T, Pontius W, Emonet T, Holley SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Using in vitro and in vivo assays, we define a network of Her/Hes dimers
underlying transcriptional negative feedback within the zebrafish segmentation
clock. Some of the dimers do not appear to be DNA-binding, whereas those dimers
that do interact with DNA have distinct preferences for cis regulatory sequences.
Dimerization is specific, with Hes6 serving as the hub of the network. Her1 binds
DNA only as a homodimer but will also dimerize with Hes6. Her12 and Her15 bind
DNA both as homodimers and as heterodimers with Hes6. Her7 dimerizes strongly
with Hes6 and weakly with Her15. This network structure engenders specific
network dynamics and imparts greater influence to the Her7 node. Computational
analysis supports the hypothesis that Her7 disproportionately influences the
availability of Hes6 to heterodimerize with other Her proteins. Genetic
experiments suggest that this regulation is important for operation of the
network. Her7 therefore has two functions within the zebrafish segmentation
clock. Her7 acts directly within the delayed negative feedback as a DNA-binding
heterodimer with Hes6. Her7 also has an emergent function, independent of DNA
binding, in which it modulates network topology via sequestration of the network 
hub.

PMCID: PMC3274355
PMID: 22278920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Haematologica. 2012 Jul;97(7):1064-72. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.047530. Epub
2012 Jan 22.

ETV6-PDGFRB and FIP1L1-PDGFRA stimulate human hematopoietic progenitor cell
proliferation and differentiation into eosinophils: the role of nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B.

Montano-Almendras CP(1), Essaghir A, Schoemans H, Varis I, Noël LA, Velghe AI,
Latinne D, Knoops L, Demoulin JB.

Author information: 
(1)Université catholique de Louvain, de Duve Institute, avenue Hippocrate 75,
BE-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: ETV6-PDGFRB (also called TEL-PDGFRB) and FIP1L1-PDGFRA are
receptor-tyrosine kinase fusion genes that cause chronic myeloid malignancies
associated with hypereosinophilia. The aim of this work was to gain insight into 
the mechanisms whereby fusion genes affect human hematopoietic cells and in
particular the eosinophil lineage.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We introduced ETV6-PDGFRB and FIP1L1-PDGFRA into human
CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells isolated from umbilical cord
blood.
RESULTS: Cells transduced with these oncogenes formed hematopoietic colonies even
in the absence of cytokines. Both oncogenes also stimulated the proliferation of 
cells in liquid culture and their differentiation into eosinophils. This model
thus recapitulated key features of the myeloid neoplasms induced by ETV6-PDGFRB
and FIP1L1-PDGFRA. We next showed that both fusion genes activated the
transcription factors STAT1, STAT3, STAT5 and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B.
Phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase inhibition blocked nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B activation in 
transduced progenitor cells and patients' cells. Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B was also
activated in the human FIP1L1-PDGFRA-positive leukemia cell line EOL1, the
proliferation of which was blocked by bortezomib and the I<U+03BA>B kinase inhibitor
BMS-345541. A mutant I<U+03BA>B that prevents nuclear translocation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
inhibited cell growth and the expression of eosinophil markers, such as the
interleukin-5 receptor and eosinophil peroxidase, in progenitors transduced with 
ETV6-PDGFRB. In addition, several potential regulators of this process, including
HES6, MYC and FOXO3 were identified using expression microarrays.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that human CD34(+) cells expressing PDGFR fusion oncogenes
proliferate autonomously and differentiate towards the eosinophil lineage in a
process that requires nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B. These results suggest new treatment
possibilities for imatinib-resistant myeloid neoplasms associated with PDGFR
mutations.

PMCID: PMC3396679
PMID: 22271894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27880. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027880. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Hes6 is required for the neurogenic activity of neurogenin and NeuroD.

Murai K(1), Philpott A, Jones PH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

In the embryonic neural plate, a subset of precursor cells with neurogenic
potential differentiates into neurons. This process of primary neurogenesis
requires both the specification of cells for neural differentiation, regulated by
Notch signaling, and the activity of neurogenic transcription factors such as
neurogenin and NeuroD which drive the program of neural gene expression. Here we 
study the role of Hes6, a member of the hairy enhancer of split family of
transcription factors, in primary neurogenesis in Xenopus embryos. Hes6 is an
atypical Hes gene in that it is not regulated by Notch signaling and promotes
neural differentiation in mouse cell culture models. We show that depletion of
Xenopus Hes6 (Xhes6) by morpholino antisense oligonucleotides results in a
failure of neural differentiation, a phenotype rescued by both wild type Xhes6
and a Xhes6 mutant unable to bind DNA. However, an Xhes6 mutant that lacks the
ability to bind Groucho/TLE transcriptional co-regulators is only partly able to 
rescue the phenotype. Further analysis reveals that Xhes6 is essential for the
induction of neurons by both neurogenin and NeuroD, acting via at least two
distinct mechanisms, the inhibition of antineurogenic Xhairy proteins and by
interaction with Groucho/TLE family proteins. We conclude Xhes6 is essential for 
neurogenesis in vivo, acting via multiple mechanisms to relieve inhibition of
proneural transcription factor activity within the neural plate.

PMCID: PMC3218063
PMID: 22114720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26878. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026878. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

A genome-wide survey on basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors in giant
panda.

Dang C(1), Wang Y, Zhang D, Yao Q, Chen K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province,
People's Republic of China.

The giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) is a critically endangered mammalian
species. Studies on functions of regulatory proteins involved in developmental
processes would facilitate understanding of specific behavior in giant panda. The
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins play essential roles in a wide range of
developmental processes in higher organisms. bHLH family members have been
identified in over 20 organisms, including fruit fly, zebrafish, mouse and human.
Our present study identified 107 bHLH family members being encoded in giant panda
genome. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that they belong to 44 bHLH families with 
46, 25, 15, 4, 11 and 3 members in group A, B, C, D, E and F, respectively, while
the remaining 3 members were assigned into "orphan". Compared to mouse, the giant
panda does not encode seven bHLH proteins namely Beta3a, Mesp2, Sclerax, S-Myc,
Hes5 (or Hes6), EBF4 and Orphan 1. These results provide useful background
information for future studies on structure and function of bHLH proteins in the 
regulation of giant panda development.

PMCID: PMC3212526
PMID: 22096504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Oncogene. 2012 Mar 8;31(10):1299-310. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.316. Epub 2011 Jul
25.

HES6 gene is selectively overexpressed in glioma and represents an important
transcriptional regulator of glioma proliferation.

Haapa-Paananen S(1), Kiviluoto S, Waltari M, Puputti M, Mpindi JP, Kohonen P,
Tynninen O, Haapasalo H, Joensuu H, Perälä M, Kallioniemi O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
and Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
saija.haapa-paananen@vtt.fi

Malignant glioma is the most common brain tumor with 16,000 new cases diagnosed
annually in the United States. We performed a systematic large-scale
transcriptomics data mining study of 9783 tissue samples from the GeneSapiens
database to systematically identify genes that are most glioma-specific. We
searched for genes that were highly expressed in 322 glioblastoma multiforme
tissue samples and 66 anaplastic astrocytomas as compared with 425 samples from
histologically normal central nervous system. Transcription cofactor HES6 (hairy 
and enhancer of split 6) emerged as the most glioma-specific gene. Immunostaining
of a tissue microarray showed HES6 expression in 335 (98.8%) out of the 339
glioma samples. HES6 was expressed in endothelial cells of the normal brain and
glioma tissue. Recurrent grade 2 astrocytomas and grade 2 or 3 oligodendrogliomas
showed higher levels of HES6 immunoreactivity than the corresponding primary
tumors. High HES6 mRNA expression correlated with the proneural subtype that
generally has a favorable outcome but is prone to recur. Functional studies
suggested an important role for HES6 in supporting survival of glioma cells, as
evidenced by reduction of cancer cell proliferation and migration after HES6
silencing. The biological role and consequences of HES6 silencing and
overexpression was explored with genome-wide analyses, which implicated a role
for HES6 in p53, c-myc and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B transcriptional networks. We
conclude that HES6 is important for glioma cell proliferation and migration, and 
may have a role in angiogenesis.

PMID: 21785461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2011 Sep-Oct;85(3-4):163-9. doi:
10.1016/j.plefa.2011.06.001. Epub 2011 Jul 2.

Cis-9,trans-11-conjugated linoleic acid promotes neuronal differentiation through
regulation of Hes6 mRNA and cell cycle in cultured neural stem cells.

Okui T(1), Hashimoto M, Katakura M, Shido O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Physiology, Shimane University Faculty of
Medicine, Izumo, Shimane 693-8501, Japan.

Conjugated linoleic acids (CLAs) are positional and geometrical isomers of
linoleic acid (LA). Cis-9,trans-11-CLA (CLA), the main isomer of CLAs in foods
derived from ruminants, has several beneficial effects for humans and animals;
however, its effects on the central nervous system are largely unknown. In this
study, we investigated the effects of LA and CLA on neuronal differentiation of
neural stem cells (NSCs). NSCs cultured with or without LA and CLA were assessed 
by immunofluorescence staining, mRNA measurement of basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors by real-time PCR,
BrdU incorporation analysis and flow cytometry analysis. In NSCs treated with
CLA, the number of Tuj-1-positive cells (neurons) and the mRNA expression levels 
of Hes6, MAP2, p21(cip1) and p27(kip1) increased, while the proportion of S-phase
cells decreased; compared with the control, no change was demonstrated in NSCs
treated with LA. These results suggest that CLA promotes neuronal differentiation
by increasing, in part, the expression of Hes6 mRNA and by activating p21(cip1)
and p27(kip1) to arrest cell cycle.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21723718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 12;108(28):11632-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1106230108. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Cyclin D1 promotes neurogenesis in the developing spinal cord in a cell
cycle-independent manner.

Lukaszewicz AI(1), Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

Neural stem and progenitor cells undergo an important transition from
proliferation to differentiation in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The
mechanisms coordinating this transition are incompletely understood. Cyclin D
proteins promote proliferation in G1 and typically are down-regulated before
differentiation. Here we show that motoneuron progenitors in the embryonic spinal
cord persistently express Cyclin D1 during the initial phase of differentiation, 
while down-regulating Cyclin D2. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function
experiments indicate that Cyclin D1 (but not D2) promotes neurogenesis in vivo, a
role that can be dissociated from its cell cycle function. Moreover, reexpression
of Cyclin D1 can restore neurogenic capacity to D2-expressing glial-restricted
progenitors. The neurogenic function of Cyclin D1 appears to be mediated,
directly or indirectly, by Hes6, a proneurogenic basic helic-loop-helix
transcription factor. These data identify a cell cycle-independent function for
Cyclin D1 in promoting neuronal differentiation, along with a potential genetic
pathway through which this function is exerted.

PMCID: PMC3136279
PMID: 21709239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Gynecol Oncol. 2011 Aug;122(2):396-401. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.04.027. Epub
2011 May 26.

Xanthohumol decreases Notch1 expression and cell growth by cell cycle arrest and 
induction of apoptosis in epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines.

Drenzek JG(1), Seiler NL, Jaskula-Sztul R, Rausch MM, Rose SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Notch1 signaling is active in ovarian cancer and is a promising
pathway for new therapies in ovarian cancer. We have previously detected high
Notch1 expression in ovarian tumors. Xanthohumol has been shown to inhibit cancer
cell growth and invasion, including Kaposi's sarcoma, which also highly expresses
Notch1. We hypothesized that the Notch1 signaling pathway is targeted by
xanthohumol leading to decreased ovarian cancer cell growth.
METHODS: SKOV3 and OVCAR3 cells were utilized. MTT growth assays were conducted
following treatment with xanthohumol. Quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot
analyses were conducted to assess Notch1 down-regulation. Luciferase reporter
assays were performed to assess functional down-regulation of Notch1. Cell cycle 
analysis was performed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Significant growth inhibition and down-regulation of Notch1
transcription and protein expression were found following xanthohumol treatment. 
In addition, xanthohumol increased Hes6 transcription and decreased Hes1
transcription, known downstream targets of Notch 1. These observations were
associated with cell cycle inhibition as demonstrated by an increase in p21
expression and S and G2/M cell cycle arrest confirmed by an increase in
phosphorylated cdc2. Furthermore, an increase in the apoptotic markers, cleaved
caspase-3 and cleaved PARP were observed.
CONCLUSION: Xanthohumol was a potent inhibitor of ovarian cancer cell growth, and
our results suggest that xanthohumol may be influencing the Notch1 pathway. These
findings suggest that xanthohumol could be useful as a therapeutic agent in
ovarian cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21616523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 May 17;11:27. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-27.

The Enhancer of split transcription factor Her8a is a novel dimerisation partner 
for Her3 that controls anterior hindbrain neurogenesis in zebrafish.

Webb KJ(1), Coolen M, Gloeckner CJ, Stigloher C, Bahn B, Topp S, Ueffing M,
Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Zebrafish Neurogenetics Department, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Ingolstädter Landstr, 1, D-85764 Neuherberg,
Germany. webb@helmholtz-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: Neurogenesis control and the prevention of premature differentiation 
in the vertebrate embryo are crucial processes, allowing the formation of
late-born cell types and ensuring the correct shape and cytoarchitecture of the
brain. Members of the Hairy/Enhancer of Split (Hairy/E(spl)) family of
bHLH-Orange transcription factors, such as zebrafish Her3, 5, 9 and 11, are
implicated in the local inhibition of neurogenesis to maintain progenitor pools
within the early neural plate. To better understand how these factors exert their
inhibitory function, we aimed to isolate some of their functional interactors.
RESULTS: We used a yeast two-hybrid screen with Her5 as bait and recovered a
novel zebrafish Hairy/E(spl) factor--Her8a. Using phylogenetic and synteny
analyses, we demonstrate that her8a evolved from an ancient duplicate of Hes6
that was recently lost in the mammalian lineage. We show that her8a is expressed 
across the mid- and anterior hindbrain from the start of segmentation. Through
knockdown and misexpression experiments, we demonstrate that Her8a is a negative 
regulator of neurogenesis and plays an essential role in generating progenitor
pools within rhombomeres 2 and 4--a role resembling that of Her3. Her8a
co-purifies with Her3, suggesting that Her8a-Her3 heterodimers may be relevant in
this domain of the neural plate, where both proteins are co-expressed. Finally,
we demonstrate that her8a expression is independent of Notch signaling at the
early neural plate stage but that SoxB factors play a role in its expression,
linking patterning information to neurogenesis control. Overall, the regulation
and function of Her8a differ strikingly from those of its closest relative in
other vertebrates--the Hes6-like proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results characterize the phylogeny, expression and functional
interactions involving a new Her factor, Her8a, and highlight the complex
interplay of E(spl) proteins that generates the neurogenesis pattern of the
zebrafish early neural plate.

PMCID: PMC3125270
PMID: 21586122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 26;6(4):e19394. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019394.

Zebrafish Her8a is activated by Su(H)-dependent Notch signaling and is essential 
for the inhibition of neurogenesis.

Chung PC(1), Lin WS, Scotting PJ, Hsieh FY, Wu HL, Cheng YC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Chang-Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Understanding how diversity of neural cells is generated is one of the main tasks
of developmental biology. The Hairy/E(spl) family members are potential targets
of Notch signaling, which has been shown to be fundamental to neural cell
maintenance, cell fate decisions, and compartment boundary formation. However,
their response to Notch signaling and their roles in neurogenesis are still not
fully understood. In the present study, we isolated a zebrafish homologue of
hairy/E(spl), her8a, and showed this gene is specifically expressed in the
developing nervous system. her8a is positively regulated by Su(H)-dependent Notch
signaling as revealed by a Notch-defective mutant and injection of variants of
the Notch intracellular regulator, Su(H). Morpholino knockdown of Her8a resulted 
in upregulation of proneural and post-mitotic neuronal markers, indicating that
Her8a is essential for the inhibition of neurogenesis. In addition, markers for
glial precursors and mature glial cells were down-regulated in Her8a morphants,
suggesting Her8a is required for gliogenesis. The role of Her8a and its response 
to Notch signaling is thus similar to mammalian HES1, however this is the
converse of what is seen for the more closely related mammalian family member,
HES6. This study not only provides further understanding of how the fundamental
signaling pathway, Notch signaling, and its downstream genes mediate neural
development and differentiation, but also reveals evolutionary diversity in the
role of H/E(spl) genes.

PMCID: PMC3082574
PMID: 21541299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Jul 1;317(11):1590-602. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.03.023. Epub
2011 Apr 9.

Hes6 is required for actin cytoskeletal organization in differentiating C2C12
myoblasts.

Malone CM(1), Domaschenz R, Amagase Y, Dunham I, Murai K, Jones PH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, UK.

Hes6 is a member of the hairy-enhancer-of-split family of transcription factors
that regulate proliferating cell fate in development and is known to be expressed
in developing muscle. Here we investigate its function in myogenesis in vitro. We
show that Hes6 is a direct transcriptional target of the myogenic transcription
factors MyoD and Myf5, indicating that it is integral to the myogenic
transcriptional program. The localization of Hes6 protein changes during
differentiation, becoming predominantly nuclear. Knockdown of Hes6 mRNA levels by
siRNA has no effect on cell cycle exit or induction of myosin heavy chain
expression in differentiating C2C12 myoblasts, but F-actin filament formation is 
disrupted and both cell motility and myoblast fusion are reduced. The knockdown
phenotype is rescued by expression of Hes6 cDNA resistant to siRNA. These results
define a novel role for Hes6 in actin cytoskeletal dynamics in post mitotic
myoblasts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21501606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 1;352(1):116-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.025. Epub 2011
Jan 27.

Altered differentiation and paracrine stimulation of mammary epithelial cell
proliferation by conditionally activated Smoothened.

Visbal AP(1), LaMarca HL, Villanueva H, Toneff MJ, Li Y, Rosen JM, Lewis MT.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling network is critical for patterning and organogenesis 
in mammals, and has been implicated in a variety of cancers. Smoothened (Smo),
the gene encoding the principal signal transducer, is overexpressed frequently in
breast cancer, and constitutive activation in MMTV-SmoM2 transgenic mice caused
alterations in mammary gland morphology, increased proliferation, and changes in 
stem/progenitor cell number. Both in transgenic mice and in clinical specimens,
proliferative cells did not usually express detectable Smo, suggesting the
hypothesis that Smo functioned in a non-cell autonomous manner to stimulate
proliferation. Here, we employed a genetically tagged mouse model carrying a
Cre-recombinase-dependent conditional allele of constitutively active Smo (SmoM2)
to test this hypothesis. MMTV-Cre- or adenoviral-Cre-mediated SmoM2 expression in
the luminal epithelium, but not in the myoepithelium, was required for the
hyper-proliferative phenotypes. High levels of proliferation were observed in
cells adjacent or in close-proximity to Smo expressing cells demonstrating that
SmoM2 expressing cells were stimulating proliferation via a paracrine or
juxtacrine mechanism. In contrast, Smo expression altered luminal cell
differentiation in a cell-autonomous manner. SmoM2 expressing cells, purified by 
fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) via the genetic fluorescent tag,
expressed high levels of Ptch2, Gli1, Gli2, Jag2 and Dll-1, and lower levels of
Notch4 and Hes6, in comparison to wildtype cells. These studies provide insight
into the mechanism of Smo activation in the mammary gland and its possible roles 
in breast tumorigenesis. In addition, these results also have potential
implications for the interpretation of proliferative phenotypes commonly observed
in other organs as a consequence of hedgehog signaling activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3057274
PMID: 21276786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 2;5(12):e15459. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015459.

HES6-1 and HES6-2 function through different mechanisms during neuronal
differentiation.

Vilas-Boas F(1), Henrique D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Notch signalling plays a central role in the mechanisms regulating
neuronal differentiation in the vertebrate nervous system. The transcriptional
repressors encoded by Hes genes are the main effectors of this pathway, acting in
neural progenitors during the lateral inhibition process to repress proneural
genes and inhibit differentiation. However, Hes6 genes seem to behave
differently: they are expressed in differentiating neurons and facilitate the
activity of proneural genes in promoting neurogenesis. Still, the molecular
mechanisms underlying this unique function of Hes6 genes are not yet understood.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we identify two subgroups of Hes6 genes
that seem conserved in most vertebrate species and characterize a novel Hes6 gene
in chicken: cHes6-1. The embryonic expression pattern of cHes6-1 suggests roles
for this gene in the formation of the pancreas, nervous system and in the
generation of body asymmetry. We show that cHes6-1 is negatively regulated by
Notch signalling in the developing embryonic spinal cord and in pancreatic
progenitors, but requires Notch for the observed asymmetric expression at the
lateral mesoderm. Functional studies by ectopic expression in the chick embryonic
neural tube revealed that cHES6-1 up-regulates the expression of cDelta1 and
cHes5 genes, in contrast with overexpression of cHES6-2, which represses the same
genes. We show that this activity of cHES6-2 is dependent on its capacity to bind
DNA and repress transcription, while cHES6-1 seems to function by sequestering
other HES proteins and inhibit their activity as transcriptional repressors.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that the two chick HES6 proteins
act at different phases of neuronal differentiation, contributing to the
progression of neurogenesis by different mechanisms: while cHES6-2 represses the 
transcription of Hes genes, cHES6-1 acts later, sequestering HES proteins.
Together, the two cHES6 proteins progressively shut down the Notch-mediated
progenitor program and ensure that neuronal differentiation can proceed.

PMCID: PMC2996300
PMID: 21151987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Oncotarget. 2010 Sep;1(5):379-85.

The Siah2-HIF-FoxA2 axis in prostate cancer  new markers and therapeutic
opportunities.

Qi J(1), Pellecchia M, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Recent studies indicate the importance of the ubiquitin ligase Siah2 in control
of more aggressive prostate tumors  namely, neuroendocrine (NE) prostate tumors 
and prostate adenocarcinoma (PCa) harboring neuroendocrine lesions.
Siah2-dependent expression and activity of HIF-1a regulate its availability to
form a transcriptional complex with FoxA2, resulting in expression of specific
target genes, including Hes6, Sox9 and Jmjd1a, whose co-expression is sufficient 
for formation of NE tumors and NE lesions in PCa. These studies provide novel
markers to diagnose and monitor formation of NE lesions and NE tumors.
Furthermore, defining the regulatory axis consisting of Siah2 and HIF-1a/FoxA2
cooperation suggests novel therapeutic modalities to treat these most aggressive 
forms of prostate cancer. Here we review current understanding of Siah role in
control of hypoxia and prostate tumor development and highlight potential
approaches for targeting components along Siah-regulated pathways.

PMCID: PMC2964873
PMID: 21037926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):23-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.05.024.

Siah2-dependent concerted activity of HIF and FoxA2 regulates formation of
neuroendocrine phenotype and neuroendocrine prostate tumors.

Qi J(1), Nakayama K, Cardiff RD, Borowsky AD, Kaul K, Williams R, Krajewski S,
Mercola D, Carpenter PM, Bowtell D, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Asian J Androl. 2013 Jul;15(4):447-8.
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):3-4.

Neuroendocrine (NE) phenotype, seen in >30% of prostate adenocarcinomas (PCa),
and NE prostate tumors are implicated in aggressive prostate cancer. Formation of
NE prostate tumors in the TRAMP mouse model was suppressed in mice lacking the
ubiquitin ligase Siah2, which regulates HIF-1alpha availability. Cooperation
between HIF-1alpha and FoxA2, a transcription factor expressed in NE tissue,
promotes recruitment of p300 to transactivate select HIF-regulated genes, Hes6,
Sox9, and Jmjd1a. These HIF-regulated genes are highly expressed in metastatic
PCa and required for hypoxia-mediated NE phenotype, metastasis in PCa, and the
formation of NE tumors. Tissue-specific expression of FoxA2 combined with
Siah2-dependent HIF-1alpha availability enables a transcriptional program
required for NE prostate tumor development and NE phenotype in PCa.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919332
PMID: 20609350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Prolif. 2010 Jun;43(3):297-309. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2010.00679.x.

Global gene expression reveals a set of new genes involved in the modification of
cells during erythroid differentiation.

da Cunha AF(1), Brugnerotto AF, Duarte AS, Lanaro C, Costa GG, Saad ST, Costa FF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética e Evolução, Centro de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde,
Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil.
anderf@ufscar.br

OBJECTIVES: Erythroid differentiation is a dynamic process in which a pluripotent
stem cell undergoes a series of developmental changes that commit it to a
specific lineage. These alterations involve changes in gene expression profiles. 
In this study, gene expression profiles during differentiation of human erythroid
cells of a normal blood donor were evaluated using SAGE.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Global gene expression was evaluated in cells collected
immediately before addition of erythropoietin (0 h) and 192 and 336 h after
addition of this hormone. Real-time PCR was used to evaluate activation of
differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS: The data indicate that global aspects of the transcriptome were similar 
during differentiation of the majority of the genes and that a relatively small
set of genes is probably involved in modification of erythroid cells during
differentiation. We have identified 93 differentially expressed genes during
erythroid development, and expression of some of these was confirmed by qPCR.
Various genes including EYA3, ERH, HES6, TIMELESS and TRIB3 were found to be
homologous to those of Drosophila melanogaster and here are described for the
first time during erythroid development. An important and unique carboxypeptidase
inhibitor described in mammalians, LXN, was also identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study amplify previously published data and may 
contribute to comprehension of erythroid differentiation and identification of
new target genes involved in some erythroid concerning diseases.

PMID: 20546246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Brain Res. 2010 Feb 8;1313:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.11.078. Epub 2009
Dec 5.

Induction of neuronal apoptosis by expression of Hes6 via p53-dependent pathway.

Eun B(1), Cho B, Moon Y, Kim SY, Kim K, Kim H, Sun W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Brain Korea 21, Korea University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Hes6 is a member of hairy/enhancer of split (Hes) family that plays a role in the
cell proliferation and differentiation. Recently, we found that Hes6 is involved 
in the regulation of cell proliferation via p53-dependent pathway. In addition to
the proliferating regions, brain regions where early post-mitotic neurons are
enriched also exhibited Hes6 and p53 mRNA expression. Because p53 is involved in 
the post-mitotic neuronal apoptosis, here we investigated whether Hes6 can
influence the neuronal survival/death. Overexpression of wild-type Hes6 and its
mutants induced the apoptosis of primary cultured cortical neurons. In addition, 
neuronal apoptosis by Hes6 overexpression was markedly blunted in p53(-/-) or
Bax(-/-) cortical neurons, suggesting that these pro-apoptotic effects are
mediated by p53- and Bax-dependent pathway. However, transactivation-defective
mutants of Hes6 also enhanced neuronal apoptosis, suggesting that apoptogenic
activity of Hes6 is not directly related to its role in the transcriptional
regulation. We propose that Hes6 may play a significant role in the neuronal cell
death and/or pathological neurodegeneration via activation of p53 signaling.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19968968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;30(3):565-77. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00927-09. Epub 2009 Nov
23.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha coordinates a transcription factor network
regulating hepatic fatty acid metabolism.

Martinez-Jimenez CP(1), Kyrmizi I, Cardot P, Gonzalez FJ, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Research Center Alexander Fleming, 16672 Vari, Greece.

Adaptation of liver to nutritional signals is regulated by several transcription 
factors that are modulated by intracellular metabolites. Here, we demonstrate a
transcription factor network under the control of hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha (HNF4alpha) that coordinates the reciprocal expression of fatty acid
transport and metabolizing enzymes during fasting and feeding conditions. Hes6 is
identified as a novel HNF4alpha target, which in normally fed animals, together
with HNF4alpha, maintains PPARgamma expression at low levels and represses
several PPARalpha-regulated genes. During fasting, Hes6 expression is diminished,
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) replaces the
HNF4alpha/Hes6 complex on regulatory regions of target genes to activate
transcription. Gene expression and promoter occupancy analyses confirmed that
HNF4alpha is a direct activator of the Pparalpha gene in vivo and that its
expression is subject to feedback regulation by PPARalpha and Hes6 proteins.
These results establish the fundamental role of dynamic regulatory interactions
between HNF4alpha, Hes6, PPARalpha, and PPARgamma in the coordinated expression
of genes involved in fatty acid transport and metabolism.

PMCID: PMC2812226
PMID: 19933841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Anim Genet. 2010 Jun;41(3):304-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2009.01987.x. Epub
2009 Nov 16.

A shared 336 kb haplotype associated with the belt pattern in three divergent
cattle breeds.

Drögemüller C(1), Demmel S, Engensteiner M, Rieder S, Leeb T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Berne, Berne,
Switzerland.

We recently mapped the belt mutation in Brown Swiss cattle to a 922 kb interval
on BTA3. In this study, we analysed two additional cattle breeds with the belted 
phenotype: Galloway and Dutch Belted (Lakenvelder). By genotyping microsatellites
in solid-coloured and belted Galloways, we confirmed that the belt mutation in
Galloways is strongly associated with the same chromosomal locus as in Brown
Swiss cattle. Subsequently, we analysed 36 SNPs in the belt interval in three
breeds. We identified a single belt-associated haplotype for each of the analysed
breeds. The three breed-specific belt haplotypes share alleles in four blocks.
Three of these blocks comprise only one single or two consecutive markers, while 
the largest shared haplotype block encompasses nine consecutive SNPs in a 336 kb 
interval. The large shared haplotype across divergent breeds suggests a common
mutation for the belt phenotype in all three breeds. We identified a potential
candidate gene within this interval coding for the developmental transcription
factor HES6. We re-sequenced the complete HES6 coding sequence in belted and
solid-coloured cattle but did not find belt-associated polymorphisms. In
conclusion, our data provide strong evidence in favour of a common founder for
the belt phenotype in different cattle breeds and have resulted in an improved
fine-mapping of the causative mutation.

PMID: 19917047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(6):R79. doi: 10.1186/bcr2446. Epub 2009 Nov 5.

Hes-6, an inhibitor of Hes-1, is regulated by 17beta-estradiol and promotes
breast cancer cell proliferation.

Hartman J(1), Lam EW, Gustafsson JA, Ström A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels väg 5, 
Solna Alfred Nobels Allé 8, 141 57 Huddinge, Sweden. johan.hartman@ki.se

INTRODUCTION: Hes-6 is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of
transcription factors, and its overexpression has been reported in metastatic
cancers of different origins. Hes-6 has been described as an inhibitor of Hes-1
during neuronal development, although its function in cancer is not known. In
this study, we investigated the function of Hes-6 in breast cancer and tested the
hypothesis that Hes-6 enhances breast cancer cell proliferation and is regulated 
by estrogen.
METHODS: To investigate the function of Hes-6, T47D cells stably expressing Hes-6
were generated by lentiviral transduction, and conversely, siRNA also was used to
knock down Hes-6 expression in breast cancer cells. The Hes-6-expressing T47D
cells were transplanted into immunodeficient mice to study effects on tumor
growth.
RESULTS: We found that Hes-6 expression was significantly higher in the
high-grade, estrogen receptor (ER)alpha-negative SKBR3 and MDA-MB-231 cells
compared with the ERalpha-positive, non-metastasizing T47D and MCF-7 breast
carcinoma cells. Moreover, the level of Hes-6 mRNA was 28 times higher in breast 
cancer samples compared with normal breast samples. In Hes-6-expressing T47D
cells, Hes-6 ectopic expression was shown to stimulate cell proliferation in
vitro as well as breast tumor growth in xenografts. Moreover, expression of Hes-6
resulted in induction of E2F-1, a crucial target gene for the transcriptional
repressor Hes-1. Consistently, silencing of Hes-6 by siRNA resulted in
downregulation of E2F-1 expression, whereas estrogen treatment caused induction
of Hes-6 and downstream targets hASH-1 and E2F-1 in MCF-7 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, the data suggest that Hes-6 is a potential oncogene
overexpressed in breast cancer, with a tumor-promoting and proliferative
function. Furthermore, Hes-6 is a novel estrogen-regulated gene in breast cancer 
cells. An understanding of the role and regulation of Hes-6 could provide
insights into estrogen signaling and endocrine resistance in breast cancer and,
hence, could be important for the development of novel anticancer drugs.

PMCID: PMC2815541
PMID: 19891787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Aug 28;460(2):185-90. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.05.065. Epub
2009 May 28.

Expression and association analyses of promoter variants of the neurogenic gene
HES6, a candidate gene for mood disorder susceptibility and antidepressant
response.

Glubb DM(1), Joyce PR, Kennedy MA.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Structure & Function Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of
Otago, Christchurch P.O. Box 4345, Christchurch, New Zealand.
dylan.glubb@otago.ac.nz

Hes6 is a neurogenic gene which is down-regulated in the hippocampi of rats
chronically treated with the antidepressant paroxetine. To assess whether
variability in HES6 associates with mood disorder diagnosis or antidepressant
response, this gene was sequenced in 24 unrelated New Zealand Caucasians. A total
of 12 polymorphisms were identified, six of which were in the promoter region of 
the gene. Haplotypes encompassing the promoter SNPs were studied by cloning the
region upstream of the transcription start site, and examining basal
transcription rates in luciferase reporter gene assays. SNPs located at positions
-1099, -831, -424 and -267 were shown to significantly alter expression of the
reporter gene. These four variants were tested for association with mood disorder
diagnosis or antidepressant response in a family study of depression, but no
significant associations were observed. However, given the importance of this
gene in neural function and development, the promoter variants described here may
be of wider relevance.

PMID: 19481584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Dyn. 2009 Sep;238(9):2163-78. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21848.

Acheate-scute like 1 (Ascl1) is required for normal delta-like (Dll) gene
expression and notch signaling during retinal development.

Nelson BR(1), Hartman BH, Ray CA, Hayashi T, Bermingham-McDonogh O, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, School of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. branden.nelson@seattlechildrens.org

Delta gene expression in Drosophila is regulated by proneural basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, such as acheate-scute. In
vertebrates, multiple Delta-like and proneural bHLH genes are expressed during
neurogenesis, especially in the retina. We recently uncovered a relationship
between Acheate-scute like 1 (Ascl1), Delta-like genes, and Notch in chick
retinal progenitors. Here, we report that mammalian retinal progenitors are also 
the primary source of Delta-like genes, likely signaling through Notch among
themselves, while differentiating neurons expressed Jagged2. Ascl1 is coexpressed
in Delta-like and Notch active progenitors, and required for normal Delta-like
gene expression and Notch signaling. We also reveal a role for Ascl1 in the
regulation of Hes6, a proneurogenic factor that inhibits Notch signaling to
promote neural rather than glial differentiation. Thus, these results suggest a
molecular mechanism whereby attenuated Notch levels coupled with reduced
proneurogenic activity in progenitors leads to increased gliogenesis and
decreased neurogenesis in the Ascl1-deficient retina.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2905851
PMID: 19191219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Acta Neuropsychiatr. 2008 Dec;20(6):307-13. doi:
10.1111/j.1601-5215.2008.00334.x.

Downregulation of Ccnd1 and Hes6 in rat hippocampus after chronic exposure to the
antidepressant paroxetine.

McHugh PC(1), Rogers GR(1), Glubb DM(1), Allington MD(1), Hughes M(2), Joyce
PR(3), Kennedy MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pathology, University of Otago, Christchurch, Christchurch, New
Zealand. (2)2Genetics Factors, Riccarton, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(3)3Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch,
Christchurch, New Zealand.

OBJECTIVE: The mechanism of action of antidepressant drugs is not fully
understood. Application of genomic methods enables the identification of
biochemical pathways that are regulated by antidepressants, and this may provide 
novel clues to the molecular and cellular actions of these drugs. The present
study examined gene expression profiles in the hippocampus of rats exposed to
chronic antidepressant treatment.
METHODS: Animals were treated for 12 days with the selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor paroxetine; then, hippocampal ribonucleic acid was recovered, and
changes in gene expression were assessed by microarray analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 160 genes that showed differential expression after
paroxetine exposure were identified. Using functional relevance and observed fold
change as selection criteria, the expression changes in a subset of these genes
were confirmed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
CONCLUSION: Of this subset, only two genes, cyclin D1 (Ccnd1) and hairy and
enhancer of split 6 (Hes6), showed robust and consistent changes in expression.
Both genes were downregulated by paroxetine, and both have been previously
implicated in neurogenesis. Further investigation of these two genes may provide 
new insight into the mechanism of action of antidepressants.

PMID: 25384412  [PubMed]


47. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 30;284(5):2891-901. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804055200. Epub 2008 
Nov 17.

Reversine increases the plasticity of lineage-committed cells toward
neuroectodermal lineage.

Lee EK(1), Bae GU, You JS, Lee JC, Jeon YJ, Park JW, Park JH, Ahn SH, Kim YK,
Choi WS, Kang JS, Han G, Han JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Pharmacy, and
Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea.

Functional dedifferentiation of lineage-committed cells toward pluripotency may
have a great potential in regenerative medicine. Reversine has been shown to
induce dedifferentiation of multiple terminally differentiated mesodermal origin 
cells, which are capable of being directed to differentiate into other cell types
within mesodermal lineages. However, the possibilities of these cells to give
rise to other lineages have not been examined. Here we show that large scale gene
expression profiling of reversine-treated C2C12 myoblasts identifies a subset of 
up-regulated genes involved in specification of neuroectodermal as well as
mesodermal lineages. Reversine treatment leads to up-regulation of priming genes 
of neuroectodermal lineages, such as Ngn2, Nts, Irx3, Pax7, Hes1, and Hes6,
through active histone modifications in the promoter regions of these genes.
Additionally, reversine increases the expression of markers for other cell types 
of mesodermal lineages, Ogn and apoE, via inducing active histone modifications, 
while down-regulating the myogenic basic helix-loop-helix factor, MyoD, via
repressive histone modifications. Consistent with up-regulation of these genes,
reversine-treated C2C12 myoblasts redifferentiate into neural as well as
mesodermal lineages, under appropriate stimuli. Taken together, these results
indicate that reversine induces a multipotency of C2C12 myoblasts via inducing a 
specific combination of active histone modifications. Collectively, our findings 
provide a mechanistic rationale for the application of reversine to
dedifferentiation of somatic cells.

PMID: 19015271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Dec 5;147B(8):1554-63. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30877.

A comparison of molecular alterations in environmental and genetic rat models of 
ADHD: a pilot study.

DasBanerjee T(1), Middleton FA, Berger DF, Lombardo JP, Sagvolden T, Faraone SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, State University of New York
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common
neurobehavioral disorder in school-aged children. In addition to genetic factors,
environmental influences or gene x environmental interactions also play an
important role in ADHD. One example of a well studied environmental risk factor
for ADHD is exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). In this study, we
investigated whether the well-established genetic model of ADHD based on the
spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) and a well established PCB-based model of
ADHD exhibited similar molecular changes in brain circuits involved in ADHD. The 
brains from 28 male rats (8 SHR, 8 Sprague-Dawley (SD) controls, 8 Wistar/Kyoto
(WKY) controls, and 4 PCB-exposed SD rats) were harvested at postnatal days
(PNDs) 55-65 and RNA was isolated from six brain regions of interest. The RNA was
analyzed for differences in expression of a set of 308 probe sets interrogating
218 unique genes considered highly relevant to ADHD or epigenetic gene regulation
using the Rat RAE230 2.0 GeneChip (Affymetrix). Selected observations were
confirmed by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. The results show that the expression 
levels of genes Gnal, COMT, Adrbk1, Ntrk2, Hk1, Syt11, and Csnk1a1 were altered
in both the SHR rats and the PCB-exposed SD rats. Arrb2, Stx12, Aqp6, Syt1, Ddc, 
and Pgk1 expression levels were changed only in the PCB-exposed SD rats. Genes
with altered expression only in the SHRs included Oprm1, Calcyon, Calmodulin,
Lhx1, and Hes6. The epigenetic genes Crebbp, Mecp2, and Hdac5 are significantly
altered in both models. The data provide strong evidence that genes and
environment can affect different set of genes in two different models of ADHD and
yet result in the similar disease-like symptoms.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2587509
PMID: 18937310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Jul;38(3):349-58. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.03.007. Epub
2008 Apr 1.

HES1 regulates 5-HT1A receptor gene transcription at a functional polymorphism:
essential role in developmental expression.

Jacobsen KX(1), Vanderluit JL, Slack RS, Albert PR.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute (Neuroscience) and Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON Canada.

Mammalian HES1 and HES5 are abundant in developing CNS and inhibit neurogenesis, 
while HES6 promotes neurogenesis. An early serotonergic differentiation marker,
the 5-HT1A receptor, is repressed by HES5 and DEAF1 which recognize the C(-1019),
but not G(-1019) allele of a human 5-HT1A promoter polymorphism associated with
mood disorders. We tested whether HES1 and HES6 regulate transcriptional activity
at this element. HES1 strongly repressed 5-HT1A transcription in neuronal and
non-neuronal cells, while HES6 reversed HES1- and HES5-mediated repression.
Mutation of a putative HES consensus site blocked HES1 and HES5, but, unlike
HES5, HES1 repressed at the G(-1019) allele. To address its role in vivo, the
temporal expression of 5-HT1A receptor RNA and protein was examined in HES1-/-
mice, and elevated levels in E12.5 hindbrain and midbrain were observed. Thus,
HES1 and HES6 oppositely regulate 5-HT1A receptor transcription and HES1 is
required for its correct developmental expression.

PMID: 18499474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BMC Med Genomics. 2008 May 19;1:17. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-1-17.

Pro-neural transcription factors as cancer markers.

Vias M(1), Massie CE, East P, Scott H, Warren A, Zhou Z, Nikitin AY, Neal DE,
Mills IG.

Author information: 
(1)Uro-Oncology Research Group, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute, 
Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK.
maria.vias@cancer.org.uk

BACKGROUND: The aberrant transcription in cancer of genes normally associated
with embryonic tissue differentiation at various organ sites may be a hallmark of
tumour progression. For example, neuroendocrine differentiation is found more
commonly in cancers destined to progress, including prostate and lung. We sought 
to identify proteins which are involved in neuroendocrine differentiation and
differentially expressed in aggressive/metastatic tumours.
RESULTS: Expression arrays were used to identify up-regulated transcripts in a
neuroendocrine (NE) transgenic mouse model of prostate cancer. Amongst these were
several genes normally expressed in neural tissues, including the pro-neural
transcription factors Ascl1 and Hes6. Using quantitative RT-PCR and
immuno-histochemistry we showed that these same genes were highly expressed in
castrate resistant, metastatic LNCaP cell-lines. Finally we performed a
meta-analysis on expression array datasets from human clinical material. The
expression of these pro-neural transcripts effectively segregates metastatic from
localised prostate cancer and benign tissue as well as sub-clustering a variety
of other human cancers.
CONCLUSION: By focussing on transcription factors known to drive normal tissue
development and comparing expression signatures for normal and malignant mouse
tissues we have identified two transcription factors, Ascl1 and Hes6, which
appear effective markers for an aggressive phenotype in all prostate models and
tissues examined. We suggest that the aberrant initiation of differentiation
programs may confer a selective advantage on cells in all contexts and this
approach to identify biomarkers therefore has the potential to uncover proteins
equally applicable to pre-clinical and clinical cancer biology.

PMCID: PMC2413260
PMID: 18489756  [PubMed]


51. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 29;283(9):5939-49. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Hes6 controls cell proliferation via interaction with cAMP-response
element-binding protein-binding protein in the promyelocytic leukemia nuclear
body.

Eun B(1), Lee Y, Hong S, Kim J, Lee HW, Kim K, Sun W, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Brain Korea 21, Korea University, Seoul 136-705, Korea.

Hes6 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that functions in the
differentiation of pluripotent progenitor cells and during tumorigenesis.
However, the molecular mechanism for its function is largely unknown. Here we
show that Hes6 is a component of the promyelocytic leukemia nuclear body (PML-NB)
complex in the nuclei and that Hes6 inhibits cell proliferation through induction
of p21 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor. We further show that Hes6 directly
interacts with CREB-binding protein (CBP), one of the key components of PML-NB,
via its basic domain. This association is critical for p21 induction through
multiple mechanisms, including chromatin remodeling and p53 acetylation. Taken
together, these results suggest that the Hes6-CBP complex in PML-NB may influence
the proliferation of cells via p53-dependent and -independent pathways.

PMID: 18160400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Dev Biol. 2007 Dec 1;312(1):61-76. Epub 2007 Sep 16.

Hes6 is required for MyoD induction during gastrulation.

Murai K(1), Vernon AE, Philpott A, Jones P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge CB2 0XZ, UK.

The specification of mesoderm into distinct compartments sharing the same lineage
restricted fates is a crucial step occurring during gastrulation, and is
regulated by morphogenic signals such as the FGF/MAPK and activin pathways. One
target of these pathways is the transcription factor XmyoD, which in early
gastrulation is expressed in the lateral and ventral mesoderm. Expression of the 
hairy/enhancer of split transcription factor hes6, is also restricted to lateral 
and ventral mesoderm in gastrula stage Xenopus embryos, leading us to investigate
whether it has a role in XmyoD regulation. In vivo, Xhes6 is required for
FGF-mediated induction of XmyoD expression but not for induction of early
mesoderm. The WRPW domain of Xhes6, which binds Groucho family transcriptional
co-regulators, is essential for the XmyoD-inducing activity of Xhes6. Two Groucho
proteins, Xgrg2 and Xgrg4, are expressed in lateral and ventral mesoderm, and
inhibit expression of XmyoD. Xhes6 binds both Xgrg2 and Xgrg4 and relieves their 
inhibition of XmyoD expression. We also find that lowering Xhes6 expression
levels blocks normal myogenic differentiation at tail bud stage. We conclude that
Xhes6 is essential for XmyoD induction and acts by relieving Groucho-mediated
repression of gene expression.

PMID: 17950722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Neurochem. 2007 Dec;103(5):2022-34. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Inhibition of cortical astrocyte differentiation by Hes6 requires amino- and
carboxy-terminal motifs important for dimerization and phosphorylation.

Belanger-Jasmin S(1), Llamosas E, Tang Y, Joachim K, Osiceanu AM, Jhas S, Stifani
S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Hairy/Enhancer of split (Hes) 6 is a basic helix-loop-helix protein that
interacts with the transcriptional co-repressor, Groucho, and antagonizes the
neural functions of the Notch pathway. More specifically, mouse Hes6 regulates
cerebral corticogenesis by promoting neurogenesis and suppressing astrocyte
differentiation. The molecular mechanisms underlying the anti-astrogenic function
of Hes6 are poorly defined. Here we describe studies aimed at testing whether
Hes6 inhibits astrocyte differentiation by antagonizing the transcription
repression activity of Notch-activated Hes family members like Hes1. It is
reported that Hes6 preferentially forms homodimers. Heterodimerization with Hes1 
is antagonized in part by a conserved N-terminal patch of negatively charged
residues. Mutation of this motif enhances heterodimerization with Hes1 and
increases Hes6 ability to antagonize Hes1-mediated transcriptional repression.
However, this mutation does not increase, but instead decreases, the
anti-astrogenic activity of Hes6. It is shown further that Hes6 harbors a second 
conserved sequence, a C-terminal SPXXSP motif. This sequence is phosphorylated by
the mitogen activated protein kinase pathway and its mutation disrupts the
anti-astrogenic activity of Hes6 without affecting its ability to suppress Hes1. 
Together, these observations suggest that Hes6 homodimers regulate astrocyte
differentiation through mechanisms that depend on the phosphorylation of Hes6
C-terminal domain but are independent of its ability to suppress Hes1-mediated
transcriptional repression.

PMID: 17868320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. FEBS Lett. 2007 Oct 2;581(24):4651-6. Epub 2007 Sep 4.

Gene expression profiling identifies Hes6 as a transcriptional target of ATOH1 in
cochlear hair cells.

Scheffer D(1), Sage C, Corey DP, Pingault V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Equipe Avenir, U841, IMRB, Creteil F-94010, France.

ATOH1 is a basic Helix-Loop-Helix transcription factor crucial for hair cell (HC)
differentiation in the inner ear. In order to identify ATOH1 target genes, we
performed a genome-wide expression profiling analysis in cells expressing ATOH1
under the control of a tetracycline-off system and found that HES6 expression is 
induced by ATOH1. We performed in situ hybridisation and showed that the rise and
fall of Hes6 expression closely follow that of Atoh1 in cochlear HC. Moreover,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and luciferase assays show that ATOH1
activates HES6 transcription through binding to three clustered E boxes of its
promoter.

PMID: 17826772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Liver Int. 2007 Sep;27(7):997-1007.

Aberrant Notch3 and Notch4 expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gramantieri L(1), Giovannini C, Lanzi A, Chieco P, Ravaioli M, Venturi A, Grazi
GL, Bolondi L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), University of Bologna and St
Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy. gramantieri@aosp.bo.it

BACKGROUND: Notch signalling is altered in several solid tumours and it plays a
role in growth inhibition and apoptosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)-derived
cell lines, bile duct development and hepatocyte regeneration.
AIMS: This study aims to analyse the expression of Notch3, Notch4 and HES1 and
HES6 as Notch-target genes in HCC, matched non-neoplastic tissue and HEPG2 cells.
RESULTS: Notch3 and Notch4 are not expressed in normal liver and in chronic
hepatitis surrounding HCC. Cirrhotic tissue stains negative for Notch3, while
Notch4 is expressed by hepatocytes at the edge of regenerative nodules and in
cell planes adjacent to fibrous septa. HCC tissue displays Notch3 and Notch4
abnormal accumulation, respectively, in 78% and 68% of the cases. The endothelium
of hepatic veins with neoplastic permeation is frequently Notch4 positive. An
upregulation of Notch3 mRNA was found in 95% of HCCs vs cirrhosis (P=0.0001),
while Notch4 mRNA was downregulated in 80% of HCCs. HES6 mRNA expression was
higher in HCC tissue when compared with cirrhosis (P=0.007), paralleling Notch3
mRNA expression. The HEPG2 cell line displays high Notch3 and low Notch4 protein 
and mRNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: These descriptive findings suggest an aberrant expression of Notch3 
and Notch4 in HCC and allow the hypothesis of an activation of Notch signalling
by Notch3.

PMID: 17696940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int J Oncol. 2007 Aug;31(2):461-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on HES/HEY family: Notch-independent HES1, HES3
transcription in undifferentiated ES cells, and Notch-dependent HES1, HES5, HEY1,
HEY2, HEYL transcription in fetal tissues, adult tissues, or cancer.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Notch signaling pathway maintains stem cells through transcriptional activation
of HES/HEY family members to repress tissue-specific transcription factors. Here,
comparative integromic analyses on HES/HEY family members were carried out. HES3 
gene encodes two isoforms due to alternative promoters. Complete coding sequence 
of HES3 variant 2 was determined by curating CX755241.1 EST. Refined phylogenetic
analysis using HES3 variant 2 instead of variant 1 revealed that mammalian bHLH
transcription factors with Orange domain were grouped into HES subfamily (HES1,
HES2, HES3, HES4, HES5, HES6, HES7) and HEY subfamily (HEY1, HEY2, HEYL,
HESL/HELT, DEC1/BHLHB2, DEC2/BHLHB3). Eight amino-acid residues were added to the
C-terminal WRPW motif in human HES3 due to lineage specific T to G nucleotide
change at stop codon of chimpanzee, rat, and mouse HES3 orthologs. HES1 and HES3 
were expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. HES1 was also
expressed in fetal tissues, and regenerating liver. HES1, HEY1 and HEY2 were
expressed in endothelial cells. HES1, HES4 and HES6 were expressed in gastric
cancer, HES1 and DEC1 in pancreatic cancer, HES1, HES2, HES4, HES6 and DEC2 in
colorectal cancer. HES6 was also expressed in other tumors, such as brain tumors,
melanoma, small cell lung cancer, retinoblastoma, ovarian cancer, and breast
cancer. Double NANOG-binding sites, CSL/RBPSUH-binding site and TATA-box in HES1 
promoter, NANOG-, SOX2-, POU5F1/OCT3/OCT4-binding sites and TATA-box in HES3
promoter, double CSL-binding sites in HES5 promoter, SOX2-, POU-binding sites and
TATA-box in HES6 promoter, and CSL-binding site in HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL promoters 
were evolutionarily conserved. However, double CSL-binding sites in mouse Hes7
promoter were not conserved in human HES7 promoter. Together these facts indicate
that HES1 and HES3 were target genes of the ES cell-specific network of
transcription factors, and that HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL were target genes
of Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 17611704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 7;7:63.

Preservation of proliferating pancreatic progenitor cells by Delta-Notch
signaling in the embryonic chicken pancreas.

Ahnfelt-Rønne J(1), Hald J, Bødker A, Yassin H, Serup P, Hecksher-Sørensen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels
Steensensvej 6, Gentofte, Denmark. jonr@hagedorn.dk <jonr@hagedorn.dk>

BACKGROUND: Genetic studies have shown that formation of pancreatic endocrine
cells in mice is dependent on the cell autonomous action of the bHLH
transcription factor Neurogenin3 and that the extent and timing of endocrine
differentiation is controlled by Notch signaling. To further understand the
mechanism by which Notch exerts this function, we have investigated pancreatic
endocrine development in chicken embryos.
RESULTS: In situ hybridization showed that expression of Notch signaling
components and pro-endocrine bHLH factors is conserved to a large degree between 
chicken and mouse. Cell autonomous inhibition of Notch signal reception results
in significantly increased endocrine differentiation demonstrating that these
early progenitors are prevented from differentiating by ongoing Notch signaling. 
Conversely, activated Notch1 induces Hes5-1 expression and prevents endocrine
development. Notably, activated Notch also prevents Ngn3-mediated induction of a 
number of downstream targets including NeuroD, Hes6-1, and MyT1 suggesting that
Notch may act to inhibit both Ngn3 gene expression and protein function.
Activated Notch1 could also block endocrine development and gene expression
induced by NeuroD. Nevertheless, Ngn3- and NeuroD-induced delamination of
endodermal cells was insensitive to activated Notch under these conditions.
Finally, we show that Myt1 can partially overcome the repressive effect of
activated Notch on endocrine gene expression.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that pancreatic endocrine development in the chicken
relies on a conserved bHLH cascade under inhibitory control of Notch signaling.
This lays the ground for further studies that take advantage of the ease at which
chicken embryos can be manipulated. Our results also demonstrate that Notch can
repress Ngn3 and NeuroD protein function and stimulate progenitor proliferation. 
To determine whether Notch in fact does act in Ngn3-expressing cells in vivo will
require further studies relying on conditional mutagenesis. Lastly, our results
demonstrate that expression of differentiation markers can be uncoupled from the 
process of delamination of differentiating cells from the epithelium.

PMCID: PMC1906762
PMID: 17555568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cells. 2007 Feb 28;23(1):49-56.

Comparative analysis of the developmental competence of three human embryonic
stem cell lines in vitro.

Kim SE(1), Kim BK, Gil JE, Kim SK, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea.

One of the goals of stem cell technology is to control the differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), thereby generating large numbers of specific 
cell types for many applications including cell replacement therapy. Although
individual hESC lines resemble each other in expressing pluripotency markers and 
telomerase activity, it is not clear whether they are equivalent in their
developmental potential in vitro. We compared the developmental competence of
three hESC lines (HSF6, Miz-hES4, and Miz-hES6). All three generated the three
embryonic germ layers, extraembryonic tissues, and primordial germ cells during
embryoid body (EB) formation. However, HSF6 and Miz-hES6 readily formed
neuroectoderm, whereas Miz-hES4 differentiated preferentially into mesoderm and
endoderm. Upon terminal differentiation, HSF6 and Miz-hES6 produced mainly
neuronal cells whereas Miz-hES4 mainly formed mesendodermal derivatives,
including endothelial cells, leukocyte progenitors, hepatocytes, and pancreatic
cells. Our observations suggest that independently-derived hESCs may differ in
their developmental potential.

PMID: 17464211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2007 Jan;62(1):9-17.

Impaired expression of Notch signaling genes in aged human skeletal muscle.

Carey KA(1), Farnfield MM, Tarquinio SD, Cameron-Smith D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Deakin University, Victoria,
Australia.

Notch signaling is essential for myogenesis and the regenerative potential of
skeletal muscle; however, its regulation in human muscle is yet to be fully
characterized. Increased expression of Notch3, Jagged1, Hes1, and Hes6 gene
transcripts were observed during differentiation of cultured human skeletal
muscle cells. Furthermore, significantly lower expressions of Notch1, Jagged1,
Numb, and Delta-like 1 were evident in muscle biopsies from older men (60-75
years old) compared to muscle from younger men (18-25 years old). Importantly,
with supervised resistance exercise training, expression of Notch1 and Hes6 genes
were increased and Delta-like 1 and Numb expression were decreased. The
differences in Notch expression between the age groups were no longer evident
following training. These results provide further evidence to support the role of
Notch in the impaired regulation of muscle mass with age and suggest that some of
the benefits provided by resistance training may be mediated through the Notch
signaling pathway.

PMID: 17301032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Apr 6;355(2):331-7. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

HES6 reverses nuclear reprogramming of insulin-producing cells following cell
fusion.

Ball AJ(1), Abrahamsson AE, Tyrberg B, Itkin-Ansari P, Levine F.

Author information: 
(1)UCSD Department of Pediatrics, University of California-San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0816, USA.

To examine the mechanism by which growth-stimulated pancreatic beta-cells
dedifferentiate, somatic cell fusions were performed between MIN6, a highly
differentiated mouse insulinoma, and betalox5, a cell line derived from human
beta-cells which progressively dedifferentiated in culture. MIN6/betalox5 somatic
cells hybrids underwent silencing of insulin expression and a marked decline in
PDX1, NeuroD, and MafA, indicating that betalox5 expresses a dominant transacting
factor(s) that represses beta-cell differentiation. Expression of Hes1, which
inhibits endocrine differentiation was higher in hybrid cells than in parental
MIN6 cells. Hes6, a repressor of Hes1, was highly expressed in primary beta-cells
as well as MIN6, but was repressed in hybrids. Hes6 overexpression using a
retroviral vector led to a decrease in Hes1 levels, an increase in beta-cell
transcription factors and partial restoration of insulin expression. We conclude 
that the balance of Notch activators and inhibitors may play an important role in
maintaining the beta-cell differentiated state.

PMCID: PMC1852427
PMID: 17300753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1720-7. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Gene-expression profiling and array-based CGH classify CD4+CD56+ hematodermic
neoplasm and cutaneous myelomonocytic leukemia as distinct disease entities.

Dijkman R(1), van Doorn R, Szuhai K, Willemze R, Vermeer MH, Tensen CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.

CD4+CD56+ hematodermic neoplasm (CD4+CD56+HN) is an aggressive hematopoietic
malignancy with distinct clinicopathologic and immunophenotypic features that
commonly involve the skin, bone marrow, and blood. Differentiation from cutaneous
myelomonocytic leukemia (c-AML) may be exceedingly difficult and requires
extensive phenotyping. The molecular mechanisms involved in the development of
CD4+CD56+HN are largely unresolved. Moreover, recurrent chromosomal alterations
have not yet been precisely defined in CD4+CD56+HN and c-AML. In the present
study an integrated genomic analysis using expression profiling and array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was performed on lesional skin biopsy
samples of patients with CD4+CD56+HN and c-AML. Our results demonstrate that
CD4+CD56+HN and c-AML show distinct gene-expression profiles and distinct
patterns of chromosomal aberrations. CD4+CD56+HN is characterized by recurrent
deletion of regions on chromosome 4 (4q34), chromosome 9 (9p13-p11 and 9q12-q34),
and chromosome 13 (13q12-q31) that contain several tumor suppressor genes with
diminished expression (Rb1, LATS2). Elevated expression of the oncogenes HES6,
RUNX2, and FLT3 was found but was not associated with genomic amplification. We
noted high expression of various plasmacytoid dendritic-cell (pDC)-related genes,
pointing to the cell of origin of this malignancy.

PMID: 17068154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Neurosci. 2006 Oct 25;26(43):11061-71.

Hes6 inhibits astrocyte differentiation and promotes neurogenesis through
different mechanisms.

Jhas S(1), Ciura S, Belanger-Jasmin S, Dong Z, Llamosas E, Theriault FM, Joachim 
K, Tang Y, Liu L, Liu J, Stifani S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.

The mechanisms regulating the generation of cell diversity in the mammalian
cerebral cortex are beginning to be elucidated. In that regard, Hairy/Enhancer of
split (Hes) 1 and 5 are basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors that inhibit the
differentiation of pluripotent cortical progenitors into neurons. In contrast, a 
related Hes family member termed Hes6 promotes neurogenesis. It is shown here
that knockdown of endogenous Hes6 causes supernumerary cortical progenitors to
differentiate into cells that exhibit an astrocytic morphology and express the
astrocyte marker protein GFAP. Conversely, exogenous Hes6 expression in cortical 
progenitors inhibits astrocyte differentiation. The negative effect of Hes6 on
astrocyte differentiation is independent of its ability to promote neuronal
differentiation. We also show that neither its proneuronal nor its anti-gliogenic
functions appear to depend on Hes6 ability to bind to DNA via the basic arm of
its bHLH domain. Both of these activities require Hes6 to be localized to nuclei,
but only its anti-gliogenic function depends on two short peptides, LNHLL and
WRPW, that are conserved in all Hes6 proteins. These findings suggest that Hes6
is an important regulator of the neurogenic phase of cortical development by
promoting the neuronal fate while suppressing astrocyte differentiation. They
suggest further that separate molecular mechanisms underlie the proneuronal and
anti-gliogenic activities of Hes6 in cortical progenitor cells.

PMID: 17065448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Arch Histol Cytol. 2006 Sep;69(3):189-98.

The bHLH transcription factors, Hes6 and Mash1, are expressed in distinct subsets
of cells within adult mouse taste buds.

Seta Y(1), Stoick-Cooper CL, Toyono T, Kataoka S, Toyoshima K, Barlow LA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Histology and Neurobiology, Department of Bioscience, Kyushu 
Dental College, Kitakyushu, Japan. yujiseta@kyu-dent.ac.jp

Taste buds are multicellular receptor organs embedded in the lingual epithelium
of vertebrates. Taste cells within these buds are modified epithelial cells as
they lack axons and turnover rapidly throughout life, yet have neuronal
properties enabling them to transduce taste stimuli and transmit this information
to the nervous system. Taste cells are heterogeneous, comprising types I, II, III
and basal cells, and are continually replaced during adult life, raising the
question of how these different cells are generated. The molecular mechanisms
governing taste cell differentiation are unknown, but the Notch signaling system 
has been implicated in this process based upon recent gene expression data. Here 
we investigate the expression in mature taste buds of Notch related transcription
factors, Hes6 and Mash1, which are among the first genes expressed in embryonic
taste buds. We further compare these patterns with those of immunocytochemical
markers of discrete taste cell types. We find that Hes6 is expressed in a subset 
of basally located, possibly progenitor cells, yet is rarely coexpressed with
taste cell markers. In contrast, Mash1 is detected in some basal cells and in the
majority of differentiated type III taste cells, but never in type II cells.
These data suggest a role for Notch signaling in taste cell differentiation in
adult taste buds.

PMID: 17031025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Dec;20(12):3293-307. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

The notch signaling system is present in the postnatal pituitary: marked
expression and regulatory activity in the newly discovered side population.

Chen J(1), Crabbe A, Van Duppen V, Vankelecom H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Pharmacology, Department of Molecular Cell Biology,
University of Leuven (K.U.Leuven), Campus Gasthuisberg O&N1, Herestraat 49,
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Recently, we discovered in the adult anterior pituitary a subset of cells with
side population (SP) phenotype, enriched for expression of stem/progenitor
cell-associated factors like Sca1, and of Notch1 and Hes (hairy and enhancer of
split) 1, components of the classically developmental Notch pathway. In the
present study, we elaborated the expression of the Notch signaling system in the 
postnatal pituitary, and examined its functional significance within the SP
compartment. Using RT-PCR, we detected in the anterior pituitary of adult mouse
the expression of all four vertebrate Notch receptors, as well as of Hes1, 5, and
6, key downstream targets and effectors of Notch. All Notch receptors, Hes1 and
Hes5 were measured at higher mRNA levels in the Sca1(high) SP than in the main
population (MP) of differentiated hormonal cells. In contrast, Hes6, known as an 
inhibitor of Hes1, was more abundant in the MP. Cells with SP phenotype, enriched
for Sca1(high) expression, were detected throughout postnatal life. Their
proportion was higher in immature mice, but did not change from adult (8 wk old) 
to much older age (1 yr old). Notch pathway expression was higher in the
Sca1(high) SP than in the MP at all postnatal ages analyzed. Functional
implication of Notch signaling in the SP was investigated in reaggregate cultures
of adult mouse anterior pituitary cells. Treatment with the gamma-secretase
inhibitor DAPT down-regulated Notch activity and reduced the proportion of SP
cells. Activation of Notch signaling with the conserved DSL motif of Notch
ligands, or with a soluble ligand, caused a rise in SP cell number, at least in
part due to a proliferative effect. The SP also expanded in proportion when
aggregates were treated with leukemia-inhibitory factor, basic fibroblast growth 
factor, and epidermal growth factor, again at least partly accounted for by a
mitogenic action. These intrapituitary growth factors all activated Notch
signaling, and DAPT abrogated the expansion of the SP by basic fibroblast growth 
factor and leukemia-inhibitory factor, thus exposing a possible cross talk. In
conclusion, we show that the Notch pathway, typically situated in embryogenesis, 
is also present and active in the postnatal pituitary, that it is particularly
expressed within the SP independent of age, and that it plays a role in the
regulation of SP abundance. Whether our data indicate that Notch regulates
renewal and fate decisions of putative stem/progenitor cells within the pituitary
SP as found in other tissues, remains open for further exploration.

PMID: 16959876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Dev Genes Evol. 2006 Jun;216(6):315-32. Epub 2006 Mar 17.

Comparative analysis of her genes during fish somitogenesis suggests a
mouse/chick-like mode of oscillation in medaka.

Gajewski M(1), Elmasri H, Girschick M, Sieger D, Winkler C.

Author information: 
(1)Universität zu Köln, Institut für Genetik [corrected] Zülpicher Str., 47,
50674 Köln, Germany. martin.gajewski@uni-koeln.de

Erratum in
    Dev Genes Evol. 2006 Jun;216(6):333.

Somitogenesis is the key developmental step, which divides the vertebrate body
axis into segmentally repeated structures. It requires an intricate process of
pre-patterning, which is driven by an oscillator mechanism consisting of the
Delta-Notch pathway and various hairy- and Enhancer of split-related (her) genes.
The subset of her genes, which are necessary to set up the segmentation clock,
reveal a complex scenario of interactions. To understand which her genes are
essential core players in this process, we compared the expression patterns of
somitogenesis-relevant her genes in zebrafish and medaka (Oryzias latipes). Most 
of the respective medaka genes (Ol-her) are duplicated like what has been shown
for zebrafish (Dr-her) and pufferfish genes (Fr-her). However, zebrafish genes
show some additional copies and significant differences in expression patterns.
For the paralogues Dr-her1 and Dr-her11, only one copy exists in the medaka
(Ol-her1/11), which combines the expression patterns found for both zebrafish
genes. In contrast to Dr-her5, the medaka orthologue appears to play a role in
somitogenesis because it is expressed in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM). PSM
expression also suggests a role for both Ol-her13 genes, homologues of mouse Hes6
(mHes6), in this process, which would be consistent with a conserved mHes6
homologue gear in the segmentation clock exclusively in lower vertebrates.
Members of the mHes5 homologue group seem to be involved in somite formation in
all vertebrates (e.g. Dr- and Ol-her12), although different paralogues are
additionally recruited in zebrafish (e.g. Dr-her15) and medaka (e.g. Ol-her4). We
found that the linkage between duplicates is strongly conserved between
pufferfish and medaka and less well conserved in zebrafish. Nevertheless, linkage
and orientation of several her duplicates are identical in all three species.
Therefore, small-scale duplications must have happened before whole genome
duplication occurred in a fish ancestor. Expression of multiple stripes in the
intermediate PSM, characteristic for the zebrafish orthologues, is absent in all 
somitogenesis-related her genes of the medaka. In fact, the expression mode of
Ol-her1/11 and Ol-her5 indicates dynamism similar to the hairy clock genes in
chicken and mouse. This suggests that Danio rerio shows a rather derived clock
mode when compared to other fish species and amniotes or that, alternatively, the
clock mode evolved independently in zebrafish, medaka and mouse or chicken.

PMID: 16544152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jun;235(6):1689-700.

Basic helix-loop-helix gene Hes6 delineates the sensory hair cell lineage in the 
inner ear.

Qian D(1), Radde-Gallwitz K, Kelly M, Tyrberg B, Kim J, Gao WQ, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene Hes6 is known to promote neural
differentiation in vitro. Here, we report the expression and functional studies
of Hes6 in the inner ear. The expression of Hes6 appears to be parallel to that
of Math1 (also known as Atoh1), a bHLH gene necessary and sufficient for hair
cell differentiation. Hes6 is expressed initially in the presumptive hair cell
precursors in the cochlea. Subsequently, the expression of Hes6 is restricted to 
morphologically differentiated hair cells. Similarly, the expression of Hes6 in
the vestibule is in the hair cell lineage. Hes6 is dispensable for hair cell
differentiation, and its expression in inner ear hair cells is abolished in the
Math1-null animals. Furthermore, the introduction of Hes6 into the cochlea in
vitro is not sufficient to promote sensory or neuronal differentiation.
Therefore, Hes6 is downstream of Math1 and its expression in the inner ear
delineates the sensory lineage. However, the role of Hes6 in the inner ear
remains elusive.

Developmental Dynamics 235:1689-1700, 2006. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2810659
PMID: 16534784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Dec;30(4):583-600.

Transcriptional changes during neuronal death and replacement in the olfactory
epithelium.

Shetty RS(1), Bose SC, Nickell MD, McIntyre JC, Hardin DH, Harris AM, McClintock 
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience of Sensory
Systems Training Program, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536-0298, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Sep;30(1):90-107.

The olfactory epithelium has the unusual ability to replace its neurons.We forced
replacement of mouse olfactory sensory neurons by bulbectomy. Microarray,
bioinformatics, and in situ hybridization techniques detected a rapid shift in
favor of pro-apoptotic proteins, a progressive immune response by macrophages and
dendritic cells, and identified or predicted 439 mRNAs enriched in olfactory
sensory neurons, including gene silencing factors and sperm flagellar proteins.
Transcripts encoding cell cycle regulators, axonogenesis proteins, and
transcription factors and signaling proteins that promote proliferation and
differentiation were increased at 5-7 days after bulbectomy and were expressed by
basal progenitor cells or immature neurons. The transcription factors included
Nhlhl, Hes6, Lmycl, c-Myc, Mxd4, Idl,Nmycl, Cited2, c-Myb, Mybll, Tead2, Dpl,
Gata2, Lmol, and Soxll. The data reveal significant similarities with embryonic
neurogenesis and make several mechanistic predictions, including the roles of the
transcription factors in the olfactory sensory neuron lineage.

PMID: 16456926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Feb;17(2):391-5.

Comparative genomics on HHIP family orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog, FGF, VEGF, and Notch signaling pathways network together for vascular
remodeling during embryogenesis and carcinogenesis. HHIP1 (HHIP) is an endogenous
antagonist for SHH, IHH, and DHH. Here, comparative integromics analyses on HHIP 
family members were performed by using bioinformatics and human intelligence.
HHIP1, HHIP2 (HHIPL1 or KIAA1822) and HHIP3 (HHIPL2 or KIAA1822L) constitute
human HHIP gene family. Rat Hhip1, Hhip2, and Hhip3 genes were identified within 
AC107504.4, AC094820.6, and AC134264.2 genome sequences, respectively.
HHIP-homologous (HIPH) domain with conserved 18 Cys residues was identified as
the novel domain conserved among mammalian HHIP1, HHIP2, and HHIP3 orthologs.
HHIP1 mRNA was expressed in coronary artery endothelial cells, prostate, and
rhabdomyosarcoma. HHIP2 mRNA was expressed in trabecular bone cells. HHIP3 mRNA
was expressed in testis, thyroid gland, osteoarthritic cartilarge, pancreatic
cancer, and lung cancer. Promoters of HHIP family genes were not well conserved
between human and rodents. Although GLI-, CSL-, and HES/HEY-binding sites were
not identified, eleven bHLH-binding sites were identified within human HHIP1
promoter. Expression of HES/HEY family members, including HES1, HES2, HES3, HES4,
HES5, HES6, HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL, in coronary artery endothelial cells was
not detected in silico. Up-regulation of HHIP1 due to down-regulation of
Notch-CSL-HES/HEY signaling cascade repressing bHLH transcription factors results
in down-regulation of the Hedgehog-VEGF-Notch signaling cascade. On the other
hand, down-regulation of HHIP1 due to up-regulation of Notch signaling in
vascular endothelial cells during angiogenesis results in up-regulation of the
Hedgehog-VEGF-Notch signaling cascade. Because HHIP1 is the key molecule for
vascular remodeling, HHIP1 is the pharmacogenomics target in the fields of
oncology and vascular medicine.

PMID: 16391842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Exp Mol Med. 2005 Oct 31;37(5):399-407.

Efficient culture system for human embryonic stem cells using autologous human
embryonic stem cell-derived feeder cells.

Yoo SJ(1), Yoon BS, Kim JM, Song JM, Roh Sl, You S, Yoon HS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Research, Medical Research Center, MizMedi Hospital,
701-4 Naebalsan-dong, Kangseo-gu, Seoul 157-280, Korea.

Erratum in
    Exp Mol Med. 2006 Feb 28;38(1):107.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) need feeder cells for their maintenance in an 
undifferentiated state. In conventional culture systems, mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) serve as feeder cells to maintain hESCs. However, the use of
MEFs elevates the risk of transmitting mouse pathogens and thus limits the
potential of hESCs in cell replacement therapy. Consequently, the use of human
feeder cells would be an important step forward in this in vitro technology. To
address this issue, we used fibroblast-like cells differentiated from the
Miz-hES6 hESC line (DiffMiz-hES6) as feeder cells to support the in vitro growth 
of three hESC lines. Immunofluorescence microscopy and reverse transcription-PCR 
assessing the expression of undifferentiated hESC markers revealed all three hESC
lines were maintained in an undifferentiated state. In vitro proliferation
proceeded as efficiently as when the hESCs were cultured on MEFS. Moreover,
karyotype analysis revealed the chromosomal normality of the hESC lines and the
DiffMiz-hES6 feeders themselves after even 50 passages. Furthermore, the hESC
lines maintained their pluripotency since they remained capable of forming
embryoid bodies (EBs) in vitro. Thus, hESC-derived fibroblast-like cells
successfully support in vitro hESC propagation.

PMID: 16264264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Oncogene. 2005 Oct 27;24(47):7073-83.

Upregulation of ASCL1 and inhibition of Notch signaling pathway characterize
progressive astrocytoma.

Somasundaram K(1), Reddy SP, Vinnakota K, Britto R, Subbarayan M, Nambiar S,
Hebbar A, Samuel C, Shetty M, Sreepathi HK, Santosh V, Hegde AS, Hegde S,
Kondaiah P, Rao MR.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Malleswaram, Bangalore 560012, India.

Astrocytoma is the most common type of brain cancer constituting more than half
of all brain tumors. With an aim to identify markers describing astrocytoma
progression, we have carried out microarray analysis of astrocytoma samples of
different grades using cDNA microarray containing 1152 cancer-specific genes.
Data analysis identified several differentially regulated genes between normal
brain tissue and astrocytoma as well as between grades II/III astrocytoma and
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; grade IV). We found several genes known to be
involved in malignancy including Achaete-scute complex-like 1 (Drosophila)
(ASCL1; Hash 1). As ASCL has been implicated in neuroendocrine, medullary thyroid
and small-cell lung cancers, we chose to examine the role of ASCL1 in the
astrocytoma development. Our data revealed that ASCL1 is overexpressed in
progressive astrocytoma as evidenced by increased levels of ASCL1 transcripts in 
85.71% (6/7) of grade II diffuse astrocytoma (DA), 90% (9/10) of grade III
anaplastic astrocytoma (AA) and 87.5% (7/8) of secondary GBMs, while the majority
of primary de novo GBMs expressed similar to or less than normal brain levels
(66.67%; 8/12). ASCL1 upregulation in progressive astrocytoma is accompanied by
inhibition of Notch signaling as seen by uninduced levels of HES1, a
transcriptional target of Notch1, increased levels of HES6, a dominant-negative
inhibitor of HES1-mediated repression of ASCL1, and increased levels of Notch
ligand Delta1, which is capable of inhibiting Notch signaling by forming
intracellular Notch ligand autonomous complexes. Our results imply that
inhibition of Notch signaling may be an important early event in the development 
of grade II DA and subsequent progression to grade III AA and secondary GBM.
Furthermore, ASCL1 appears to be a putative marker to distinguish primary GBM
from secondary GBM.

PMID: 16103883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Stem Cells. 2005 Nov-Dec;23(10):1502-13. Epub 2005 Aug 11.

Heat shock 70-kDa protein 8 isoform 1 is expressed on the surface of human
embryonic stem cells and downregulated upon differentiation.

Son YS(1), Park JH, Kang YK, Park JS, Choi HS, Lim JY, Lee JE, Lee JB, Ko MS, Kim
YS, Ko JH, Yoon HS, Lee KW, Seong RH, Moon SY, Ryu CJ, Hong HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Antibody Engineering, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yusong-Gu, Daejon 305-333, Republic of Korea.

The cell-surface markers used routinely to define the undifferentiated state and 
pluripotency of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are those used in mouse
embryonic stem cells (mESCs) because of a lack of markers directly originated
from hESC itself. To identify more hESC-specific cell-surface markers, we
generated a panel of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) by immunizing the irradiated
cell clumps of hESC line Miz-hES1, and selected 26 MAbs that were able to bind to
Miz-hES1 cells but not to mESCs, mouse embryonic fibroblast cells, and STO cells.
Most antibodies did not bind to human neural progenitor cells derived from the
Miz-hES1 cells, either. Of these, MAb 20-202S (IgG1, kappa) immunoprecipitated a 
cell-surface protein of 72-kDa from the lysate of biotin-labeled Miz-hES1 cells, 
which was identified to be heat shock 70-kDa protein 8 isoform 1 (HSPA8) by
quadrupole time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometry. Immunocytochemical analyses
proved that the HSPA8 protein was also present on the surface of hESC lines
Miz-hES4, Miz-hES6, and HSF6. Two-color flow cytometric analysis of Miz-hES1 and 
HSF6 showed the coexpression of the HSPA8 protein with other hESC markers such as
stage-specific embryonic antigen 3 (SSEA3), SSEA4, TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81. Flow
cytometric and Western blot analyses using various cells showed that MAb 20-202S 
specifically bound to the HSPA8 protein on the surface of Miz-hES1, contrary to
other anti-HSP70 antibodies examined. Furthermore, the surface expression of the 
HSPA8 protein on Miz-hES1 was markedly downregulated upon differentiation. These 
data indicate that a novel MAb 20-202S recognizes the HSPA8 protein on the
surface of hESCs and suggest that the HSPA8 protein is a putative cell-surface
marker for undifferentiated hESCs.

PMID: 16100000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Dev. 2005 May 15;19(10):1156-61.

Zebrafish hairy/enhancer of split protein links FGF signaling to cyclic gene
expression in the periodic segmentation of somites.

Kawamura A(1), Koshida S, Hijikata H, Sakaguchi T, Kondoh H, Takada S.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Biosciences, National Institutes of Natural 
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.

Notch and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling pathways have been implicated 
in the establishment of proper periodicity of vertebrate somites. Here, we show
evidence that a Hes6-related hairy/Enhancer of split-related gene, her13.2, links
FGF signaling to the Notch-regulated oscillation machinery in zebrafish.
Expression of her13.2 is induced by FGF-soaked beads and decreased by an FGF
signaling inhibitor. her13.2 is required for periodic repression of the
Notch-regulated genes her1 and her7, and for proper somite segmentation.
Furthermore, Her13.2 augments autorepression of her1 in association with Her1
protein. Therefore, FGF signaling appears to maintain the oscillation machinery
by supplying a binding partner, Her13.2, for Her1.

PMCID: PMC1132002
PMID: 15905406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jun 24;332(1):33-6.

The conserved WRPW motif of Hes6 mediates proteasomal degradation.

Kang SA(1), Seol JH, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Life Sciences and Center for Cell Signaling Research,
Ewha Womans University, 11-1 Daehyun-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-750, Korea.

Hes6 belongs to a subfamily of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that 
includes Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split genes. Like other members of the 
family, Hes6 features the WRPW motif which is consisted just of four amino acids 
at its C-terminus. Here, we show that WRPW motif deletion mutant protein is
substantially stabilized in comparison to the full length protein and that the
enhanced stability is due to its resistance to proteasomal degradation. The WRPW 
motif also appears to be sufficient for acceleration of proteolysis as its fusion
to two heterologous proteins, the green fluorescent protein (GFP) of Aequoria
victoria and Gal4 DNA binding domain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, significantly
destabilized the proteins. These findings demonstrate a novel function of this
conserved motif as a degradation signal and raise the possibility of utilizing it
for controlling the level of ectopically expressed gene products.

PMID: 15896295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Biol. 2005 May 15;281(2):318-33.

A novel hes5/hes6 circuitry of negative regulation controls Notch activity during
neurogenesis.

Fior R(1), Henrique D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Av. Prof.
Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal.

HES transcriptional repressors are important components of the Notch pathway that
regulates neurogenesis from Drosophila to vertebrates. These proteins are
normally induced by Notch activity and inhibit neural commitment by antagonizing 
the activity of proneural genes. We describe here four chick hes genes that are
expressed during neurogenesis: three hes5-like genes (hes5-1, hes5-2 and hes5-3) 
and one hes6-like (hes6-2). We show that hes6-2 represses transcription of the
hes5 genes, thus functioning as a negative regulator of Notch signaling.
Conversely, hes6-2 may be repressed by hes5 activity. In cells committing to
differentiation, we find that hes6-2 is up-regulated by proneural genes and
contributes to the proneural program of neuronal commitment by preventing Notch
activity in these cells. In neural progenitors, Notch signaling produces an
initial burst of hes5 activity, which represses hes6-2. However, as hes5
transcription declines due to negative auto-regulation, hes6-2 may become active 
and inhibit the remaining hes5 activity to end Notch signaling. These cells can
then enter a new cycle of fate decisions and will be kept as progenitors if a new
pulse of Notch activity occurs. Maintenance of progenitors during vertebrate
neurogenesis therefore requires that these cells go through successive cycles of 
Notch activity. We propose that the hes5/hes6 circuitry of negative
cross-regulations is a conserved feature of the Notch pathway that underlies
these cycles in neural progenitors.

PMID: 15893982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):19115-26. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

Identification of direct serum-response factor gene targets during Me2SO-induced 
P19 cardiac cell differentiation.

Zhang SX(1), Garcia-Gras E, Wycuff DR, Marriot SJ, Kadeer N, Yu W, Olson EN,
Garry DJ, Parmacek MS, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Serum-response factor (SRF) is an obligatory transcription factor, required for
the formation of vertebrate mesoderm leading to the origin of the cardiovascular 
system. Protein A-TEV-tagged chromatin immunoprecipitation technology was used to
collect direct SRF-bound gene targets from pluripotent P19 cells, induced by
Me2SO treatment into an enriched cardiac cell population. From 242 sequenced DNA 
fragments, we identified 188 genomic DNA fragments as potential direct SRF
targets that contain CArG boxes and CArG-like boxes. Of the 92 contiguous genes
that were identified, a subgroup of 43 SRF targets was then further validated by 
co-transfection assays with SRF. Expression patterns of representative candidate 
genes were compared with the LacZ reporter expression activity of the endogenous 
SRF gene. According to the Unigene data base, 84% of the SRF target candidates
were expressed, at least, in the heart. In SRF null embryonic stem cells, 81% of 
these SRF target candidates were greatly affected by the absence of SRF. Among
these SRF-regulated genes, Raf1, Map4k4, and Bicc1 have essential roles in
mesoderm formation. The 12 regulated SRF target genes, Mapk10 (JNK3), Txnl2,
Azi2, Tera, Sema3a, Lrp4, Actc1, Myl3, Hspg2, Pgm2, Hif3a, and Asb5, have been
implicated in cardiovascular formation, and the Ski and Hes6 genes have roles in 
muscle differentiation. SRF target genes related to cell mitosis and cycle, E2f5,
Npm1, Cenpb, Rbbp6, and Scyl1, expressed in the heart tissue were differentially 
regulated in SRF null ES cells.

PMID: 15699019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Jan;16(1):339-47. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

NGF controls dendrite development in hippocampal neurons by binding to p75NTR and
modulating the cellular targets of Notch.

Salama-Cohen P(1), Arévalo MA, Meier J, Grantyn R, Rodríguez-Tébar A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal de Neurobiología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, E28002 Madrid, Spain.

Notch and neurotrophins control neuronal shape, but it is not known whether their
signaling pathways intersect. Here we report results from hippocampal neuronal
cultures that are in support of this possibility. We found that low cell density 
or blockade of Notch signaling by a soluble Delta-Fc ligand decreased the mRNA
levels of the nuclear targets of Notch, the homologues of enhancer-of-split 1 and
5 (Hes1/5). This effect was associated with enhanced sprouting of new dendrites
or dendrite branches. In contrast, high cell density or exposure of low-density
cultures to NGF increased the Hes1/5 mRNA, reduced the number of primary
dendrites and promoted dendrite elongation. The NGF effects on both Hes1/5
expression and dendrite morphology were prevented by p75-antibody (a
p75NTR-blocking antibody) or transfection with enhancer-of-split 6 (Hes6), a
condition known to suppress Hes activity. Nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB was 
identified as a link between p75NTR and Hes1/5 because it was required for the
up-regulation of these two genes. The convergence of the Notch and p75NTR
signaling pathways at the level of Hes1/5 illuminates an unexpected mechanism
through which a diffusible factor (NGF) could regulate dendrite growth when
cell-cell interaction via Notch is not in action.

PMCID: PMC539177
PMID: 15496460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Oct;14(4):747-51.

Identification and characterization of human HESL, rat Hesl and rainbow trout
hesl genes in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to nuclear translocation of Notch
intracellular domain (NIC), and transcriptional activation of target genes
through the interaction between CSL proteins (RBPSUH or RBPSUHL) and NIC. HES1,
HES5, HEY1 and HEY2 are Notch target genes. Mammalian HES/HEY family proteins as 
well as Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split are implicated in the cell fate
determination. We have previously identified and characterized human HES2, HES3
and HES5 genes. Here, we identified and characterized human HES-like (HESL), rat 
Fesl, and rainbow trout fesl genes by using bioinformatics. Human HESL gene,
located within AC093824.3 genome sequence, was mapped to human chromosome 4q35.1 
between ACSL1 and SLC25A4 genes. Rat Fesl gene, located within AC111303.4 genome 
sequence, was mapped to rat chromosome 16q11. EST BX875070.2 was the
representative rainbow trout fesl cDNA. HESL-ACSL1 locus was conserved among
human, rat, mouse, and zebrafish genomes. Human HESL (241 aa) showed 92.9%
total-amino-acid identity with rat Hesl (240 aa), 92.1% total-amino-acid identity
with mouse Hesl (240 aa), and 68.0% total-amino-acid identity with rainbow trout 
hesl (235 aa). HESL orthologs consist of basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
ORANGE domain. C-terminal region of HESL orthologs were divergent from that of
HES, HEY, and DEC homologs. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that bHLH
transcription factors with ORANGE domain were classified into the following three
groups: (group I) HES1, HES2, HES4 and HES6 orthologs; (group II) HESL, HES5,
HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL orthologs; (group III) HES3, DEC1/BHLHB2 and
DEC2/BHLHB3 orthologs.

PMID: 15375612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Oncol. 2004 Aug;25(2):529-34.

Identification and characterization of human HES2, HES3, and HES5 genes in
silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan.

MMTV induces the mouse mammary tumor through the dysregulation of Notch, Wnt, or 
Fgf signaling pathway. Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to
transcriptional activation of Hes family genes through the interaction between
Notch intracellular domain and RBPSUH (CSL). Hes family proteins are mammalian
homologs of Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split. Hes family of transcriptional
repressors with basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and Orange domains are implicated
in the cell fate determination of stem cells (or precursor cells) by suppressing 
the expression of tissue-specific transcriptional activators. Human HES1, HES4,
HES6, and HES7 genes have been reported by other groups. Here, we identified and 
characterized human HES2, HES3 and HES5 genes by using bioinformatics. FLJ33803
(AK091122.1) was the representative human HES2 cDNA. HES2 gene, encoding a 173-aa
protein, was located within human genome sequence AL031848.11. HES3 gene,
encoding a 186-aa protein, was identified within human genome sequence
AL031847.17. HES5 gene, encoding a 166-aa protein, was identified within human
genome sequence AL139246.20. HES2 and HES3 genes were mapped to human chromosome 
1p36.31, while HES5 gene to 1p36.32. HES2 mRNA was expressed in placenta,
pancreatic cancer, colon cancer with RER, cervical cancer, and in head and neck
tumors. HES5 mRNA was expressed in fetal heart, and brain tumors. Human HES
family proteins were found consisting of bHLH, Orange, Proline-rich domains, and 
WRPW motif. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that HES family proteins were
distantly related except a paralog pair of HES1 and HES4. HES family genes are
pharmacogenomic targets in the field of regenerative medicine and oncology.

PMID: 15254753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Apr 13;101(15):5559-64. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

RNA interference of achaete-scute homolog 1 in mouse prostate neuroendocrine
cells reveals its gene targets and DNA binding sites.

Hu Y(1), Wang T, Stormo GD, Gordon JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

We have previously characterized a transgenic mouse model (CR2-TAg) of metastatic
prostate cancer arising in the neuroendocrine (NE) cell lineage. Biomarkers of NE
differentiation in this model are expressed in conventional adenocarcinoma of the
prostate with NE features. To further characterize the pathways that control NE
proliferation, differentiation, and survival, we established prostate NE cancer
(PNEC) cell lines from CR2-TAg prostate tumors and metastases. GeneChip analyses 
of cell lines harvested at different passages, and as xenografted tumors,
indicated that PNECs express consistent features ex vivo and in vivo and share a 
remarkable degree of similarity with primary CR2-TAg prostate NE tumors. PNECs
express mAsh1, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor essential for
NE cell differentiation in other tissues. RNA interference knockdown of mAsh1,
GeneChip comparisons of treated and control cell populations, and a computational
analysis of down-regulated genes identified 12 transcriptional motifs enriched in
the gene set. Affected genes, including Adcy9, Hes6, Iapp1, Ndrg4, c-Myb, and
Mesdc2, are enriched for a palindromic E-box motif, CAGCTG, indicating that it is
a physiologically relevant mAsh1 binding site. The enrichment of a c-Myb binding 
site and the finding that c-Myb is down-regulated by mAsh1 RNA interference
suggest that mAsh1 and c-Myb are in the same signaling pathway. Our data indicate
that mAsh1 negatively regulates the cell cycle (e.g., via enhanced Cdkn2d, Bub1
expression), promotes differentiation (e.g., through effects on cAMP), and
enhances survival by inhibiting apoptosis. PNEC cell lines should be generally
useful for genetic and/or pharmacologic studies of the regulation of NE cell
proliferation, differentiation, and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC397422
PMID: 15060276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Nov;38(11):1642-9.

Effects of whole blood, crystalloid, and colloid resuscitation of hemorrhagic
shock on renal damage in rats: an ultrastructural study.

Onen A(1), Cigdem MK, Deveci E, Kaya S, Turhanoglu S, Yaldiz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dicle University School of Medicine,
Diyarbakir, Turkey.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Jul;39(7):1155; author reply 1155.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine the effects of whole blood,
crystalloid, and colloid treatment on histopathologic damage of kidney induced by
hemorrhagic shock in rats.
METHODS: Fifty-six male Sprague Dawley rats were divided into 8 groups. The
carotid artery was cannulated, and systolic arterial pressure (SAP), diastolic
arterial pressure (DAP), heart rate (HR), and rectal temperature (RT) were
observed during the procedure. The jugular vein also was cannulated, and the SAP 
was decreased by aspiration of 75% of blood through the jugular vein in the
control (nonresuscitated) and study (resuscitated) groups, whereas blood was not 
diminished in the sham group. The hemorrhagic shock was permitted to last 45
minutes; then, the study group rats were resuscitated with heparinized shed
autologous whole blood (WB), normal saline (NS), Lactated Ringer's solution (LR),
hydroxyethyl starch 6% (HES6), hydroxyethyl starch 10% (HES10), or dextran 40
(D40). Histopathologic evaluation was performed under light and electron
microscope.
RESULTS: The RT, SAP, and DAP decreased, and HR increased significantly in the
control and study groups during the shock period compared with those of sham
group. After volume resuscitation, these parameters changed to preshock levels.
Electron and light microscopic examinations of kidneys showed severe proximal
tubular degeneration with moderate glomerular damage in the control group;
moderate proximal tubular degeneration with mild glomerular damage in the NS, LR,
HES6, and HES10 groups; and mild proximal tubular degeneration with no evidence
of glomerular damage in the WB and D-40 groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The characteristic ultrastructural features of hemorrhagic shock
appear to be severe tubular degeneration and mild to moderate changes in
glomeruli. Resuscitation of hemorrhagic shock with whole blood or dextran 40
solution appears to be most favorable therapy in preventing ultrastructural renal
damage in rats.

PMID: 14614716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;23(19):6922-35.

Hes6 promotes cortical neurogenesis and inhibits Hes1 transcription repression
activity by multiple mechanisms.

Gratton MO(1), Torban E, Jasmin SB, Theriault FM, German MS, Stifani S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.

Hes1 is a mammalian basic helix-loop-helix transcriptional repressor that
inhibits neuronal differentiation together with corepressors of the Groucho
(Gro)/Transducin-like Enhancer of split (TLE) family. The interaction of Hes1
with Gro/TLE is mediated by a WRPW tetrapeptide present in all Hairy/Enhancer of 
split (Hes) family members. In contrast to Hes1, the related protein Hes6
promotes neuronal differentiation. Little is known about the molecular mechanisms
that underlie the neurogenic activity of Hes6. It is shown here that Hes6
antagonizes Hes1 function by two mechanisms. Hes6 inhibits the interaction of
Hes1 with its transcriptional corepressor Gro/TLE. Moreover, it promotes
proteolytic degradation of Hes1. This effect is maximal when both Hes1 and Hes6
contain the WRPW motif and is reduced when Hes6 is mutated to eliminate a
conserved site (Ser183) that can be phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2.
Consistent with these findings, Hes6 inhibits Hes1-mediated transcriptional
repression in cortical neural progenitor cells and promotes the differentiation
of cortical neurons, a process that is normally inhibited by Hes1. Mutation of
Ser183 impairs the neurogenic ability of Hes6. Taken together, these findings
clarify the molecular events underlying the neurogenic function of Hes6 and
suggest that this factor can antagonize Hes1 activity by multiple mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC193938
PMID: 12972610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cancer Lett. 2003 Aug 20;198(2):229-39.

Detection of differentially expressed HES-6 gene in metastatic colon carcinoma by
combination of suppression subtractive hybridization and cDNA library array.

Swearingen ML(1), Sun D, Bourner M, Weinstein EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology Pharmacology, Pharmacia Corporation, Mail Zone AA4C,
700 Chesterfield Parkway North, Chesterfield, MO 63017, USA.

The molecular mechanisms involved in the progression of colon carcinomas from a
primary to a metastatic tumor have been only partially elucidated and poorly
understood. This study combines suppression subtractive hybridization and cDNA
array hybridization to identify genes with expression differences between a
primary human colon tumor cell line (HT29) and three isogenic lung tumor
metastases. The positive clones isolated in this screen were further validated
and quantitated with real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reactions. 
HES-6 was identified as up-regulated in each of the individual tumor metastases, 
as well as in a panel of primary human tumors derived from the lung, breast and
kidney. These findings demonstrate that it is possible to utilize longitudinal
samples from an in vivo model of colon carcinoma to identify genes up-regulated
in metastases and that HES-6 may be an important marker of a range of primary
cancers as well as metastatic colon carcinoma.

PMID: 12957362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Sep 8;464(1):49-61.

Notch-associated gene expression in embryonic and adult taste papillae and taste 
buds suggests a role in taste cell lineage decisions.

Seta Y(1), Seta C, Barlow LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology and the Rocky Mountain Taste and
Smell Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado
80262, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway is involved in cell fate decisions during
development. To explore the role of this signaling cascade in the taste system,
we investigated the expression patterns of Notch signaling genes in fetal and
adult mouse tongues using in situ hybridization. Three of the four murine Notch
receptors, their ligands, Delta-like 1 (Dll-1), Jagged1, and Jagged2, as well as 
three transcription factors, Hes1, Hes6, and Mash1, are expressed in the
embryonic taste epithelium. Expression is first detected in the circumvallate
papilla at embryonic day E14.5, when Notch1, Jagged1, and Jagged2 are expressed
broadly in the papilla and general lingual epithelium. In contrast, Mash1 and
Hes6 are restricted to only a few epithelial cells in the apical region of the
developing papilla. By E18.5, many of the genes now exhibit a bimodal expression 
pattern in the papillary epithelium: apically and dorsally they are expressed in 
sparse clusters of cells, while more ventrally expression typically occurs
throughout the lower regions of the trenches. The extent of papilla innervation
was compared with Mash1 and Hes6 expression. At E14.5, when Hes6 and Mash1 are
already expressed in small numbers of epithelial cells, PGP9.5 immunoreactive
fibers have not yet invaded the epithelium, consistent with the specification of 
taste bud primordia prior to nerve contact. All of the genes examined (except
Notch2) are also expressed in subsets of cells within circumvallate taste buds in
adult mice, although Notch1 is restricted to basal cells adjacent to taste buds. 
The onset of embryonic Notch associated gene expression after the morphological
differentiation of the circumvallate papilla argues that this signaling cascade
may specify taste receptor cell lineages within an already specified taste
papilla. Similarly, Notch gene expression in adult taste buds suggests continued 
roles in cell lineage determination and cell turnover.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12866128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Chem Senses. 2003 Mar;28(3):197-205.

Expression of Hes6 and NeuroD in the olfactory epithelium, vomeronasal organ and 
non-sensory patches.

Suzuki Y(1), Mizoguchi I, Nishiyama H, Takeda M, Obara N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry, Health Sciences University of
Hokkaido, Ishikari-Tobetsu 061-0293, Japan. suzuki@hoku-iryo-u.ac.jp

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors NeuroD and Hes6 promote neuronal
differentiation. The expression of their genes in the olfactory epithelium (OE), 
vomeronasal organ (VNO) and the non-sensory patches of the posterior nasal cavity
of mice was examined. As detected by in situ hybridization, Hes6 was expressed in
a basal progenitor layer of the embryonic OE. After birth, the expression of Hes6
was detected in a cell layer above the basement membrane, globose basal cells
(GBCs). Expression of NeuroD in the embryonic OE was in agreement with that
previously described; and in the postnatal OE, it was detected in cells of GBC
layer and cells upper to GBCs. In the VNO, Hes6 was expressed throughout the
sensory epithelium (S-VNO) at embryonic day 12, and later became restricted to a 
single layer of cells in the basal region of the S-VNO, where Hes5-expressing
undifferentiated cells were present. NeuroD was expressed throughout the S-VNO
during the embryonic stage. After birth, Hes6 and NeuroD expressions were
observed in the border between the S-VNO and non-sensory VNO.
Immunohistochemistry using anti-NeuroD antibody revealed that NeuroD-positive
cells were still present not only at the edges but also in the center of the
S-VNO until P3. These findings suggest that Hes6 and NeuroD are expressed in
progenitors of chemoreceptor neurons and that the expression of Hes6 precedes
that of NEUROD: Moreover, in the regenerating VNO of bulbectomized mice,
NeuroD-positive cells were observed both at the edges and in the center of the
S-VNO, suggesting that neuronal turnover occurred in both regions. Moreover, in
the dorsal fossa of the posterior nasal cavity, several non-sensory patches are
formed between postnatal (P) days 10 and 21 because of programmed death of ORNs
and GBCs. During embryonic stages, the expression of Hes6 and NeuroD in the OE
showed no regional differences. At P3-P7, expression of NeuroD and Hes6
disappeared in the region corresponding to the presumptive non-sensory patches.
The loss of these genes may stop the differentiation and may cause apoptosis of
GBCs and ORNs.

PMID: 12714442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2195-207.

Hes6 regulates myogenic differentiation.

Cossins J(1), Vernon AE, Zhang Y, Philpott A, Jones PH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Hes6 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor homologous to Drosophila
Enhancer of Split (EoS) proteins. It is known to promote neural differentiation
and to bind to Hes1, a related protein that is part of the Notch signalling
pathway, affecting Hes1-regulated transcription. We show that Hes6 is expressed
in the murine embryonic myotome and is induced on C2C12 myoblast differentiation 
in vitro. Hes6 binds DNA containing the Enhancer of Split E box (ESE) motif, the 
preferred binding site of Drosophila EoS proteins, and represses transcription of
an ESE box reporter. When overexpressed in C2C12 cells, Hes6 impairs normal
differentiation, causing a decrease in the induction of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor, p21(Cip1), and an increase in the number of cells that can be
recruited back into the cell cycle after differentiation in culture. In Xenopus
embryos, Hes6 is co-expressed with MyoD in early myogenic development.
Microinjection of Hes6 RNA in vivo in Xenopus embryos results in an expansion of 
the myotome, but suppression of terminal muscle differentiation and disruption of
somite formation at the tailbud stage. Analysis of Hes6 mutants indicates that
the DNA-binding activity of Hes6 is not essential for its myogenic phenotype, but
that protein-protein interactions are. Thus, we demonstrate a novel role for Hes6
in multiple stages of muscle formation.

PMID: 11959828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Cell Biol. 2001 Sep 17;154(6):1161-71. Epub 2001 Sep 10.

HES6 acts as a transcriptional repressor in myoblasts and can induce the myogenic
differentiation program.

Gao X(1), Chandra T, Gratton MO, Quélo I, Prud'homme J, Stifani S, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montréal H3G 1A6, Québec,
Canada.

HES6 is a novel member of the family of basic helix-loop-helix mammalian
homologues of Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split. We have analyzed the
biochemical and functional roles of HES6 in myoblasts. HES6 interacted with the
corepressor transducin-like Enhancer of split 1 in yeast and mammalian cells
through its WRPW COOH-terminal motif. HES6 repressed transcription from an N
box-containing template and also when tethered to DNA through the GAL4 DNA
binding domain. On N box-containing promoters, HES6 cooperated with HES1 to
achieve maximal repression. An HES6-VP16 activation domain fusion protein
activated the N box-containing reporter, confirming that HES6 bound the N box in 
muscle cells. The expression of HES6 was induced when myoblasts fused to become
differentiated myotubes. Constitutive expression of HES6 in myoblasts inhibited
expression of MyoR, a repressor of myogenesis, and induced differentiation, as
evidenced by fusion into myotubes and expression of the muscle marker myosin
heavy chain. Reciprocally, blocking endogenous HES6 function by using a
WRPW-deleted dominant negative HES6 mutant led to increased expression of MyoR
and completely blocked the muscle development program. Our results show that HES6
is an important regulator of myogenesis and suggest that MyoR is a target for
HES6-dependent transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC2150829
PMID: 11551980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mech Dev. 2000 Nov;98(1-2):133-7.

Expression of mouse HES-6, a new member of the Hairy/Enhancer of split family of 
bHLH transcription factors.

Vasiliauskas D(1), Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, 701 West 168th
Street #1602, New York, NY 10032, USA.

We studied the expression of mouse HES-6, a new member of the Hairy/Enhancer of
split family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. HES-6 is expressed 
in all neurogenic placodes and their derivatives and in the brain, where it is
patterned along both the anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes. HES-6 is also
expressed in the trunk, in the dorsal root ganglia and in the myotomes. In the
limb buds HES-6 is expressed in skeletal muscle and presumptive tendons.

PMID: 11044617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2000 Oct;127(19):4203-16.

Hes6 acts in a positive feedback loop with the neurogenins to promote neuronal
differentiation.

Koyano-Nakagawa N(1), Kim J, Anderson D, Kintner C.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, PO Box 85800, La Jolla, CA
92186-5800, USA.

During the development of the vertebrate nervous system, neurogenesis is promoted
by proneural bHLH proteins such as the neurogenins, which act as potent
transcriptional activators of neuronal differentiation genes. The pattern by
which these proteins promote neuronal differentiation is thought to be governed
by inhibitors, including a class of transcriptional repressors called the
WRPW-bHLH proteins, which are similar to Drosophila proteins encoded by hairy and
genes in the enhancer of split complex (E-(SPL)-C). Here, we describe the
isolation and characterization of Hes6, which encodes a novel WRPW-bHLH protein
expressed during neurogenesis in mouse and Xenopus embryos. We show that Hes6
expression follows that of neurogenins but precedes that of the neuronal
differentiation genes. We provide several lines of evidence to show that Hes6
expression occurs in developing neurons and is induced by the proneural bHLH
proteins but not by the Notch pathway. When ectopically expressed in Xenopus
embryos, Hes6 promotes neurogenesis. The properties of Hes6 distinguish it from
other members of the WRPW-bHLH family in vertebrates, and suggest that it acts in
a positive-feedback loop with the proneural bHLH proteins to promote neuronal
differentiation.

PMID: 10976052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mech Dev. 2000 Jul;95(1-2):275-8.

Expression of hes6, a new member of the Hairy/Enhancer-of-split family, in mouse 
development.

Pissarra L(1), Henrique D, Duarte A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Histologia e Embriologia, Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Av.
Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028, Lisboa, Portugal.

Genes of the Hairy/Enhancer-of-split (HES) family encode basic-Helix-Loop-Helix
proteins that function as nuclear effectors of Notch signaling to regulate the
transcriptional activity of several Notch target genes. Here, we report the
characterization of a new member of the HES family, hes6, and describe its
expression in mouse embryos ranging from 8.5 to 15.5 dpc. High levels of
expression are observed in several embryonic tissues where Notch signaling is
known to control cell-fate decisions, like the nervous system, muscle and thymus.
In the nervous system, hes6 is initially expressed in the closing neural tube and
then in the spinal cord, cranial and dorsal root ganglia, and brain
neuroepithelium. During muscle development, the expression of hes6 occurs during 
both myoblast commitment and differentiation, being the first hes gene to reveal 
expression throughout embryonic myogenesis. hes6 is also expressed in epithelial 
cells of the embryonic respiratory, urinary and digestive systems.

PMID: 10906477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Development. 2000 Jul;127(13):2933-43.

The bHLH gene Hes6, an inhibitor of Hes1, promotes neuronal differentiation.

Bae S(1), Bessho Y, Hojo M, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

We have isolated the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene Hes6, a novel member of
the family of mammalian homologues of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split.
Hes6 is expressed by both undifferentiated and differentiated cells, unlike Hes1,
which is expressed only by the former cells. Hes6 alone does not bind to the DNA 
but suppresses Hes1 from repressing transcription. In addition, Hes6 suppresses
Hes1 from inhibiting Mash1-E47 heterodimer and thereby enables Mash1 and E47 to
upregulate transcription in the presence of Hes1. Furthermore, misexpression of
Hes6 with retrovirus in the developing retina promotes rod photoreceptor
differentiation, like Mash1, in sharp contrast to Hes1, which inhibits cell
differentiation. These results suggest that Hes6 is an inhibitor of Hes1,
supports Mash1 activity and promotes cell differentiation. Mutation analysis
revealed that Hes1- and Hes6-specific functions are, at least in part,
interchangeable by alteration of the loop region, suggesting that the loop is not
simply a nonfunctional spacer but plays an important role in the specific
functions.

PMID: 10851137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Liver. 1998 Dec;18(6):398-404.

Mature hepatocytes actively divide and express gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
after D-galactosamine liver injury.

Kitten O(1), Ferry N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Transfert de Gènes, INSERM, Centre Eugène Marquis, Rennes,
France.

AIMS/BACKGROUND: We studied the fate of hepatocytes in the rat liver after
D-galactosamine injury by genetic labeling using recombinant retroviruses
carrying the Escherichia coli lacZ gene coupled to a nuclear localization signal.
METHODS: Hepatocytes were either labeled by direct injection of 2.5 ml high-titer
retrovirus-containing medium in the regenerating liver parenchyma after
administration of a single dose of D-galactosamine. Alternatively hepatocytes
were pre-labeled, 24 h after a two-thirds hepatectomy, by injecting the same
volume of retroviral solution in the portal vein and D-galactosamine was
administered 15 days later. Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase and beta-galactosidase 
activities were assessed on cryostat sections, along with localization of the
hepatocyte-specific HES6 antigen.
RESULTS: Morphological observations, as well as beta-galactosidase activity
detection, showed that hepatocytes actively divide as early as 1 day after
D-galactosamine injection. Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase activity was detected in
biliary cells, but also in mature hepatocytes, pre-labeled with
beta-galactosidase before D-galactosamine administration.
CONCLUSIONS: These experiments demonstrate that hepatocytes can divide to restore
the liver mass after D-galactosamine liver injury. Furthermore, we also show that
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, which has been reported to be expressed only by
fetal or preneoplastic hepatocytes, can be re-expressed by mature hepatocytes
during the recovery process.

PMID: 9869394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Mar;217(1):22-30.

Specialization switch in differentiating embryonic rat liver progenitor cells in 
response to sodium butyrate.

Blouin MJ(1), Lamy I, Loranger A, Noël M, Corlu A, Guguen-Guillouzo C, Marceau N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, l'Hôtel-Dieu de
Québec, Canada.

Embryonic (E) 12 rat liver epithelial cells constitute a population of
bipotential progenitor cells which can differentiate along the hepatocyte (Hep)
or biliary epithelial cell (BEC) lineage in primary culture. In the present
study, E12 cells were seeded on fibronectin-coated substratum and exposed to
sodium butyrate (SB) for various exposure times, and the emergence of the Hep or 
BEC phenotype was monitored by following the variations in albumin production and
assessing the appearance of the two surface-exposed markers HES6 and BDS7.
Continuous exposure to SB resulted into a major reduction in albumin production
and, at Day 9 postseeding, few cells coexpressed BDS7 and albumin. When cells
were exposed to SB for 5 days and then cultured for an additional 5 days without 
SB, they massively express BDS7, but very little HES6. Moreover, the reverse
sequence, i.e., 5 days without SB followed by 5 days with it, led to the
appearance of many cells expressing both HES6 and BDS7. These results indicate
that progenitors committed preferentially along the Hep lineage still have the
option to switch to BECs, at a transitional stage that we refer to as a
"differentiation window."

PMID: 7867717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Differentiation. 1992 Dec;52(1):45-54.

Cytokeratin 14 expression in rat liver cells in culture and localization in vivo.

Blouin R(1), Blouin MJ, Royal I, Grenier A, Roop DR, Loranger A, Marceau N.

Author information: 
(1)Laval University Cancer Research Center, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Canada.

Rat liver epithelial cells (LECs) are non-parenchymal proliferating cells that
readily emerge in primary culture and can be established as cell lines, but their
in vivo cell(s) of origin is unclear. We reported recently some evidence
indicating that the LEC line, T51B, contains two cytokeratins (CKs) equivalent to
human CK8 and CK14 respectively. T51B cells also contain vimentin assembled as a 
network of intermediate filaments distinct from that of the CKs. In the present
study, we examined the expression of CK14 gene in various LEC preparations and a 
Triton-resistant rat skin cytoskeletal fraction, and then assessed its usefulness
as an LEC specific marker in the liver. Northern and Western blot analyses with
cDNAs and antibodies for CK8, CK14, CK18 and vimentin confirmed that rat
hepatocytes express CK8 and CK18 genes only, whereas T51B cells express CK8, CK14
and vimentin genes in the absence of CK18. CK14 was also present in LECs derived 
as primary from embryonic-day 12 rat liver and secondary cultures from 4-day-old 
rat liver. Primary cultures of oval cells isolated from
3'-methyl-4-dimethylaminoazobenzene (3'-Me-DAB) treated rat liver (an enriched
source of biliary epithelial cells) contained CK14 mRNAs which were slightly
shorter than those in LECs. The analyses of CK5 (the usual partner of CK14) gene 
expression using specific cDNA and antibody clearly demonstrated its absence in
LECs. In situ double immunolocalization analyses by laser scanning confocal
microscopy showed that CK14 was not present in hepatocytes (HES6+ cells) and was 
expressed in some biliary epithelial (BDS7+ cells). CK14-positive cells were also
found in the Glisson's capsule. However, CK14-positive cells of the portal region
were vimentin negative, whereas those of the Glisson's capsule were vimentin
positive. Our results suggest that CK14 gene expression is part of the
differentiation program of two types of LECs and that this differential CK14 gene
expression can be used as a new means to type LECs in culture and in vivo.

PMID: 1283740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cancer Res. 1988 Sep 1;48(17):4909-18.

Biliary epithelial and hepatocytic cell lineage relationships in embryonic rat
liver as determined by the differential expression of cytokeratins,
alpha-fetoprotein, albumin, and cell surface-exposed components.

Germain L(1), Blouin MJ, Marceau N.

Author information: 
(1)Laval University Cancer Research Center, Hotel-Dieu Hospital, Quebec, Canada.

The differentiation patterns of epithelial cells in fetal rat liver were analyzed
in situ and in primary culture by indirect immunofluorescence microscopy using
polyvalent and monoclonal antibodies directed against cytokeratins with molecular
weights of 55,000 (CK55), 52,000 (CK52), and 39,000 (CK39) and against vimentin, 
albumin, alpha-fetoprotein, and surface-exposed components of bile ductular cells
(BDS7) and hepatocytes (HES6). The anti-CK52 antibody, which reacted with biliary
ductal cells in the liver of adult rats (Germain et al., Cancer Res., 45:673,
1985; Germain et al., Cancer Res., 48: 368-378, 1988), stained essentially all of
the epithelial cells of embryonic day 12 (E12) rat liver. The anti-BDS7 antibody 
reacted with a few cell foci, which enlarged and became more numerous at later
developmental ages. At E12 essentially all of the cells were positive for albumin
and alpha-fetoprotein but did not express HES6. In fact HES6 was not detected
until E15 in cells with the morphology of immature hepatocytes. By E18 staining
with anti-HES6 reached the level of that observed on adult rat hepatocytes. Liver
cells isolated from E12 rats were seeded on fibronectin-treated dishes and their 
response to various combinations of growth- and differentiation-promoting factors
was evaluated with respect to their capacity to express either the hepatocytic or
the bile ductular phenotype. In medium supplemented with serum, insulin,
dexamethasone, and dimethyl sulfoxide, the E12 cells were capable of
differentiating in culture to mimic over a 6-day period the sequential phenotypic
changes which occur in vivo during normal hepatoontogeny, namely the loss of CK52
and the appearance of HES6. In contrast, the addition of sodium butyrate to the
above supplement mixture resulted in the massive expression of BDS7. To further
assess the developmental potential of fetal rat liver cells toward the biliary
epithelial cell lineage, the in vitro assay was performed using cells isolated
from livers of E18 rats and also from 2-day-old (P2) and P14 rats. While a slight
expression of BDS7 was induced in cell culture from E18 liver, essentially no
expression was observed in cells from postnatal livers. These findings strongly
suggest that the emerging hepatic tissue in rat embryo is composed of bipotential
progenitor epithelial cells that are capable of differentiating along either the 
hepatocytic or biliary epithelial cell lineage. These observations constitute a
clear demonstration of the plasticity of liver differentiation and also provide a
striking example of environmental influences on liver progenitor cell
differentiation.

PMID: 2457432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cancer Res. 1988 Jan 15;48(2):368-78.

Promotion of growth and differentiation of rat ductular oval cells in primary
culture.

Germain L(1), Noël M, Gourdeau H, Marceau N.

Author information: 
(1)Laval University Cancer Research Center, Hôtel-Dieu Hospital, Québec, Canada.

Oval cells emerging in rat liver at the early period of
3-methyl-4-dimethylaminoazobenzene treatment constitute a mixed epithelial cell
compartment with respect to alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and cytokeratin differential 
expression, and include a subpopulation which exhibits a phenotype intermediate
between ductular cells and hepatocytes (Germain et al., Cancer Res., 45:673-681, 
1985). In the present study we have examined the developmental potential of
ductular oval cells in primary culture and after in vivo transfer. The use of
monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies directed against cytokeratins of Mr 39,000
(CK39), 52,000 (CK52), and 55,000 (CK55) and vimentin, and also monoclonal
antibodies against exposed surface components of oval cells (BDS7) and normal
hepatocytes (HES6) allowed us to establish the ductular phenotype of the oval
cells. A highly enriched preparation of oval cells was obtained by
perfusion/digestion of the liver with collagenase, treatment of the cell
suspension with trypsin and DNase, selective removal of hepatocytes by panning
using the anti-HES6 antibody, and cell separation by isopyknic centrifugation in 
a Percoll gradient. The procedure yielded about 8 x 10(7) cells, of which 95%
expressed CK39, CK52, and BDS7, 84% gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, and 5% albumin
and AFP. The primary response of cultured oval cells to various combinations of
growth and differentiation promoting factors was evaluated with respect to their 
capacity to initiate DNA synthesis as measured by [3H]thymidine labeling from day
1 to 3, and/or to produce albumin and AFP and express tyrosine aminotransferase. 
Culture in the presence of either serum or clot blood extract resulted in a low
proliferative activity with less than 5% of the nuclei being labeled. Over a
5-day period, fusion of a large portion of the oval cells led to multinucleated
cells. When the cells were cultured in the presence of an elaborate combination
of supplements [minimum essential medium containing 1 mM pyruvate, 0.2 mM
aspartate, 0.2 mM serine, 1 mM tyrosine, 1 mM proline, 1 mM phenylalanine and
supplemented with 20% clot blood extract, 10 ng/ml oxidized bile acids, 17 microM
bilirubin, 10 ng/ml cholera toxin, 1 microM dexamethasone, 2.5 micrograms/ml
insulin, 50 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, and 5 micrograms/ml transferrin (medium
MX)], the labeling index increased to around 30% and the level of cell fusion
greatly decreased. The addition of dimethyl sulfoxide further enhanced the
initiation of DNA synthesis, while sodium butyrate acted as an
inhibitor.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 2446746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


