
1. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:8648356. doi: 10.1155/2016/8648356. Epub 2016 Feb 1.

Highly Synchronized Expression of Lineage-Specific Genes during In Vitro Hepatic 
Differentiation of Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Lines.

Ghosheh N(1), Olsson B(2), Edsbagge J(3), Küppers-Munther B(3), Van Giezen M(3), 
Asplund A(2), Andersson TB(4), Björquist P(5), Carén H(6), Simonsson S(7),
Sartipy P(8), Synnergren J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience, Systems Biology Research Center, University of Skövde,
541 28 Skövde, Sweden; Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Clinical Chemistry
and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 413 45
Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)School of Bioscience, Systems Biology Research Center,
University of Skövde, 541 28 Skövde, Sweden. (3)Takara Bio Europe AB, Arvid
Wallgrens Backe 20, 413 46 Gothenburg, Sweden. (4)AstraZeneca R&D, CVMD DMPK, 431
83 Mölndal, Sweden; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of
Pharmacogenetics, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. (5)NovaHep AB,
Arvid Wallgrens Backe 20, 413 46 Gothenburg, Sweden. (6)Sahlgrenska Cancer
Center, Department of Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. (7)Institute of Biomedicine,
Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. (8)School of Bioscience,
Systems Biology Research Center, University of Skövde, 541 28 Skövde, Sweden;
AstraZeneca R&D, GMD CVMD GMed, 431 83 Mölndal, Sweden.

Human pluripotent stem cells- (hPSCs-) derived hepatocytes have the potential to 
replace many hepatic models in drug discovery and provide a cell source for
regenerative medicine applications. However, the generation of fully functional
hPSC-derived hepatocytes is still a challenge. Towards gaining better
understanding of the differentiation and maturation process, we employed a
standardized protocol to differentiate six hPSC lines into hepatocytes and
investigated the synchronicity of the hPSC lines by applying RT-qPCR to assess
the expression of lineage-specific genes (OCT4, NANOG, T, SOX17, CXCR4, CER1,
HHEX, TBX3, PROX1, HNF6, AFP, HNF4a, KRT18, ALB, AAT, and CYP3A4) which serve as 
markers for different stages during liver development. The data was evaluated
using correlation and clustering analysis, demonstrating that the expression of
these markers is highly synchronized and correlated well across all cell lines.
The analysis also revealed a distribution of the markers in groups reflecting the
developmental stages of hepatocytes. Functional analysis of the differentiated
cells further confirmed their hepatic phenotype. Taken together, these results
demonstrate, on the molecular level, the highly synchronized differentiation
pattern across multiple hPSC lines. Moreover, this study provides additional
understanding for future efforts to improve the functionality of hPSC-derived
hepatocytes and thereby increase the value of related models.

PMCID: PMC4753346
PMID: 26949401  [PubMed]


2. Cell Biosci. 2016 Feb 13;6:12. doi: 10.1186/s13578-016-0077-7. eCollection 2016.

Misregulation of the proline rich homeodomain (PRH/HHEX) protein in cancer cells 
and its consequences for tumour growth and invasion.

Gaston K(1), Tsitsilianos MA(1), Wadey K(1), Jayaraman PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry, University Walk, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8
1TD UK. (2)Division of Immunity and Infection, School of Medicine, University of 
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT UK.

The proline rich homeodomain protein (PRH), also known as haematopoietically
expressed homeobox (HHEX), is an essential transcription factor in embryonic
development and in the adult. The PRH protein forms oligomeric complexes that
bind to tandemly repeated PRH recognition sequences within or at a distance from 
PRH-target genes and recruit a variety of PRH-interacting proteins. PRH can also 
bind to other transcription factors and co-regulate specific target genes either 
directly through DNA binding, or indirectly through effects on the activity of
its partner proteins. In addition, like some other homeodomain proteins, PRH can 
regulate the translation of specific mRNAs. Altered PRH expression and altered
PRH intracellular localisation, are associated with breast cancer, liver cancer
and thyroid cancer and some subtypes of leukaemia. This is consistent with the
involvement of multiple PRH-interacting proteins, including the oncoprotein
c-Myc, translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E), and the promyelocytic leukaemia 
protein (PML), in the control of cell proliferation and cell survival. Similarly,
multiple PRH target genes, including the genes encoding vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), VEGF receptors, Endoglin, and Goosecoid, are known to be
important in the control of cell proliferation and cell survival and/or the
regulation of cell migration and invasion. In this review, we summarise the
evidence that implicates PRH in tumourigenesis and we review the data that
suggests PRH levels could be useful in cancer prognosis and in the choice of
treatment options.

PMCID: PMC4752775
PMID: 26877867  [PubMed]


3. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol. 2016 Feb 3;36:1G.3.1-1G.3.12. doi:
10.1002/9780470151808.sc01g03s36.

Differentiation of Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells into Ventral Foregut Precursors.

Rothová M(1), Hölzenspies JJ(1), Livigni A(2), Villegas SN(2,)(3), Brickman
JM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre (DanStem), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)MRC Centre
for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. (3)Instituto de Neurociencias, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, Universidad Miguel Hernandez de Elche,
Alicante, Spain.

Anterior definitive endoderm (ADE), the ventral foregut precursor, is both an
important embryonic signaling center and a unique multipotent precursor of liver,
pancreas, and other organs. Here, a method is described for the differentiation
of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) to definitive endoderm with pronounced
anterior character. ADE-containing cultures can be produced in vitro by
suspension (embryoid body) culture or in a serum-free adherent monolayer culture.
ESC-derived ADE cells are committed to endodermal fates and can undergo further
differentiation in vitro towards ventral foregut derivatives. © 2016 by John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 26840225  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 19;11(1):e0146806. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146806.
eCollection 2016.

Hhex Is Necessary for the Hepatic Differentiation of Mouse ES Cells and Acts via 
Vegf Signaling.

Arterbery AS(1), Bogue CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Critical Care Medicine, Yale School of
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, United States of
America.

Elucidating the molecular mechanisms involved in the differentiation of stem
cells to hepatic cells is critical for both understanding normal developmental
processes as well as for optimizing the generation of functional hepatic cells
for therapy. We performed in vitro differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells 
(mESCs) with a null mutation in the homeobox gene Hhex and show that Hhex-/-
mESCs fail to differentiate from definitive endoderm (Sox17+/Foxa2+) to hepatic
endoderm (Alb+/Dlk+). In addition, hepatic culture elicited a >7-fold increase in
Vegfa mRNA expression in Hhex-/- cells compared to Hhex+/+ cells. Furthermore, we
identified VEGFR2+/ALB+/CD34- in early Hhex+/+ hepatic cultures. These cells were
absent in Hhex-/- cultures. Finally, through manipulation of Hhex and Vegfa
expression, gain and loss of expression experiments revealed that Hhex shares an 
inverse relationship with the activity of the Vegf signaling pathway in
supporting hepatic differentiation. In summary, our results suggest that Hhex
represses Vegf signaling during hepatic differentiation of mouse ESCs allowing
for cell-type autonomous regulation of Vegfr2 activity independent of endothelial
cells.

PMCID: PMC4718667
PMID: 26784346  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2015 Dec 18. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.2456. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Screening of HHEX Mutations in Chinese Children with Thyroid Dysgenesis.

Shiguo L, Jian C, Guohua Z, Huichao L, Deguo L.

OBJECTIVE: Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is a frequent neonatal endocrine
disease with an incidence of about 1:2500 worldwide. Although thyroid dysgenesis 
(TD) is the most reason for about 85% of the CH cases, its pathogenesis remains
unclear. The study was to screen Hematopoietically Expressed homeobox gene (HHEX)
mutations in Chinese children with TD.
METHODS: After 234 TD patients were collected from Shandong Province, genomic DNA
was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes. Mutations in all exons and nearby
introns of HHEX were analyzed by direct sequencing after PCR amplification.
RESULTS: Sequencing analysis of HHEX has been indicated that no causative
mutations have been find in the coding region in 234 TD patients, however, a
genetic variant (IVS2+ 127 G/T, 10.26%) was observed in the intron 2 in HHEX.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that the rate of HHEX mutation is very low, and
may not serve as the main causative factor in Chinese TD patients. However, these
results need to be replicated using larger datasets collected from different
populations.

PMID: 26757609  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Sep 1;1(5):550-569.

Spontaneous Pancreatitis Caused by Tissue-Specific Gene Ablation of Hhex in Mice.

Ferreira MJ(1), McKenna LB(1), Zhang J(1), Reichert M(2), Bakir B(2), Buza EL(3),
Furth EE(4), Bogue CW(5), Rustgi AK(2), Kaestner KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Abramson
Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Perturbations in pancreatic ductal bicarbonate secretion cause
chronic pancreatitis. The physiologic mechanism of ductal secretion is known, but
its transcriptional control is not. We determine the role of the transcription
factor hematopoietically expressed homeobox protein (Hhex) in ductal secretion
and pancreatitis.
METHODS: We derived mice with pancreas-specific, Cremediated Hhex gene ablation
to determine the requirement of Hhex in the pancreatic duct in early life and in 
adult stages. Histologic and immunostaining analyses were used to detect the
presence of pathology. Pancreatic primary ductal cells were isolated to discover 
differentially expressed transcripts upon acute Hhex ablation on a cell
autonomous level.
RESULTS: Hhex protein was detected throughout the embryonic and adult ductal
trees. Ablation of Hhex in pancreatic progenitors resulted in postnatal ductal
ectasia associated with acinar-to-ductal metaplasia, a progressive phenotype that
ultimately resulted in chronic pancreatitis. Hhex ablation in adult mice,
however, did not cause any detectable pathology. Ductal ectasia in young mice did
not result from perturbation of expression of Hnf6, Hnf1ß, or the primary cilia
genes. RNA-seq analysis of Hhex-ablated pancreatic primary ductal cells showed
mRNA levels of the G-protein coupled receptor natriuretic peptide receptor 3
(Npr3), implicated in paracrine signaling, up-regulated by 4.70-fold.
CONCLUSIONS: Although Hhex is dispensable for ductal cell function in the adult, 
ablation of Hhex in pancreatic progenitors results in pancreatitis. Our data
highlight the critical role of Hhex in maintaining ductal homeostasis in early
life and support ductal hypersecretion as a novel etiology of pediatric chronic
pancreatitis.

PMCID: PMC4698881
PMID: 26740970  [PubMed]


7. Genes Dev. 2016 Jan 1;30(1):78-91. doi: 10.1101/gad.268425.115.

Acute myeloid leukemia requires Hhex to enable PRC2-mediated epigenetic
repression of Cdkn2a.

Shields BJ(1), Jackson JT(2), Metcalf D(1), Shi W(3), Huang Q(2), Garnham AL(4), 
Glaser SP(1), Beck D(5), Pimanda JE(5), Bogue CW(6), Smyth GK(7), Alexander
WS(1), McCormack MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical
Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia; (2)Cancer 
and Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; (3)Bioinformatics Division, The
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3050,
Australia; Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria 3050, Australia; (4)Bioinformatics Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia; (5)Lowy
Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia; (6)Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA; (7)Department of Medical Biology,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia; Mathematics and
Statistics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

Unlike clustered HOX genes, the role of nonclustered homeobox gene family members
in hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis has not been extensively studied. Here we
found that the hematopoietically expressed homeobox gene Hhex is overexpressed in
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and is essential for the initiation and propagation 
of MLL-ENL-induced AML but dispensable for normal myelopoiesis, indicating a
specific requirement for Hhex for leukemic growth. Loss of Hhex leads to
expression of the Cdkn2a-encoded tumor suppressors p16(INK4a) and p19(ARF), which
are required for growth arrest and myeloid differentiation following Hhex
deletion. Mechanistically, we show that Hhex binds to the Cdkn2a locus and
directly interacts with the Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) to enable
H3K27me3-mediated epigenetic repression. Thus, Hhex is a potential therapeutic
target that is specifically required for AML stem cells to repress tumor
suppressor pathways and enable continued self-renewal.

© 2016 Shields et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4701980 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26728554  [PubMed - in process]


8. Genetics. 2016 Feb;202(2):457-70. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.180869. Epub 2015 Dec
29.

Meta-analysis of Complex Diseases at Gene Level with Generalized Functional
Linear Models.

Fan R(1), Wang Y(2), Chiu CY(2), Chen W(3), Ren H(4), Li Y(5), Boehnke M(6), Amos
CI(7), Moore JH(8), Xiong M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892 fanr@mail.nih.gov. (2)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (3)Division
of Pulmonary Medicine, Allergy and Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Medical 
Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224. (4)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
Basking Ridge, New Jersey 07920. (5)Departments of Genetics and Biostatistics,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 27599. (6)Department
of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109. (7)Department of Community and Family Medicine, Dartmouth Medical
School, Lebanon, New Hampshire 03756. (8)Department of Biostatistics and
Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

We developed generalized functional linear models (GFLMs) to perform a
meta-analysis of multiple case-control studies to evaluate the relationship of
genetic data to dichotomous traits adjusting for covariates. Unlike the
previously developed meta-analysis for sequence kernel association tests
(MetaSKATs), which are based on mixed-effect models to make the contributions of 
major gene loci random, GFLMs are fixed models; i.e., genetic effects of multiple
genetic variants are fixed. Based on GFLMs, we developed chi-squared-distributed 
Rao's efficient score test and likelihood-ratio test (LRT) statistics to test for
an association between a complex dichotomous trait and multiple genetic variants.
We then performed extensive simulations to evaluate the empirical type I error
rates and power performance of the proposed tests. The Rao's efficient score test
statistics of GFLMs are very conservative and have higher power than MetaSKATs
when some causal variants are rare and some are common. When the causal variants 
are all rare [i.e., minor allele frequencies (MAF) < 0.03], the Rao's efficient
score test statistics have similar or slightly lower power than MetaSKATs. The
LRT statistics generate accurate type I error rates for homogeneous
genetic-effect models and may inflate type I error rates for heterogeneous
genetic-effect models owing to the large numbers of degrees of freedom and have
similar or slightly higher power than the Rao's efficient score test statistics. 
GFLMs were applied to analyze genetic data of 22 gene regions of type 2 diabetes 
data from a meta-analysis of eight European studies and detected significant
association for 18 genes (P < 3.10 × 10(-6)), tentative association for 2 genes
(HHEX and HMGA2; P  10(-5)), and no association for 2 genes, while MetaSKATs
detected none. In addition, the traditional additive-effect model detects
association at gene HHEX. GFLMs and related tests can analyze rare or common
variants or a combination of the two and can be useful in whole-genome and
whole-exome association studies.

Copyright © 2016 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4788228 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26715663  [PubMed - in process]


9. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 2;14(4):15793-801. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.1.31.

LITAF, HHEX, and DUSP1 expression in mesenchymal stem cells from patients with
psoriasis.

Chang WJ(1), Niu XP(1), Hou RX(1), Li JQ(1), Liu RF(1), Wang Q(1), Wang CF(2), Li
XH(1), Yin GH(1), Zhang KM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dermatology, Taiyuan City Central Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi
Province, China. (2)Institute of Central Laboratory, Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan, Shanxi Province, China. (3)Institute of Dermatology, Taiyuan City
Central Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi Province, China Zhangkaiming@sina.com.

Psoriasis is a common chronic relapsing inflammatory skin disease, in which
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been hypothesized to play an important role in
abnormal localized inflammation and vascular proliferation observed in skin
lesions. Previous studies have revealed abnormal gene expression patterns, DNA
methylation status, and cytokine secretion of MSCs in psoriatic skin lesions, as 
well as some gene expression abnormalities related to inflammation and
angiogenesis. We further verified the gene and protein expressions of
inflammation-related lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor-alpha
transcription factor (LITAF), dual-specificity protein phosphatase 1 (DUSP1), and
angiogenesis-related hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX) in MSCs derived 
from the skin lesions of psoriasis patients. The gene expression of LITAF, DUSP1,
and HHEX in dermal MSCs was measured at the mRNA level using reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and the corresponding protein expression 
levels were analyzed by western blotting analysis. The gene and protein
expression levels of LITAF, HHEX, and DUSP1 in dermal MSCs were significantly
lower in psoriasis patients compared to controls. Amplification and western
blotting results were consistent with our previously reported gene chip data. Our
results suggest that dermal MSCs in psoriatic skin lesions may be involved in the
development, progression, and regulation of localized inflammatory abnormalities 
by reducing the expression of LITAF, HHEX, and DUSP1, which are related to
inflammation and angiogenesis.

PMID: 26634547  [PubMed - in process]


10. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 1;14(4):15471-81. doi: 10.4238/2015.November.30.25.

Quantitative candidate gene association studies of metabolic traits in Han
Chinese type 2 diabetes patients.

Wei FJ(1), Cai CY(1), Yu P(1), Lv J(1), Ling C(1), Shi WT(1), Jiao HX(1), Chang
BC(2), Yang FH(1), Tian Y(1), Li MS(1), Wang YH(1), Zou L(1), Shi JM(1), Chen
LM(2), Li WD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (2)Metabolic Diseases Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (3)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China liweidong98@tmu.edu.cn.

Recent genome-wide association studies have identified many loci associated with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), hyperuricemia, and obesity in various ethnic
populations. However, quantitative traits have been less well investigated in Han
Chinese T2DM populations. We investigated the association between candidate gene 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and metabolic syndrome-related
quantitative traits in Han Chinese T2DM subjects. Unrelated Han Chinese T2DM
patients (1975) were recruited. Eighty-six SNPs were genotyped and tested for
association with quantitative traits including lipid profiles, blood pressure,
body mass index (BMI), serum uric acid (SUA), glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), plasma
glucose [fasting plasma glucose (FPG)], plasma glucose 120 min post-OGTT (P2PG;
OGTT = oral glucose tolerance test), and insulin resistance-related traits. We
found that CAMTA1, ABI2, VHL, KAT2B, PKHD1, ESR1, TOX, SLC30A8, SFI1, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with HbA1c, FPG, and/or P2PG; GCK, HHEX, TCF7L2,
KCNQ1, and TBX5 polymorphisms were associated with insulin resistance-related
traits; ABCG2, SLC2A9, and PKHD1 polymorphisms were associated with SUA; CAMTA1, 
VHL, KAT2B, PON1, NUB1, SLITRK5, SMAD3, FTO, FANCA, and PCSK2 polymorphisms were 
associated with blood lipid traits; CAMTA1, SPAG16, TOX, KCNQ1, ACACB, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with blood pressure; and UBE2E3, SPAG16, SLC2A9,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, SMAD3, and PNPLA3 polymorphisms were associated with
BMI (all P values <0.05). Some of the candidate genes were associated with
metabolic and anthropometric traits in T2DM in Han Chinese. Although none of
these associations reached genome-wide significance (P < 5 x 10(-8)), genes and
loci identified in this study are worthy of further replication and
investigation.

PMID: 26634513  [PubMed - in process]


11. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 3;10(12):e0144100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144100.
eCollection 2015.

The Role of ARX in Human Pancreatic Endocrine Specification.

Gage BK(1), Asadi A(1), Baker RK(1), Webber TD(1), Wang R(2), Itoh M(3), Hayashi 
M(4), Miyata R(4), Akashi T(5), Kieffer TJ(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (2)Departments of Physiology,
Pharmacology & Medicine, Child Health Research Institute, the University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada. (3)National Center of Neurology and
Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
Tokyo, Japan. (5)Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department
of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

The in vitro differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) offers a model
system to explore human development. Humans with mutations in the transcription
factor Aristaless Related Homeobox (ARX) often suffer from the syndrome X-linked 
lissencephaly with ambiguous genitalia (XLAG), affecting many cell types
including those of the pancreas. Indeed, XLAG pancreatic islets lack glucagon and
pancreatic polypeptide-positive cells but retain somatostatin, insulin, and
ghrelin-positive cells. To further examine the role of ARX in human pancreatic
endocrine development, we utilized genomic editing in hESCs to generate deletions
in ARX. ARX knockout hESCs retained pancreatic differentiation capacity and ARX
knockout endocrine cells were biased toward somatostatin-positive cells (94% of
endocrine cells) with reduced pancreatic polypeptide (rarely detected), glucagon 
(90% reduced) and insulin-positive (65% reduced) lineages. ARX knockout
somatostatin-positive cells shared expression patterns with human fetal and adult
d-cells. Differentiated ARX knockout cells upregulated PAX4, NKX2.2, ISL1, HHEX, 
PCSK1, PCSK2 expression while downregulating PAX6 and IRX2. Re-expression of ARX 
in ARX knockout pancreatic progenitors reduced HHEX and increased PAX6 and
insulin expression following differentiation. Taken together these data suggest
that ARX plays a key role in pancreatic endocrine fate specification of
pancreatic polypeptide, somatostatin, glucagon and insulin positive cells from
hESCs.

PMCID: PMC4669132
PMID: 26633894  [PubMed - in process]


12. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 24;10(11):e0143607. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143607.
eCollection 2015.

The Association of Type 2 Diabetes Loci Identified in Genome-Wide Association
Studies with Metabolic Syndrome and Its Components in a Chinese Population with
Type 2 Diabetes.

Kong X(1), Zhang X(1), Xing X(1), Zhang B(1), Hong J(1), Yang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.

Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is prevalent in type 2 diabetes (T2D) patients. The
comorbidity of MetS and T2D increases the risk of cardiovascular complications.
The aim of the present study was to determine the T2D-related genetic variants
that contribute to MetS-related components in T2D patients of Chinese ancestry.
We successfully genotyped 25 genome wide association study validated T2D-related 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) among 5,169 T2D individuals and 4,560
normal glycemic controls recruited from the Chinese National Diabetes and
Metabolic Disorders Study (DMS). We defined MetS in this population using the
harmonized criteria (2009) combined with the Chinese criteria for abdominal
obesity. The associations between SNPs and MetS-related components, as well as
the associations between SNPs and risk for T2D with or without MetS, were
subjected to logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and sex. Results
showed that the T2D risk alleles of rs243021 located near BCL11A, rs10830963 in
MTNR1B, and rs2237895 in KCNQ1 were related to a lower risk for abdominal obesity
in T2D patients (rs243021: 0.92 (0.84, 1.00), P = 4.42 × 10-2; rs10830963: 0.92
(0.85, 1.00), P = 4.07 × 10-2; rs2237895: 0.89 (0.82, 0.98), P = 1.29 × 10-2).
The T2D risk alleles of rs972283 near KLF14 contributed to a higher risk of
elevated blood pressure (1.10 (1.00, 1.22), P = 4.48 × 10-2), while the T2D risk 
allele of rs7903146 in TCF7L2 was related to a lower risk for elevated blood
pressure (0.74 (0.61, 0.90), P = 2.56 × 10-3). The T2D risk alleles of rs972283
near KLF14 and rs11634397 near ZFAND6 were associated with a higher risk for
elevated triglycerides (rs972283: 1.11 (1.02, 1.24), P = 1.46 × 10-2; rs11634397:
1.14 (1.00, 1.29), P = 4.66 × 10-2), while the T2D risk alleles of rs780094 in
GCKR and rs7903146 in TCF7L2 were related to a lower risk of elevated
triglycerides (rs780094: 0.86 (0.80, 0.93), P = 1.35 × 10-4; rs7903146: 0.82
(0.69, 0.98), P = 3.18 × 10-2). The genotype risk score of the 25 T2D-related
SNPs was related to a lower risk for abdominal obesity (Ptrend = 1.29 × 10-2) and
lower waist circumference (P = 2.20 × 10-3). Genetic variants of WFS1, CDKAL1,
CDKN2BAS, TCF7L2, HHEX, KCNQ1, TSPAN8/LGR5, FTO, and TCF2 were associated with
the risk for T2D with MetS, as well as the risk for development of T2D with at
least one of the MetS components (P < 0.05). In addition, genetic variants of
BCL11A, GCKR, ADAMTS9, CDKAL1, KLF14, CDKN2BAS, TCF7L2, CDC123/CAMK1D, HHEX,
MTNR1B, and KCNQ1 contributed to the risk for T2D without MetS (P < 0.05). In
conclusion, these findings highlight the contribution of T2D-related genetic loci
to MetS in a Chinese Han population. The study also provides insight into the
pleotropic effects of genome-wide association loci of diabetes on metabolic
regulation.

PMCID: PMC4657988
PMID: 26599349  [PubMed - in process]


13. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Nov 13. doi: 10.1071/RD15157. [Epub ahead of print]

Is the association between insulin resistance and diabetogenic haematopoietically
expressed homeobox (HHEX) polymorphism (rs1111875) affected by polycystic ovary
syndrome status?

Tehrani FR, Zarkesh M, Tohidi M, Azizi F, Zadeh-Vakili A.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is frequently accompanied by insulin resistance 
(IR). The aim of the present study was to investigate whether the genetic
association between insulin resistance and two single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), namely rs7903146 (C/T) in transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) and
rs1111875 (A/G) in haematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX), is affected by
PCOS status in Iranian women. The study participants consisted of 582 women with 
PCOS (cases) referred to the Reproductive Endocrinology Research Center and 504
subjects without PCOS (controls), randomly selected from the Tehran Lipid and
Glucose Study. Cases and controls were further subdivided to two groups according
to IR status: those with and without IR. IR was identified on the basis of
homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) =2.63. The SNPs in
TCF7L2 and HHEX were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphism. There were no significant differences in the distribution of
genotypes and alleles between cases and controls (P < 0.05). Among cases, the
prevalence of the CC, CT and TT genotypes was 37.8%, 46.3% and 15.9%,
respectively, whereas the prevalence of the AA, AG and GG genotypes was 13.5%,
46.1% and 40.4%, respectively. In the control group, the prevalence of the CC, CT
and TT genotypes was 32.2%, 53.9% and 13.9%, respectively, whereas the prevalence
of the AA, AG and GG genotypes was 11.3%, 48.6% and 40.0%, respectively. After
adjustment for age and body mass index, the probability of IR was decreased by
49% among carriers of the A allele in the control group (95% confidence interval 
0.33-0.78; P = 0.002). The findings of the present study suggest that the
association between IR and diabetogenic polymorphisms may be affected by PCOS
status.

PMID: 26563606  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2015 Dec;21(12):1435-40. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.10.010. Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Association of type 2 diabetes GWAS loci and the risk of Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's diseases.

Chung SJ(1), Kim MJ(2), Kim J(3), Ryu HS(3), Kim YJ(3), Kim SY(4), Lee JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. Electronic address: sjchung@amc.seoul.kr.
(2)Department of Neurology, Bobath Memorial Hospital, Seongnam, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (4)Department of Psychiatry, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Insulin and insulin-like growth factor contribute to normal brain
function. Recent experimental and clinical studies showed that type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM) and Parkinson's disease (PD) or Alzheimer's disease (AD) share
several dysregulated pathways.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate whether genome-wide significant loci of T2DM
are associated with the risk of PD and AD as well as the severity of cognitive
impairment.
METHODS: Study subjects were 500 PD patients, 400 AD patients, and 500 unrelated 
controls. We selected 32 genetic variants from 11 genes (CDC123, CDKAL1, CDKN2B, 
FTO, GLIS3, HHEX, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, SLC30A8, and TCF7L2) and intergenic
regions based on results of recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in
T2DM. These variants were reported to be T2DM-susceptibility loci and have been
replicated in other independent studies. All association analyses were performed 
using logistic regression models, adjusting for age and sex.
RESULTS: KCNQ1 SNP rs163182 showed the strongest association with AD, but it was 
not significant after Bonferroni correction (OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 1.07-1.59,
Pcorrected = 0.32). In PD patients, CDC123 SNP rs11257655 showed modest
association with MMSE score <26, and CDKN2B SNPs (rs2383208, rs10965250, and
rs10811661) showed modest association with MoCA score <26, which were not
significant after Bonferroni correction. Other genetic variants had no
association with the risk of PD or AD and the severity of cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that genome-wide significant loci of T2DM play
no major role in the risk and cognitive impairment of PD and AD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26499758  [PubMed - in process]


15. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2015 Sep;68:272-83. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2015.08.008. Epub 2015 
Aug 23.

The tumor suppressor HHEX inhibits axon growth when prematurely expressed in
developing central nervous system neurons.

Simpson MT(1), Venkatesh I(1), Callif BL(1), Thiel LK(1), Coley DM(1), Winsor
KN(1), Wang Z(1), Kramer AA(1), Lerch JK(2), Blackmore MG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Marquette University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 53201, United States.
(2)The Ohio State University, The Center for Brain and Spinal Cord Repair, The
Department of Neuroscience, 43210, United States. (3)Marquette University,
Department of Biomedical Sciences, 53201, United States. Electronic address:
murray.blackmore@marquette.edu.

Neurons in the embryonic and peripheral nervous system respond to injury by
activating transcriptional programs supportive of axon growth, ultimately
resulting in functional recovery. In contrast, neurons in the adult central
nervous system (CNS) possess a limited capacity to regenerate axons after injury,
fundamentally constraining repair. Activating pro-regenerative gene expression in
CNS neurons is a promising therapeutic approach, but progress is hampered by
incomplete knowledge of the relevant transcription factors. An emerging
hypothesis is that factors implicated in cellular growth and motility outside the
nervous system may also control axon growth in neurons. We therefore tested
sixty-nine transcription factors, previously identified as possessing tumor
suppressive or oncogenic properties in non-neuronal cells, in assays of neurite
outgrowth. This screen identified YAP1 and E2F1 as enhancers of neurite
outgrowth, and PITX1, RBM14, ZBTB16, and HHEX as inhibitors. Follow-up
experiments are focused on the tumor suppressor HHEX, one of the strongest growth
inhibitors. HHEX is widely expressed in adult CNS neurons, including
corticospinal tract neurons after spinal injury, but is present only in trace
amounts in immature cortical neurons and adult peripheral neurons. HHEX
overexpression in early postnatal cortical neurons reduced both initial
axonogenesis and the rate of axon elongation, and domain deletion analysis
strongly implicated transcriptional repression as the underlying mechanism. These
findings suggest a role for HHEX in restricting axon growth in the developing
CNS, and substantiate the hypothesis that previously identified oncogenes and
tumor suppressors can play conserved roles in axon extension.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26306672  [PubMed - in process]


16. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2015 Jul-Aug;49(4):601-9. doi: 10.7868/S0026898415040126.

[The HHEX rs1111875A/G gene polymorphism is associated with susceptibility to
type 2 diabetes in the Iranian population].

[Article in Russian]

Mansoori Y(1), Daraei A(2), Naghizadeh MM(1), Salehi R(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Fasa University of Medical
Sciences, Fasa, Iran. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of Genetics
and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. (4)r_salehi@med.mui.ac.ir.

The illuminating picture of genetic mechanisms underlying the development of type
2 diabetes (T2DM) includes differently accumulated genetic polymorphisms that
increase the risk along with environmental factors. A number of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) are indicated to be linked with T2DM, but also conflicting
results have been found. To examine the contribution of these polymorphisms in
conferring susceptibility to T2DM, the association of HHEX rs1111875A/G and
CDKN2A/B rs10811661C/T common gene polymorphisms with the risk of T2DM in an
Iranian population was evaluated. In this study participated 140 patients and 140
controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from samples and genotyping of the
polymorphisms was performed by the Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment
Length Polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) technique. A significant association was found
with the G allele (OR = 1.729, CI = 1.184-2.523, P = 0.004) and GG genotype (OR =
2.921, 95% CI = 1.789-4.771, P < 0.001) of the rs1111875A/G SNP for
susceptibility to T2DM in the recessive model. Furthermore, compared with the GG 
genotype, individuals with the GA genotype had a lower risk to develop T2DM (OR =
0.237, 95% CI = 0.137-0.408, P< 0.001) in the additive model. In addition, an
association between the polymorphism and BMI in regard to the risk of T2DM was
identified. The genotype and allele frequencies of the rs10811661C/T polymorphism
did not show a statistically significant association with T2DM in any genetic
model. Our results show that the rs1111875A/G polymorphism is an important
susceptibility polymorphism for the development of T2DM in the Iranian
population. Also, these findings support that this polymorphism is a key genetic 
risk factor for the development of T2DM in multiple ethnic populations.

PMID: 26299860  [PubMed - in process]


17. Curr Pathobiol Rep. 2015 Jun 1;3(2):137-145.

Xenopus as a Model for GI/Pancreas Disease.

Salanga MC(1), Horb ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Xenopus Resource, Eugene Bell Center for Regenerative Biology and
Tissue Engineering, Marine Biological Laboratory, 7 MBL St., Woods Hole, MA
02543, .

Diseases affecting endodermal organs like the pancreas, lung and gastrointestinal
(GI) tract have a substantial impact on human welfare. Since many of these are
congenital defects that arise as a result of defects during development broad
efforts are focused on understanding the development of these organs so as to
better identify risk factors, disease mechanisms and therapeutic targets. Studies
implementing model systems, like the amphibian Xenopus, have contributed
immensely to our understanding of signaling (e.g. Wnt, FGF, BMP, RA) pathways and
gene regulation (e.g. hhex, ptf1a, ngn3) that underlie normal development as well
as disease progression. Recent advances in genome engineering further enhance the
capabilities of the Xenopus model system for pursuing biomedical research, and
will undoubtedly result in a boom of new information underlying disease
mechanisms ultimately leading to advancements in diagnosis and therapy.

PMCID: PMC4518857 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26236566  [PubMed]


18. PLoS Med. 2015 Jul 14;12(7):e1001853. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001853.
eCollection 2015.

HHEX_23 AA Genotype Exacerbates Effect of Diabetes on Dementia and Alzheimer
Disease: A Population-Based Longitudinal Study.

Xu WL(1), Pedersen NL(2), Keller L(3), Kalpouzos G(4), Wang HX(4), Graff C(5),
Winblad B(3), Bäckman L(4), Fratiglioni L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Aging Research Center, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, 
Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China. (2)Department of Medical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Aging Research
Center, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska
Institutet and Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden; Alzheimer's Disease
Research Center, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Aging Research Center, Department of
Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Department
of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden; Department of Geriatric Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden. (6)Aging Research Center, Department of Neurobiology, Care
Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Stockholm Gerontology Research Center, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Research has suggested that variations within the IDE/HHEX gene
region may underlie the association of type 2 diabetes with Alzheimer disease
(AD). We sought to explore whether IDE genes play a role in the association of
diabetes with dementia, AD, and structural brain changes using data from two
community-based cohorts of older adults and a subsample with structural MRI.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The first cohort, which included dementia-free adults aged 
=75 y (n = 970) at baseline, was followed for 9 y to detect incident dementia (n 
= 358) and AD (n = 271) cases. The second cohort (for replication), which
included 2,060 dementia-free participants aged =60 y at baseline, was followed
for 6 y to identify incident dementia (n = 166) and AD (n = 121) cases. A
subsample (n = 338) of dementia-free participants from the second cohort
underwent MRI. HHEX_23 and IDE_9 were genotyped, and diabetes (here including
type 2 diabetes and prediabetes) was assessed. In the first cohort, diabetes led 
to an adjusted hazard ratio (HR) of 1.73 (95% CI 1.19-2.32) and 1.66 (95% CI
1.06-2.40) for dementia and AD, respectively, among all participants. Compared to
people carrying the GG genotype without diabetes, AA genotype carriers with
diabetes had an adjusted HR of 5.54 (95% CI 2.40-7.18) and 4.81 (95% CI
1.88-8.50) for dementia and AD, respectively. There was a significant interaction
between HHEX_23-AA and diabetes on dementia (HR 4.79, 95% CI 1.63-8.90, p =
0.013) and AD (HR 3.55, 95% CI 1.45-9.91, p = 0.025) compared to the GG genotype 
without diabetes. In the second cohort, the HRs were 1.68 (95% CI 1.04-2.99) and 
1.64 (1.02-2.33) for the diabetes-AD and dementia-AD associations, respectively, 
and 4.06 (95% CI 1.06-7.58, p = 0.039) and 3.29 (95% CI 1.02-8.33, p = 0.044) for
the interactions, respectively. MRI data showed that HHEX_23-AA carriers with
diabetes had significant structural brain changes compared to HHEX_23-GG carriers
without diabetes. No joint effects of IDE_9 and diabetes on dementia were shown. 
As a limitation, the sample sizes were small for certain subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: A variant in the HHEX_23 gene interacts with diabetes to be
associated with a substantially increased risk of dementia and AD, and with
structural brain changes among dementia-free elderly people.

PMCID: PMC4501827
PMID: 26173052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Jul 20;128(14):1873-8. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.160489.

Positive Association Between Type 2 Diabetes Risk Alleles Near CDKAL1 and Reduced
Birthweight in Chinese Han Individuals.

Sun XF, Xiao XH(1), Zhang ZX, Liu Y, Xu T, Zhu XL, Zhang Y, Wu XP, Li WH, Zhang
HB, Yu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Ministry of
Health, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Diabetes Research Center of
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100730, China.

BACKGROUND: Fetal insulin hypothesis was proposed that the association between
low birth weight and type 2 diabetes is principally genetically mediated. The aim
of this study was to investigate whether common variants in genes CDKAL1, HHEX,
ADCY5, SRR, PTPRD that predisposed to type 2 diabetes were also associated with
reduced birthweight in Chinese Han population.
METHODS: Twelve single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs7756992/rs10946398 in CDKAL1, 
rs1111875 in HHEX, rs391300 in SRR, rs17584499 in PTPRD,
rs1170806/rs9883204/rs4678017/rs9881942/rs7641344/rs6777397/rs6226243 in ADCY5)
were genotyped in 1174 unrelated individuals born in Peking Union Medical College
Hospital from 1921 to 1954 by TaqMan allelic discrimination assays, of which 645 
had normal glucose tolerance, 181 had developed type 2 diabetes and 348 impaired 
glucose regulation. Associations of these 12 genetic variants with birthweight
and glucose metabolism in later life were analyzed.
RESULTS: Birthweight was inversely associated with CDKAL1-rs10946398 (ß = -41 g
[95% confidence interval [CI]: -80, -3], P = 0.034), common variants both
associated with increased risk of impaired glucose metabolism and decreased
insulin secretion index later in life. After adjusting for sex, gestational
weeks, parity and maternal age, the risk allele of CDKAL1-rs7756992 was
associated with reduced birthweight (ß = -36 g [95% CI: -72, -0.2], P = 0.048).
The risk allele in SRR showed a trend toward a reduction of birthweight (P =
0.085).
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified the association between type 2 diabetes risk
variants in CDKAL1 and birthweight in Chinese Han individuals, and the carrier of
risk allele within SRR had the trend of reduced birthweight. This demonstrates
that there is a clear overlap between the genetics of type 2 diabetes and fetal
growth, which proposes that lower birth weight and type 2 diabetes may be two
phenotypes of one genotype.

PMID: 26168825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 31;463(3):466-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.121. Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Hepassocin is required for hepatic outgrowth during zebrafish hepatogenesis.

Gao M(1), Yan H(2), Yin RH(3), Wang Q(4), Zhan YQ(3), Yu M(3), Ge CH(3), Li
CY(3), Wang XH(3), Ge ZQ(5), Yang XM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin University, Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin 300072, 
China; Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China. (2)Beijing
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Beijing 100850, China. (3)Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China; State Key Laboratory of
Proteomics, Beijing 100850, China. (4)Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (5)Tianjin University, Department of
Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin 300072, China. (6)Tianjin University,
Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin 300072, China; Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China; State Key Laboratory of
Proteomics, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address: xiaomingyang@sina.com.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepassocin (HPS) is a hepatotrophic growth factor that
specifically stimulates hepatocyte proliferation and promotes liver regeneration 
after liver damage. In this paper, zebrafish were used to investigate the role of
HPS in liver development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: During zebrafish development, HPS expression is enriched in 
liver throughout hepatogenesis. Knockdown of HPS using its specific morpholino
leads to a smaller liver phenotype. Further results showed that the HPS knockdown
has no effect on the expression of the early endoderm marker gata6 and early
hepatic marker hhex. In addition, results showed that the smaller-liver phenotype
in HPS morphants was caused by suppression of cell proliferation, not induction
of cell apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Current findings indicated that HPS is essential to the later stages
of development in vertebrate liver organogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26047702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Meta Gene. 2015 May 21;5:9-20. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2015.05.001. eCollection
2015.

Gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in the etiology of type 2 diabetes
mellitus in the population of Hyderabad, India.

Uma Jyothi K(1), Reddy BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Anthropology Unit (Molecular Anthropology Group), Indian
Statistical Institute, Hyderabad, India.

Fifteen SNPs from nine different genes were genotyped on 1379 individuals, 758
T2DM patients and 621 controls, from the city of Hyderabad, India, using Sequenom
Massarray platform. These data were analyzed to examine the role of gene-gene and
gene-environment interactions in the manifestation of T2DM. The multivariate
analysis suggests that TCF7L2, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, HHEX and PPARG genes are
significantly associated with T2DM, albeit only the first two of the above 5 were
associated in the univariate analysis. Significant gene-gene and gene-environment
interactions were also observed with reference to TCF7L2, CAPN10 and CDKAL1
genes, highlighting their importance in the pathophysiology of T2DM. In the
analysis for cumulative effect of risk alleles, SLC30A8 steps in as significant
contributor to the disease by its presence in all combinations of risk alleles. A
striking difference between risk allele categories, 1-4 and 5-6, was evident in
showing protective and susceptible roles, respectively, while the latter was
characterized by the presence of TCF7L2 and CDKAL1 variants. Overall, these two
genes TCF7L2 and CDKAL1 showed strong association with T2DM, either individually 
or in interaction with the other genes. However, we need further studies on
gene-gene and gene-environment interactions among heterogeneous Indian
populations to obtain unequivocal conclusions that are applicable for the Indian 
population as a whole.

PMCID: PMC4443428
PMID: 26042206  [PubMed]


22. Stem Cells. 2015 Aug;33(8):2628-41. doi: 10.1002/stem.2049. Epub 2015 May 27.

Hhex is Required at Multiple Stages of Adult Hematopoietic Stem and Progenitor
Cell Differentiation.

Goodings C(1,)(2), Smith E(2), Mathias E(2), Elliott N(3), Cleveland SM(2),
Tripathi RM(2), Layer JH(2), Chen X(4), Guo Y(4), Shyr Y(4), Hamid R(5), Du Y(6),
Davé UP(1,)(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology. (3)MRC
Molecular Hematology Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Center for Quantitative Sciences. (5)Division of 
Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (7)Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System, Nashville VA, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Hhex encodes a homeodomain transcription factor that is widely expressed in
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell populations. Its enforced expression
induces T-cell leukemia and we have implicated it as an important oncogene in
early T-cell precursor leukemias where it is immediately downstream of an
LMO2-associated protein complex. Conventional Hhex knockouts cause embryonic
lethality precluding analysis of adult hematopoiesis. Thus, we induced highly
efficient conditional knockout (cKO) using vav-Cre transgenic mice. Hhex cKO mice
were viable and born at normal litter sizes. At steady state, we observed a
defect in B-cell development that we localized to the earliest B-cell precursor, 
the pro-B-cell stage. Most remarkably, bone marrow transplantation using Hhex cKO
donor cells revealed a more profound defect in all hematopoietic lineages. In
contrast, sublethal irradiation resulted in normal myeloid cell repopulation of
the bone marrow but markedly impaired repopulation of T- and B-cell compartments.
We noted that Hhex cKO stem and progenitor cell populations were skewed in their 
distribution and showed enhanced proliferation compared to WT cells. Our results 
implicate Hhex in the maintenance of LT-HSCs and in lineage allocation from
multipotent progenitors especially in stress hematopoiesis.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4641572
PMID: 25968920  [PubMed - in process]


23. Dev Biol. 2015 Jun 15;402(2):175-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.023. Epub 2015 
Apr 22.

AVE protein expression and visceral endoderm cell behavior during
anterior-posterior axis formation in mouse embryos: Asymmetry in OTX2 and DKK1
expression.

Hoshino H(1), Shioi G(2), Aizawa S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vertebrate Body Plan, Center for Developmental Biology (CDB),
RIKEN Kobe, 2-2-3 Minatojima Minami-machi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0046, Japan.
Electronic address: hoshino@cdb.riken.jp. (2)Laboratory for Animal Resources and 
Genetic Engineering, Center for Developmental Biology (CDB), RIKEN Kobe, 2-2-3
Minatojima Minami-machi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0046, Japan. Electronic address:
shioi@cdb.riken.jp. (3)Laboratory for Vertebrate Body Plan, Center for
Developmental Biology (CDB), RIKEN Kobe, 2-2-3 Minatojima Minami-machi, Chuo-ku, 
Kobe 650-0046, Japan; Laboratory for Animal Resources and Genetic Engineering,
Center for Developmental Biology (CDB), RIKEN Kobe, 2-2-3 Minatojima
Minami-machi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0046, Japan. Electronic address:
saizawa@cdb.riken.jp.

The initial landmark of anterior-posterior (A-P) axis formation in mouse embryos 
is the distal visceral endoderm, DVE, which expresses a series of anterior genes 
at embryonic day 5.5 (E5.5). Subsequently, DVE cells move to the future anterior 
region, generating anterior visceral endoderm (AVE). Questions remain regarding
how the DVE is formed and how the direction of the movement is determined. This
study compares the detailed expression patterns of OTX2, HHEX, CER1, LEFTY1 and
DKK1 by immunohistology and live imaging at E4.5-E6.5. At E6.5, the AVE is
subdivided into four domains: most anterior (OTX2, HHEX, CER1-low/DKK1-high),
anterior (OTX2, HHEX, CER1-high/DKK1-low), main (OTX2, HHEX, CER1, LEFTY1-high)
and antero-lateral and posterior (OTX2, HHEX-low). The study demonstrates how
this pattern is established. AVE protein expression in the DVE occurs de novo at 
E5.25-E5.5. Neither HHEX, LEFTY1 nor CER1 expression is asymmetric. In contrast, 
OTX2 expression is tilted on the future posterior side with the DKK1 expression
at its proximal domain; the DVE cells move in the opposite direction of the tilt.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25910836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Gene. 2015 Jul 1;565(1):68-75. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.03.065. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Diabetes susceptibility in Mayas: Evidence for the involvement of polymorphisms
in HHEX, HNF4a, KCNJ11, PPAR<U+03B3>, CDKN2A/2B, SLC30A8, CDC123/CAMK1D, TCF7L2, ABCA1
and SLC16A11 genes.

Lara-Riegos JC(1), Ortiz-López MG(2), Peña-Espinoza BI(1), Montúfar-Robles I(2), 
Peña-Rico MA(1), Sánchez-Pozos K(1), Granados-Silvestre MA(1), Menjivar M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genómica de Poblaciones Aplicada a la Salud, Facultad de Química
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México - Instituto Nacional de Medicina
Genómica, Mexico. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Hospital Juárez de
México, Mexico. (3)Unidad de Genómica de Poblaciones Aplicada a la Salud,
Facultad de Química Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México - Instituto Nacional 
de Medicina Genómica, Mexico. Electronic address: menjivar@unam.mx.

Association of type 2 diabetes (T2D) with common variants in HHEX, HNF4a, KCNJ11,
PPAR<U+03B3>, CDKN2A/2B, SLC30A8, CDC123/CAMK1D, TCF7L2, ABCA1 and SLC16A11 genes have
been reported, mainly in populations of European and Asian ancestry and to a
lesser extent in Latin Americans. Thus, we aimed to investigate the contribution 
of rs1111875 (HHEX), rs1800961 (HNF4a), rs5219 (KCNJ11), rs1801282 (PPAR<U+03B3>),
rs10811661 (CDKN2A/2B), rs13266634 (SLC30A8), rs12779790 (CDC123/CAMK1D),
rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs9282541 (ABCA1) and rs13342692 (SLC16A11) polymorphisms in 
the genetic background of Maya population to associate their susceptibility to
develop T2D. This is one of the first studies designed specifically to
investigate the inherited component of T2D in the indigenous population of
Mexico. SNPs were genotyped by allelic discrimination method in 575 unrelated
Maya individuals. Two SNPs rs10811661 and rs928254 were significantly associated 
with T2D after adjusting for BMI; rs10811661 in a recessive and rs9282541 in a
dominant model. Additionally, we found phenotypical alterations associated with
genetic variants: HDL to rs9282541 and insulin to rs13342692. In conclusion,
these findings support an association of genetic polymorphisms to develop T2D in 
Maya population.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25839936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. World J Diabetes. 2015 Mar 15;6(2):358-66. doi: 10.4239/wjd.v6.i2.358.

Association of gene variants with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes among Omanis.

Al-Sinani S(1), Woodhouse N(1), Al-Mamari A(1), Al-Shafie O(1), Al-Shafaee M(1), 
Al-Yahyaee S(1), Hassan M(1), Jaju D(1), Al-Hashmi K(1), Al-Abri M(1), Al-Rassadi
K(1), Rizvi S(1), Loic Y(1), Froguel P(1), Bayoumi R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sawsan Al-Sinani, Nicolas Woodhouse, Ali Al-Mamari, Omaima Al-Shafie, Mohammed
Al-Shafaee, Said Al-Yahyaee, Mohammed Hassan, Deepali Jaju, Khamis Al-Hashmi,
Mohammed Al-Abri, Khalid Al-Rassadi, Syed Rizvi, Riad Bayoumi, Department of
Biochemistry, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University, 
Muscat 123, Sultanate of Oman.

AIM: To investigate the association of 10 known common gene variants with
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) among Omanis.
METHODS: Using case-control design, a total of 992 diabetic patients and 294
normoglycemic Omani Arabs were genotyped, by an allelic discrimination
assay-by-design TaqMan method on fast real time polymerase chain reaction system,
for the following gene variants: KCNJ11 (rs5219), TCF7L2 (rs7903146), CDKAL1
(rs10946398), CDKN2A/B (rs10811661), FTO (rs9939609 and rs8050136), IGF2BP2
(rs4402960), SLC30A8 (rs13266634) CAPN10 (rs3792267) and HHEX (rs1111875). T2D
patients were recruited from the Diabetes Clinic (n = 243) and inpatients (n =
749) at Sultan Qaboos Univesity Hospital (SQUH), Muscat, Oman. Adult control
participants (n = 294) were volunteers from the community and from those visiting
Family Medicine Clinic at SQU, for regular medical checkup. The difficulty in
recruiting Omani participants with no family history of diabetes was the main
reason behind the small number of control participants in this study. Almost all 
volunteers questioned had a relative with diabetes mellitus. Inspite of the small
number of normoglycemic controls in this study, this sample was sufficient for
detection of genes and loci for common alleles influencing T2D with an odds ratio
of = 1.3 reaching at least 80% power. Data was collected from June 2010 to
February 2012.
RESULTS: Using binary logistic regression analysis, four gene variants showed
significant association with T2D risk: KCNJ11 (rs5219, P = 5.8 × 10(-6), OR =
1.74), TCF7L2 (rs7903146, P = 0.001, OR = 1.46), CDKAL1 (rs10946398, P = 0.002,
OR = 1.44) and CDKN2A/B (rs10811661, P = 0.020, OR = 1.40). The fixation index
analysis of these four gene variants indicated significant genetic
differentiation between diabetics and controls {[KCNJ11 (rs5219), P < 0.001],
[TCF7L2 (rs7903146), P < 0.001], [CDKAL1 (rs10946398), P < 0.05], [CDKN2A/B
(rs10811661), P < 0.05]}. The highest genotype variation % between diabetics and 
controls was found at KCNJ11 (2.07%) and TCF7L2 (1.62%). This study was not able 
to detect an association of T2D risk with gene variants of IGF2BP2 (rs4402960),
SLC30A8 (rs13266634), CAPN10 (rs3792267) and HHEX (rs1111875). Moreover, no
association was found between FTO gene variants (rs9939609 and rs8050136) and T2D
risk. However, T2D risk was found to be significantly associated with obesity (P 
= 0.002, OR = 2.22); and with the Waist-to-Hip ratio (n = 532, P = 1.9 ×10(-7),
OR = 2.4), [among males (n = 234, P = 1.2 × 10(-4), OR = 2.0) and females (n =
298, P = 0.001, OR = 6.3)].
CONCLUSION: Results confirmed the association of KCNJ11 (rs5219), TCF7L2
(rs7903146), CDKAL1 (rs10946398) and CDKN2A/B (rs10811661) gene variants with
susceptibility to T2D among Omani Arabs.

PMCID: PMC4360431
PMID: 25789119  [PubMed]


26. Biomark Cancer. 2015 Jan 29;7:1-6. doi: 10.4137/BIC.S19614. eCollection 2015.

Trisomy 8 Acute Myeloid Leukemia Analysis Reveals New Insights of DNA Methylome
with Identification of HHEX as Potential Diagnostic Marker.

Saied MH(1), Marzec J(2), Khalid S(3), Smith P(3), Molloy G(3), Young BD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and the London
School of Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom. ;
Clinical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt. (2)Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Barts 
and the London School of Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London,
United Kingdom. ; Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Barts
and the London School of Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London,
United Kingdom. (3)Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and
the London School of Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, United
Kingdom.

Trisomy 8 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the commonest numerical aberration in
AML. Here we present a global analysis of trisomy 8 AML using methylated DNA
immunoprecipitation-sequencing (MeDIP-seq). The study is based on three
diagnostic trisomy 8 AML and their parallel relapse status in addition to nine
non-trisomic AML and four normal bone marrows (NBMs). In contrast to non-trisomic
DNA samples, trisomy 8 AML showed a characteristic DNA methylation distribution
pattern because an increase in the frequency of the hypermethylation signals in
chromosome 8 was associated with an increase in the hypomethylation signals in
the rest of the chromosomes. Chromosome 8 hypermethylation signals were found
mainly in the CpG island (CGI) shores and interspersed repeats. Validating the
most significant differentially methylated CGI (P = 7.88 × 10(-11)) identified in
trisomy 8 AML demonstrated a specific core region within the gene body of HHEX,
which was significantly correlated with HHEX expression in both diagnostic and
relapse trisomy 8 AMLs. Overall, the existence of extra chromosome 8 was
associated with a global impact on the DNA methylation distribution with
identification of HHEX gene methylation as a potential diagnostic marker for
trisomy 8 AML.

PMCID: PMC4315123
PMID: 25674022  [PubMed]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 14;10(1):e0116537. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116537.
eCollection 2015.

Cumulative effect and predictive value of genetic variants associated with type 2
diabetes in Han Chinese: a case-control study.

Qian Y(1), Lu F(2), Dong M(1), Lin Y(1), Li H(2), Dai J(2), Jin G(2), Hu Z(2),
Shen H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chronic Non-communicable Disease Control, Wuxi Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Wuxi 214023, China. (2)Department of Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified dozens of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes risk. We
have previously confirmed the associations of genetic variants in HHEX, CDKAL1,
VEGFA and FTO with type 2 diabetes in Han Chinese. However, the cumulative effect
and predictive value of these GWAS identified SNPs on the risk of type 2 diabetes
in Han Chinese are largely unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We conducted a two-stage case-control study
consisting of 2,925 cases and 3,281 controls to examine the association of 30
SNPs identified by GWAS with type 2 diabetes in Han Chinese. Significant
associations were found for proxy SNPs at KCNQ1 [odds ratio (OR) = 1.41, P = 9.91
× 10-16 for rs2237897], CDKN2A/CDKN2B (OR = 1.30, P = 1.34 × 10-10 for
rs10811661), CENTD2 (OR = 1.28, P = 9.88 × 10-4 for rs1552224) and SLC30A8 (OR = 
1.19, P = 1.43 × 10-5 for rs13266634). We further evaluated the cumulative effect
on type 2 diabetes of these 4 SNPs, in combination with 5 SNPs at HHEX, CDKAL1,
VEGFA and FTO reported previously. Individuals carrying 12 or more risk alleles
had a nearly 4-fold increased risk for developing type 2 diabetes compared with
those carrying less than 6 risk alleles [adjusted OR = 3.68, 95% confidence
interval (CI): 2.76-4.91]. Adding the genetic factors to clinical factors
slightly improved the prediction of type 2 diabetes, with the area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve increasing from 0.76 to 0.78. However,
the difference was statistically significant (P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We confirmed associations of SNPs in KCNQ1,
CDKN2A/CDKN2B, CENTD2 and SLC30A8 with type 2 diabetes in Han Chinese. The
utilization of genetic information may improve the accuracy of risk prediction in
combination with clinical characteristics for type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4294637
PMID: 25587982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Diabetes Metab Disord. 2016 Mar 1;15:4. doi: 10.1186/s40200-016-0225-y.
eCollection 2015.

Candidate gene analysis supports a role for polymorphisms at TCF7L2 as risk
factors for type 2 diabetes in Sudan.

Ibrahim AT(1), Hussain A(2), Salih MA(1), Ibrahim OA(3), Jamieson SE(4), Ibrahim 
ME(2), Blackwell JM(4), Mohamed HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Ministry of Science and Technology, Khartoum, Sudan.
(2)Institute of Endemic Disease, University of Khartoum, P. O. Box 102 Khartoum, 
Sudan. (3)Tuti Health Centre, Khartoum, Sudan. (4)Telethon Kids Institute,
University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes (T2D) is multifactorial. A 
growing number of genes have been identified as risk factors for T2D across
multiple ethnicities in trans-ancestry meta-analysis of large-scale genome-wide
association studies. Few studies have looked at these genes in Sub-Saharan
African populations. This study was undertaken to look for associations between
T2D and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a number of the top candidate
genes in a selected Sudanese population.
METHODS: A total 240 T2D cases and 128 unrelated healthy control subjects were
included in this study. Age, sex, weight and height were recorded, blood pressure
and biochemical profiles of glucose and lipids were analysed. Single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) genotyping was performed using the Sequenom MassARRAY® system.
Fourteen SNPs were selected across 7 genes: CAPN10 (rs2975760 and rs5030952),
PPARG (rs17036314 and rs1801282), IGF2BP2 (rs4402960 and rs1470579), CDKAL1
(rs9465871), HHEX (rs1111875), TCF7L2 (rs7903146, rs11196205 and rs12255372), and
KCNJ11 (rs5215, rs1800467 and rs5219). Allelic and haplotype association analyses
were performed under additive models in PLINK. P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007 (=0.05/7 genes) was the 
P-value required to achieve correction for multiple testing.
RESULTS: A significant genetic association between the SNPs rs7903146 (odds ratio
1.69, 95 % confidence interval 1.21-2.38, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) and rs12255372 (odds ratio
1.70, 95 % confidence interval 1.20-2.41, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) at TCF7L2 and T2D was found 
in Sudanese population. These associations were retained after adjusting for age,
sex and BMI (e.g. rs7903146: odds ratio 1.70, P adj:age/sex/BMI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). The
strongest haplotype association (odds ratio 2.24; P adj:age/sex/BMI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0003)
comprised the two point haplotype T_C across rs7903146 and rs11196205. Stepwise
logistic regression demonstrated that SNP rs7903146 added significant main
effects to rs11196205 or rs12255372, whereas the reverse was not true, indicating
that the main effect for association with T2D in this population is most strongly
tagged by SNP rs7903146. Adjusted analyses also provided support for protection
from T2D associated with minor alleles at SNPs rs2975760 at CAPN10 (odds ratio
0.44, 95 % confidence interval 0.20-0.97, P adj:age/sex/BMI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.042) and
rs1111876 at HHEX (odds ratio 0.60, 95 % confidence interval 0.39- 0.93, P
adj:age/sex/BMI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022).
CONCLUSIONS: Multiethnic associations between T2D and SNPs at TCF7L2, CAPN10 and 
HHEX extend to Sub-Saharan Africa, specifically Sudan.

PMCID: PMC4774008
PMID: 26937418  [PubMed]


29. Horm Metab Res. 2015 Jun;47(6):411-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1395667. Epub 2014 Dec 
12.

Genetics of neuroendocrine factors in rheumatoid arthritis.

Mravcova M(1), Chovanova L(1), Paulikova L(2), Vlcek M(1), Rovensky J(3),
Killinger Z(4), Wendl J(5), Imrich R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Slovak Academy of Sciences,
Bratislava, Slovakia. (2)Center for Molecular Medicine, Slovak Academy of
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. (3)National Institute of Rheumatic Diseases,
Piestany, Slovakia. (4)5th Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. (5)Fidelitas, s.r.o., Rheumatology
Out-patient Clinic, Bratislava, Slovakia.

Inadequate production of cortisol related to inflammation and decrease in adrenal
androgen production are hallmarks of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)-related
endocrine findings in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In particular, lower
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) levels were consistently found in a subset
of premenopausal RA females. Recently, several new gene variants have been
identified in association with serum DHEAS concentrations, such as in SULT2A1 and
HHEX genes. These DHEAS-related genes and other variants involved in HPA
regulation may play a role in the adrenal androgen deficiency in RA. The aim of
our study was to review involvement of genetic mechanisms of HPA regulation, with
focus on adrenal androgens, in the context of RA pathophysiology. Although,
effects of the DHEAS-related gene variants appear to be relatively small compared
to other well-known factors such as age, complex interactions between
DHEAS-associated genotypes and adrenal androgen hypofunction phenotype may exist 
in RA. Further studies analyzing specific neuroendocrine phenotype/genotype in RA
are needed.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 25502945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Blood. 2015 Jan 29;125(5):803-14. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-579813. Epub 2014
Dec 3.

A crucial role for the homeodomain transcription factor Hhex in lymphopoiesis.

Jackson JT(1), Nasa C(1), Shi W(2), Huntington ND(3), Bogue CW(4), Alexander
WS(5), McCormack MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer and Haematology, and. (2)Bioinformatics, The Walter and
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Australia; Computing and
Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia; (3)Department
of Medical Biology and Molecular Immunology, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 
of Medical Research, Parkville, Australia; and. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (5)Division of Cancer and
Haematology, and Department of Medical Biology and.

The hematopoietically expressed homeobox gene, Hhex, is a transcription factor
that is important for development of definitive hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
and B cells, and that causes T-cell leukemia when overexpressed. Here, we have
used an Hhex inducible knockout mouse model to study the role of Hhex in adult
hematopoiesis. We found that loss of Hhex was tolerated in HSCs and myeloid
lineages, but resulted in a progressive loss of B lymphocytes in the circulation.
This was accompanied by a complete loss of B-cell progenitors in the bone marrow 
and of transitional B-cell subsets in the spleen. In addition, transplantation
and in vitro culture experiments demonstrated an almost complete failure of
Hhex-null HSCs to contribute to lymphoid lineages beyond the common lymphoid
precursor stage, including T cells, B cells, NK cells, and dendritic cells. Gene 
expression analysis of Hhex-deleted progenitors demonstrated deregulated
expression of a number of cell cycle regulators. Overexpression of one of these, 
cyclin D1, could rescue the B-cell developmental potential of Hhex-null lymphoid 
precursors. Thus, Hhex is a key regulator of early lymphoid development,
functioning, at least in part, via regulation of the cell cycle.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25472970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 1;397(1):56-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.007. Epub 2014
Oct 23.

Gro/TLE enables embryonic stem cell differentiation by repressing pluripotent
gene expression.

Laing AF(1), Lowell S(1), Brickman JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine-Institute for Stem Cell Research, School 
of Biological Sciences, 5 Little France Drive, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh
EH16 4UU, UK. (2)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine-Institute for Stem Cell
Research, School of Biological Sciences, 5 Little France Drive, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, UK; The Danish Stem Cell Centre-DanStem,
University of Copenhagen, 3B Blegdamsvej, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic
address: joshua.brickman@sund.ku.dk.

Gro/TLE proteins (TLE1-4) are a family of transcriptional corepressors acting
downstream of multiple signalling pathways. Several TLEs are expressed in a
dynamic manner throughout embryonic development and at high levels in embryonic
stem cells (ESCs). Here we find that Gro/TLE is not required in ESC for
sustaining pluripotency and suppressing differentiation genes, but rather is
important for the shutting down of the pluripotency network in differentiation.
Consistent with this view, we found that one of the Gro/TLE family, TLE4 is
expressed heterogeneously in ESCs in a population that corresponds to a Nanog low
subset of ESC culture. TLE4 expression is also increased in response to LIF
withdrawal and Fgf/Mek/Erk stimulation. To explore the role of Gro/TLE in more
detail we generated an allelic series of knockout ESCs of two TLE genes expressed
most dynamically in early differentiation, TLE3 and TLE4. Genetic reduction in
TLE dose resulted in an increase in the expression of pluripotency markers and
inhibition of ESC differentiation towards both epiblast and endoderm lineages.
Overexpression of a drug inducible TLE4 could both rescue TLE3/TLE4 compound
phenotypes and induce early expression of endoderm (Hhex-Venus) and neural
(Sox1-GFP) reporter genes. Taken together, our results suggest that TLE activity 
is essential for early differentiation where it acts to suppress the pluripotency
network, allowing for the initiation of lineage specific gene expression
programs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Biol. 2014 Dec 15;396(2):201-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.002. Epub 2014 
Oct 18.

Hepatic Notch2 deficiency leads to bile duct agenesis perinatally and secondary
bile duct formation after weaning.

Falix FA(1), Weeda VB(2), Labruyere WT(3), Poncy A(4), de Waart DR(3), Hakvoort
TB(3), Lemaigre F(4), Gaemers IC(3), Aronson DC(5), Lamers WH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Emma Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical
Center of Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: f.a.falix@amc.nl. (2)Tytgat Institute for Liver and
Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Emma
Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical Center of Amsterdam, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Tytgat Institute for Liver and
Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Université Catholique de Louvain and the Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Emma Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical Center of Amsterdam,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Notch signaling plays an acknowledged role in bile-duct development, but its
involvement in cholangiocyte-fate determination remains incompletely understood. 
We investigated the effects of early Notch2 deletion in
Notch2(fl/fl)/Alfp-Cre(tg/-) ("Notch2-cKO") and Notch2(fl/fl)/Alfp-Cre(-/-)
("control") mice. Fetal and neonatal Notch2-cKO livers were devoid of
cytokeratin19 (CK19)-, Dolichos-biflorus agglutinin (DBA)-, and SOX9-positive
ductal structures, demonstrating absence of prenatal cholangiocyte
differentiation. Despite extensive cholestatic hepatocyte necrosis and growth
retardation, mortality was only ~15%. Unexpectedly, a slow process of secondary
cholangiocyte differentiation and bile-duct formation was initiated around
weaning that histologically resembled the ductular reaction. Newly formed ducts
varied from rare and non-connected, to multiple, disorganized tubular structures 
that connected to the extrahepatic bile ducts. Jaundice had disappeared in ~30%
of Notch2-cKO mice by 6 months. The absence of NOTCH2 protein in postnatally
differentiating cholangiocyte nuclei of Notch2-cKO mice showed that these cells
had not originated from non-recombined precursor cells. Notch2 and Hnf6 mRNA
levels were permanently decreased in Notch2-cKO livers. Perinatally, Foxa1,
Foxa2, Hhex, Hnf1ß, Cebpa and Sox9 mRNA levels were all significantly lower in
Notch2-cKO than control mice, but all except Foxa2 returned to normal or
increased levels after weaning, coincident with the observed secondary bile-duct 
formation. Interestingly, Hhex and Sox9 mRNA levels remained elevated in icteric 
6 months old Notch2-cKOs, but decreased to control levels in non-icteric
Notch2-cKOs, implying a key role in secondary bile-duct formation.CONCLUSION:
Cholangiocyte differentiation becomes progressively less dependent on NOTCH2
signaling with age, suggesting that ductal-plate formation is dependent on
NOTCH2, but subsequent cholangiocyte differentiation is not.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Endocrine. 2015 May;49(1):204-14. doi: 10.1007/s12020-014-0470-0. Epub 2014 Nov
9.

Identification of a novel germline FOXE1 variant in patients with familial
non-medullary thyroid carcinoma (FNMTC).

Pereira JS(1), da Silva JG, Tomaz RA, Pinto AE, Bugalho MJ, Leite V, Cavaco BM.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Investigacão em Patobiologia Molecular (UIPM), Instituto Português 
de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Rua Prof. Lima Basto, 1099-023, Lisboa, 
Portugal.

The familial forms of non-medullary thyroid carcinoma (FNMTC) represent
approximately 5 % of thyroid neoplasms. Nine FNMTC susceptibility loci have been 
mapped; however, only the DICER1 and SRGAP1 susceptibility genes have been
identified. The transcription factors NKX2-1, FOXE1, PAX8, and HHEX are involved 
in the morphogenesis and differentiation of the thyroid. Recent studies have
identified NKX2-1 germline mutations in FNMTC families. However, the role of
high-penetrant FOXE1 variants in FNMTC etiology remains unclear. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the role of FOXE1 germline mutations in the pathogenesis
of FNMTC. We searched for molecular changes in the FOXE1 gene in the probands
from 60 Portuguese families with FNMTC. In this series, we identified nine
polymorphisms and one variant (c.743C>G, p.A248G) which was not previously
described. This variant, which involved an amino acid residue conserved in
evolution, segregated with disease in one family, and was also detected in an
apparently unrelated case of sporadic NMTC. Functional studies were performed
using rat normal thyroid cells (PCCL3) clones and human papillary thyroid
carcinoma cell line (TPC-1) pools, expressing the wild type and mutant (p.A248G) 
forms of FOXE1. In these experiments, we observed that the p.A248G variant
promoted cell proliferation and migration, suggesting that it may be involved in 
thyroid tumorigenesis. Additionally, somatic p.V600E BRAF mutations were also
detected in the thyroid tumors of two members of the family carrying the p.A248G 
variant. This study represents the first evidence of involvement of a germline
FOXE1 rare variant in FNMTC etiology and suggests that mutations in MAPK
pathway-related genes may contribute to tumor development in these familial
cases.

PMID: 25381600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2015 Jun;103(6):471-8. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23332. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Association between maternal single nucleotide polymorphisms in genes regulating 
glucose metabolism and risk for neural tube defects in offspring.

Fu Y(1), Wang LL(1), Yi D(1), Jin L(1), Liu J(1), Zhang Y(1), Ren A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Child Health / Ministry of Health Key Laboratory
of Reproductive Health, School of Public Health, Peking University, Beijing,
China.

BACKGROUND: Maternal pregestational hyperglycemia, diabetes, and obesity are
well-established risk factors for neural tube defects (NTDs). As a common
underlying mechanism, the imbalance of glucose homeostasis is directly related to
the development of NTDs. Polymorphisms in genes regulating glucose metabolism in 
women may impact their chance of having an NTD-affected pregnancy.
METHODS: We conducted a two-stage case-control study to investigate the
association between maternal genetic variants in genes regulating glucose
metabolism and risk for NTDs. The cases were 547 women who gave birth to a child 
with an NTD (anencephaly, spina bifida, or encephalocele); the controls were 543 
women who gave birth to a full-term healthy infant. In the first stage, 12 single
nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped in 160 cases and 162 controls. In the
second stage, five single nucleotide polymorphisms found in the first stage and
potentially associated with NTD risk were genotyped for validation, in an
additional 387 cases and 381 controls.
RESULTS: Combined analysis of data from the two stages showed an association
between maternal AA genotype of GCKR rs780094 and increased risk for total NTDs
[odds ratio, 1.73; 95% confidence interval, 1.16-2.59) and spina bifida subtype
[odds ratio, 1.83; 95% confidence interval, 1.16-2.88). No association was found 
between the other four single nucleotide polymorphisms (LEPR rs1137100, HK1
rs748235, HHEX rs5015480, KCNQ1 rs2237892) and NTD risk.
CONCLUSION: The AA genotype in maternal GCKR rs780094 is associated with an
increased risk for NTDs and spina bifida in the Chinese population.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25369983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Jan;11(1):29-42. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.186. Epub 2014
Oct 28.

Thyroid transcription factors in development, differentiation and disease.

Fernández LP(1), López-Márquez A(1), Santisteban P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols", Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 
4, Madrid 28029, Spain.

Identification of the thyroid transcription factors (TTFs), NKX2-1, FOXE1, PAX8
and HHEX, has considerably advanced our understanding of thyroid development,
congenital thyroid disorders and thyroid cancer. The TTFs are fundamental to
proper formation of the thyroid gland and for maintaining the functional
differentiated state of the adult thyroid; however, they are not individually
required for precursor cell commitment to a thyroid fate. Although knowledge of
the mechanisms involved in thyroid development has increased, the full complement
of genes involved in thyroid gland specification and the signals that trigger
expression of the genes that encode the TTFs remain unknown. The mechanisms
involved in thyroid organogenesis and differentiation have provided clues to
identifying the genes that are involved in human congenital thyroid disorders and
thyroid cancer. Mutations in the genes that encode the TTFs, as well as
polymorphisms and epigenetic modifications, have been associated with thyroid
pathologies. Here, we summarize the roles of the TTFs in thyroid development and 
the mechanisms by which they regulate expression of the genes involved in thyroid
differentiation. We also address the implications of mutations in TTFs in thyroid
diseases and in diseases not related to the thyroid gland.

PMID: 25350068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Leukemia. 2015 Apr;29(4):927-38. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.292. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

Hhex regulates Kit to promote radioresistance of self-renewing thymocytes in
Lmo2-transgenic mice.

Shields BJ(1), Alserihi R(1), Nasa C(2), Bogue C(3), Alexander WS(1), McCormack
MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer and Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia [2] Department of Medical
Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (2)Cancer and
Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Lmo2 is an oncogenic transcription factor that is frequently overexpressed in
T-cell acute leukemias, in particular poor prognosis early T-cell precursor-like 
(ETP-) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The primary effect of Lmo2 is to cause
self-renewal of developing CD4(-)CD8(-) (double negative, DN) T cells in the
thymus, leading to serially transplantable thymocytes that eventually give rise
to leukemia. These self-renewing thymocytes are intrinsically radioresistant
implying that they may be a source of leukemia relapse after therapy. The
homeobox transcription factor, Hhex, is highly upregulated in Lmo2-transgenic
thymocytes and can phenocopy Lmo2 in inducing thymocyte self-renewal, implying
that Hhex may be a key component of the Lmo2-induced self-renewal program. To
test this, we conditionally deleted Hhex in the thymi of Lmo2-transgenic mice.
Surprisingly, this did not prevent accumulation of DN thymocytes, nor alter the
rate of overt leukemia development. However, deletion of Hhex abolished the
transplantation capacity of Lmo2-transgenic thymocytes and overcame their
radioresistance. We found that Hhex regulates Kit expression in Lmo2-transgenic
thymocytes and that abrogation of Kit signaling phenocopied loss of Hhex in
abolishing the transplantation capacity and radioresistance of these cells. Thus,
targeting the Kit signaling pathway may facilitate the eradication of
leukemia-initiating cells in immature T-cell leukemias in which it is expressed.

PMID: 25283843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Oncogene. 2015 Jun 4;34(23):3011-22. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.240. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Growth-promoting and tumourigenic activity of c-Myc is suppressed by Hhex.

Marfil V(1), Blazquez M(1), Serrano F(1), Castell JV(1), Bort R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, CIBERehd, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria La Fe, Avda. Fernando Abril Martorell 106, Valencia, Spain.

c-Myc transcription factor is a key protein involved in cellular growth,
proliferation and metabolism. c-Myc is one of the most frequently activated
oncogenes, highlighting the need to identify intracellular molecules that
interact directly with c-Myc to suppress its function. Here we show that Hhex is 
able to interact with the basic region/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper of c-Myc. 
Knockdown of Hhex increases proliferation rate in hepatocellular carcinoma cells,
whereas Hhex expression cell-autonomously reduces cell proliferation rate in
multiple cell lines by increasing G1 phase length through a c-Myc-dependent
mechanism. Global transcriptomic analysis shows that Hhex counter-regulates
multiple c-Myc targets involved in cell proliferation and metabolism.
Concomitantly, Hhex expression leads to reduced cell size, lower levels of
cellular RNA, downregulation of metabolism-related genes, decreased sensitivity
to methotrexate and severe reduction in the ability to form tumours in nude mouse
xenografts, all indicative of decreased c-Myc activity. Our data suggest that
Hhex is a novel regulator of c-Myc function that limits c-Myc activity in
transformed cells.

PMID: 25220416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Diabetologia. 2014 Sep;57(9):1859-68. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3287-8. Epub 2014
Jun 7.

Type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene variants predispose to adult-onset autoimmune
diabetes.

Andersen MK(1), Sterner M, Forsén T, Käräjämäki A, Rolandsson O, Forsblom C,
Groop PH, Lahti K, Nilsson PM, Groop L, Tuomi T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Programs Unit, Diabetes and Obesity, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland, mette.k.andersen@helsinki.fi.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) is phenotypically a 
hybrid of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Genetically LADA is poorly characterised
but does share genetic predisposition with type 1 diabetes. We aimed to improve
the genetic characterisation of LADA and hypothesised that type 2
diabetes-associated gene variants also predispose to LADA, and that the
associations would be strongest in LADA patients with low levels of GAD
autoantibodies (GADA).
METHODS: We assessed 41 type 2 diabetes-associated gene variants in Finnish
(phase I) and Swedish (phase II) patients with LADA (n = 911) or type 1 diabetes 
(n = 406), all diagnosed after the age of 35 years, as well as in non-diabetic
control individuals 40 years or older (n = 4,002).
RESULTS: Variants in the ZMIZ1 (rs12571751, p = 4.1 × 10(-5)) and TCF7L2
(rs7903146, p = 5.8 × 10(-4)) loci were strongly associated with LADA. Variants
in the KCNQ1 (rs2237895, p = 0.0012), HHEX (rs1111875, p = 0.0024 in Finns) and
MTNR1B (rs10830963, p = 0.0039) loci showed the strongest association in patients
with low GADA, supporting the hypothesis that the disease in these patients is
more like type 2 diabetes. In contrast, variants in the KLHDC5 (rs10842994, p =
9.5 × 10(-4) in Finns), TP53INP1 (rs896854, p = 0.005), CDKAL1 (rs7756992, p =
7.0 × 10(-4); rs7754840, p = 8.8 × 10(-4)) and PROX1 (rs340874, p = 0.003) loci
showed the strongest association in patients with high GADA. For type 1 diabetes,
a strong association was seen for MTNR1B (rs10830963, p = 3.2 × 10(-6)) and HNF1A
(rs2650000, p = 0.0012).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: LADA and adult-onset type 1 diabetes share genetic
risk variants with type 2 diabetes, supporting the idea of a hybrid form of
diabetes and distinguishing them from patients with classical young-onset type 1 
diabetes.

PMID: 24906951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Physiol Rep. 2014 Mar 20;2(3):e00261. doi: 10.1002/phy2.261. Print 2014.

Dextran induces differentiation of circulating endothelial progenitor cells.

Obi S(1), Masuda H, Akimaru H, Shizuno T, Yamamoto K, Ando J, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine Science, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

Abstract Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been demonstrated to be
effective for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. However, the
differentiation process from circulation to adhesion has not been clarified
because circulating EPCs rarely attached to dishes in EPC cultures previously.
Here we investigated whether immature circulating EPCs differentiate into mature 
adhesive EPCs in response to dextran. When floating-circulating EPCs derived from
ex vivo expanded human cord blood were cultured with 5% and 10% dextran, they
attached to fibronectin-coated dishes and grew exponentially. The bioactivities
of adhesion, proliferation, migration, tube formation, and differentiated type of
EPC colony formation increased in EPCs exposed to dextran. The surface protein
expression rate of the endothelial markers vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2, ICAM1, VCAM1, and integrin av/ß3 increased in
EPCs exposed to dextran. The mRNA levels of VEGF-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, MMP9, and VEGF increased in EPCs treated with 
dextran. Those of endothelium-related transcription factors ID1/2, FOXM1, HEY1,
SMAD1, FOSL1, NFkB1, NRF2, HIF1A, EPAS1 increased in dextran-treated EPCs;
however, those of hematopoietic- and antiangiogenic-related transcription factors
TAL1, RUNX1, c-MYB, GATA1/2, ERG, FOXH1, HHEX, SMAD2/3 decreased in
dextran-exposed EPCs. Inhibitor analysis showed that PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and
p38 signal transduction pathways are involved in the differentiation in response 
to dextran. In conclusion, dextran induces differentiation of circulating EPCs in
terms of adhesion, migration, proliferation, and vasculogenesis. The
differentiation mechanism in response to dextran is regulated by multiple signal 
transductions including PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. These findings indicate
that dextran is an effective treatment for EPCs in regenerative medicines.

PMCID: PMC4002241
PMID: 24760515  [PubMed]


40. Genes Dev. 2014 Apr 15;28(8):829-34. doi: 10.1101/gad.235499.113.

The diabetes gene Hhex maintains d-cell differentiation and islet function.

Zhang J(1), McKenna LB, Bogue CW, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA;

The homeodomain transcription factor HHEX (hematopoietically expressed homeobox) 
has been repeatedly linked to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) using genome-wide
association studies. We report here that within the adult endocrine pancreas,
Hhex is selectively expressed in the somatostatin-secreting d cell. Using two
mouse models with Hhex deficiency in the endocrine pancreas, we show that Hhex is
required for d-cell differentiation. Decreased somatostatin levels in
Hhex-deficient islets cause disrupted paracrine inhibition of insulin release
from ß cells. These findings identify Hhex as the first transcriptional regulator
specifically required for islet d cells and suggest compromised paracrine control
as a contributor to T2DM.

PMCID: PMC4003275
PMID: 24736842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e95045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095045. eCollection
2014.

Validation of type 2 diabetes risk variants identified by genome-wide association
studies in Han Chinese population: a replication study and meta-analysis.

Chang YC(1), Liu PH(2), Yu YH(3), Kuo SS(3), Chang TJ(3), Jiang YD(3), Nong
JY(3), Hwang JJ(3), Chuang LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital HsinChu
branch, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei,
Taiwan. (2)Clinical Informatics and Medical Statistics Research Center, College
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute
of Clinical Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Several genome-wide association studies (GWAS) involving European
populations have successfully identified risk genetic variants associated with
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, the effects conferred by these variants
in Han Chinese population have not yet been fully elucidated.
METHODS: We analyzed the effects of 24 risk genetic variants with reported
associations from European GWAS in 3,040 Han Chinese subjects in Taiwan
(including 1,520 T2DM cases and 1,520 controls). The discriminative power of the 
prediction models with and without genotype scores was compared. We further
meta-analyzed the association of these variants with T2DM by pooling all
candidate-gene association studies conducted in Han Chinese.
RESULTS: Five risk variants in IGF2BP2 (rs4402960, rs1470579), CDKAL1
(rs10946398), SLC30A8 (rs13266634), and HHEX (rs1111875) genes were nominally
associated with T2DM in our samples. The odds ratio was 2.22 (95% confidence
interval, 1.81-2.73, P<0.0001) for subjects with the highest genetic score
quartile (score>34) as compared with subjects with the lowest quartile
(score<29). The incoporation of genotype score into the predictive model
increased the C-statistics from 0.627 to 0.657 (P<0.0001). These estimates are
very close to those observed in European populations. Gene-environment
interaction analysis showed a significant interaction between rs13266634 in
SLC30A8 gene and age on T2DM risk (P<0.0001). Further meta-analysis pooling 20
studies in Han Chinese confirmed the association of 10 genetic variants in
IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, JAZF1, SCL30A8, HHEX, TCF7L2, EXT2, and FTO genes with T2DM. The
effect sizes conferred by these risk variants in Han Chinese were similar to
those observed in Europeans but the allele frequencies differ substantially
between two populations.
CONCLUSION: We confirmed the association of 10 variants identified by European
GWAS with T2DM in Han Chinese population. The incorporation of genotype scores
into the prediction model led to a small but significant improvement in T2DM
prediction.

PMCID: PMC3988150
PMID: 24736664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Front Aging Neurosci. 2014 Mar 18;6:44. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00044.
eCollection 2014.

Transcriptomics of post-stroke angiogenesis in the aged brain.

Buga AM(1), Margaritescu C(2), Scholz CJ(3), Radu E(4), Zelenak C(5), Popa-Wagner
A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Medicine Rostock , Rostock , Germany ;
Center of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Medicine Craiova ,
Craiova , Romania. (2)Center of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Medicine Craiova , Craiova , Romania. (3)IZKF Lab for Microarray Applications,
University of Würzburg , Würzburg , Germany. (4)University of Medicine and
Pharmacy Carol Davila , Bucharest , Romania. (5)Molecular Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill University ,
Montreal, QC , Canada. (6)Department of Psychiatry, University of Medicine
Rostock , Rostock , Germany.

Despite the obvious clinical significance of post-stroke angiogenesis in aged
subjects, a detailed transcriptomic analysis of post-stroke angiogenesis has not 
yet been undertaken in an aged experimental model. In this study, by combining
stroke transcriptomics with immunohistochemistry in aged rats and post-stroke
patients, we sought to identify an age-specific gene expression pattern that may 
characterize the angiogenic process after stroke. We found that both young and
old infarcted rats initiated vigorous angiogenesis. However, the young rats had a
higher vascular density by day 14 post-stroke. "New-for-stroke" genes that were
linked to the increased vasculature density in young animals included Angpt2,
Angptl2, Angptl4, Cib1, Ccr2, Col4a2, Cxcl1, Lef1, Hhex, Lamc1, Nid2, Pcam1,
Plod2, Runx3, Scpep1, S100a4, Tgfbi, and Wnt4, which are required for sprouting
angiogenesis, reconstruction of the basal lamina (BL), and the resolution phase. 
The vast majority of genes involved in sprouting angiogenesis (Angpt2, Angptl4,
Cib1, Col8a1, Nrp1, Pcam1, Pttg1ip, Rac2, Runx1, Tnp4, Wnt4); reconstruction of a
new BL (Col4a2, Lamc1, Plod2); or tube formation and maturation (Angpt1, Gpc3,
Igfbp7, Sparc, Tie2, Tnfsf10), had however, a delayed upregulation in the aged
rats. The angiogenic response in aged rats was further diminished by the
persistent upregulation of "inflammatory" genes (Cxcl12, Mmp8, Mmp12, Mmp14,
Mpeg1, Tnfrsf1a, Tnfrsf1b) and vigorous expression of genes required for the
buildup of the fibrotic scar (Cthrc1, Il6ra, Il13ar1, Il18, Mmp2, Rassf4, Tgfb1, 
Tgfbr2, Timp1). Beyond this barrier, angiogenesis in the aged brains was similar 
to that in young brains. We also found that the aged human brain is capable of
mounting a vigorous angiogenic response after stroke, which most likely reflects 
the remaining brain plasticity of the aged brain.

PMCID: PMC3957426
PMID: 24672479  [PubMed]


43. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 20;9(3):e90791. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090791. eCollection
2014.

HHEX promotes hepatic-lineage specification through the negative regulation of
eomesodermin.

Watanabe H(1), Takayama K(2), Inamura M(1), Tachibana M(1), Mimura N(3), Katayama
K(1), Tashiro K(4), Nagamoto Y(5), Sakurai F(1), Kawabata K(4), Furue MK(6),
Mizuguchi H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. (2)Laboratory of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory of Hepatocyte Differentiation,
National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Osaka, Japan; iPS Cell-Based
Research Project on Hepatic Toxicity and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. (3)Laboratory of
Hepatocyte Differentiation, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Osaka,
Japan. (4)Laboratory of Stem Cell Regulation, National Institute of Biomedical
Innovation, Osaka, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan;
Laboratory of Hepatocyte Differentiation, National Institute of Biomedical
Innovation, Osaka, Japan. (6)Laboratory of Embryonic Stem Cell Cultures,
Department of Disease Bioresources Research, National Institute of Biomedical
Innovation, Osaka, Japan; Department of Embryonic Stem Cell Research, Field of
Stem Cell Research, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan. (7)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory of 
Hepatocyte Differentiation, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Osaka,
Japan; iPS Cell-Based Research Project on Hepatic Toxicity and Metabolism,
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; The
Center for Advanced Medical Engineering and Informatics, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) could provide a major window into human
developmental biology, because the differentiation methods from hESCs mimic human
embryogenesis. We previously reported that the overexpression of
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX) in the hESC-derived definitive
endoderm (DE) cells markedly promotes hepatic specification. However, it remains 
unclear how HHEX functions in this process. To reveal the molecular mechanisms of
hepatic specification by HHEX, we tried to identify the genes directly targeted
by HHEX. We found that HHEX knockdown considerably enhanced the expression level 
of eomesodermin (EOMES). In addition, HHEX bound to the HHEX response element
located in the first intron of EOMES. Loss-of-function assays of EOMES showed
that the gene expression levels of hepatoblast markers were significantly
upregulated, suggesting that EOMES has a negative role in hepatic specification
from the DE cells. Furthermore, EOMES exerts its effects downstream of HHEX in
hepatic specification from the DE cells. In conclusion, the present results
suggest that HHEX promotes hepatic specification by repressing EOMES expression.

PMCID: PMC3961246
PMID: 24651531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 17;9(3):e91790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091790. eCollection
2014.

Cross-sectional and longitudinal replication analyses of genome-wide association 
loci of type 2 diabetes in Han Chinese.

Zhao Q(1), Xiao J(2), He J(3), Zhang X(2), Hong J(2), Kong X(2), Mills KT(1),
Weng J(4), Jia W(5), Yang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China. 
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America; Department
of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United
States of America. (4)Sun Yat-Sen University Third Affiliated Hospital,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (5)Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

This study aimed to examine genomic loci of type 2 diabetes (T2D) initially
identified by genome-wide association studies in populations of European ancestry
for their associations with T2D and quantitative glycemic traits, as well as
their effects on longitudinal change in fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and T2D
development, in the Chinese population. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP)
from 25 loci were genotyped in a large case-control sample of 10,001 subjects
(5,338 T2D cases and 4,663 controls) and a prospective cohort of 1,881 Chinese.
In the case-control sample, 8 SNPs in or near WFS1, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, CDC123,
HHEX, TCF7L2, KCNQ1, and MTNR1B were significantly associated with T2D (P<0.05). 
Thirteen SNPs were associated with quantitative glycemic traits. For example, the
most significant SNP, rs10811661 near CDKN2A/2B (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.11×10(-8) for T2D), was
also associated with 2-h glucose level of an oral glucose tolerance test
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.11×10(-3)) and insulinogenic index (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.71×10(-2)). In the cohort study,
individuals carrying more risk alleles of the replicated SNPs had greater FPG
increase and T2D incidence in a 7.5-year follow-up period, with each quartile
increase in the number of risk alleles being associated with a 0.06 mmol/l
greater increase in FPG (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03) and 19% higher odds of developing T2D
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.058). Our study identified the associations of several established
T2D-loci in Europeans with T2D and quantitative glycemic traits in the Chinese
population. The prospective data also suggest their potential role in the risk
prediction of T2D in the Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC3956742
PMID: 24637646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1515-26. doi: 10.1002/stem.1695.

Hhex and Cer1 mediate the Sox17 pathway for cardiac mesoderm formation in
embryonic stem cells.

Liu Y(1), Kaneda R, Leja TW, Subkhankulova T, Tolmachov O, Minchiotti G, Schwartz
RJ, Barahona M, Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, USA; Institute for Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health
Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Cardiac muscle differentiation in vivo is guided by sequential growth factor
signals, including endoderm-derived diffusible factors, impinging on cardiogenic 
genes in the developing mesoderm. Previously, by RNA interference in AB2.2 mouse 
embryonic stem cells (mESCs), we identified the endodermal transcription factor
Sox17 as essential for Mesp1 induction in primitive mesoderm and subsequent
cardiac muscle differentiation. However, downstream effectors of Sox17 remained
to be proven functionally. In this study, we used genome-wide profiling of
Sox17-dependent genes in AB2.2 cells, RNA interference, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and luciferase reporter genes to dissect this pathway. Sox17
was required not only for Hhex (a second endodermal transcription factor) but
also for Cer1, a growth factor inhibitor from endoderm that, like Hhex, controls 
mesoderm patterning in Xenopus toward a cardiac fate. Suppressing Hhex or Cer1
blocked cardiac myogenesis, although at a later stage than induction of Mesp1/2. 
Hhex was required but not sufficient for Cer1 expression. Over-expression of
Sox17 induced endogenous Cer1 and sequence-specific transcription of a Cer1
reporter gene. Forced expression of Cer1 was sufficient to rescue cardiac
differentiation in Hhex-deficient cells. Thus, Hhex and Cer1 are indispensable
components of the Sox17 pathway for cardiopoiesis in mESCs, acting at a stage
downstream from Mesp1/2.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4260090
PMID: 24585688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 29;9(1):e87332. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087332. eCollection
2014.

Quantitative assessment of common genetic variants on FOXE1 and differentiated
thyroid cancer risk.

Zhu H(1), Xi Q(1), Liu L(1), Wang J(1), Gu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine, Shanghai Pudong New Area Gongli Hospital, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

Forkhead box E1 encodes the transcription factor FOXE1 (or TTF-2), which together
with Homeobox protein NKX2-1, PAX8 and HHEX, are pivotal proteins required for
thyroid gland formation, differentiation and function. Recently, genome-wide
association studies have identified FOXE1 as a thyroid cancer (TC) susceptibility
gene in populations of European descent. After that, a number of studies reported
that the rs965513, rs1867277, and rs71369530 polymorphism in FOXE1 has been
implicated in TC risk. However, the causal variants remain unknown. To derive a
more precise estimation of the relationship, a meta-analysis of 9,828 TC cases
and 109,995 controls from 14 case-control studies was performed. Overall,
significant results were observed for rs965513 (OR=1.71, 95% CI: 1.59-1.85,
P<10(-5)), rs1867277 (OR=1.64, 95% CI: 1.51-1.78, P<10(-5)) and rs71369530
(OR=2.01, 95% CI: 1.66-2.44, P<10(-5)) polymorphism. In the subgroup analysis by 
ethnicity, we found that rs965513 polymorphism confer high risk for Caucasians
with per-allele OR of 1.80 (95% CI: 1.69-1.92, P<10(-5)) compared to East Asians 
of 1.35 (95% CI: 1.09-1.67, P=0.006). There was strong evidence of heterogeneity,
which largely disappeared after stratification by ethnicity. In the subgroup
analysis by sample size, and study design, significantly increased risks were
found for the polymorphism. In conclusion, this meta-analysis demonstrated that
common variations of FOXE1 are a risk factor associated with increased TC
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3906140
PMID: 24489898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biomed Res. 2014 Jan;28(1):53-8. doi: 10.7555/JBR.27.20120091. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Genetic variants at 10q23.33 are associated with plasma lipid levels in a Chinese
population.

Liu S(1), Qian Y(2), Lu F(3), Dong M(4), Lin Y(4), Li H(3), Shen C(3), Dai J(3), 
Jiang Y(3), Jin G(3), Hu Z(3), Shen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China; ; Department of Public
Service Management, Kangda College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 
210029, China; (2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public 
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China; ; Department 
of Chronic Non-communicable Disease Control, Wuxi Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214023, China. (3)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, China; (4)Department of Chronic Non-communicable Disease Control,
Wuxi Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214023, China.

Plasma lipid abnormalities are implicated in the pathogenic process of type 2
diabetes. The IDE-KIF11-HHEX gene cluster on chromosome 10q23.33 has been
identified as a susceptibility locus for type 2 diabetes. We hypothesized that
genetic variants at 10q23.33 may be associated with plasma lipid concentrations. 
Seven tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs: rs7923837, rs2488075,
rs947591, rs11187146, rs5015480, rs4646957 and rs1111875) at 10q23.33 were
genotyped in 3,281 subjects from a Han Chinese population, using the TaqMan
OpenArray and Sequenom MassARRAY platforms. Multiple linear regression analyses
showed that SNP rs7923837 in the 3'-flanking region of HHEX was significantly
associated with triglyceride levels (P = 0.019, 0.031 mmol/L average decrease per
minor G allele) and that rs2488075 and rs947591 in the downstream region of HHEX 
were significantly associated with total cholesterol levels (P = 0.041, 0.058
mmol/L average decrease per minor C allele and P = 0.018, 0.063 mmol/L average
decrease per minor A allele, respectively). However, the other four SNPs
(rs11187146, rs5015480, rs4646957 and rs1111875) were not significantly
associated with any plasma lipid concentrations in this Chinese population. Our
data suggest that genetic variants in the IDE-KIF11-HHEX gene cluster at 10q23.33
may partially explain the variation of plasma lipid levels in the Han Chinese
population. Further studies are required to confirm these findings in other
populations.

PMCID: PMC3904175
PMID: 24474964  [PubMed]


48. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Feb;103(2):328-37. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2013.12.016. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Genetic variants for type 2 diabetes and new-onset cancer in Chinese with type 2 
diabetes.

Ma RC(1), So WY(2), Tam CH(3), Luk AO(3), Ho JS(3), Wang Y(3), Lam VK(3), Lee
HM(3), Kong AP(3), Tong PC(3), Xu G(4), Chow CC(3), Ng MC(3), Yang XL(3), Chan
JC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong; Hong Kong Institute
of Diabetes and Obesity, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong; Lee Ka Shing
Institute of Health Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
Electronic address: rcwma@cuhk.edu.hk. (2)Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, 
New Territories, Hong Kong. Electronic address: wingyeeso@cuhk.edu.hk.
(3)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong. (4)Department of
Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong; Hong Kong Institute of Diabetes and
Obesity, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong; Lee Ka Shing Institute of
Health Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of cancer. This study
aimed to evaluate associations between recently reported type 2 diabetes (T2D)
susceptibility genetic variants and cancer risk in a prospective cohort of
Chinese patients with T2D.
METHODS: Seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8,
CDKN2A/B, HHEX and TCF7L2, all identified from genome-wide association studies of
T2D, were genotyped in 5900 T2D patients [age mean ± SD = 57 ± 13 years, % males 
= 46] without any known cancer at baseline. Associations between new-onset of
cancer and SNPs were tested by Cox proportional hazard models with adjustment of 
conventional risk factors.
RESULTS: During the mean follow-up period of 8.5 ± 3.3 years, 429 patients (7.3%)
developed cancer. Of the T2D-related SNPs, the G-alleles of HHEX rs7923837
(hazard ratio [HR] (95% C.I.) = 1.34 (1.08-1.65); P = 6.7 ×10(-3) under dominant 
model) and TCF7L2 rs290481 (HR (95% C.I.) = 1.16 (1.01-1.33); P = 0.040 under
additive model) were positively associated with cancer risk, while the G-allele
of CDKAL1 rs7756992 was inversely associated (HR (95% C.I.) = 0.80 (0.65-1.00); P
= 0.048 under recessive model). The risk alleles of these significant SNPs
exhibited combined effect on increasing cancer risk (per-allele HR (95% C.I.) =
1.25 (1.12-1.39); P = 4.8 × 10(-5)). The adjusted cancer risk was 2.41 (95% C.I. 
1.23-4.69) for patients with four risk alleles comparing to patients without risk
allele.
CONCLUSIONS: T2D-related variants HHEX rs7923837, TCF7L2 rs290481 and CDKAL1
rs7756992 increased cancer risk in patients with diabetes.
IMPACT: Our findings provide novel insights into the pathogenesis of cancer in
diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24468095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 21;9(1):e85883. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085883. eCollection
2014.

LIM domain only-2 (LMO2) induces T-cell leukemia by two distinct pathways.

Smith S(1), Tripathi R(1), Goodings C(1), Cleveland S(1), Mathias E(1), Hardaway 
JA(2), Elliott N(1), Yi Y(3), Chen X(4), Downing J(5), Mullighan C(5), Swing
DA(6), Tessarollo L(6), Li L(7), Love P(7), Jenkins NA(8), Copeland NG(8),
Thompson MA(9), Du Y(10), Davé UP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and the 
Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of
America. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America. (3)Division of Genetic Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of
America. (4)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America. (5)Department of Pathology, St
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America. 
(6)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland,
United States of America. (7)National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of 
America. (8)The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, Texas, United
States of America. (9)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America. (10)Department of
Pediatrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.

The LMO2 oncogene is deregulated in the majority of human T-cell leukemia cases
and in most gene therapy-induced T-cell leukemias. We made transgenic mice with
enforced expression of Lmo2 in T-cells by the CD2 promoter/enhancer. These
transgenic mice developed highly penetrant T-ALL by two distinct patterns of gene
expression: one in which there was concordant activation of Lyl1, Hhex, and Mycn 
or alternatively, with Notch1 target gene activation. Most strikingly, this gene 
expression clustering was conserved in human Early T-cell Precursor ALL
(ETP-ALL), where LMO2, HHEX, LYL1, and MYCN were most highly expressed. We
discovered that HHEX is a direct transcriptional target of LMO2 consistent with
its concordant gene expression. Furthermore, conditional inactivation of Hhex in 
CD2-Lmo2 transgenic mice markedly attenuated T-ALL development, demonstrating
that Hhex is a crucial mediator of Lmo2's oncogenic function. The CD2-Lmo2
transgenic mice offer mechanistic insight into concordant oncogene expression and
provide a model for the highly treatment-resistant ETP-ALL subtype.

PMCID: PMC3897537
PMID: 24465765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e83093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083093.
eCollection 2013.

Use of net reclassification improvement (NRI) method confirms the utility of
combined genetic risk score to predict type 2 diabetes.

Tam CH(1), Ho JS(1), Wang Y(1), Lam VK(1), Lee HM(1), Jiang G(1), Lau ES(1), Kong
AP(2), Fan X(3), Woo JL(1), Tsui SK(4), Ng MC(5), So WY(2), Chan JC(2), Ma RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China. (2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China ; Hong Kong Institute of Diabetes
and Obesity, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China ; Li Ka
Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong SAR, China. (3)Department of Statistics, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (4)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (5)Center for Genomics and
Personalized Medicine Research, Center for Diabetes Research, Wake Forest School 
of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified more than 70
novel loci for type 2 diabetes (T2D), some of which have been widely replicated
in Asian populations. In this study, we investigated their individual and
combined effects on T2D in a Chinese population.
METHODOLOGY: We selected 14 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in T2D genes
relating to beta-cell function validated in Asian populations and genotyped them 
in 5882 Chinese T2D patients and 2569 healthy controls. A combined genetic score 
(CGS) was calculated by summing up the number of risk alleles or weighted by the 
effect size for each SNP under an additive genetic model. We tested for
associations by either logistic or linear regression analysis for T2D and
quantitative traits, respectively. The contribution of the CGS for predicting T2D
risk was evaluated by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis and net
reclassification improvement (NRI).
RESULTS: We observed consistent and significant associations of IGF2BP2, WFS1,
CDKAL1, SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B, HHEX, TCF7L2 and KCNQ1 (8.5×10(-18)<P<8.5×10(-3)), as 
well as nominal associations of NOTCH2, JAZF1, KCNJ11 and HNF1B (0.05<P<0.1) with
T2D risk, which yielded odds ratios ranging from 1.07 to 2.09. The 8 significant 
SNPs exhibited joint effect on increasing T2D risk, fasting plasma glucose and
use of insulin therapy as well as reducing HOMA-ß, BMI, waist circumference and
younger age of diagnosis of T2D. The addition of CGS marginally increased AUC
(2%) but significantly improved the predictive ability on T2D risk by 11.2% and
11.3% for unweighted and weighted CGS, respectively using the NRI approach
(P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: In a Chinese population, the use of a CGS of 8 SNPs modestly but
significantly improved its discriminative ability to predict T2D above and beyond
that attributed to clinical risk factors (sex, age and BMI).

PMCID: PMC3869744
PMID: 24376643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:394523. doi: 10.1155/2013/394523. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

IRS1, TCF7L2, ADRB1, PPARG, and HHEX polymorphisms associated with atherogenic
risk in Mexican population.

Estrada-Velasco BI(1), Cruz M(2), Madrid-Marina V(1), Martínez-Nava GA(1),
Gomez-Zamudio J(2), Burguete-García AI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública,
Avenida Universidad 655, Santa María Ahuacatitlán, Cuernavaca, 62100 Cuernavaca, 
MOR, Mexico. (2)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Bioquímica, Hospital de
Especialidades, IMSS, Avenida Cuauhtémoc 330, Doctores, Cuauhtémoc, CMN Siglo
XXI, 06720 México, DF, Mexico.

Objective. We aimed to explore the association between polymorphisms of IRS1
(rs1801278), TCF7L2 (rs7903146 and rs12255372), ADRB1 (rs1801253), PPARG
(rs1801282), and HHEX (rs5015480) genes with atherogenic risk (AI = Total
cholesterol/HDL) in MetS, T2D, and healthy populations from the Mexican Social
Security Institute. Methodology and Results. Four hundred thirty-five MetS, 517
T2D, and 547 healthy individuals were selected. The association between the SNPs 
and the atherogenic index was evaluated by multiple linear regression and
multinomial logistic regression models. The ADRB1 gene showed a statistically
significant association with high-risk atherogenic index, OR = 2.94 (IC 95%
1.64-5.24; P < 0.0001) for the Arg/Gly variant, under the dominant model an OR = 
2.96 (IC 95% 1.67-5.25; P < 0.0001), and under the Log additive model an OR =
2.52 (IC 95% 1.54-4.15; P < 0.0001). Conclusions. The Arg389Gly polymorphism of
the ADRB1 gene may be a worthy biological marker to predict the risk of
developing cardiovascular diseases given a high-risk atherogenic index.

PMCID: PMC3859263
PMID: 24371822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Res. 2014 Feb 15;74(4):1079-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0912. Epub
2013 Dec 26.

NUP98 fusion oncoproteins promote aneuploidy by attenuating the mitotic spindle
checkpoint.

Salsi V(1), Ferrari S, Gorello P, Fantini S, Chiavolelli F, Mecucci C, Zappavigna
V.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, Modena; and Department of Hematology, University of Perugia,
University Hospital S. Maria della Misericordia, Perugia, Italy.

NUP98 is a recurrent fusion partner in chromosome translocations that cause acute
myelogenous leukemia. NUP98, a nucleoporin, and its interaction partner Rae1,
have been implicated in the control of chromosome segregation, but their
mechanistic contributions to tumorigenesis have been unclear. Here, we show that 
expression of NUP98 fusion oncoproteins causes mitotic spindle defects and
chromosome missegregation, correlating with the capability of NUP98 fusions to
cause premature securin degradation and slippage from an unsatisfied spindle
assembly checkpoint (SAC). NUP98 fusions, unlike wild-type NUP98, were found to
physically interact with the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C)(Cdc20) 
and to displace the BubR1 SAC component, suggesting a possible mechanistic basis 
for their interference with SAC function. In addition, NUP98 oncoproteins
displayed a prolonged half-life in cells. We found that NUP98 stability is
controlled by a PEST sequence, absent in NUP98 oncoproteins, whose deletion
reproduced the aberrant SAC-interfering activity of NUP98 oncoproteins. Together,
our findings suggest that NUP98 oncoproteins predispose myeloid cells to
oncogenic transformation or malignant progression by promoting whole chromosome
instability.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 24371226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):2158-71. doi: 10.2337/db13-0949. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Impact of type 2 diabetes susceptibility variants on quantitative glycemic traits
reveals mechanistic heterogeneity.

Dimas AS(1), Lagou V(2), Barker A(3), Knowles JW(4), Mägi R(5), Hivert MF(6),
Benazzo A(7), Rybin D(8), Jackson AU(9), Stringham HM(9), Song C(10),
Fischer-Rosinsky A(11), Boesgaard TW(12), Grarup N(13), Abbasi FA(4), Assimes
TL(4), Hao K(14), Yang X(15), Lecoeur C(16), Barroso I(17), Bonnycastle LL(18),
Böttcher Y(19), Bumpstead S(20), Chines PS(18), Erdos MR(18), Graessler J(21),
Kovacs P(22), Morken MA(18), Narisu N(18), Payne F(20), Stancakova A(23), Swift
AJ(18), Tönjes A(24), Bornstein SR(21), Cauchi S(16), Froguel P(25), Meyre D(26),
Schwarz PE(21), Häring HU(27), Smith U(28), Boehnke M(9), Bergman RN(29), Collins
FS(18), Mohlke KL(30), Tuomilehto J(31), Quertemous T(4), Lind L(32), Hansen
T(33), Pedersen O(34), Walker M(35), Pfeiffer AF(36), Spranger J(11), Stumvoll
M(24), Meigs JB(37), Wareham NJ(3), Kuusisto J(23), Laakso M(23), Langenberg
C(3), Dupuis J(38), Watanabe RM(39), Florez JC(40), Ingelsson E(41), McCarthy
MI(42), Prokopenko I(43); MAGIC Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
U.K.Alexander Fleming, Biomedical Sciences Research Center, Vari, Athens, Greece.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
U.K.Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Oxford, U.K. (3)Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, Institute of
Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, U.K. (4)Department of
Medicine and Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA. (5)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, U.K.Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K.Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 
(6)Department of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec,
CanadaGeneral Medicine Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.
(7)Department of Biology and Evolution, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(8)Boston University Data Coordinating Center, Boston, MA. (9)Department of
Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, University of Michigan School 
of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI. (10)Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular
Epidemiology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
SwedenDepartment of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (11)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department
of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Berlin, Germany. (12)Steno Diabetes Center,
Gentofte, Denmark. (13)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic
Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (14)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Institute
of Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY.
(15)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California,
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA. (16)CNRS UMR8199-Institute of Biology, Pasteur
Institute, Lille 2-Droit et Santé University, Lille, France. (17)Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute, Hinxton, U.K.University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
Laboratories and National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical
Research Centre, Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, U.K. (18)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, MD. (19)IFB AdiposityDiseases, Leipzig University Medical
Center, Leipzig, Germany. (20)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, U.K.
(21)Department of Medicine III, Division of Prevention and Care of Diabetes,
University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (22)Interdisciplinary Center for
Clinical Research Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (23)Department of Medicine,
University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(24)IFB AdiposityDiseases, Leipzig University Medical Center, Leipzig,
GermanyDepartment of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (25)CNRS 
UMR8199-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille 2-Droit et Santé
University, Lille, FranceDepartment of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial
College London, London, U.K. (26)CNRS UMR8199-Institute of Biology, Pasteur
Institute, Lille 2-Droit et Santé University, Lille, FranceDepartment of Clinical
Epidemiology & Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(27)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Vascular Medicine, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. (28)Lundberg Laboratory for Diabetes Research, Center of
Excellence for Metabolic and Cardiovascular Research, Department of Molecular and
Clinical Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,
Sweden. (29)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA. (30)Department of Genetics,
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC. (31)Diabetes
Prevention Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
FinlandCentre for Vascular Prevention, Danube University Krems, Krems,
AustriaKing Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. (32)Department of Medical
Sciences, Akademiska Sjukhuset, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (33)The Novo
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (34)The Novo Nordisk
Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkHagedorn Research
Institute, Copenhagen, DenmarkInstitute of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health
Sciences, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark. (35)Institute of Cellular
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.
(36)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Berlin, GermanyDepartment of Clinical Nutrition, German Institute of 
Human Nutrition, Nuthetal, Germany. (37)General Medicine Division, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MADepartment of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA. (38)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public
Health, Boston, MAThe National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham
Heart Study, Framingham, MA. (39)Departments of Preventive Medicine and
Physiology & Biophysics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA. (40)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MACenter for Human Genetic Research and Diabetes Research Center
(Diabetes Unit), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MAProgram in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA. (41)Wellcome Trust Centre
for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.Department of Medical
Sciences, Molecular Epidemiology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden. (42)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology &
Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.Oxford National Institute for
Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, U.K.
(43)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
U.K.Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Oxford, U.K.Department of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London,
London, U.K.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):1836-7.

Patients with established type 2 diabetes display both ß-cell dysfunction and
insulin resistance. To define fundamental processes leading to the diabetic
state, we examined the relationship between type 2 diabetes risk variants at 37
established susceptibility loci, and indices of proinsulin processing, insulin
secretion, and insulin sensitivity. We included data from up to 58,614
nondiabetic subjects with basal measures and 17,327 with dynamic measures. We
used additive genetic models with adjustment for sex, age, and BMI, followed by
fixed-effects, inverse-variance meta-analyses. Cluster analyses grouped risk loci
into five major categories based on their relationship to these continuous
glycemic phenotypes. The first cluster (PPARG, KLF14, IRS1, GCKR) was
characterized by primary effects on insulin sensitivity. The second cluster
(MTNR1B, GCK) featured risk alleles associated with reduced insulin secretion and
fasting hyperglycemia. ARAP1 constituted a third cluster characterized by defects
in insulin processing. A fourth cluster (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX/IDE, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/2B) was defined by loci influencing insulin processing and secretion
without a detectable change in fasting glucose levels. The final group contained 
20 risk loci with no clear-cut associations to continuous glycemic traits. By
assembling extensive data on continuous glycemic traits, we have exposed the
diverse mechanisms whereby type 2 diabetes risk variants impact disease
predisposition.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association.

PMCID: PMC4030103
PMID: 24296717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncogene. 2014 Dec 4;33(49):5592-600. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.496. Epub 2013 Nov
18.

PRH/HHex inhibits the migration of breast and prostate epithelial cells through
direct transcriptional regulation of Endoglin.

Kershaw RM(1), Siddiqui YH(2), Roberts D(1), Jayaraman PS(1), Gaston K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunity and Infection, School of Medicine, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK. (2)School of Biochemistry, University
Walk, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

PRH/HHex (proline-rich homeodomain protein) is a transcription factor that
controls cell proliferation and cell differentiation in a variety of tissues.
Aberrant subcellular localisation of PRH is associated with breast cancer and
thyroid cancer. Further, in blast crisis chronic myeloid leukaemia, and a subset 
of acute myeloid leukaemias, PRH is aberrantly localised and its activity is
downregulated. Here we show that PRH is involved in the regulation of cell
migration and cancer cell invasion. We show for the first time that PRH is
expressed in prostate cells and that a decrease in PRH protein levels increases
the migration of normal prostate epithelial cells. We show that a decrease in PRH
protein levels also increases the migration of normal breast epithelial cells.
Conversely, PRH overexpression inhibits cell migration and cell invasion by PC3
and DU145 prostate cancer cells and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Previous work
has shown that the transforming growth factor-ß co-receptor Endoglin inhibits the
migration of prostate and breast cancer cells. Here we show that PRH can bind to 
the Endoglin promoter in immortalised prostate and breast cells. PRH
overexpression in these cells results in increased Endoglin protein expression,
whereas PRH knockdown results in decreased Endoglin protein expression. Moreover,
we demonstrate that Endoglin overexpression abrogates the increased migration
shown by PRH knockdown cells. Our data suggest that PRH controls the migration of
multiple epithelial cell lineages in part at least through the direct
transcriptional regulation of Endoglin. We discuss these results in terms of the 
functions of PRH in normal cells and the mislocalisation of PRH seen in multiple 
cancer cell types.

PMID: 24240683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Pediatr Res. 2014 Jan;75(1-2):120-6. doi: 10.1038/pr.2013.201. Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Endodermal and mesenchymal cross talk: a crossroad for the maturation of foregut 
organs.

Arterbery AS(1), Bogue CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.

The developmental stages of each foregut organ are intimately linked to the
development of the other foregut organs such that the ultimate function of any
one foregut organ, such as the metabolic function of the liver, depends on
organizational changes associated with the maturation of multiple foregut organs.
These changes include: (i) proliferation of the intrahepatic bile ducts and
hepatoblasts within the liver coinciding with parenchymal expansion, (ii)
elongation of extrahepatic bile ducts, which allows for proper gallbladder (GB)
formation, and (iii) duodenal elongation and rotation, which coincides with all
of the above to connect the intrahepatic, extrahepatic, and pancreatic ductal
systems with the intestine. It is well established that cross talk between
endodermal and mesenchymal components of the foregut occurs, particularly
regarding the vascularization of developing organs. Furthermore, genetic
mutations in mesenchymal and hepatic compartments of the developing foregut
result in similar foregut pathologies: hypoplastic liver, absence of GB, biliary 
atresia (intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic), and failure of gut elongation and
rotation. Finally, these shared pathologies can be linked to deficiencies in
genes specific to the septum transversum mesenchyme (Hes1, Hlx, and Foxf1) or
liver (Hhex and Hnf6), illustrating the complexity of such cross talk.

PMID: 24192700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Diabetes. 2014 May;6(3):251-9. doi: 10.1111/1753-0407.12093. Epub 2013 Oct 29.

CDKAL1 and HHEX are associated with type 2 diabetes-related traits among Yup'ik
people.

Klimentidis YC(1), Lemas DJ, Wiener HH, O'Brien DM, Havel PJ, Stanhope KL,
Hopkins SE, Tiwari HK, Boyer BB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of 
Public Health, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D), mainly
among individuals of European ancestry. In the present study, we examined the
frequency of these SNPs and their association with T2D-related traits in an
Alaska Native study population with a historically low prevalence of T2D. We also
investigated whether dietary characteristics that may protect against T2D, such
as n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) intake, modify these associations.
METHODS: In 1144 Yup'ik people, we examined 17 SNPs repeatedly identified in GWAS
for individual and cumulative associations with T2D-related traits. Cumulative
associations were evaluated using a genetic risk score (GRS) calculated by
summing risk alleles. Associations were tested for interactions with sex, body
mass index (BMI), and n-3 PUFA intake.
RESULTS: The rs7754840 SNP in CDKAL1 is significantly associated with HbA1c
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00091). The rs5015480 SNP near HHEX is significantly associated (in
opposite direction to that in Europeans) with a combined fasting glucose (FG) and
HbA1c measure (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00046) and with homeostatic model assessment of ß-cell
function (HOMA-B; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0014). The GRS is significantly associated with FG and
combined FG and HbA1c only when the HHEX SNP is dropped from the GRS.
Associations are not modified by BMI or n-3 PUFA intake.
CONCLUSION: Our results highlight the potential importance of CDKAL1 and HHEX in 
glucose homeostasis in this Alaska Native population with a low prevalence of
T2D, and suggest that these loci should be examined in greater detail in this
population.

© 2013 Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine and Wiley
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3964139
PMID: 24112421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Diabetes Care. 2014 Feb;37(2):475-82. doi: 10.2337/dc13-1458. Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Co-occurrence of risk alleles in or near genes modulating insulin secretion
predisposes obese youth to prediabetes.

Giannini C(1), Dalla Man C, Groop L, Cobelli C, Zhao H, Shaw MM, Duran E,
Pierpont B, Bale AE, Caprio S, Santoro N.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Nicola Santoro, nicola.santoro@yale.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Paralleling the rise of pediatric obesity, the prevalence of impaired 
glucose tolerance (IGT) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) is increasing among youth. In
this study, we asked whether the co-occurrence of risk alleles in or near five
genes modulating insulin secretion (TCF7L2 rs7903146, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, CDKAL1
rs7754840, HHEX rs1111875, and HNF1A rs1169288) is associated with a higher risk 
of IGT/T2D in obese children and adolescents.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 714 obese subjects (290 boys and 424
girls; mean age 13.6 ± 3.1 years; mean z score BMI 2.2 ± 0.4) and evaluated the
insulin secretion by using the oral minimal model and, in a subgroup of 37
subjects, the hyperglycemic clamp. Also, 203 subjects were followed up for a mean
of 2.1 years.
RESULTS: We observed that the increase of risk alleles was associated with a
progressive worsening of insulin secretion (P < 0.001) mainly due to an
impairment of the dynamic phase of insulin secretion (P = 0.004); the higher the 
number of the risk alleles, the higher the chance of progression from normal
glucose tolerance (NGT) to IGT/T2D (P = 0.022). Also, for those who were IGT at
baseline, a higher risk score was associated with a lower odds to revert to NGT
(P = 0.026).
CONCLUSIONS: Obese children and adolescents developing IGT/T2D have a higher
genetic predisposition than those who do not show these diseases, and this
predisposition is mainly related to gene variants modulating the early phase of
insulin secretion. Although these data are very interesting, they need to be
replicated in other cohorts.

PMCID: PMC3898754
PMID: 24062323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Regen Med. 2013 Sep;8(5):597-612. doi: 10.2217/rme.13.42.

Pancreatic differentiation of human dental pulp CD117<U+207A> stem cells.

Ishkitiev N(1), Yaegaki K, Kozhuharova A, Tanaka T, Okada M, Mitev V, Fukuda M,
Imai T.

Author information: 
(1)Nippon Dental University, School of Life Dentistry at Tokyo, Department of
Oral Health, 1-9-20 Chiyoda-ku, 102-8159 Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: Adult stem cells cannot proliferate to produce enough cells for human
transplantation with keeping stem cell characteristics shown in the primary
culture. We established a novel culture protocol using human dental pulp stem
cells (DPSCs) that can produce quantities sufficient for human transplantation.
The present study assessed differentiation of DPSCs toward a pancreatic lineage
in serum-free conditions, which is essential for safe transplantation.
MATERIALS & METHODS: CD117<U+207A> stem cells were separated from human exfoliated
deciduous teeth (stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth; SHED) and
adult DPSCs. The cells were characterized with real-time reverse-transcription
PCR for a panel of embryonal lineage markers.
RESULTS: 82 out of 84 markers were expressed in different levels in SHED or
DPSCs. After pancreatic differentiation in vitro, we found expression of
pancreatic-specific endocrine markers insulin, glucagon, somatostatin and
pancreatic polypeptide, and exocrine marker amylase-2a in both cultures. We also 
found reprogramming in both cell cultures mimicking the embryonal stages of
development of the pancreas. Transcription factors PDX1, HHEX, MNX1, NEUROG3,
PAX4, PAX6 and NKX6-1, crucial markers for the pancreatic development, were all
activated. Expression of these factors strongly implies that the cells
differentiated toward a distinguished pancreatic lineage.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that CD117<U+207A> SHED and DPSCs are capable of
differentiation toward all functional endocrine and exocrine subsets of
pancreatic cells in serum-free conditions. SHED and DPSCs may therefore have
great potential for future cell therapy of pancreatic disorders.

PMID: 23998753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. World J Pediatr. 2013 Aug;9(3):278-80. doi: 10.1007/s12519-013-0430-4. Epub 2013 
Aug 9.

The HHEX gene is not related to congenital heart disease in 296 Chinese patients.

Deng XP(1), Zhao LX, Wang BB, Wang J, Cheng LF, Cheng Z, Suo PS, Li H, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang 110004, China.

BACKGROUND: The hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX) gene is an important 
determinant of mammalian heart development. This study aimed to identify the
potential mutations of the gene in Chinese patients with congenital heart disease
(CHD).
METHODS: We collected 296 CHD patients and 200 controls, and classified the
cardiac deformities. Then we conducted sequence analyses of the HHEX gene in
those patients.
RESULTS: In all the CHD patients, we did not find any causative mutations in the 
coding region of the HHEX gene.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the HHEX gene in
non-symptomatic CHD cases, and this has expanded our knowledge about its
etiology.

PMID: 23929257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Endocrinol Invest. 2013 Sep;36(8):654-64. doi: 10.3275/8973. Epub 2013 May 22.

The molecular causes of thyroid dysgenesis: a systematic review.

Nettore IC(1), Cacace V, De Fusco C, Colao A, Macchia PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico
II", Via S. Pansini, 5 - 80131 Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is a frequent disease occurring with
an incidence of about 1/2500 newborns/year. In 80-85% of the cases CH is caused
by alterations in thyroid morphogenesis, generally indicated by the term "thyroid
dysgenesis" (TD). TD is generally a sporadic disease, but in about 5% of the
cases a genetic origin has been demonstrated. In these cases, mutations in genes 
playing a role during thyroid morphogenesis (NKX2-1, PAX8, FOXE1, NKX2-5, TSHR)
have been reported.
AIM: This work reviews the main steps of thyroid morphogenesis and all the
genetic alterations associated with TD and published in the literature.

PMID: 23698639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jul;183(1):153-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.03.013. Epub 2013 
May 8.

Regulation of liver growth by glypican 3, CD81, hedgehog, and Hhex.

Bhave VS(1), Mars W, Donthamsetty S, Zhang X, Tan L, Luo J, Bowen WC,
Michalopoulos GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Previous studies from our laboratory have found glypican 3 (GPC3) as a negative
regulator of growth. CD81 was found to be a binding partner for GPC3, and its
expression and co-localization with GPC3 increased at the end of hepatocyte
proliferation. However, the mechanisms through which these two molecules might
regulate liver regeneration are not known. We tested the hypothesis that GPC3
down-regulates the hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway by competing with patched-1
for HH binding. We found decreased GPC3-Indian HH binding at peak proliferation
in mice followed by increase in glioblastoma 1 protein (effector of HH
signaling). We performed a yeast two-hybrid assay and identified
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (Hhex, a known transcriptional repressor) as
a binding partner for CD81. We tested the hypothesis that Hhex binding to CD81
keeps it outside the nucleus. However, when GPC3 binds to CD81, CD81-Hhex binding
decreases, resulting in nuclear translocation of Hhex and transcriptional
repression. In support of this, we found decreased GPC3-CD81 binding at
hepatocyte proliferation peak, increased CD81-Hhex binding, and decreased nuclear
Hhex. GPC3 transgenic mice were used as an additional tool to test our
hypothesis. Overall, our data suggest that GPC3 down-regulates cell proliferation
by binding to HH and down-regulating the HH signaling pathway and binding with
CD81, thus making it unavailable to bind to Hhex and causing its nuclear
translocation.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3702736
PMID: 23665349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Biol. 2013 Jun 1;378(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.02.024. Epub 2013 Apr
3.

Different thresholds of Wnt-Frizzled 7 signaling coordinate proliferation,
morphogenesis and fate of endoderm progenitor cells.

Zhang Z(1), Rankin SA, Zorn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center and the College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati OH 45229, USA.

Wnt signaling has multiple dynamic roles during development of the
gastrointestinal and respiratory systems. Differential Wnt signaling is thought
to be a critical step in Xenopus endoderm patterning such that during late
gastrula and early somite stages of embryogenesis, Wnt activity must be
suppressed in the anterior to allow the specification of foregut progenitors.
However, the foregut endoderm also expresses the Wnt-receptor Frizzled 7 (Fzd7)
as well as several Wnt ligands suggesting that the current model may be too
simple. In this study, we show that Fzd7 is required to transduce a low level of 
Wnt signaling that is essential to maintain foregut progenitors. Foregut-specific
Fzd7-depletion from the Xenopus foregut resulted in liver and pancreas agenesis. 
Fzd7-depleted embryos failed to maintain the foregut progenitor marker hhex and
exhibited decreased proliferation; in addition the foregut cells were enlarged
with a randomized orientation. We show that in the foregut Fzd7 signals via both 
the Wnt/ß-catenin and Wnt/JNK pathways and that different thresholds of Wnt-Fzd7 
activity coordinate progenitor cell fate, proliferation and morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4263287
PMID: 23562607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Diabetes. 2013 Aug;62(8):2978-83. doi: 10.2337/db12-1627. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Effects of common genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes and glycemic
traits on a- and ß-cell function and insulin action in humans.

Jonsson A(1), Ladenvall C, Ahluwalia TS, Kravic J, Krus U, Taneera J, Isomaa B,
Tuomi T, Renström E, Groop L, Lyssenko V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. jonsson@sund.ku.dk

Although meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies have identified >60
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes and/or
glycemic traits, there is little information on whether these variants also
affect a-cell function. The aim of the current study was to evaluate the effects 
of glycemia-associated genetic loci on islet function in vivo and in vitro. We
studied 43 SNPs in 4,654 normoglycemic participants from the Finnish
population-based Prevalence, Prediction, and Prevention of Diabetes-Botnia
(PPP-Botnia) Study. Islet function was assessed, in vivo, by measuring insulin
and glucagon concentrations during oral glucose tolerance test, and, in vitro, by
measuring glucose-stimulated insulin and glucagon secretion from human pancreatic
islets. Carriers of risk variants in BCL11A, HHEX, ZBED3, HNF1A, IGF1, and NOTCH2
showed elevated whereas those in CRY2, IGF2BP2, TSPAN8, and KCNJ11 showed
decreased fasting and/or 2-h glucagon concentrations in vivo. Variants in BCL11A,
TSPAN8, and NOTCH2 affected glucagon secretion both in vivo and in vitro. The
MTNR1B variant was a clear outlier in the relationship analysis between insulin
secretion and action, as well as between insulin, glucose, and glucagon. Many of 
the genetic variants shown to be associated with type 2 diabetes or glycemic
traits also exert pleiotropic in vivo and in vitro effects on islet function.

PMCID: PMC3717852
PMID: 23557703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58881. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058881. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Replication of type 2 diabetes candidate genes variations in three geographically
unrelated Indian population groups.

Ali S(1), Chopra R, Manvati S, Singh YP, Kaul N, Behura A, Mahajan A, Sehajpal P,
Gupta S, Dhar MK, Chainy GB, Bhanwer AS, Sharma S, Bamezai RN.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre of Applied Human Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi, India.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a syndrome of multiple metabolic disorders and is
genetically heterogeneous. India comprises one of the largest global populations 
with highest number of reported type 2 diabetes cases. However, limited
information about T2D associated loci is available for Indian populations. It is,
therefore, pertinent to evaluate the previously associated candidates as well as 
identify novel genetic variations in Indian populations to understand the extent 
of genetic heterogeneity. We chose to do a cost effective high-throughput
mass-array genotyping and studied the candidate gene variations associated with
T2D in literature. In this case-control candidate genes association study, 91
SNPs from 55 candidate genes have been analyzed in three geographically
independent population groups from India. We report the genetic variants in five 
candidate genes: TCF7L2, HHEX, ENPP1, IDE and FTO, are significantly associated
(after Bonferroni correction, p<5.5E-04) with T2D susceptibility in combined
population. Interestingly, SNP rs7903146 of the TCF7L2 gene passed the genome
wide significance threshold (combined P value<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.05E-08) in the studied
populations. We also observed the association of rs7903146 with blood glucose
(fasting and postprandial) levels, supporting the role of TCF7L2 gene in blood
glucose homeostasis. Further, we noted that the moderate risk provided by the
independently associated loci in combined population with Odds Ratio (OR)<1.38
increased to OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.44, (95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.67-3.59) when the risk providing genotypes of 
TCF7L2, HHEX, ENPP1 and FTO genes were combined, suggesting the importance of
gene-gene interactions evaluation in complex disorders like T2D.

PMCID: PMC3602599
PMID: 23527042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Dec;21(12):E745-54. doi: 10.1002/oby.20445. Epub
2013 Jun 13.

Modeling metabolic syndrome through structural equations of metabolic traits,
comorbid diseases, and GWAS variants.

Karns R(1), Succop P, Zhang G, Sun G, Indugula SR, Havas-Augustin D, Novokmet N, 
Durakovic Z, Milanovic SM, Missoni S, Vuletic S, Chakraborty R, Rudan P, Deka R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Department of Environmental
Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To provide a quantitative map of relationships between metabolic
traits, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) variants, metabolic syndrome
(MetS), and metabolic diseases through factor analysis and structural equation
modeling (SEM).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Cross-sectional data were collected on 1,300 individuals from
an eastern Adriatic Croatian island, including 14 anthropometric and biochemical 
traits, and diagnoses of type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease, gout, kidney
disease, and stroke. MetS was defined based on Adult Treatment Panel III
criteria. Forty widely replicated GWAS variants were genotyped. Correlated
quantitative traits were reduced through factor analysis; relationships between
factors, genetic variants, MetS, and metabolic diseases were determined through
SEM.
RESULTS: MetS was associated with obesity (P < 0.0001), dyslipidemia (P <
0.0001), glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c; P = 0.0013), hypertension (P < 0.0001), and 
hyperuricemia (P < 0.0001). Of metabolic diseases, MetS was associated with gout 
(P = 0.024), coronary heart disease was associated with HbA1c (P < 0.0001), and
type 2 diabetes was associated with HbA1c (P < 0.0001) and obesity (P = 0.008).
Eleven GWAS variants predicted metabolic variables, MetS, and metabolic diseases.
Notably, rs7100623 in HHEX/IDE was associated with HbA1c (ß = 0.03; P < 0.0001)
and type 2 diabetes (ß = 0.326; P = 0.0002), underscoring substantial impact on
glucose control.
CONCLUSIONS: Although MetS was associated with obesity, dyslipidemia, glucose
control, hypertension, and hyperuricemia, limited ability of MetS to indicate
metabolic disease risk is suggested.

Copyright © 2013 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 23512735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Apr;98(4):E744-52. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-3324. Epub 
2013 Mar 7.

Clinical and genetic risk factors for type 2 diabetes at early or late post
partum after gestational diabetes mellitus.

Kwak SH(1), Choi SH, Jung HS, Cho YM, Lim S, Cho NH, Kim SY, Park KS, Jang HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
110-744, Korea.

CONTEXT: Women with a history of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are at
increased risk of type 2 diabetes (T2DM). However, the time to progression to
diabetes differs individually.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the clinical and genetic risk factors that are
associated with T2DM early or late post partum after GDM pregnancy.
DESIGN AND SETTING: This was a hospital-based prospective cohort study that
enrolled GDM women.
PATIENTS AND OUTCOME MEASURES: A total of 843 GDM subjects were followed for the 
development of T2DM. Clinical risk factors were investigated during pregnancy, 2 
months post partum, and annually thereafter. GDM subjects were genotyped for 21
known T2DM-associated genetic variants, and their genotype frequencies were
compared with elderly nondiabetic controls.
RESULTS: At 2 months post partum, 105 (12.5%) subjects had T2DM (early
converters). Among the 370 remaining subjects who underwent more than 1 year of
follow-up, 88 (23.8%) had newly developed T2DM (late converters). Independent
risk factors for early converters were higher prepregnancy body mass index,
higher area under the curve of glucose during an antepartum oral glucose
tolerance test, lower fasting insulin concentration, and decreased ß-cell
function. Independent risk factors for late converters were higher prepregnancy
body mass index and higher glucose area under the curve. Variants in CDKN2A/2B
and HHEX were associated with early conversion, whereas variants in CDKAL1 were
associated with late conversion.
CONCLUSIONS: Obesity was a risk factor for both early and late T2DM converters.
However, early converters had more pronounced defects in ß-cell function, which
might be explained, in part, by differences in genetic predisposition.

PMID: 23471980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Diabetologia. 2013 May;56(5):1036-46. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2815-7. Epub 2013
Mar 6.

Identification of CpG-SNPs associated with type 2 diabetes and differential DNA
methylation in human pancreatic islets.

Dayeh TA(1), Olsson AH, Volkov P, Almgren P, Rönn T, Ling C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Epigenetics and Diabetes, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, Clinical Research Centre, Scania University Hospital, Jan
Waldenströmsgata 35, 205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2013 May;56(5):947-8.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To date, the molecular function of most of the reported type 2
diabetes-associated loci remains unknown. The introduction or removal of
cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) dinucleotides, which are possible sites of DNA
methylation, has been suggested as a potential mechanism through which
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can affect gene function via epigenetics. 
The aim of this study was to examine if any of 40 SNPs previously associated with
type 2 diabetes introduce or remove a CpG site and if these CpG-SNPs are
associated with differential DNA methylation in pancreatic islets of 84 human
donors.
METHODS: DNA methylation was analysed using pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: We found that 19 of 40 (48%) type 2 diabetes-associated SNPs introduce
or remove a CpG site. Successful DNA methylation data were generated for 16 of
these 19 CpG-SNP loci, representing the candidate genes TCF7L2, KCNQ1, PPARG,
HHEX, CDKN2A, SLC30A8, DUSP9, CDKAL1, ADCY5, SRR, WFS1, IRS1, DUSP8, HMGA2,
TSPAN8 and CHCHD9. All analysed CpG-SNPs were associated with differential DNA
methylation of the CpG-SNP site in human islets. Moreover, six CpG-SNPs,
representing TCF7L2, KCNQ1, CDKN2A, ADCY5, WFS1 and HMGA2, were also associated
with DNA methylation of surrounding CpG sites. Some of the type 2 diabetes
CpG-SNP sites that exhibit differential DNA methylation were further associated
with gene expression, alternative splicing events determined by splice index, and
hormone secretion in the human islets. The 19 type 2 diabetes-associated CpG-SNPs
are in strong linkage disequilibrium (r² > 0.8) with a total of 295 SNPs,
including 91 CpG-SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that the introduction or removal 
of a CpG site may be a molecular mechanism through which some of the type 2
diabetes SNPs affect gene function via differential DNA methylation and
consequently contributes to the phenotype of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3622750
PMID: 23462794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Gene. 2013 May 15;520(2):166-77. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.017. Epub 2013 Feb
28.

ACE I/D and MTHFR C677T polymorphisms are significantly associated with type 2
diabetes in Arab ethnicity: a meta-analysis.

Al-Rubeaan K(1), Siddiqui K, Saeb AT, Nazir N, Al-Naqeb D, Al-Qasim S.

Author information: 
(1)Strategic Center for Diabetes Research, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.
krubean@ksu.edu.sa

In this meta-analysis study, SNPs were investigated for their association with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) in both Arab and Caucasian ethnicities. A total of 55 SNPs 
were analyzed, of which 11 fulfilled the selection criteria, and were used for
analysis. It was found that TCF7L2 rs7903146 was significantly associated with a 
pooled OR of 1.155 (95%C.I.=1.059-1.259), p<0.0001 and I(2)=78.30% among the Arab
population, whereas among Caucasians, the pooled OR was 1.45
(95%C.I.=1.386-1.516), p<0.0001 and I(2)=77.20%. KCNJ11 rs5219 was significantly 
associated in both the populations with a pooled OR of 1.176(1.092-1.268),
p<0.0001 and I(2)=32.40% in Caucasians and a pooled OR of 1.28(1.111-1.475),
p=0.001 among Arabs. The ACE I/D polymorphism was found to be significantly
associated with a pooled OR of 1.992 (95%C.I.=1.774-2.236), p<0.0001 and
I(2)=83.20% among the Arab population, whereas among Caucasians, the pooled OR
was 1.078 (95%C.I.=0.993-1.17), p=0.073 and I(2)=0%. Similarly, MTHFR C677T
polymorphism was also found to be significantly associated among Arabs with a
pooled OR of 1.924 (95%C.I.=1.606-2.304), p<0.0001 and I(2)=27.20%, whereas among
Caucasians, the pooled OR was 0.986 (95%C.I.=0.868-1.122), p=0.835 and I(2)=0%.
Meanwhile PPARG-2 Pro12Ala, CDKN2A/2B rs10811661, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, HHEX
rs7923837, CDKAL1 rs7754840, EXT2 rs1113132 and SLC30A8 rs13266634 were found to 
have no significant association with T2D among Arabs. In conclusion, it seems
from this study that both Arabs and Caucasians have different SNPs associated
with T2D. Moreover, this study sheds light on the profound necessity for further 
investigations addressing the question of the genetic components of T2D in Arabs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23458876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. BMC Genomics. 2013 Feb 27;14:136. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-136.

A Drosophila functional evaluation of candidates from human genome-wide
association studies of type<U+2009>2<U+2009>diabetes and related metabolic traits identifies
tissue-specific roles for dHHEX.

Pendse J(1), Ramachandran PV, Na J, Narisu N, Fink JL, Cagan RL, Collins FS,
Baranski TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount SinaiSchool of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identify regions of the genome
that are associated with particular traits, but do not typically identify
specific causative genetic elements. For example, while a large number of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms associated with type<U+2009>2<U+2009>diabetes (T2D) and related traits
have been identified by human GWAS, only a few genes have functional evidence to 
support or to rule out a role in cellular metabolism or dietary interactions.
Here, we use a recently developed Drosophila model in which high-sucrose feeding 
induces phenotypes similar to T2D to assess orthologs of human GWAS-identified
candidate genes for risk of T2D and related traits.
RESULTS: Disrupting orthologs of certain T2D candidate genes (HHEX, THADA, PPARG,
KCNJ11) led to sucrose-dependent toxicity. Tissue-specific knockdown of the HHEX 
ortholog dHHEX (CG7056) directed metabolic defects and enhanced lethality; for
example, fat-body-specific loss of dHHEX led to increased hemolymph glucose and
reduced insulin sensitivity.
CONCLUSION: Candidate genes identified in human genetic studies of metabolic
traits can be prioritized and functionally characterized using a simple
Drosophila approach. To our knowledge, this is the first large-scale effort to
study the functional interaction between GWAS-identified candidate genes and an
environmental risk factor such as diet in a model organism system.

PMCID: PMC3608171
PMID: 23445342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. BMC Genet. 2013 Feb 25;14:10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-10.

Diabetes genes identified by genome-wide association studies are regulated in
mice by nutritional factors in metabolically relevant tissues and by glucose
concentrations in islets.

Ho MM(1), Yoganathan P, Chu KY, Karunakaran S, Johnson JD, Clee SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Life Sciences Institute,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have recently identified many 
new genetic variants associated with the development of type 2 diabetes. Many of 
these variants are in introns of known genes or between known genes, suggesting
they affect the expression of these genes. The regulation of gene expression is
often tissue and context dependent, for example occurring in response to dietary 
changes, hormone levels, or many other factors. Thus, to understand how these new
genetic variants associated with diabetes risk may act, it is necessary to
understand the regulation of their cognate genes.
RESULTS: We identified fourteen type 2 diabetes-associated genes discovered by
the first waves of GWAS for which there was little prior evidence of their
potential role in diabetes (Adam30, Adamts9, Camk1d, Cdc123, Cdkal1, Cdkn2a,
Cdkn2b, Ext2, Hhex, Ide, Jazf1, Lgr5, Thada and Tspan8). We examined their
expression in metabolically relevant tissues including liver, adipose tissue,
brain, and hypothalamus obtained from mice under fasted, non-fasted and high fat 
diet-fed conditions. In addition, we examined their expression in pancreatic
islets from these mice cultured in low and high glucose. We found that the
expression of Jazf1 was reduced by high fat feeding in liver, with similar
tendencies in adipose tissue and the hypothalamus. Adamts9 expression was
decreased in the hypothalamus of high fat fed mice. In contrast, the expression
of Camk1d, Ext2, Jazf1 and Lgr5 were increased in the brain of non-fasted animals
compared to fasted mice. Most notably, the expression levels of most of the genes
were decreased in islets cultured in high glucose.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide insight into the metabolic regulation of these
new type 2 diabetes genes that will be important for determining how the GWAS
variants affect gene expression and ultimately the development of type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3664586
PMID: 23442068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 1;190(7):3276-88. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202970. Epub 2013
Feb 25.

Loss of T cell progenitor checkpoint control underlies leukemia initiation in
Rag1-deficient nonobese diabetic mice.

Yui MA(1), Feng N, Zhang JA, Liaw CY, Rothenberg EV, Longmate JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA. yui@caltech.edu

NOD mice exhibit major defects in the earliest stages of T cell development in
the thymus. Genome-wide genetic and transcriptome analyses were used to
investigate the origins and consequences of an early T cell developmental
checkpoint breakthrough in Rag1-deficient NOD mice. Quantitative trait locus
analysis mapped the presence of checkpoint breakthrough cells to several known
NOD diabetes susceptibility regions, particularly insulin-dependent diabetes
susceptibility genes (Idd)9/11 on chromosome 4, suggesting common genetic origins
for T cell defects affecting this trait and autoimmunity. Genome-wide RNA
deep-sequencing of NOD and B6 Rag1-deficient thymocytes revealed the effects of
genetic background prior to breakthrough, as well as the cellular consequences of
the breakthrough. Transcriptome comparison between the two strains showed
enrichment in differentially expressed signal transduction genes, prominently
tyrosine kinase and actin-binding genes, in accord with their divergent
sensitivities to activating signals. Emerging NOD breakthrough cells aberrantly
expressed both stem cell-associated proto-oncogenes, such as Lmo2, Hhex, Lyl1,
and Kit, which are normally repressed at the commitment checkpoint, and
post-ß-selection checkpoint genes, including Cd2 and Cd5. Coexpression of genes
characteristic of multipotent progenitors and more mature T cells persists in the
expanding population of thymocytes and in the thymic leukemias that emerge with
age in these mice. These results show that Rag1-deficient NOD thymocytes have T
cell defects that can collapse regulatory boundaries at two early T cell
checkpoints, which may predispose them to both leukemia and autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3608698
PMID: 23440410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Chemosphere. 2013 May;91(8):1099-106. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.01.012.
Epub 2013 Feb 8.

Endocrine-related effects of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in zebrafish, H295R
steroidogenesis and receptor reporter gene assays.

Du G(1), Huang H, Hu J, Qin Y, Wu D, Song L, Xia Y, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.

Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), a persistent perfluorinated compound, is
distributed widely in wildlife and humans. Recent studies showed that PFOA is a
suspected endocrine disruptor. But the results are somewhat contradictory and the
mechanisms are unclear. In this study, we investigated the endocrine-related
effects of PFOA using a series of assays. The lower dose effect of PFOA on
development and endocrine-related gene expression were assessed in a short-term
zebrafish assay in vivo. To clarify the mechanism of PFOA, in vitro assays were
performed. We tested the hormone receptor activities of ER, AR, and TR against
PFOA using reporter gene assays. The hormone levels of estradiol (E2) and
testosterone (T), the expression of major steroidogenic genes and the key
steroidogenic gene regulator steroidogenic factors 1 (SF-1) were measured after
PFOA exposure in H295R steroidogenesis assay. Exposure of zebrafish embryo to
PFOA resulted in higher expression of esr1, hhex and pax. PFOA is able to
interfere with hormone receptor ER and TR. In H295R cells, PFOA could increase
the E2 production and decrease the T production, altered the expression of major 
steroidogenic genes and regulator SF-1. The current findings indicated the
potential endocrine-related effects of PFOA and provided novel information for
human risk assessment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23399300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053944. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Association study of 25 type 2 diabetes related Loci with measures of obesity in 
Indian sib pairs.

Gupta V(1), Vinay DG, Sovio U, Rafiq S, Kranthi Kumar MV, Janipalli CS, Evans D, 
Mani KR, Sandeep MN, Taylor A, Kinra S, Sullivan R, Bowen L, Timpson N, Smith GD,
Dudbridge F, Prabhakaran D, Ben-Shlomo Y, Reddy KS, Ebrahim S, Chandak GR; Indian
Migration Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi, India. udaiig@gmail.com

Obesity is an established risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D) and they are
metabolically related through the mechanism of insulin resistance. In order to
explore how common genetic variants associated with T2D correlate with body mass 
index (BMI), we examined the influence of 25 T2D associated loci on obesity risk.
We used 5056 individuals (2528 sib-pairs) recruited in Indian Migration Study and
conducted within sib-pair analysis for six obesity phenotypes. We found
associations of variants in CXCR4 (rs932206) and HHEX (rs5015480) with higher
body mass index (BMI) (ß=0.13, p=0.001) and (ß=0.09, p=0.002), respectively and
weight (ß=0.13, p=0.001) and (ß=0.09, p=0.001), respectively. CXCR4 variant was
also strongly associated with body fat (ß=0.10, p=0.0004). In addition, we
demonstrated associations of CXCR4 and HHEX with overweight/obesity (OR=1.6,
p=0.003) and (OR=1.4, p=0.002), respectively, in 1333 sib-pairs (2666
individuals). We observed marginal evidence of associations between variants at
six loci (TCF7L2, NGN3, FOXA2, LOC646279, FLJ39370 and THADA) and waist hip ratio
(WHR), BMI and/or overweight which needs to be validated in larger set of
samples. All the above findings were independent of daily energy consumption and 
physical activity level. The risk score estimates based on eight significant loci
(including nominal associations) showed associations with WHR and body fat which 
were independent of BMI. In summary, we establish the role of T2D associated loci
in influencing the measures of obesity in Indian population, suggesting common
underlying pathophysiology across populations.

PMCID: PMC3547960
PMID: 23349771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Diabetes. 2013 Jun;62(6):2004-14. doi: 10.2337/db12-1045. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

The type 2 diabetes-associated gene ide is required for insulin secretion and
suppression of a-synuclein levels in ß-cells.

Steneberg P(1), Bernardo L, Edfalk S, Lundberg L, Backlund F, Ostenson CG, Edlund
H.

Author information: 
(1)Umeå Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden.

Genome-wide association studies have identified several type 2 diabetes (T2D)
risk loci linked to impaired ß-cell function. The identity and function of the
causal genes in these susceptibility loci remain, however, elusive. The HHEX/IDE 
T2D locus is associated with decreased insulin secretion in response to oral
glucose stimulation in humans. Here we have assessed ß-cell function in Ide
knockout (KO) mice. We find that glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) is
decreased in Ide KO mice due to impaired replenishment of the releasable pool of 
granules and that the Ide gene is haploinsufficient. We also show that autophagic
flux and microtubule content are reduced in ß-cells of Ide KO mice. One important
cellular role for IDE involves the neutralization of amyloidogenic proteins, and 
we find that a-synuclein and IDE levels are inversely correlated in ß-cells of
Ide KO mice and T2D patients. Moreover, we provide evidence that both gain and
loss of function of a-synuclein in ß-cells in vivo impair not only GSIS but also 
autophagy. Together, these data identify the Ide gene as a regulator of GSIS,
suggest a molecular mechanism for ß-cell degeneration as a consequence of Ide
deficiency, and corroborate and extend a previously established important role
for a-synuclein in ß-cell function.

PMCID: PMC3661649
PMID: 23349488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Diabetes. 2013 Jun;5(2):136-45. doi: 10.1111/1753-0407.12025.

Association study of genetic variants of 17 diabetes-related genes/loci and
cardiovascular risk and diabetic nephropathy in the Chinese She population.

Chen G(1), Xu Y, Lin Y, Lai X, Yao J, Huang B, Chen Z, Huang H, Fu X, Lin L, Lai 
S, Wen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fujian Medical
University, Fujian Provincial Hospital Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Fuzhou,
China.

BACKGROUND: Genetic determinations are important in type 2 diabetes (T2DM)
pathology. We investigated associations between genetic variants of 17
diabetes-related genes/loci, T2DM and diabetic complications in Chinese She
subjects.
METHODS: A comprehensive gene-based association study was conducted using 17
single nucleotide polymorphisms in Chinese She subjects with normal glucose
tolerance (n = 1119), impaired glucose regulation (n = 1767), and T2DM (n = 443).
We applied major abnormal Minnesota Code findings to predict cardiovascular risk 
and estimated glomerular filtration rate to assess kidney function.
RESULTS: Nine variants in FTO rs8050136, WFS1 rs10010131, CDKN2A/B rs10811661,
KCNJ11 rs5219, CDC123/CAMK1D rs12779790, JAZF1 rs864745, SLC30A8 rs13266634,
CDKAL1 rs10946398, and HHEX/IDE rs5015480 were significantly associated with T2DM
(P < 0.05). Single nucleotide polymorphisms in WFS1 rs10010131, CDKN2A/B
rs10811661, CDC123/CAMK1D rs12779790, JAZF1 rs864745, FTO rs8050136, and HHEX/IDE
rs5015480 were associated with T2DM and impaired glucose regulation. Risk alleles
in WFS1 rs10010131, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, CDKAL1 rs10946398, FTO rs8050136, KCNQ1
rs2237897, and ADAMTS9 rs4607103 were significantly associated with decreased
homeostatic model assessment (HOMA)-ß (P < 0.05). After adjusting for age, gender
and body mass index, genetic variants JAZF1 rs864745, FTO rs8050136, and HHEX/IDE
rs5015480 were significantly related to reduced estimated glomerular filtration
rate (P < 0.05). Genetic variants in WFS1 rs10010131, CDKN2A/B rs10811661,
CDC123/CAMID rs12779790, JAZF1 rs864745, FTO rs80501360, CDKAL1 rs10946398, and
HHEX/IDE rs5015480 correlated with abnormal major Minnesota Code findings (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Variants in WFS1, CDKN2A/B, KCNJ11, CDC123/CAMK1D, JAZF1, SLC30A8,
FTO, CDKAL1, and HHEX/IDE genes are significantly associated with T2DM in She
Chinese subjects. JAZF1, FTO, CDKAL1, and HHEX/IDE are associated with diabetic
nephropathy. WFS1, CDKN2A/B, CDC123/CAMK1D, JAZF1, FTO, CDKAL1, and HHEX/IDE are 
associated with cardiovascular risk.

© 2013 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd and Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine.

PMID: 23298195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Jan 15;126:207-13. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2012.11.009. Epub
2012 Nov 19.

Exposure of zebrafish embryos/larvae to TDCPP alters concentrations of thyroid
hormones and transcriptions of genes involved in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis.

Wang Q(1), Liang K, Liu J, Yang L, Guo Y, Liu C, Zhou B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Tris(1,3-dichloro-2-propyl) phosphate (TDCPP) has been frequently detected in the
environment and in various biota, including fish, and has been implicated in
disruption of the thyroid endocrine system. In the present study, zebrafish
(Danio rerio) embryos were exposed to different concentrations of TDCPP (10, 50, 
100, 300 and 600 µg/L) from 2 h post-fertilization (hpf) to 144 hpf.
Developmental endpoints, and whole-body concentrations of thyroid hormones and
transcriptional profiles of genes involved in the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid 
(HPT) axis were examined. Exposure to TDCPP caused a dose-dependent developmental
toxicity, including decreased body weight, reduced hatching, survival and
heartbeat rates, and increased malformation (spinal curvature). Treatment with
the positive control chemical 3,3',5-triiodo-l-thyronine (T3) significantly
decreased whole-body thyroxin (T4) concentrations, increased whole-body T3
concentrations, and upregulated mRNA expression involved in the HPT axis as a
compensatory mechanism. These results suggested that the HPT axis in 144-hpf
zebrafish larvae was responsive to chemical exposure and could be used to
evaluate the effects of chemicals on the thyroid endocrine system. TDCPP exposure
significantly decreased whole-body T4 concentrations and increased whole-body T3 
concentrations, indicating thyroid endocrine disruption. The upregulation of
genes related to thyroid hormone metabolism (dio1 and ugt1ab) might be
responsible for decreased T4 concentrations. Treatment with TDCPP also
significantly increased transcription of genes involved in thyroid hormone
synthesis (tshß, slc5a5 and tg) and thyroid development (hhex, nkx2.1 and pax8)
as a compensatory mechanism for decreased T4 concentrations. Taken together,
these results suggest that TDCPP alters the transcription of genes involved in
the HPT axis and changes whole-body concentrations of thyroid hormones in
zebrafish embryos/larvae, thus causing an endocrine disruption of the thyroid
system.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23220413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49917. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049917. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

Hematopoietically-expressed homeobox gene three widely-evaluated polymorphisms
and risk for diabetes: a meta-analysis.

Li X(1), Li Y, Song B, Guo S, Chu S, Jia N, Niu W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The hematopoietically-expressed homeobox (HHEX) gene is identified as
a promising candidate for type 2 diabetes by genome-wide association studies,
triggering plenty of subsequent replications; however, the results are
conflicting. We therefore conducted a meta-analysis of three widely-evaluated
polymorphisms in HHEX gene and diabetes risk.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A random-effects model was adopted irrespective
of heterogeneity. Data and study quality were assessed in duplicate. There were
49 studies (cases/controls: 57931/74658) for rs1111875, 18 studies (18227/30366) 
for rs5015480 and 26 studies (25725/30579) for rs7923837, respectively. Overall
analyses indicated that rs1111875-C allele (odds ratio [OR] = 1.16; 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 1.13-1.2; P<0.0005), rs5015480-C allele (OR = 1.16; 95%
CI: 1.06-1.26; P = 0.001) and rs7923837-G allele (OR = 1.18; 95% CI: 1.12-1.24;
P<0.0005) conferred significantly increased risk for type 2 diabetes, yet
accompanying moderate to strong evidence of heterogeneity. Despite vast
divergence in allele distributions, subgroup analyses by ethnicity showed
comparable risk estimates between Asians and Caucasians for three examined
polymorphisms. Moreover, results of studies with hospital-based controls deviated
greatly from that of all qualified studies, especially for rs7923837-G allele
carrying a doubled risk (OR = 1.37 versus 1.18). Furthermore, when only large
studies (= 500 case-patients) were considered, risk effects were identical to the
overall estimates for three examined polymorphisms. The Begg's funnel plot and
Egger's test indicated low probability of publication bias.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide clarification to the significant association of 
rs1111875, rs5015480 and rs7923837 in HHEX gene with type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3499530
PMID: 23166797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nat Genet. 2012 Dec;44(12):1294-301. doi: 10.1038/ng.2435. Epub 2012 Oct 28.

Bayesian refinement of association signals for 14 loci in 3 common diseases.

Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium(1), Maller JB, McVean G, Byrnes J,
Vukcevic D, Palin K, Su Z, Howson JM, Auton A, Myers S, Morris A, Pirinen M,
Brown MA, Burton PR, Caulfield MJ, Compston A, Farrall M, Hall AS, Hattersley AT,
Hill AV, Mathew CG, Pembrey M, Satsangi J, Stratton MR, Worthington J, Craddock
N, Hurles M, Ouwehand W, Parkes M, Rahman N, Duncanson A, Todd JA, Kwiatkowski
DP, Samani NJ, Gough SC, McCarthy MI, Deloukas P, Donnelly P.

Collaborators: Aerts J, Ahmad T, Arbury H, Attwood A, Auton A, Ball SG, Balmforth
AJ, Barnes C, Barrett JC, Barroso I, Barton A, Bennett AJ, Bhaskar S, Blaszczyk
K, Bowes J, Brand OJ, Braund PS, Bredin F, Breen G, Brown MJ, Bruce IN, Bull J,
Burren OS, Burton J, Byrnes J, Caesar S, Cardin N, Clee CM, Coffey AJ, Connell
JM, Conrad DF, Cooper JD, Dominiczak AF, Downes K, Drummond HE, Dudakia D, Dunham
A, Ebbs B, Eccles D, Edkins S, Edwards C, Elliot A, Emery P, Evans DM, Evans G,
Eyre S, Farmer A, Ferrier IN, Flynn E, Forbes A, Forty L, Franklyn JA, Frayling
TM, Freathy RM, Giannoulatou E, Gibbs P, Gilbert P, Gordon-Smith K, Gray E, Green
E, Groves CJ, Grozeva D, Gwilliam R, Hall A, Hammond N, Hardy M, Harrison P,
Hassanali N, Hebaishi H, Hines S, Hinks A, Hitman GA, Hocking L, Holmes C, Howard
E, Howard P, Howson JM, Hughes D, Hunt S, Isaacs JD, Jain M, Jewell DP, Johnson
T, Jolley JD, Jones IR, Jones LA, Kirov G, Langford CF, Lango-Allen H, Lathrop
GM, Lee J, Lee KL, Lees C, Lewis K, Lindgren CM, Maisuria-Armer M, Maller J,
Mansfield J, Marchini JL, Martin P, Massey DC, McArdle WL, McGuffin P, McLay KE, 
McVean G, Mentzer A, Mimmack ML, Morgan AE, Morris AP, Mowat C, Munroe PB, Myers 
S, Newman W, Nimmo ER, O'Donovan MC, Onipinla A, Ovington NR, Owen MJ, Palin K,
Palotie A, Parnell K, Pearson R, Pernet D, Perry JR, Phillips A, Plagnol V,
Prescott NJ, Prokopenko I, Quail MA, Rafelt S, Rayner NW, Reid DM, Renwick A,
Ring SM, Robertson N, Robson S, Russell E, St Clair D, Sambrook JG, Sanderson JD,
Sawcer SJ, Schuilenburg H, Scott CE, Scott R, Seal S, Shaw-Hawkins S, Shields BM,
Simmonds MJ, Smyth DJ, Somaskantharajah E, Spanova K, Steer S, Stephens J,
Stevens HE, Stirrups K, Stone MA, Strachan DP, Su Z, Symmons DP, Thompson JR,
Thomson W, Tobin MD, Travers ME, Turnbull C, Vukcevic D, Wain LV, Walker M,
Walker NM, Wallace C, Warren-Perry M, Watkins NA, Webster J, Weedon MN, Wilson
AG, Woodburn M, Wordsworth BP, Yau C, Young AH, Zeggini E, Brown MA, Burton PR,
Caulfield MJ, Compston A, Farrall M, Gough SC, Hall AS, Hattersley AT, Hill AV,
Mathew CG, Pembrey M, Satsangi J, Stratton MR, Worthington J, Hurles ME,
Duncanson A, Ouwehand WH, Parkes M, Rahman N, Todd JA, Samani NJ, Kwiatkowski DP,
McCarthy MI, Craddock N, Deloukas P, Donnelly P.

To further investigate susceptibility loci identified by genome-wide association 
studies, we genotyped 5,500 SNPs across 14 associated regions in 8,000 samples
from a control group and 3 diseases: type 2 diabetes (T2D), coronary artery
disease (CAD) and Graves' disease. We defined, using Bayes theorem, credible sets
of SNPs that were 95% likely, based on posterior probability, to contain the
causal disease-associated SNPs. In 3 of the 14 regions, TCF7L2 (T2D), CTLA4
(Graves' disease) and CDKN2A-CDKN2B (T2D), much of the posterior probability
rested on a single SNP, and, in 4 other regions (CDKN2A-CDKN2B (CAD) and CDKAL1, 
FTO and HHEX (T2D)), the 95% sets were small, thereby excluding most SNPs as
potentially causal. Very few SNPs in our credible sets had annotated functions,
illustrating the limitations in understanding the mechanisms underlying
susceptibility to common diseases. Our results also show the value of more
detailed mapping to target sequences for functional studies.

PMCID: PMC3791416
PMID: 23104008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2013 Feb;32(2):353-60. doi: 10.1002/etc.2034. Epub 2012 Dec
27.

Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) affects hormone receptor activity,
steroidogenesis, and expression of endocrine-related genes in vitro and in vivo.

Du G(1), Hu J, Huang H, Qin Y, Han X, Wu D, Song L, Xia Y, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) is a widespread and persistent chemical in the
environment. We investigated the endocrine-disrupting effects of PFOS using a
combination of in vitro and in vivo assays. Reporter gene assays were used to
detect receptor-mediated (anti-)estrogenic, (anti-)androgenic, and (anti-)thyroid
hormone activities. The effect of PFOS on steroidogenesis was assessed both at
hormone levels in the supernatant and at expression levels of hormone-induced
genes in the H295R cell. A zebrafish-based short-term screening method was
developed to detect the effect of PFOS on endocrine function in vivo. The results
indicate that PFOS can act as an estrogen receptor agonist and thyroid hormone
receptor antagonist. Exposure to PFOS decreased supernatant testosterone (T),
increased estradiol (E2) concentrations in H295R cell medium and altered the
expression of several genes involved in steroidogenesis. In addition, PFOS
increased early thyroid development gene (hhex and pax8) expression in a
concentration-dependent manner, decreased steroidogenic enzyme gene (CYP17,
CYP19a, CYP19b) expression, and changed the expression pattern of estrogen
receptor production genes (esr1, esr2b) after 500<U+2009>µg/L PFOS treatment in
zebrafish embryos. These results indicate that PFOS has the ability to act as an 
endocrine disruptor both in vitro and in vivo by disrupting the function of
nuclear hormone receptors, interfering with steroidogenesis, and altering the
expression of endocrine-related genes in zebrafish embryo.

Copyright © 2012 SETAC.

PMID: 23074026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46705. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046705. Epub 2012 Oct 5.

Heterogeneity in white blood cells has potential to confound DNA methylation
measurements.

Adalsteinsson BT(1), Gudnason H, Aspelund T, Harris TB, Launer LJ, Eiriksdottir
G, Smith AV, Gudnason V.

Author information: 
(1)Icelandic Heart Association, Kopavogur, Iceland.

Epigenetic studies are commonly conducted on DNA from tissue samples. However,
tissues are ensembles of cells that may each have their own epigenetic profile,
and therefore inter-individual cellular heterogeneity may compromise these
studies. Here, we explore the potential for such confounding on DNA methylation
measurement outcomes when using DNA from whole blood. DNA methylation was
measured using pyrosequencing-based methodology in whole blood (n = 50-179) and
in two white blood cell fractions (n = 20), isolated using density gradient
centrifugation, in four CGIs (CpG Islands) located in genes HHEX (10 CpG sites
assayed), KCNJ11 (8 CpGs), KCNQ1 (4 CpGs) and PM20D1 (7 CpGs). Cellular
heterogeneity (variation in proportional white blood cell counts of neutrophils, 
lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and basophils, counted by an automated cell
counter) explained up to 40% (p<0.0001) of the inter-individual variation in
whole blood DNA methylation levels in the HHEX CGI, but not a significant
proportion of the variation in the other three CGIs tested. DNA methylation
levels in the two cell fractions, polymorphonuclear and mononuclear cells,
differed significantly in the HHEX CGI; specifically the average absolute
difference ranged between 3.4-15.7 percentage points per CpG site. In the other
three CGIs tested, methylation levels in the two fractions did not differ
significantly, and/or the difference was more moderate. In the examined CGIs,
methylation levels were highly correlated between cell fractions. In summary, our
analysis detects region-specific differential DNA methylation between white blood
cell subtypes, which can confound the outcome of whole blood DNA methylation
measurements. Finally, by demonstrating the high correlation between methylation 
levels in cell fractions, our results suggest a possibility to use a proportional
number of a single white blood cell type to correct for this confounding effect
in analyses.

PMCID: PMC3465258
PMID: 23071618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Apr;34(4):1309.e1-7. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.08.010. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

Discovery by the Epistasis Project of an epistatic interaction between the GSTM3 
gene and the HHEX/IDE/KIF11 locus in the risk of Alzheimer's disease.

Bullock JM(1), Medway C, Cortina-Borja M, Turton JC, Prince JA, Ibrahim-Verbaas
CA, Schuur M, Breteler MM, van Duijn CM, Kehoe PG, Barber R, Coto E, Alvarez V,
Deloukas P, Hammond N, Combarros O, Mateo I, Warden DR, Lehmann MG, Belbin O,
Brown K, Wilcock GK, Heun R, Kölsch H, Smith AD, Lehmann DJ, Morgan K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics, School of Molecular Medical Sciences, Queen's Medical Centre, 
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

Despite recent discoveries in the genetics of sporadic Alzheimer's disease, there
remains substantial "hidden heritability." It is thought that some of this
missing heritability may be because of gene-gene, i.e., epistatic, interactions. 
We examined potential epistasis between 110 candidate polymorphisms in 1757 cases
of Alzheimer's disease and 6294 control subjects of the Epistasis Project,
divided between a discovery and a replication dataset. We found an epistatic
interaction, between rs7483 in GSTM3 and rs1111875 in the HHEX/IDE/KIF11 gene
cluster, with a closely similar, significant result in both datasets. The synergy
factor (SF) in the combined dataset was 1.79, 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.35-2.36; p = 0.00004. Consistent interaction was also found in 7 out of the 8
additional subsets that we examined post hoc: i.e., it was shown in both North
Europe and North Spain, in both men and women, in both those with and without the
e4 allele of apolipoprotein E, and in people older than 75 years (SF, 2.27; 95%
CI, 1.60-3.20; p < 0.00001), but not in those younger than 75 years (SF, 1.06;
95% CI, 0.59-1.91; p = 0.84). The association with Alzheimer's disease was purely
epistatic with neither polymorphism showing an independent effect: odds ratio,
1.0; p = 0.7. Indeed, each factor was associated with protection in the absence
of the other factor, but with risk in its presence. In conclusion, this epistatic
interaction showed a high degree of consistency when stratifying by sex, the e4
allele of apolipoprotein E genotype, and geographic region.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23036584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Sep 24;13:89. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-89.

Expression analyses of the genes harbored by the type 2 diabetes and pediatric
BMI associated locus on 10q23.

Zhao J(1), Deliard S, Aziz AR, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is evidence that one of the key type 2 diabetes (T2D) loci
identified by GWAS exerts its influence early on in life through its impact on
pediatric BMI. This locus on 10q23 harbors three genes, encoding
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX), insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) and
kinesin family member 11 (KIF11), respectively.
METHODS: We analyzed the impact of adipogeneis on the mRNA and protein expression
levels of these genes in the human adipocyte Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome
(SGBS) cell line in order to investigate which could be the culprit gene(s) in
this region of linkage disequilibrium.
RESULTS: Following activation of differentiation with a PPAR<U+03B3> ligand, we observed
~20% decrease in IDE, ~40% decrease in HHEX and in excess of 80% decrease in
KIF11 mRNA levels when comparing the adipocyte and pre-adipocyte states. We also 
observed decreases in KIF11 and IDE protein levels, but conversely we observed a 
dramatic increase in HHEX protein levels. Subsequent time course experiments
revealed some marked changes in expression as early as three hours after
activation of differentiation.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the expression of all three genes at this locus
are impacted during SGBS adipogenesis and provides insights in to the possible
mechanisms of how the genes at this 10q23 locus could influence both adipocyte
differentiation and susceptibility to T2D through insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC3514277
PMID: 22998375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Diabetes. 2012 Dec;61(12):3314-21. doi: 10.2337/db11-0550. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Contribution of common genetic variation to the risk of type 2 diabetes in the
Mexican Mestizo population.

Gamboa-Meléndez MA(1), Huerta-Chagoya A, Moreno-Macías H, Vázquez-Cárdenas P,
Ordóñez-Sánchez ML, Rodríguez-Guillén R, Riba L, Rodríguez-Torres M,
Guerra-García MT, Guillén-Pineda LE, Choudhry S, Del Bosque-Plata L,
Canizales-Quinteros S, Pérez-Ortiz G, Escobedo-Aguirre F, Parra A, Lerman-Garber 
I, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biología Molecular y Medicina Genómica, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México e Instituto Nacional de 
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.

Several studies have identified nearly 40 different type 2 diabetes
susceptibility loci, mainly in European populations, but few of them have been
evaluated in the Mexican population. The aim of this study was to examine the
extent to which 24 common genetic variants previously associated with type 2
diabetes are associated in Mexican Mestizos. Twenty-four single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near genes (KCNJ11, PPARG, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX,
CDKN2A/2B, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, ARHGEF11, JAZF1, CDC123/CAMK1D, FTO, TSPAN8/LGR5,
KCNQ1, THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, NXPH1, RORA, UBQLNL, and RALGPS2) were genotyped
in Mexican Mestizos. A case-control association study comprising 1,027 type 2
diabetic individuals and 990 control individuals was conducted. To account for
population stratification, a panel of 104 ancestry-informative markers was
analyzed. Association to type 2 diabetes was found for rs13266634 (SLC30A8),
rs7923837 (HHEX), rs10811661 (CDKN2A/2B), rs4402960 (IGF2BP2), rs12779790
(CDC123/CAMK1D), and rs2237892 (KCNQ1). In addition, rs7754840 (CDKAL1) was
associated in the nonobese type 2 diabetic subgroup, and for rs7903146 (TCF7L2), 
association was observed for early-onset type 2 diabetes. Lack of association for
the rest of the variants may have resulted from insufficient power to detect
smaller allele effects.

PMCID: PMC3501881
PMID: 22923468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Leuk Res. 2012 Nov;36(11):1434-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.07.013. Epub 2012
Aug 5.

Dasatinib inhibits leukaemic cell survival by decreasing PRH/Hhex phosphorylation
resulting in increased repression of VEGF signalling genes.

Noy P(1), Gaston K, Jayaraman PS.

Author information: 
(1)School Immunity and Infection, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

The PRH/Hhex transcription factor represses multiple genes in the VEGF signalling
pathway (VSP) to inhibit myeloid cell survival. Protein kinase CK2 phosphorylates
PRH and counteracts the inhibitory effect of this protein on cell survival by
blocking the repression of VSP genes. Here we show that the BCR-ABL/Src kinase
inhibitor dasatinib decreases PRH phosphorylation and increases PRH-dependent
repression of Vegf and Vegfr-1. Moreover in the absence of PRH, dasatinib does
not inhibit cell survival as effectively as in PRH expressing cells. Thus the
re-establishment of gene control by PRH is in part responsible for the
therapeutic effects of dasatinib.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3462996
PMID: 22874537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(18):9008-20. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks687. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Protein kinase CK2 inactivates PRH/Hhex using multiple mechanisms to de-repress
VEGF-signalling genes and promote cell survival.

Noy P(1), Sawasdichai A, Jayaraman PS, Gaston K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunity and Infection, School of Medicine, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Protein kinase CK2 promotes cell survival and the activity of this kinase is
elevated in several cancers including chronic myeloid leukaemia. We have shown
previously that phosphorylation of the Proline-Rich Homeodomain protein
(PRH/Hhex) by CK2 inhibits the DNA-binding activity of this transcription factor.
Furthermore, PRH represses the transcription of multiple genes encoding
components of the VEGF-signalling pathway and thereby influences cell survival.
Here we show that the inhibitory effects of PRH on cell proliferation are
abrogated by CK2 and that CK2 inhibits the binding of PRH at the Vegfr-1
promoter. Phosphorylation of PRH by CK2 also decreases the nuclear association of
PRH and induces its cleavage by the proteasome. Moreover, cleavage of
phosphorylated PRH produces a stable truncated cleavage product which we have
termed PRH<U+0394>C (Hhex<U+0394>C). PRH<U+0394>C acts as a transdominant negative regulator of
full-length PRH by sequestering TLE proteins that function as PRH co-repressors. 
We show that this novel regulatory mechanism results in the alleviation of
PRH-mediated repression of Vegfr-1. We suggest that the re-establishment of PRH
function through inhibition of CK2 could be of value in treatment of myeloid
leukaemias, as well as other tumour types in which PRH is inactivated by
phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC3467080
PMID: 22844093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38224. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038224. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Allele summation of diabetes risk genes predicts impaired glucose tolerance in
female and obese individuals.

Linder K(1), Wagner R, Hatziagelaki E, Ketterer C, Heni M, Machicao F, Stefan N, 
Staiger H, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Nephrology, Vascular Disease and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard Karls University
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in approximately 40 genes
have been associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
genome-wide association studies. It is not known whether a similar genetic impact
on the risk of prediabetes (impaired glucose tolerance [IGT] or impaired fasting 
glycemia [IFG]) exists.
METHODS: In our cohort of 1442 non-diabetic subjects of European origin (normal
glucose tolerance [NGT] n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1046, isolated IFG n<U+200A>=<U+200A>142, isolated IGT n<U+200A>=<U+200A>140,
IFG+IGT n<U+200A>=<U+200A>114), an impact on glucose homeostasis has been shown for 9 SNPs in
previous studies in this specific cohort. We analyzed these SNPs (within or in
the vicinity of the genes TCF7L2, KCNJ11, HHEX, SLC30A8, WFS1, KCNQ1, MTNR1B,
FTO, PPARG) for association with prediabetes.
RESULTS: The genetic risk load was significantly associated with the risk for IGT
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0006) in a model including gender, age, BMI and insulin sensitivity. To
further evaluate potential confounding effects, we stratified the population on
gender, BMI and insulin sensitivity. The association of the risk score with IGT
was present in female participants (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008), but not in male participants. The
risk score was significantly associated with IGT (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008) in subjects with a
body mass index higher than 30 kg/m(2) but not in non-obese individuals.
Furthermore, only in insulin resistant subjects a significant association between
the genetic load and the risk for IGT (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01) was found.
DISCUSSION: We found that T2D genetic risk alleles cause an increased risk for
IGT. This effect was not present in male, lean and insulin sensitive subjects,
suggesting a protective role of beneficial environmental factors on the genetic
risk.

PMCID: PMC3387191
PMID: 22768041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Diabetes Care. 2012 Aug;35(8):1763-70. doi: 10.2337/dc11-2006. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Genetic risk score constructed using 14 susceptibility alleles for type 2
diabetes is associated with the early onset of diabetes and may predict the
future requirement of insulin injections among Japanese individuals.

Iwata M(1), Maeda S, Kamura Y, Takano A, Kato H, Murakami S, Higuchi K, Takahashi
A, Fujita H, Hara K, Kadowaki T, Tobe K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Toyama University,
Toyama, Japan. iwamino-tym@umin.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the clinical usefulness of a genetic risk score (GRS)
based on 14 well-established variants for type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 14 SNPs at HHEX, CDKAL1, CDKN2B,
SLC30A8, KCNJ11, IGF2BP2, PPARG, TCF7L2, FTO, KCNQ1, IRS-1, GCKR, UBE2E2, and
C2CD4A/B in 1,487 Japanese individuals (724 patients with type 2 diabetes and 763
control subjects). A GRS was calculated according to the number of risk alleles
by counting all 14 SNPs (T-GRS) as well as 11 SNPs related to ß-cell function
(ß-GRS) and then assessing the association between each GRS and the clinical
features.
RESULTS: Among the 14 SNPs, 4 SNPs were significantly associated with type 2
diabetes in the present Japanese sample (P < 0.0036). The T-GRS was significantly
associated with type 2 diabetes (P = 5.9 × 10(-21)). Among the subjects with type
2 diabetes, the ß-GRS was associated with individuals receiving insulin therapy
(ß = 0.0131, SE = 0.006, P = 0.0431), age at diagnosis (ß = -0.608, SE = 0.204, P
= 0.0029), fasting serum C-peptide level (ß = -0.032, SE = 0.0140, P = 0.022),
and C-peptide index (ß = -0.031, SE = 0.012, P = 0.0125).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the ß-GRS is associated with reduced ß-cell
functions and may be useful for selecting patients who should receive more
aggressive ß-cell-preserving therapy.

PMCID: PMC3402252
PMID: 22688542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 29;109(22):8594-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1206547109. Epub 2012 May 16.

Homeoprotein hhex-induced conversion of intestinal to ventral pancreatic
precursors results in the formation of giant pancreata in Xenopus embryos.

Zhao H(1), Han D, Dawid IB, Pieler T, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine
and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 510530 Guangzhou, China.

Liver and ventral pancreas develop from neighboring territories within the
endoderm of gastrulae. ventral pancreatic precursor 1 (vpp1) is a marker gene
that is differentially expressed in a cell population within the dorsal endoderm 
in a pattern partially overlapping with that of hematopoietically expressed
homeobox (hhex) during gastrulation. In tail bud embryos, vpp1 expression
specifically demarcates two ventral pancreatic buds, whereas hhex expression is
mainly restricted to the liver diverticulum. Ectopic expression of a critical
dose of hhex led to a greatly enlarged vpp1-positive domain and, subsequently, to
the formation of giant ventral pancreata, putatively by conversion of intestinal 
to ventral pancreatic precursor cells. Conversely, antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown of hhex resulted in a down-regulation of vpp1 
expression and a specific loss of the ventral pancreas. Furthermore, titration of
hhex with a dexamethasone-inducible hhex-VP16GR fusion construct suggested that
endogenous hhex activity during gastrulation is essential for the formation of
ventral pancreatic progenitor cells. These observations suggest that, beyond its 
role in liver development, hhex controls specification of a vpp1-positive
endodermal cell population during gastrulation that is required for the formation
of the ventral pancreas.

PMCID: PMC3365154
PMID: 22592794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 Sep;97(3):394-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.04.020. Epub 2012 May 14.

Genetic prediction of postpartum diabetes in women with gestational diabetes
mellitus.

Ekelund M(1), Shaat N, Almgren P, Anderberg E, Landin-Olsson M, Lyssenko V, Groop
L, Berntorp K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital of Helsingborg, Helsingborg, Sweden.
magnus.ekelund@med.lu.se

AIMS: To examine whether genetic variants that predispose individuals to type 2
diabetes (T2D) could predict the development of diabetes after gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: 13 SNPs (FTO rs8050136, CDKAL1 rs7754840 and rs7756992, CDKN2A/2B
rs10811661, HHEX rs1111875, IGF2BP2 rs1470579 and rs4402960, SLC30A8 rs13266634, 
TCF7L2 rs7903146, PPARG rs1801282, GCK rs1799884, HNF1A rs1169288, and KCNJ11
rs5219) were genotyped in 793 women with GDM after a median follow-up of 57
months.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age and ethnicity, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 and the FTO
rs8050136 variants significantly predicted postpartum diabetes; hazard ratio (95%
confidence interval 1.29 (1.01-1.66) and 1.36 (1.06-1.74), respectively (additive
model) versus 1.45 (1.01-2.08) and 1.56 (1.06-2.29) (dominant model)). Adjusting 
for BMI attenuated the effect of the FTO variant, suggesting that the effect was 
mediated through its effect on BMI. Combining all risk alleles to a weighted risk
score was significantly associated with the risk of postpartum diabetes (hazard
ratio 1.11, 95% confidence interval 1.05-1.18, p=0.00016 after adjustment for age
and ethnicity).
CONCLUSIONS: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 and FTO rs8050136 polymorphisms, and
particularly a weighted risk score of T2D risk alleles, predict diabetes after
GDM. Further studies in other populations are needed to confirm our results.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22591707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2012 Aug;16(8):948-51. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2012.0051.
Epub 2012 May 14.

Association of TCF7L2 and ADIPOQ with body mass index, waist-hip ratio, and
systolic blood pressure in an endogamous ethnic group of India.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Walia GK, Kalla L, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi, India. udaiig@gmail.com

Despite the increasing burden of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and its established
association with anthropometric and physiological traits as a risk factor,
genetic studies focusing on the association of T2D-related genes with
quantitative traits like body mass index (BMI), waist-hip ratio (WHR), and
systolic blood pressure (SBP) are only a few for western populations and rare for
Indian populations. The present study tested the association of TCF7L2, HHEX,
KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ with BMI, SBP, and WHR in men and women of the Aggarwal
population of India and found a differential association of TCF7L2 (rs7903146,
rs4506565, and rs12256372) and ADIPOQ (rs2241766 and rs1501299) genes with
increasing BMI, SBP, and WHR between the two sexes. We conclude that TCF7L2 and
ADIPOQ together might play an important role in explaining these traits and to
understand the biological and genetic mechanisms underlying T2D, and the role of 
other T2D genes must also be evaluated with these continuous traits.

PMCID: PMC3710444
PMID: 22583123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2012 Dec;68(12):1587-94. doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1292-8.
Epub 2012 May 9.

Analysis of common type 2 diabetes mellitus genetic risk factors in new-onset
diabetes after transplantation in kidney transplant patients medicated with
tacrolimus.

Kurzawski M(1), Dziewanowski K, Lapczuk J, Wajda A, Drozdzik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical
University, Powstancow Wlkp. 72, 70-111, Szczecin, Poland. mkurz@op.pl

PURPOSE: New-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is a major complication
after kidney transplantation. The risk factors for NODAT include the use of
calcineurin inhibitors as part of the immunosuppressive regimen, among which
tacrolimus has the most pronounced diabetogenic effect. Both NODAT and type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) share several risk factors. Recent studies have
identified a number of common genetic variants associated with increased risk of 
T2DM. Here we report the results of our study on the potential effect of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously associated with T2DM on the risk of
NODAT in kidney transplant patients medicated with tacrolimus.
METHODS: Seven SNPs in six genes known to increase the risk of T2DM in Caucasians
were genotyped by means of TaqMan assays in 235 kidney transplant patients
medicated with tacrolimus: rs4402960 and rs1470579 in IGF2BP2; rs1111875 in HHEX;
rs10811661 upstream of CDKN2A/B; rs13266634 in SLC30A8; rs1801282 in PPARG;
rs5215 in KCNJ11. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNP was also included in the multivariate 
analysis.
RESULTS: None of the analyzed SNPs was significantly associated with the risk of 
NODAT. However, the IGF2BP2 rs4402960 T allele was present significantly more
frequently among patients diagnosed with NODAT more than 2 weeks after
transplantation (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.048). Mean (± standard deviation) number of the analyzed
alleles tended to be lower in patients without NODAT (6.19<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.71) than in NODAT 
patients (6.58<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.1.95; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.09) and significantly lower compared to late-onset
NODAT patients (7.03<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.88; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.018). Multivariate analysis confirmed the
significance of 'diabetogenic' allele number in late-onset NODAT development
[odds ratio (OR) 1.37, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.05-1.78; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.017].
Additionally, individuals carrying >7 of the analyzed 'diabetogenic' alleles were
at a significantly higher risk of NODAT (OR 2.17, 95 % CI 1.18-3.99; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: Complex analysis of genotypes increasing the risk of diabetes may
lead to the identification of NODAT susceptibility predictors.

PMCID: PMC3496482
PMID: 22569928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035410. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Lack of association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genotypes and body weight
on the development of islet autoimmunity and type 1 diabetes.

Winkler C(1), Raab J, Grallert H, Ziegler AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diabetes Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg,
Germany.

AIM: To investigate whether type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes and body weight 
influence the development of islet autoantibodies and the rate of progression to 
type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: Genotyping for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of the type 2
diabetes susceptibility genes CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, FTO, HHEX-IDE, HMGA2, IGF2BP2,
KCNJ11, KCNQ1, MTNR1B, PPARG, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 was obtained in 1350 children
from parents with type 1 diabetes participating in the BABYDIAB study. Children
were prospectively followed from birth for islet autoantibodies and type 1
diabetes. Data on weight and height were obtained at 9 months, 2, 5, 8, 11, and
14 years of age.
RESULTS: None of type 2 diabetes risk alleles at the CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, FTO,
HHEX-IDE, HMGA2, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, MTNR1B, PPARG and SLC30A8 loci were
associated with the development of islet autoantibodies or diabetes. The type 2
diabetes susceptible genotype of TCF7L2 was associated with a lower risk of islet
autoantibodies (7% vs. 12% by age of 10 years, P = 0.015, P(corrected) = 0.18).
Overweight children at seroconversion did not progress to diabetes faster than
non-overweight children (HR: 1.08; 95% CI: 0.48-2.45, P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings do not support an association of type 2 diabetes risk
factors with islet autoimmunity or acceleration of diabetes in children with a
family history of type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3338842
PMID: 22558147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035984. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

The proline rich homeodomain protein PRH/Hhex forms stable oligomers that are
highly resistant to denaturation.

Shukla A(1), Burton NM, Jayaraman PS, Gaston K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research, Birmingham University Medical School,
Edgbaston, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Many transcription factors control gene expression by binding to
specific DNA sequences at or near the genes that they regulate. However, some
transcription factors play more global roles in the control of gene expression by
altering the architecture of sections of chromatin or even the whole genome. The 
ability to form oligomeric protein assemblies allows many of these proteins to
manipulate extensive segments of DNA or chromatin via the formation of structures
such as DNA loops or protein-DNA fibres.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that the proline rich homeodomain protein
PRH/Hhex forms predominantly octameric and/or hexadecameric species in solution
as well as larger assemblies. We show that these assemblies are highly stable
resisting denaturation by temperature and chemical denaturants.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that PRH is functionally and structurally related
to the Lrp/AsnC family of proteins, a group of proteins that are known to act
globally to control gene expression in bacteria and archaea.

PMCID: PMC3335068
PMID: 22540015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Dev Biol. 2012 Jun 15;366(2):142-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.04.013. Epub 2012 
Apr 21.

Zebrafish bcl2l is a survival factor in thyroid development.

Porreca I(1), De Felice E, Fagman H, Di Lauro R, Sordino P.

Author information: 
(1)IRGS, Biogem, Via Camporeale, 83031 Ariano Irpino, Avellino, Italy.

Regulated cell death, defined in morphological terms as apoptosis, is crucial for
organ morphogenesis. While differentiation of the thyroid gland has been
extensively studied, nothing is yet known about the survival mechanisms involved 
in the development of this endocrine gland. Using the zebrafish model system, we 
aim to understand whether genes belonging to the Bcl-2 family that control
apoptosis are implicated in regulation of cell survival during thyroid
development. Evidence of strong Bcl-2 gene expression in mouse thyroid precursors
prompted us to investigate the functions played by its zebrafish homologs during 
thyroid development. We show that the bcl2-like (bcl2l) gene is expressed in the 
zebrafish thyroid primordium. Morpholino-mediated knockdown and mutant analyses
revealed that bcl2l is crucial for thyroid cell survival and that this function
is tightly modulated by the transcription factors pax2a, nk2.1a and hhex. Also,
the bcl2l gene appears to control a caspase-3-dependent apoptotic mechanism
during thyroid development. Thyroid precursor cells require an actively
maintained survival mechanism to properly proceed through development. The bcl2l 
gene operates in the inhibition of cell death under direct regulation of a
thyroid specific set of transcription factors. This is the first demonstration of
an active mechanism to ensure survival of the thyroid primordium during
morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22537491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35060. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035060. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

Genetic variants of IDE-KIF11-HHEX at 10q23.33 associated with type 2 diabetes
risk: a fine-mapping study in Chinese population.

Qian Y(1), Lu F, Dong M, Lin Y, Li H, Chen J, Shen C, Jin G, Hu Z, Shen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China. yunqian@yahoo.cn

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in populations of European
ancestry have mapped a type 2 diabetes susceptibility region to chromosome
10q23.33 containing IDE, KIF11 and HHEX genes (IDE-KIF11-HHEX), which has also
been replicated in Chinese populations. However, the functional relevance for
genetic variants at this locus is still unclear. It is critical to systematically
assess the relationship of genetic variants in this region with the risk of type 
2 diabetes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A fine-mapping study was conducted by genotyping 
fourteen tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a 290-kb linkage
disequilibrium (LD) region using a two-stage case-control study of type 2
diabetes in a Chinese Han population. Suggestive associations (P<0.05) observed
from 1,200 cases and 1,200 controls in the first stage were further replicated in
1,725 cases and 2,081 controls in the second stage. Seven tagging SNPs were
consistently associated with type 2 diabetes in both stages (P<0.05), with
combined odds ratios (ORs) ranging from 1.14 to 1.33 in the combined analysis.
The most significant locus was rs7923837 [OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.33, 95% confidence interval
(CI): 1.21-1.47] at the 3'-flanking region of HHEX gene. SNP rs1111875 was found 
to be another partially independent locus (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.23, 95% CI: 1.13-1.35) in this 
region that was associated with type 2 diabetes risk. A cumulative effect of
rs7923837 and rs1111875 was observed with individuals carrying 1, 2, and 3 or 4
risk alleles having a 1.27, 1.44, and 1.73-fold increased risk, respectively, for
type 2 diabetes (P for trend<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.1E-10).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results confirm that genetic variants of the
IDE-KIF11-HHEX region at 10q23.33 contribute to type 2 diabetes susceptibility
and suggest that rs7923837 may represent the strongest signal related to type 2
diabetes risk in the Chinese Han population.

PMCID: PMC3323633
PMID: 22506066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Diabetes. 2012 Jul;61(7):1726-33. doi: 10.2337/db11-1516. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Reduced insulin exocytosis in human pancreatic ß-cells with gene variants linked 
to type 2 diabetes.

Rosengren AH(1), Braun M, Mahdi T, Andersson SA, Travers ME, Shigeto M, Zhang E, 
Almgren P, Ladenvall C, Axelsson AS, Edlund A, Pedersen MG, Jonsson A, Ramracheya
R, Tang Y, Walker JN, Barrett A, Johnson PR, Lyssenko V, McCarthy MI, Groop L,
Salehi A, Gloyn AL, Renström E, Rorsman P, Eliasson L.

Author information: 
(1)Lund University Diabetes Centre, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmo, Lund
University, Malmo, Sweden. anders.rosengren@med.lu.se

The majority of genetic risk variants for type 2 diabetes (T2D) affect insulin
secretion, but the mechanisms through which they influence pancreatic islet
function remain largely unknown. We functionally characterized human islets to
determine secretory, biophysical, and ultrastructural features in relation to
genetic risk profiles in diabetic and nondiabetic donors. Islets from donors with
T2D exhibited impaired insulin secretion, which was more pronounced in lean than 
obese diabetic donors. We assessed the impact of 14 disease susceptibility
variants on measures of glucose sensing, exocytosis, and structure. Variants near
TCF7L2 and ADRA2A were associated with reduced glucose-induced insulin secretion,
whereas susceptibility variants near ADRA2A, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, and TCF7L2 were
associated with reduced depolarization-evoked insulin exocytosis. KCNQ1, ADRA2A, 
KCNJ11, HHEX/IDE, and SLC2A2 variants affected granule docking. We combined our
results to create a novel genetic risk score for ß-cell dysfunction that includes
aberrant granule docking, decreased Ca(2+) sensitivity of exocytosis, and reduced
insulin release. Individuals with a high risk score displayed an impaired
response to intravenous glucose and deteriorating insulin secretion over time.
Our results underscore the importance of defects in ß-cell exocytosis in T2D and 
demonstrate the potential of cellular phenotypic characterization in the
elucidation of complex genetic disorders.

PMCID: PMC3379663
PMID: 22492527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;29(2):194-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.02.017.

[Association analysis of genetic polymorphisms of TCF7L2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX
genes and microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu LL(1), Lin Y, Yang ZL, Yin YB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing University of Medical Sciences,
Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
TCF7L2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX with diabetic retinopathy (DR) and nephropathy (DN)
in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: A total of 479 subjects with DR,248 with DN and 650 without DR or DN
were recruited to assess the associations between SNPs of TCF7L2 (rs7903146,
rs6585205, rs11196218), CDKAL1 (rs10946398,rs4712527), SLC30A8 (rs13266634,
rs3802177, rs11558471) and HHEX (rs1111875, rs7923837) and the development of DR 
and DN.
RESULTS: There were significant differences in genotypic and allele frequencies
of rs11558471 (SLC30A8) between DR and control groups (P< 0.05), the odds ratio
(OR) values of A and AA were 1.27 and 1.68. The distributions of genotype and
allele frequency for rs11196218 (TCF7L2) were significantly different between DN 
and control group (P=0.0051,OR=1.37). However, the P value after Bonferroni
correction showed no significant difference. No significant differences were
found in the distributions of rs13266634 and rs3802177 (SLC30A8), rs10946398
(CDKAL1), rs6585205, rs7903146 and rs11196218 (TCF7L2) and rs7923837 (HHEX)
between DR and control groups, and nor significant differences were found in
distributions of rs6585205 (TCF7L2), rs4712527 (CDKAL1), rs13266634, rs3802177
and rs11558471 (SLC30A8), and 7923837 (HHEX) between DN and control groups,
though for all comparison the OR values were greater than 1.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 genes may be associated with the 
development of DR and DN, respectively. Association between the polymorphisms of 
CKDAL1, TCF7L2 and HHEX genes and DR, and between the polymorphisms of SLC30A8,
HHEX and CDKAL1 genes and DN, cannot be excluded.

PMID: 22487833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 Sep;77(3):439-45. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2012.04389.x.

Polycystic ovary syndrome is not associated with polymorphisms of the TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, HHEX, KCNJ11, FTO and SLC30A8 genes.

Kim JJ(1), Choi YM, Cho YM, Hong MA, Chae SJ, Hwang KR, Hwang SS, Yoon SH, Moon
SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Insulin resistance is a core feature of polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS). Recently, genome-wide association studies have reported a number of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with reproducible associations and
susceptibilities to type 2 diabetes. We examined the potential association
between the diabetogenic genes uncovered in the genome-wide association studies
and PCOS in Korean women.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
PATIENTS: Women with or without PCOS.
MEASUREMENTS: DNA samples from 377 patients with PCOS and 386 age-matched
controls were genotyped.
RESULTS: None of the 12 SNPs in the six genes (KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, FTO
and CDKAL1) uncovered in the genome-wide association studies were associated with
PCOS. For further analysis, the patients with PCOS were divided into two or three
subgroups according to genotype, and the associations between the genotypes and
insulin resistance or insulin secretory capacity were assessed. No SNPs were
significantly associated with HOMA-IR, HOMA (ßcell) (%), or 2-h 75-g oral glucose
tolerance test insulin levels in the patients with PCOS; there were no
significant associations with other serum hormonal and metabolic markers, such as
androgen or glucose levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the six type 2 diabetes-associated genes
identified in genome-wide association studies are not associated with PCOS.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22443257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Acta Diabetol. 2013 Jun;50(3):459-62. doi: 10.1007/s00592-012-0389-y. Epub 2012
Mar 22.

A SNP in G6PC2 predicts insulin secretion in type 1 diabetes.

Sanda S(1), Wei S, Rue T, Shilling H, Greenbaum C.

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute, 1201 9th Ave., IN-RC, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
ssanda@benaroyaresearch.org

We investigated whether single nucleotide polymorphisms in genes related to
glucose metabolism correlate with insulin secretion in type 1 diabetes patients. 
A cohort of 49 type 1 diabetes patients underwent serial mixed meal tolerance
tests to assess insulin secretion. Patients were genotyped for SNPs related to
glucose metabolism: CDKAL1 rs7754840, G6PC2 rs560887, HHEX rs1111875, KCNJ11
rs5215. Recently diagnosed patients (<100 days) homozygous for the G allele of
G6PC2 had higher area under the curve C-peptide on mixed meal tolerance tests
compared to non-homozygous patients (344.8 ± 203.2 vs. 167.9 ± 131.5, p = 0.04). 
Other SNPs did not correlate with insulin secretion in the new onset period. In a
longitudinal survival analysis, homozygosity for the minor allele (A) in G6PC2
predicted more rapid loss of insulin secretion over time. A SNP in the beta cell 
gene G6PC2 may correlate with preserved insulin secretion in type 1 diabetes.

PMID: 22438186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2012 May;15(3):258-64. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0b013e328351f543.

Genetic origins of low birth weight.

Yaghootkar H(1), Freathy RM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Smaller size at birth is associated with a higher risk of type
2 diabetes in later life, but the mechanisms behind this association are poorly
understood. Genetic variants which influence susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
via effects on insulin secretion or action are good candidates for association
with birth weight because foetal insulin is a key foetal growth factor. This
review will focus on recent progress in identifying associations between common
genetic variants and birth weight.
RECENT FINDINGS: Foetal genetic variants at two loci (near CCNL1 and in ADCY5)
were robustly associated with birth weight via the foetal genotype in the first
genome-wide association study of birth weight. The birth weight-lowering allele
at ADCY5 also predisposes to type 2 diabetes. In addition, evidence from studies 
of other type 2 diabetes loci is accumulating for association between the foetal 
risk alleles at CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE and lower birth weight, and the maternal risk
alleles at GCK and TCF7L2 and higher birth weight.
SUMMARY: The associations with birth weight at ADCY5, CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE support
the foetal insulin hypothesis, which proposed that type 2 diabetes and lower
birth weight could be two phenotypes of the same genotype. The associations at
GCK and TCF7L2 illustrate that maternal genes are also important determinants of 
birth weight.

PMID: 22406741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Hum Genet. 2012 May;57(5):305-10. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.21. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Association between type 2 diabetes genetic susceptibility loci and visceral and 
subcutaneous fat area as determined by computed tomography.

Hotta K(1), Kitamoto A, Kitamoto T, Mizusawa S, Teranishi H, So R, Matsuo T,
Nakata Y, Hyogo H, Ochi H, Nakamura T, Kamohara S, Miyatake N, Kotani K, Komatsu 
R, Itoh N, Mineo I, Wada J, Yoneda M, Nakajima A, Funahashi T, Miyazaki S,
Tokunaga K, Masuzaki H, Ueno T, Chayama K, Hamaguchi K, Yamada K, Hanafusa T,
Oikawa S, Yoshimatsu H, Sakata T, Tanaka K, Matsuzawa Y, Nakao K, Sekine A.

Author information: 
(1)EBM Research Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine,Yoshida-Konoecho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. kikukoh@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Visceral fat accumulation has an important role in the development of several
metabolic disorders, such as type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemia and hypertension. New 
genetic loci that contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes have been
identified by genome-wide association studies. To examine the association of type
2 diabetes susceptibility loci and visceral fat accumulation, we genotyped 1279
Japanese subjects (556 men and 723 women), who underwent computed tomography for 
measurements of visceral fat area (VFA) and subcutaneous fat area (SFA) for the
following single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs): NOTCH2 rs10923931, THADA
rs7578597, PPARG rs1801282, ADAMTS9 rs4607103, IGF2BP2 rs1470579, VEGFA
rs9472138, JAZF1 rs864745, CDKN2A/CDKN2B rs564398 and rs10811661, HHEX rs1111875 
and rs5015480, TCF7L2 rs7901695, KCNQ1 rs2237892, KCNJ11 rs5215 and rs5219, EXT2 
rs1113132, rs11037909, and rs3740878, MTNR1B rs10830963, DCD rs1153188,
TSPAN8/LGR5 rs7961581, and FTO rs8050136 and rs9939609. None of the above SNPs
were significantly associated with VFA. The FTO rs8050136 and rs9939609 risk
alleles exhibited significant associations with body mass index (BMI; P=0.00088
and P=0.0010, respectively) and SFA (P=0.00013 and P=0.00017, respectively). No
other SNPs were significantly associated with BMI or SFA. Our results suggest
that two SNPs in the FTO gene are associated with subcutaneous fat accumulation. 
The contributions of other SNPs are inconclusive because of a limitation of the
sample power.

PMID: 22377712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jul 6;358(1):36-45. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.02.013.
Epub 2012 Feb 19.

Functional inactivation of thyroid transcription factor-1 in PCCl3 thyroid cells.

Christophe-Hobertus C(1), Lefort A, Libert F, Christophe D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche Interdisciplinaire en Biologie Humaine et Moléculaire,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, IBMM, Biopark Charleroi Brussels South, B-6041
Gosselies, Belgium.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is a key regulator of thyroid development 
and function. In order to identify the genes whose expression depends on TTF-1
transcriptional activity within the thyrocyte we analyzed the consequence of the 
functional inactivation of this factor in PCCl3 cells. The expression of a fusion
protein composed of the DNA binding domain of TTF-1 and of the strong repressive 
domain of the engrailed protein resulted in a dramatic loss of epithelial cell
morphology and in proliferation arrest. These changes were reversed when the
inhibition of endogenous TTF-1 was relieved. No change was observed when a
similar fusion protein containing point mutations abolishing DNA binding activity
was produced in the cells. Besides the expected down-regulation of expression of 
the main genes linked to the differentiated thyroid function, we observed a
decreased expression of the transcription factors Hhex, Pax 8 and TTF-2 and of
E-cadherin. By contrast, both ThOX-1 and DUOXA-1 genes were up-regulated, as well
as the ones encoding vimentin and several proteins involved in cell cycle arrest.
Our data thus extend the known roles of TTF-1 in thyroid development and in the
expression of differentiated function in the adult organ to the control of
epithelial morphology and of cell division in mature thyrocytes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22370158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Leukemia. 2012 Apr;26(4):572-81. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.330. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

NKL homeobox genes in leukemia.

Homminga I(1), Pieters R, Meijerink JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC/Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

NK-like (NKL) homeobox genes code for transcription factors, which can act as key
regulators in fundamental cellular processes. NKL genes have been implicated in
divergent types of cancer. In this review, we summarize the involvement of NKL
genes in cancer and leukemia in particular. NKL genes can act as tumor-suppressor
genes and as oncogenes, depending on tissue type. Aberrant expression of NKL
genes is especially common in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). In
T-ALL, 8 NKL genes have been reported to be highly expressed in specific T-ALL
subgroups, and in ~30% of cases, high expression is caused by chromosomal
rearrangement of 1 of 5 NKL genes. Most of these NKL genes are normally not
expressed in T-cell development. We hypothesize that the NKL genes might share a 
similar downstream effect that promotes leukemogenesis, possibly due to mimicking
a NKL gene that has a physiological role in early hematopoietic development, such
as HHEX. All eight NKL genes posses a conserved Eh1 repressor motif, which has an
important role in regulating downstream targets in hematopoiesis and possibly in 
leukemogenesis as well. Identification of a potential common leukemogenic NKL
downstream pathway will provide a promising subject for future studies.

PMID: 22094586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Aug 28;17(32):3684-90. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i32.3684.

Future of liver transplantation: non-human primates for patient-specific organs
from induced pluripotent stem cells.

Sanal MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, D-1, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110070,
India. sanalmg@gmail.com

Strategies to fill the huge gap in supply versus demand of human organs include
bioartificial organs, growing humanized organs in animals, cell therapy, and
implantable bioengineered constructs. Reproducing the complex relations between
different cell types, generation of adequate vasculature, and immunological
complications are road blocks in generation of bioengineered organs, while
immunological complications limit the use of humanized organs produced in
animals. Recent developments in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) biology
offer a possibility of generating human, patient-specific organs in non-human
primates (NHP) using patient-derived iPSC and NHP-derived iPSC lacking the
critical developmental genes for the organ of interest complementing a NHP
tetraploid embryo. The organ derived in this way will have the same human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) profile as the patient. This approach can be curative in 
genetic disorders as this offers the possibility of gene manipulation and
correction of the patient's genome at the iPSC stage before tetraploid
complementation. The process of generation of patient-specific organs such as the
liver in this way has the great advantage of making use of the natural signaling 
cascades in the natural milieu probably resulting in organs of great quality for 
transplantation. However, the inexorable scientific developments in this
direction involve several social issues and hence we need to educate and prepare 
society in advance to accept the revolutionary consequences, good, bad and ugly.

PMCID: PMC3181453
PMID: 21990949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(10):1589-95.

Overexpression of hematopoietically expressed homeoprotein induces nonapoptotic
cell death in mouse prechondrogenic ATDC5 cells.

Morimoto R(1), Obinata A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Science, Faculty of Physiological Chemistry II,
Teikyo University, Sagamihara 2525195, Japan. r-morimo@pharm.teikyo-u.ac.jp

Physiological cell death is an essential event in normal development and
maintenance of homeostasis. Recently, the morphological and pharmacological
characteristics of programmed cell death, which are distinct from those of
apoptosis under physiological and pathological conditions, have been reported.
However, the molecular mechanism and executioner of this type of cell death are
unknown. We show that overexpression of hematopoietically expressed homeoprotein 
(Hex), a homeoprotein of divergent type, and enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) fusion protein (Hex-EGFP) induces cell death in mouse chondrogenic cell
line ATDC5. The expression rate of Hex-EGFP decreased more rapidly than that of
EGFP 96 h after transfection. The time-lapse image of living cells revealed the
Hex-EGFP-positive cells rapidly died in a necrosis-like fashion. The nuclei of
Hex-EGFP-expressing cells were rarely fragmented; however, these cells were
negative for terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine
triphosphate nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining. The expression rate of Hex-EGFP 
clearly increased by treatment with radical scavengers, propyl gallate and
butylated hydroxyanisole, slightly increased with a caspase inhibitor, zVAD-fmk, 
and was not affected by N-acetyl cysteine in ATDC5 cells. A fluorescent probe
indicated that reactive oxygen species (ROS) were localized near the nuclei in
Hex-EGFP-positive cells. In differentiated ATDC5 cells, as hypertrophic
chondrocyte-like cells, the expression rate of Hex-EGFP increased above that in
uninduced ATDC5 cells. These results suggest that Hex induces nonapoptotic cell
death through local accumulation of reactive oxygen species, and mature
chondrocytes, which express Hex, might be able to escape cell death induced by
Hex in cartilage.

PMID: 21963500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Med Oncol. 2012 Jun;29(2):1059-67. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-9989-6. Epub 2011 Jun 
8.

A potential role for the homeoprotein Hhex in hepatocellular carcinoma
progression.

Su J(1), You P, Zhao JP, Zhang SL, Song SH, Fu ZR, Ye LW, Zi XY, Xie DF, Zhu MH, 
Hu YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin
Rd., Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the most common primary malignant tumor of the
liver, often associated with the dysregulation of transcriptional pathways
involved in cell growth and differentiation. The hematopoietically expressed
homeobox protein (Hhex) is an important transcription factor throughout liver
development and is essential to liver bud formation and hepatoblast
differentiation. Here, we report a relationship between Hhex expression and HCC. 
First, adenovirus-mediated Hhex delivery into the hepatoma cell line, Hepa1-6,
resulted in decreased expression of several proto-oncogenes (c-Jun and Bcl2),
increased expression of some tumor suppressor genes (P53 and Rb), and enhanced
expression of a cluster of hepatocytic and bile ductular markers. Second, Hhex
expression significantly attenuated Hepa1-6 tumorigenicity in nude mice. Third,
we report a correlation between Hhex expression and the differentiation state of 
human HCC. In 24 cases of clinical specimens, there was a significant difference 
in Hhex expression between poorly differentiated HCC and well-differentiated HCC 
(P < 0.001). Taken together, these results indicate that Hhex is a potential
candidate molecular marker for HCC pathological evaluation, suggesting a need to 
evaluate Hhex as a potential target for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 21656028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Metabolism. 2011 Nov;60(11):1634-40. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2011.03.014. Epub
2011 May 6.

Genotype risk score of common susceptible variants for prediction of type 2
diabetes mellitus in Japanese: the Shimanami Health Promoting Program (J-SHIPP
study). Development of type 2 diabetes mellitus and genotype risk score.

Tabara Y(1), Osawa H, Kawamoto R, Onuma H, Shimizu I, Makino H, Kohara K, Miki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Research and Education, Ehime University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Toon City, Ehime, Japan. tabara@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

Recent genomewide association studies have successfully identified several
genotypes susceptible to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, only a few
studies have investigated whether these variations confer a risk of the future
development of T2DM. We conducted a longitudinal genetic epidemiological study to
clarify the prognostic significance of the T2DM-associated variants. The sample
population consisted of 2037 middle-aged to elderly community residents. Personal
health records were obtained from a clinical database administered by the local
government. Genotype risk score was calculated by the following variants, namely,
KCNQ1, TCF7L2, CDKAL1, HHEX, IGF2BP2, CDKN2AB, SLC30A8, KCNJ11, PPARG, and GCKR. 
Susceptibility of these variants in Japanese has been confirmed by association
analysis. Among the 1824 subjects who did not have T2DM at baseline, 95 cases of 
T2DM were newly diagnosed during the 9.4-year follow-up period. Mean genotype
risk score in these subjects was significantly higher than that in the subjects
who remained nondiabetic (9.5 ± 1.8 vs 9.1 ± 2.0, P = .042). Although the initial
mean body mass index (24.7 ± 3.2 vs 23.0 ± 2.8, P < .001) and initial glucose
(106 ± 18 vs 90 ± 13, P < .001) were also significantly higher in those subjects 
who developed T2DM, the genotype risk score remained an independent determinant
of the development of T2DM even after adjustment for these parameters and
possible confounding factors. Per-allele odds ratio for the development of T2DM
was 1.12 (95% confidence interval, 1.00-1.25; P = .049). Type 2 diabetes
mellitus-susceptible genetic variants identified by a cross-sectional genomewide 
association study were significantly associated with the future development of
T2DM in a general population sample.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21550079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS Genet. 2011 Apr;7(4):e1002025. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002025. Epub 2011 
Apr 14.

Eight common genetic variants associated with serum DHEAS levels suggest a key
role in ageing mechanisms.

Zhai G(1), Teumer A, Stolk L, Perry JR, Vandenput L, Coviello AD, Koster A, Bell 
JT, Bhasin S, Eriksson J, Eriksson A, Ernst F, Ferrucci L, Frayling TM, Glass D, 
Grundberg E, Haring R, Hedman AK, Hofman A, Kiel DP, Kroemer HK, Liu Y, Lunetta
KL, Maggio M, Lorentzon M, Mangino M, Melzer D, Miljkovic I; MuTHER Consortium,
Nica A, Penninx BW, Vasan RS, Rivadeneira F, Small KS, Soranzo N, Uitterlinden
AG, Völzke H, Wilson SG, Xi L, Zhuang WV, Harris TB, Murabito JM, Ohlsson C,
Murray A, de Jong FH, Spector TD, Wallaschofski H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London,
London, United Kingdom.

Dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) is the most abundant circulating steroid 
secreted by adrenal glands--yet its function is unknown. Its serum concentration 
declines significantly with increasing age, which has led to speculation that a
relative DHEAS deficiency may contribute to the development of common age-related
diseases or diminished longevity. We conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide
association data with 14,846 individuals and identified eight independent common 
SNPs associated with serum DHEAS concentrations. Genes at or near the identified 
loci include ZKSCAN5 (rs11761528; p = 3.15 × 10(-36)), SULT2A1 (rs2637125; p =<U+200A>
2.61 × 10(-19)), ARPC1A (rs740160; p =<U+200A> 1.56 × 10(-16)), TRIM4 (rs17277546; p =<U+200A> 
4.50 × 10(-11)), BMF (rs7181230; p = 5.44 × 10(-11)), HHEX (rs2497306; p =<U+200A> 4.64 
× 10(-9)), BCL2L11 (rs6738028; p = 1.72 × 10(-8)), and CYP2C9 (rs2185570; p =
2.29 × 10(-8)). These genes are associated with type 2 diabetes, lymphoma, actin 
filament assembly, drug and xenobiotic metabolism, and zinc finger proteins.
Several SNPs were associated with changes in gene expression levels, and the
related genes are connected to biological pathways linking DHEAS with ageing.
This study provides much needed insight into the function of DHEAS.

PMCID: PMC3077384
PMID: 21533175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2011 Jun;15(6):399-405. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0199.
Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Association of genetic variations in TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, and EXT2
with Type 2 diabetes mellitus in Tunisia.

Kifagi C(1), Makni K, Boudawara M, Mnif F, Hamza N, Abid M, Granier C, Ayadi H.

Author information: 
(1)Targets for Diagnosis and Therapeutic in the Human Pathology Research Unit,
Center of Biotechnology of Sfax, route Sidi Mansour km 6, Sfax, Tunisia.

AIM: In recent genome-wide association studies, genetic variants in TCF7L2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, and EXT2 were associated with risk for type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM). We aimed at investigating the association of these
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with T2DM and defining their corresponding
allelic and genotypic combinations in the Tunisian population. We also tried to
determine the effect of R325W of SLC30A8 on the modeled structural properties of 
the protein.
METHODS: Five SNPs were genotyped in 331 T2DM Tunisian patients and 403 healthy
subjects by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. A
model of residues 318-366 of the SLC30A8 protein was built by homology modeling.
RESULTS: LOC387761 provided the strongest evidence for replication, where
rs7480010 presented a risk of 2.41 with T2DM, followed by rs1111875 in HHEX (odds
ratio=1.95) and rs13266634 in SLC30A8 (odds ratio=1.59). None of the two other
SNPs previously reported was associated. The highest risk of T2DM was 3.1,
obtained by the genotype combination of the three associated SNPs. Modeling of
the cytoplasmic part of the SLC30A8 protein showed that the R325W change might
affect the electrostatic potential of the SLC30A8 protein.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that the SLC30A8, HHEX, and LOC387761 are more likely to
represent the genuine signals of T2DM in the Tunisian population.

PMID: 21510814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS Genet. 2011 Apr;7(4):e1001363. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001363. Epub 2011 
Apr 7.

Transferability of type 2 diabetes implicated loci in multi-ethnic cohorts from
Southeast Asia.

Sim X(1), Ong RT, Suo C, Tay WT, Liu J, Ng DP, Boehnke M, Chia KS, Wong TY,
Seielstad M, Teo YY, Tai ES.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Epidemiology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.

Recent large genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple loci
which harbor genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D),
many of which encode proteins not previously suspected to be involved in the
pathogenesis of T2D. Most GWAS for T2D have focused on populations of European
descent, and GWAS conducted in other populations with different ancestry offer a 
unique opportunity to study the genetic architecture of T2D. We performed
genome-wide association scans for T2D in 3,955 Chinese (2,010 cases, 1,945
controls), 2,034 Malays (794 cases, 1,240 controls), and 2,146 Asian Indians (977
cases, 1,169 controls). In addition to the search for novel variants implicated
in T2D, these multi-ethnic cohorts serve to assess the transferability and
relevance of the previous findings from European descent populations in the three
major ethnic populations of Asia, comprising half of the world's population. Of
the SNPs associated with T2D in previous GWAS, only variants at CDKAL1 and
HHEX/IDE/KIF11 showed the strongest association with T2D in the meta-analysis
including all three ethnic groups. However, consistent direction of effect was
observed for many of the other SNPs in our study and in those carried out in
European populations. Close examination of the associations at both the CDKAL1
and HHEX/IDE/KIF11 loci provided some evidence of locus and allelic heterogeneity
in relation to the associations with T2D. We also detected variation in linkage
disequilibrium between populations for most of these loci that have been
previously identified. These factors, combined with limited statistical power,
may contribute to the failure to detect associations across populations of
diverse ethnicity. These findings highlight the value of surveying across diverse
racial/ethnic groups towards the fine-mapping efforts for the casual variants and
also of the search for variants, which may be population-specific.

PMCID: PMC3072366
PMID: 21490949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cell Cycle. 2011 Apr 15;10(8):1312-21. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

p53-dependent regulation of growth, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
stemness in normal pancreatic epithelial cells.

Pinho AV(1), Rooman I, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Patología Molecular, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1715.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Aug 15;10(16):2616-7.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1717.

Pancreatic acinar cells acquire in vitro a pancreatic progenitor phenotype
associated with activation of p53, growth arrest and senescence. A similar
program is also activated in chronic pancreatitis. To assess the mechanisms
involved in this process, we cultured pancreatic acinar cells from wild-type,
p53(-/-), p16(-/-) and p21(-/-) mice. Cultures from p53(-/-) mice, but not those 
from p16(-/-) or p21(-/-) mice, display an enhanced proliferation and can be
expanded continuously for more than 20 passages. p53(-/-) cells also display
features of stemness such as enhanced sphere formation, increased expression of
pancreatic multipotent progenitor markers (Ptf1a, Pdx1, Cpa1, c-myc, Sox9 and
Hnf1b), and of the stemness regulators Bmi1 and Klf4. Upon subculture, p53(-/-)
cells undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and express high levels 
of vimentin and of the transcriptional regulators Snai1, Snai2, Twist, Zeb1 and
Zeb2. Genetic lineage tracing unequivocally demonstrates the epithelial origin of
the cells with mesenchymal phenotype. These cells express the endodermal markers 
Hhex, Pdx1, Sox9, Hnf1b, Foxa2, Gata6 and Sox17, and the stem cell markers c-myc,
Bmi1 and Klf4. Cultures from p53(+/-) mice display intermediate levels of the
transcription factors involved in EMT but do not surpass the growth arrest. Our
findings support the notion that p53 controls both growth and epithelial cell
differentiation in the pancreas. These observations have important implications
regarding the mechanisms through which p53 inactivation in tumors may be
associated with aggressive biological behavior.

PMID: 21490434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biochem. 2011 Jul;150(1):61-71. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvr039. Epub 2011 Mar 30.

Homeoprotein Hex is expressed in mouse developing chondrocytes.

Morimoto R(1), Yamamoto A, Akimoto Y, Obinata A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry II, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science,
Teikyo University, Kanagawa, Japan. r-morimo@pharm.teikyo-u.ac.jp

Endochondral ossification is a complex process involving the formation of
cartilage and the subsequent replacement by mineralized bone. Although the
proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes are strictly regulated, the
molecular mechanisms involved are not completely understood. Here, we show that a
divergent-type homeobox gene, hematopoietically expressed homeobox gene (HEX), is
expressed in mouse chondrogenic cell line ATDC5. The expression of Hex protein
drastically increased during differentiation. The chondrogenic
differentiation-enhanced expression of Hex protein was also observed in
chondrocytes in the tibia of embryonic day 15.5 (E15.5) mouse embryos. The
localization of Hex protein in the chondrocytes of the tibia changed in
association with maturation; namely, there was Hex protein in the cytoplasm near 
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in resting chondrocytes, which moved to the
nucleus in prehypertrophic chondrocytes, and thereafter entered the ER in
hypertrophic chondrocytes. These results suggest Hex expression and subcellular
localization are associated with chondrocyte maturation.

PMID: 21454303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 18;6(3):e17620. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017620.

Correct patterning of the primitive streak requires the anterior visceral
endoderm.

Stuckey DW(1), Di Gregorio A, Clements M, Rodriguez TA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology Group, Medical Research Council's Clinical Sciences
Centre, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

Anterior-posterior axis specification in the mouse requires signalling from a
specialised extra-embryonic tissue called the anterior visceral endoderm (AVE).
AVE precursors are induced at the distal tip of the embryo and move to the
prospective anterior. Embryological and genetic analysis has demonstrated that
the AVE is required for anterior patterning and for correctly positioning the
site of primitive streak formation by inhibiting Nodal activity. We have carried 
out a genetic ablation of the Hex-expressing cells of the AVE (Hex-AVE) by
knocking the Diphtheria toxin subunit A into the Hex locus in an inducible
manner. Using this model we have identified that, in addition to its requirement 
in the anterior of the embryo, the Hex-AVE sub-population has a novel role
between 5.5 and 6.5dpc in patterning the primitive streak. Embryos lacking the
Hex-AVE display delayed initiation of primitive streak formation and
miss-patterning of the anterior primitive streak. We demonstrate that in the
absence of the Hex-AVE the restriction of Bmp2 expression to the proximal
visceral endoderm is also defective and expression of Wnt3 and Nodal is not
correctly restricted to the posterior epiblast. These results, coupled with the
observation that reducing Nodal signalling in Hex-AVE ablated embryos increases
the frequency of phenotypes observed, suggests that these primitive streak
patterning defects are due to defective Nodal signalling. Together, our
experiments demonstrate that the AVE is not only required for anterior
patterning, but also that specific sub-populations of this tissue are required to
pattern the posterior of the embryo.

PMCID: PMC3060820
PMID: 21445260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jun;19(6):672-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.6. Epub 2011 Feb 2.

Heterogeneity of genetic associations of CDKAL1 and HHEX with susceptibility of
type 2 diabetes mellitus by gender.

Ryoo H(1), Woo J, Kim Y, Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Systems Biomedical Science, Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea.

We examined the genetic associations of previously identified sequence variants
with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its potentially genetic heterogeneity by
gender in a large-scale cohort. A total of 613 T2DM patients and 8221 control
subjects from the Korea Association REsource (KARE) cohort were included in the
analysis of genetic association of T2DM with 33 nucleotide polymorphic markers
identified by previous studies. The association analysis was further conducted
with data partitioned by gender. The association analysis resulted in five
nucleotide sequence variants associated with the susceptibility of T2DM after
Bonferonni correction (P < 0.0015). One was located near the gene of
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX), and the others were all in the gene 
of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit-associated protein 1-like 1
(CDKAL1). Further analysis revealed that the sequence variant (rs5015480) near
HHEX and two SNPs (rs7756992 and rs9465871) in CDKAL1 were associated with the
susceptibility of T2DM in females (P<0.005), but not in males (P>0.005). We
suggested heterogeneous genetic associations of the T2DM susceptibility with the 
CDKAL1 and HHEX genes by gender.

PMCID: PMC3110056
PMID: 21368910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Diabetologia. 2011 Jun;54(6):1368-74. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2063-2. Epub 2011
Feb 25.

Replication of 13 genome-wide association (GWA)-validated risk variants for type 
2 diabetes in Pakistani populations.

Rees SD(1), Hydrie MZ, Shera AS, Kumar S, O'Hare JP, Barnett AH, Basit A, Kelly
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Laboratory, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, The Medical School, University of
Birmingham, Vincent Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. s.d.rees@bham.ac.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies and subsequent
replication studies have greatly increased the number of validated type 2
diabetes susceptibility variants, but most of these have been conducted in
European populations. Despite the high prevalence of the disease in South Asians,
studies investigating GWA-validated type 2 diabetes risk variants in this ethnic 
group are limited. We investigated 30 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
predominantly derived from recent GWA studies, to determine if and to what extent
these variants affect type 2 diabetes risk in two Punjabi populations,
originating predominantly from the District of Mirpur, Pakistan.
METHODS: Thirty SNPs were genotyped in 1,678 participants with type 2 diabetes
and 1,584 normoglycaemic control participants from two populations; one resident 
in the UK and one indigenous to the District of Mirpur.
RESULTS: SNPs in or near PPARG, TCF7L2, FTO, CDKN2A/2B, HHEX/IDE, IGF2BP2,
SLC30A8, KCNQ1, JAZF1, IRS1, KLF14, CHCHD9 and DUSP9 displayed significant (p <
0.05) associations with type 2 diabetes, with similar effect sizes to those seen 
in European populations. A constructed genetic risk score was associated with
type 2 diabetes (p = 5.46 × 10(-12)), BMI (p = 2.25 × 10(-4)) and age at onset of
diabetes (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We have demonstrated that 13 variants confer an
increased risk of type 2 diabetes in our Pakistani populations; to our knowledge 
this is the first time that SNPs in or near KCNQ1, JAZF1, IRS1, KLF14, CHCHD9 and
DUSP9 have been significantly associated with the disease in South Asians.
Large-scale studies and meta-analyses of South Asian populations are needed to
further confirm the effect of these variants in this ethnic group.

PMID: 21350842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Feb;46(1):R33-42.

Morphogenetics of early thyroid development.

Fagman H(1), Nilsson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy at 
the University of Gothenburg, Gula Stråket 8, 413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.
henrik.fagman@gu.se

The thyroid develops from the foregut endoderm. Yet uncharacterized inductive
signals specify endoderm progenitors to a thyroid cell fate that assembles in the
pharyngeal floor from which the primordium buds and migrates to the final
position of the gland. The morphogenetic process is regulated by both
cell-autonomous (e.g. activated by NKX2-1, FOXE1, PAX8, and HHEX) and
mesoderm-derived (e.g. mediated by TBX1 and fibroblast growth factors) mechanisms
acting in concert to promote growth and survival of progenitor cells. The
developmental role of TSH is limited to thyroid differentiation set to work after
the gross anatomy of the gland is already sculptured. This review summarizes
recent advances on the molecular genetics of thyroid morphogenesis put into
context of endoderm developmental traits and highlights established and novel
mechanisms of thyroid dysgenesis of potential relevance to congenital
hypothyroidism in man.

PMID: 21322126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 15;351(2):297-310. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.11.037. Epub 2011
Jan 4.

A gene regulatory network controlling hhex transcription in the anterior endoderm
of the organizer.

Rankin SA(1), Kormish J, Kofron M, Jegga A, Zorn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation
and Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The homeobox gene hhex is one of the earliest markers of the anterior endoderm,
which gives rise to foregut organs such as the liver, ventral pancreas, thyroid, 
and lungs. The regulatory networks controlling hhex transcription are poorly
understood. In an extensive cis-regulatory analysis of the Xenopus hhex promoter,
we determined how the Nodal, Wnt, and BMP pathways and their downstream
transcription factors regulate hhex expression in the gastrula organizer. We show
that Nodal signaling, present throughout the endoderm, directly activates hhex
transcription via FoxH1/Smad2 binding sites in the proximal -0.44 Kb promoter.
This positive action of Nodal is suppressed in the ventral-posterior endoderm by 
Vent 1 and Vent2, homeodomain repressors that are induced by BMP signaling.
Maternal Wnt/ß-catenin on the dorsal side of the embryo cooperates with Nodal and
indirectly activates hhex expression via the homeodomain activators Siamois and
Twin. Siamois/Twin stimulate hhex transcription through two mechanisms: (1) they 
induce the expression of Otx2 and Lim1 and together Siamois, Twin, Otx2, and Lim1
appear to promote hhex transcription through homeobox sites in a Wnt-responsive
element located between -0.65 to -0.55 Kb of the hhex promoter. (2) Siamois/Twin 
also induce the expression of the BMP-antagonists Chordin and Noggin, which are
required to exclude Vents from the organizer allowing hhex transcription. This
study reveals a complex network regulating anterior endoderm transcription in the
early embryo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3044432
PMID: 21215263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2011 Jan-Feb;15(1-2):79-83. doi:
10.1089/gtmb.2010.0107. Epub 2011 Jan 3.

LOC387761 polymorphism is associated with type 2 diabetes in the Mexican
population.

Gutiérrez-Vidal R(1), Rodríguez-Trejo A, Canizales-Quinteros S, Herrera-Cornejo
M, Granados-Silvestre MA, Montúfar-Robles I, Ortiz-López MG, Menjívar M.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Química, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México, México.

Worldwide researchers have invested time, effort, and money during the last years
to find new genes associated with diabetes susceptibility, such as LOC387761,
HHEX, EXT2, and SLC30A8. The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of these genes are associated with type 2 
diabetes (T2D) and metabolic traits in the Mexican population. We also assessed
these SNPs in Mexican indigenous groups to identify a possible inherited
susceptibility. Seven SNPs were analyzed in 789 Mexicans (234 control subjects,
455 type 2 diabetic patients, and 100 of indigenous origin), using the KASPar
assay (KBioscience Company). Analysis of the data showed an association of the
LOC387761 SNP rs7480010 with T2D (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.019). The risk allele A of rs7480010
increased body mass index in diabetic patients (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). In addition, there was
no association between T2D and the SNPs of HHEX, EXT2, and SLC30A8. Our findings 
suggest that the SNP rs7480010 (LOC387761) can contribute to a failure in insulin
secretion, thus increasing the susceptibility to T2D in Mexicans.

PMID: 21198374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Hum Genet. 2011 Apr;129(4):407-18. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0935-z. Epub 2010 Dec 
28.

Natural selection at genomic regions associated with obesity and type-2 diabetes:
East Asians and sub-Saharan Africans exhibit high levels of differentiation at
type-2 diabetes regions.

Klimentidis YC(1), Abrams M, Wang J, Fernandez JR, Allison DB.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 1665 University Blvd., RPHB 327, Birmingham, AL 35294,
USA. yann@uab.edu

Different populations suffer from different rates of obesity and type-2 diabetes 
(T2D). Little is known about the genetic or adaptive component, if any, that
underlies these differences. Given the cultural, geographic, and dietary
variation that accumulated among humans over the last 60,000 years, we examined
whether loci identified by genome-wide association studies for these traits have 
been subject to recent selection pressures. Using genome-wide SNP data on 938
individuals in 53 populations from the Human Genome Diversity Panel, we compare
population differentiation and haplotype patterns at these loci to the rest of
the genome. Using an "expanding window" approach (100-1,600 kb) for the
individual loci as well as the loci as ensembles, we find a high degree of
differentiation for the ensemble of T2D loci. This differentiation is most
pronounced for East Asians and sub-Saharan Africans, suggesting that these groups
experienced natural selection at loci associated with T2D. Haplotype analysis
suggests an excess of obesity loci with evidence of recent positive selection
among South Asians and Europeans, compared to sub-Saharan Africans and Native
Americans. We also identify individual loci that may have been subjected to
natural selection, such as the T2D locus, HHEX, which displays both elevated
differentiation and extended haplotype homozygosity in comparisons of East Asians
with other groups. Our findings suggest that there is an evolutionary genetic
basis for population differences in these traits, and we have identified
potential group-specific genetic risk factors.

PMCID: PMC3113599
PMID: 21188420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2011 Apr;30(4):870-7. doi: 10.1002/etc.443. Epub 2011 Feb
8.

Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid exposure increases cadmium toxicity in early life
stage of zebrafish, Danio rerio.

Kim S(1), Ji K, Lee S, Lee J, Kim J, Kim S, Kho Y, Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Exposure to perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) is known to induce
thyroid-related adverse effects in aquatic organisms. Because an antioxidant
defense mechanism is one of the key functions of the thyroid gland, we examined
whether preexposure to PFOS could disrupt thyroid function and enhance cadmium
(Cd)-induced oxidative stress in fish. Zebrafish embryos were exposed to control 
or 0.5<U+2009>mg/L PFOS for 7 d after fertilization and subsequently exposed to
0.038<U+2009>mg/L of Cd(2+) or a mixture of the PFOS and Cd for an additional 3 d until 
10 d postfertilization (dpf). Survival rates, body length, messenger RNA (mRNA)
expressions related to thyroid function and oxidative stress, the levels of
thyroid hormones, and malondialdehyde and antioxidant enzyme activities were
measured. Significant down-regulation of mRNAs related to thyroid function
(thyroid hormone receptor-alpha [THRa], thyroid hormone receptor-beta [THRß],
hematopoietically expressed homeobox [hhex], and paired box gene 8 [pax8]) and
decrease of throxine (T4) levels were observed in the PFOS preexposure group,
suggesting that PFOS preexposure would influence the performance of thyroid gland
in the later stages of life. Certain genes relative to oxidative stress, such as 
superoxide dismutase 1 (sod1) and heat shock protein 70 (hsp70), in the PFOS
preexposure group were significantly up-regulated when the larvae were
subsequently exposed to Cd or to the mixture of PFOS and Cd. Glutathione
S-transferase activity and malondialdehyde levels of the PFOS-preexposed group
were increased significantly by Cd exposure. Significant decrease of the survival
rates and body length of fish were observed at 10 dpf among the larvae that were 
previously exposed to PFOS. These results suggest that preexposure to PFOS could 
affect antioxidant defense mechanisms and potentially increase the toxicity of Cd
on mRNA expression and enzyme activity level responses, as well as on survival or
growth of individuals.

Copyright © 2010 SETAC.

PMID: 21184528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Diabetologia. 2011 Mar;54(3):563-71. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1977-4. Epub 2010
Dec 12.

Association of indices of liver and adipocyte insulin resistance with 19
confirmed susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes in 6,733 non-diabetic Finnish
men.

Vangipurapu J(1), Stancáková A, Pihlajamäki J, Kuulasmaa TM, Kuulasmaa T,
Paananen J, Kuusisto J, Ferrannini E, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio University
Hospital, 70210, Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Of the confirmed type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci only a few 
are known to affect insulin sensitivity. We examined the association of indices
of hepatic and adipocyte insulin resistance (IR) with 19 confirmed type 2
diabetes risk loci in a large population-based study.
METHODS: Non-diabetic participants (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8,460, age 57.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>7.0 years, BMI
26.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>3.8 kg/m(2); mean ± SD) from a population-based cohort underwent an OGTT. 
Of them, 6,733 non-diabetic men were genotyped for single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near PPARG2 (also known as PPARG), KCNJ11, TCF7L2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1, JAZF1, CDC123, TSPAN8,
THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, KCNQ1, MTNR1B and SNP rs7480010. We investigated hepatic 
IR with a new index of liver IR. The adipocyte IR index was defined as a product 
of fasting NEFA and plasma insulin levels.
RESULTS: Type 2 diabetes risk SNPs in or near KCNJ11 and HHEX were significantly 
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0013), and those in or near CDKN2B, NOTCH2 and MTNR1B were nominally
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), associated with decreased liver IR index. The Pro12 allele of PPARG2 
was significantly associated with a high adipocyte IR index and nominally
associated with high liver IR.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The Pro12 allele of PPARG2 seems to impair insulin's 
antilipolytic effect, leading to high NEFA release in the fasting state and IR.
In addition, the type 2 diabetes risk alleles of KCNJ11 and HHEX, which are known
to impair insulin secretion, were associated with increased hepatic insulin
sensitivity.

PMID: 21153532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nat Commun. 2010 Nov 30;1:131.

Deep resequencing reveals excess rare recent variants consistent with explosive
population growth.

Coventry A(1), Bull-Otterson LM, Liu X, Clark AG, Maxwell TJ, Crosby J, Hixson
JE, Rea TJ, Muzny DM, Lewis LR, Wheeler DA, Sabo A, Lusk C, Weiss KG, Akbar H,
Cree A, Hawes AC, Newsham I, Varghese RT, Villasana D, Gross S, Joshi V,
Santibanez J, Morgan M, Chang K, Iv WH, Templeton AR, Boerwinkle E, Gibbs R, Sing
CF.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York 14853, USA. [2].

Accurately determining the distribution of rare variants is an important goal of 
human genetics, but resequencing of a sample large enough for this purpose has
been unfeasible until now. Here, we applied Sanger sequencing of genomic PCR
amplicons to resequence the diabetes-associated genes KCNJ11 and HHEX in 13,715
people (10,422 European Americans and 3,293 African Americans) and validated
amplicons potentially harbouring rare variants using 454 pyrosequencing. We
observed far more variation (expected variant-site count ~578) than would have
been predicted on the basis of earlier surveys, which could only capture the
distribution of common variants. By comparison with earlier estimates based on
common variants, our model shows a clear genetic signal of accelerating
population growth, suggesting that humanity harbours a myriad of rare,
deleterious variants, and that disease risk and the burden of disease in
contemporary populations may be heavily influenced by the distribution of rare
variants.

PMCID: PMC3060603
PMID: 21119644  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


123. Mol Ther. 2011 Feb;19(2):400-7. doi: 10.1038/mt.2010.241. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

Efficient generation of hepatoblasts from human ES cells and iPS cells by
transient overexpression of homeobox gene HEX.

Inamura M(1), Kawabata K, Takayama K, Tashiro K, Sakurai F, Katayama K, Toyoda M,
Akutsu H, Miyagawa Y, Okita H, Kiyokawa N, Umezawa A, Hayakawa T, Furue MK,
Mizuguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan.

Human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have
the potential to differentiate into all cell lineages, including hepatocytes, in 
vitro. Induced hepatocytes have a wide range of potential application in
biomedical research, drug discovery, and the treatment of liver disease. However,
the existing protocols for hepatic differentiation of PSCs are not very
efficient. In this study, we developed an efficient method to induce
hepatoblasts, which are progenitors of hepatocytes, from human ESCs and iPSCs by 
overexpression of the HEX gene, which is a homeotic gene and also essential for
hepatic differentiation, using a HEX-expressing adenovirus (Ad) vector under
serum/feeder cell-free chemically defined conditions. Ad-HEX-transduced cells
expressed a-fetoprotein (AFP) at day 9 and then expressed albumin (ALB) at day
12. Furthermore, the Ad-HEX-transduced cells derived from human iPSCs also
produced several cytochrome P450 (CYP) isozymes, and these P450 isozymes were
capable of converting the substrates to metabolites and responding to the
chemical stimulation. Our differentiation protocol using Ad vector-mediated
transient HEX transduction under chemically defined conditions efficiently
generates hepatoblasts from human ESCs and iPSCs. Thus, our methods would be
useful for not only drug screening but also therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC3034848
PMID: 21102561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mutagenesis. 2011 Mar;26(2):309-14. doi: 10.1093/mutage/geq095. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Meta-analysis of the effect of HHEX gene polymorphism on the risk of type 2
diabetes.

Cai Y(1), Yi J, Ma Y, Fu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 180 Feng
Lin Road, Shanghai 200032, Peoples Republic of China.

In the past decade, a number of case-control studies have been carried out to
investigate the relationship between the HHEX polymorphism and type 2 diabetes
(T2D). However, the results have been inconclusive. To investigate this
inconsistency, we performed a meta-analysis of all available studies dealing with
the relationship between the HHEX polymorphism and T2D. In total, 22 association 
studies on two HHEX polymorphisms (rs1111875 and rs7923837) and risk of T2D
published before April 2010, including a total of 36<U+2009>695 T2D cases and 51<U+2009>800
controls were included. We also explored potential sources of heterogeneity. In a
combined analysis, the summary per-allele odds ratio (OR) for T2D of the
rs1111875 and rs7923837 polymorphism was 1.17 [95% confidence interval (CI):
1.13-1.21] and 1.23 (95% CI: 1.18-1.28), respectively. The haplotype analysis
also showed significant association in the pooled international populations with 
an OR of 1.19 (95% CI: 1.15-1.22). In the subgroup analysis by ethnicity,
significantly increased risks were found in Asians and Caucasians for these
polymorphisms in almost all genetic models. Subgroup analysis also showed that
ethnicity is the main source of heterogeneity between pooled studies. This
meta-analysis demonstrated that the risk allele of HHEX polymorphisms (rs1111875 
and rs7923837) is a risk factor for developing T2D. However, additional very
large-scale studies are warranted to provide conclusive evidence on the effects
of the HHEX gene on risk of T2D.

PMID: 21059810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Genet Metab. 2011 Feb;102(2):194-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.09.013. Epub
2010 Nov 5.

Quantitative assessment of the influence of hematopoietically expressed homeobox 
variant (rs1111875) on type 2 diabetes risk.

Wang Y(1), Qiao W, Zhao X, Tao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the 6th People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiaotong University, 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai, China.

Hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX) gene encodes for a transcription
factor involved in Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway which has attracted
considerable attention as a candidate gene for type 2 diabetes (T2D) since it was
first identified through genome wide association approach. The relationship
between HHEX and T2D has been reported in various ethnic groups; however, these
studies have yielded contradictory results. To investigate this inconsistency, we
performed a meta-analysis of 26 studies involving a total of 110,875 subjects for
rs1111875 of the HHEX gene to evaluate the effect of HHEX on genetic
susceptibility for T2D. An overall random effects odds ratio of 1.16 (95% CI:
1.13-1.20) was found for C allele versus T allele. Significant results were also 
observed using dominant (OR=1.21, 95% CI: 1.16-1.25) or recessive genetic model
(OR=1.24, 95% CI: 1.18-1.30). There was strong evidence of heterogeneity
(P<0.001), which largely disappeared after stratification by ethnicity. In the
subgroup analysis by sample size, source of controls and diagnostic criterion,
significantly increased risks were found for the polymorphism in all genetic
models. This meta-analysis demonstrated that the C allele of rs1111875 of HHEX is
a risk factor associated with increased T2D susceptibility, but these
associations vary in different ethnic populations.

Crown Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21056935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2010 Dec;14(6):781-5. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0095.
Epub 2010 Oct 28.

Population structure of Aggarwals of north India as revealed by molecular
markers.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Kumar S, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease (SANCD), Public Health Foundation of
India, New Delhi, India.

Using molecular genetic data on Aggarwals (Vaish/Vysya), an endogamous population
group of north India, we provide evidence of its homogeneous unstratified
population structure. We found the mean average heterozygosity value of 0.33 for 
14 single nucleotide polymorphisms belonging to four genes (TCF7L2-, HHEX-,
KCNJ11-, and ADIPOQ-) in the Aggarwal population (sample of 184 individuals) and 
tried to evaluate the genomic efficiency of endogamy in this population with the 
help of clan-based stratified analysis. We concluded that the sociocultural
identity of the endogamous population groups could act as a robust proxy maker
for inferring their homogeneity and population structure in India, which is ideal
also for population selection for future genome-wide association studies in the
country.

PMCID: PMC3490109
PMID: 20979565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 15;5(10):e13420. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013420.

Transcriptome, methylome and genomic variations analysis of ectopic thyroid
glands.

Abu-Khudir R(1), Paquette J, Lefort A, Libert F, Chanoine JP, Vassart G, Deladoëy
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology Service and Research Center, CHU
Sainte-Justine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Congenital hypothyroidism from thyroid dysgenesis (CHTD) is
predominantly a sporadic disease characterized by defects in the differentiation,
migration or growth of thyroid tissue. Of these defects, incomplete migration
resulting in ectopic thyroid tissue is the most common (up to 80%). Germinal
mutations in the thyroid-related transcription factors NKX2.1, FOXE1, PAX-8, and 
NKX2.5 have been identified in only 3% of patients with sporadic CHTD. Moreover, 
a survey of monozygotic twins yielded a discordance rate of 92%, suggesting that 
somatic events, genetic or epigenetic, probably play an important role in the
etiology of CHTD.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To assess the role of somatic genetic or
epigenetic processes in CHTD, we analyzed gene expression, genome-wide
methylation, and structural genome variations in normal versus ectopic thyroid
tissue. In total, 1011 genes were more than two-fold induced or repressed.
Expression array was validated by quantitative real-time RT-PCR for 100 genes.
After correction for differences in thyroid activation state, 19 genes were
exclusively associated with thyroid ectopy, among which genes involved in
embryonic development (e.g. TXNIP) and in the Wnt pathway (e.g. SFRP2 and FRZB)
were observed. None of the thyroid related transcription factors (FOXE1, HHEX,
NKX2.1, NKX2.5) showed decreased expression, whereas PAX8 expression was
associated with thyroid activation state. Finally, the expression profile was
independent of promoter and CpG island methylation and of structural genome
variations.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first integrative molecular analysis of
ectopic thyroid tissue. Ectopic thyroids show a differential gene expression
compared to that of normal thyroids, although molecular basis could not be
defined. Replication of this pilot study on a larger cohort could lead to
unraveling the elusive cause of defective thyroid migration during embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2955549
PMID: 20976176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 15;250(2):137-46. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2010.10.001. Epub 2010 Oct 16.

The UV-absorber benzophenone-4 alters transcripts of genes involved in hormonal
pathways in zebrafish (Danio rerio) eleuthero-embryos and adult males.

Zucchi S(1), Blüthgen N, Ieronimo A, Fent K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Applied Sciences Northwestern
Switzerland, Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.

Benzophenone-4 (BP-4) is frequently used as UV-absorber in cosmetics and
materials protection. Despite its frequent detection in the aquatic environment
potential effects on aquatic life are unknown. In this study, we evaluate the
effects of BP-4 in eleuthero-embryos and in the liver, testis and brain of adult 
male fish on the transcriptional level by focusing on target genes involved in
hormonal pathways to provide a more complete toxicological profile of this
important UV-absorber. Eleuthero-embryos and males of zebrafish were exposed up
to 3 days after hatching and for 14 days, respectively, to BP-4 concentrations
between 30 and 3000 µg/L. In eleuthero-embryos transcripts of vtg1, vtg3, esr1,
esr2b, hsd17ß3, cyp19b cyp19a, hhex and pax8 were induced at 3000 µg/L BP-4,
which points to a low estrogenic activity and interference with early thyroid
development, respectively. In adult males BP-4 displayed multiple effects on gene
expression in different tissues. In the liver vtg1, vtg3, esr1 and esr2b were
down-regulated, while in the brain, vtg1, vtg3 and cyp19b transcripts were
up-regulated. In conclusion, the transcription profile revealed that BP-4
interferes with the expression of genes involved in hormonal pathways and
steroidogenesis. The effects of BP-4 differ in life stages and adult tissues and 
point to an estrogenic activity in eleuthero-embryos and adult brain, and an
antiestrogenic activity in the liver. The results indicate that BP-4 interferes
with the sex hormone system of fish, which is important for the risk assessment
of this UV-absorber.

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20937294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Oct 8;11:140. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-140.

The longitudinal association of common susceptibility variants for type 2
diabetes and obesity with fasting glucose level and BMI.

Webster RJ(1), Warrington NM, Beilby JP, Frayling TM, Palmer LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetic Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Western
Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Variation in the effects of genetic variants on physiological traits 
over time or with age may alter the trajectories of these traits. However, few
studies have investigated this possibility for variants associated with type 2
diabetes or obesity, and these show little consensus. We aimed to characterise
the possible longitudinal associations of common diabetes-susceptibility variants
in the KCNJ11, PPARG, TCF7L2, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8 and HHEX gene loci, with
fasting glucose level; and of an obesity-associated variant in the FTO gene, with
body mass index (BMI).
METHODS: The study analysed data from the Busselton Health Study (n = 4,554).
Cross-sectional association analyses included family data and used the total
association test. Longitudinal association analyses of unrelated participant data
(n = 2,864) used linear mixed-effects models.
RESULTS: In cross-sectional analyses, we observed associations of the T allele at
the IGF2BP2 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs4402960 with raised fasting
glucose (p = 0.045), and the A allele at the FTO SNP rs9939609 with raised BMI (p
= 0.003). Longitudinal analyses showed no significant associations between SNPs
and changes in fasting glucose or BMI in the same individuals, either over mean
follow-up times of 18.7 and 21.8 years respectively, or with age during
adulthood.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no indication that the effects of common type 2 diabetes
variants on fasting glucose varied with age during adulthood or over time.

PMCID: PMC2958899
PMID: 20929593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Hum Genet. 2010 Dec;55(12):810-5. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.117. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Variations in/nearby genes coding for JAZF1, TSPAN8/LGR5 and HHEX-IDE and risk of
type 2 diabetes in Han Chinese.

Zhou DZ(1), Liu Y, Zhang D, Liu SM, Yu L, Yang YF, Zhao T, Chen Z, Kan MY, Zhang 
ZF, Feng GY, Xu H, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 294 Taiyuan Road, Shanghai, PR China.

Several genetic loci (JAZF1, CDC123/CAMK1D, TSPAN8/LGR5, ADAMTS9, VEGFA and
HHEX-IDE) were identified to be significantly related to the risk of type 2
diabetes and quantitative metabolic traits in European populations. Here, we
aimed to evaluate the impacts of these novel loci on type 2 diabetes risk in a
population-based case-control study of Han Chinese (1912 cases and 2041
controls). We genotyped 13 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in/near these
genes and examined the differences in allele/genotype frequency between cases and
controls. We found that both IDE rs11187007 and HHEX rs1111875 were associated
with type 2 diabetes risk (for both variants: odds ratio (OR)=1.15, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.04-1.28, P=0.009). In a meta-analysis where we pooled 
our data with the three previous studies conducted in East Asians, we found that 
the variants of JAZF1 rs864745 (1.09 (1.03-1.16); P=3.49 × 10(-3)) and
TSPAN8/LGR5 rs7961581 (1.11(1.05-1.17); P=1.89 × 10(-4)) were significantly
associated with type 2 diabetes risk. In addition, the meta-analysis (7207 cases 
and 8260 controls) also showed that HHEX rs1111875 did have effects on type 2
diabetes in Chinese population (OR=1.15(1.10-1.21); P=1.93 × 10(-8)). This large 
population-based study and meta-analysis further confirmed the modest effects of 
the JAZF1, TSPAN8/LGR5 and HHEX-IDE loci on type 2 diabetes in Chinese and other 
East Asians.

PMID: 20927120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Pharmacol Res. 2010 Dec;62(6):500-5. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2010.08.003. Epub 2010
Sep 8.

P2Y(13) receptor is responsible for ADP-mediated degranulation in RBL-2H3 rat
mast cells.

Gao ZG(1), Ding Y, Jacobson KA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Recognition Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0810, USA. zg21o@nih.gov

Extracellular ADP is known to play many important physiological roles. In this
study, we identified the P2Y(13) receptor in a rat mast cell line (RBL-2H3) and
explored the functional role of ADP, its endogenous agonist. ADP induced both
intracellular calcium mobilization and release of hexosaminidase (Hex). In an
assay of intracellular calcium, ADP was 100-fold less potent than and equally
efficacious as the P2Y(1) receptor-selective agonist MRS2365. However, ADP was
more potent and efficacious than MRS2365 in inducing Hex release and in enhancing
antigen-induced Hex release. ADP-induced intracellular calcium mobilization was
blocked by phospholipase C inhibitor U73122 and by P2Y(1) receptor-selective
antagonist MRS2500, but not by pertussis toxin (PTX), suggesting a mechanism
mediated by the G(q)-coupled P2Y(1) receptor, but not P2Y(13) (G(i)-coupled) or
P2X receptors. ADP-induced Hex release was blocked by PTX and a selective P2Y(13)
receptor antagonist MRS2211, but not by MRS2500 or P2Y(1) receptor-specific
siRNA, suggesting a G(i)-coupled P2Y(13) receptor-related mechanism. Measurement 
of gene expression confirmed high expression of both P2Y(1) and P2Y(13) receptors
(in comparison to a previously reported P2Y(14) receptor) in RBL-2H3 cells. Thus,
we demonstrated that ADP-mediated intracellular calcium mobilization and Hex
release in RBL-2H3 cells are via P2Y(1) and P2Y(13) receptors, respectively.
Selective antagonists of the P2Y(13) receptor might be novel therapeutic agents
for various allergic conditions.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2974784
PMID: 20813187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Diabetes. 2010 Sep;59(9):e15; author reply e16. doi: 10.2337/db10-0748.

Comment on: Chauhan et al. (2010) Impact of common variants of PPARG, KCNJ11,
TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A, IGF2BP2, and CDKAL1 on the risk of type 2 diabetes
in 5,164 Indians. Diabetes;59:2068-2074.

Gupta V, Ebrahim S.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2010 Aug;59(8):2068-74.

PMID: 20805377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Diabetes. 2010 Dec;59(12):3247-52. doi: 10.2337/db10-0674. Epub 2010 Aug 29.

Glycemia determines the effect of type 2 diabetes risk genes on insulin
secretion.

Heni M(1), Ketterer C, Thamer C, Herzberg-Schäfer SA, Guthoff M, Stefan N,
Machicao F, Staiger H, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in diabetes risk genes 
reduce glucose- and/or incretin-induced insulin secretion. Here, we investigated 
interactions between glycemia and such diabetes risk polymorphisms.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Insulin secretion was assessed by insulinogenic
index and areas under the curve of C-peptide/glucose in 1,576 subjects using an
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Participants were genotyped for 10 diabetes
risk SNPs associated with ß-cell dysfunction: rs5215 (KCNJ11), rs13266634
(SLC30A8), rs7754840 (CDKAL1), rs10811661 (CDKN2A/2B), rs10830963 (MTNR1B),
rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs10010131 (WFS1), rs7923837 (HHEX), rs151290 (KCNQ1), and
rs4402960 (IGF2BP2). Furthermore, the impact of the interaction between genetic
variation in TCF7L2 and glycemia on changes in insulin secretion was tested in
315 individuals taking part in a lifestyle intervention study.
RESULTS: For the SNPs in TCF7L2 and WFS1, we found a significant interaction
between glucose control and insulin secretion (all P = 0.0018 for glucose ×
genotype). When plotting insulin secretion against glucose at 120 min OGTT, the
compromising SNP effects on insulin secretion are most apparent under high
glucose. In the longitudinal study, rs7903146 in TCF7L2 showed a significant
interaction with baseline glucose tolerance upon change in insulin secretion (P =
0.0027). Increased glucose levels at baseline predicted an increase in insulin
secretion upon improvement of glycemia by lifestyle intervention only in carriers
of the risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: For the diabetes risk genes TCF7L2 and WFS1, which are associated
with impaired incretin signaling, the level of glycemia determines SNP effects on
insulin secretion. This indicates the increasing relevance of these SNPs during
the progression of prediabetes stages toward clinically overt type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2992789
PMID: 20802253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jan;33(1):199.e13-7. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.07.005. Epub 2010 Aug 17.

Association between variants in IDE-KIF11-HHEX and plasma amyloid ß levels.

Reitz C(1), Cheng R, Schupf N, Lee JH, Mehta PD, Rogaeva E, St George-Hyslop P,
Mayeux R.

Author information: 
(1)The Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and Aging Brain,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Genetic linkage and association studies in late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) 
or its endophenotypes have pointed to several regions on chromosome 10q, among
these the ~ 250 kb linkage disequilibrium (LD) block harboring the genes IDE,
KIF1, and HHEX. We explored the association between variants in the genomic
region harboring the IDE-KIF11-HHEX complex with plasma Aß40 and Aß42 levels in a
case-control cohort of Caribbean Hispanics. First, we performed single marker
linear regression analysis relating the individual single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with plasma Aß40 and Aß42 levels. Then we performed 3-SNP
sliding window haplotype analyses, correcting all analyses for multiple testing. 
Out of 32 SNPs in this region, 3 SNPs in IDE (rs2421943, rs12264682, rs11187060) 
were associated with plasma Aß40 or Aß42 levels in single marker and haplotype
analyses after correction for multiple testing. All these SNPs lie within the
same LD block, and are in LD with the previously reported haplotypes. Our
findings provide support for an association in the IDE region on chromosome 10q
with Aß40 and 42 levels.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3117070
PMID: 20724036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Diabetologia. 2010 Nov;53(11):2334-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1861-2. Epub 2010
Aug 12.

Expression analysis of loci associated with type 2 diabetes in human tissues.

Cotsapas C(1), Prokunina-Olsson L, Welch C, Saxena R, Weaver C, Usher N, Guiducci
C, Bonakdar S, Turner N, LaCroix B, Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2011 Jan;54(1):209.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genetic mapping has identified over 20 loci contributing to
genetic risk of type 2 diabetes. The next step is to identify the genes and
mechanisms regulating the contributions of genetic risk to disease. The goal of
this study was to evaluate the effect of age, height, weight and risk alleles on 
expression of candidate genes in diabetes-associated regions in three relevant
human tissues.
METHODS: We measured transcript abundance for WFS1, KCNJ11, TCF2 (also known as
HNF1B), PPARG, HHEX, IDE, CDKAL1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 by 
quantitative RT-PCR in human pancreas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>50), colon (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>195) and liver
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>50). Tissue samples were genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes. The effects of age, height, weight,
tissue and SNP on RNA expression were tested by linear modelling.
RESULTS: Expression of all genes exhibited tissue bias. Immunohistochemistry
confirmed the findings for HHEX, IDE and SLC30A8, which showed strongest
tissue-specific mRNA expression bias. Neither age, height nor weight were
associated with gene expression. We found no evidence that type 2
diabetes-associated SNPs affect neighbouring gene expression (cis-expression
quantitative trait loci) in colon, pancreas and liver.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study provides new evidence that tissue-type,
but not age, height, weight or SNPs in or near candidate genes associated with
increased risk of type 2 diabetes are strong contributors to differential gene
expression in the genes and tissues examined.

PMID: 20703447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncogene. 2010 Oct 28;29(43):5796-808. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.320. Epub 2010 Aug
2.

A previously unrecognized promoter of LMO2 forms part of a transcriptional
regulatory circuit mediating LMO2 expression in a subset of T-acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia patients.

Oram SH(1), Thoms JA, Pridans C, Janes ME, Kinston SJ, Anand S, Landry JR, Lock
RB, Jayaraman PS, Huntly BJ, Pimanda JE, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

The T-cell oncogene Lim-only 2 (LMO2) critically influences both normal and
malignant haematopoiesis. LMO2 is not normally expressed in T cells, yet ectopic 
expression is seen in the majority of T-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL)
patients with specific translocations involving LMO2 in only a subset of these
patients. Ectopic lmo2 expression in thymocytes of transgenic mice causes T-ALL, 
and retroviral vector integration into the LMO2 locus was implicated in the
development of clonal T-cell disease in patients undergoing gene therapy. Using
array-based chromatin immunoprecipitation, we now demonstrate that in contrast to
B-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, human T-ALL samples largely use promoter
elements with little influence from distal enhancers. Active LMO2 promoter
elements in T-ALL included a previously unrecognized third promoter, which we
demonstrate to be active in cell lines, primary T-ALL patients and transgenic
mice. The ETS factors ERG and FLI1 previously implicated in lmo2-dependent mouse 
models of T-ALL bind to the novel LMO2 promoter in human T-ALL samples, while in 
return LMO2 binds to blood stem/progenitor enhancers in the FLI1 and ERG gene
loci. Moreover, LMO2, ERG and FLI1 all regulate the +1 enhancer of HHEX/PRH,
which was recently implicated as a key mediator of early progenitor expansion in 
LMO2-driven T-ALL. Our data therefore suggest that a self-sustaining triad of
LMO2/ERG/FLI1 stabilizes the expression of important mediators of the leukaemic
phenotype such as HHEX/PRH.

PMID: 20676125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Nov;38(21):7513-25. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq659. Epub 2010
Jul 31.

DNA compaction by the higher-order assembly of PRH/Hex homeodomain protein
oligomers.

Soufi A(1), Sawasdichai A, Shukla A, Noy P, Dafforn T, Smith C, Jayaraman PS,
Gaston K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research, Birmingham University Medical School,
Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Protein self-organization is essential for the establishment and maintenance of
nuclear architecture and for the regulation of gene expression. We have shown
previously that the Proline-Rich Homeodomain protein (PRH/Hex) self-assembles to 
form oligomeric complexes that bind to arrays of PRH binding sites with high
affinity and specificity. We have also shown that many PRH target genes contain
suitably spaced arrays of PRH sites that allow this protein to bind and regulate 
transcription. Here, we use analytical ultracentrifugation and electron
microscopy to further characterize PRH oligomers. We use the same techniques to
show that PRH oligomers bound to long DNA fragments self-associate to form highly
ordered assemblies. Electron microscopy and linear dichroism reveal that PRH
oligomers can form protein-DNA fibres and that PRH is able to compact DNA in the 
absence of other proteins. Finally, we show that DNA compaction is not sufficient
for the repression of PRH target genes in cells. We conclude that DNA compaction 
is a consequence of the binding of large PRH oligomers to arrays of binding sites
and that PRH is functionally and structurally related to the Lrp/AsnC family of
proteins from bacteria and archaea, a group of proteins formerly thought to be
without eukaryotic equivalents.

PMCID: PMC2995075
PMID: 20675722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Aug;19(8):2106-9. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0515. Epub 2010 Jul 20.

No association between FTO or HHEX and endometrial cancer risk.

Gaudet MM(1), Yang HP, Bosquet JG, Healey CS, Ahmed S, Dunning AM, Easton DF,
Spurdle AB, Ferguson K, O'Mara T, Lambrechts D, Despierre E, Vergote I, Amant F, 
Lacey JV Jr, Lissowska J, Peplonska B, Brinton LA, Chanock S, Garcia-Closas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Population Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, New York, NY 10461, USA.
mia.gaudet@einstein.yu.edu

INTRODUCTION: Obesity and diabetes are known risk factors for endometrial cancer;
thus, the genetic risk factors of these phenotypes might also be associated with 
endometrial cancer risk. To evaluate this hypothesis, we genotyped tag-single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) and candidate SNPs in FTO and HHEX in a primary
set of 417 endometrial cancer cases and 406 population-based controls, and
validated significant findings in a replication set of approximately 2,347 cases 
and 3,140 controls from three additional studies.
METHODS: We genotyped 189 tagSNPs in FTO (including rs8050136) and five tagSNPs
in HHEX (including rs1111875) in the primary set and one SNP each in FTO
(rs12927155) and HHEX (rs1111875) in the validation set. Per allele odds ratios
(OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated to estimate the
association between the genotypes of each SNPs (as an ordinal variable) and
endometrial cancer risk using unconditional logistic regression models,
controlling for age and site.
RESULTS: In the primary study, the most significant finding in FTO was rs12927155
(OR, 1.56; 95% CI, 1.21-2.01; P = 5.8 x 10(-4)), and in HHEX, it was rs1111875
(OR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.66-0.97; P = 0.026). In the validation studies, the pooled
per allele OR, adjusted for age and study for FTO, was rs12927155 (OR, 0.94; 95% 
CI, 0.83-1.06; P = 0.29), whereas for HHEX, it was rs1111875 (OR, 1.00; 95% CI,
0.92-1.10; P = 0.96).
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that common genetic variants in two genes
previously related to obesity (FTO) and diabetes (HHEX) by genome-wide
association scans were not associated with endometrial cancer risk.
IMPACT: Polymorphisms in FTO and HHEX are unlikely to have large effects on
endometrial cancer risk but may have weaker effects.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2919629
PMID: 20647405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Sep;30(9):1867-72. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.208496. Epub 2010 Jul 8.

Coronary artery calcification and its relationship to validated genetic variants 
for diabetes mellitus assessed in the Heinz Nixdorf recall cohort.

Pechlivanis S(1), Scherag A, Mühleisen TW, Möhlenkamp S, Horsthemke B, Boes T,
Bröcker-Preuss M, Mann K, Erbel R, Jöckel KH, Nöthen MM, Moebus S; Heinz Nixdorf 
Recall Study Group.

Collaborators: Roggenbuck U, Slomiany S, Beck EM, Offner A, Münkel S, Bauer M,
Schrader S, Peter R, Hirche H, Meinertz T, Bode C, de Feyter PJ, Güntert B, Hall 
i T, Gutzwiller F, Heinen H, Hess O, Kline B, Löwel H, Reiser M, Schmidt G,
Schwaige M, Steinmüller C, Theorell T, Willich SN, Bode C, Berge K, Figulla HR,
Hamm C, Hanrath P, Köpcke W, Weimar C, Zeiher A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, University
Hospital of Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
sonali.pechlivanis@uk-essen.de

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between genomewide association study-based 
diabetes mellitus-related single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and coronary
artery calcification (CAC), a valid risk factor for coronary heart disease, in a 
large, unselected, population-based cohort.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We genotyped 11 validated genomewide association study-based
diabetes SNPs in 4459 participants of the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study. We applied 
generalized linear regression models to explore the impact of the diabetes SNPs
on CAC and to jointly model the effect of the SNPs and CAC on diabetes status. We
observed a significant association between cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
2A/2B (CDKN2A/2B) variant rs564398 and quantitative CAC (P=1.81 x 10(-5) and
adjusted P=4.02 x 10(-4); odds ratio for the presence of CAC, 1.12 [95% CI, 1.02 
to 1.25]). Moreover, we observed no strong impact of CAC on diabetes risk in the 
presence of the other genetic variants.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that a genetic variant near CDKN2A/2B that has been reported
to be strongly associated with diabetes is strongly associated with CAC. In
contrast, variants near insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 2 (IGFBP2),
CDK5 regulatory subunit associated protein 1-like 1 (CDKAL1), solute carreir
family 30 (zinc transporter), member 8 (SLC30A8), hematopoietically-expressed
homeobox (HHEX), and transcription factor 7-like2 (TCF7L2) were clearly
associated with diabetes; no evidence for an association to CAC was observable.
This differential association pattern underlines the potential of endophenotypes,
such as CAC, to extend the scope of disease outcome associations.

PMID: 20616309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Ann Hum Genet. 2010 Jul;74(4):361-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00580.x.

A validation study of type 2 diabetes-related variants of the TCF7L2, HHEX,
KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ genes in one endogamous ethnic group of north India.

Gupta V(1), Khadgawat R, Ng HK, Kumar S, Aggarwal A, Rao VR, Sachdeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India,
Delhi-110016.

The aim of this study was to validate the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
of four candidate genes (TCF7L2, HHEX, KCNJ11, and ADIPOQ) related to type 2
diabetes (T2D) in an endogamous population of north India; the Aggarwal
population, having 18-clans. This endogamous population model was heavily
supported by recent land mark work and we also verified the homogeneity of this
population by clan-based stratification analysis. Two SNPs (rs4506565; rs7903146)
in TCF7L2 were found to be significant (p-value = 0.00191; p-value = 0.00179,
respectively), and odds ratios of 2.1 (dominant-model) and 2.0 (recessive-model) 
respectively, were obtained for this population. The TTT haplotype in the TCF7L2 
gene was significantly associated with T2D. Waist-Hip ratio (WHR), systolic blood
pressure (SBP), and age were significant covariates for increasing risk of T2D.
Single-SNP, combined-SNPs and haplotype analysis provides clear evidence that the
causal mutation is near to or within the significant haplotype (TTT) of the
TCF7L2 gene. In spite of a culturally-learned sedentary lifestyle and
fat-enriched dietary habits, WHR rather than body-mass-index emerged as a robust 
predictor of risk for T2D in this population.

PMID: 20597906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Sci China Life Sci. 2010 Apr;53(4):455-61. doi: 10.1007/s11427-010-0078-4. Epub
2010 May 7.

The role of mesodermal signals during liver organogenesis in zebrafish.

Niu X(1), Shi H, Peng J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China.

Three germ cell layers, the ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm, are established
during the gastrulation stage. All cell types in different organs and tissues are
derived from these 3 germ cell layers at later stages. For example, skin
epithelial cells and neuronal cells are derived from the ectoderm, while
endothelial cells and muscle cells from the mesoderm and lung, and intestine
epithelial cells from the endoderm. While in a normal situation different germ
cells are destined to specific cell fates in different organs and tissues, each
type of germ cells or its derivatives also produce extracellular signaling
molecules to direct and facilitate the specification and differentiation of other
germ cells during organogenesis. Liver is derived from the endoderm, but
completion of liver organogenesis is regulated at different levels. While the
pan-endoderm factors (e.g. FoxA and Gata families) and liver specific factors
(e.g. Prox1 and Hhex) are essential intrinsic factors for endoderm cells to be
differentiated into hepatoblasts, the role of signals produced by neighboring
mesoderm cells for liver organogenesis is equally important. This review
summarizes recent progress in studying the role of Bone morphogenetic proteins
(Bmp), Fibroblast growth factors (Fgf), retinoic acid (RA) and Wingless and Int
(Wnt), the 4 types of signaling molecules produced by the mesoderm cells, in
liver organogenesis in zebrafish.

PMID: 20596911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Metabolism. 2010 Dec;59(12):1760-6. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2010.04.024. Epub 2010
Jul 2.

Replication of recently described type 2 diabetes gene variants in a South Indian
population.

Chidambaram M(1), Radha V, Mohan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Madras Diabetes Research Foundation-ICMR
Advanced Centre for Genomics of Diabetes, Chennai 603103, India.

Recent genomewide association studies have identified several new gene variants
associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) mostly in European populations.
These need to be replicated in other populations. We studied 926 unrelated T2D
and 812 normal glucose-tolerant subjects randomly selected from the Chennai Urban
Rural Epidemiology Study in Southern India. A total of 45 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from 15 genes and 13 unannotated loci identified from recent
genomewide association T2D studies were genotyped. Only 6 of 45 SNPs studied were
replicated in this South Indian population. Three SNPs-rs7756992 (P = .007),
rs7754840 (P = .015), and rs6931514 (P = .029)-of the CDKAL1, rs7020996 (P =
.003) of the CDKN2A/B gene, rs7923837 (P = .038) of the HHEX gene, and rs12056034
(P = .033) of the BAZ1B gene were associated with T2D in our population.
Large-scale studies are needed in our population to validate our findings.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20580033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jun 15;11:97. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-97.

Association study of genetic variants in eight genes/loci with type 2 diabetes in
a Han Chinese population.

Lin Y(1), Li P, Cai L, Zhang B, Tang X, Zhang X, Li Y, Xian Y, Yang Y, Wang L, Lu
F, Liu X, Rao S, Chen M, Ma S, Shi Y, Bao M, Wu J, Yang Y, Yang J, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Molecular Biology & Genetics, Sichuan Academy of Medical
Sciences & Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: At least twenty genes/loci were shown to be associated with type
2diabetes in European original populations. Five of these genes were shown to be 
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Chinese populations. The purpose of this
study was to replicate the association of genetic vairants in the eight
diabetes-related genes/loci with type 2 diabetes in a Han Chinese cohort from
western part of China. Nineteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the
eight genes/loci including TCF7L2, HHEX, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, PPARG, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11,
and CDKN2A/CDKN2B were genotyped in 1,529 cases and 1,439 controls in a Han
Chinese population using the ABI SNaPshot method. The meta-analysis of the
association between rs7903146 in TCF7L2 gene and T2D in the Han Chinese was
performed.
RESULTS: Among the eight genes/loci examined, we found that four were
significantly associated with T2D. Although previous studies showed that the
association between the SNP rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene and T2D was
controversial within the Han Chinese population, we have confirmed the
significant association between the SNP rs7903146 in the TCF7L2 gene and T2D in
both this study and the meta-analysis in the population. In addition, we also
confirmed that three SNPs (rs1111875, rs7923837 and rs5015480) in HHEX , one SNP 
(rs10946398) in CDKAL1, and three SNPs (rs13266634, rs3802177 and rs11558471) in 
SLC30A8 were significantly associated with T2D in the population being studied.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that the variants in TCF7L2, CDKAL1, HHEX, and
SLC30A8 genes are associated with T2D in a Han Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC2894791
PMID: 20550665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS Biol. 2010 May 25;8(5):e1000379. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000379.

Functional heterogeneity of embryonic stem cells revealed through translational
amplification of an early endodermal transcript.

Canham MA(1), Sharov AA, Ko MS, Brickman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Research, Medical Research Council - Centre for
Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

ES cells are defined as self-renewing, pluripotent cell lines derived from early 
embryos. Cultures of ES cells are also characterized by the expression of certain
markers thought to represent the pluripotent state. However, despite the
widespread expression of key markers such as Oct4 and the appearance of a
characteristic undifferentiated morphology, functional ES cells may represent
only a small fraction of the cultures grown under self-renewing conditions. Thus 
phenotypically "undifferentiated" cells may consist of a heterogeneous population
of functionally distinct cell types. Here we use a transgenic allele designed to 
detect low level transcription in the primitive endoderm lineage as a tool to
identify an immediate early endoderm-like ES cell state. This reporter employs a 
tandem array of internal ribosomal entry sites to drive translation of an
enhanced Yellow Fluorescent Protein (Venus) from the transcript that normally
encodes for the early endodermal marker Hex. Expression of this Venus transgene
reports on single cells with low Hex transcript levels and reveals the existence 
of distinct populations of Oct4 positive undifferentiated ES cells. One of these 
cells types, characterized by both the expression of the Venus transgene and the 
ES cells marker SSEA-1 (V(+)S(+)), appears to represent an early step in
primitive endoderm specification. We show that the fraction of cells present
within this state is influenced by factors that both promote and suppress
primitive endoderm differentiation, but conditions that support ES cell
self-renewal prevent their progression into differentiation and support an
equilibrium between this state and at least one other that resembles the Nanog
positive inner cell mass of the mammalian blastocysts. Interestingly, while these
subpopulations are equivalently and clonally interconvertible under self-renewing
conditions, when induced to differentiate both in vivo and in vitro they exhibit 
different behaviours. Most strikingly when introduced back into morulae or
blastocysts, the V(+)S(+) population is not effective at contributing to the
epiblast and can contribute to the extra-embryonic visceral and parietal
endoderm, while the V(-)S(+) population generates high contribution chimeras.
Taken together our data support a model in which ES cell culture has trapped a
set of interconvertible cell states reminiscent of the early stages in blastocyst
differentiation that may exist only transiently in the early embryo.

PMCID: PMC2876051
PMID: 20520791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. BMC Med Genet. 2010 May 28;11:81. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-81.

Implication of genetic variants near SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2,
FTO, TCF2, KCNQ1, and WFS1 in type 2 diabetes in a Chinese population.

Han X(1), Luo Y, Ren Q, Zhang X, Wang F, Sun X, Zhou X, Ji L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Peking University Diabetes Center, No 11, Xizhimen South Street,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Recently, several genome-wide and candidate gene association studies 
have identified many novel genetic loci for type 2 diabetes (T2D); among these
genes, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B, HHEX, FTO, TCF2, KCNQ1, and WFS1 are
the most important. We aimed to determine the effects of these genetic loci
associated with T2D in the Chinese Han population of China.
METHODS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near CDKAL1, IGF2BP2,
SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B, HHEX, FTO, TCF2, KCNQ1, and WFS1 genes were genotyped in a
case-control Chinese Han sample living in Beijing, China involving 1024 patients 
with T2D and 1005 control subjects.
RESULTS: In Chinese Han, we replicated the associations between 7 genetic loci
and T2D, with risk allele-specific odds ratios (ORs) as follows: 1.27 (95% CI,
1.11-1.45; p = 0.0008) for CDKAL1-rs10946398, 1.26 (95% CI, 1.08-1.47; p = 0.003)
for IGF2BP2-rs4402960, 1.19 (95% CI, 1.04-1.37; p = 0.009) for
SLC30A8-rs13266634, 1.22 (95% CI, 1.06-1.41; p = 0.005) for CDKN2A/B-rs10811661, 
1.20 (95% CI, 1.01-1.42; p = 0.03) for HHEX-rs5015480, 1.37 (95% CI, 1.19-1.69; p
= 1.0 x 10(-4)) for KCNQ1-rs2237892, and 1.24 (95% CI, 1.01-1.52; p = 0.046) for 
FTO-rs8050136 after adjustment for age, gender, and body mass index. Not only did
an association between WFS1-rs6446482 and early-onset T2D exist in the subgroup
analysis, but TCF2-rs7501939 and WFS1-rs6446482 were also confirmed to confer
risk for T2D in this meta-analysis. Moreover, the relationship between
FTO-rs8050136 and body mass index, together with the effect of CDKAL1-rs10946398 
on beta cell function, was also observed in the control individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the important contribution of these genetic
loci to susceptibility for T2D in the Chinese Han population in Beijing of China.

PMCID: PMC2896346
PMID: 20509872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2010 May;26(4):261-70. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.1082.

Candidate gene association study conditioning on individual ancestry in patients 
with type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome from Mexico City.

Cruz M(1), Valladares-Salgado A, Garcia-Mena J, Ross K, Edwards M,
Angeles-Martinez J, Ortega-Camarillo C, de la Peña JE, Burguete-Garcia AI,
Wacher-Rodarte N, Ambriz R, Rivera R, D'artote AL, Peralta J, Parra EJ, Kumate J.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigacion Medica en Bioquimica, Hospital de Especialidades,
Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, CMN Siglo XXI, Mexico, DF, Mexico.
mcruzl@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is influenced by diverse environmental and
genetic risk factors. Metabolic syndrome (MS) increases the risk of
cardiovascular disease and diabetes. We analysed 14 cases of polymorphisms
located in 10 candidate loci, in a sample of patients with T2D and controls from 
Mexico City.
METHODS: We analysed the association of 14 polymorphisms located within 10 genes 
(TCF7L2, ENPP1, ADRB3, KCNJ11, LEPR, PPARgamma, FTO, CDKAL1, SIRT1 and HHEX) with
T2D and MS. The analysis included 519 subjects with T2D defined according to the 
ADA criteria, 389 with MS defined according to the AHA/NHLBI criteria and 547
controls. Association was tested with the program ADMIXMAP including individual
ancestry, age, sex, education and in some cases body mass index (BMI), in a
logistic regression model.
RESULTS: The two markers located within the TCF7L2 gene showed strong
associations with T2D (rs7903146, T allele, odd ratio (OR) = 1.76, p = 0.001 and 
rs12255372, T allele, OR = 1.78, p = 0.002), but did not show significant
association with MS. The non-synonymous rs4994 polymorphism of the ADRB3 gene was
associated with T2D (Trp allele, OR = 0.62, p = 0.001) and MS (Trp allele, OR =
0.74, p = 0.018). Nominally significant associations were also observed between
T2D and the SIRT1 rs3758391 SNP and MS and the HHEX rs5015480 polymorphism.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants located within the gene TCF7L2 are strongly associated with
T2D but not with MS, providing support to previous evidence indicating that
polymorphisms at the TCF7L2 gene increase T2D risk. In contrast, the
non-synonymous ADRB3 rs4994 polymorphism is associated with T2D and MS.

PMID: 20503258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Diabetologia. 2010 Sep;53(9):1908-16. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1790-0. Epub 2010
May 20.

Type 2 diabetes risk alleles near ADCY5, CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE are associated with 
reduced birthweight.

Andersson EA(1), Pilgaard K, Pisinger C, Harder MN, Grarup N, Faerch K, Poulsen
P, Witte DR, Jørgensen T, Vaag A, Hansen T, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensens Vej 1, Gentofte, Denmark.
ehaa@hagedorn.dk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The fetal insulin hypothesis suggests that variation in the
fetal genotype influencing insulin secretion or action may predispose to low
birthweight and type 2 diabetes. We examined associations between 25 confirmed
type 2 diabetes risk variants and birthweight in individuals from the Danish
Inter99 population and in meta-analyses including Inter99 data and reported
studies.
METHODS: Midwife records from the Danish State Archives provided information on
mother's age and parity, as well as birthweight, length at birth and prematurity 
of the newborn in 4,744 individuals of the population-based Inter99 study. We
genotyped 25 risk alleles showing genome-wide associations with type 2 diabetes.
RESULTS: Birthweight was inversely associated with the type 2 diabetes risk
alleles of ADCY5 rs11708067 (beta = -33 g [95% CI -55, -10], p = 0.004) and
CDKAL1 rs7756992 (beta = -22 g [95% CI -43, -1], p = 0.04). The association for
the latter locus was confirmed in a meta-analysis (n = 24,885) (beta = -20 g [95%
CI -29, -11], p = 5 x 10(-6)). The HHEX-IDE rs1111875 variant showed no
significant association among Danes (p = 0.09); however, in a meta-analysis (n = 
25,164) this type 2 diabetes risk allele was associated with lower birthweight
(beta = -16 g [95% CI -24, -8], p = 8 x 10(-5)). On average, individuals with
high genetic risk (>or=25 type 2 diabetes risk alleles) weighed marginally less
at birth than those with low genetic risk (<25 type 2 diabetes risk alleles)
(beta = -35 g [95% CI -69, -2], p = 0.037).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We report a novel association between the fetal ADCY5
type 2 diabetes risk allele and decreased birthweight, and confirm in
meta-analyses associations between decreased birthweight and the type 2 diabetes 
risk alleles of HHEX-IDE and CDKAL1. No strong general effect on birthweight can 
be ascribed to the 25 common type 2 diabetes risk alleles.

PMID: 20490451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Blood. 2010 Aug 26;116(8):1254-62. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-254383. Epub 2010
May 14.

The homeobox gene Hhex regulates the earliest stages of definitive hematopoiesis.

Paz H(1), Lynch MR, Bogue CW, Gasson JC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Interdepartmental Program, College of Letters and Science,
University of California, Los Angeles, USA.

The development and emergence of the hematopoietic stem cell involves a series of
tightly regulated molecular events that are not well characterized. The
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (Hhex) gene, a member of the homeobox gene
family, is an essential regulator of embryogenesis and hematopoietic progenitor
development. To investigate the role of Hhex in hematopoiesis we adapted a murine
embryonic stem (ES) cell coculture system, in which ES cells can differentiate
into CD41(+) and CD45(+) hematopoietic progenitors in vitro. Our results show
that in addition to delayed hemangioblast development, Hhex(-/-) ES-derived
progeny accumulate as CD41(+) and CD41(+)c-kit(+) cells, or the earliest
definitive hematopoietic progenitors. In addition, Hhex(-/-) ES-derived progeny
display a significantly reduced ability to develop into mature CD45(+)
hematopoietic cells. The observed reduction in hematopoietic maturation was
accompanied by reduced proliferation, because Hhex(-/-) CD41(+)CD45(-)c-kit(+)
hematopoietic progenitors accumulated in the G(2) phase of the cell cycle. Thus, 
Hhex is a critical regulator of hematopoietic development and is necessary for
the maturation and proliferation of the earliest definitive hematopoietic
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2938236
PMID: 20472829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 14;11:306. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-306.

Comparative genomics reveals a functional thyroid-specific element in the far
upstream region of the PAX8 gene.

Nitsch R(1), Di Dato V, di Gennaro A, de Cristofaro T, Abbondante S, De Felice M,
Zannini M, Di Lauro R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Endocrinology and Oncology G. Salvatore, National
Research Council, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms leading to a fully differentiated thyrocite 
are still object of intense study even if it is well known that thyroglobulin,
thyroperoxidase, NIS and TSHr are the marker genes of thyroid differentiation. It
is also well known that Pax8, TTF-1, Foxe1 and Hhex are the thyroid-enriched
transcription factors responsible for the expression of the above genes, thus are
responsible for the differentiated thyroid phenotype. In particular, the role of 
Pax8 in the fully developed thyroid gland was studied in depth and it was
established that it plays a key role in thyroid development and differentiation. 
However, to date the bases for the thyroid-enriched expression of this
transcription factor have not been unraveled yet. Here, we report the
identification and characterization of a functional thyroid-specific enhancer
element located far upstream of the Pax8 gene.
RESULTS: We hypothesized that regulatory cis-acting elements are conserved among 
mammalian genes. Comparison of a genomic region extending for about 100 kb at the
5'-flanking region of the mouse and human Pax8 gene revealed several conserved
regions that were tested for enhancer activity in thyroid and non-thyroid cells. 
Using this approach we identified one putative thyroid-specific regulatory
element located 84.6 kb upstream of the Pax8 transcription start site. The in
silico data were verified by promoter-reporter assays in thyroid and non-thyroid 
cells. Interestingly, the identified far upstream element manifested a very high 
transcriptional activity in the thyroid cell line PC Cl3, but showed no activity 
in HeLa cells. In addition, the data here reported indicate that the
thyroid-enriched transcription factor TTF-1 is able to bind in vitro and in vivo 
the Pax8 far upstream element, and is capable to activate transcription from it.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study reveal the presence of a thyroid-specific
regulatory element in the 5' upstream region of the Pax8 gene. The identification
of this regulatory element represents the first step in the investigation of
upstream regulatory mechanisms that control Pax8 transcription during thyroid
differentiation and are relevant to further studies on Pax8 as a candidate gene
for thyroid dysgenesis.

PMCID: PMC2996967
PMID: 20470391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Diabetes. 2010 Aug;59(8):2063-7. doi: 10.2337/db10-0099. Epub 2010 May 11.

BMI at age 8 years is influenced by the type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes
HHEX-IDE and CDKAL1.

Winkler C(1), Bonifacio E, Grallert H, Henneberger L, Illig T, Ziegler AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fuer Diabetes forschung der Forschergruppe Diabetes e.V. at Helmholtz
Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether HHEX-IDE and CDKAL1 genes, which are associated
with birth weight and susceptibility to type 2 diabetes, continue to influence
growth during childhood.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: BMI, weight, and height at age 8 years expressed as 
age- and sex-corrected standard deviation scores (SDS) against national reference
data and single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping of HHEX-IDE and CDKAL1 loci
were analyzed in 646 prospectively followed children in the German BABYDIAB
cohort. All children were singleton full-term births; 386 had mothers with type 1
diabetes, and 260 had fathers with type 1 diabetes and a nondiabetic mother.
RESULTS: Type 2 diabetes risk alleles at the HHEX-IDE locus were associated with 
reduced BMI-SDS at age 8 years (0.17 SDS per allele; P = 0.004). After
stratification for birth weight, both HHEX-IDE and CDKAL1 risk alleles were
associated with reduced BMI-SDS (0.45 SDS, P = 0.0002; 0.52 SDS, P = 0.0001) and 
weight-SDS (0.22 SDS, P = 0.04; 0.56 SDS, P = 0.0002) in children born large for 
gestational age (>90th percentile) but not children born small or appropriate for
gestational age. Within children born large for gestational age, BMI and weight
decreased with each additional type 2 diabetes risk allele ( approximately -2 kg 
per allele; >8 kg overall). Findings were consistent in children of mothers with 
type 1 diabetes (P < 0.0001) and children of nondiabetic mothers (P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: The type 2 diabetes susceptibility alleles at HHEX-IDE and CDKAL1
loci are associated with low BMI at age 8 years in children who were born large
for gestational age.

PMCID: PMC2911059
PMID: 20460429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Diabetes. 2010 Aug;59(8):2068-74. doi: 10.2337/db09-1386. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

Impact of common variants of PPARG, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A,
IGF2BP2, and CDKAL1 on the risk of type 2 diabetes in 5,164 Indians.

Chauhan G(1), Spurgeon CJ, Tabassum R, Bhaskar S, Kulkarni SR, Mahajan A, Chavali
S, Kumar MV, Prakash S, Dwivedi OP, Ghosh S, Yajnik CS, Tandon N, Bharadwaj D,
Chandak GR.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology
(CSIR), Delhi, India.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2010 Sep;59(9):e15; author reply e16.

OBJECTIVE: Common variants in PPARG, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A,
IGF2BP2, and CDKAL1 genes have been shown to be associated with type 2 diabetes
in European populations by genome-wide association studies. We have studied the
association of common variants in these eight genes with type 2 diabetes and
related traits in Indians by combining the data from two independent case-control
studies.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped eight single nucleotide polymorphisms
(PPARG-rs1801282, KCNJ11-rs5219, TCF7L2-rs7903146, SLC30A8-rs13266634,
HHEX-rs1111875, CDKN2A-rs10811661, IGF2BP2-rs4402960, and CDKAL1-rs10946398) in
5,164 unrelated Indians of Indo-European ethnicity, including 2,486 type 2
diabetic patients and 2,678 ethnically matched control subjects.
RESULTS: We confirmed the association of all eight loci with type 2 diabetes with
odds ratio (OR) ranging from 1.18 to 1.89 (P = 1.6 x 10(-3) to 4.6 x 10(-34)).
The strongest association with the highest effect size was observed for TCF7L2
(OR 1.89 [95% CI 1.71-2.09], P = 4.6 x 10(-34)). We also found significant
association of PPARG and TCF7L2 with homeostasis model assessment of beta-cell
function (P = 6.9 x 10(-8) and 3 x 10(-4), respectively), which looked consistent
with recessive and under-dominant models, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study replicates the association of well-established common
variants with type 2 diabetes in Indians and shows larger effect size for most of
them than those reported in Europeans.

PMCID: PMC2911051
PMID: 20424228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Dev Orig Health Dis. 2010 Apr;1(2):96-105. doi: 10.1017/S2040174410000127.

Genetic influences on the association between fetal growth and susceptibility to 
type 2 diabetes.

Shields BM(1), Freathy RM(2), Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Peninsula NIHR Clinical Research Facility, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. (2)2Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula
Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

The fetal insulin hypothesis proposes that low birth weight and susceptibility to
type 2 diabetes (T2D) could both be two phenotypes of the same genotype. Insulin 
is a key growth factor in utero, and T2D is characterized by insulin resistance
and/or beta-cell dysfunction. Therefore, genetic variants impacting on insulin
secretion and action are likely to alter both fetal growth and susceptibility to 
T2D. There are three lines of evidence in support of this hypothesis. (1) Studies
of rare monogenic diabetes have shown mutations in a single gene, such as GCK or 
KCNJ11, can cause diabetes by reducing insulin secretion, and these mutations are
also associated with reduced birth weight. (2) Epidemiological studies have
indicated that children born to fathers with diabetes are born smaller. As the
father cannot influence the intrauterine environment, this association is likely 
to reflect genes inherited by the fetus from the father. (3) The most compelling 
evidence comes from recent genome-wide association studies. Variants in the
CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE genes that predispose to diabetes, if present in the fetus,
are associated with reduced birth weight. These data provide evidence for a
genetic contribution to the association between low birth weight and
susceptibility to T2D. This genetic background is important to take into
consideration when investigating the impact of environmental determinants and
developing strategies for intervention and prevention.

PMID: 25143063  [PubMed]


153. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics. 2009;2(4-5):225-34. doi: 10.1159/000259341. Epub 2010
Mar 9.

Evidence of interaction between type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes and dietary 
fat intake for adiposity and glucose homeostasis-related phenotypes.

Ruchat SM(1), Elks CE, Loos RJ, Vohl MC, Weisnagel SJ, Rankinen T, Bouchard C,
Pérusse L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Laval University, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Genome-wide association studies have led to the identification
of several susceptibility genes for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The
objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that the associations between 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these genes and adiposity and glucose
homeostasis-related phenotypes are influenced by dietary fat intake.
METHODS: Thirty-three SNPs in 9 T2DM genes (CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, HHEX, HNF1B,
IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, SLC30A8, TCF7L2 and WFS1) were tested in a maximum of 669
subjects from the Quebec Family Study. Subjects were measured for several
adiposity indices and underwent a 75-gram oral glucose tolerance test. Total fat 
intake was estimated from a 3-day dietary record.
RESULTS: We observed 13 significant (p < or = 0.01) SNP-dietary fat interactions.
Among them, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, alone or in interaction with dietary fat intake,
influenced abdominal total fat (ATF: SNP effect, p = 0.006, interaction effect, p
= 0.009) and abdominal visceral fat (AVF: SNP effect, p = 0.007, interaction
effect, p = 0.01). Similarly, TCF7L2 rs12573128 alone or in interaction with
dietary fat intake, influenced insulin sensitivity (SNP effect and interaction
effect, p < or = 0.008) and glucose tolerance (SNP effect p < or= 0.009 and
interaction effect, p < or = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that gene-dietary fat interactions may
influence glucose homeostasis-related phenotypes and play an important role in
determining the increased risk of diabetes associated with the T2DM
susceptibility genes.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20215779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 May;30(9):2120-34. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01511-09. Epub 2010 Feb
22.

PRH/Hhex controls cell survival through coordinate transcriptional regulation of 
vascular endothelial growth factor signaling.

Noy P(1), Williams H, Sawasdichai A, Gaston K, Jayaraman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research, Birmingham University Medical School,
Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

The proline-rich homeodomain protein (PRH) plays multiple roles in the control of
gene expression during embryonic development and in the adult. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a mitogen that stimulates cell proliferation 
and survival via cell surface receptors including VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2. VEGF
signaling is of critical importance in angiogenesis and hematopoiesis and is
elevated in many tumors. Here we show that PRH binds directly to the promoter
regions of the Vegf, Vegfr-1, and Vegfr-2 genes and that in each case PRH
represses transcription. We demonstrate that overexpression or knockdown of PRH
directly impinges on the survival of both leukemic and tumor cells and that the
modulation of VEGF and VEGF receptor signaling by PRH mediates these effects. Our
findings demonstrate that PRH is a key regulator of the VEGF signaling pathway
and describe a mechanism whereby PRH plays an important role in tumorigenesis and
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2863580
PMID: 20176809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Feb;19(2):558-65. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0902.

Diabetes genes and prostate cancer in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
study.

Meyer TE(1), Boerwinkle E, Morrison AC, Volcik KA, Sanderson M, Coker AL, Pankow 
JS, Folsom AR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Center and Division of Epidemiology, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

There is a known inverse association between type 2 diabetes (T2D) and prostate
cancer (PrCa) that is poorly understood. Genetic studies of the T2D-PrCa
association may provide insight into the underlying mechanisms of this
association. We evaluated associations in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
study between PrCa and nine T2D single nucleotide polymorphisms from genome-wide 
association studies of T2D (in CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, FTO, HHEX, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11,
PPARG, SLC30A8, and TCF7L2) and four T2D single nucleotide polymorphisms from
pre-genome-wide association studies (in ADRB2, CAPN10, SLC2A2, and UCP2). From
1987 to 2000, there were 397 incident PrCa cases among 6,642 men ages 45 to 64
years at baseline. We used race-adjusted Cox proportional hazards models to
estimate associations between PrCa and increasing number of T2D risk-raising
alleles. PrCa was positively associated with the CAPN10 rs3792267 G allele
[hazard ratio (HR) 1.20; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.00-1.44] and inversely
associated with the SLC2A2 rs5400 Thr110 allele (HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.72, 1.00),
the UCP2 rs660339 Val55 allele (HR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.73, 0.97) and the IGF2BP2
rs4402960 T allele (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.61-1.02; blacks only). The TCF7L2
rs7903146 T allele was inversely associated with PrCa using a dominant genetic
model (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.65-0.97). Further knowledge of T2D gene-PrCa
mechanisms may improve understanding of PrCa etiology.

PMCID: PMC2820124
PMID: 20142250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Science. 2010 Feb 12;327(5967):879-83. doi: 10.1126/science.1182378. Epub 2010
Jan 21.

The Lmo2 oncogene initiates leukemia in mice by inducing thymocyte self-renewal.

McCormack MP(1), Young LF, Vasudevan S, de Graaf CA, Codrington R, Rabbitts TH,
Jane SM, Curtis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratories, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Grattan
Street, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia. mccormack@wehi.edu.au

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Jun 15;9(12):2267-8.

The LMO2 oncogene causes a subset of human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias
(T-ALL), including four cases that arose as adverse events in gene therapy
trials. To investigate the cellular origin of LMO2-induced leukemia, we used cell
fate mapping to study mice in which the Lmo2 gene was constitutively expressed in
the thymus. Lmo2 induced self-renewal of committed T cells in the mice more than 
8 months before the development of overt T-ALL. These self-renewing cells
retained the capacity for T cell differentiation but expressed several genes
typical of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), suggesting that Lmo2 might reactivate
an HSC-specific transcriptional program. Forced expression of one such gene,
Hhex, was sufficient to initiate self-renewal of thymocytes in vivo. Thus, Lmo2
promotes the self-renewal of preleukemic thymocytes, providing a mechanism by
which committed T cells can then accumulate additional genetic mutations required
for leukemic transformation.

PMID: 20093438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Feb;152A(2):340-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33194.

Pancreatic hypoplasia presenting with neonatal diabetes mellitus in association
with congenital heart defect and developmental delay.

Balasubramanian M(1), Shield JP, Acerini CL, Walker J, Ellard S, Marchand M,
Polak M, Vaxillaire M, Crolla JA, Bunyan DJ, Mackay DJ, Temple IK.

Author information: 
(1)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield, UK.

Congenital pancreatic hypoplasia is a rare cause of neonatal diabetes. We report 
on a series of three patients with pancreatic agenesis and congenital heart
defects. All had abdominal scan evidence of pancreatic agenesis. In addition,
Patient 1 had a ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary
artery stenosis; Patient 2 had a truncus arteriosus and Patient 3 had tetralogy
of Fallot. Two of the three patients have developmental delay. All three patients
were isolated cases within the family. Investigations included sequencing of GCK,
ABCC8, IPF1, NEUROD1, PTF1A, HNF1B, INS, ISL1, NGN3, HHEX, G6PC2, TCF7L2, SOX4,
FOXP3 (Patients 1 and 2), GATA4 and KCNJ11 genes (all three patients), but no
mutations were found. Genetic investigation to exclude paternal UPD 6,
methylation aberrations and duplications of 6q24 was also negative in all three. 
22q11 deletion was excluded in all three patients. Array CGH in Patient (1)
showed a approximately 250 kb, paternally inherited duplication of chromosome 12q
[arr cgh 12q24.33 (B35:CHR12:131808577-132057649++) pat], not found in the other 
two patients. Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus due to pancreatic hypoplasia
with congenital heart defects has been reported before and may represent a
distinct condition. We discuss this rare association and review previously
reported literature.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20082465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 12;107(2):775-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911591107. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Long-range gene regulation links genomic type 2 diabetes and obesity risk regions
to HHEX, SOX4, and IRX3.

Ragvin A(1), Moro E, Fredman D, Navratilova P, Drivenes Ø, Engström PG, Alonso
ME, de la Calle Mustienes E, Gómez Skarmeta JL, Tavares MJ, Casares F, Manzanares
M, van Heyningen V, Molven A, Njølstad PR, Argenton F, Lenhard B, Becker TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 8;108(10):4264.

Genome-wide association studies identified noncoding SNPs associated with type 2 
diabetes and obesity in linkage disequilibrium (LD) blocks encompassing HHEX-IDE 
and introns of CDKAL1 and FTO [Sladek R, et al. (2007) Nature 445:881-885;
Steinthorsdottir V, et al. (2007) Nat. Genet 39:770-775; Frayling TM, et al.
(2007) Science 316:889-894]. We show that these LD blocks contain highly
conserved noncoding elements and overlap with the genomic regulatory blocks of
the transcription factor genes HHEX, SOX4, and IRX3. We report that human highly 
conserved noncoding elements in LD with the risk SNPs drive expression in
endoderm or pancreas in transgenic mice and zebrafish. Both HHEX and SOX4 have
recently been implicated in pancreas development and the regulation of insulin
secretion, but IRX3 had no prior association with pancreatic function or
development. Knockdown of its orthologue in zebrafish, irx3a, increased the
number of pancreatic ghrelin-producing epsilon cells and decreased the number of 
insulin-producing beta-cells and glucagon-producing alpha-cells, thereby
suggesting a direct link of pancreatic IRX3 function to both obesity and type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2818943
PMID: 20080751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):633-41. doi: 10.1002/hep.23293.

The homeobox gene Hex regulates hepatocyte differentiation from embryonic stem
cell-derived endoderm.

Kubo A(1), Kim YH, Irion S, Kasuda S, Takeuchi M, Ohashi K, Iwano M, Dohi Y,
Saito Y, Snodgrass R, Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan.
akubo@naramed-u.ac.jp

We investigated the role of the hematopoietically expressed homeobox (Hex) in the
differentiation and development of hepatocytes within embryonic stem cell
(ESC)-derived embryoid bodies (EBs). Analyses of hepatic endoderm derived from
Hex(-/-) EBs revealed a dramatic reduction in the levels of albumin (Alb) and
alpha-fetoprotein (Afp) expression. In contrast, stage-specific forced expression
of Hex in EBs from wild-type ESCs led to the up-regulation of Alb and Afp
expression and secretion of Alb and transferrin. These inductive effects were
restricted to c-kit(+) endoderm-enriched EB-derived populations, suggesting that 
Hex functions at the level of hepatic specification of endoderm in this model.
Microarray analysis revealed that Hex regulated the expression of a broad
spectrum of hepatocyte-related genes, including fibrinogens, apolipoproteins, and
cytochromes. When added to the endoderm-induced EBs, bone morphogenetic protein 4
acted synergistically with Hex in the induction of expression of Alb, Afp,
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, transcription factor 1, and CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein alpha. These findings indicate that Hex plays a pivotal role
during induction of liver development from endoderm in this in vitro model and
suggest that this strategy may provide important insight into the generation of
functional hepatocytes from ESCs.

PMID: 20063280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 1;5(1):e8541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008541.

Association between type 2 diabetes loci and measures of fatness.

Pecioska S(1), Zillikens MC, Henneman P, Snijders PJ, Oostra BA, van Duijn CM,
Aulchenko YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Clinical Genetics, Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a metabolic disorder characterized by
disturbances of carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism and insulin resistance. 
The majority of T2D patients are obese and obesity by itself may be a cause of
insulin resistance. Our aim was to evaluate whether the recently identified T2D
risk alleles are associated with human measures of fatness as characterized with 
Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DEXA).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genotypes and phenotypes of approximately 3,000
participants from cross-sectional ERF study were analyzed. Nine single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in CDKN2AB, CDKAL1, FTO, HHEX, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, PPARG,
SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 were genotyped. We used linear regression to study association
between individual SNPs and the combined allelic risk score with body mass index 
(BMI), fat mass index (FMI), fat percentage (FAT), waist circumference (WC) and
waist to hip ratio (WHR). Significant association was observed between rs8050136 
(FTO) and BMI (p = 0.003), FMI (p = 0.007) and WC (p = 0.03); fat percentage was 
borderline significant (p = 0.053). No other SNPs alone or combined in a risk
score demonstrated significant association to the measures of fatness.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: From the recently identified T2D risk variants only the
risk variant of the FTO gene (rs8050136) showed statistically significant
association with BMI, FMI, and WC.

PMCID: PMC2796390
PMID: 20049090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Dec 31;2:72. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-72.

Prioritizing genes for follow-up from genome wide association studies using
information on gene expression in tissues relevant for type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Parikh H(1), Lyssenko V, Groop LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University, 
University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Sweden. parikhhm@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have emerged as a powerful
approach for identifying susceptibility loci associated with polygenetic diseases
such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, it is still a daunting task to 
prioritize single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from GWAS for further
replication in different population. Several recent studies have shown that
genetic variation often affects gene-expression at proximal (cis) as well as
distal (trans) genomic locations by different mechanisms such as altering rate of
transcription or splicing or transcript stability.
METHODS: To prioritize SNPs from GWAS, we combined results from two GWAS related 
to T2DM, the Diabetes Genetics Initiative (DGI) and the Wellcome Trust Case
Control Consortium (WTCCC), with genome-wide expression data from pancreas,
adipose tissue, liver and skeletal muscle of individuals with or without T2DM or 
animal models thereof to identify T2DM susceptibility loci.
RESULTS: We identified 1,170 SNPs associated with T2DM with P < 0.05 in both GWAS
and 243 genes that were located in the vicinity of these SNPs. Out of these 243
genes, we identified 115 differentially expressed in publicly available gene
expression profiling data. Notably five of them, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, NOTCH2, TCF7L2 
and TSPAN8, have subsequently been shown to be associated with T2DM in different 
populations. To provide further validation of our approach, we reversed the
approach and started with 26 known SNPs associated with T2DM and related traits. 
We could show that 12 (57%) (HHEX, HNF1B, IGF2BP2, IRS1, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, NOTCH2,
PPARG, TCF7L2, THADA, TSPAN8 and WFS1) out of 21 genes located in vicinity of
these SNPs were showing aberrant expression in T2DM from the gene expression
profiling studies.
CONCLUSIONS: Utilizing of gene expression profiling data from different tissues
of individuals with or without T2DM or animal models thereof is a powerful tool
for prioritizing SNPs from WGAS for further replication studies.

PMCID: PMC2815699
PMID: 20043853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Diabetologia. 2010 Apr;53(4):679-89. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1630-2. Epub 2009
Dec 31.

Improvements in glucose homeostasis in response to regular exercise are
influenced by the PPARG Pro12Ala variant: results from the HERITAGE Family Study.

Ruchat SM(1), Rankinen T, Weisnagel SJ, Rice T, Rao DC, Bergman RN, Bouchard C,
Pérusse L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, PEPS-Laval University, 2300 rue 
de Terrasse, Quebec, QC, Canada G1V 0A6.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Exercise training improves glucose homeostasis, but large
inter-individual differences are reported, suggesting a role of genetic factors. 
We investigated whether variants either confirmed or newly identified as diabetes
susceptibility variants through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) modulate
changes in phenotypes derived from an IVGTT in response to an endurance training 
programme.
METHODS: We analysed eight polymorphisms in seven type 2 diabetes genes (CDKAL1
rs7756992; CDKN2A and CDKN2B rs10811661 and rs564398; HHEX rs7923837; IGF2BP2
rs4402960; KCNJ11 rs5215; PPARG rs1801282; and TCF7L2 rs7903146) in a maximum of 
481 sedentary, non-diabetic white individuals, who participated in a 20-week
endurance training programme. Associations were tested between the variants and
changes in IVGTT-derived phenotypes.
RESULTS: The only evidence of association with training response was found with
PPARG rs1801282 (Pro12Ala). We observed that Ala carriers experienced greater
increase in overall glucose tolerance (Deltaglucose disappearance index Ala/Ala
0.22 +/- 0.22, Pro/Ala 0.14 +/- 0.06, Pro/Pro 0.004 +/- 0.03; p = 0.0008),
glucose effectiveness (Ala/Ala 0.28 +/- 0.41, Pro/Ala 0.44 +/- 0.14, Pro/Pro 0.09
+/- 0.06; p = 0.004), acute insulin response to glucose (Ala/Ala 64.21 +/- 37.73,
Pro/Ala -11.92 +/- 40.30, Pro/Pro -46.30 +/- 14.70; p = 0.03) and disposition
index (Ala/Ala 551.8 +/- 448.5, Pro/Ala 534.6 +/- 218.3, Pro/Pro -7.44 +/- 88.18;
p = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Compared with Pro/Pro individuals, PPARG Ala carriers
experienced greater improvements in glucose and insulin metabolism in response to
regular endurance training. However, we did not find evidence of association
between type 2 diabetes susceptibility variants recently identified through GWAS 
and glucose homeostasis response to exercise. Our results extend those of
previous studies showing that Ala carriers appear to be more responsive to
beneficial health effects of lifestyle interventions.

PMCID: PMC2840709
PMID: 20043145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2010 Jan;27(1):23-8. doi: 10.1007/s10815-009-9377-8. Epub 
2009 Dec 30.

Polymorphisms of TCF7L2 and HHEX genes in Chinese women with polycystic ovary
syndrome.

Xu P(1), Che Y, Cao Y, Wu X, Sun H, Liang F, Sun J, Ke L, Yi L, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine & The Center for Reproductive
medicine, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical School, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, 210093, China.

PURPOSE: This study was to evaluate whether polymorphisms of TCF7L2 (rs7903146)
and HHEX (rs1111875) genes responsible for insulin secretion are associated with 
the polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in Chinese people.
METHODS: 326 PCOS patients and 290 healthy individuals as controls were studied. 
Blood samples were obtained for DNA analyses and hormone measurements. Genotyping
of the TCF7L2 (rs7903146) and HHEX (rs1111875) genes was carried out by the
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method.
RESULTS: We did not find statistically significant differences in the
distribution of the TCF7L2 rs7903146 and HHEX rs1111875 polymorphisms between the
Chinese women with PCOS and the controls. Levels of hormones such as insulin,
FSH, LH, LH/FSH, P, T and E2 were also similar between the different genotypes of
the genes TCF7L2 and HHEX, respectively, which was confirmed within either the
PCOS subjects or controls.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no association of either of the two variants, rs7903146 of
TCF7L2 and rs1111875 of HHEX, with the occurrence of PCOS in the Chinese
population.

PMCID: PMC2826618
PMID: 20041287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 19;285(8):5726-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.046649. Epub 2009 
Dec 22.

Interaction between Hhex and SOX13 modulates Wnt/TCF activity.

Marfil V(1), Moya M, Pierreux CE, Castell JV, Lemaigre FP, Real FX, Bort R.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 08003, Spain.

Fine-tuning of the Wnt/TCF pathway is crucial for multiple embryological
processes, including liver development. Here we describe how the interaction
between Hhex (hematopoietically expressed homeobox) and SOX13 (SRY-related high
mobility group box transcription factor 13), modulates Wnt/TCF pathway activity. 
Hhex is a homeodomain factor expressed in multiple endoderm-derived tissues, like
the liver, where it is essential for proper development. The pleiotropic
expression of Hhex during embryonic development and its dual role as a
transcriptional repressor and activator suggest the presence of different
tissue-specific partners capable of modulating its activity and function. While
searching for developmentally regulated Hhex partners, we set up a yeast
two-hybrid screening using an E9.5-10.5 mouse embryo library and the N-terminal
domain of Hhex as bait. Among the putative protein interactors, we selected SOX13
for further characterization. We found that SOX13 interacts directly with
full-length Hhex, and we delineated the interaction domains within the two
proteins. SOX13 is known to repress Wnt/TCF signaling by interacting with TCF1.
We show that Hhex is able to block the SOX13-dependent repression of Wnt/TCF
activity by displacing SOX13 from the SOX13 x TCF1 complex. Moreover, Hhex
de-repressed the Wnt/TCF pathway in the ventral foregut endoderm of cultured
mouse embryos electroporated with a SOX13-expressing plasmid. We conclude that
the interaction between Hhex and SOX13 may contribute to control Wnt/TCF
signaling in the early embryo.

PMCID: PMC2820800
PMID: 20028982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 11;4(12):e8261. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008261.

Maternal and zygotic aldh1a2 activity is required for pancreas development in
zebrafish.

Alexa K(1), Choe SK, Hirsch N, Etheridge L, Laver E, Sagerström CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America.

We have isolated and characterized a novel zebrafish pancreas mutant. Mutant
embryos lack expression of isl1 and sst in the endocrine pancreas, but retain
isl1 expression in the CNS. Non-endocrine endodermal gene expression is less
affected in the mutant, with varying degrees of residual expression observed for 
pdx1, carbA, hhex, prox1, sid4, transferrin and ifabp. In addition, mutant
embryos display a swollen pericardium and lack fin buds. Genetic mapping revealed
a mutation resulting in a glycine to arginine change in the catalytic domain of
the aldh1a2 gene, which is required for the production of retinoic acid from
vitamin A. Comparison of our mutant (aldh1a2(um22)) to neckless (aldh1a2(i26)), a
previously identified aldh1a2 mutant, revealed similarities in residual
endodermal gene expression. In contrast, treatment with DEAB
(diethylaminobenzaldehyde), a competitive reversible inhibitor of Aldh enzymes,
produces a more severe phenotype with complete loss of endodermal gene
expression, indicating that a source of Aldh activity persists in both mutants.
We find that mRNA from the aldh1a2(um22) mutant allele is inactive, indicating
that it represents a null allele. Instead, the residual Aldh activity is likely
due to maternal aldh1a2, since we find that translation-blocking, but not
splice-blocking, aldh1a2 morpholinos produce a phenotype similar to DEAB
treatment. We conclude that Aldh1a2 is the primary Aldh acting during pancreas
development and that maternal Aldh1a2 activity persists in aldh1a2(um22) and
aldh1a2(i26) mutant embryos.

PMCID: PMC2788244
PMID: 20011517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Endocr Rev. 2010 Apr;31(2):183-93. doi: 10.1210/er.2009-0029. Epub 2009 Dec 10.

Can the genetics of type 1 and type 2 diabetes shed light on the genetics of
latent autoimmune diabetes in adults?

Grant SF(1), Hakonarson H, Schwartz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. grants@chop.edu

The pathophysiology of latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) is considered 
less understood than its much better characterized counterparts of type 1 and
type 2 diabetes (T1D and T2D), where its clinical presentation exhibits some
features of each of these two main diseases, earning it a reputation as being
"type 1.5 diabetes". The etiology of LADA remains unknown, but a genetic
component has been implicated from recent reports of T1D and T2D genes playing a 
role in its pathogenesis. One way to shed much needed light on the classification
of LADA is to determine the discrete genetic factors conferring risk to the
pathogenesis of this specific phenotype and to determine to what extent LADA
shares genetic similarities with T1D and T2D. For instance, no conclusive support
for a role of the T1D-associated INS gene has been reported in T2D; conversely,
but similarly, no evidence has been found for the role of the T2D-associated
genes IDE/HHEX, SLC30A8, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, FTO, and TCF7L2 in T1D.
However, and somewhat at odds with current thinking, TCF7L2, the most strongly
associated gene with T2D to date, is strongly associated with LADA, a disorder
considered by the World Health Organization to be a slowly progressing form of
T1D. In this review, we address recent advances in the genetics of T1D and T2D
and how such discoveries have in turn shed some light on the genetics of LADA as 
being potentially at the "genetic intersection" of these two major diseases.

PMID: 20007922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Diabetes. 2010 Mar;59(3):751-5. doi: 10.2337/db09-0972. Epub 2009 Nov 23.

Examination of all type 2 diabetes GWAS loci reveals HHEX-IDE as a locus
influencing pediatric BMI.

Zhao J(1), Bradfield JP, Zhang H, Annaiah K, Wang K, Kim CE, Glessner JT,
Frackelton EC, Otieno FG, Doran J, Thomas KA, Garris M, Hou C, Chiavacci RM, Li
M, Berkowitz RI, Hakonarson H, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: A number of studies have found that BMI in early life influences the
risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life. Our goal was to investigate if 
any type 2 diabetes variants uncovered through genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) impact BMI in childhood.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Using data from an ongoing GWAS of pediatric BMI in 
our cohort, we investigated the association of pediatric BMI with 20 single
nucleotide polymorphisms at 18 type 2 diabetes loci uncovered through GWAS,
consisting of ADAMTS9, CDC123-CAMK1D, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, EXT2, FTO, HHEX-IDE,
IGF2BP2, the intragenic region on 11p12, JAZF1, KCNQ1, LOC387761, MTNR1B, NOTCH2,
SLC30A8, TCF7L2, THADA, and TSPAN8-LGR5. We randomly partitioned our cohort
exactly in half in order to have a discovery cohort (n = 3,592) and a replication
cohort (n = 3,592).
RESULTS: Our data show that the major type 2 diabetes risk-conferring G allele of
rs7923837 at the HHEX-IDE locus was associated with higher pediatric BMI in both 
the discovery (P = 0.0013 and survived correction for 20 tests) and replication
(P = 0.023) sets (combined P = 1.01 x 10(-4)). Association was not detected with 
any other known type 2 diabetes loci uncovered to date through GWAS except for
the well-established FTO.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that the same genetic HHEX-IDE variant, which is
associated with type 2 diabetes from previous studies, also influences pediatric 
BMI.

PMCID: PMC2828649
PMID: 19933996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2010 Feb;21(1):31-7. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e3283346cb6.

Interactions between genetic factors that predict diabetes and dietary factors
that ultimately impact on risk of diabetes.

Qi L(1), Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. nhlqi@channing.harvard.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of the present review is to summarize recent
advances in investigations of interactions between established genetic and
dietary risk factors for type 2 diabetes (T2D).
RECENT FINDINGS: Several studies reported that dietary factors related to
carbohydrate quality and quantity, such as whole grains and glycemic load, might 
interact with transcription factor 7-like 2 variants in relation to T2D risk. The
genetic predisposition defined by the combination of 10 established T2D risk
alleles was found to modulate the association between Western dietary pattern
(high intakes of red meat, processed meat, and low fiber) and T2D; a stronger
association was observed in those with a high-risk genetic profile. Variants in
genes HHEX, CDKN2A/2B, JAZF1, and IGF2BP2 were found to interact with prenatal
nutrition in relation to T2D risk and glucose levels in later life.
SUMMARY: The available data provide preliminary support for the gene-diet
interactions in determining T2D. However, most findings have yet to be validated.
Future studies will need agreed standards of study design and statistical power, 
dietary measurement, analytical methods, and replication strategies.

PMCID: PMC2833314
PMID: 19915463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jan;95(1):390-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0688. Epub
2009 Nov 5.

Polymorphisms identified through genome-wide association studies and their
associations with type 2 diabetes in Chinese, Malays, and Asian-Indians in
Singapore.

Tan JT(1), Ng DP, Nurbaya S, Ye S, Lim XL, Leong H, Seet LT, Siew WF, Kon W, Wong
TY, Saw SM, Aung T, Chia KS, Lee J, Chew SK, Seielstad M, Tai ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore.

CONTEXT: Novel type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) susceptibility loci, identified
through genome-wide association studies (GWAS), have been replicated in many
European and Japanese populations. However, the association in other East Asian
populations is less well characterized.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of SNPs in CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, HHEX,
SLC30A8, PKN2, LOC387761, and KCNQ1 on risk of T2DM in Chinese, Malays, and
Asian-Indians in Singapore.
DESIGN: We genotyped these candidate single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
subjects from three major ethnic groups in Asia, namely, the Chinese (2196
controls and 1541 cases), Malays (2257 controls and 1076 cases), and
Asian-Indians (364 controls and 246 cases). We also performed a metaanalysis of
our results with published studies in East Asians.
RESULTS: In Chinese, SNPs in CDKAL1 [odds ratio (OR) = 1.19; P = 2 x 10(-4)],
HHEX (OR = 1.15; P = 0.013), and KCNQ1 (OR = 1.21; P = 3 x 10(-4)) were
significantly associated with T2DM. Among Malays, SNPs in CDKN2A/B (OR = 1.22; P 
= 3.7 x 10(-4)), HHEX (OR = 1.12; P = 0.044), SLC30A8 (OR = 1.12; P = 0.037), and
KCNQ1 (OR = 1.19-1.25; P = 0.003-2.5 x 10(-4)) showed significant association
with T2DM. The combined analysis of the three ethnic groups revealed significant 
associations between SNPs in CDKAL1 (OR = 1.13; P = 3 x 10(-4)), CDKN2A/B (OR =
1.16; P = 9 x 10(-5)), HHEX (OR = 1.14; P = 6 x 10(-4)), and KCNQ1 (OR =
1.16-1.20; P = 3 x 10(-4) to 3 x 10(-6)) with T2DM. SLC30A8 (OR = 1.06; P =
0.039) showed association only after adjustment for gender and body mass index.
Metaanalysis with data from other East Asian populations showed similar effect
sizes to those observed in populations of European ancestry.
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs at T2DM susceptibility loci identified through GWAS in
populations of European ancestry show similar effects in Asian populations.
Failure to detect these effects across different populations may be due to issues
of power owing to limited sample size, lower minor allele frequency, or
differences in genetic effect sizes.

PMID: 19892838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 28;4(10):e7643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007643.

PPARG, KCNJ11, CDKAL1, CDKN2A-CDKN2B, IDE-KIF11-HHEX, IGF2BP2 and SLC30A8 are
associated with type 2 diabetes in a Chinese population.

Hu C(1), Zhang R, Wang C, Wang J, Ma X, Lu J, Qin W, Hou X, Wang C, Bao Y, Xiang 
K, Jia W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent advance in genetic studies added the confirmed susceptible
loci for type 2 diabetes to eighteen. In this study, we attempt to analyze the
independent and joint effect of variants from these loci on type 2 diabetes and
clinical phenotypes related to glucose metabolism.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Twenty-one single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
from fourteen loci were successfully genotyped in 1,849 subjects with type 2
diabetes and 1,785 subjects with normal glucose regulation. We analyzed the
allele and genotype distribution between the cases and controls of these SNPs as 
well as the joint effects of the susceptible loci on type 2 diabetes risk. The
associations between SNPs and type 2 diabetes were examined by logistic
regression. The associations between SNPs and quantitative traits were examined
by linear regression. The discriminative accuracy of the prediction models was
assessed by area under the receiver operating characteristic curves. We confirmed
the effects of SNPs from PPARG, KCNJ11, CDKAL1, CDKN2A-CDKN2B, IDE-KIF11-HHEX,
IGF2BP2 and SLC30A8 on risk for type 2 diabetes, with odds ratios ranging from
1.114 to 1.406 (P value range from 0.0335 to 1.37E-12). But no significant
association was detected between SNPs from WFS1, FTO, JAZF1, TSPAN8-LGR5, THADA, 
ADAMTS9, NOTCH2-ADAM30 and type 2 diabetes. Analyses on the quantitative traits
in the control subjects showed that THADA SNP rs7578597 was association with 2-h 
insulin during oral glucose tolerance tests (P = 0.0005, empirical P = 0.0090).
The joint effect analysis of SNPs from eleven loci showed the individual carrying
more risk alleles had a significantly higher risk for type 2 diabetes. And the
type 2 diabetes patients with more risk allele tended to have earlier diagnostic 
ages (P = 0.0006).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The current study confirmed the association between
PPARG, KCNJ11, CDKAL1, CDKN2A-CDKN2B, IDE-KIF11-HHEX, IGF2BP2 and SLC30A8 and
type 2 diabetes. These type 2 diabetes risk loci contributed to the disease
additively.

PMCID: PMC2763267
PMID: 19862325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diabetes. 2010 Jan;59(1):287-92. doi: 10.2337/db09-0736. Epub 2009 Oct 6.

Combined risk allele score of eight type 2 diabetes genes is associated with
reduced first-phase glucose-stimulated insulin secretion during hyperglycemic
clamps.

't Hart LM(1), Simonis-Bik AM, Nijpels G, van Haeften TW, Schäfer SA,
Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, Boomsma DI, Groenewoud MJ, Reiling E, van Hove EC,
Diamant M, Kramer MH, Heine RJ, Maassen JA, Kirchhoff K, Machicao F, Häring HU,
Slagboom PE, Willemsen G, Eekhoff EM, de Geus EJ, Dekker JM, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands. l.m.t_hart@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: At least 20 type 2 diabetes loci have now been identified, and several
of these are associated with altered beta-cell function. In this study, we have
investigated the combined effects of eight known beta-cell loci on insulin
secretion stimulated by three different secretagogues during hyperglycemic
clamps.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 447 subjects originating from four
independent studies in the Netherlands and Germany (256 with normal glucose
tolerance [NGT]/191 with impaired glucose tolerance [IGT]) underwent a
hyperglycemic clamp. A subset had an extended clamp with additional glucagon-like
peptide (GLP)-1 and arginine (n = 224). We next genotyped single nucleotide
polymorphisms in TCF7L2, KCNJ11, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, HHEX/IDE, CDKN2A/B, SLC30A8,
and MTNR1B and calculated a risk allele score by risk allele counting.
RESULTS: The risk allele score was associated with lower first-phase
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) (P = 7.1 x 10(-6)). The effect size
was equal in subjects with NGT and IGT. We also noted an inverse correlation with
the disposition index (P = 1.6 x 10(-3)). When we stratified the study population
according to the number of risk alleles into three groups, those with a medium-
or high-risk allele score had 9 and 23% lower first-phase GSIS. Second-phase
GSIS, insulin sensitivity index and GLP-1, or arginine-stimulated insulin release
were not significantly different.
CONCLUSIONS: A combined risk allele score for eight known beta-cell genes is
associated with the rapid first-phase GSIS and the disposition index. The slower 
second-phase GSIS, GLP-1, and arginine-stimulated insulin secretion are not
associated, suggesting that especially processes involved in rapid granule
recruitment and exocytosis are affected in the majority of risk loci.

PMCID: PMC2797935
PMID: 19808892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Transplantation. 2009 Sep 15;88(5):693-8. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3181b29c41.

Association of common type 2 diabetes risk gene variants and posttransplantation 
diabetes mellitus in renal allograft recipients in Korea.

Kang ES(1), Kim MS, Kim CH, Nam CM, Han SJ, Hur KY, Ahn CW, Cha BS, Kim SI, Lee
HC, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Posttransplantation diabetes mellitus (PTDM) is a major metabolic
complication in renal transplant recipients. Recent genome-wide association
studies have identified several genes associated with type 2 diabetes. Here, we
examined the association between PTDM and 17 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) located within 15 genes in a cohort of renal allograft recipients in
Korea.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 589 patients who received kidney transplants
between 1989 and 2007, without a history of diabetes and had a pretransplant
fasting glucose less than 5.5 mmol/L were included in this study. We analyzed the
association between the PTDM development and the following SNPs: TCF7L2
rs7903146, SLC30A8 rs13266634, HHEX (rs1111875, rs7923837, and rs5015480), CDKAL1
rs10946398, CDKN2A/B rs10811661, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, FTO rs8050136, WFS1 rs734312,
JAZF1 rs864745, CDC123/CAMK1D rs12779790, TSPAN8 rs7961581, THADA rs7578597,
ADAMTS9 rs4607103, NOTCH2 rs1092391, and KCNQ1 rs2237892.
RESULTS: Eight SNPs in six genes were significantly associated with the PTDM
development: TCF7L2 rs7903146 (odds ratio [OR]=2.20, P =0.016), SLC30A8
rs13266634 (OR=1.52, P =0.003), HHEX rs1111875 (OR=1.47, P =0.007), HHEX
rs7923837 (OR=2.32, P =0.014), HHEX rs5015480 (OR=1.59, P =0.003), CDKAL1
rs10946398 (OR=1.43, P =0.008), CDKN2A/B rs10811661 (OR=1.33, P =0.039), and
KCNQ1 rs2237892 (OR=1.46, P =0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that genetic variations in TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, and KCNQ1 are associated with PTDM in Korea.

PMID: 19741467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Diabetes. 2009 Dec;58(12):2939-45. doi: 10.2337/db09-0374. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Common genetic determinants of glucose homeostasis in healthy children: the
European Youth Heart Study.

Kelliny C(1), Ekelund U, Andersen LB, Brage S, Loos RJ, Wareham NJ, Langenberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Institute 
of Metabolic Science, Cambridge, U.K.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to investigate whether the effects of
common genetic variants associated with fasting glucose in adults are detectable 
in healthy children.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms in MTNR1B
(rs10830963), G6PC2 (rs560887), and GCK (rs4607517) were genotyped in 2,025
healthy European children aged 9-11 and 14-16 years. Associations with fasting
glucose, insulin, homeostasis model assessment (HOMA)-insulin resistance (IR) and
HOMA-B were investigated along with those observed for type 2 diabetes variants
available in this study (CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX-IDE, and Chr
11p12).
RESULTS: Strongest associations were observed for G6PC2 and MTNR1B, with mean
fasting glucose levels (95% CI) being 0.084 (0.06-0.11) mmol/l, P = 7.9 x 10(-11)
and 0.069 (0.04-0.09) mmol/l, P = 1.9 x 10(-7) higher per risk allele copy,
respectively. A similar but weaker trend was observed for GCK (0.028 [-0.006 to
0.06] mmol/l, P = 0.11). All three variants were associated with lower beta-cell 
function (HOMA-B P = 9.38 x 10(-5), 0.004, and 0.04, respectively). SLC30A8
(rs13266634) was the only type 2 diabetes variant associated with higher fasting 
glucose (0.033 mmol/l [0.01-0.06], P = 0.01). Calculating a genetic
predisposition score adding the number of risk alleles of G6PC2, MTNR1B, GCK, and
SLC30A8 showed that glucose levels were successively higher in children carrying 
a greater number of risk alleles (P = 7.1 x 10(-17)), with mean levels of 5.34
versus 4.91 mmol/l comparing children with seven alleles (0.6% of all children)
to those with none (0.5%). No associations were found for fasting insulin or
HOMA-IR with any of the variants.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of common polymorphisms influencing fasting glucose are 
apparent in healthy children, whereas the presence of multiple risk alleles
amounts to a difference of >1 SD of fasting glucose.

PMCID: PMC2780884
PMID: 19741166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dis Model Mech. 2009 Sep-Oct;2(9-10):467-78. doi: 10.1242/dmm.001438. Epub 2009
Jul 28.

Folate rescues lithium-, homocysteine- and Wnt3A-induced vertebrate cardiac
anomalies.

Han M(1), Serrano MC, Lastra-Vicente R, Brinez P, Acharya G, Huhta JC, Chen R,
Linask KK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, USF/ACH Children's
Research Institute, St Petersburg, FL 33701, USA.

Elevated plasma homocysteine (HCy), which results from folate (folic acid, FA)
deficiency, and the mood-stabilizing drug lithium (Li) are both linked to the
induction of human congenital heart and neural tube defects. We demonstrated
previously that acute administration of Li to pregnant mice on embryonic day
(E)6.75 induced cardiac valve defects by potentiating Wnt-beta-catenin signaling.
We hypothesized that HCy may similarly induce cardiac defects during gastrulation
by targeting the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway. Because dietary FA supplementation
protects from neural tube defects, we sought to determine whether FA also
protects the embryonic heart from Li- or HCy-induced birth defects and whether
the protection occurs by impacting Wnt signaling. Maternal elevation of HCy or Li
on E6.75 induced defective heart and placental function on E15.5, as identified
non-invasively using echocardiography. This functional analysis of HCy-exposed
mouse hearts revealed defects in tricuspid and semilunar valves, together with
altered myocardial thickness. A smaller embryo and placental size was observed in
the treated groups. FA supplementation ameliorates the observed developmental
errors in the Li- or HCy-exposed mouse embryos and normalized heart function.
Molecular analysis of gene expression within the avian cardiogenic crescent
determined that Li, HCy or Wnt3A suppress Wnt-modulated Hex (also known as Hhex) 
and Islet-1 (also known as Isl1) expression, and that FA protects from the gene
misexpression that is induced by all three factors. Furthermore, myoinositol with
FA synergistically enhances the protective effect. Although the specific
molecular epigenetic control mechanisms remain to be defined, it appears that Li 
or HCy induction and FA protection of cardiac defects involve intimate control of
the canonical Wnt pathway at a crucial time preceding, and during, early heart
organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2737056
PMID: 19638421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Oct;94(10):4113-5. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0970. Epub 
2009 Jul 21.

HHEX-IDE polymorphism is associated with low birth weight in offspring with a
family history of type 1 diabetes.

Winkler C(1), Illig T, Koczwara K, Bonifacio E, Ziegler AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fuer Diabetesforschung der Forschergruppe Diabetes e.V. at the
Helmholtz Center Munich, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

CONTEXT: The fetal insulin hypothesis proposes that common genetic variants that 
reduce insulin secretion also reduce birth weight, and an association of low
birth weight and the type 2 diabetes risk alleles at the HHEX-IDE and CDKAL1 loci
were recently reported.
OBJECTIVE: Here, we examined the relationship between type 2 diabetes risk
alleles and birth weight in a diabetic environment presented in children of
mothers with type 1 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Birth weight and genotyping of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) at the CDKAL1, HHEX-IDE, and SLC30A8 loci was obtained and
analyzed in 729 singleton full-term children of mothers with type 1 diabetes born
in Germany.
RESULTS: The fetal risk alleles of HHEX-IDE SNP rs5015480 and SNP rs10882102 were
associated with reduced birth weight: 81g (95% confidence interval, 20-140 g; P =
0.009) and 85 g (95% confidence interval, 25-145 g; P = 0.005) lower birth weight
per risk allele, respectively. The association remained significant after
adjusting for maternal pregnancy-glycosylated hemoglobin. Fetal genotypes at the 
CDKAL1 and SLC30A8 loci were not associated with birth weight in this cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: The association of low birth weight and type 2 diabetes risk alleles
of the HHEX-IDE locus is confirmed in children of mothers with type 1 diabetes.

PMID: 19622614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Blood. 2009 Sep 10;114(11):2299-306. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-219386. Epub 2009
Jul 13.

Cytokine-mediated increases in fetal hemoglobin are associated with globin gene
histone modification and transcription factor reprogramming.

Sripichai O(1), Kiefer CM, Bhanu NV, Tanno T, Noh SJ, Goh SH, Russell JE,
Rognerud CL, Ou CN, Oneal PA, Meier ER, Gantt NM, Byrnes C, Lee YT, Dean A,
Miller JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Therapeutic regulation of globin genes is a primary goal of translational
research aimed toward hemoglobinopathies. Signal transduction was used to
identify chromatin modifications and transcription factor expression patterns
that are associated with globin gene regulation. Histone modification and
transcriptome profiling were performed using adult primary CD34(+) cells cultured
with cytokine combinations that produced low versus high levels of gamma-globin
mRNA and fetal hemoglobin (HbF). Embryonic, fetal, and adult globin transcript
and protein expression patterns were determined for comparison. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed RNA polymerase II occupancy and histone tail 
modifications consistent with transcriptional activation only in the high-HbF
culture condition. Transcriptome profiling studies demonstrated reproducible
changes in expression of nuclear transcription factors associated with high HbF. 
Among the 13 genes that demonstrated differential transcript levels, 8
demonstrated nuclear protein expression levels that were significantly changed by
cytokine signal transduction. Five of the 8 genes are recognized regulators of
erythropoiesis or globin genes (MAFF, ID2, HHEX, SOX6, and EGR1). Thus,
cytokine-mediated signal transduction in adult erythroid cells causes significant
changes in the pattern of globin gene and protein expression that are associated 
with distinct histone modifications as well as nuclear reprogramming of erythroid
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2745848
PMID: 19597182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Diabetes. 2009 Oct;58(10):2414-8. doi: 10.2337/db09-0506. Epub 2009 Jul 10.

Examination of type 2 diabetes loci implicates CDKAL1 as a birth weight gene.

Zhao J(1), Li M, Bradfield JP, Wang K, Zhang H, Sleiman P, Kim CE, Annaiah K,
Glaberson W, Glessner JT, Otieno FG, Thomas KA, Garris M, Hou C, Frackelton EC,
Chiavacci RM, Berkowitz RI, Hakonarson H, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: A number of studies have found that reduced birth weight is associated
with type 2 diabetes later in life; however, the underlying mechanism for this
correlation remains unresolved. Recently, association has been demonstrated
between low birth weight and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the CDKAL1
and HHEX-IDE loci, regions that were previously implicated in the pathogenesis of
type 2 diabetes. In order to investigate whether type 2 diabetes risk-conferring 
alleles associate with low birth weight in our Caucasian childhood cohort, we
examined the effects of 20 such loci on this trait.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Using data from an ongoing genome-wide association
study in our cohort of 5,465 Caucasian children with recorded birth weights, we
investigated the association of the previously reported type 2
diabetes-associated variation at 20 loci including TCF7L2, HHEX-IDE, PPARG,
KCNJ11, SLC30A8, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/2B, and JAZF1 with birth weight.
RESULTS: Our data show that the minor allele of rs7756992 (P = 8 x 10(-5)) at the
CDKAL1 locus is strongly associated with lower birth weight, whereas a perfect
surrogate for variation previously implicated for the trait at the same locus
only yielded nominally significant association (P = 0.01; r(2) rs7756992 =
0.677). However, association was not detected with any of the other type 2
diabetes loci studied.
CONCLUSIONS: We observe association between lower birth weight and type 2
diabetes risk-conferring alleles at the CDKAL1 locus. Our data show that the same
genetic locus that has been identified as a marker for type 2 diabetes in
previous studies also influences birth weight.

PMCID: PMC2750235
PMID: 19592620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biochem. 2009 Dec;332(1-2):173-81. doi: 10.1007/s11010-009-0188-0. Epub 
2009 Jul 9.

A mechanism of nucleocytoplasmic trafficking for the homeodomain protein PRH.

Ploski JE(1), Topisirovic I, Park KW, Borden KL, Radu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Proline-rich homeodomain (PRH)/hematopoietically expressed homeodomain (Hex) is a
homeodomain protein that plays an important role in early embryonic patterning
and hematopoiesis. PRH can act as either a tumor suppressor or an oncogene and
its expression is dysregulated in certain types of lymphoid and myeloid
leukemias. Aberrant exclusion of PRH from the nuclei has been associated with
thyroid and breast cancers and a subset of myeloid leukemias. Accordingly,
nuclear localization of PRH was found to be necessary for the inhibition of
eIF4E-dependent transformation. Since PRH's nuclear-cytoplasmic localization has 
been associated with neoplastic transformation we sought to better understand how
PRH is transported to the nuclear compartment. Here, we report an essential
element that controls the mechanism of PRH nucleocytoplasmic trafficking, namely 
that it is imported into the nuclei by Karyopherin/Importin 7. Kap7 was
identified as a binding partner for PRH in a GST-pull down from a HeLa cell
protein lysate, followed by mass-spectrometry. The Kap7-PRH complex is
dissociated in the presence of RanGTP, as expected for a nuclear import complex. 
Kap7 can bind directly to PRH in a GST-pull down assay with purified proteins, as
well as mediates the transport of PRH to the nuclear compartment in a digitonin
permeabilized cells assay. Finally, in vivo depletion of Kap7 dramatically
reduces accumulation of PRH in the nucleus. Our data open the way for
investigations of the mechanism of perturbed PRH localization in tumors and
possible therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC4440652
PMID: 19588232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Diabetes. 2009 Sep;58(9):2129-36. doi: 10.2337/db09-0117. Epub 2009 Jun 5.

Association of 18 confirmed susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes with indices 
of insulin release, proinsulin conversion, and insulin sensitivity in 5,327
nondiabetic Finnish men.

Stancáková A(1), Kuulasmaa T, Paananen J, Jackson AU, Bonnycastle LL, Collins FS,
Boehnke M, Kuusisto J, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital,
Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the effects of 18 confirmed type 2 diabetes risk
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on insulin sensitivity, insulin secretion,
and conversion of proinsulin to insulin.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 5,327 nondiabetic men (age 58 +/- 7
years, BMI 27.0 +/- 3.8 kg/m(2)) from a large population-based cohort were
included. Oral glucose tolerance tests and genotyping of SNPs in or near PPARG,
KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1,
JAZF1, CDC123, TSPAN8, THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, KCNQ1, and MTNR1B were performed. 
HNF1B rs757210 was excluded because of failure to achieve Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium.
RESULTS: Six SNPs (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2B, CDKAL1, and MTNR1B) were
significantly (P < 6.9 x 10(-4)) and two SNPs (KCNJ11 and IGF2BP2) were nominally
(P < 0.05) associated with early-phase insulin release
(InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30)), adjusted for age, BMI, and insulin sensitivity
(Matsuda ISI). Combined effects of these eight SNPs reached -32% reduction in
InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30) in carriers of >or=11 vs. <or=3 weighted risk alleles. 
Four SNPs (SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1, and TCF7L2) were significantly or nominally
associated with indexes of proinsulin conversion. Three SNPs (KCNJ11, HHEX, and
TSPAN8) were nominally associated with Matsuda ISI (adjusted for age and BMI).
The effect of HHEX on Matsuda ISI became significant after additional adjustment 
for InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30). Nine SNPs did not show any associations with
examined traits.
CONCLUSIONS: Eight type 2 diabetes-related loci were significantly or nominally
associated with impaired early-phase insulin release. Effects of SLC30A8, HHEX,
CDKAL1, and TCF7L2 on insulin release could be partially explained by impaired
proinsulin conversion. HHEX might influence both insulin release and insulin
sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC2731523
PMID: 19502414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Diabetologia. 2009 Oct;52(10):2109-16. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1391-y. Epub 2009 
May 20.

No association of multiple type 2 diabetes loci with type 1 diabetes.

Raj SM(1), Howson JM, Walker NM, Cooper JD, Smyth DJ, Field SF, Stevens HE, Todd 
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Oct;52(10):1983-6.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We used recently confirmed type 2 diabetes gene regions to
investigate the genetic relationship between type 1 and type 2 diabetes, in an
average of 7,606 type 1 diabetic individuals and 8,218 controls, providing >80%
power to detect effects as small as an OR of 1.11 at a false-positive rate of
0.003.
METHODS: The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the most convincing
evidence of association in 12 type 2 diabetes-associated gene regions, PPARG,
CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1, SLC30A8, CDKN2A-CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, FTO,
HHEX-IDE and THADA, were analysed in type 1 diabetes cases and controls. PPARG
and HHEX-IDE were additionally tested for association in 3,851 type 1 diabetes
families. Tests for interaction with HLA class II genotypes, autoantibody status,
sex, and age-at-diagnosis of type 1 diabetes were performed with all 12 gene
regions.
RESULTS: Only PPARG and HHEX-IDE showed any evidence of association with type 1
diabetes cases and controls (p = 0.004 and p = 0.003, respectively; p > 0.05 for 
other SNPs). The potential association of PPARG was supported by family analyses 
(p = 0.003; p (combined) = 1.0 x 10(-4)). No SNPs showed evidence of interaction 
with any covariate (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We found no convincing genetic link between type 1
and type 2 diabetes. An association of PPARG (rs1801282/Pro12Ala) could be
consistent with its known function in inflammation. Hence, our results reinforce 
evidence suggesting that type 1 diabetes is a disease of the immune system,
rather than being due to inherited defects in beta cell function or regeneration 
or insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC2738846
PMID: 19455305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int J Cancer. 2009 Aug 1;125(3):612-20. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24392.

Gene expression profiling of alpha-radiation-induced rat osteosarcomas:
identification of dysregulated genes involved in radiation-induced tumorigenesis 
of bone.

Daino K(1), Ugolin N, Altmeyer-Morel S, Guilly MN, Chevillard S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Cancérologie Expérimentale, iRCM, DSV, CEA, Fontenay-aux-Roses,
France.

To better understand the molecular basis of radiation-induced osteosarcoma (OS), 
we performed global gene expression profiling of rat OS tumors induced by the
bone-seeking alpha emitter (238)Pu, and the expression profiles were compared
with those of normal osteoblasts (OB). The expressions of 72 genes were
significantly differentially expressed in the tumors related to OB. These
included genes involved in the cell adhesion (e.g., Podxl, Col18a1, Cd93, Emcn
and Vcl), differentiation, developmental processes (e.g., Hhex, Gata2, P2ry6,
P2rx5, Cited2, Osmr and Igsf10), tumor-suppressor function (e.g., Nme3, Blcap and
Rrm1), Src tyrosine kinase signaling (e.g., Hck, Shf, Arhgap29, Cttn and Akap12),
and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling (e.g., Fzd6, Lzic, Dkk3 and Ctnna1) pathways.
Expression changes of several genes were validated by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR analysis. Notably, all of the identified genes involved in the
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway were known or proposed to be negative
regulators of this pathway and were downregulated in the tumors, suggesting the
activation of beta-catenin in radiation-induced OS. By using immunohistochemical 
and immunoblot analyses, constitutive activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling pathway in the tumors was confirmed by observing nuclear and/or
cytoplasmic localization of beta-catenin and a decrease in its inactive
(phosphorylated) form. Furthermore, we found a significant reduction in the
levels of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) protein in the tumors
relative to OB. Taken together, these findings provide new insights into the
molecular basis of radiation-induced OS.

PMID: 19444910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Diabetes. 2009 Jul;58(7):1690-9. doi: 10.2337/db08-1494. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

Confirmation of multiple risk Loci and genetic impacts by a genome-wide
association study of type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

Takeuchi F(1), Serizawa M, Yamamoto K, Fujisawa T, Nakashima E, Ohnaka K, Ikegami
H, Sugiyama T, Katsuya T, Miyagishi M, Nakashima N, Nawata H, Nakamura J, Kono S,
Takayanagi R, Kato N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Ecology and Informatics, Research Institute,
International Medical Center of Japan, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To identify novel type 2 diabetes gene variants and confirm previously
identified ones, a three-staged genome-wide association study was performed in
the Japanese population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In the stage 1 scan, we genotyped 519 case and 503
control subjects with 482,625 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers; in
the stage 2 panel comprising 1,110 case subjects and 1,014 control subjects, we
assessed 1,456 SNPs (P < 0.0025, stage 1); additionally to direct genotyping, 964
healthy control subjects formed the in silico control panel. Along with
genome-wide exploration, we aimed to replicate the disease association of 17 SNPs
from 16 candidate loci previously identified in Europeans. The associated and/or 
replicated loci (23 SNPs; P < 7 x 10(-5) for genome-wide exploration and P < 0.05
for replication) were examined in the stage 3 panel comprising 4,000 case
subjects and 12,569 population-based samples, from which 4,889 nondiabetic
control subjects were preselected. The 12,569 subjects were used for overall risk
assessment in the general population.
RESULTS: Four loci-1 novel with suggestive evidence (PEPD on 19q13, P = 1.4 x
10(-5)) and three previously reported-were identified; the association of CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/CDKN2B, and KCNQ1 were confirmed (P < 10(-19)). Moreover, significant
associations were replicated in five other candidate loci: TCF7L2, IGF2BP2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, and KCNJ11. There was substantial overlap of type 2 diabetes
susceptibility genes between the two populations, whereas effect size and
explained variance tended to be higher in the Japanese population.
CONCLUSIONS: The strength of association was more prominent in the Japanese
population than in Europeans for more than half of the confirmed type 2 diabetes 
loci.

PMCID: PMC2699880
PMID: 19401414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Apr 15;10:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-33.

Contribution of type 2 diabetes associated loci in the Arabic population from
Tunisia: a case-control study.

Ezzidi I(1), Mtiraoui N, Cauchi S, Vaillant E, Dechaume A, Chaieb M, Kacem M,
Almawi WY, Froguel P, Mahjoub T, Vaxillaire M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy of Monastir, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.
intissar_z@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Candidate gene and genome-wide association studies have both
reproducibly identified several common Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)
that confer type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk in European populations. Our aim was to
evaluate the contribution to T2D of five of these established T2D-associated loci
in the Arabic population from Tunisia.
METHODS: A case-control design comprising 884 type 2 diabetic patients and 513
control subjects living in the East-Center of Tunisia was used to analyze the
contribution to T2D of the following SNPs: E23K in KCNJ11/Kir6.2, K121Q in ENPP1,
the -30G/A variant in the pancreatic beta-cell specific promoter of Glucokinase, 
rs7903146 in TCF7L2 encoding transcription factor 7-like2, and rs7923837 in HHEX 
encoding the homeobox, hematopoietically expressed transcription factor.
RESULTS: TCF7L2-rs7903146 T allele increased susceptibility to T2D (OR = 1.25
[1.06-1.47], P = 0.006) in our study population. This risk was 56% higher among
subjects carrying the TT genotype in comparison to those carrying the CC genotype
(OR = 1.56 [1.13-2.16], P = 0.002). No allelic or genotypic association with T2D 
was detected for the other studied polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: In the Tunisian population, TCF7L2-rs7903146 T allele confers an
increased risk of developing T2D as previously reported in the European
population and many other ethnic groups. In contrast, none of the other tested
SNPs that influence T2D risk in the European population was associated with T2D
in the Tunisian Arabic population. An insufficient power to detect minor allelic 
contributions or genetic heterogeneity of T2D between different ethnic groups can
explain these findings.

PMCID: PMC2678106
PMID: 19368707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jun;37(10):3288-300. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp197. Epub 2009
Mar 25.

CK2 phosphorylation of the PRH/Hex homeodomain functions as a reversible switch
for DNA binding.

Soufi A(1), Noy P, Buckle M, Sawasdichai A, Gaston K, Jayaraman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research, Birmingham University Medical School,
Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.

The proline-rich homeodomain protein (PRH/Hex) regulates transcription by binding
to specific DNA sequences and regulates mRNA transport by binding to translation 
initiation factor eIF4E. Protein kinase CK2 plays multiple roles in the
regulation of gene expression and cell proliferation. Here, we show that PRH
interacts with the beta subunit of CK2 in vitro and in cells and that CK2
phosphorylates PRH. Phosphorylation of PRH by CK2 inhibits the DNA binding
activity of this protein and dephosphorylation restores DNA binding indicating
that this modification acts as a reversible switch. We show that phosphorylation 
of the homeodomain is sufficient to block DNA binding and we identify two amino
acids within this the domain that are phosphorylated by CK2: S163 and S177.
Site-directed mutagenesis demonstrates that mutation of either of these residues 
to glutamic acid partially mimics phosphorylation but is insufficient to
completely block DNA binding whereas an S163E/S177E double mutation severely
inhibits DNA binding. Significantly, the S163E and S177E mutations and the
S163E/S177E double mutation all inhibit the ability of PRH to regulate
transcription in cells. Since these amino acids are conserved between many
homeodomain proteins, our results suggest that CK2 may regulate the activity of
several homeodomain proteins in this manner.

PMCID: PMC2691835
PMID: 19324893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Diabetes. 2009 Jun;58(6):1440-4. doi: 10.2337/db08-1173. Epub 2009 Mar 3.

Genetic variant in the IGF2BP2 gene may interact with fetal malnutrition to
affect glucose metabolism.

van Hoek M(1), Langendonk JG, de Rooij SR, Sijbrands EJ, Roseboom TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Fetal malnutrition may predispose to type 2 diabetes through gene
programming and developmental changes. Previous studies showed that these effects
may be modulated by genetic variation. Genome-wide association studies discovered
and replicated a number of type 2 diabetes-associated genes. We investigated the 
effects of such well-studied polymorphisms and their interactions with fetal
malnutrition on type 2 diabetes risk and related phenotypes in the Dutch Famine
Birth Cohort.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The rs7754840 (CDKAL1), rs10811661 (CDKN2AB),
rs1111875 (HHEX), rs4402960 (IGF2BP2), rs5219 (KCNJ11), rs13266634 (SLC30A8), and
rs7903146 (TCF7L2) polymorphisms were genotyped in 772 participants of the Dutch 
Famine Birth Cohort Study (n = 328 exposed, n = 444 unexposed). Logistic and
linear regression models served to analyze their interactions with prenatal
exposure to famine on type 2 diabetes, impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), and area
under the curves (AUCs) for glucose and insulin during oral glucose tolerance
testing (OGTT).
RESULTS: In the total population, the TCF7L2 and IGF2BP2 variants most strongly
associated with increased risk for type 2 diabetes/IGT and increased AUC for
glucose, while the CDKAL1 polymorphism associated with decreased AUC for insulin.
The IGF2BP2 polymorphism showed an interaction with prenatal exposure to famine
on AUC for glucose (beta = -9.2 [95% CI -16.2 to -2.1], P = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The IGF2BP2 variant showed a nominal interaction with exposure to
famine in utero, decreasing OGTT AUCs for glucose. This may provide a clue that
modulation of the consequences of fetal environment depends on an individual's
genetic background.

PMCID: PMC2682678
PMID: 19258437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 May;94(5):1775-80. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1876. Epub 
2009 Mar 3.

The inhibitory effect of recent type 2 diabetes risk loci on insulin secretion is
modulated by insulin sensitivity.

Haupt A(1), Guthoff M, Schäfer SA, Kirchhoff K, Machicao F, Gallwitz B, Staiger
H, Stefan N, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic, Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Nephrology and
Angiology, Otfried-Müller-Strasse 10, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

CONTEXT/OBJECTIVE: Recently novel type 2 diabetes risk loci were identified and
reported to associate with beta-cell dysfunction. We assessed whether the risk
alleles in TCF7L2, CDKAL1, HHEX, SLC30A8, IGF2BP2, CDKN2A/2B, JAZF1, and WFS1
reduce insulin secretion in an additive manner and whether their impact is
influenced by insulin sensitivity.
DESIGN/METHODS: We genotyped 1397 nondiabetic subjects for the aforementioned
risk alleles and performed risk allele summation. Participants underwent an oral 
glucose tolerance test and in a subgroup also an iv glucose tolerance test with
C-peptide and insulin measurements. In our cohort, only polymorphisms in SLC30A8,
HHEX, TCF7L2, and CDKAL1 influenced insulin secretion. So we tested only these
polymorphisms and, in a separate analysis, all above-mentioned polymorphisms.
RESULTS: We observed a 28% decline in insulin secretion with increment of risk
alleles (P <or= 0.0018). Subjects with two to four risk alleles displayed a
progressive decline in ss-cell function, which was not further enhanced in
carriers of five to seven alleles. After stratification for insulin sensitivity, 
subjects with low insulin sensitivity revealed a significant decline in insulin
secretion with increment of risk alleles (P = 0.0086), whereas this was not seen 
in subjects with high insulin sensitivity (P = 0.07). The additional study with
eight risk alleles provided similar results.
CONCLUSIONS: The negative effects of the risk alleles on ss-cell function appear 
additive in subjects with low insulin sensitivity but not in subjects with high
insulin sensitivity. Effective compensatory mechanisms may exist in subjects with
high insulin sensitivity that limit the impact of these genes.

PMID: 19258404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;54(4):236-41. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.17. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Construction of a prediction model for type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Japanese
population based on 11 genes with strong evidence of the association.

Miyake K(1), Yang W, Hara K, Yasuda K, Horikawa Y, Osawa H, Furuta H, Ng MC,
Hirota Y, Mori H, Ido K, Yamagata K, Hinokio Y, Oka Y, Iwasaki N, Iwamoto Y,
Yamada Y, Seino Y, Maegawa H, Kashiwagi A, Wang HY, Tanahashi T, Nakamura N,
Takeda J, Maeda E, Yamamoto K, Tokunaga K, Ma RC, So WY, Chan JC, Kamatani N,
Makino H, Nanjo K, Kadowaki T, Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Prediction of the disease status is one of the most important objectives of
genetic studies. To select the genes with strong evidence of the association with
type 2 diabetes mellitus, we validated the associations of the seven candidate
loci extracted in our earlier study by genotyping the samples in two independent 
sample panels. However, except for KCNQ1, the association of none of the
remaining seven loci was replicated. We then selected 11 genes, KCNQ1, TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8, HHEX, GCKR, HNF1B, KCNJ11 and PPARG, whose
associations with diabetes have already been reported and replicated either in
the literature or in this study in the Japanese population. As no evidence of the
gene-gene interaction for any pair of the 11 loci was shown, we constructed a
prediction model for the disease using the logistic regression analysis by
incorporating the number of the risk alleles for the 11 genes, as well as age,
sex and body mass index as independent variables. Cumulative risk assessment
showed that the addition of one risk allele resulted in an average increase in
the odds for the disease of 1.29 (95% CI=1.25-1.33, P=5.4 x 10(-53)). The area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve, an estimate of the power of
the prediction model, was 0.72, thereby indicating that our prediction model for 
type 2 diabetes may not be so useful but has some value. Incorporation of data
from additional risk loci is most likely to increase the predictive power.

PMID: 19247372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Diabetes. 2009 Jun;58(6):1428-33. doi: 10.2337/db08-1739. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

Type 2 diabetes risk alleles are associated with reduced size at birth.

Freathy RM(1), Bennett AJ, Ring SM, Shields B, Groves CJ, Timpson NJ, Weedon MN, 
Zeggini E, Lindgren CM, Lango H, Perry JR, Pouta A, Ruokonen A, Hyppönen E, Power
C, Elliott P, Strachan DP, Järvelin MR, Smith GD, McCarthy MI, Frayling TM,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science,
Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2009 Jun;58(6):1255-6.

OBJECTIVE: Low birth weight is associated with an increased risk of type 2
diabetes. The mechanisms underlying this association are unknown and may
represent intrauterine programming or two phenotypes of one genotype. The fetal
insulin hypothesis proposes that common genetic variants that reduce insulin
secretion or action may predispose to type 2 diabetes and also reduce birth
weight, since insulin is a key fetal growth factor. We tested whether common
genetic variants that predispose to type 2 diabetes also reduce birth weight.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
at five recently identified type 2 diabetes loci (CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, HHEX-IDE,
IGF2BP2, and SLC30A8) in 7,986 mothers and 19,200 offspring from four studies of 
white Europeans. We tested the association between maternal or fetal genotype at 
each locus and birth weight of the offspring.
RESULTS: We found that type 2 diabetes risk alleles at the CDKAL1 and HHEX-IDE
loci were associated with reduced birth weight when inherited by the fetus (21 g 
[95% CI 11-31], P = 2 x 10(-5), and 14 g [4-23], P = 0.004, lower birth weight
per risk allele, respectively). The 4% of offspring carrying four risk alleles at
these two loci were 80 g (95% CI 39-120) lighter at birth than the 8% carrying
none (P(trend) = 5 x 10(-7)). There were no associations between birth weight and
fetal genotypes at the three other loci or maternal genotypes at any locus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results are in keeping with the fetal insulin hypothesis and
provide robust evidence that common disease-associated variants can alter size at
birth directly through the fetal genotype.

PMCID: PMC2682672
PMID: 19228808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Diabetologia. 2009 May;52(5):825-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1291-1. Epub 2009 Feb
19.

Interaction between prenatal growth and high-risk genotypes in the development of
type 2 diabetes.

Pulizzi N(1), Lyssenko V, Jonsson A, Osmond C, Laakso M, Kajantie E, Barker DJ,
Groop LC, Eriksson JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
drpulizzi@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Dec;52(12):2671-2.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Early environmental factors and genetic variants have been
reported to be involved in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether there is an interaction between birthweight and 
common variants in the TCF7L2, HHEX, PPARG, KCNJ11, SLC30A8, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1 genes in the risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: A total of 2,003 participants from the Helsinki Birth Cohort Study, 311 
of whom were diagnosed with type 2 diabetes by an OGTT, were genotyped for the
specified variants. Indices for insulin sensitivity and secretion were
calculated.
RESULTS: Low birthweight was associated with type 2 diabetes (p = 0.008) and
impaired insulin secretion (p = 0.04). Of the tested variants, the risk variant
in HHEX showed a trend towards a low birthweight (p = 0.09) and the risk variant 
in the CDKN2A/2B locus was associated with high birthweight (p = 0.01). The
TCF7L2 risk allele was associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Pooling
across all nine genes, each risk allele increased the risk of type 2 diabetes by 
14%. [corrected] Risk variants in the HHEX, CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1 genes interacted 
with birthweight, so that the risk of type 2 diabetes was highest in those with
lower birthweight (p <or= 0.05). The interaction was also present in the pooled
data.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Low birthweight might affect the strength of the
association of some common variants (HHEX, CDKN2A/2B and JAZF1) with type 2
diabetes. These findings need to be replicated in independent cohorts.

PMID: 19225753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;125(3):305-18. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0626-9. Epub 2009 Jan 
29.

Identification of susceptibility genes for complex diseases using pooling-based
genome-wide association scans.

Bossé Y(1), Bacot F, Montpetit A, Rung J, Qu HQ, Engert JC, Polychronakos C,
Hudson TJ, Froguel P, Sladek R, Desrosiers M.

Author information: 
(1)Laval Hospital Research Center, Laval University, Pavillon
Margeritte-d'Youville, chemin Sainte-Foy, Quebec, QC, Canada.
yohan.bosse@crhl.ulaval.ca

The success of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to identify risk loci of
complex diseases is now well-established. One persistent major hurdle is the cost
of those studies, which make them beyond the reach of most research groups.
Performing GWAS on pools of DNA samples may be an effective strategy to reduce
the costs of these studies. In this study, we performed pooling-based GWAS with
more than 550,000 SNPs in two case-control cohorts consisting of patients with
Type II diabetes (T2DM) and with chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS). In the T2DM study,
the results of the pooling experiment were compared to individual genotypes
obtained from a previously published GWAS. TCF7L2 and HHEX SNPs associated with
T2DM by the traditional GWAS were among the top ranked SNPs in the pooling
experiment. This dataset was also used to refine the best strategy to correctly
identify SNPs that will remain significant based on individual genotyping. In the
CRS study, the top hits from the pooling-based GWAS located within ten kilobases 
of known genes were validated by individual genotyping of 1,536 SNPs. Forty-one
percent (598 out of the 1,457 SNPs that passed quality control) were associated
with CRS at a nominal P value of 0.05, confirming the potential of pooling-based 
GWAS to identify SNPs that differ in allele frequencies between two groups of
subjects. Overall, our results demonstrate that a pooling experiment on
high-density genotyping arrays can accurately determine the minor allelic
frequency as compared to individual genotyping and produce a list of top ranked
SNPs that captures genuine allelic differences between a group of cases and
controls. The low cost associated with a pooling-based GWAS clearly justifies its
use in screening for genetic determinants of complex diseases.

PMID: 19184112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Diabetologia. 2009 Mar;52(3):457-62. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1250-2. Epub 2009
Jan 27.

The risk allele load accelerates the age-dependent decline in beta cell function.

Haupt A(1), Staiger H, Schäfer SA, Kirchhoff K, Guthoff M, Machicao F, Gallwitz
B, Stefan N, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic, Department of Internal Medicine IV (Diabetology,
Endocrinology, Nephrology, Angiology, and Clinical Chemistry), Eberhard Karls
University, Otfried-Müller-Strasse 10, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Among the novel type 2 diabetes risk loci identified by
genome-wide association studies, TCF7L2, HHEX, SLC30A8 and CDKAL1 appear to
affect beta cell function. In the present study we examined the effect of these
genes' risk alleles on the age-dependent decline in insulin secretion.
METHODS: The SNPs rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs7754840(CDKAL1), rs7923837 (HHEX) and
rs13266634 (SLC30A8) were genotyped in 1,412 non-diabetic patients, who were
subsequently grouped according to their number of risk alleles. All participants 
underwent an OGTT. Insulin secretion was assessed by validated indices and
proinsulin conversion by calculating AUC(proinsulin)/AUC(insulin).
RESULTS: The number of risk alleles revealed a Gaussian distribution, with most
participants carrying four risk alleles. Stratification into groups with low
(LAL, up to three alleles), median (MAL, four alleles) and high (HAL, five to
eight alleles) allele load resulted in MAL and HAL participants displaying
significantly lower insulin secretion and proinsulin conversion than LAL
participants (p <or= 0.0014 and p = 0.0185, respectively). In the overall cohort,
age was negatively associated with insulin secretion and proinsulin conversion
(both p < 0.0001). MAL and HAL participants showed a significantly more
pronounced decline in insulin secretion with increasing age than LAL participants
(p <or= 0.0325; analysis of covariance), and after stratification for BMI this
relationship was maintained in obese, but not non-obese, participants. Proinsulin
conversion decreased with increasing age in MAL and HAL, but not LAL,
participants (p <or= 0.0003 vs p = 0.2).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The risk allele load significantly accelerates the
age-dependent decline in beta cell function, and this might be of particular
importance in obese people.

PMID: 19172244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2009 Feb;25(2):156-62. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.926.

The influence of genetic variations in HHEX gene on insulin metabolism in the
German MESYBEPO cohort.

Pivovarova O(1), Nikiforova VJ, Pfeiffer AF, Rudovich N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Nutrition, German Institute of Human Nutrition,
Potsdam, Germany. olga.pivovarova@dife.de

BACKGROUND: In the present study, we aimed to validate the type 2 diabetes (T2DM)
susceptibility alleles identified in the first genome-wide association study in
the hematopoietically expressed homeobox protein (HHEX) gene region (rs1111875
and rs7923837). Furthermore, we investigated quantitative metabolic risk
phenotypes of these two variants for association with three key components of the
insulin metabolism: insulin secretion, insulin sensitivity and insulin
degradation.
METHODS: Two HHEX polymorphisms were genotyped in 1026 subjects from the German
MESYBEPO cohort. Complete OGTT data were available for a subset of 420 with
normal glucose tolerance (NGT), 282 with impaired glucose tolerance/impaired
fasting glucose (IGT/IFG) and 146 diabetic subjects.
RESULTS: We validated association of both HHEX polymorphisms with T2DM. In the
non-diabetic subcohort including NGT and IFG/IGT subjects, the risk alleles of
rs7923837 and rs1111875 were significantly associated with decreased first and
second phases of insulin secretion and lower insulinogenic index after oral
glucose loading. In healthy, normal glucose-tolerant subjects, the same
association of HHEX SNP rs1111875 with OGTT-derived phases of insulin secretion
were detectable, however, rs7923837 was only weakly associated with reduced
insulinogenic index. For both polymorphisms, no significant correlations with
insulin sensitivity were obtained. Reduced insulin clearance was also observed in
heterozygous carriers of rs1111875.
CONCLUSIONS: We validated the association of polymorphisms of the HHEX gene with 
T2DM in the MESYBEPO cohort. Importantly, variations within the HHEX gene
conferred the impaired insulin secretion and changes of insulin degradation but
no alteration in insulin sensitivity in carriers of risk alleles.

Copyright (c) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19117022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Acta Diabetol. 2009 Sep;46(3):217-26. doi: 10.1007/s00592-008-0080-5. Epub 2008
Dec 10.

Association between insulin secretion, insulin sensitivity and type 2 diabetes
susceptibility variants identified in genome-wide association studies.

Ruchat SM(1), Elks CE, Loos RJ, Vohl MC, Weisnagel SJ, Rankinen T, Bouchard C,
Pérusse L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada.

Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) risk have been identified by genome wide association studies (GWAS). The
objective of the present study was to investigate the impact of these SNPs on
T2DM intermediate phenotypes in order to clarify the physiological mechanisms
through which they exert their effects on disease etiology. We analysed 23 SNPs
in 9 T2DM genes (CDKAL1, CDKN2B, HHEX/IDE, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, SLC30A8, TCF2, TCF7L2
and WFS1) in a maximum of 712 men and women from the Quebec Family Study. The
participants underwent a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and were
measured for glucose, insulin and C-peptide levels. Indices of insulin
sensitivity and insulin secretion were derived from fasting and OGTT
measurements. We confirmed the significant associations of variants in CDKAL1,
CDKN2B, HHEX/IDE, KCNJ11 and TCF7L2 with insulin secretion and also found
associations of some of these variants with insulin sensitivity and glucose
tolerance. IGF2BP2 and SLC30A8 SNPs were not associated with insulin secretion
but were with insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance (0.002 <or= P <or= 0.02).
To examine the joint effects of these variants and their contribution to T2DM
endophenotypes variance, stepwise regression models were used and the model R (2)
was computed. The variance in the phenotypes explained by combinations of
variants ranged from 2.0 to 8.5%. Diabetes-associated variants in CDKAL1, CDKN2B,
HHEX/IDE, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 are associated with physiological
alterations leading to T2DM, such as glucose intolerance, impaired insulin
secretion or insulin resistance, supporting their role in the disease aetiology. 
These variants were found to account for 2.0-8.5% of the variance of T2DM-related
traits.

PMID: 19082521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Hepatology. 2009 Mar;49(3):979-88. doi: 10.1002/hep.22712.

Hematopoietically expressed homeobox is a target gene of farnesoid X receptor in 
chenodeoxycholic acid-induced liver hypertrophy.

Xing X(1), Burgermeister E, Geisler F, Einwächter H, Fan L, Hiber M, Rauser S,
Walch A, Röcken C, Ebeling M, Wright MB, Schmid RM, Ebert MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University
Munich, Germany.

Farnesoid X receptor (FXR/Fxr) is a bile acid-regulated nuclear receptor that
promotes hepatic bile acid metabolism, detoxification, and liver regeneration.
However, the adaptive pathways under conditions of bile acid stress are not fully
elucidated. We found that wild-type but not Fxr knockout mice on diets enriched
with chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) increase their liver/body weight ratios by 50% 
due to hepatocellular hypertrophy. Microarray analysis identified Hex
(Hematopoietically expressed homeobox), a central transcription factor in
vertebrate embryogenesis and liver development, as a novel CDCA- and
Fxr-regulated gene. HEX/Hex was also regulated by FXR/Fxr and CDCA in primary
mouse hepatocytes and human HepG2 cells. Comparative genomic analysis identified 
a conserved inverted repeat-1-like DNA sequence within a 300 base pair enhancer
element of intron-1 in the human and mouse HEX/Hex gene. A combination of
chromatin immunoprecipitation, electromobility shift assay, and transcriptional
reporter assays demonstrated that FXR/Fxr binds to this element and mediates
HEX/Hex transcriptional activation.CONCLUSION: HEX/Hex is a novel bile
acid-induced FXR/Fxr target gene during adaptation of hepatocytes to chronic bile
acid exposure.

PMID: 19072826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2009 Apr;117(4):186-90. doi:
10.1055/s-0028-1100419. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Loci of TCF7L2, HHEX and IDE on chromosome 10q and the susceptibility of their
genetic polymorphisms to type 2 diabetes.

Nordman S(1), Ostenson CG, Efendic S, Gu HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Sweden.

TCF7L2, HHEX and IDE on chromosome 10q23-25 reside within the linkage region for 
type 2 diabetes (T2D). Previous studies including ours have demonstrated that
genetic polymorphisms in these three loci are associated with T2D, respectively. 
But, it is unclear whether TCF7L2, independently or interactively with HHEX and
IDE, confer the susceptibility to T2D. In the present study, we first replicated 
genetic association study of the TCF7L2 gene in a Swedish cohort including 528
non-diabetic healthy controls and 243 T2D patients and then evaluated combining
effect from common risk polymorphisms in TCF7L2-HHEX-IDE loci. T2D patients were 
diagnosed in the intermediate study time. To avoid influence from anti-diabetic
treatment, baseline data in all T2D patients were used for analysis. We found
that SNPs rs7901695, rs4506565, rs7903146 and rs12255372 in the TCF7L2 gene were 
strongly associated with T2D (p<0.004). In rs7903146, T2D patients carrying
genotypes CT or TT had higher fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels (p=0.042) and
lower HOMA-beta index (p=0.015) and BMI (p=0.015) compared to the patients
carrying CC genotype. Furthermore, the risk alleles from TCF7L2 rs7903146
polymorphism either with IDE rs2251101 polymorphism (p=0.0257, OR=1.398) or with 
HHEX rs1544210 polymorphism (p=0.0024, OR=1.514) were significantly associated
with T2D. When risk alleles from three loci were combined, the association with
T2D remained significant (p=0.0018, OR=1.506). The present study thus provides
evidence that TCF7L2, as the main gene, together with HHEX and IDE loci have
combining effects on genetic predisposition to T2D.

PMID: 19053027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Diabetes. 2009 Feb;58(2):493-8. doi: 10.2337/db07-1785. Epub 2008 Nov 25.

Replication study of candidate genes associated with type 2 diabetes based on
genome-wide screening.

Tabara Y(1), Osawa H, Kawamoto R, Onuma H, Shimizu I, Miki T, Kohara K, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Research and Education, Ehime University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Toon City, Ehime, Japan. tabara@m.ehime-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: The present study was conducted to confirm possible associations
between candidate genes from genome-wide association studies and type 2 diabetes 
in Japanese diabetic patients and a community-based general population. A total
of 11 previously reported single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, HHEX, IGF2BP2, CDKN2A/B, SLC30A8, and KCNJ11 genes were analyzed.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Candidate SNPs were genotyped in 506 type 2 diabetic
patients and 402 control subjects and meta-analyzed with six previous association
studies in Japanese patients. Associations with fasting plasma insulin levels
were investigated in a general population sample (n = 1,963, 61 +/- 13 years).
RESULTS: In our case-control subjects, susceptibility to type 2 diabetes was
replicated in TCF7L2 (rs12255372), CDKAL1 (rs7756992, rs7754840), HHEX
(rs7923837), IGF2BP2 (rs4402960 and rs1470579), CDKN2A/B (rs10811661), and
SLC30A8 (rs13266634). In addition to these polymorphisms, meta-analysis confirmed
the association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility with KCNJ11 rs5219, TCF7L2
rs7903146, and HHEX rs1111875. The TCF7L2 rs12255372 polymorphism showed the
highest odds ratio (OR) for type 2 diabetes (OR 1.714 [1.298-2.263]). Odds ratio 
of other polymorphisms ranged from 1.13 to 1.41. The risk allele of CDKAL1
rs7756992 was significantly associated with lower insulin levels in type 2
diabetic patients after adjustment for other confounding factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Type 2 diabetes susceptibility of seven candidate genes was
confirmed in Japanese. Conservation of susceptible loci for type 2 diabetes was
independent of ethnic background.

PMCID: PMC2628625
PMID: 19033397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. N Engl J Med. 2008 Nov 20;359(21):2220-32. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801869.

Clinical risk factors, DNA variants, and the development of type 2 diabetes.

Lyssenko V(1), Jonsson A, Almgren P, Pulizzi N, Isomaa B, Tuomi T, Berglund G,
Altshuler D, Nilsson P, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
valeri.lyssenko@med.lu.se

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2009 Apr;5(4):187-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Mar 26;360(13):1360; author reply 1361.
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Mar 26;360(13):1360; author reply 1361.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus is thought to develop from an interaction
between environmental and genetic factors. We examined whether clinical or
genetic factors or both could predict progression to diabetes in two prospective 
cohorts.
METHODS: We genotyped 16 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and examined
clinical factors in 16,061 Swedish and 2770 Finnish subjects. Type 2 diabetes
developed in 2201 (11.7%) of these subjects during a median follow-up period of
23.5 years. We also studied the effect of genetic variants on changes in insulin 
secretion and action over time.
RESULTS: Strong predictors of diabetes were a family history of the disease, an
increased body-mass index, elevated liver-enzyme levels, current smoking status, 
and reduced measures of insulin secretion and action. Variants in 11 genes
(TCF7L2, PPARG, FTO, KCNJ11, NOTCH2, WFS1, CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8, JAZF1, and
HHEX) were significantly associated with the risk of type 2 diabetes
independently of clinical risk factors; variants in 8 of these genes were
associated with impaired beta-cell function. The addition of specific genetic
information to clinical factors slightly improved the prediction of future
diabetes, with a slight increase in the area under the
receiver-operating-characteristic curve from 0.74 to 0.75; however, the magnitude
of the increase was significant (P=1.0x10(-4)). The discriminative power of
genetic risk factors improved with an increasing duration of follow-up, whereas
that of clinical risk factors decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: As compared with clinical risk factors alone, common genetic
variants associated with the risk of diabetes had a small effect on the ability
to predict the future development of type 2 diabetes. The value of genetic
factors increased with an increasing duration of follow-up.

2008 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMID: 19020324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2008 Dec;18(10):651-8. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2008.08.001.

Homeobox genes in normal and abnormal vasculogenesis.

Cantile M(1), Schiavo G, Terracciano L, Cillo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Federico II University
Medical School, Naples, Italy.

Homeobox containing genes are a family of transcription factors regulating normal
development and controlling primary cellular processes (cell identity, cell
division and differentiation) recently enriched by the discovery of their
interaction with miRNAs and ncRNAs. Class I human homeobox genes (HOX genes) are 
characterized by a unique genomic network organization: four compact chromosomal 
loci where 39 sequence corresponding genes can be aligned with each other in 13
antero-posterior paralogous groups. The cardiovascular system is the first
mesoderm organ-system to be generated during embryonic development; subsequently 
it generates the blood and lymphatic vascular systems. Cardiovascular remodelling
is involved through homeobox gene regulation and deregulation in adult physiology
(menstrual cycle and wound healing) and pathology (atherosclerosis, arterial
restenosis, tumour angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis). Understanding the role
played by homeobox genes in endothelial and smooth muscle cell phenotype
determination will be crucial in identifying the molecular processes involved in 
vascular cell differentiation, as well as to support future therapeutic
strategies. We report here on the current knowledge of the role played by
homeobox genes in normal and abnormal vasculogenesis and postulate a common
molecular mechanism accounting for the involvement of homeobox genes in the
regulation of the nuclear export of specific transcripts potentially capable of
generating endothelial phenotype modification involved in new vessel formation.

PMID: 19013779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Diabetes. 2009 Feb;58(2):478-88. doi: 10.2337/db08-0877. Epub 2008 Nov 13.

Association analysis of variation in/near FTO, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX, EXT2,
IGF2BP2, LOC387761, and CDKN2B with type 2 diabetes and related quantitative
traits in Pima Indians.

Rong R(1), Hanson RL, Ortiz D, Wiedrich C, Kobes S, Knowler WC, Bogardus C, Baier
LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Phoenix, Arizona, USA.

OBJECTIVE: In recent genome-wide association studies, variants in CDKAL1,
SLC30A8, HHEX, EXT2, IGF2BP2, CDKN2B, LOC387761, and FTO were associated with
risk for type 2 diabetes in Caucasians. We investigated the association of these 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and some additional tag SNPs with type 2
diabetes and related quantitative traits in Pima Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Forty-seven SNPs were genotyped in 3,501 Pima
Indians informative for type 2 diabetes and BMI, among whom 370 had measures of
quantitative traits.
RESULTS: FTO provided the strongest evidence for replication, where SNPs were
associated with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio = 1.20 per copy of the risk allele, P
= 0.03) and BMI (P = 0.002). None of the other previously reported SNPs were
associated with type 2 diabetes; however, associations were found between CDKAL1 
and HHEX variants and acute insulin response (AIR), where the Caucasian risk
alleles for type 2 diabetes were associated with reduced insulin secretion in
normoglycemic Pima Indians. Multiallelic analyses of carrying risk alleles for
multiple genes showed correlations between number of risk alleles and type 2
diabetes and impaired insulin secretion in normoglycemic subjects (P = 0.006 and 
0.0001 for type 2 diabetes and AIR, respectively), supporting the hypothesis that
many of these genes influence diabetes risk by affecting insulin secretion.
CONCLUSIONS: Variation in FTO impacts BMI, but the implicated common variants in 
the other genes did not confer a significant risk for type 2 diabetes in Pima
Indians. However, confidence intervals for their estimated effects were
consistent with the small effects reported in Caucasians, and the multiallelic
"genetic risk profile" identified in Caucasians is associated with diminished
early insulin secretion in Pima Indians.

PMCID: PMC2628623
PMID: 19008344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Diabetologia. 2009 Feb;52(2):253-61. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1196-4. Epub 2008
Nov 11.

Type 2 diabetes-associated genetic variants discovered in the recent genome-wide 
association studies are related to gestational diabetes mellitus in the Korean
population.

Cho YM(1), Kim TH, Lim S, Choi SH, Shin HD, Lee HK, Park KS, Jang HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, 28 Yongon-Dong Chongno-Gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: New genetic variants associated with susceptibility to type 2
diabetes mellitus have been discovered in recent genome-wide association (GWA)
studies. The aim of the present study was to examine the association between
these diabetogenic variants and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: The study included 869 Korean women with GDM and 345 female and 287 male
Korean non-diabetic controls. We genotyped the single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) rs7756992 and rs7754840 in CDKAL1; rs564398, rs1333040, rs10757278 and
rs10811661 in the CDKN2A-CDKN2B region; rs8050136 in FTO; rs1111875, rs5015480
and rs7923837 in HHEX; rs4402960 in IGF2BP2; and rs13266634 in SLC30A8. In
addition, rs7903146 and rs12255372 in TCF7L2; rs5215 and rs5219 in KCNJ11; and
rs3856806 and rs1801282 in PPARG were genotyped. The genotype frequencies in the 
GDM patients were compared with those in the non-diabetic controls.
RESULTS: Compared with controls (men and women combined), GDM was associated with
rs7756992 and rs7754840 (OR 1.55, 95% CI 1.34-1.79, p = 4.17 x 10(-9)) in CDKAL1;
rs10811661 (OR 1.49, 95% CI 1.29-1.72, p = 1.05 x 10(-7)) in the CDKN2A-CDKN2B
region; rs1111875 (OR 1.27, 95% CI 1.09-1.49, p = 0.003), rs5015480, and
rs7923837 in HHEX; rs4402960 (OR 1.18, 95% CI 1.01-1.38, p = 0.03) in IGF2BP2;
rs13266634 (OR 1.24, 95% CI 1.07-1.43, p = 0.005) in SLC30A8; and rs7903146 (OR
1.58, 95% CI 1.03-2.43, p = 0.038) in TCF7L2. The risk alleles of the SNPs
rs7756992 and rs7754840 in CDKAL1; rs10811661 in the CDKN2A-CDKN2B region; and
rs1111875, rs5015480 and rs7923837 in HHEX were associated with significant
decreases in the insulin AUC during a 100 g OGTT performed at the time of
diagnosis of GDM.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Some of the type 2 diabetes-associated genetic
variants that were discovered in the recent GWA studies are also associated with 
GDM in Koreans.

PMID: 19002430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(11-12):991-8. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0341-8. Epub 2008 Nov 
11.

Association between polymorphisms in SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, FTO, WFS1,
CDKAL1, KCNQ1 and type 2 diabetes in the Korean population.

Lee YH(1), Kang ES, Kim SH, Han SJ, Kim CH, Kim HJ, Ahn CW, Cha BS, Nam M, Nam
CM, Lee HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134
Shinchon-Dong Seodaemun-Gu, Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

According to recent genome-wide association studies, a number of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are reported to be associated with type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The aim of the present study was to investigate the
association among the polymorphisms of SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, FTO,
WFS1, CDKAL1 and KCNQ1 and the risk of T2DM in the Korean population. This study 
was based on a multicenter case-control study, including 908 patients with T2DM
and 502 non-diabetic controls. We genotyped rs13266634, rs1111875, rs10811661,
rs4402960, rs8050136, rs734312, rs7754840 and rs2237892 and measured the body
weight, body mass index and fasting plasma glucose in all patients and controls. 
The strongest association was found in a variant of CDKAL1 [rs7754840, odds ratio
(OR) = 1.77, 95% CI = 1.50-2.10, p = 5.0 x 10(-11)]. The G allele of rs1111875
(OR = 1.43, 95% CI = 1.18-1.72, p = 1.8 x 10(-4)) in HHEX), the T allele of
rs10811661 (OR = 1.47, 95% CI = 1.23-1.75, p = 2.1 x 10(-5)) in CDKN2A/B) and the
C allele of rs2237892 (OR = 1.31, 95% CI = 1.10-1.56, p = 0.003) in KCNQ1 showed 
significant associations with T2DM. Rs13266634 (OR = 1.19, 95% CI = 1.00-1.42, p 
= 0.045) in SLC30A8 showed a nominal association with the risk of T2DM, whereas
SNPs in IGF2BP2, FTO and WFS1 were not associated. In conclusion, we have shown
that SNPs in HHEX, CDKN2A/B, CDKAL1, KCNQ1 and SLC30A8 confer a risk of T2DM in
the Korean population.

PMID: 18991055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jan;94(1):145-50. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1336. Epub
2008 Nov 4.

Common type 2 diabetes risk gene variants associate with gestational diabetes.

Lauenborg J(1), Grarup N, Damm P, Borch-Johnsen K, Jørgensen T, Pedersen O,
Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pregnant Women with Diabetes, Department of Obstetrics, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
jeannet@lauenb.org

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to examine the association between gestational diabetes
mellitus (GDM) and 11 recently identified type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Type 2 diabetes risk variants in TCF7L2, CDKAL1,
SLC30A8, HHEX/IDE, CDKN2A/2B, IGF2BP2, FTO, TCF2, PPARG, KCNJ11, and WFS1 loci
were genotyped in a cohort of women with a history of GDM (n = 283) and
glucose-tolerant women of the population-based Inter99 cohort (n = 2446).
RESULTS: All the risk alleles in the 11 examined type 2 diabetes risk variants
showed an odds ratio (OR) greater than 1 for the GDM group compared with the
control group ranging from 1.13 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.88-1.46] to 1.44 
(95% CI 1.19-1.74) except for the WFS1 rs10010131 variant with OR 0.87 (95% CI
0.73-1.05). Combined analysis of all 11 variants showed a highly significant
additive effect of multiple risk alleles on risk of GDM [OR 1.18 (95% CI
1.10-1.27)] per risk allele, P = 3.2 x 10(-6)). Applying receiver-operating
characteristic showed an area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve
of 0.62 for the genetic test alone and 0.73 when combining information on age,
body mass index, and genotypes of the 11 gene variants.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence in a prior GDM group of several previously proven
type 2 diabetes risk alleles equals the findings from association studies on type
2 diabetes. This supports the hypothesis that GDM and type 2 diabetes are two of 
the same entity.

PMID: 18984664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Oct 9;3(4):402-15. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.07.021.

Anterior definitive endoderm from ESCs reveals a role for FGF signaling.

Morrison GM(1), Oikonomopoulou I, Migueles RP, Soneji S, Livigni A, Enver T,
Brickman JM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, King's Buildings, West Mains
Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JQ, UK. gmm38@cscr.cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Oct 9;3(4):355-6.

The use of embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation to generate functional
hepatic or pancreatic progenitors and as a tool for developmental biology is
limited by an inability to isolate in vitro equivalents of regionally specified
anterior definitive endoderm (ADE). To address this, we devised a strategy using 
a fluorescent reporter gene under the transcriptional control of the anterior
endoderm marker Hex alongside the definitive mesendoderm marker Cxcr4. Isolation 
of Hex(+)Cxcr4(+) differentiating ESCs yielded a population expressing ADE
markers that both can be expanded and is competent to undergo differentiation
toward liver and pancreatic fates. Hex reporter ESCs were also used to define
conditions for ADE specification in serum-free adherent culture and revealed an
unexpected role for FGF signaling in the generation of ADE. Our findings in
defined monolayer differentiation suggest FGF signaling is an important regulator
of early anterior mesendoderm differentiation rather than merely a mediator of
morphogenetic movement.

PMID: 18940732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Mol Biol. 2008 Oct 31;383(1):10-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.004. Epub 2008
Aug 7.

DNA wrapping and distortion by an oligomeric homeodomain protein.

Williams H(1), Jayaraman PS, Gaston K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
Bristol, UK.

Many transcription factors alter DNA or chromatin structure. Changes in chromatin
structure are often brought about by the recruitment of chromatin-binding
proteins, chromatin-modifying proteins, or other transcription co-activator or
co-repressor proteins. However, some transcription factors form oligomeric
assemblies that may themselves induce changes in DNA conformation and chromatin
structure. The proline-rich homeodomain (PRH/Hex) protein is a transcription
factor that regulates cell differentiation and cell proliferation, and has
multiple roles in embryonic development. Earlier, we showed that PRH can repress 
transcription by multiple mechanisms, including the recruitment of co-repressor
proteins belonging to the TLE family of chromatin-binding proteins. Our in vivo
crosslinking studies have shown that PRH forms oligomeric complexes in cells and 
a variety of biophysical techniques suggest that the protein forms octamers.
However, as yet we have little knowledge of the role played by PRH
oligomerisation in the regulation of promoter activity or of the architecture of 
promoters that are regulated directly by PRH in cells. Here, we compare the
binding of PRH and the isolated PRH homeodomain to DNA fragments with single and 
multiple PRH sites, using gel retardation assays and DNase I and chemical
footprinting. We show that the PRH oligomer binds to multiple sites within the
human Goosecoid promoter with high affinity and that the binding of PRH brings
about DNA distortion. We suggest that PRH octamers wrap DNA in order to bring
about transcriptional repression.

PMID: 18755198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Diabetologia. 2008 Nov;51(11):1989-92. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1124-7. Epub 2008 
Aug 22.

Beta cell glucose sensitivity is decreased by 39% in non-diabetic individuals
carrying multiple diabetes-risk alleles compared with those with no risk alleles.

Pascoe L(1), Frayling TM, Weedon MN, Mari A, Tura A, Ferrannini E, Walker M; RISC
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)The Medical School, Newcastle University, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon
Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Novel type 2 diabetes-susceptibility loci have been identified
with evidence that individually they mediate the increased diabetes risk through 
altered pancreatic beta cell function. The aim of this study was to test the
cumulative effects of diabetes-risk alleles on measures of beta cell function in 
non-diabetic individuals.
METHODS: A total of 1,211 non-diabetic individuals underwent metabolic assessment
including an OGTT, from which measures of beta cell function were derived.
Individuals were genotyped at each of the risk loci and then classified according
to the total number of risk alleles that they carried. Initial analysis focused
on CDKAL1, HHEX/IDE and TCF7L2 loci, which were individually associated with a
decrease in beta cell function in our cohort. Risk alleles for CDKN2A/B, SLC30A8,
IGF2BP2 and KCNJ11 loci were subsequently included into the analysis.
RESULTS: The diabetes-risk alleles for CDKAL1, HHEX/IDE and TCF7L2 showed an
additive model of association with measures of beta cell function. Beta cell
glucose sensitivity was decreased by 39% in those individuals with five or more
risk alleles compared with those individuals with no risk alleles (geometric mean
[SEM]: 84 [1.07] vs 137 [1.11] pmol min(-1) m(-2) (mmol/l)(-1), p = 1.51 x
10(-6)). The same was seen for the 30 min insulin response (p = 4.17 x 10(-7)).
The relationship remained after adding in the other four susceptibility loci (30 
min insulin response and beta cell glucose sensitivity, p < 0.001 and p = 0.003, 
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study shows how individual type 2 diabetes-risk 
alleles combine in an additive manner to impact upon pancreatic beta cell
function in non-diabetic individuals.

PMID: 18719881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochem J. 2009 Jan 1;417(1):121-32. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080872.

The PRH/Hex repressor protein causes nuclear retention of Groucho/TLE
co-repressors.

Desjobert C(1), Noy P, Swingler T, Williams H, Gaston K, Jayaraman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical School, University of Bristol, University 
Walk, Bristol BS81TD, UK.

The PRH (proline-rich homeodomain) [also known as Hex (haematopoietically
expressed homeobox)] protein is a transcription factor that functions as an
important regulator of vertebrate development and many other processes in the
adult including haematopoiesis. The Groucho/TLE (transducin-like enhancer) family
of co-repressor proteins also regulate development and modulate the activity of
many DNA-binding transcription factors during a range of diverse cellular
processes including haematopoiesis. We have shown previously that PRH is a
repressor of transcription in haematopoietic cells and that an Eh-1 (Engrailed
homology) motif present within the N-terminal transcription repression domain of 
PRH mediates binding to Groucho/TLE proteins and enables co-repression. In the
present study we demonstrate that PRH regulates the nuclear retention of TLE
proteins during cellular fractionation. We show that transcriptional repression
and the nuclear retention of TLE proteins requires PRH to bind to both TLE and
DNA. In addition, we characterize a trans-dominant-negative PRH protein that
inhibits wild-type PRH activity by sequestering TLE proteins to specific
subnuclear domains. These results demonstrate that transcriptional repression by 
PRH is dependent on TLE availability and suggest that subnuclear localization of 
TLE plays an important role in transcriptional repression by PRH.

PMCID: PMC2605961
PMID: 18713067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. OMICS. 2008 Dec;12(4):237-44. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.0044.

Dissecting the nutrigenomics, diabetes, and gastrointestinal disease interface:
from risk assessment to health intervention.

Ferguson LR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. l.ferguson@auckland.ac.nz

The promise of nutrigenomics is of personalized nutrition that will lead to
optimization or maintenance of good health and/or prevention of the development
of chronic diseases. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a leading health problem 
throughout the world. Adherence to a Mediterranean-style diet, regulation of
carbohydrate intake, and regular exercise may be desirable. Four key genes were
originally identified: KCNJ11, potassium inwardly rectifying channel, subfamily
J, member 11 gene; PPAR-gamma, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma; 
TCF2, transcription factor 2, hepatic; WFS1, Wolfram syndrome 1. However,
genome-wide association studies are accelerating our knowledge of the genetics of
complex diseases, and have identified seven other key genes in T2DM: CDKAL1, CDK5
regulatory subunit associated protein-like 1; CDKN2, cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2A; FTO, fat mass and obesity associated; HHEX, haematopoietically
expressed homeobox; IDE, insulin-degrading enzyme; IGF2BP2, insulin-like growth
factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 2; SLC30A8, solute carrier family 30 (zinc
transporter), member 8; TCF7L2, transcription factor 7-like 2 (T-cell specific,
HMG-box). Gene-nutrient or gene-environment interactions may be important. For
example, the PPAR-gamma variant genotype is responsive to different types and
levels of lipids, while the effect of the FTO variant can be partly overcome by
exercise. Several of these genes act through their effect on the gastrointestinal
tract. There are analytical challenges in analyzing the high-dimensional datasets
relating genes, nutrients, and other variables to their influence on health and
disease processes. An even greater challenge may be in implementing population
level changes in diet and behavior to fully exploit the potential of this field.

PMID: 18710364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Xue Bao. 2008 Aug;6(8):843-51. doi: 10.3736/jcim20080814.

[Differentially expressed genes in adrenal gland of H22 liver cancer mice with
different syndromes and in different stages].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan ZQ(1), Fang ZQ, Lu WL, Liang C, Wu ZH, Liu XM, Hou L, Zhang H, Zhuo SY, Liao 
MJ, Gao BF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Shanghai 201203, China.

OBJECTIVE: To reveal the characteristics of gene expression in adrenal gland of
H22 tumor mice with typical syndromes and in different liver cancer stages.
METHODS: By the quantitative four diagnosis and syndrome differentiation methods 
and GeneChip Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Array, we observed adrenal gland gene expression
in H22 tumor mice with pathogenic factor-toxin predominance syndrome and qi
deficiency syndrome in the earlier stage, yang-qi deficiency syndrome in the
intermediate stage, and qi-yin-yang deficiency syndrome in the advanced stage.
Genes highly expressed and remarkably different were analyzed in this study.
RESULTS: A total of seventy-three up-regulated coincident genes and twenty-six
down-regulated coincident genes in different stages were investigated in the
study. Up-regulated coincident genes included Hp, C3, Anxa1, Procr, C2, Il4ra,
Cd14, Ptprc, Cd52, C4b, Eno3, Xdh, Gpx3, and so on. Down-regulated coincident
genes included nervous system function-related genes such as Plp1, Mbp, Aldh1a1, 
Cck, Atn1, genes associated with electrolyte metabolism such as Aldh1a1 and
Slc22a17, genes related to signal transduction such as Cxcr4, Spag5 and Stmn3,
etc, and genes related to transcriptional control and protein biosynthesis such
as Hspa1a, Dnajb1, Thra, Hhex and so on.
CONCLUSION: With the development of the tumorigenesis, the symptoms and signs and
differentially expressed genes in adrenal gland of H22 tumor mice can be
measured. Up-regulated and down-regulated coincident genes may be the features of
H22 tumor mice different from those of normal mice.

PMID: 18664355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Diabetes. 2008 Oct;57(10):2834-42. doi: 10.2337/db08-0047. Epub 2008 Jul 15.

Common variants in CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8, and HHEX/IDE genes are
associated with type 2 diabetes and impaired fasting glucose in a Chinese Han
population.

Wu Y(1), Li H, Loos RJ, Yu Z, Ye X, Chen L, Pan A, Hu FB, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences and Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association studies have identified common variants in
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8, HHEX/IDE, EXT2, and LOC387761 loci that
significantly increase the risk of type 2 diabetes. We aimed to replicate these
observations in a population-based cohort of Chinese Hans and examine the
associations of these variants with type 2 diabetes and diabetes-related
phenotypes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 17 single nucleotide polymorhisms
(SNPs) in 3,210 unrelated Chinese Hans, including 424 participants with type 2
diabetes, 878 with impaired fasting glucose (IFG), and 1,908 with normal fasting 
glucose.
RESULTS: We confirmed the associations between type 2 diabetes and variants near 
CDKAL1 (odds ratio 1.49 [95% CI 1.27-1.75]; P = 8.91 x 10(-7)) and CDKN2A/B (1.31
[1.12-1.54]; P = 1.0 x 10(-3)). We observed significant association of SNPs in
IGF2BP2 (1.17 [1.03-1.32]; P = 0.014) and SLC30A8 (1.12 [1.01-1.25]; P = 0.033)
with combined IFG/type 2 diabetes. The SNPs in CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, and SLC30A8 were 
also associated with impaired beta-cell function estimated by homeostasis model
assessment of beta-cell function. When combined, each additional risk allele from
CDKAL1-rs9465871, CDKN2A/B-rs10811661, IGF2BP2-rs4402960, and SLC30A8-rs13266634 
increased the risk for type 2 diabetes by 1.24-fold (P = 2.85 x 10(-7)) or for
combined IFG/type 2 diabetes by 1.21-fold (P = 6.31 x 10(-11)). None of the SNPs 
in EXT2 or LOC387761 exhibited significant association with type 2 diabetes or
IFG. Significant association was observed between the HHEX/IDE SNPs and type 2
diabetes in individuals from Shanghai only (P < 0.013) but not in those from
Beijing (P > 0.33).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that in Chinese Hans, common variants in
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, and SLC30A8 loci independently or additively
contribute to type 2 diabetes risk, likely mediated through beta-cell
dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2551696
PMID: 18633108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Diabetologia. 2008 Sep;51(9):1659-63. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1083-z. Epub 2008
Jul 11.

Variants of CDKAL1 and IGF2BP2 affect first-phase insulin secretion during
hyperglycaemic clamps.

Groenewoud MJ(1), Dekker JM, Fritsche A, Reiling E, Nijpels G, Heine RJ, Maassen 
JA, Machicao F, Schäfer SA, Häring HU, 't Hart LM, van Haeften TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC),
P.O. Box 9600, 2300 RC, Leiden, the Netherlands.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genome-wide association studies have recently identified novel
type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene regions. We assessed the effects of six of
these regions on insulin secretion as determined by a hyperglycaemic clamp.
METHODS: Variants of the HHEX/IDE, CDKAL1, SLC30A8, IGF2BP2 and CDKN2A/CDKN2B
genes were genotyped in a cohort of 146 participants with NGT and 126 with IGT
from the Netherlands and Germany, who all underwent a hyperglycaemic clamp at 10 
mmol/l glucose.
RESULTS: Variants of CDKAL1 and IGF2BP2 were associated with reductions in
first-phase insulin secretion (34% and 28%, respectively). The disposition index 
was also significantly reduced. For gene regions near HHEX/IDE, SLC30A8 and
CDKN2A/CDKN2B we did not find significant associations with first-phase insulin
secretion (7-18% difference between genotypes; all p > 0.3). None of the variants
showed a significant effect on second-phase insulin secretion in our cohorts
(2-8% difference between genotypes, all p > 0.3). Furthermore, the gene variants 
were not associated with the insulin sensitivity index.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants of CDKAL1 and IGF2BP2 attenuate the first phase of
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion but show no effect on the second phase of
insulin secretion. Our results, based on hyperglycaemic clamps, provide further
insight into the pathogenic mechanism behind the association of these gene
variants with type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18618095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Jul 3;9:59. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-59.

Impact of nine common type 2 diabetes risk polymorphisms in Asian Indian Sikhs:
PPARG2 (Pro12Ala), IGF2BP2, TCF7L2 and FTO variants confer a significant risk.

Sanghera DK(1), Ortega L, Han S, Singh J, Ralhan SK, Wander GS, Mehra NK,
Mulvihill JJ, Ferrell RE, Nath SK, Kamboh MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Dharambir-Sanghera@ouhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified several 
unsuspected genes associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) with previously unknown
functions. In this investigation, we have examined the role of 9 most significant
SNPs reported in GWA studies: [peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2
(PPARG2; rs 1801282); insulin-like growth factor two binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2; 
rs 4402960); cyclin-dependent kinase 5, a regulatory subunit-associated
protein1-like 1 (CDK5; rs7754840); a zinc transporter and member of solute
carrier family 30 (SLC30A8; rs13266634); a variant found near cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A; rs10811661); hematopoietically expressed homeobox
(HHEX; rs 1111875); transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2; rs 10885409);
potassium inwardly rectifying channel subfamily J member 11(KCNJ11; rs 5219); and
fat mass obesity-associated gene (FTO; rs 9939609)].
METHODS: We genotyped these SNPs in a case-control sample of 918 individuals
consisting of 532 T2D cases and 386 normal glucose tolerant (NGT) subjects of an 
Asian Sikh community from North India. We tested the association between T2D and 
each SNP using unconditional logistic regression before and after adjusting for
age, gender, and other covariates. We also examined the impact of these variants 
on body mass index (BMI), waist to hip ratio (WHR), fasting insulin, and glucose 
and lipid levels using multiple linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: Four of the nine SNPs revealed a significant association with T2D;
PPARG2 (Pro12Ala) [odds ratio (OR) 0.12; 95% confidence interval (CI)
(0.03-0.52); p = 0.005], IGF2BP2 [OR 1.37; 95% CI (1.04-1.82); p = 0.027], TCF7L2
[OR 1.64; 95% CI (1.20-2.24); p = 0.001] and FTO [OR 1.46; 95% CI (1.11-1.93); p 
= 0.007] after adjusting for age, sex and BMI. Multiple linear regression
analysis revealed significant association of two of nine investigated loci with
diabetes-related quantitative traits. The 'C' (risk) allele of CDK5 (rs 7754840) 
was significantly associated with decreased HDL-cholesterol levels in both NGT (p
= 0.005) and combined (NGT and T2D) (0.005) groups. The less common 'C' (risk)
allele of TCF7L2 (rs 10885409) was associated with increased LDL-cholesterol (p =
0.010) in NGT and total and LDL-cholesterol levels (p = 0.008; p = 0.003,
respectively) in combined cohort.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is first study reporting the role of some
recently emerged loci with T2D in a high risk population of Asian Indian origin. 
Further investigations are warranted to understand the pathway-based functional
implications of these important loci in T2D pathophysiology in different
ethnicities.

PMCID: PMC2481250
PMID: 18598350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Horm Metab Res. 2008 Oct;40(10):722-6. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1078730. Epub 2008 Jul
2.

Variants of the PPARG, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HHEX, and TCF7L2 genes confer risk of
type 2 diabetes independently of BMI in the German KORA studies.

Herder C(1), Rathmann W, Strassburger K, Finner H, Grallert H, Huth C, Meisinger 
C, Gieger C, Martin S, Giani G, Scherbaum WA, Wichmann HE, Illig T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Diabetes Research, German Diabetes Centre, Leibniz
Centre at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
christian.herder@ddz.uni-duesseldorf.de

Genome-wide association (GWA) studies identified novel gene variants that are
associated with type 2 diabetes. However, results were not always consistent
across different populations. Thus, the aims of this study were (i) to replicate 
findings from previous GWA studies in mainly Northern European populations using 
data from the German KORA 500 K diabetes project and (ii) to assess the impact of
BMI on associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and type 2
diabetes. The KORA 500 K diabetes project includes 433 cases with validated type 
2 diabetes and 1 438 nondiabetic controls from two population-based KORA surveys.
Genotyping was performed using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 500 K Array 
Set. We investigated associations between SNPs and type 2 diabetes in 10 genes
that have been reported to increase the risk of type 2 diabetes or were in
complete or near-complete linkage disequilibrium with these variants. SNPs in the
CDKAL1 gene showed the strongest association with type 2 diabetes [range of age
and sex-adjusted odds ratios (OR): 1.30-1.39, p-values 0.0008-0.0004]. In
addition, we found evidence for association of SNPs in the genes PPARG, IGF2BP2, 
HHEX, TCF7L2, and FTO with type 2 diabetes in the same directions as previously
described (p<0.05), but not for WFS1, CDKN2A/B, KCNJ11, or EXT2. Adjustment for
BMI slightly strengthened the link between CDKAL1 and type 2 diabetes, but had
almost no impact on the other associations. We conclude that gene variants of
CDKAL1, PPARG, IGF2BP2, HHEX, TCF7L2, and FTO predispose to type 2 diabetes in
the German KORA 500 K study population. These associations appear to be
independent of BMI.

PMID: 18597214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Diabetes. 2008 Sep;57(9):2503-10. doi: 10.2337/db08-0284. Epub 2008 Jun 10.

Extension of type 2 diabetes genome-wide association scan results in the diabetes
prevention program.

Moore AF(1), Jablonski KA, McAteer JB, Saxena R, Pollin TI, Franks PW, Hanson RL,
Shuldiner AR, Knowler WC, Altshuler D, Florez JC; Diabetes Prevention Program
Research Group.

Collaborators: Bray GA, Culbert IW, Champagne CM, Eberhardt B, Greenway F,
Guillory FG, Herbert AA, Jeffirs ML, Kennedy BM, Lovejoy JC, Morris LH, Ryan D,
Sanford DA, Smith KG, Smith LL, St Amant JA, Tulley RT, Vicknair PC, Williamson
D, Zachwieja JJ, Polonsky KS, Tobian J, Ehrmann D, Matulik MJ, Clark B, Czech K, 
DeSandre C, Hillbrich R, McNabb W, Semenske AR, Caro JF, Watson PG, Goldstein BJ,
Smith KA, Mendoza J, Liberoni R, Pepe C, Spandorfer J, Donahue RP, Goldberg RB,
Prineas R, Rowe P, Calles J, Cassanova-Romero P, Florez HJ, Giannella A, Kirby L,
Larreal C, McLymont V, Mendez J, Ojito J, Perry A, Saab P, Haffner SM, Montez MG,
Lorenzo C, Martinez A, Hamman RF, Nash PV, Testaverde L, Anderson DR, Ballonoff
LB, Bouffard A, Calonge BN, Delve L, Farago M, Hill JO, Hoyer SR, Jortberg BT,
Lenz D, Miller M, Price DW, Regensteiner JG, Seagle H, Smith CM, Steinke SC,
VanDorsten B, Horton ES, Lawton KE, Arky RA, Bryant M, Burke JP, Caballero E,
Callaphan KM, Ganda OP, Franklin T, Jackson SD, Jacobsen AM, Kula LM, Kocal M,
Malloy MA, Nicosia M, Oldmixon CF, Pan J, Quitingon M, Rubtchinsky S, Seely EW,
Schweizer D, Simonson D, Smith F, Solomon CG, Warram J, Kahn SE, Montgomery BK,
Fujimoto W, Knopp RH, Lipkin EW, Marr M, Trence D, Kitabchi AE, Murphy ME,
Applegate WB, Bryer-Ash M, Frieson SL, Imseis R, Lambeth H, Lichtermann LC,
Oktaei H, Rutledge LM, Sherman AR, Smith CM, Soberman JE, Williams-Cleaves B,
Metzger BE, Johnson MK, Behrends C, Cook M, Fitzgibbon M, Giles MM, Heard D,
Johnson CK, Larsen D, Lowe A, Lyman M, McPherson D, Molitch ME, Pitts T, Reinhart
R, Roston S, Schinleber PA, Nathan DM, McKitrick C, Turgeon H, Abbott K, Anderson
E, Bissett L, Cagliero E, Delahanty L, Goldman V, Poulos A, Olefsky JM,
Carrion-Petersen ML, Barrett-Connor E, Edelman SV, Henry RR, Horne J, Janesch SS,
Leos D, Mudaliar S, Polonsky W, Smith J, Vejvoda K, Pi-Sunyer FX, Lee JE, Allison
DB, Aronoff N, Crandall JP, Foo ST, Pal C, Parkes K, Pena MB, Rooney ES, Van Wye 
GE, Viscovich KA, Marrero DG, Prince MJ, Kelly SM, Dotson YF, Fineberg ES, Guare 
JC, Hadden AM, Ignaut JM, Jackson ML, Kirkman MS, Mather KJ, Porter BD, Roach PJ,
Rowland ND, Wheeler ML, Ratner RE, Youssef G, Shapiro S, Bavido-Arrage C, Boggs
G, Bronsord M, Brown E, Cheatham WW, Cola S, Evans C, Gibbs P, Kellum T, Levatan 
C, Nair AK, Passaro M, Uwaifo G, Saad MF, Budget M, Jinagouda S, Akbar K, Conzues
C, Magpuri P, Ngo K, Rassam A, Waters D, Xapthalamous K, Santiago J, Dagogo-Jack 
S, White NH, Das S, Santiago A, Brown A, Fisher E, Hurt E, Jones T, Kerr M, Ryder
L, Wernimont C, Saudek CD, Bradley V, Sullivan E, Whittington T, Abbas C,
Brancati FL, Clark JM, Charleston JB, Freel J, Horak K, Jiggetts D, Johnson D,
Joseph H, Loman K, Mosley H, Rubin RR, Samuels A, Stewart KJ, Williamson P,
Schade DS, Adams KS, Johannes C, Alter LF, Boyle PJ, Burge MR, Canady JL, Chai L,
Gonzales Y, Hernandez-McGinnis DA, Katz P, King C, Rassam A, Rubinchik S, Senter 
W, Waters D, Shamoon H, Brown JO, Adorno E, Cox L, Crandall J, Duffy H, Engel S, 
Friedler A, Howard-Century CJ, Kloiber S, Longchamp N, Martinez H, Pompi D,
Scheindlin J, Violino E, Walker E, Wylie-Rosett J, Zimmerman E, Zonszein J,
Orchard T, Wing RR, Koenning G, Kramer MK, Barr S, Boraz M, Clifford L, Culyba R,
Frazier M, Gilligan R, Harrier S, Harris L, Jeffries S, Kriska A, Manjoo Q,
Mullen M, Noel A, Otto A, Semler L, Smith CF, Smith M, Venditti E, Weinzierl V,
Williams KV, Wilson T, Arakaki RF, Latimer RW, Baker-Ladao NK, Beddow R, Dias L, 
Inouye J, Mau MK, Mikami K, Mohideen P, Odom SK, Perry RU, Knowler WC, Cooeyate
N, Hoskin MA, Percy CA, Acton KJ, Andre VL, Barber R, Begay S, Bennett PH, Benson
MB, Bird EC, Broussard BA, Chavez M, Dacawyma T, Doughty MS, Duncan R, Edgerton
C, Ghahate JM, Glass J, Glass M, Gohdes D, Grant W, Hanson RL, Horse E, Ingraham 
LE, Jackson M, Jay P, Kaskalla RS, Kessler D, Kobus KM, Krakoff J, Manus C,
Michales S, Morgan T, Nashboo Y, Nelson JA, Poirier S, Polczynski E, Reidy M,
Roumain J, Rowse D, Sangster S, Sewenemewa J, Tonemah D, Wilson C, Yazzie M, Bain
R, Fowler S, Brenneman T, Abebe S, Bamdad J, Callaghan J, Edelstein S, Gao Y,
Grimes KL, Grover N, Haffner L, Jones S, Jones TL, Katz R, Lachin JM, Mucik P,
Orlosky R, Rochon J, Sapozhnikova A, Sherif H, Stimpson C, Temprosa M,
Walker-Murray F, Marcovina S, Strylewicz G, Aldrich FA, Eastman R, Fradkin J,
Garfield S, Florez JC, Altshuler D, de Bakker PI, Franks P, Hanson RL, Jablonski 
K, Knowler WC, McAteer J, Pollin TI, Shuldiner AR.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association scans (GWASs) have identified novel
diabetes-associated genes. We evaluated how these variants impact diabetes
incidence, quantitative glycemic traits, and response to preventive interventions
in 3,548 subjects at high risk of type 2 diabetes enrolled in the Diabetes
Prevention Program (DPP), which examined the effects of lifestyle intervention,
metformin, and troglitazone versus placebo.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped selected single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near diabetes-associated loci, including EXT2, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, HHEX, LOC387761, and SLC30A8 in DPP participants and performed
Cox regression analyses using genotype, intervention, and their interactions as
predictors of diabetes incidence. We evaluated their effect on insulin resistance
and secretion at 1 year.
RESULTS: None of the selected SNPs were associated with increased diabetes
incidence in this population. After adjustments for ethnicity, baseline insulin
secretion was lower in subjects with the risk genotype at HHEX rs1111875 (P =
0.01); there were no significant differences in baseline insulin sensitivity.
Both at baseline and at 1 year, subjects with the risk genotype at LOC387761 had 
paradoxically increased insulin secretion; adjustment for self-reported ethnicity
abolished these differences. In ethnicity-adjusted analyses, we noted a nominal
differential improvement in beta-cell function for carriers of the protective
genotype at CDKN2A/B after 1 year of troglitazone treatment (P = 0.01) and
possibly lifestyle modification (P = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: We were unable to replicate the GWAS findings regarding diabetes
risk in the DPP. We did observe genotype associations with differences in
baseline insulin secretion at the HHEX locus and a possible pharmacogenetic
interaction at CDKNA2/B.

PMCID: PMC2518503
PMID: 18544707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2008 Jul;11(4):371-7. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0b013e32830349a1.

New gene variants alter type 2 diabetes risk predominantly through reduced
beta-cell function.

Perry JR(1), Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science,
Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Over the past 18 months, the number of gene loci robustly
associated with type 2 diabetes has risen from three to 18. In this study, we
focus on explaining the genome-wide approach that has led to most of these
discoveries and discuss some of the early insights the new gene loci have
provided into the aetiology of type 2 diabetes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent genome-wide association studies have provided an
important resource for furthering our understanding of type 2 diabetes disease
mechanisms. Genes previously unsuspected of playing a role in diabetes are now
implicated in the disease process. These include genes in cell cycling control
(CDKN2A/2B, CDKAL1), transcription factors (TCF7L2, HHEX), and ion channels
(SLC30A8). These variants are all associated with insulin-secretory defects in
the general population and show little if any relationship to insulin resistance.
Two common variants (near or in FTO and MC4R) alter diabetes risk through a
primary effect on obesity.
SUMMARY: Recent genome-wide association studies show that there are now 18 gene
loci associated with the risk of type 2 diabetes. Most of these T2D gene loci
affect insulin secretion.

PMID: 18541994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochem J. 2008 Jun 15;412(3):399-413. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080035.

PRH/Hex: an oligomeric transcription factor and multifunctional regulator of cell
fate.

Soufi A(1), Jayaraman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, Division of Immunity and Infection, Medical 
School, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.

The PRH (proline-rich homeodomain) [also known as Hex (haematopoietically
expressed homeobox)] protein is a critical regulator of vertebrate development.
PRH is able to regulate cell proliferation and differentiation and is required
for the formation of the vertebrate body axis, the haematopoietic and vascular
systems and the formation of many vital organs. PRH is a DNA-binding protein that
can repress and activate the transcription of its target genes using multiple
mechanisms. In addition, PRH can regulate the nuclear transport of specific mRNAs
making PRH a member of a select group of proteins that control gene expression at
the transcriptional and translational levels. Recent biophysical analysis of the 
PRH protein has shown that it forms homo-oligomeric complexes in vivo and in
vitro and that the proline-rich region of PRH forms a novel dimerization
interface. Here we will review the current literature on PRH and discuss the
complex web of interactions centred on this multifunctional protein.

PMCID: PMC2570084
PMID: 18498250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Aug;93(8):3136-41. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0452. Epub 
2008 May 13.

Replication of genome-wide association studies of type 2 diabetes susceptibility 
in Japan.

Horikawa Y(1), Miyake K, Yasuda K, Enya M, Hirota Y, Yamagata K, Hinokio Y, Oka
Y, Iwasaki N, Iwamoto Y, Yamada Y, Seino Y, Maegawa H, Kashiwagi A, Yamamoto K,
Tokunaga K, Takeda J, Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Division of Molecule and Structure, 
Gifu University School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In Europeans and populations of European origin, several groups have 
recently identified novel type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes, including FTO,
SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1, CDKN2B, and IGF2BP2, none of which were in the list of
functional candidates.
OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: The aim of this study was to replicate in a Japanese
population previously identified associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) within 10 candidate loci with type 2 diabetes using a relatively large
sample size: 1921 subjects with type 2 diabetes and 1622 normal controls.
RESULTS: A total of 15 SNPs were genotyped. Eight SNPs in five loci were found to
be associated with type 2 diabetes: rs3802177 [odds ratio (OR) = 1.16 (95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.05-1.27); P = 4.5 x 10(-3)] in SLC30A8; rs1111875 [OR 
= 1.27 (95% CI 1.14-1.40); P = 1.4 x 10(-5)] and rs7923837 [OR = 1.27 (95% CI
1.13-1.43); P = 1.0 x 10(-4)] in HHEX; rs10811661 [OR = 1.27 (95% CI 1.15-1.40); 
P = 1.9 x 10(-6)] in CDKN2B; rs4402960 [OR = 1.23 (95% CI 1.11-1.36); P = 8.1 x
10(-5)] and rs1470579 [OR = 1.18 (95% CI 1.07-1.31); P = 8.3 x 10(-4)] in
IGF2BP2; and rs7754840 [OR = 1.28 (95% CI 1.17-1.41); P = 4.5 x 10(-7)] and
rs7756992 [OR = 1.27 (95% CI 1.15-1.40); P = 9.8 x 10(-7)] in CDKAL1. The first
and second strongest associations were found at variants in CDKAL1 and CDKN2B,
both of which are involved in the regenerative capacity of pancreatic beta-cells.
CONCLUSION: Some of these variants represent common type 2
diabetes-susceptibility genes in both Japanese and Europeans.

PMID: 18477659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Diabetes. 2008 Aug;57(8):2226-33. doi: 10.2337/db07-1583. Epub 2008 May 9.

Implication of genetic variants near TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B,
IGF2BP2, and FTO in type 2 diabetes and obesity in 6,719 Asians.

Ng MC(1), Park KS, Oh B, Tam CH, Cho YM, Shin HD, Lam VK, Ma RC, So WY, Cho YS,
Kim HL, Lee HK, Chan JC, Cho NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. maggieng@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: Recent genome-wide association studies have identified six novel genes
for type 2 diabetes and obesity and confirmed TCF7L2 as the major type 2 diabetes
gene to date in Europeans. However, the implications of these genes in Asians are
unclear.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 13 associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms from these genes in 3,041 patients with type 2 diabetes and 3,678
control subjects of Asian ancestry from Hong Kong and Korea.
RESULTS: We confirmed the associations of TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1,
CDKN2A/CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, and FTO with risk for type 2 diabetes, with odds ratios
ranging from 1.13 to 1.35 (1.3 x 10(-12) < P(unadjusted) < 0.016). In addition,
the A allele of rs8050136 at FTO was associated with increased BMI in the control
subjects (P(unadjusted) = 0.008). However, we did not observe significant
association of any genetic variants with surrogate measures of insulin secretion 
or insulin sensitivity indexes in a subset of 2,662 control subjects. Compared
with subjects carrying zero, one, or two risk alleles, each additional risk
allele was associated with 17% increased risk, and there was an up to 3.3-fold
increased risk for type 2 diabetes in those carrying eight or more risk alleles. 
Despite most of the effect sizes being similar between Asians and Europeans in
the meta-analyses, the ethnic differences in risk allele frequencies in most of
these genes lead to variable attributable risks in these two populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the important but differential contribution of 
these genetic variants to type 2 diabetes and obesity in Asians compared with
Europeans.

PMCID: PMC2494677
PMID: 18469204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. PLoS One. 2008 May 7;3(5):e2031. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002031.

Post genome-wide association studies of novel genes associated with type 2
diabetes show gene-gene interaction and high predictive value.

Cauchi S(1), Meyre D, Durand E, Proença C, Marre M, Hadjadj S, Choquet H, De
Graeve F, Gaget S, Allegaert F, Delplanque J, Permutt MA, Wasson J, Blech I,
Charpentier G, Balkau B, Vergnaud AC, Czernichow S, Patsch W, Chikri M, Glaser B,
Sladek R, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

BACKGROUND: Recently, several Genome Wide Association (GWA) studies in
populations of European descent have identified and validated novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), highly associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Our aims were to validate these markers in other European and non-European
populations, then to assess their combined effect in a large French study
comparing T2D and normal glucose tolerant (NGT) individuals.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the same French population analyzed in our
previous GWA study (3,295 T2D and 3,595 NGT), strong associations with T2D were
found for CDKAL1 (OR(rs7756992) = 1.30[1.19-1.42], P = 2.3x10(-9)), CDKN2A/2B
(OR(rs10811661) = 0.74[0.66-0.82], P = 3.5x10(-8)) and more modestly for IGFBP2
(OR(rs1470579) = 1.17[1.07-1.27], P = 0.0003) SNPs. These results were replicated
in both Israeli Ashkenazi (577 T2D and 552 NGT) and Austrian (504 T2D and 753
NGT) populations (except for CDKAL1) but not in the Moroccan population (521 T2D 
and 423 NGT). In the overall group of French subjects (4,232 T2D and 4,595 NGT), 
IGFBP2 and CXCR4 synergistically interacted with (LOC38776, SLC30A8, HHEX) and
(NGN3, CDKN2A/2B), respectively, encoding for proteins presumably regulating
pancreatic endocrine cell development and function. The T2D risk increased
strongly when risk alleles, including the previously discovered T2D-associated
TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNP, were combined (8.68-fold for the 14% of French individuals 
carrying 18 to 30 risk alleles with an allelic OR of 1.24). With an area under
the ROC curve of 0.86, only 15 novel loci were necessary to discriminate French
individuals susceptible to develop T2D.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In addition to TCF7L2, SLC30A8 and HHEX, initially
identified by the French GWA scan, CDKAL1, IGFBP2 and CDKN2A/2B strongly
associate with T2D in French individuals, and mostly in populations of Central
European descent but not in Moroccan subjects. Genes expressed in the pancreas
interact together and their combined effect dramatically increases the risk for
T2D, opening avenues for the development of genetic prediction tests.

PMCID: PMC2346547
PMID: 18461161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Diabetes. 2008 Aug;57(8):2220-5. doi: 10.2337/db07-1319. Epub 2008 Apr 28.

Association analysis in african americans of European-derived type 2 diabetes
single nucleotide polymorphisms from whole-genome association studies.

Lewis JP(1), Palmer ND, Hicks PJ, Sale MM, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI, Divers J,
Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Several whole-genome association studies have reported identification 
of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in various European-derived study
populations. Little investigation of these loci has been reported in other ethnic
groups, specifically African Americans. Striking differences exist between these 
populations, suggesting they may not share identical genetic risk factors. Our
objective was to examine the influence of type 2 diabetes genes identified in
whole-genome association studies in a large African American case-control
population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 loci
(e.g., TCF7L2, IDE/KIF11/HHEX, SLC30A8, CDKAL1, PKN2, IGF2BP2, FLJ39370, and
EXT2/ALX4) associated with type 2 diabetes in European-derived populations were
genotyped in 993 African American type 2 diabetic and 1,054 African American
control subjects. Additionally, 68 ancestry-informative markers were genotyped to
account for the impact of admixture on association results.
RESULTS: Little evidence of association was observed between SNPs, with the
exception of those in TCF7L2, and type 2 diabetes in African Americans. One
TCF7L2 SNP (rs7903146) showed compelling evidence of association with type 2
diabetes (admixture-adjusted additive P [P(a)] = 1.59 x 10(-6)). Only the
intragenic SNP on 11p12 (rs9300039, dominant P [P(d)] = 0.029) was also
associated with type 2 diabetes after admixture adjustments. Interestingly, four 
of the SNPs are monomorphic in the Yoruba population of the HAPMAP project, with 
only the risk allele from the populations of European descent present.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that these variants do not significantly contribute 
to interindividual susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in African Americans.
Consequently, genes contributing to type 2 diabetes in African Americans may, in 
part, be different from those in European-derived study populations. High
frequency of risk alleles in several of these genes may, however, contribute to
the increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

PMCID: PMC2494685
PMID: 18443202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Diabetologia. 2008 Jun;51(6):971-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-0982-3. Epub 2008 Apr
24.

Genetic analysis of recently identified type 2 diabetes loci in 1,638 unselected 
patients with type 2 diabetes and 1,858 control participants from a Norwegian
population-based cohort (the HUNT study).

Hertel JK(1), Johansson S, Raeder H, Midthjell K, Lyssenko V, Groop L, Molven A, 
Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recent genome-wide association studies performed in selected
patients and control participants have provided strong support for several new
type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci. To get a better estimation of the true risk 
conferred by these novel loci, we tested a completely unselected population of
type 2 diabetes patients from a Norwegian health survey (the HUNT study).
METHODS: We genotyped single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in PKN2, IGFBP2,
FLJ39370 (also known as C4ORF32), CDKAL1, SLC30A8, CDKN2B, HHEX and FTO using a
Norwegian population-based sample of 1,638 patients with type 2 diabetes and
1,858 non-diabetic control participants (the HUNT Study), for all of whom data on
BMI, WHR, cholesterol and triacylglycerol levels were available. We used
diabetes, measures of obesity and lipid values as phenotypes in case-control and 
quantitative association study designs.
RESULTS: We replicated the association with type 2 diabetes for rs10811661 in the
vicinity of CDKN2B (OR 1.20, 95% CI: 1.06-1.37, p=0.004), rs9939609 in FTO (OR
1.14, 95% CI: 1.04-1.25, p=0.006) and rs13266634 in SLC30A8 (OR 1.20, 95% CI:
1.09-1.33, p=3.9 x 10(-4)). We found borderline significant association for the
IGFBP2 SNP rs4402960 (OR 1.10, 95% CI: 0.99-1.22). Results for the HHEX SNP
(rs1111875) and the CDKAL1 SNP (rs7756992) were non-significant, but the
magnitude of effect was similar to previous estimates. We found no support for an
association with the less consistently replicated FLJ39370 or PKN2 SNPs. In
agreement with previous studies, FTO was most strongly associated with BMI (p=8.4
x 10(-4)).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data show that SNPs near IGFBP2, CDKAL1, SLC30A8,
CDKN2B, HHEX and FTO are also associated with diabetes in non-selected patients
with type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18437351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Diabetes. 2008 Jul;57(7):1983-6. doi: 10.2337/db08-0270. Epub 2008 Apr 21.

Association analysis of type 2 diabetes Loci in type 1 diabetes.

Qu HQ(1), Grant SF, Bradfield JP, Kim C, Frackelton E, Hakonarson H,
Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal,
Québec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To search for a possible association of type 1 diabetes with 10
validated type 2 diabetes loci, i.e., PPARG, KCNJ11, WFS1, HNF1B, IDE/HHEX,
SLC30A8, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, and FTO/RPGRIP1L.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Two European population samples were studied: 1) one
case-control cohort of 514 type 1 diabetic subjects and 2,027 control subjects
and 2) one family cohort of 483 complete type 1 diabetic case-parent trios (total
997 affected). A total of 13 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the 
10 type 2 diabetes loci were analyzed for type 1 diabetes association.
RESULTS: No association of type 1 diabetes was found with any of the 10 type 2
diabetes loci, and no age-at-onset effect was detected. By combined analysis
using the Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium type 1 diabetes data, SNP
rs1412829 in the CDKN2A/B locus bordered on significance (P = 0.039) (odds ratio 
0.929 [95% CI 0.867-0.995]), which did not reach the statistical significance
threshold adjusted for 13 tests (alpha = 0.00385).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the type 2 diabetes loci do not play any
obvious role in type 1 diabetes genetic susceptibility. The distinct molecular
mechanisms of the two diseases highlighted the importance of differentiation
diagnosis and different treatment principles.

PMCID: PMC2453613
PMID: 18426861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Jul 1;230(1):23-32. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2008.01.043.
Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Developmental toxicity and alteration of gene expression in zebrafish embryos
exposed to PFOS.

Shi X(1), Du Y, Lam PK, Wu RS, Zhou B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China.

Perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) is a persistent organic pollutant, the potential 
toxicity of which is causing great concern. In the present study, we employed
zebrafish embryos to investigate the developmental toxicity of this compound.
Four-hour post-fertilization (hpf) zebrafish embryos were exposed to 0.1, 0.5, 1,
3 and 5 mg/L PFOS. Hatching was delayed and hatching rates as well as larval
survivorship were significantly reduced after the embryos were exposed to 1, 3
and 5 mg/L PFOS until 132 hpf. The fry displayed gross developmental
malformations, including epiboly deformities, hypopigmentation, yolk sac edema,
tail and heart malformations and spinal curvature upon exposure to PFOS
concentrations of 1 mg/L or greater. Growth (body length) was significantly
reduced in the 3 and 5 mg/L PFOS-treated groups. To test whether developmental
malformation was mediated via apoptosis, flow cytometry analysis of DNA content, 
acridine orange staining and TUNEL assay was used. These techniques indicated
that more apoptotic cells were present in the PFOS-treated embryos than in the
control embryos. Certain genes related to cell apoptosis, p53 and Bax, were both 
significantly up-regulated upon exposure to all the concentrations tested. In
addition, we investigated the effects of PFOS on marker genes related to early
thyroid development (hhex and pax8) and genes regulating the balance of androgens
and estrogens (cyp19a and cyp19b). For thyroid development, the expression of
hhex was significantly up-regulated at all concentrations tested, whereas pax8
expression was significantly up-regulated only upon exposure to lower
concentrations of PFOS (0.1, 0.5, 1 mg/L). The expression of cyp19a and of cyp19b
was significantly down-regulated at all exposure concentrations. The overall
results indicated that zebrafish embryos constitute a reliable model for testing 
the developmental toxicity of PFOS, and the gene expression patterns in the
embryos were able to reveal some potential mechanisms of developmental toxicity.

PMID: 18407306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Blood. 2008 Jun 15;111(12):5672-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-108175. Epub 2008 
Apr 3.

Leukemogenic mechanisms and targets of a NUP98/HHEX fusion in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Jankovic D(1), Gorello P, Liu T, Ehret S, La Starza R, Desjobert C, Baty F,
Brutsche M, Jayaraman PS, Santoro A, Mecucci C, Schwaller J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

We have studied a patient with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and t(10;11)(q23;p15)
as the sole cytogenetic abnormality. Molecular analysis revealed a translocation 
involving nucleoporin 98 (NUP98) fused to the DNA-binding domain of the
hematopoietically expressed homeobox gene (HHEX). Expression of NUP98/HHEX in
murine bone marrow cells leads to aberrant self-renewal and a block in normal
differentiation that depends on the integrity of the NUP98 GFLG repeats and the
HHEX homeodomain. Transplantation of bone marrow cells expressing NUP98/HHEX
leads to transplantable acute leukemia characterized by extensive infiltration of
leukemic blasts expressing myeloid markers (Gr1(+)) as well as markers of the
B-cell lineage (B220(+)). A latency period of 9 months and its clonal character
suggest that NUP98/HHEX is necessary but not sufficient for disease induction.
Expression of EGFP-NUP98/HHEX fusions showed a highly similar nuclear
localization pattern as for other NUP98/homeodomain fusions, such as NUP98/HOXA9.
Comparative gene expression profiling in primary bone marrow cells provided
evidence for the presence of common targets in cells expressing NUP98/HOXA9 or
NUP98/HHEX. Some of these genes (Hoxa5, Hoxa9, Flt3) are deregulated in
NUP98/HHEX-induced murine leukemia as well as in human blasts carrying this
fusion and might represent bona fide therapeutic targets.

PMID: 18388181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Development. 2008 Apr;135(8):1525-35. doi: 10.1242/dev.011767. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

The stepwise specification of embryonic stem cells to hematopoietic fate is
driven by sequential exposure to Bmp4, activin A, bFGF and VEGF.

Pearson S(1), Sroczynska P, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester
University, Wilmslow Road, M20 4BX, Manchester, UK.

The differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells offers a powerful approach to
study mechanisms implicated in cell fate decision. A major hurdle, however, is to
promote the directed and efficient differentiation of ES cells toward a specific 
lineage. Here, we define in serum-free media the minimal factor requirement
controlling each step of the differentiation process, resulting in the production
of highly enriched hematopoietic progenitors. Four factors - Bmp4, activin A,
bFGF (Fgf2) and VEGF (VegfA) - are sufficient to drive the selective and
efficient differentiation of mouse ES cells to hematopoiesis. Each of these
factors appears to regulate a step of the process: Bmp4 promotes the very
efficient formation of mesoderm; bFGF and activin A induce the differentiation of
these mesodermal precursors to the hemangioblast fate; and VEGF is required for
the production of fully committed hematopoietic progenitors. The stimulation of
mesodermal precursors by bFGF and activin A switches on very rapidly the
hematopoietic program, allowing us to dissect the molecular events leading to the
formation of the hemangioblast. Runx1, Scl (Tal1) and Hhex expression is
upregulated within 3 hours of stimulation, whereas upregulation of Lmo2 and Fli1 
is observed later. Interestingly, increased expression levels of genes such as
cMyb, Pu.1 (Sfpi1), Gata1 and Gata2 are not observed at the onset of
hemangioblast commitment. This stepwise control of differentiation is extremely
efficient, giving rise to a very high frequency of hematopoietic precursors, and 
provides an optimal system for understanding the molecular machineries involved
in blood progenitor commitment.

PMID: 18339678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Mar;24(3):241-2. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2008243241.

[What is new in the genetics of type 2 diabetes].

[Article in French]

Polychronakos C.

PMID: 18334167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Diabetologia. 2008 Apr;51(4):597-601. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-0926-y. Epub 2008
Feb 9.

Polymorphisms in the TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and SLC30A8 genes are associated with
impaired proinsulin conversion.

Kirchhoff K(1), Machicao F, Haupt A, Schäfer SA, Tschritter O, Staiger H, Stefan 
N, Häring HU, Fritsche A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Vascular Medicine, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard-Karls-Universität 
Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Str. 10, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Variation within six novel genetic loci has been reported to
confer risk of type 2 diabetes and may be associated with beta cell dysfunction. 
We investigated whether these polymorphisms are also associated with impaired
proinsulin to insulin conversion.
METHODS: We genotyped 1,065 German participants for single nucleotide
polymorphisms rs7903146 in TCF7L2, rs7754840 in CDKAL1, rs7923837 and rs1111875
in HHEX, rs13266634 in SLC30A8, rs10811661 in CDKN2A/B and rs4402960 in IGF2BP2. 
All participants underwent an OGTT. Insulin, proinsulin and C-peptide
concentrations were measured at 0, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min during the OGTT.
Insulin secretion was estimated from C-peptide or insulin levels during the OGTT 
using validated indices. We used the ratio proinsulin/insulin during the OGTT as 
indicator of proinsulin conversion.
RESULTS: In our cohort, we confirmed the significant association of variants in
TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and HHEX with reduced insulin secretion during the OGTT (p<0.05
for all). Variation in SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B and IGF2BP2 was not associated with
insulin secretion. The risk alleles of the variants in TCF7L2, CDKAL1 and SLC30A8
reduced proinsulin to insulin conversion (p<0.05 for all), whereas the risk
alleles in HHEX, CDKN2A/B and IGF2BP2 were not associated with reduced proinsulin
to insulin conversion (p>0.6).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Diabetes-associated variants in TCF7L2 and CDKAL1
impair insulin secretion and conversion of proinsulin to insulin. However, both
aspects of beta cell function are not necessarily linked, as impaired insulin
secretion is specifically present in variants of HHEX and impaired proinsulin
conversion is specifically present in a variant of SLC30A8.

PMID: 18264689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 May;16(5):652-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5202008. Epub 2008
Jan 30.

HHEX gene polymorphisms are associated with type 2 diabetes in the Dutch Breda
cohort.

van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV(1), Onland-Moret NC, van Haeften TW, Franke L, Elbers
CC, Shiri-Sverdlov R, van der Schouw YT, Hofker MH, Wijmenga C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Recently, the hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX) gene, encoding a
transcription factor, was identified in a large genome-wide scan in French
individuals as a type 2 diabetes (T2D)-susceptibility locus. We aimed to check
whether this finding could be replicated in a Dutch T2D cohort. Two common
variants (rs7923837 and rs1111875) located near the HHEX gene were genotyped in
501 unrelated T2D patients and in 920 healthy controls. The major alleles of both
variants were overrepresented in T2D cases compared with controls (66.7 vs 64.1%,
P=0.16 for rs7923837 and 64.6 vs 60.4%, P=0.027 for rs1111875). For both
polymorphisms, the risk for T2D was significantly increased in carriers of the
major alleles (rs7923837: odds ratio (OR): 1.57, 95% confidence interval (CI):
1.08-2.27, P=0.017 and rs1111875: OR: 1.68, 95% CI: 1.19-2.35, P=0.003). The
haplotype analysis did not reveal a risk haplotype that provided stronger
evidence for association with T2D than each variant individually. Assuming a
dominant genetic model, the population-attributable risks for diabetes due to the
at-risk alleles of rs7923837 and rs1111875 were estimated to be 33 and 36%,
respectively. These data provide evidence that variants near the HHEX gene
contribute to the risk of T2D in a Dutch population.

PMID: 18231124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 Mar;86(3):341-8. doi: 10.1007/s00109-007-0295-x. Epub 2008
Jan 22.

Analysis of novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes in a general French population:
the D.E.S.I.R. study.

Cauchi S(1), Proença C, Choquet H, Gaget S, De Graeve F, Marre M, Balkau B,
Tichet J, Meyre D, Vaxillaire M, Froguel P; D.E.S.I.R. Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

Recently, Genome Wide Association (GWA) studies identified novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), highly associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in 
several case-control studies of European descent. However, the impact of these
markers on glucose homeostasis in a population-based study remains to be
clarified. The French prospective D.E.S.I.R. study (N = 4,707) was genotyped for 
22 polymorphisms within 14 loci showing nominal to strong association with T2D in
recently published GWA analyses (CDKAL1, IGFBP2, CDKN2A/2B, EXT2, HHEX,
LOC646279, SLC30A8, MMP26, KCTD12, LDLR, CAMTA1, LOC38776, NGN3 and CXCR4). We
assessed their effects on quantitative traits related to glucose homeostasis in
4,283 normoglycemic middle-aged participants at baseline and their contribution
to T2D incidence during 9 years of follow-up. Individuals carrying T2D risk
alleles of CDKAL1 or SLC30A8 had lower fasting plasma insulin level (rs7756992 P 
= 0.003) or lower basal insulin secretion (rs13266634 P = 0.0005), respectively, 
than non-carriers. Furthermore, NGN3 and MMP26 risk alleles associated with
higher fasting plasma glucose levels (rs10823406 P = 0.01 and rs2499953 P = 0.04,
respectively). However, for these SNPs, only modest associations were found with 
a higher incidence of T2D: hazard ratios of 2.03 [1.00-4.11] for MMP26 (rs2499953
P = 0.05) and 1.33 [1.02-1.73] for NGN3 (rs10823406 P = 0.03). We confirmed
deleterious effects of SLC30A8, CDKAL1, NGN3 and MMP26 risk alleles on glucose
homeostasis in the D.E.S.I.R. prospective cohort. However, in contrast to TCF7L2,
the contribution of novel loci to T2D incidence seems only modest in the general 
middle-aged French population and should be replicated in larger cohorts.

PMID: 18210030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Diabetes. 2008 Mar;57(3):791-5. Epub 2007 Dec 27.

Association of CDKAL1, IGF2BP2, CDKN2A/B, HHEX, SLC30A8, and KCNJ11 with
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population.

Omori S(1), Tanaka Y, Takahashi A, Hirose H, Kashiwagi A, Kaku K, Kawamori R,
Nakamura Y, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Diabetic Nephropathy, SNP Research Center, RIKEN, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Recently, several genes have been shown to be associated with an
increased risk of type 2 diabetes by genome-wide association studies in white
populations. To further investigate the involvement of these polymorphisms in
conferring susceptibility to type 2 diabetes, we examined the association of 14
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 11 candidate loci with type 2
diabetes in a Japanese population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 14 SNPs (rs4402960 in IGF2BP2,
rs10811661 in CDKN2A/B, rs1111875 and rs7923837 in HHEX, rs13266634 in SLC30A8,
rs1113132 and rs11037909 in EXT2, rs9939609 and rs8050136 in FTO, rs7756992 in
CDKAL1, rs1801282 in PPARG Pro12Ara, rs5219 in KCNJ11 Glu23Lys, rs7480010 in
LOC387761, and rs9300039 in Ch11) in 1,630 Japanese subjects with type 2 diabetes
and in 1,064 control subjects by using an invader assay or a TaqMan assay.
RESULTS: Among the 11 loci examined, 6 were significantly associated with type 2 
diabetes in our population by a logistic regression analysis, similar to
previously reported results (rs4402960, P = 0.00009; rs10811661, P = 0.0024;
rs5219, P = 0.0034; rs1111875, P = 0.0064; rs13266634, P = 0.0073; rs7756992, P =
0.0363). In this population, the remaining five loci were not significantly
associated with type 2 diabetes. In addition, we identified significant
association of the SNPs in FTO gene with BMI in the control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified 6 of the 11 loci that were identified by
genome-wide association studies in white populations, and these loci are
considered strong candidates for type 2 diabetes susceptibility across different 
ethnicities.

PMID: 18162508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Diabetes. 2008 Feb;57(2):514-7. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

A candidate type 2 diabetes polymorphism near the HHEX locus affects acute
glucose-stimulated insulin release in European populations: results from the
EUGENE2 study.

Staiger H(1), Stancáková A, Zilinskaite J, Vänttinen M, Hansen T, Marini MA,
Hammarstedt A, Jansson PA, Sesti G, Smith U, Pedersen O, Laakso M, Stefan N,
Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine IV, Medical Clinic Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Str. 10, D-72076
Tübingen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: In recent genome-wide association studies, two single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) near the HHEX locus were shown to be more frequent in type 2
diabetic patients than in control subjects. Based on HHEX's function during
embryonic development of the ventral pancreas in mice, we investigated whether
these SNPs affect beta-cell function in humans.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 854 nondiabetic subjects, collected from 
five European clinical centers, were genotyped for the HHEX SNPs rs1111875 and
rs7923837 and thoroughly characterized by an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). 
To assess glucose-stimulated insulin release, a subgroup of 758 subjects
underwent an intravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT).
RESULTS: SNPs rs1111875 and rs7923837 were not associated with anthropometric
data (age, weight, height, BMI, body fat, and waist and hip circumference). After
adjustment for center, family relationship, sex, age, and BMI, both SNPs were
also not associated with glucose and insulin concentrations in the fasting state 
and during the OGTT or with measures of insulin sensitivity. Furthermore, HHEX
SNP rs1111875 was not associated with insulin release during the IVGTT. By
contrast, the minor A-allele of HHEX SNP rs7923837 was significantly associated
with higher IVGTT-derived first-phase insulin release before and after
appropriate adjustment (P = 0.013 and P = 0.014, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: A common genetic variation in the 3'-flanking region of the HHEX
locus, i.e., SNP rs7923837, is associated with altered glucose-stimulated insulin
release. This SNP's major allele represents a risk allele for beta-cell
dysfunction and, thus, might confer increased susceptibility of beta-cells toward
adverse environmental factors.

PMID: 18039816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jan;93(1):310-4. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Polymorphisms in the IDE-KIF11-HHEX gene locus are reproducibly associated with
type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population.

Furukawa Y(1), Shimada T, Furuta H, Matsuno S, Kusuyama A, Doi A, Nishi M, Sasaki
H, Sanke T, Nanjo K.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

CONTEXT: A genome-wide association study in the French population has detected
that novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IDE-KIF11-HHEX gene
locus and the SLC30A8 gene locus are associated with susceptibility to type 2
diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether SNPs in these loci were associated with type 2
diabetes in Japanese.
DESIGN: Two SNPs, rs7923837 and rs1111875, in the IDE-KIF11-HHEX gene locus and
one SNP, rs13266634, in the SLC30A8 gene locus were genotyped in Japanese type 2 
diabetic patients (n = 405) and in nondiabetic control subjects (n = 340) using
the TaqMan genotyping assay system.
RESULTS: The G allele of rs7923837 was associated with type 2 diabetes [odds
ratio 1.66, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.28-2.15; P = 0.00014], following the
same tendency as in the French population of the previous report. Heterozygous
and homozygous carriers of the risk allele had odds ratios of 1.57 (95% CI
1.15-2.16; P = 0.0050) and 3.16 (95% CI 1.40-7.16; P = 0.0038) relative to
noncarriers. Although the G allele was a major allele (66.5%) in the French
population, it was a minor allele (23.8%) in Japanese. The G allele of rs1111875 
was also associated with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio 1.42, 95% CI 1.13-1.78; P = 
0.0024). Heterozygous and homozygous carriers of the risk allele had odds ratios 
of 1.31 (95% CI 0.97-1.77; P = 0.0810) and 2.40 (95% CI 1.34-4.32; P = 0.0028)
relative to noncarriers. A significant association with type 2 diabetes was not
observed for rs13266634.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in the IDE-KIF11-HHEX gene locus are associated with
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes across the boundary of race.

PMID: 17971426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2461-6. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Variations in the HHEX gene are associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes
in the Japanese population.

Horikoshi M(1), Hara K, Ito C, Shojima N, Nagai R, Ueki K, Froguel P, Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Recently, several groups have carried out whole-genome
association studies in European and European-origin populations and found novel
type 2 diabetes-susceptibility genes, fat mass and obesity associated (FTO),
solute carrier family 30 (zinc transporter), member 8 (SLC30A8),
haematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX), exostoses (multiple) 2 (EXT2), CDK5
regulatory subunit associated protein 1-like 1 (CDKAL1), cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitor 2B (p15, inhibits CDK4) (CDKN2B) and insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA 
binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2), which had not been in the list of functional
candidates. The aim of this study was to determine the association between single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these genes and type 2 diabetes in
participants from the Japanese population.
METHODS: Sixteen previously reported SNPs were genotyped in 864 Japanese type 2
diabetes individuals (535 men and 329 women; age 63.1 +/- 9.5 years (mean+/-SD), 
BMI 24.3 +/- 3.9 kg/m(2)) and 864 Japanese control individuals (386 men and 478
women; age 69.5 +/- 6.8 years, BMI 23.8 +/- 3.7 kg/m(2)).
RESULTS: The SNPs rs5015480 [odds ratio (OR) = 1.46 (95% CI 1.20-1.77), p = 2.0 x
10(-4)], rs7923837 [OR = 1.40 (95% CI 1.17-1.68), p = 2.0 x 10(-4)] and rs1111875
[OR = 1.30 (95% CI 1.11-1.52), p = 0.0013] in HHEX were significantly associated 
with type 2 diabetes with the same direction as previously reported. SNP
rs8050136 in FTO was nominally associated with type 2 diabetes [OR = 1.22 (95% CI
1.03-1.46), p = 0.025]. SNPs in other genes such as rs7756992 in CDKAL1,
rs10811661 in CDKN2B and rs13266634 in SLC30A8 showed nominal association with
type 2 diabetes. rs7756992 in CDKAL1 and rs10811661 in CDKN2B were correlated
with impaired pancreatic beta cell function as estimated by the homeostasis model
assessment beta index (p = 0.023, p = 0.0083, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: HHEX is a common type 2 diabetes-susceptibility gene 
across different ethnic groups.

PMID: 17928989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Hum Gene Ther. 2007 Oct;18(10):895-906.

Retroviral integration site analysis and the fate of transduced clones in an MDR1
gene therapy protocol targeting metastatic breast cancer.

Mitsuhashi J(1), Tsukahara S, Suzuki R, Oh-hara Y, Nishi S, Hosoyama H, Katayama 
K, Noguchi K, Minowa S, Shibata H, Ito Y, Hatake K, Aiba K, Takahashi S, Sugimoto
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo
135-8550, Japan.

A clinical study of an MDR1 gene therapy protocol targeting metastatic breast
cancer has been conducted in which the patients received high-dose chemotherapy, 
a transplant of MDR1-transduced autologous CD34(+) cells, and docetaxel. We
herein report the molecular results of a 6-year follow-up of an individual in
this study (patient 1). HaMDR-transduced cells, which had been initially detected
in the peripheral blood of this individual, were found to have gradually
decreased. After 10 cycles of docetaxel (days 71-316), MDR1 transgene levels were
found to have increased, and then decreased to undetectable levels by day 1461.
Thirty-eight MDR1-transduced clones were identified in patient 1, of which 11
showed a retroviral integration in close proximity to genes listed in the
Retrovirus Tagged Cancer Gene Database (RTCGD). Four short-life clones in this
group were found to harbor retroviral integrations close to the ZFHX1B, NOTCH1,
BMI1, or HHEX gene; these genes have been frequently reported in the RTCGD. In
addition, a long-lived RTCGD-hit clone, L-34, had a retroviral integration at a
position 179 kb upstream of the EVI1 gene. L-34 was detectable on days 327-1154, 
but became undetectable 3 years after the docetaxel treatments had ceased. An
additional three docetaxel-induced long-life clones showed comparable polymerase 
chain reaction profiles, which were also similar to that of the total
MDR1-transduced cells. Our results thus show that docetaxel may have been
effective in promoting the expansion of several MDR1-transduced clones in patient
1, but that they persist in the peripheral blood for only a few years.

PMID: 17907967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):3105-11. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Studies of association of variants near the HHEX, CDKN2A/B, and IGF2BP2 genes
with type 2 diabetes and impaired insulin release in 10,705 Danish subjects:
validation and extension of genome-wide association studies.

Grarup N(1), Rose CS, Andersson EA, Andersen G, Nielsen AL, Albrechtsen A,
Clausen JO, Rasmussen SS, Jørgensen T, Sandbaek A, Lauritzen T, Schmitz O, Hansen
T, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Niels Steensens Vej 1, NLC2.14, 2820 Gentofte, Denmark.
ngrp@steno.dk

OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we aimed to validate the type 2 diabetes
susceptibility alleles identified in six recent genome-wide association studies
in the HHEX/KIF11/IDE (rs1111875), CDKN2A/B (rs10811661), and IGF2BP2 (rs4402960)
loci, as well as the intergenic rs9300039 variant. Furthermore, we aimed to
characterize quantitative metabolic risk phenotypes of the four variants.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The variants were genotyped in the population-based 
Inter99 cohort (n = 5,970), the ADDITION Study (n = 1,626), a population-based
sample of young healthy subjects (n = 377), and in additional type 2 diabetic
case (n = 2,111) and glucose-tolerant (n = 521) subjects. The case-control
studies involved a total of 4,089 type 2 diabetic patients and 5,043
glucose-tolerant control subjects.
RESULTS: We validated association of variants near HHEX/KIF11/IDE, CDKN2A/B, and 
IGF2BP2 with type 2 diabetes. Interestingly, in middle-aged people, the rs1111875
C-allele of HHEX/KIF11/IDE strongly associated with lower acute insulin response 
during an oral glucose tolerance test (P = 6 x 10(-7)). In addition, decreased
insulin release following intravenous tolbutamide injection was observed in young
healthy subjects (P = 0.02). Also, a reduced insulin release was observed for the
CDKN2A/B rs10811661 T-allele after both oral and intravenous glucose challenges
(P = 0.001 and P = 0.009, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: We validate that variants in the proximity of the HHEX/KIF11/IDE,
CDKN2A/B, and IFG2BP2 loci associate with type 2 diabetes. Importantly,
variations within the HHEX/KIF11/IDE and CDKN2A/B loci confer impaired glucose-
and tolbutamide-induced insulin release in middle-aged and young healthy
subjects, suggesting a role for these variants in the pathogenesis of pancreatic 
beta-cell dysfunction.

PMID: 17827400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):3101-4. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

Common variants of the novel type 2 diabetes genes CDKAL1 and HHEX/IDE are
associated with decreased pancreatic beta-cell function.

Pascoe L(1), Tura A, Patel SK, Ibrahim IM, Ferrannini E, Zeggini E, Weedon MN,
Mari A, Hattersley AT, McCarthy MI, Frayling TM, Walker M; RISC Consortium; U.K. 
Type 2 Diabetes Genetics Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Group, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Type 2 diabetes is characterized by impaired pancreatic beta-cell
function and decreased insulin sensitivity. Genome-wide association studies have 
identified common, novel type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci within the FTO,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, HHEX/IDE, and SLC30A8 gene regions. Our objective
was to explore the relationships between the diabetes-associated alleles and
measures of beta-cell function and whole-body insulin sensitivity.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 1,276 healthy subjects of European
ancestry were studied at 19 centers. Indexes of beta-cell function (including
30-min insulin response and glucose sensitivity) were derived from a 75-g oral
glucose tolerance test, and whole-body insulin sensitivity (M/I) was assessed by 
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp. Genotype/phenotype relationships were studied 
by linear trend analysis correcting for age, sex, and recruitment center.
RESULTS: CDKAL1 and HHEX/IDE diabetes-associated alleles were both associated
with decreased 30-min insulin response (both P = 0.0002) and decreased pancreatic
beta-cell glucose sensitivity (P = 9.86 x 10(-5) and 0.009, respectively), and
these relationships remained after correction for M/I. The FTO susceptibility
allele showed a weak but consistent association with increased adiposity, which
in turn was linked to a decrease in M/I. However, none of the other novel
diabetes susceptibility alleles were associated with insulin sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: CDKAL1 and HHEX/IDE diabetes-associated alleles are associated with 
decreased pancreatic beta-cell function, including decreased beta-cell glucose
sensitivity that relates insulin secretion to plasma glucose concentration. We
confirmed the association between the FTO allele and increased adiposity, but
none of the other novel susceptibility alleles were associated with whole-body
insulin sensitivity.

PMID: 17804762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 5;2(9):e832.

Polymorphisms within novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes determine beta-cell
function.

Staiger H(1), Machicao F, Stefan N, Tschritter O, Thamer C, Kantartzis K, Schäfer
SA, Kirchhoff K, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology, and Clinical Chemistry, Eberhard-Karls-University
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes arises when insulin resistance-induced compensatory
insulin secretion exhausts. Insulin resistance and/or beta-cell dysfunction
result from the interaction of environmental factors (high-caloric diet and
reduced physical activity) with a predisposing polygenic background. Very
recently, genetic variations within four novel genetic loci (SLC30A8, HHEX, EXT2,
and LOC387761) were reported to be more frequent in subjects with type 2 diabetes
than in healthy controls. However, associations of these variations with insulin 
resistance and/or beta-cell dysfunction were not assessed.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By genotyping of 921 metabolically characterized 
German subjects for the reported candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), we show that the major alleles of the SLC30A8 SNP rs13266634 and the HHEX
SNP rs7923837 associate with reduced insulin secretion stimulated by orally or
intravenously administered glucose, but not with insulin resistance. In contrast,
the other reported type 2 diabetes candidate SNPs within the EXT2 and LOC387761
loci did not associate with insulin resistance or beta-cell dysfunction,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The HHEX and SLC30A8 genes encode for proteins that
were shown to be required for organogenesis of the ventral pancreas and for
insulin maturation/storage, respectively. Therefore, the major alleles of type 2 
diabetes candidate SNPs within these genetic loci represent crucial alleles for
beta-cell dysfunction and, thus, might confer increased susceptibility of
beta-cells towards adverse environmental factors.

PMCID: PMC1952072
PMID: 17786204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Diabetologia. 2007 Nov;50(11):2405-7. Epub 2007 Jul 14.

Variation in the HHEX-IDE gene region predisposes to type 2 diabetes in the
prospective, population-based EPIC-Potsdam cohort.

Schulze MB, Al-Hasani H, Boeing H, Fisher E, Döring F, Joost HG.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Nov;50(11):2229-33.

PMID: 17632701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Diabetologia. 2007 Sep;50(9):2019-22. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

Mutations in HHEX are not a common cause of monogenic forms of beta cell
dysfunction.

Minton JA, van de Bunt M, Boustred C, Hussain K, Hattersley AT, Ellard S, Gloyn
AL.

PMID: 17618412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 15;308(2):355-67. Epub 2007 May 25.

The homeobox gene Hhex is essential for proper hepatoblast differentiation and
bile duct morphogenesis.

Hunter MP(1), Wilson CM, Jiang X, Cong R, Vasavada H, Kaestner KH, Bogue CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Hhex is required for early development of the liver. A null mutation of Hhex
results in a failure to form the liver bud and embryonic lethality. Therefore,
Hhex null mice are not informative as to whether this gene is required during
later stages of hepatobiliary morphogenesis. To address this question, we derived
Hhex conditional null mice using the Cre-loxP system and two different Cre
transgenics (Foxa3-Cre and Alfp-Cre). Deletion of Hhex in the hepatic
diverticulum (Foxa3-Cre;Hhex(d2,3/-)) led to embryonic lethality and resulted in 
a small and cystic liver with loss of Hnf4alpha and Hnf6 expression in early
hepatoblasts. In addition, the gall bladder was absent and the extrahepatic bile 
duct could not be identified. Loss of Hhex in the embryonic liver
(Alfp-Cre;Hhex(d2,3/-)) caused irregular development of intrahepatic bile ducts
and an absence of Hnf1beta in many (cystic) biliary epithelial cells, which
resulted in a slow, progressive form of polycystic liver disease in adult mice.
Thus, we have shown that Hhex is required during multiple stages of hepatobiliary
development. The altered expression of Hnf4alpha, Hnf6 and Hnf1beta in Hhex
conditional null mice suggests that Hhex is an essential component of the genetic
networks regulating hepatoblast differentiation and intrahepatic bile duct
morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2045067
PMID: 17580084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Neuroimmunol. 2007 Aug;188(1-2):39-47. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Intraperitoneal inoculation of Sandhoff mouse neonates with an HIV-1 based
lentiviral vector exacerbates the attendant neuroinflammation and disease
phenotype.

Kyrkanides S(1), Miller JN, Tallents RH, Brouxhon SM, Centola GM, Olschowka JA.

Author information: 
(1)Eastman Dental Center, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, United States.
stephanos_kyrkanides@urmc.rochester.edu <stephanos_kyrkanides@urmc.rochester.edu>

We aimed to evaluate the efficacy of VSV-G pseudotyped, defective HIV-1 based
lentiviral vectors for the neonatal transfer of therapeutic genes following
systemic administration in Sandhoff mouse pups. Despite transgene expression in
mouse brains, these animals presented with significant exacerbation and
acceleration of the disease neurological phenotype. We observed an increase and
acceleration in the presence of MHC-II and CD45+ cells in their brains, along
with neuroinflammation, but not in control heterozygous or wild type littermates 
that also received the same treatment.

PMID: 17572511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Development. 2007 Jun;134(11):2041-50.

Bmp and Fgf signaling are essential for liver specification in zebrafish.

Shin D(1), Shin CH, Tucker J, Ober EA, Rentzsch F, Poss KD, Hammerschmidt M,
Mullins MC, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, Liver Center, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Based on data from in vitro tissue explant and ex vivo cell/bead implantation
experiments, Bmp and Fgf signaling have been proposed to regulate hepatic
specification. However, genetic evidence for this hypothesis has been lacking.
Here, we provide in vivo genetic evidence that Bmp and Fgf signaling are
essential for hepatic specification. We utilized transgenic zebrafish that
overexpress dominant-negative forms of Bmp or Fgf receptors following heat-shock 
induction. These transgenes allow one to bypass the early embryonic requirements 
for Bmp and Fgf signaling, and also to completely block Bmp or Fgf signaling. We 
found that the expression of hhex and prox1, the earliest liver markers in
zebrafish, was severely reduced in the liver region when Bmp or Fgf signaling was
blocked just before hepatic specification. However, hhex and prox1 expression in 
adjacent endodermal and mesodermal tissues appeared unaffected by these
manipulations. Additional genetic studies indicate that the endoderm maintains
competence for Bmp-mediated hepatogenesis over an extended window of embryonic
development. Altogether, these data provide the first genetic evidence that Bmp
and Fgf signaling are essential for hepatic specification, and suggest that
endodermal cells remain competent to differentiate into hepatocytes for longer
than anticipated.

PMID: 17507405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Development. 2007 Jun;134(12):2207-17. Epub 2007 May 16.

Repression of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the anterior endoderm is essential
for liver and pancreas development.

McLin VA(1), Rankin SA, Zorn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation, Department of Pediatrics, College
of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, 
USA.

The liver and pancreas are specified from the foregut endoderm through an
interaction with the adjacent mesoderm. However, the earlier molecular mechanisms
that establish the foregut precursors are largely unknown. In this study, we have
identified a molecular pathway linking gastrula-stage endoderm patterning to
organ specification. We show that in gastrula and early-somite stage Xenopus
embryos, Wnt/beta-catenin activity must be repressed in the anterior endoderm to 
maintain foregut identity and to allow liver and pancreas development. By
contrast, high beta-catenin activity in the posterior endoderm inhibits foregut
fate while promoting intestinal development. Experimentally repressing
beta-catenin activity in the posterior endoderm was sufficient to induce ectopic 
organ buds that express early liver and pancreas markers. beta-catenin acts in
part by inhibiting expression of the homeobox gene hhex, which is one of the
earliest foregut markers and is essential for liver and pancreas development.
Promoter analysis indicates that beta-catenin represses hhex transcription
indirectly via the homeodomain repressor Vent2. Later in development,
beta-catenin activity has the opposite effect and enhances liver development.
These results illustrate that turning Wnt signaling off and on in the correct
temporal sequence is essential for organ formation, a finding that might directly
impact efforts to differentiate liver and pancreas tissue from stem cells.

PMID: 17507400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2007 Jan;85(1):55-65.

Regulation and function of homeodomain proteins in the embryonic and adult
vascular systems.

Douville JM(1), Wigle JT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, St. Boniface General Hospital Research
Centre and Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R2H 2A6, Canada.

During embryonic development, the cardiovascular system first forms and then
gives rise to the lymphatic vascular system. Homeobox genes are essential for
both the development of the blood and lymphatic vascular systems, as well as for 
their maintenance in the adult. These genes all encode proteins that are
transcription factors that contain a well conserved DNA binding motif, the
homeodomain. It is through the homeodomain that these transcription factors bind 
to the promoters of target genes and regulate their expression. Although many
homeodomain proteins have been found to be expressed within the vascular systems,
little is known about their downstream target genes. This review highlights
recent advances made in the identification of novel genes downstream of the
homeodomain proteins that are necessary for regulating vascular cellular
processes such as proliferation, migration, and endothelial tube formation.
Factors known to regulate the functions of vascular cells via modulating the
expression of homeobox genes will be discussed. We will also review current
methods used to identify and characterize downstream target genes of homeodomain 
proteins.

PMID: 17487245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 May;156(5):521-9.

Screening for mutations in transcription factors in a Czech cohort of 170
patients with congenital and early-onset hypothyroidism: identification of a
novel PAX8 mutation in dominantly inherited early-onset non-autoimmune
hypothyroidism.

Al Taji E(1), Biebermann H, Límanová Z, Hníková O, Zikmund J, Dame C, Grüters A, 
Lebl J, Krude H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic. evataji@seznam.cz

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in NKX2.1, NKX2.5, FOXE1 and PAX8 genes, encoding for
transcription factors involved in the development of the thyroid gland, have been
identified in a minority of patients with syndromic and non-syndromic congenital 
hypothyroidism (CH).
DESIGN: In a phenotype-selected cohort of 170 Czech paediatric and adolescent
patients with non-goitre CH, including thyroid dysgenesis, or non-goitre
early-onset hypothyroidism, PAX8, NKX2.1, NKX2.5, FOXE1 and HHEX genes were
analysed for mutations.
METHODS: NKX2.1, NKX2.5, FOXE1 and HHEX genes were directly sequenced in patients
with syndromic CH. PAX8 mutational screening was performed in all 170 patients by
single-stranded conformation polymorphism, followed by direct sequencing of
samples with abnormal findings. The R52P PAX8 mutation was functionally
characterized by DNA binding studies.
RESULTS: We identified a novel PAX8 mutation R52P, dominantly inherited in a
three-generation pedigree and leading to non-congenital, early-onset, non-goitre,
non-autoimmune hypothyroidism with gradual postnatal regression of the thyroid
size and function. The R52P PAX8 mutation results in the substitution of a highly
conserved residue of the DNA-binding domain with a loss-of-function effect.
CONCLUSIONS: The very low frequency of genetic defects in a population-based
cohort of children affected by non-goitre congenital and early-onset
hypothyroidism, even in a phenotype-focussed screening study, suggests the
pathogenetic role of either non-classic genetic mechanisms or the involvement of 
genes unknown so far. Identification of a novel PAX8 mutation in a particular
variant of non-congenital early-onset hypothyroidism indicates a key function of 
PAX8 in the postnatal growth and functional maintenance of the thyroid gland.

PMID: 17468187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Science. 2007 Jun 1;316(5829):1336-41. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

Replication of genome-wide association signals in UK samples reveals risk loci
for type 2 diabetes.

Zeggini E(1), Weedon MN, Lindgren CM, Frayling TM, Elliott KS, Lango H, Timpson
NJ, Perry JR, Rayner NW, Freathy RM, Barrett JC, Shields B, Morris AP, Ellard S, 
Groves CJ, Harries LW, Marchini JL, Owen KR, Knight B, Cardon LR, Walker M,
Hitman GA, Morris AD, Doney AS; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC),
McCarthy MI, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, OX3 7LJ, UK.

Erratum in
    Science. 2007 Aug 24;317(5841):1035-6.

The molecular mechanisms involved in the development of type 2 diabetes are
poorly understood. Starting from genome-wide genotype data for 1924 diabetic
cases and 2938 population controls generated by the Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium, we set out to detect replicated diabetes association signals through 
analysis of 3757 additional cases and 5346 controls and by integration of our
findings with equivalent data from other international consortia. We detected
diabetes susceptibility loci in and around the genes CDKAL1, CDKN2A/CDKN2B, and
IGF2BP2 and confirmed the recently described associations at HHEX/IDE and
SLC30A8. Our findings provide insight into the genetic architecture of type 2
diabetes, emphasizing the contribution of multiple variants of modest effect. The
regions identified underscore the importance of pathways influencing pancreatic
beta cell development and function in the etiology of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3772310
PMID: 17463249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Science. 2007 Jun 1;316(5829):1341-5. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

A genome-wide association study of type 2 diabetes in Finns detects multiple
susceptibility variants.

Scott LJ(1), Mohlke KL, Bonnycastle LL, Willer CJ, Li Y, Duren WL, Erdos MR,
Stringham HM, Chines PS, Jackson AU, Prokunina-Olsson L, Ding CJ, Swift AJ,
Narisu N, Hu T, Pruim R, Xiao R, Li XY, Conneely KN, Riebow NL, Sprau AG, Tong M,
White PP, Hetrick KN, Barnhart MW, Bark CW, Goldstein JL, Watkins L, Xiang F,
Saramies J, Buchanan TA, Watanabe RM, Valle TT, Kinnunen L, Abecasis GR, Pugh EW,
Doheny KF, Bergman RN, Tuomilehto J, Collins FS, Boehnke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Identifying the genetic variants that increase the risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D) 
in humans has been a formidable challenge. Adopting a genome-wide association
strategy, we genotyped 1161 Finnish T2D cases and 1174 Finnish normal
glucose-tolerant (NGT) controls with >315,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and imputed genotypes for an additional >2 million autosomal SNPs. We
carried out association analysis with these SNPs to identify genetic variants
that predispose to T2D, compared our T2D association results with the results of 
two similar studies, and genotyped 80 SNPs in an additional 1215 Finnish T2D
cases and 1258 Finnish NGT controls. We identify T2D-associated variants in an
intergenic region of chromosome 11p12, contribute to the identification of
T2D-associated variants near the genes IGF2BP2 and CDKAL1 and the region of
CDKN2A and CDKN2B, and confirm that variants near TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, FTO,
PPARG, and KCNJ11 are associated with T2D risk. This brings the number of T2D
loci now confidently identified to at least 10.

PMCID: PMC3214617
PMID: 17463248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Science. 2007 Jun 1;316(5829):1331-6. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

Genome-wide association analysis identifies loci for type 2 diabetes and
triglyceride levels.

Diabetes Genetics Initiative of Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Lund
University, and Novartis Institutes of BioMedical Research(1), Saxena R, Voight
BF, Lyssenko V, Burtt NP, de Bakker PI, Chen H, Roix JJ, Kathiresan S, Hirschhorn
JN, Daly MJ, Hughes TE, Groop L, Altshuler D, Almgren P, Florez JC, Meyer J,
Ardlie K, Bengtsson Boström K, Isomaa B, Lettre G, Lindblad U, Lyon HN, Melander 
O, Newton-Cheh C, Nilsson P, Orho-Melander M, Råstam L, Speliotes EK, Taskinen
MR, Tuomi T, Guiducci C, Berglund A, Carlson J, Gianniny L, Hackett R, Hall L,
Holmkvist J, Laurila E, Sjögren M, Sterner M, Surti A, Svensson M, Svensson M,
Tewhey R, Blumenstiel B, Parkin M, Defelice M, Barry R, Brodeur W, Camarata J,
Chia N, Fava M, Gibbons J, Handsaker B, Healy C, Nguyen K, Gates C, Sougnez C,
Gage D, Nizzari M, Gabriel SB, Chirn GW, Ma Q, Parikh H, Richardson D, Ricke D,
Purcell S.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT),
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

New strategies for prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes (T2D) require
improved insight into disease etiology. We analyzed 386,731 common
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1464 patients with T2D and 1467 matched
controls, each characterized for measures of glucose metabolism, lipids, obesity,
and blood pressure. With collaborators (FUSION and WTCCC/UKT2D), we identified
and confirmed three loci associated with T2D-in a noncoding region near CDKN2A
and CDKN2B, in an intron of IGF2BP2, and an intron of CDKAL1-and replicated
associations near HHEX and in SLC30A8 found by a recent whole-genome association 
study. We identified and confirmed association of a SNP in an intron of
glucokinase regulatory protein (GCKR) with serum triglycerides. The discovery of 
associated variants in unsuspected genes and outside coding regions illustrates
the ability of genome-wide association studies to provide potentially important
clues to the pathogenesis of common diseases.

PMID: 17463246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Jun;18(6):2192-202. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

The activity of Pax3 and Zic1 regulates three distinct cell fates at the neural
plate border.

Hong CS(1), Saint-Jeannet JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

In Xenopus, the neural plate border gives rise to at least three cell
populations: the neural crest, the preplacodal ectoderm, and the hatching gland. 
To understand the molecular mechanisms that regulate the formation of these
lineages, we have analyzed the role of two transcription factors, Pax3 and Zic1, 
which are among the earliest genes activated in response to neural plate
border-inducing signals. At the end of gastrulation, Pax3 and Zic1 are
coexpressed in the neural crest forming region. In addition, Pax3 is expressed in
progenitors of the hatching gland, and Zic1 is detected in the preplacodal
ectoderm. Using gain of function and knockdown approaches in whole embryos and
animal explants, we demonstrate that Pax3 and Zic1 are necessary and sufficient
to promote hatching gland and preplacodal fates, respectively, whereas their
combined activity is essential to specify the neural crest. Moreover, we show
that by manipulating the levels of Pax3 and Zic1 it is possible to shift fates
among these cells. These findings provide novel information on the mechanisms
regulating cell fate decisions at the neural plate border.

PMCID: PMC1877120
PMID: 17409353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nature. 2007 Feb 22;445(7130):881-5. Epub 2007 Feb 11.

A genome-wide association study identifies novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes.

Sladek R(1), Rocheleau G, Rung J, Dina C, Shen L, Serre D, Boutin P, Vincent D,
Belisle A, Hadjadj S, Balkau B, Heude B, Charpentier G, Hudson TJ, Montpetit A,
Pshezhetsky AV, Prentki M, Posner BI, Balding DJ, Meyre D, Polychronakos C,
Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation
Centre, Montreal H3A 1A4, Canada.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Feb 22;445(7130):828-30.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus results from the interaction of environmental factors
with a combination of genetic variants, most of which were hitherto unknown. A
systematic search for these variants was recently made possible by the
development of high-density arrays that permit the genotyping of hundreds of
thousands of polymorphisms. We tested 392,935 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 
a French case-control cohort. Markers with the most significant difference in
genotype frequencies between cases of type 2 diabetes and controls were
fast-tracked for testing in a second cohort. This identified four loci containing
variants that confer type 2 diabetes risk, in addition to confirming the known
association with the TCF7L2 gene. These loci include a non-synonymous
polymorphism in the zinc transporter SLC30A8, which is expressed exclusively in
insulin-producing beta-cells, and two linkage disequilibrium blocks that contain 
genes potentially involved in beta-cell development or function (IDE-KIF11-HHEX
and EXT2-ALX4). These associations explain a substantial portion of disease risk 
and constitute proof of principle for the genome-wide approach to the elucidation
of complex genetic traits.

PMID: 17293876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Neurobiol Aging. 2007 Sep;28(9):1374-80. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Positive association between risk for late-onset Alzheimer disease and genetic
variation in IDE.

Björk BF(1), Katzov H, Kehoe P, Fratiglioni L, Winblad B, Prince JA, Graff C.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department NVS, Division of KI-Alzheimer Disease
Research Center, SE-141 57 Huddinge, Sweden.

Insulin degrading enzyme (IDE) is one of the principal proteases involved in the 
degradation of the beta-amyloid peptide, which is the major constituent of senile
plaques in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains. Previous association studies between 
AD and IDE have produced inconsistent results which may be indicative of a need
for larger case-control series to identify what may be a relatively small effect 
size. Thus, we performed a large association study using four SNPs in the 276-kb 
haplotype block in and around IDE (IDE_7, IDE_9, IDE_14 and HHEX_23) in a
previously unpublished Swedish and a UK case-control series, and combined our
data with a previously reported Swedish case-control sample set from Prince et
al., 2003. The combined genotype data from 1269 late-onset AD cases and 980
controls yielded a significant association to IDE_9 located in the 3'-end of the 
IDE gene after conservative multiple testing Bonferroni correction (p=0.005). The
effect seemed to predominate in male cases. However, we did not observe a
globally significant association to haplotypes generated from three "tag" SNPs.
These findings indicate a role for IDE in AD, and provide models that may improve
chances of further independent replication.

PMID: 16876916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. BMC Cancer. 2006 Jul 19;6:192.

HEX expression and localization in normal mammary gland and breast carcinoma.

Puppin C(1), Puglisi F, Pellizzari L, Manfioletti G, Pestrin M, Pandolfi M, Piga 
A, Di Loreto C, Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, Italy.
pupp.cin@tin.it

BACKGROUND: The homeobox gene HEX is expressed in several cell types during
different phases of animal development. It encodes for a protein localized in
both the nucleus and the cytoplasm. During early mouse development, HEX is
expressed in the primitive endoderm of blastocyst. Later, HEX is expressed in
developing thyroid, liver, lung, as well as in haematopoietic progenitors and
endothelial cells. Absence of nuclear expression has been observed during
neoplastic transformation of the thyroid follicular cells. Aim of the present
study was to evaluate the localization and the function of the protein HEX in
normal and tumoral breast tissues and in breast cancer cell lines.
METHODS: HEX expression and nuclear localization were investigated by
immunohistochemistry in normal and cancerous breast tissue, as well as in breast 
cancer cell lines. HEX mRNA levels were evaluated by real-time PCR. Effects of
HEX expression on Sodium Iodide Symporter (NIS) gene promoter activity was
investigated by HeLa cell transfection.
RESULTS: In normal breast HEX was detected both in the nucleus and in the
cytoplasm. In both ductal and lobular breast carcinomas, a great reduction of
nuclear HEX was observed. In several cells from normal breast tissue as well as
in MCF-7 and T47D cell line, HEX was observed in the nucleolus. MCF-7 treatment
with all-trans retinoic acid enhanced HEX expression and induced a diffuse
nuclear localization. Enhanced HEX expression and diffuse nuclear localization
were also obtained when MCF-7 cells were treated with inhibitors of histone
deacetylases such as sodium butyrate and trichostatin A. With respect to normal
non-lactating breast, the amount of nuclear HEX was greatly increased in
lactating tissue. Transfection experiments demonstrated that HEX is able to
up-regulate the activity of NIS promoter.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that localization of HEX is regulated in epithelial
breast cells. Since modification of localization occurs during lactation and
tumorigenesis, we suggest that HEX may play a role in differentiation of the
epithelial breast cell.

PMCID: PMC1550255
PMID: 16854221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;330:123-33.

The role of Hex in hemangioblast and hematopoietic development.

Chan RJ(1), Hromas R, Yoder MC.

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, USA.

The orphan homeobox gene Hex has been shown to be critical for normal murine
liver development using Hex-/- mice. Because of the early lethality of the Hex-/-
mice, however, in vitro embryonic stem cell differentiation assays were employed 
to elucidate the role of Hex in murine hematopoiesis. These studies revealed that
Hex is not required for hemangioblast development but is required in a
dose-dependent fashion for hemangioblast differentiation to definitive
hematopoietic progenitors. Contained here are the methods needed to conduct
embryonic stem cell-derived in vitro hematopoietic assays.

PMID: 16846021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Nefrologia. 2006;26(2):195-205.

[What are the Hox genes? Its importance in vascular and renal disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Hernández Perera O(1), Marrero A, Rodríguez Pérez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr Negrín,
Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.

PMID: 16808257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nature. 2006 Aug 10;442(7103):688-91. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Mesodermal Wnt2b signalling positively regulates liver specification.

Ober EA(1), Verkade H, Field HA, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, and the Liver Center, University of California, San 
Francisco, 1550 Fourth Street, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
eober@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2007 Feb;45(2):540-1.

Endodermal organs such as the lung, liver and pancreas emerge at precise
locations along the primitive gut tube. Although several signalling pathways have
been implicated in liver formation, so far no single gene has been identified
that exclusively regulates liver specification. In zebrafish, the onset of liver 
specification is marked by the localized endodermal expression of hhex and prox1 
at 22 hours post fertilization. Here we used a screen for mutations affecting
endodermal organ morphogenesis to identify a unique phenotype: prometheus (prt)
mutants exhibit profound, though transient, defects in liver specification.
Positional cloning reveals that prt encodes a previously unidentified Wnt2b
homologue. prt/wnt2bb is expressed in restricted bilateral domains in the lateral
plate mesoderm directly adjacent to the liver-forming endoderm. Mosaic analyses
show the requirement for Prt/Wnt2bb in the lateral plate mesoderm, in agreement
with the inductive properties of Wnt signalling. Taken together, these data
reveal an unexpected positive role for Wnt signalling in liver specification, and
indicate a possible common theme for the localized formation of endodermal organs
along the gut tube.

PMID: 16799568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mech Dev. 2006 Jul;123(7):580-90. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Id3 is important for proliferation and differentiation of the hepatoblasts during
the chick liver development.

Nakayama M(1), Matsumoto K, Tatsumi N, Yanai M, Yokouchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pattern Formation, Department of Organogenesis, Institute of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto
860-0811, Japan.

The specified hepatic endoderm (hepatoblasts), the bipotential progenitor for
hepatocytes and bile duct epithelial cells, proliferates during the primordial
stages of liver development. Despite extensive studies, the mechanism that
regulates proliferation of bipotential hepatoblasts is not fully understood. Here
we show that Id3, a negative regulator of helix-loop-helix transcription factors,
is an important regulator of hepatoblast proliferation in the developing chick
liver. Id3 was expressed in hepatoblasts at early developmental stages (stages
12-29) but not in hepatocytes at later developmental stages (stage 34 onwards).
Depletion of Id3 in hepatoblasts by siRNA results in failure of cell
proliferation, but is not associated with either cell death or failure of
expression of Hhex and Fibrinogen, the earliest hepatoblast markers. These
observations suggest that at early developmental stages, Id3 functions as a
positive regulator of hepatoblast proliferation, independent of cell death or
maintenance of the non-terminally differentiated state. Interestingly at later
developmental stages, the expression pattern of Id3 is complementary to that of
Albumin, a marker of mature hepatocytes. Overexpression of Id3 in liver explants 
delayed the initiation of Albumin expression. Taken together, our observations
show that Id3 is not only a positive regulator of hepatoblast proliferation, but 
also an inhibitor of their differentiation into hepatocytes in the developing
chick liver.

PMID: 16793241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Int J Oncol. 2006 Jul;29(1):57-64.

Identification of gene expression signatures for molecular classification in
human leukemia cells.

Song JH(1), Kim HJ, Lee CH, Kim SJ, Hwang SY, Kim TS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Although the methods by which leukemia is classified have been improved for
effective therapies, leukemia patients occasionally exhibit diverse, sometimes
unpredictable, responses to treatment. Consequently, these patients also evidence
individually different clinical courses when administered with anti-leukemia
drugs. In order to find new, more precise molecular markers for leukemia
classification, we have analyzed the gene expression profiles from 65 diagnostic 
bone marrow specimens of adult patients with AML, ALL, CML or CLL by using
high-throughput DNA microarrays harboring approximately 8,300 unique human genes 
or expression sequence tags. In the present study, we identified a group of
leukemia-specific genes, which manifest gene expression profiles distinctly
representative of normal bone marrow samples, as determined by a significance
analysis of microarray (SAM) and GeneSpring 6.1 programs. We also determined the 
minimal number of genes showing a difference between acute and chronic leukemia
patient groups. Furthermore, the unsupervised cluster analysis revealed a gene
subset which can be used to distinguish between AML, ALL, CML and CLL patient
groups, based on expression signatures. The expression levels of differentially
regulated genes were verified via the principle component analysis (PCA). Our
results may provide a novel set of molecular criteria for the classification of
leukemia patients, and may also facilitate effects to discovery new targets,
allowing for more effective treatment of leukemia patients.

PMID: 16773185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):835-41. Epub 2006 Jun 11.

Epigenetic characterization of the early embryo with a chromatin
immunoprecipitation protocol applicable to small cell populations.

O'Neill LP(1), VerMilyea MD, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Institute of Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) defines the genomic distribution of proteins
and their modifications but is limited by the cell numbers required (ideally
>10(7)). Here we describe a protocol that uses carrier chromatin and PCR,
'carrier' ChIP (CChIP), to permit analysis of as few as 100 cells. We assayed
histone modifications at key regulator genes (such as Nanog, Pou5f1 (also known
as Oct4) and Cdx2) by CChIP in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and in inner cell 
mass (ICM) and trophectoderm of cultured blastocysts. Activating and silencing
modifications (H4 acetylation and H3K9 methylation) mark active and silent
promoters as predicted, and we find close correlation between values derived from
CChIP (1,000 ES cells) and conventional ChIP (5 x 10(7) ES cells). Studies on
genes silenced in both ICM and ES cells (Cdx2, Cfc1, Hhex and Nkx2-2, also known 
as Nkx) show that the intensity of silencing marks is relatively diminished in ES
cells, indicating a possible relaxation of some components of silencing on
adaptation to culture.

PMID: 16767102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 28;346(2):535-45. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Hhex is a direct repressor of endothelial cell-specific molecule 1 (ESM-1).

Cong R(1), Jiang X, Wilson CM, Hunter MP, Vasavada H, Bogue CW.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT 06520, USA.

Hhex encodes a homeodomain-containing protein that functions as both a
transcriptional repressor and activator, and is necessary for normal embryonic
development. We previously reported that a null mutation of Hhex leads to
abnormalities in vasculogenesis and have focused on identifying the
transcriptional targets of Hhex necessary for vascular development. Here we
report that the expression of ESM-1, a cysteine-rich protein expressed in the
endothelium, is increased in Hhex(-/-) embryos. Overexpression of Hhex in
endothelial cells down-regulates ESM-1. The results from transient cotransfection
assay, electrophoretic-mobility shift assay, site-directed mutagenesis, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrate that Hhex can directly bind to
and repress ESM-1 via an evolutionarily conserved Hhex response element (HRE) 1. 
These findings indicate that ESM-1 is a direct target of Hhex and that Hhex
functions as a transcriptional repressor of ESM-1. We speculate that
Hhex-mediated repression of ESM-1 is critical for the normal function of the
vascular endothelium and for tumor vasculogenesis.

PMID: 16764824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2006 Apr;64(4):398-404.

HEX, PAX-8 and TTF-1 gene expression in human thyroid tissues: a comparative
analysis with other genes involved in iodide metabolism.

Lacroix L(1), Michiels S, Mian C, Arturi F, Caillou B, Filetti S, Schlumberger M,
Bidart JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biology, Institut Gustave-Roussy and Commissariat à
l'Energie Atomique LRC 29V, Villejuif, France.

OBJECTIVE: Benign and malignant thyroid tumours are characterized by alterations 
of the expression level of thyroid-specific genes involved in the iodide
metabolism. Imbalance in the levels of transcription factors has been recognized 
as a critical molecular event in the development of neoplasm. The delineation of 
eventual correlations existing between the expression of transcription factors
and of putative target genes in physiological and pathological conditions could
be relevant to better understand tumorigenesis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We examined the expression levels of transcription factors 
involved in thyroid development [thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), paired
box gene 8 (PAX-8) and haematopoietically expressed homeobox (HEX)] in 101
thyroid tissues, including 14 normal thyroid tissues, 13 hyperfunctioning
tissues, 27 benign adenomas and 47 follicular or papillary carcinomas. Then, we
compared their expression levels with those of thyroid-specific genes involved in
iodide metabolism.
RESULTS: In benign tumours, PAX-8 and TTF-1 gene expression levels were not
significantly different from the expression levels in normal tissues. However, a 
significant decrease was found in carcinomas. Interestingly, HEX gene expression 
was significantly decreased in both hyper- and hypofunctioning benign tissues and
also in carcinomas. Expression levels of Pendred syndrome (PDS), natrium iodine
symporter (NIS), thyroglobulin (Tg), thyroid peroxidase (TPO) and dual oxidase 1 
or 2 (DUOX2) genes were significantly correlated with the expression of PAX-8 and
with that of HEX. Expression level of TTF-1 was weakly correlated only with the
expression levels of PDS and DUOX2.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that alterations in the transcription factors
PAX-8, TTF-1 and HEX gene expression, by acting individually or together, have a 
role in both thyroidal tumorigenesis and in the dedifferentiation process.

PMID: 16584511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Mol Biol. 2006 May 12;358(4):943-62. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Oligomerisation of the developmental regulator proline rich homeodomain (PRH/Hex)
is mediated by a novel proline-rich dimerisation domain.

Soufi A(1), Smith C, Clarke AR, Gaston K, Jayaraman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol
BS81TD, UK.

Homeodomain proteins regulate multiple developmental pathways by altering gene
expression temporally and in a tissue-specific fashion. The Proline Rich
Homeodomain protein (PRH/Hex) is a transcription factor and an essential
regulator of embryonic development and haematopoiesis. Recent discoveries have
implicated self-association as an important feature of transcription factor
function. Here, we show using a variety of techniques including gel-filtration,
analytical ultracentrifugation, electron microscopy and in vitro cross-linking,
that purified recombinant PRH is oligomeric and we use in vivo cross-linking to
confirm that this protein exists as oligomers in cells. This is the first
demonstration that a homeodomain protein can oligomerise in vivo. Consistent with
these findings we show that a fraction of endogenous and exogenous PRH appears as
discrete foci within the nucleus and at the nuclear periphery. The N-terminal
domain of PRH is involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and
transcriptional repression and can make multiple protein-protein interactions. We
show that this region of PRH contains a novel proline-rich dimerisation domain
that mediates oligomerisation. We propose a model that explains how PRH forms
oligomers and we discuss how these oligomers might control transcription.

PMID: 16540119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Biol Macromol. 2006 Aug 15;39(1-3):45-50. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Purification and characterisation of the PRH homeodomain: Removal of the
N-terminal domain of PRH increases the PRH homeodomain-DNA interaction.

Soufi A(1), Gaston K, Jayaraman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

The Proline-Rich Homeodomain (PRH) protein is a regulator of transcription and
translation and plays a key role in the control of cell proliferation and cell
differentiation. PRH contains an N-terminal proline-rich domain that can repress 
transcription when expressed as a fusion protein with an unrelated DNA binding
domain, a central homeodomain that binds to specific DNA sequences and an acidic 
C-terminal domain of no known function. In order to investigate the structure and
functions of PRH we have purified the full-length protein and truncated proteins 
corresponding to different domains of PRH fused to histidine tags. Here we
compare the effects of elution conditions and column volume on protein
purification and we investigate the DNA binding activity of these proteins. We
show that the PRH homeodomain co-purifies with nucleic acids even after nuclease 
treatment and that a high salt-wash is required to remove bound nucleic acids. In
contrast with the full-length PRH protein, the PRH homeodomain binds to DNA with 
high affinity. We show that a truncated protein comprising the homeodomain and
C-terminal domain also binds to DNA with high affinity and we conclude that the
N-terminal domain of PRH inhibits the homeodomain-DNA interaction.

PMID: 16494938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Dev Biol. 2006 Feb 1;290(1):44-56. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Hex homeobox gene controls the transition of the endoderm to a pseudostratified, 
cell emergent epithelium for liver bud development.

Bort R(1), Signore M, Tremblay K, Martinez Barbera JP, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Little is known about the mechanism by which embryonic liver, lung, and pancreas 
progenitor cells emerge from the endodermal epithelium to initiate organogenesis.
Understanding this process and its genetic control provides insight into
ontogeny, developmental abnormalities, and tissue regeneration. We find that
shortly after hepatic endoderm cells are specified, they undergo a transition
from a columnar, gut morphology to a pseudostratified morphology, with
concomitant "interkinetic nuclear migration" (INM) during cell division. INM is a
hallmark of pseudostratified epithelia and the process used by neural progenitors
to emerge from the neural epithelium. We find that the transition of the hepatic 
endoderm, but not the neural epithelium, to a pseudostratified epithelium is
dependent upon the cell-autonomous activity of the homeobox gene Hex. In the
absence of Hex, hepatic endoderm cells survive but maintain a columnar, simple
epithelial phenotype and ectopically express Shh and other genes characteristic
of the midgut epithelium. Thus, Hex promotes endoderm organogenesis by promoting 
the transition to a pseudostratified epithelium, which in turn allows
hepatoblasts to emerge into the stromal environment and continue differentiating.

PMID: 16364283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2005 Aug;6(3):217-28.

Thyroid development and effect on the nervous system.

Santisteban P(1), Bernal J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Arturo Duperier no 4,
28029, Madrid, Spain.

PMID: 16151626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Apr;14(2):188-98.

Differential gene expression profiling of CD34+ CD133+ umbilical cord blood
hematopoietic stem progenitor cells.

He X(1), Gonzalez V, Tsang A, Thompson J, Tsang TC, Harris DT.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Group, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Umbilical cord blood (CB)-derived primitive hematopoietic stem progenitor cells
(HSPC) are a promising source for stem cell-based gene therapy due to the reduced
incidence and severity of graftversus- host disease (GVHD) after human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA)-disparate CB transplantation. Cell-surface markers such as CD34 and
CD133 have been used in combination to enrich primitive HSPC for research and
clinical applications. To understand the molecular characteristics of the CB
HSPC, we compared the global gene expression of freshly isolated CB CD34+ CD133+ 
cells with their progenies using a cDNA microarray containing 22,000 human cDNA
clones printed on a single chip. A total of 139 genes were differentially
expressed between CB HSPC and their progenies. These transcripts included a
number of known genes that might play roles in key functions of CB HSPC as well
as many genes of unknown function. Among the genes showing the greatest
differential expression levels in HSPC were: psoriasin 1, CRHBP, HDAC3, MLLT3,
HBEX2, SPINK2, c-kit, H2BFQ, CD133, HHEX, TCF4, ALDH1A1, and FHL1. These data
provide more information on the molecular phenotype of CB HSPC and may lead to
the identification of new genes critical to stem cell function.

PMID: 15910245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2005 Jul 5;136B(1):69-71.

Mutation screening of a haplotype block around the insulin degrading enzyme gene 
and association with Alzheimer's disease.

Feuk L(1), McCarthy S, Andersson B, Prince JA, Brookes AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Genetic and biological studies point to a role for insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE)
in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Two SNP-based studies recently reported evidence for
association with AD using markers in a approximately 270 kb haplotype block on
chromosome 10q. This haplotype block region harbors three known genes;
insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE), kinesin family member 11 (KIF11), and
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX). In an attempt to search for
susceptibility variants we have sequenced all coding exons, 2 kb of 5' and
3'-flanking sequence, and all regions showing a high degree of human-mouse
conservation in these three genes in 30 individuals. We found a total of 40
single nucleotide polymorphisms and 8 insertion/deletion polymorphisms. No coding
variants were identified in any of the three genes. Nine polymorphisms in IDE and
four polymorphisms in KIF11 situated in conserved regions or near coding exons
were subsequently genotyped in a set of AD cases and controls. Two markers in
KIF11 yielded borderline significant results in the ApoE4 non-carrier subgroup,
but the results were otherwise not significant in this small set of samples. This
study of multiple new markers in the region will facilitate further association
studies in this important AD region.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15858821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Blood. 2005 Jun 15;105(12):4590-7. Epub 2005 Feb 22.

The homeobox gene HEX regulates proliferation and differentiation of
hemangioblasts and endothelial cells during ES cell differentiation.

Kubo A(1), Chen V, Kennedy M, Zahradka E, Daley GQ, Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

In this report we have investigated the role of the homeobox gene Hex in the
development and differentiation of the blast colony-forming cell (BL-CFC), a
progenitor with hemangioblast characteristics generated in embryonic stem (ES)
cell-derived embryoid bodies (EBs). Molecular analysis showed that Hex is
expressed in mesoderm, in populations that contain BL-CFCs, and in blast cell
colonies, the progeny of the BL-CFCs. Hex(-/-) EBs displayed a defect in
macrophage development but generated higher numbers of BL-CFCs than did wild-type
EBs. In addition to differences in these progenitor populations, we also found
that endothelial cells from the Hex(-/-) EBs showed enhanced proliferative
potential compared with those from wild-type EBs. Forced expression of Hex at the
onset of ES cell differentiation resulted in reduced EB cellularity, fetal liver 
kinase-1 (Flk-1) expression, and BL-CFC development. Taken together, these
findings demonstrate that Hex functions at multiple stages of development within 
the differentiating EBs and uncover a novel role for this transcription factor as
a negative regulator of the hemangioblast and the endothelial lineage.

PMCID: PMC1895005
PMID: 15728128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Genes Dev. 2005 Feb 1;19(3):387-96.

Heart induction by Wnt antagonists depends on the homeodomain transcription
factor Hex.

Foley AC(1), Mercola M.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regeneration Program, Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Inhibition of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling by Dickkopf-1 (Dkk-1) or
Crescent initiates cardiogenesis in vertebrate embryos. However, nearly nothing
is known about the downstream effectors of these secreted Wnt antagonists or the 
mechanism by which they activate heart formation. Here we show that Wnt
antagonists in Xenopus stimulate cardiogenesis non-cell-autonomously, up to
several cells away from those in which canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is
blocked, indicative of an indirect role in heart induction. A screen for
downstream mediators revealed that Dkk-1 and other inhibitors of the canonical
Wnt pathway induce the homeodomain transcription factor Hex, which is normally
expressed in endoderm underlying the presumptive cardiac mesoderm in amphibian,
bird, and mammalian embryos. Loss of Hex function blocks both endogenous heart
development and ectopic heart induction by Dkk-1. As with the canonical Wnt
pathway antagonists, ectopic Hex induces expression of cardiac markers
non-cell-autonomously. Thus, to initiate cardiogenesis, Wnt antagonists act on
endoderm to up-regulate Hex, which, in turn, controls production of a diffusible 
heart-inducing factor. This novel function for Hex suggests an etiology for the
cardiac malformations in Hex mutant mice and will make possible the isolation of 
factors that induce heart directly in the mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC546516
PMID: 15687261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(3):1100-12.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E activity is modulated by HOXA9 at
multiple levels.

Topisirovic I(1), Kentsis A, Perez JM, Guzman ML, Jordan CT, Borden KL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunovirology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) alters gene expression on
multiple levels. In the cytoplasm, eIF4E acts in the rate-limiting step of
translation initiation. In the nucleus, eIF4E facilitates nuclear export of a
subset of mRNAs. Both of these functions contribute to eIF4E's ability to
oncogenically transform cells. We report here that the homeodomain protein,
HOXA9, is a positive regulator of eIF4E. HOXA9 stimulates eIF4E-dependent export 
of cyclin D1 and ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) mRNAs in the nucleus, as well as
increases the translation efficiency of ODC mRNA in the cytoplasm. These
activities depend on direct interactions of HOXA9 with eIF4E and are independent 
of the role of HOXA9 in transcription. At the biochemical level, HOXA9 mediates
these effects by competing with factors that repress eIF4E function, in
particular the proline-rich homeodomain PRH/Hex. This competitive mechanism of
eIF4E regulation is disrupted in a subset of leukemias, where HOXA9 displaces PRH
from eIF4E, thereby contributing to eIF4E's dysregulation. In regard to these
results and our previous finding that approximately 200 homeodomain proteins
contain eIF4E binding sites, we propose that homeodomain modulation of eIF4E
activity is a novel means through which this family of proteins implements their 
effects on growth and development.

PMCID: PMC544005
PMID: 15657436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Mar 1;14(5):595-601. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Genome-wide identification of cis-regulatory sequences controlling blood and
endothelial development.

Donaldson IJ(1), Chapman M, Kinston S, Landry JR, Knezevic K, Piltz S, Buckley N,
Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institue for Medical Research, Cambridge 
University, UK.

The development of blood has long served as a model for mammalian cell type
specification and differentiation, and yet the underlying transcriptional
networks remain ill defined. Characterization of such networks will require
genome-wide identification of cis-regulatory sequences and an understanding of
how regulatory information is encoded in the primary DNA sequence. Despite
progress in lower organisms, genome-wide computational identification of
mammalian cis-regulatory sequences has been hindered by increased genomic
complexity and cumbersome transgenic assays. Starting with a well-characterized
blood stem cell enhancer from the SCL gene, we have developed computational tools
for the identification of functionally related gene regulatory sequences. Two
candidate enhancers discovered in this way were located in intron 1 of the Fli-1 
and PRH/Hex genes, both transcription factors previously implicated in
controlling blood and endothelial development. Subsequent transgenic and
biochemical analysis demonstrated that the two computationally identified
enhancers are functionally related to the SCL stem cell enhancer. The approach
developed here may therefore be useful for identifying additional enhancers
involved in the control of early blood and endothelial development, and may be
adapted to decipher transcriptional regulatory codes controlling a broad range of
mammalian developmental programmes.

PMID: 15649946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Endocrinology. 2005 Mar;146(3):1025-34. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Minireview: transcriptional regulation in pancreatic development.

Habener JF(1), Kemp DM, Thomas MK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, WEL320,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. jhabener@partners.org

Considerable progress has been made in the understanding of the sequential
activation of signal transduction pathways and the expression of transcription
factors during pancreas development. Much of this understanding has been obtained
by analyses of the phenotypes of mice in which the expression of key genes has
been disrupted (knockout mice). Knockout of the genes for Pdx1, Hlxb9, Isl1, or
Hex results in an arrest of pancreas development at a very early stage (embryonic
d 8-9). Disruption of genes encoding components of the Notch signaling pathway,
e.g. Hes1 or neurogenin-3, abrogates development of the endocrine pancreas
(islets of Langerhans). Disruption of transcription factor genes expressed more
downstream in the developmental cascade (Beta2/NeuroD, Pax4, NKx2.2, and Nkx6.1) 
curtails the formation of insulin-producing beta-cells. An understanding of the
importance of transcription factor genes during pancreas development has provided
insights into the pathogenesis of diabetes, in which the mass of
insulin-producing beta-cells is reduced.

PMID: 15604203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):552-62.

Regulation of hhex expression in the yolk syncytial layer, the potential
Nieuwkoop center homolog in zebrafish.

Bischof J(1), Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Institute of Biology 1, University of Freiburg,
Haupstrasse 1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The Nieuwkoop center is the earliest signaling center during dorsal-ventral
pattern formation in amphibian embryos and has been implied to function in
induction of the Spemann-Mangold organizer. In zebrafish, Nieuwkoop-center-like
activity resides in the dorsal yolk syncytial layer (YSL) at the interface of the
vegetal yolk cell and the blastoderm. hex homologs are expressed in the anterior 
endomesoderm in frogs (Xhex), the anterior visceral endoderm in mice, and the
dorsal YSL in zebrafish (hhex). Here, we investigate the control of hhex
expression in the YSL. We demonstrate that bozozok (boz) is absolutely required
for early hhex expression, while overexpression of boz causes ectopic hhex
expression. Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling by LiCl induces hhex
expression in wild-type YSL but not in boz mutant embryos, revealing that boz
activity is required downstream of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling for hhex
expression. Further, we show that the boz-mediated induction of hhex is
independent of the Boz-mediated repression of bmp2b. Our data reveal that
repressive effects of both Vega1 and Vega2 may be responsible for the exclusion
of hhex expression from the ventral and lateral parts of the YSL. In summary,
zebrafish hhex appears to be activated by Wnt/beta-catenin in the dorsal YSL,
where Boz acts in a permissive way to limit repression of hhex by Vega1 and
Vega2.

PMID: 15581885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):464-75.

An integrated regulatory network controlling survival and migration in thyroid
organogenesis.

Parlato R(1), Rosica A, Rodriguez-Mallon A, Affuso A, Postiglione MP, Arra C,
Mansouri A, Kimura S, Di Lauro R, De Felice M.

Author information: 
(1)Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Naples, Italy.

The thyroid gland originates from the ventral floor of the foregut as a
thickening of the endodermal cell layer. The molecular mechanisms underlying the 
early steps of thyroid morphogenesis are not known. Gene targeting experiments
have contributed to the identification of several transcription factors, in
general playing a role in the proliferation, survival, and migration of the
thyroid cell precursors. The experiments reported here analyze the expression of 
the transcription factors Titf1, Hhex, Pax8, and Foxe1 in the thyroid primordium 
of null mutants of each of them. We found that most of these transcription
factors are linked in an integrated regulatory network, each of them controlling 
the presence of other members of the network. The expression of Foxe1 is
regulated in an intriguing fashion as it is strongly dependent on the presence of
Pax8 in thyroid precursor cells, while the expression of the same gene in the
pharyngeal endoderm surrounding the primordium is dependent on Sonic hedgehog
(Shh)-derived signaling. Moreover, by the generation of mouse mutants expressing 
Foxe1 exclusively in the thyroid primordium, we provide a better understanding of
the role of Foxe1 in these cells in order to acquire the competence to migrate
into the underlying mesenchyme. In conclusion, we provide the first evidence of
gene expression programs, controlled by a hierarchy of transcription factors
expressed in the thyroid presumptive gut domain and directing the progression of 
thyroid morphogenesis.

PMID: 15581879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Feb;42(2):184-92.

Fine mapping of chromosome 10q deletions in mycosis fungoides and sezary
syndrome: identification of two discrete regions of deletion at 10q23.33-24.1 and
10q24.33-25.1.

Wain EM(1), Mitchell TJ, Russell-Jones R, Whittaker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Skin Tumour Unit, St. John's Institute of Dermatology, St. Thomas' Hospital,
London, UK. marywain@doctors.net.uk

Previous cytogenetic studies in mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sezary syndrome (SS)
have identified a large and poorly defined area of chromosomal deletion on
chromosome 10q. We report an extensive fine-mapping allelotyping study using 19
microsatellite markers in the region 10q22.3-10q26.13. Allelic loss was
identified by loss of heterozygosity analysis in 26 of 60 (43%) cases: 15 of 45
(33%) with MF and 11 of 15 (73%) with SS. MF and SS samples showed similar
patterns of allelic loss with the identification of two discrete regions of
deletion which were mutually exclusive in all but two cases. Within the first
region of deletion at 10q23.33-10q24.1, around microsatellite marker D10S185
(2.77 Mb), 23 genes were identified, including three (KIF11, HHEX, and HELLS)
with functions that, if dysregulated, could be critical in MF and SS. The second 
region of deletion, 10q24.33-10q25.1, around microsatellite marker D10S530 (3.92 
Mb), encodes 11 genes, the majority of which have poorly identified functions.
This extensive allelotyping study provides the basis for future highly selective 
candidate gene analyses.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15540164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):5197-209.

A null mutation of Hhex results in abnormal cardiac development, defective
vasculogenesis and elevated Vegfa levels.

Hallaq H(1), Pinter E, Enciso J, McGrath J, Zeiss C, Brueckner M, Madri J, Jacobs
HC, Wilson CM, Vasavada H, Jiang X, Bogue CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 464 Congress
Avenue, New Haven, CT, 06519-1361, USA.

The homeobox gene Hhex has recently been shown to be essential for normal liver, 
thyroid and forebrain development. Hhex(-/-) mice die by mid-gestation (E14.5)
and the cause of their early demise remains unclear. Because Hhex is expressed in
the developing blood islands at E7.0 in the endothelium of the developing
vasculature and heart at E9.0-9.5, and in the ventral foregut endoderm at
E8.5-9.0, it has been postulated to play a critical role in heart and vascular
development. We show here, for the first time, that a null mutation of Hhex
results in striking abnormalities of cardiac and vascular development which
include: (1) defective vasculogenesis, (2) hypoplasia of the right ventricle, (3)
overabundant endocardial cushions accompanied by ventricular septal defects,
outflow tract abnormalities and atrio-ventricular (AV) valve dysplasia and (4)
aberrant development of the compact myocardium. The dramatic enlargement of the
endocardial cushions in the absence of Hhex is due to decreased apoptosis and
dysregulated epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT). Interestingly, vascular
endothelial growth factor A (Vegfa) levels in the hearts of Hhex(-/-) mice were
elevated as much as three-fold between E9.5 and E11.5, and treatment of cultured 
Hhex(-/-) AV explants with truncated soluble Vegfa receptor 1, sFlt-1, an
inhibitor of Vegf signaling, completely abolished the excessive
epithelial-mesenchymal transformation seen in the absence of Hhex. Therefore,
Hhex expression in the ventral foregut endoderm and/or the endothelium is
necessary for normal cardiovascular development in vivo, and one function of Hhex
is to repress Vegfa levels during development.

PMID: 15459110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2004 Sep;24(9):1602-7. Epub 2004 Jul 8.

Homeobox protein Hex facilitates serum responsive factor-mediated activation of
the SM22alpha gene transcription in embryonic fibroblasts.

Oyama Y(1), Kawai-Kowase K, Sekiguchi K, Sato M, Sato H, Yamazaki M, Ohyama Y,
Aihara Y, Iso T, Okamaoto E, Nagai R, Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biological Science, University of Gunma, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Hex (hematopoietically expressed homeobox), a member of homeobox
family of transcription factors, has been implicated in the vascular development 
because of its expression in hemangioblast, a hypothetical stem cell that gives
rise to both angioblasts and hematopoietic lineages. In the present study, we
examined the role of Hex in the differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We constructed adenovirus expressing Hex, to which we refer 
to as AxCA/Hex, and transduced murine embryonic fibroblasts, 10T1/2 cells.
Northern blot analyses showed that Hex increased the mRNA levels of smooth muscle
alpha-actin and SM22alpha but not of calponin and smooth muscle myosin heavy
chain. Transient transfection assays showed that Hex activates the transcription 
from the SM22alpha promoter in a CArG box-dependent manner. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays demonstrate that Hex is not able to bind to CArG box, but
binding of serum responsive factor (SRF) to CArG box is enhanced in
AxCA/Hex-transduced cells. Recombinant Hex protein produced by in vitro
translation system augmented the binding activity of SRF to CArG box.
Immunoprecipitation experiments revealed the physical association between Hex and
SRF.
CONCLUSIONS: Hex induces transcription of the SM22alpha gene by facilitating the 
interaction between SRF and its cognate binding site in pluripotent embryonic
fibroblasts. This study demonstrates that Hex, a hematopoietically expressed
homeobox protein, induces transcription of the SM22alpha gene by facilitating the
interaction between SRF and its cognate binding site in embryonic fibroblasts.
These findings will provide the clue for understanding the mechanisms by which
bone marrow-derived SMC precursor cells undergo differentiation.

PMID: 15242862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Feb 12;214(1-2):117-25.

Functional interaction among thyroid-specific transcription factors: Pax8
regulates the activity of Hex promoter.

Puppin C(1), Presta I, D'Elia AV, Tell G, Arturi F, Russo D, Filetti S, Damante
G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, Piazzale
Kolbe 1, 33100 Udine, Italy.

The transcription factor Hex is expressed in the thyroid follicular cells (TFC)
and in several other cell types. In TFC, Hex contributes to the control of the
tissue-specific gene expression. By means of RT-PCR assays we found a correlation
between the Hex and Pax8 (a different tissue-specific transcription factor,
expressed in TFC) mRNA levels in normal and neoplastic thyroid tissues. This
finding suggested the presence of a functional correlation between the two
transcription factors. Therefore, we tested whether Pax8 regulates the
transcriptional activity of Hex promoter. Indeed, by using cotransfection
experiments in non-thyroidal cells, we show that increasing doses of Pax8
expression vector elicited a dose-dependent increase of the transcriptional
activity of Hex promoter. Accordingly, gel-retardation assays indicated that in
the Hex promoter are present several Pax8 binding sites. The Pax8 activating
effect on Hex promoter was further increased by the contemporary presence of Hex 
protein. In fact, cotransfection of both Hex and Pax8 expression vectors doubled 
the transcriptional activity of Hex promoter with respect to the condition in
which the Pax8 expression vector only was transfected. In addition, we show that 
also the transcriptional cofactor APE/Ref-1 cooperated with Pax8 for upregulation
of Hex promoter activity. These findings, together with other published data,
suggest that a network of functional interactions between transcriptional
regulators is present in TFC.

PMID: 15062550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biochem. 2004 Feb;135(2):259-68.

Identification and characterization of the hematopoietic cell-specific
enhancer-like element of the mouse hex gene.

Sato A(1), Keng VW, Yamamoto T, Kasamatsu S, Ban T, Tanaka H, Satoh S, Yamada K, 
Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464-8601.

Hex is one of the homeobox genes suggested to be important for hematopoietic cell
differentiation. However, its biological function and mechanism of
transcriptional regulation in hematopoietic cells remain elusive. We have
identified the regulatory region necessary for transcription of the mouse Hex
gene in K562 leukemia cells through transient reporter assays involving various
deletion mutants. This region, comprising +775 to +1177 in the first intron, had 
enhancer-like properties and showed high activity in other hematopoietic cell
lines such as U937, HEL, and RAW264.7, but little activity in other
Hex-expressing cell lines such as MH(1)C(1) and H4IIE hepatoma cells, suggesting 
that this region functions as a hematopoietic cell-specific enhancer-like
element. Binding site mutation of hematopoietic transcription factors, such as
GATAs and c-Myb present in the enhancer-like element, significantly decreased the
luciferase reporter gene expression in K562 cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that GATA-1, GATA-2, or c-Myb actually binds to three of these
putative binding sites, and also suggested that several unidentified factors
might interact with the enhancer-like element. Overexpression of GATA-1, GATA-2, 
or c-Myb stimulated the enhancer-like activity via these three binding sites.
Thus, we conclude that Hex expression in hematopoietic cells is mainly regulated 
by GATA-1, GATA-2, and c-Myb via this intronic enhancer-like element.

PMID: 15047729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Hum Mutat. 2004 Apr;23(4):334-42.

Genetic variants in a haplotype block spanning IDE are significantly associated
with plasma Abeta42 levels and risk for Alzheimer disease.

Ertekin-Taner N(1), Allen M, Fadale D, Scanlin L, Younkin L, Petersen RC,
Graff-Radford N, Younkin SG.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Department of Neuroscience, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

Risk for late onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD) and plasma amyloid beta levels
(Abeta42; encoded by APP), an intermediate phenotype for LOAD, show linkage to
chromosome 10q. Several strong candidate genes (VR22, PLAU, IDE) lie within the
1-lod support interval for linkage. Others have independently identified
haplotypes in the chromosome 10q region harboring IDE that show highly
significant association with intermediate AD phenotypes and with risk for AD. To 
pursue these associations, we analyzed the same haplotypes for association with
plasma Abeta42 in 24 extended LOAD families and for association with LOAD in two 
independent case-control series. One series (MCR, 188 age-matched case-control
pairs) did not show association (p=0.64) with the six haplotypes in the 276-kb
region spanning three genes (IDE, KNSL1, and HHEX) previously shown to associate 
with LOAD. The other series (MCJ, 109 age-matched case-control pairs) showed
significant (p=0.003) association with these haplotypes. In the MCJ series, the
H4 (odds ratio [OR]=5.1, p=0.003) and H2(H7) haplotypes (OR=0.60, p=0.04) had the
same effects previously reported. In this series, the H8 haplotype (OR=2.7,
p=0.098) also had an effect similar as in one previous case control series but
not in others. In the extended families, the H8 haplotype was associated with
significantly elevated plasma Abeta42 (p=0.02). In addition, the H5(H10)
haplotype, which is associated with reduced risk for AD in the other study is
associated with reduced plasma Abeta42 (p=0.007) in our family series. These
results provide strong evidence for pathogenic variant(s) in the 276-kb region
harboring IDE that influence intermediate AD phenotypes and risk for AD.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15024728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 14;279(20):20626-35. Epub 2004 Mar 10.

Interaction between hex and GATA transcription factors in vascular endothelial
cells inhibits flk-1/KDR-mediated vascular endothelial growth factor signaling.

Minami T(1), Murakami T, Horiuchi K, Miura M, Noguchi T, Miyazaki J, Hamakubo T, 
Aird WC, Kodama T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Tokyo,
4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan. minami@med.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Recent evidence supports a role for GATA transcription factors as important
signal intermediates in differentiated endothelial cells. The goal of this study 
was to identify proteins that interact with endothelial-derived GATA
transcription factors. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (Hex) as a GATA-binding partner in
endothelial cells. The physical association between Hex and GATA was confirmed
with immunoprecipitation in cultured cells. Hex overexpression resulted in
decreased flk-1/KDR expression, both at the level of the promoter and the
endogenous gene, and attenuated vascular endothelial growth factor-mediated tube 
formation in primary endothelial cell cultures. In electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, Hex inhibited the binding of GATA-2 to the flk-1/KDR 5'-untranslated
region GATA motif. Finally, in RNase protection assays, transforming growth
factor beta1, which has been previously shown to decrease flk-1 expression by
interfering with GATA binding activity, was shown to increase Hex expression in
endothelial cells. Taken together, the present study provides evidence for a
novel association between Hex and GATA and suggests that transforming growth
factor beta-mediated repression of flk-1/KDR and vascular endothelial growth
factor signaling involves the inducible formation of inhibitory Hex-GATA
complexes.

PMID: 15016828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Development. 2004 Mar;131(5):1157-64.

Active cell migration drives the unilateral movements of the anterior visceral
endoderm.

Srinivas S(1), Rodriguez T, Clements M, Smith JC, Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. shankar@srinivas.org

The anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) of the mouse embryo is a specialised
extra-embryonic tissue that is essential for anterior patterning of the embryo.
It is characterised by the expression of anterior markers such as Hex,
Cerberus-like and Lhx1. At pre-gastrula stages, cells of the AVE are initially
located at the distal tip of the embryo, but they then move unilaterally to the
future anterior. This movement is essential for converting the existing
proximodistal axis into an anteroposterior axis. To investigate this process, we 
developed a culture system capable of imaging embryos in real time with single
cell resolution. Our results show that AVE cells continuously change shape and
project filopodial processes in their direction of motion, suggesting that they
are actively migrating. Their proximal movement stops abruptly at the junction of
the epiblast and extra-embryonic ectoderm, whereupon they move laterally.
Confocal microscope images show that AVE cells migrate as a single layer in
direct contact with the epiblast, suggesting that this tissue might provide
directional cues. Together, these results show that the anteroposterior axis is
correctly positioned by the active movement of cells of the AVE in response to
cues from their environment, and by a 'barrier' to their movement that provides
an endpoint for this migration.

PMID: 14973277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Seikagaku. 2003 Dec;75(12):1493-504.

[Homeodomain transcription factor T/EBP/NKX2.1 in development and differentiation
of the thyroid and lung].

[Article in Japanese]

Kimura S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 37, Rm. 3112B, NIH, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

PMID: 14748143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Development. 2004 Feb;131(4):797-806. Epub 2004 Jan 21.

Hex homeobox gene-dependent tissue positioning is required for organogenesis of
the ventral pancreas.

Bort R(1), Martinez-Barbera JP, Beddington RS, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 7701 Burholme
Aveue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

In animal development, digestive tissues emerge from different positions of the
endoderm as a result of patterning signals from overlying mesoderm. Although
embryonic tissue movement during gastrulation generates an initial positional
relationship between the endoderm and mesoderm, the role of subsequent endoderm
movement against the mesoderm in patterning is unknown. At embryonic day 8.5 in
the mouse, proliferation of cells at the leading edge of ventral-lateral
endoderm, where the liver and ventral pancreas emerge, helps close off the
foregut. During this time, the endoderm grows adjacent to and beyond the
cardiogenic mesoderm, an inducer of the liver program and an inhibitor of the
pancreas program. The homeobox gene Hex is expressed in this endoderm cell domain
and in the liver and ventral pancreas buds, after organogenesis. We have found
that in Hex(-/-) embryos, there is a complete failure in ventral pancreatic
specification, while the liver program is still induced. However, when Hex-null
ventral endoderm is isolated prior to its interaction with cardiogenic mesoderm
and is cultured in vitro, it activates early pancreas genes. We found that Hex
controls the proliferation rate, and thus the positioning, of the leading edge of
endoderm cells that grow beyond the cardiogenic mesoderm, during gut tube
closure. Thus, Hex-controlled positioning of endoderm cells beyond cardiogenic
mesoderm dictates ventral pancreas specification. Other endodermal transcription 
factors may also function morphogenetically rather than by directly regulating
tissue-specific programs.

PMID: 14736744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):8992-9002.

Aberrant eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-dependent mRNA transport
impedes hematopoietic differentiation and contributes to leukemogenesis.

Topisirovic I(1), Guzman ML, McConnell MJ, Licht JD, Culjkovic B, Neering SJ,
Jordan CT, Borden KL.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, One Gustave Levy Place, New York, 
NY 10029, USA.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) acts as both a key
translation factor and as a promoter of nucleocytoplasmic transport of specific
transcripts. Traditionally, its transformation capacity in vivo is attributed to 
its role in translation initiation in the cytoplasm. Here, we demonstrate that
elevated eIF4E impedes granulocytic and monocytic differentiation. Our subsequent
mutagenesis studies indicate that this block is a result of dysregulated
eIF4E-dependent mRNA transport. These studies indicate that the RNA transport
function of eIF4E could contribute to leukemogenesis. We extended our studies to 
provide the first evidence that the nuclear transport function of eIF4E
contributes to human malignancy, specifically in a subset of acute and chronic
myelogenous leukemia patients. We observe an increase in eIF4E-dependent cyclin
D1 mRNA transport and a concomitant increase in cyclin D1 protein levels. The
aberrant nuclear function of eIF4E is due to abnormally large eIF4E bodies and
the loss of regulation by the proline-rich homeodomain PRH. We developed a novel 
tool to modulate this transport activity. The introduction of IkappaB, the
repressor of NF-kappaB, leads to suppression of eIF4E, elevation of PRH,
reorganization of eIF4E nuclear bodies, and subsequent downregulation of
eIF4E-dependent mRNA transport. Thus, our findings indicate that this nuclear
function of eIF4E can contribute to leukemogenesis by promoting growth and by
impeding differentiation.

PMCID: PMC309660
PMID: 14645512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Dev Biol. 2003 Nov 1;263(1):67-80.

Zebrafish hhex, nk2.1a, and pax2.1 regulate thyroid growth and differentiation
downstream of Nodal-dependent transcription factors.

Elsalini OA(1), von Gartzen J, Cramer M, Rohr KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17, 
50923 Köln, Germany.

During zebrafish development, the thyroid primordium initiates expression of
molecular markers such as hhex and nk2.1a in the endoderm prior to pharynx
formation. As expected for an endodermally derived organ, initiation of thyroid
development depends on Nodal signalling. We find that it also depends on three
downstream effectors of Nodal activity, casanova (cas), bonnie and clyde (bon),
and faust (fau)/gata5. Despite their early Nodal-dependent expression in the
endoderm, both hhex and nk2.1a are only required relatively late during thyroid
development. In hhex and nk2.1a loss-of-function phenotypes, thyroid development 
is initiated and arrests only after the primordium has evaginated from the
pharyngeal epithelium. Thus, like pax2.1, both hhex and nk2.1a have similarly
late roles in differentiation or growth of thyroid follicular cells, and here, we
show that all three genes act in parallel rather than in a single pathway. Our
functional analysis suggests that these genes have similar roles as in mammalian 
thyroid development, albeit in a different temporal mode of organogenesis.

PMID: 14568547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 2;22(43):6764-73.

The homeobox gene Hex induces T-cell-derived lymphomas when overexpressed in
hematopoietic precursor cells.

George A(1), Morse HC 3rd, Justice MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Proviral insertions at the viral insertion site Lvis1 occur frequently in B- and 
T-cell leukemias and lymphomas in AKXD mice and activate two nearby genes, the
divergent homeobox gene Hex and the kinesin-related spindle protein gene Eg5. To 
determine whether Hex misexpression results in the altered differentiation or
neoplastic transformation of hematopoietic lineages, we have transplanted mice
with bone marrow cells transduced with retrovirus containing the Hex coding
region. High levels of Hex expression in hematopoietic precursor cells inhibit
contribution to mature blood cell lineages by these precursors. Hex bone marrow
transplant recipient mice also develop hematologic neoplasms that appear to
originate in the bone marrow. The tumors have clonal rearrangements of the TCR
locus, are Thy1+, and are CD4+CD8+, CD4-CD8-, or mixed, indicating tumor origin
from a precursor T-cell population. Tumors in transplant mice contain clonal and 
transcriptionally active Hex proviral insertions, demonstrating a causal role for
Hex misexpression in the onset of these neoplasms. Our results demonstrate that
Hex can act as a T lineage oncogene when misexpressed in hematopoietic precursor 
cells.

PMID: 14555989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Hum Mutat. 2003 Nov;22(5):363-71.

Genetic variation in a haplotype block spanning IDE influences Alzheimer disease.

Prince JA(1), Feuk L, Gu HF, Johansson B, Gatz M, Blennow K, Brookes AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Linkage studies have identified a large (>60-Mb) region on chromosome 10q that
segregates with Alzheimer Disease (AD). Within the region, the gene for insulin
degrading enzyme (IDE) represents a notable biological candidate given that it
degrades amyloid beta-protein (one of the major constituents of senile plaques)
and the intracellular amyloid precursor protein (APP) domain released by
gamma-secretase processing. We have used a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
genetic association strategy to investigate AD in relation to a 480-kb region
encompassing IDE. A 276-kb linkage disequilibrium block was revealed that spans
three genes (IDE, KNSL1, and HHEX). Assessing this block in several independent
sets of case-control materials (early- and late-onset AD) and focusing also upon 
quantitative measures that are pertinent to AD diagnosis and severity (MMSE
scores, microtubule-associated protein Tau [MAPT] levels in CSF, degree of brain 
pathology, and age-at-onset) produced extensive evidence for significant AD
association. Signals (p-values ranging from 0.05 to <1x10(-9)) were generally
stronger when examining haplotypes rather than individual SNPs, and quantitative 
trait tests most uniformly revealed the detected associations. Consistent risk
alleles and haplotypes were apparent across the study, with effects in some cases
as large as that of the epsilon4 allele of APOE. A subsequent mutation screen of 
exons in all three suspect genes provided no evidence for common causative
mutations. These results provide substantial evidence that genetic variation
within or extremely close to IDE impacts both disease risk and traits related to 
the severity of AD.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14517947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 15;261(2):470-87.

Dynamic morphogenetic events characterize the mouse visceral endoderm.

Rivera-Pérez JA(1), Mager J, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, 103 Mason Farm Road,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA.

Several lines of evidence suggest that the extraembryonic endoderm of vertebrate 
embryos plays an important role in the development of rostral neural structures. 
In mice, neural inductive signals are thought to reside in an area of visceral
endoderm that expresses the Hex gene. Here, we have conducted a morphological and
lineage analysis of visceral endoderm cells spanning pre- and postprimitive
streak stages. Our results show that Hex-expressing cells have a tall, columnar
epithelial morphology, which distinguishes them from other visceral endoderm
cells. This region of visceral endoderm thickening (VET) is found overlying first
the distal and then one side of the epiblast at stages between 5.5 and 5.75 days 
post coitum (d.p.c.). In addition, we show that the epiblast has an
anteroposterior-compressed appearance that is aligned with the position of the
VET. Intracellular labeling of VET/Hex-expressing cells reveals an anterior and
anterolateral shift from their distal epiblast position. VET/Hex-expressing cells
are first localized to the anterior side of the epiblast by 5.75 d.p.c. and form 
a crescent on the anterior half of the embryo at the onset of gastrulation.
Subsequently, VET descendants are distributed along the embryonic/extraembryonic 
boundary by headfold stages at 7.5 d.p.c. The morphological characteristics and
position of VET/Hex-expressing cells distinguishes the future anteroposterior
axis of the embryo and provide landmarks to stage mouse embryos at preprimitive
streak stages. Moreover, the morphological characteristics of pregastrulation
mouse embryos together with the stereotyped shift in the position of visceral
endoderm cells reveal similarities among amniote embryos that suggest an
evolutionary conservation of the mechanisms that pattern the rostral neurectoderm
at pregastrula stages.

PMID: 14499654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem J. 2003 Sep 15;374(Pt 3):667-75.

The transcriptional repressor protein PRH interacts with the proteasome.

Bess KL(1), Swingler TE, Rivett AJ, Gaston K, Jayaraman PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol
BS81TD, UK.

PRH (proline-rich homeodomain protein)/Hex is important in the control of cell
proliferation and differentiation. We have shown previously that PRH contains two
domains that can bring about transcriptional repression independently; the PRH
homeodomain represses transcription by binding to TATA box sequences, whereas the
proline-rich N-terminal domain can repress transcription by interacting with
members of the Groucho/TLE (transducin-like enhancer of split) family of
co-repressor proteins. The proteasome is a multi-subunit protein complex involved
in the processing and degradation of proteins. Some proteasome subunits have been
suggested to play a role in the regulation of transcription. In the present
study, we show that PRH interacts with the HC8 subunit of the proteasome in the
context of both 20 and 26 S proteasomes. Moreover, we show that PRH is associated
with the proteasome in haematopoietic cells and that the proline-rich PRH
N-terminal domain is responsible for this interaction. Whereas PRH can be cleaved
by the proteasome, it does not appear to be degraded rapidly in vitro or in vivo,
and the proteolytic activity of the proteasome is not required for
transcriptional repression by PRH. However, proteasomal digestion of PRH can
liberate truncated PRH proteins that retain the ability to bind to DNA. We
discuss these findings in terms of the biological role of PRH in gene regulation 
and the control of cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC1223646
PMID: 12826010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Blood. 2003 Oct 1;102(7):2428-35. Epub 2003 Jun 5.

The homeoprotein Hex is required for hemangioblast differentiation.

Guo Y(1), Chan R, Ramsey H, Li W, Xie X, Shelley WC, Martinez-Barbera JP, Bort B,
Zaret K, Yoder M, Hromas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University Cancer Center, Indianapolis, IN,
USA.

The first hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors are derived from a common
embryonic precursor termed the hemangioblast. The genetic cascades that regulate 
the differentiation of the hemangioblast to hematopoietic and endothelial cells
are largely unknown. In general, much of embryonic development is coordinately
regulated by temporal and spatial expression of transcription factors, such as
the Homeobox (Hox) gene family. We and others isolated a divergent homeobox gene 
termed Hex (or Prh) that is preferentially expressed in hematopoietic and
endothelial cells. Using in vitro Hex-/- embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation, in vivo yolk sac hematopoietic progenitor assays, and chimeric
mouse analysis, we found that Hex is required for differentiation of the
hemangioblast to definitive embryonic hematopoietic progenitors and to a lesser
extent endothelial cells. Therefore, Hex is a novel regulator of hemangioblast
differentiation to hematopoietic and endothelial cells.

PMID: 12791650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Apr 1;31(7):1845-52.

Thyroid-specific transcription factors control Hex promoter activity.

Puppin C(1), D'Elia AV, Pellizzari L, Russo D, Arturi F, Presta I, Filetti S,
Bogue CW, Denson LA, Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, Piazzale
Kolbe, 1 33100 Udine, Italy.

The homeobox-containing gene Hex is expressed in several cell types, including
thyroid follicular cells, in which it regulates the transcription of tissue-
specific genes. In this study the regulation of Hex promoter activity was
investigated. Using co- transfection experiments, we demonstrated that the
transcriptional activity of the Hex gene promoter in rat thyroid FRTL-5 cells is 
approximately 10-fold greater than that observed in HeLa and NIH 3T3 cell lines
(which do not normally express the Hex gene). To identify the molecular
mechanisms underlying these differences, we evaluated the effect of the thyroid- 
specific transcription factor TTF-1 on the Hex promoter activity. TTF-1 produced 
3-4-fold increases in the Hex promoter activity. Gel- retardation assays and
mutagenesis experiments revealed the presence of functionally relevant TTF-1
binding sites in the Hex promoter region. These in vitro data may also have
functional relevance in vivo, since a positive correlation between TTF-1 and Hex 
mRNAs was demonstrated in human thyroid tissues by means of RT-PCR analysis. The 
TTF-1 effect, however, is not sufficient to explain the difference in Hex
promoter activity between FRTL-5 and cells that do not express the Hex gene. For 
this reason, we tested whether Hex protein is able to activate the Hex promoter. 
Indeed, co-transfection experiments indicate that Hex protein is able to increase
the activity of its own promoter in HeLa cells approximately 4-fold. TTF-1 and
Hex effects are additive: when transfected together in HeLa cells, the Hex
promoter activity is increased 6-7-fold. Thus, the contemporary presence of both 
TTF-1 and Hex could be sufficient to explain the higher transcriptional activity 
of the Hex promoter in thyroid cells with respect to cell lines that do not
express the Hex gene. These findings demonstrate the existence of direct
cross-regulation between thyroid-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC152810
PMID: 12655000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. FEBS Lett. 2003 Mar 13;538(1-3):125-33.

In vivo studies of liver-type fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP) gene expression
in liver of transgenic zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Her GM(1), Chiang CC, Chen WY, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Marine Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Mammalian liver fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP) is a small cytosolic protein 
in various tissues including liver, small intestine and kidney and is thought to 
play a crucial role in intracellular fatty acid trafficking and metabolism. To
better understand its tissue-specific regulation during zebrafish hepatogenesis, 
we isolated 5'-flanking sequences of the zebrafish L-FABP gene and used a green
fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic strategy to generate liver-specific
transgenic zebrafish. The 2.8-kb 5'-flanking sequence of zebrafish L-FABP gene
was sufficient to direct GFP expression in liver primordia, first observed in 2
dpf embryos and then continuously to the adult stage. This pattern of transgenic 
expression is consistent with the expression pattern of the endogenous gene. F2
inheritance rates of 42-51% in all the seven transgenic lines were consistent
with the ratio of Mendelian segregation. Further, hhex and zXbp-1 morphants
displayed a visible liver defect, which suggests that it is possible to establish
an in vivo system for screening genes required for liver development.

PMID: 12633865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. EMBO J. 2003 Feb 3;22(3):689-703.

The proline-rich homeodomain protein, PRH, is a tissue-specific inhibitor of
eIF4E-dependent cyclin D1 mRNA transport and growth.

Topisirovic I(1), Culjkovic B, Cohen N, Perez JM, Skrabanek L, Borden KL.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program and Institute for Computational Biomedicine,
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York
University, One Gustave Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The translation initiation factor eIF4E is involved in the modulation of cellular
growth. In the nucleus, where eIF4E is associated with PML nuclear bodies, eIF4E 
mediates nucleocytoplasmic transport of specific transcripts, and this
contributes to its transformation activity. Surprisingly, we found that a trans
cription factor, the proline-rich homeodomain protein PRH, is a negative
regulator of eIF4E in myeloid cells, interacting with eIF4E through a conserved
binding site typically found in translational regulators. Through this
interaction, PRH inhibits eIF4E-dependent mRNA transport and subsequent
transformation. These activities of PRH are independent of its transcriptional
functions. Further, we found that 199 homeodomain proteins contain potential
eIF4E-binding sites. Thus, there could be many tissue-specific regulators of
eIF4E. These findings provide a model for regulation of a general factor, eIF4E, 
in tissue- specific contexts, and suggest that its regulation is important in
differentiation and development.

PMCID: PMC140753
PMID: 12554669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):556-61. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

Impaired B cell development and function in mice with a targeted disruption of
the homeobox gene Hex.

Bogue CW(1), Zhang PX, McGrath J, Jacobs HC, Fuleihan RL.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Child Health Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. clifford.bogue@yale.edu

Hex is a homeobox gene that is expressed in all stages of B cell development
except plasma cells. We studied lymphocyte development in the absence of Hex by
using the RAG1-deficient blastocyst complementation system because homozygous
disruption of Hex is embryonic lethal. Hex(-/-);RAG1(-/-) chimeric mice had
severely reduced numbers of mature B cells, pre-B cells, and CD5(+) B cells with 
a striking 15-fold increase in the percentage of B220(-)CD19(+) cells in the bone
marrow. Hex(-/-);RAG1(-/-) chimeric mice failed to generate IgG antibodies to T
cell-independent antigens, although their serum IgM levels and antibody responses
to T cell-dependent antigens were intact. Therefore, Hex is necessary for B cell 
development and function and its absence results in a dramatic increase in
B220(-)CD19(+) cells.

PMCID: PMC141034
PMID: 12522149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jan;226(1):118-27.

Molecular components of the endoderm specification pathway in Xenopus tropicalis.

D'Souza A(1), Lee M, Taverner N, Mason J, Carruthers S, Smith JC, Amaya E,
Papalopulu N, Zorn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Xenopus laevis has been instrumental in elucidating a conserved molecular pathway
that regulates vertebrate endoderm specification. However, loss-of-function
analysis is required to resolve the precise function of the genes involved. For
such analysis, antisense oligos and possibly forward genetics are likely to be
more effective in the diploid species Xenopus tropicalis than in the
pseudotetraploid Xenopus laevis. Here we have isolated most of the tropicalis
genes in the endoderm specification pathway, specifically, tVegT, tMixer, tMix,
tBix, tGata6, tSox17alpha, tSox17beta, tFoxA1, tHex, and tCerberus, which lack
the redundant copies that are found in laevis. In situ hybridization analysis has
revealed identical expression patterns between the orthologous tropicalis and
laevis endoderm genes, thus suggesting conserved genetic functions. Furthermore, 
we noted that the smaller tropicalis embryos gave better probe penetration than
in laevis whole-mount in situ hybridizations-allowing us to visualize transcripts
in the deep endoderm in tropicalis, which is difficult in laevis. This study
illustrates how an entire genetic pathway can be quickly transferred from laevis 
to tropicalis due to high sequence conservation between the sister species and
the large number of tropicalis-expressed sequence tags that are now available.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12508233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mech Dev. 2002 Dec;119(2):191-200.

Xhex-expressing endodermal tissues are essential for anterior patterning in
Xenopus.

Smithers LE(1), Jones CM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Cancer Research, 237
Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

Two regions expressing Hex in the early gastrula contribute to organizing the
anterior of the vertebrate embryo. In Xenopus, these include the anterior yolky
endoderm and the suprablastoporal endoderm (SBE), which is fated to form the
epithelial lining of the gut. These tissues may correspond to the anterior
visceral endoderm and anterior definitive endoderm of amniotes. Genetic studies
in mice have demonstrated the important roles of these tissues in producing
anterior identity in the adjacent neural ectoderm. In Xenopus, both the anterior 
endoderm and the SBE have anterior inducing properties; furthermore, the SBE can 
organize a full anterior-posterior axis. Inhibition of Xhex function shows that
both these Xhex-expressing endodermal tissues are required for anterior
development in Xenopus.

PMID: 12464432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Immunology. 2002 Dec;107(4):444-51.

Down-regulation of the myeloid homeobox protein Hex is essential for normal
T-cell development.

Mack DL(1), Leibowitz DS, Cooper S, Ramsey H, Broxmeyer HE, Hromas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, the Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University
Medical Center, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The haematopoietic homeobox gene Hex (also called Prh) is expressed in myeloid
cells and B cells but not T cells. To investigate whether Hex levels might play a
role in myeloid versus T-cell development, two types of transgenic mouse lines
were constructed, each with ectopic expression of Hex in T cells (CD11a/Hex and
Lck/Hex). Both these types of transgenic mouse had the same defects in T-cell
maturation, indicating that proper T-cell development may be dependent not just
on the up-regulation of lymphoid-specific transcriptional regulators but also on 
the co-ordinated down-regulation of myeloid-specific transcriptional regulators
such as Hex. In addition, Hex over-expression significantly increased myeloid
progenitor cycling, which may explain its role in retrovirally induced murine
leukaemia.

PMCID: PMC1782816
PMID: 12460189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mech Dev. 2002 Oct;118(1-2):147-55.

Prox1 is an early specific marker for the developing liver and pancreas in the
mammalian foregut endoderm.

Burke Z(1), Oliver G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 N.
Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Although important progress has been made recently in the elucidation of the
molecular mechanisms that regulate differentiation and morphogenesis of
endoderm-derived tissues such as pancreas and liver, less is known about the
preliminary steps of early regional specification. Recent evidence supports the
proposal that the early endoderm contains a bipotential precursor cell type for
pancreas and liver. We have also previously shown that the activity of the
homeobox gene Prox1 controls hepatocyte migration during liver morphogenesis.
Using detailed comparative analysis of whole embryos and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction of dissected embryonic endoderm, we have now determined
that in the early endoderm, Prox1 expression is restricted to regions giving rise
to the mammalian pancreas and liver. This finding indicates that Prox1 is one of 
the earliest specific markers of this commonly fated region of the mammalian
endoderm.

PMID: 12351178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):45435-41. Epub 2002 Sep 20.

Regulation of Hex gene expression by a Smads-dependent signaling pathway.

Zhang W(1), Yatskievych TA, Cao X, Antin PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Arizona, Tucson 85724,
USA.

The homeobox gene Hex is expressed in multiple cell types during embryogenesis
and is required for liver and monocyte development. Hex is expressed in the
foregut region of late gastrula avian and mammalian embryos in a pattern that
overlaps with expression of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). Here we
investigate the relationship between BMP signaling and Hex gene expression. We
find that Hex expression in avian anterior lateral endoderm is regulated by
autocrine BMP signaling. Characterization of the mouse Hex gene promoter
identified a 71-nucleotide BMP-responsive element (BRE) that is required for
up-regulation of Hex by an activated BMP signaling pathway. The Hex BRE binds
Smad4 and Smad1-Smad4 complexes in vitro, and in transfection assays, it is
responsive to Smad1 and Smad4 but not to Smad2 and Smad4 or Smad3 and Smad4. The 
BRE contains two copies of a GCCGnCGC-like motif that in Drosophila is the
binding site for Mad and Madea followed by two CAGAG boxes that are similar to
sequences required for transforming growth factor-beta/activin responsiveness of 
several vertebrate genes. Mutation of the GC elements, but not the two CAGAG
boxes, abolishes Smads responsiveness in the intact Hex promoter, whereas
mutations in both the GC elements and CAGAG boxes show that they act
cooperatively to confer Smads responsiveness to the Hex promoter. The Hex BRE can
confer Smads responsiveness to a heterologous promoter, and in this context, both
the GC-rich elements and the CAGAG boxes are required for Smads-dependent
promoter activity. An element almost identical to the Hex BRE is present within
the BMP-responsive Nkx2-5 gene promoter, suggesting that the Hex BRE represents a
common response element for genes regulated by BMP signaling in the foregut
region of the embryo.

PMID: 12270938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Dev Cell. 2002 Aug;3(2):171-81.

Formation of multiple hearts in mice following deletion of beta-catenin in the
embryonic endoderm.

Lickert H(1), Kutsch S, Kanzler B, Tamai Y, Taketo MM, Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute for Immunobiology,
Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Using Cre/loxP, we conditionally inactivated the beta-catenin gene in cells of
structures that exhibit important embryonic organizer functions: the visceral
endoderm, the node, the notochord, and the definitive endoderm. Mesoderm
formation was not affected in the mutant embryos, but the node was missing,
patterning of the head and trunk was affected, and no notochord or somites were
formed. Surprisingly, deletion of beta-catenin in the definitive endoderm led to 
the formation of multiple hearts all along the anterior-posterior (A/P) axis of
the embryo. Ectopic hearts developed in parallel with the normal heart in regions
of ectopic Bmp2 expression. We provide evidence that ablation of beta-catenin in 
embryonic endoderm changes cell fate from endoderm to precardiac mesoderm,
consistent with the existence of bipotential mesendodermal progenitors in mouse
embryos.

PMID: 12194849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Int J Dev Biol. 2002;46(4):483-92.

Developmental biology of zebrafish myeloid cells.

Crowhurst MO(1), Layton JE, Lieschke GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Victoria, 
Australia.

The zebrafish (Danio rerio) has emerged as an informative vertebrate model for
developmental studies, particularly those employing genetic approaches such as
mutagenesis and screening. Zebrafish myelopoiesis has recently been
characterized, paving the way for the experimental strengths of this model
organism to contribute to an improved understanding of the genetic regulation of 
myeloid development. Zebrafish have a multi-lineage myeloid compartment with two 
types of granulocyte (heterophil/neutrophil and eosinophil granulocytes), and
monocyte/macrophages, each with characteristic morphological features and
histochemical staining properties. Molecular markers have been characterised for 
various myeloid cell types and their precursor cells, for example: stem cells
(scl, hhex, lmo2), myeloid lineage precursors (spi1/pu.1, c/ebp1), heterophil
granulocytes (mpx/mpo), macrophages (L-plastin, fms). In zebrafish, the sites of 
early myeloid and erythroid commitment are anatomically separated, being located 
in the rostral and caudal lateral plate mesoderm respectively. Functional
macrophages appear before cells displaying granulocytic markers. By the second
day of life, cells expressing granulocyte- and macrophage-specific genes are
scattered throughout the embryo, but tend to aggregate in the ventral venous
plexus, which may be a site of their production or a preferred site for their
residence. Even in early embryos, macrophages are phagocytically active, and
granulocytes participate in acute inflammation. Equipped with an understanding of
the developmental biology of these various myeloid cells and a set of tools for
their identification and functional study, we will now be able to exploit the
experimental strengths of this model organism to better understand the genetic
regulation of myelopoiesis.

PMID: 12141435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Mar;87(3):1376-83.

Expression and localization of the homeodomain-containing protein HEX in human
thyroid tumors.

D'Elia AV(1), Tell G, Russo D, Arturi F, Puglisi F, Manfioletti G, Gattei V, Mack
DL, Cataldi P, Filetti S, Di Loreto C, Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, 33100
Udine, Italy.

Homeobox genes are involved in neoplastic transformation of both epithelial and
hemopoietic tissues. The divergent homeobox gene HEX is expressed in the anterior
visceral endoderm during early mouse development and in some adult tissues of
endodermal origin, including liver and thyroid. Whereas a role in leukemyogenesis
has been proposed already, few data are available on the involvement of HEX in
human epithelial tumors. Herein, we analyzed HEX expression and subcellular
localization in a series of 55 human thyroid tumors and in several tumoral cell
lines. HEX mRNA was detected by RT-PCR either in normal tissues or in thyroid
adenomas and differentiated (papillary and follicular) carcinomas. HEX mRNA was
also expressed in most undifferentiated carcinomas. Subcellular localization of
HEX protein was investigated by immunohistochemistry. In normal tissues and
adenomas, HEX protein was present both in nucleus and cytoplasm. In contrast,
both differentiated and undifferentiated carcinomas, as well as the tumoral cell 
lines investigated, showed HEX protein only in the cytoplasm. These findings
suggest that regulation of HEX entry in the nucleus of thyrocytes may represent a
critical step during human thyroid tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11889211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Biochem. 2001 Dec;130(6):885-91.

Sp family members stimulate transcription of the hex gene via interactions with
GC boxes.

Kikkawa E(1), Hinata M, Keng VW, Myint Z, Sato A, Yamada K, Tanaka T, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

The 5'-flanking region of the mouse Hex gene was examined in order to identify
transcription factors regulating its expression in hepatocytes and haematopoietic
cells. We have identified two further GC boxes (GC boxes 3 and 4 at nucleotide
positions -149 to -140 and -79 to -70, respectively), i.e. in addition to the two
previously determined ones (GC boxes 1 and 2 at nucleotide positions -197 to -188
and -176 to -167, respectively). Luciferase reporter assays revealed that all
four GC boxes are transcriptionally active in both MH(1)C(1) rat hepatoma and
K562 human chronic myelogenous leukemia cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays with specific competitors and antibodies showed that members of the Sp
family, namely Sp1 and Sp3, bind to these GC boxes. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3
in Drosophila SL2 cells stimulated transcription of the Hex gene through
interactions with GC boxes 1 to 4, Sp1 being a more potent activator than Sp3.
Thus, we conclude that Sp1 and Sp3 stimulate transcription of the Hex gene in
both MH(1)C(1) and K562 cells.

PMID: 11726291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;94(1-2):30-2.

Genomic organization and chromosome mapping of the human homeobox gene HHEX.

Morgutti M(1), Demori E, Pecile V, Amoroso A, Rustighi A, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Genetica Medica, IRCCS Burlo Garofalo, Trieste, Italy.

In the present study, we report the genomic reconstruction of the human
homeobox-containing gene HHEX by the use of the data available in public
databases. This analysis allowed characterization of the gene organization
showing that it is very similar to the mouse gene. Moreover the gene was mapped
using FISH to 10q24.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11701950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):43074-82. Epub 2001 Sep 10.

Functional interaction of Jun and homeodomain proteins.

Schaefer LK(1), Wang S, Schaefer TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We have used the yeast two-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with 
the N-terminal region of c-Jun, which is known to be involved in regulatory
interactions. One of the proteins identified is the homeodomain-containing
protein Hex. The Hex homeodomain is sufficient for interaction; moreover, the
homeodomains of several other transcription factors also interact. Mutations
within helix III of the Hex homeodomain greatly reduce the interaction. In vitro,
c-Jun/c-Fos, JunB/c-Fos, and JunD/c-Fos all interact with the Hex homeodomain
more strongly than the respective Jun proteins (or c-Fos) alone, suggesting that 
heterodimerization exposes reactive regions in the N termini of the Jun proteins.
In transfected cells, Hex expression inhibits Jun- or Jun/c-Fos-dependent
transcription of a reporter gene; the presence of Hex-binding sites in the
promoter enhances the inhibitory effect. Jun-dependent activation of
transcription from the basic fibroblast growth factor gene, previously shown to
be regulated by both Jun and homeodomain proteins, was also dramatically reduced 
by Hex expression. Furthermore, in contrast to the reduction of Jun-mediated
transcription by Hex, we found that expression of the Drosophila ultrabithorax
gene enhanced c-Jun-dependent transcription. We conclude that the functional
interaction between members of the Jun and homeodomain families of transcription 
factors could play a critical role in regulating developmental and
differentiation programs.

PMID: 11551904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Genesis. 2001 Jul;30(3):141-3.

Zebrafish hhex regulates liver development and digestive organ chirality.

Wallace KN(1), Yusuff S, Sonntag JM, Chin AJ, Pack M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

PMID: 11477693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Dev Biol. 2001 Jun 15;234(2):304-16.

Distinct enhancer elements control Hex expression during gastrulation and early
organogenesis.

Rodriguez TA(1), Casey ES, Harland RM, Smith JC, Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

In the mouse, embryological and genetic studies have indicated that two spatially
distinct signalling centres, the anterior visceral endoderm and the node and its 
derivatives, are required for the correct patterning of the anterior neural
ectoderm. The divergent homeobox gene Hex is expressed in the anterior visceral
endoderm, in the node (transiently), and in the anterior definitive endoderm.
Other sites of Hex expression include the liver and thyroid primordia and the
endothelial cell precursors. We have used transgenic analysis to map the
cis-acting regulatory elements controlling Hex expression during early mouse
development. A 4.2-kb upstream region is important for Hex expression in the
endothelial cell precursors, liver, and thyroid, and a 633-bp intronic fragment
is both necessary and sufficient for Hex expression in the anterior visceral
endoderm and the anterior definitive endoderm. These same regions drive
expression in homologous structures in Xenopus laevis, indicating conservation of
these regulatory regions in vertebrates. Analysis of the anterior visceral
endoderm/anterior definitive endoderm enhancer identifies a repressor region that
is required to downregulate Hex expression in the node once the anterior
definitive endoderm has formed. This analysis also reveals that the initiation of
Hex expression in the anterior visceral endoderm and axial mesendoderm requires
common elements, but maintenance of expression is regulated independently in
these tissues.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11397001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mech Dev. 2001 May;103(1-2):153-7.

Gene expression in the embryonic Xenopus liver.

Zorn AM(1), Mason J.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute of Cancer and Developmental Biology, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK. amz@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

In recent years, significant progress has been made in uncovering the molecular
basis of endoderm specification in Xenopus. Much less is understood, however,
about endodermal patterning and how endoderm-derived organs such as the liver are
formed. Progress has been hampered by the lack of good molecular markers of
presumptive liver tissue. Here, we have examined the embryonic expression of a
number of marker genes during liver organogenesis, including the transcription
factors hex, sox17alpha, and hnf3beta, as well as a number of proteins specific
to the adult liver. Interestingly, sox17alpha appears to specifically mark the
gall bladder precursors. At 7 days of development expression of the liver
differentiation markers albumin, alpha1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor,
fibrinogen, transferrin and transthyretin is restricted to the differentiating
liver bud. Surprisingly, however, at 3 days of development most of these genes
have a more widespread endodermal expression pattern. In addition to expression
in the undifferentiated liver bud they were expressed extensively throughout the 
presumptive intestinal tissue, which may reflect some general feature of how the 
hepatic gene program is developmentally regulated.

PMID: 11335125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Int J Dev Biol. 2001;45(1):327-36.

Getting your head around Hex and Hesx1: forebrain formation in mouse.

Martinez-Barbera JP(1), Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, National Institute for Medical Research,
London, England.

An increasing amount of evidence suggests that in mouse there are two signalling 
centres required for the formation of a complete neural axis: the anterior
visceral endoderm (AVE), and the node and its derivatives. Embryological and
genetic studies suggest that the AVE has a head-inducing activity. In contrast,
the node appears to act first as a head inducer in synergy with the AVE
initiating anterior neural patterning at early stages of mouse development, and
later, node derivatives are necessary for maintenance and embellishment of
anterior neural character. Hex and Hesx1 are homeobox genes that are expressed in
relevant tissues involved in anterior patterning. The analysis of the Hex and
Hesx1 mutant mice has revealed that the lack of these genes has little or no
effect on the early steps of anterior neural induction. However, both genes are
required subsequently for the proper expansion of the forebrain region. We
suggest that disturbance in the specification of an Fgf8 signalling centre in the
anterior neural ridge may account for the anterior defects observed in these
mutants.

PMID: 11291863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Circ Res. 2001 Jan 19;88(1):52-8.

Homeobox protein Hex induces SMemb/nonmuscle myosin heavy chain-B gene expression
through the cAMP-responsive element.

Sekiguchi K(1), Kurabayashi M, Oyama Y, Aihara Y, Tanaka T, Sakamoto H, Hoshino
Y, Kanda T, Yokoyama T, Shimomura Y, Iijima H, Ohyama Y, Nagai R.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2001 Jan 19;88(1):7-8.

Recent studies have shown that the homeobox gene Hex plays an important role in
inducing differentiation of vascular endothelial cells. In this study, we
examined the expression of Hex in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in vitro
and in vivo. Immunohistochemistry showed a marked induction of Hex protein in
neointimal VSMCs after balloon injury in rat aorta. Western and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analyses demonstrated that Hex was
abundantly expressed in cultured VSMCs, whereas it was undetectable in other cell
types or in normal aorta. The expression pattern of Hex was similar to that of
SMemb/NMHC-B, a nonmuscle isoform of myosin heavy chain that we have previously
reported to be a molecular marker of dedifferentiated VSMCs. We next examined the
role of Hex in SMemb gene transcription. Promoter analysis demonstrated that the 
sequence identical to consensus cAMP-responsive element (CRE) located at -481 of 
the SMemb promoter was critical for Hex responsiveness. Mutant Hex expression
vector, which lacks the homeodomain, failed to stimulate SMemb gene
transcription, suggesting the requirement of the homeodomain for its
transactivation. Elecrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that Hex binds to a
consensus binding sequence for homeobox proteins, but not to CRE. Cotransfection 
of protein kinase A expression vector increased the ability of Hex to stimulate
SMemb promoter activity in a CRE-dependent manner. Overexpression of CRE binding 
protein (CREB), but not Mut-CREB which contains mutation at Ser133, strongly
activated Hex-induced SMemb promoter activity. These results suggest that Hex
mediates transcriptional induction of the SMemb/NMHC-B gene via its homeodomain, 
and Hex can function as a transcriptional modulator of CRE-dependent
transcription in VSMCs.

PMID: 11139473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Dec 19;97(26):14388-93.

Gene expression profiles in normal and Otx2-/- early gastrulating mouse embryos.

Zakin L(1), Reversade B, Virlon B, Rusniok C, Glaser P, Elalouf JM, Brulet P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Embyologie Moléculaire, Unité de Recherche Associée 1947, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, and Laboratoire de Génomique des
Microorganismes Pathogènes, Institut Pasteur, 25 Rue du Docteur Roux, 75724,
Paris Cedex 15, France.

The mouse Otx2 gene is a homeobox transcription factor required as early as
gastrulation for the proper development of the head. We compared gene expression 
profiles in wild-type and Otx2(-/-) 6.5 days postcoitum embryos by using a serial
analysis of gene expression assay adapted to microdissected structures. Among a
broader list, the study of six genes found to be differentially expressed allows 
defining a role for Otx2 in the orchestration of cell movements leading to the
adequate organization of the embryo before gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC18928
PMID: 11114168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Leuk Res. 2000 Dec;24(12):1023-31.

The homeodomain protein PRH influences the differentiation of haematopoietic
cells.

Jayaraman PS(1), Frampton J, Goodwin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, University Walk, BS8 1TD,
Bristol, UK. sheela.jayaraman@bristol.ac.uk

Haematopoiesis involves the differentiation of a self-renewing stem cell into all
of the lineages found in circulating blood. Myb-Ets transformed chicken
blastoderm cells (MEPs) have many of the characteristics of multipotent
haematopoietic cells and represent a useful model system for the study of
haematopoiesis. The proline-rich homeodomain protein (PRH) has previously been
shown to be expressed in the haematopoietic compartment. In this report we show
that PRH mRNA and protein levels are down regulated as MEPs differentiate along
the myelomonocytic and erythrocytic lineages. In contrast, PRH mRNA and protein
levels remain high as MEPs differentiate toward the thrombocytic lineage.
Over-expression of full length PRH in MEPs inhibits their transformation and/or
proliferation. However, the over-expression of N-terminally truncated PRH
proteins results in normally proliferating cells that are predominantly
differentiated along the myelomonocytic and eosinophilic lineages. These results 
suggest that PRH plays a role in the proliferation and differentiation of
haematopoietic cells.

PMID: 11077116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Pediatr Res. 2000 Nov;48(5):634-8.

Immunocytochemical characterization of murine Hex, a homeobox-containing protein.

Ghosh B(1), Ganea GR, Denson LA, Iannucci R, Jacobs HC, Bogue CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

A polyclonal antibody against a glutathione S:-transferase fusion protein
containing the 76 COOH-terminal amino acids of Hex, a divergent homeobox gene,
was raised in rabbits. Western blot and immunofluorescence reveal that Hex is a
35-37-kD soluble protein present both in the nucleus and cytoplasm of transfected
and nontransfected cultured cells as well as in whole mouse embryo. Confocal
microscopy of whole mount immunostained mouse embryos at E7. 5 and E8.5
demonstrates that Hex is differentially localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus of
definitive endoderm, developing blood islands, and hepatic diverticulum. In
particular, in the region of the foregut that gives rise to the liver, Hex
expression is nuclear in the endodermal cells of the hepatic diverticulum,
whereas expression is primarily cytoplasmic in cells lateral to the liver-forming
region. This suggests that nuclear localization of Hex is involved in early
hepatic specification and that compartmentalization of Hex protein plays an
important role in its function during mouse development.

PMID: 11044484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Oct 5;276(3):1155-61.

Homeobox gene Hex is essential for onset of mouse embryonic liver development and
differentiation of the monocyte lineage.

Keng VW(1), Yagi H, Ikawa M, Nagano T, Myint Z, Yamada K, Tanaka T, Sato A,
Muramatsu I, Okabe M, Sato M, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601,
Japan.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000 Dec 20;279(2):739.

Disruption of the mouse Hex gene resulted in embryonic lethality around embryonic
age (E) 10.5, due to no substantial liver formation. Expression of albumin was
detectable in heterozygous (Hex(+/-)) but not in homozygous (Hex(-/-))
[corrected] embryos at E8.5. Instead of liver bud formation at E9.5, a liver-like
capsule structure was observed in Hex(-/-) [corrected] embryos. In Hex(-/-)
[corrected] mutant liver, we found no hepatocytes but no signs of apoptotic cell 
death in the area. Expression of transcription factors involved in hepatocyte
differentiation, hepatocyte nuclear factor (Hnf)3beta, Hnf6, Hnf4alpha and
Hnf1alpha, were restricted to the capsule and internal matrix-like structure in
the mutant liver and expression of a subset of these factors were reduced.
Hematopoiesis of monocytes was impaired in mutant embryos while erythroid lineage
was unaffected. These results indicate that Hex plays an essential role in
progenitor cells which commit to the hepatic endoderm and in the hematopoietic
differentiation of the monocyte lineage.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11027604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4303-13.

Hhex and scl function in parallel to regulate early endothelial and blood
differentiation in zebrafish.

Liao W(1), Ho CY, Yan YL, Postlethwait J, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA.

During embryogenesis, endothelial and blood precursors are hypothesized to arise 
from a common progenitor, the hemangioblast. Several genes that affect the
differentiation of, or are expressed early in, both the endothelial and blood
lineages may in fact function at the level of the hemangioblast. For example, the
zebrafish cloche mutation disrupts the differentiation of both endothelial and
blood cells. The transcription factor gene scl is expressed in both endothelial
and blood lineages from an early stage and can regulate their differentiation.
Here we report that in zebrafish the homeobox gene hhex (previously called hex)
is also expressed in endothelial and blood lineages from an early stage. We find 
that hhex expression in these lineages is significantly reduced in cloche mutant 
embryos, indicating that hhex functions downstream of cloche to regulate
endothelial and blood differentiation. Ectopic expression of hhex through
injection of a DNA construct leads to the premature and ectopic expression of
early endothelial and blood differentiation genes such as fli1, flk1 and gata1,
indicating that Hhex can positively regulate endothelial and blood
differentiation. However, analysis of a hhex deficiency allele shows that hhex is
not essential for early endothelial and blood differentiation, suggesting that
another gene, perhaps scl, compensates for the absence of Hhex function.
Furthermore, we find that hhex and scl can induce each other's expression,
suggesting that these two genes cross-regulate each other during early
endothelial and blood differentiation. Together, these data provide the initial
framework of a pathway that can be used to further integrate the molecular events
regulating hemangioblast differentiation.

PMID: 11003831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Dev Dyn. 2000 Sep;219(1):84-9.

Hex expression suggests a role in the development and function of organs derived 
from foregut endoderm.

Bogue CW(1), Ganea GR, Sturm E, Ianucci R, Jacobs HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8064, USA. clifford.bogue@yale.edu

Hex is a divergent homeobox gene expressed as early as E4.5 in the mouse and in a
pattern that suggests a role in anterior-posterior patterning. Later in
embryogenesis, Hex is expressed in the developing thyroid, lung, and liver. We
now show Hex expression during thymus, gallbladder, and pancreas development and 
in the adult thyroid, lung, and liver. At E10.0, Hex is expressed in the 3rd
pharyngeal pouch, from which the thymus originates, the endodermal cells of liver
that are invading the septum transversum, the thyroid, the dorsal pancreatic bud,
and gallbladder primoridum. At E13.5, expression is maintained at high levels in 
the thyroid, liver, epithelial cells lining the pancreatic and extrahepatic
biliary ducts and is present in both the epithelial and mesenchymal cells of the 
lung. Expression in the thymus at this age is less than in the other organs. In
the E16.5 embryo, expression persists in the thyroid, pancreatic, and bile duct
epithelium, lung, and liver, with thymic expression dropping to barely detectable
levels. By E18.5, expression in the thyroid and bile ducts remains high, whereas 
lung expression is markedly decreased. At this age, expression in the pancreas
and thymus is no longer present. Finally, we show the cell types in the adult
thyroid, lung, and liver that express Hex in the mature animal. Our results
provide more detail on the potential role of Hex in the development of several
organs derived from foregut endoderm and in the maintenance of function of
several of these organs in the mature animal.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10974674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2000 Aug;279(2):G347-55.

Divergent homeobox gene hex regulates promoter of the Na(+)-dependent bile acid
cotransporter.

Denson LA(1), Karpen SJ, Bogue CW, Jacobs HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8064, USA.

The divergent homeobox gene Hex is expressed in both developing and mature liver.
A putative Hex binding site was identified in the promoter region of the
liver-specific Na(+)-bile acid cotransporter gene (ntcp), and we hypothesized
that Hex regulates the ntcp promoter through this site. Successive 5'-deletions
of the ntcp promoter in a luciferase reporter construct transfected into Hep G2
cells confirmed a Hex response element (HRE) within the ntcp promoter (nt
-733/-714). Moreover, p-CMHex transactivated a heterologous promoter construct
containing HRE multimers (p4xHRELUC), whereas a 5-bp mutation of the core HRE
eliminated transactivation. A dominant negative form of Hex (p-Hex-DN) suppressed
basal luciferase activity of p-4xHRELUC and inhibited activation of this
construct by p-CMHex. Interestingly, p-CMHex transactivated the HRE in Hep G2
cells but not in fibroblast-derived COS cells, suggesting the possibility that
Hex protein requires an additional liver cell-specific factor(s) for full
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays confirmed that liver and Hep G2
cells contain a specific nuclear protein that binds the native HRE. We have
demonstrated that the liver-specific ntcp gene promoter is the first known target
of Hex and is a useful tool for evaluating function of the Hex protein.

PMID: 10915644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mol Hum Reprod. 2000 Aug;6(8):707-11.

Transcription of homeobox-containing genes detected in cDNA libraries derived
from human unfertilized oocytes and preimplantation embryos.

Adjaye J(1), Monk M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Molecular Embryology Unit, Institute of Child Health,
30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Genes containing the evolutionarily conserved homeodomain sequence encode a
family of DNA-binding transcription factors whose functions are crucial for
embryonic development in vertebrates, invertebrates and plants. We describe the
detection and analysis of transcripts of homeobox-containing genes present in
cDNA libraries generated from human unfertilized oocytes, single cleavage stage
embryos (2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell and blastocyst) and a 10-week old whole fetus.
Using degenerate primers derived from sequences within helix 1 and helix 3 of the
highly conserved region of the ANTENNAPEDIA:-class homeodomain, a 166 bp band was
detected in all the cDNA libraries tested. Subcloning of the oocyte-derived band 
revealed that it contained a heterogeneous group of 166 bp fragments. Sequence
analysis of 40 independent clones demonstrated the presence of HOXA7, HOXD8, and 
HOXD1 sequences, the ubiquitously expressed POU family member, OCT1, and HEX, a
homeotic gene expressed in haematopoietic cells.

PMID: 10908280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jul 1;28(13):2503-11.

Expression and function of the homeodomain-containing protein Hex in thyroid
cells.

Pellizzari L(1), D'Elia A, Rustighi A, Manfioletti G, Tell G, Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, Italy.

The homeodomain-containing protein Hex (also named Prh) is expressed in primitive
endoderm (during the early phases of development), in some endoderm-derived
tissues and in endothelial and hematopoietic precursors. Hex expression is
exting-uished during terminal differentiation of endothelial and hematopoietic
cells as well as in adult lung. Previous investigations have demonstrated that
Hex is expressed during early thyroid gland development. No information has been 
reported on Hex expression in adult thyroid gland or on the function of this
protein in follicular thyroid cells. These issues represent the focus of the
present study. We demonstrate that Hex mRNA is present in rat and human adult
thyroid gland as well as in differentiated follicular thyroid cell lines. In
FRTL-5 cells TSH reduces Hex expression. In thyroid cell lines transformed by
several oncogenes Hex expression is completely abolished. By using
co-transfection assays we demonstrate that Hex is a repressor of the
thyroglobulin promoter and that it is able to abolish the activating effects of
both TTF-1 and Pax8. These data would suggest that Hex may play an important role
in thyroid cell differentiation. Protein-DNA interaction experiments indicate
that Hex is able to bind sites of the thyroglobulin promoter containing either
the core sequence 5'-TAAT-3' or 5'-CAAG-3'. The DNA binding specificity of the
Hex homeodomain, therefore, is more 'relaxed' than that observed in the majority 
of other homeo-domains.

PMCID: PMC102703
PMID: 10871399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2433-45.

The homeobox gene Hex is required in definitive endodermal tissues for normal
forebrain, liver and thyroid formation.

Martinez Barbera JP(1), Clements M, Thomas P, Rodriguez T, Meloy D, Kioussis D,
Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

The homeobox gene Hex is expressed in the anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) and
rostral definitive endoderm of early mouse embryos. Later, Hex transcripts are
detected in liver, thyroid and endothelial precursor cells. A null mutation was
introduced into the Hex locus by homologous recombination in embryonic stem
cells. Hex mutant embryos exhibit varying degrees of anterior truncation as well 
as liver and thyroid dysplasia. The liver diverticulum is formed but migration of
hepatocytes into the septum transversum fails to occur. Development of the
thyroid is arrested at the thyroid bud stage at 9.5 dpc. Brain defects are
restricted to the rostral forebrain and have a caudal limit at the zona limitans 
intrathalamica, the boundary between dorsal and ventral thalamus. Analysis of
Hex(-/-) mutants at early stages shows that the prospective forebrain ectoderm is
correctly induced and patterned at 7.5 days post coitum (dpc), but subsequently
fails to develop. AVE markers are expressed and correctly positioned but
development of rostral definitive endoderm is greatly disturbed in Hex(-/-)
embryos. Chimeric embryos composed of Hex(-/-) cells developing within a
wild-type visceral endoderm show forebrain defects indicating that Hex is
required in the definitive endoderm. All together, these results demonstrate that
Hex function is essential in definitive endoderm for normal development of the
forebrain, liver and thyroid gland.

PMID: 10804184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2303-15.

Hex is a transcriptional repressor that contributes to anterior identity and
suppresses Spemann organiser function.

Brickman JM(1), Jones CM, Clements M, Smith JC, Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Mammalian Development and Developmental Biology, National
Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

One of the earliest markers of anterior asymmetry in vertebrate embryos is the
transcription factor Hex. We find that Hex is a transcriptional repressor that
can be converted to an activator by fusing full length Hex to two copies of the
minimal transcriptional activation domain of VP16 together with the flexible
hinge region of the (lambda) repressor (Hex-(lambda)VP2). Retention of the entire
Hex open reading frame allows one to examine Hex function without disrupting
potential protein-protein interactions. Expression of Hex-(lambda)VP2 in Xenopus 
inhibits expression of the anterior marker Cerberus and results in anterior
truncations. Such embryos have multiple notochords and disorganised muscle
tissue. These effects can occur in a cell non-autonomous manner, suggesting that 
one role of wild-type Hex is to specify anterior structures by suppressing
signals that promote dorsal mesoderm formation. In support of this idea,
over-expression of wild-type Hex causes cell non-autonomous
dorso-anteriorization, as well as cell autonomous suppression of dorsal mesoderm.
Suppression of dorsal mesoderm by Hex is accompanied by the down-regulation of
Goosecoid and Chordin, while induction of dorsal mesoderm by Hex-(lambda)VP2
results in activation of these genes. Transient transfection experiments in ES
cells suggest that Goosecoid is a direct target of Hex. Together, our results
support a model in which Hex suppresses organiser activity and defines anterior
identity.

PMID: 10804173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Gene. 2000 Apr 4;246(1-2):311-20.

HNF3beta and GATA-4 transactivate the liver-enriched homeobox gene, Hex.

Denson LA(1), McClure MH, Bogue CW, Karpen SJ, Jacobs HC.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. lee.denson@yale.edu

The orphan homeobox gene, Hex, has a limited domain of expression which includes 
the developing and adult mouse liver. Hex is expressed in the developing liver
coincident with the forkhead/winged helix transcription factor, Hepatocyte
Nuclear Factor 3beta (HNF3beta). Although preliminary characterization of the
mouse Hex promoter has recently been reported, the identity of the molecular
regulators that drive liver expression is not known. We hypothesized that
putative HNF3beta and GATA-4 elements within the Hex promoter would confer
liver-enriched expression. A series of Hex promoter-driven luciferase reporter
constructs were transfected in liver-derived HepG2 and fibroblast-like Cos
cells+/-HNF3beta or GATA expression plasmids. The Hex promoter region from nt
-235/+22 conferred basal activity in both HepG2 and Cos cells, with the region
from -103/+22 conferring liver-enriched activity. HNF3beta and GATA-4
transactivated the promoter via response elements located within nt -103/+22,
whereas Sp1 activated the -235/+22 construct. Mutation of the HNF3 element
significantly reduced promoter activity in HepG2 cells, whereas this element in
isolation conferred HNF3beta responsiveness to a heterologous promoter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed to confirm transcription
factor:DNA binding. We conclude that HNF3beta and GATA-4 contribute to
liver-enriched expression of Hex.

PMID: 10767553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 11;18(47):6531-9.

Activation of Hex and mEg5 by retroviral insertion may contribute to mouse B-cell
leukemia.

Hansen GM(1), Justice MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

AKXD recombinant inbred mice develop a variety of leukemias and lymphomas due to 
retrovirally mediated insertional activation of cellular proto-oncogenes. We
describe a new retroviral insertion site that is the most frequent genetic
alteration in AKXD B-cell leukemias. Multiple genes flank the site of viral
insertion, but the expression of just two, Hex and mEg5, is significantly
upregulated. Hex is a divergent homeobox gene that is transiently expressed in
many hematopoietic lineages, suggesting an involvement in cellular
differentiation. mEg5 is a member of the bim-C subfamily of kinesin related
proteins that are necessary for spindle formation and stabilization during
mitosis. Our data provide the first genetic evidence for the activation of these 
genes in leukemia, and suggest that unscheduled expression of Hex and mEg5
contributes to the development of B-cell leukemia. In addition, this work
highlights the use of genomic approaches for the study of position effect
mutations.

PMID: 10597256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Curr Biol. 1999 Oct 7;9(19):1131-4.

A role for the extraembryonic yolk syncytial layer in patterning the zebrafish
embryo suggested by properties of the hex gene.

Ho CY(1), Houart C, Wilson SW, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics University of California at San
Francisco San Francisco, California, 94143-0448, USA.

Recent studies in mouse suggest that the extraembryonic endoderm has an important
role in early embryonic patterning [1]. To analyze whether similar mechanisms
operate in other vertebrates, we cloned the zebrafish homologue of Hex, a
homeobox gene that is expressed asymmetrically in the mouse visceral endoderm
[2]. Early expression of zebrafish hex is restricted to the dorsal portion of the
yolk syncytial layer (YSL), an extraembryonic tissue. By the onset of
gastrulation, hex is expressed in the entire dorsal half of the YSL, which
directly underlies the cells fated to form the neural plate. We show that hex
expression is initially regulated by the maternal Wnt pathway and later by a
Bmp-mediated pathway. Overexpression experiments of wild-type and chimeric Hex
constructs indicate that Hex functions as a transcriptional repressor and its
overexpression led to the downregulation of bmp2b and wnt8 expression and the
expansion of chordin expression. These findings provide further evidence that the
zebrafish YSL is the functional equivalent of the mouse visceral endoderm and
that extraembryonic structures may regulate early embryonic patterning in many
vertebrates.

PMID: 10531010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Curr Biol. 1999 Sep 9;9(17):946-54.

An anterior signalling centre in Xenopus revealed by the homeobox gene XHex.

Jones CM(1), Broadbent J, Thomas PQ, Smith JC, Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, NW7 1AA, UK. jonesm@icr.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Signals from anterior endodermal cells that express the homeobox gene
Hex initiate development of the most rostral tissues of the mouse embryo. The
dorsal/anterior endoderm of the Xenopus gastrula, which expresses Hex and the
putative head-inducing gene cerberus, is proposed to be equivalent to the mouse
anterior endoderm. Here, we report the origin and signalling properties of this
population of cells in the early Xenopus embryo.
RESULTS: Xenopus anterior endoderm was found to derive in part from cells at the 
centre of the blastocoel floor that express XHex, the Xenopus cognate of Hex.
Like their counterparts in the mouse embryo, these Hex-expressing blastomeres
moved to the dorsal side of the Xenopus embryo as gastrulation commenced, and
populated deep endodermal adjacent to Spemann's organiser. Experiments involving 
the induction of secondary axes confirmed that XHex expression was associated
with anterior development. Ventral misexpression of XHex induced ectopic cerberus
expression and conferred anterior signalling properties to the endoderm. Unlike
the effect of misexpressing cerberus, these signals could not neuralise overlying
ectoderm.
CONCLUSIONS: XHex expression reveals the unexpected origin of an anterior
signalling centre in Xenopus, which arises in part from the centre of the
blastula and localises to the deep endoderm adjacent to Spemann's organiser.
Signals originating from these endodermal cells impart an anterior identity to
the overlying ectoderm, but are insufficient for neural induction. The anterior
movement of Hex-expressing cells in both Xenopus and mouse embryos suggests that 
this process is a conserved feature of vertebrate development.

PMID: 10508583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mamm Genome. 1999 Oct;10(10):1023-5.

Genomic structure, cDNA mapping, and chromosomal localization of the mouse
homeobox gene, Hex.

Ghosh B(1), Jacobs HC, Wiedemann LM, Brown A, Bedford FK, Nimmakayalu MA, Ward
DC, Bogue CW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Critical Care and Applied Physiology, Department of Pediatrics,
Yale University School of Medicine, P.O. Box 208064, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8064, USA.

PMID: 10501975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Dev Biol. 1999 May 15;209(2):282-97.

Anterior endomesoderm specification in Xenopus by Wnt/beta-catenin and TGF-beta
signalling pathways.

Zorn AM(1), Butler K, Gurdon JB.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute of Cancer and Developmental Biology, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK. amz@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

In Xenopus, XHex and cerberus are early marker genes of the anterior endomesoderm
(AE), a subset of endoderm cells fated to form the liver and foregut and
implicated in head induction. Using XHex and cerberus as markers we have examined
the signals underlying AE induction. We show that the AE is specified by the
early blastula in the absence of mesodermal signals but that cell-cell contact
between presumptive AE cells is required. In overexpression experiments maternal 
Wnt/beta-catenin and TGF-beta signals (Vg1, Xnr1-2) can induce ectopic XHex and
cerberus. Inhibiting these pathways with dominant interfering signalling
components blocks endogenous XHex and cerberus expression. We assess the role of 
signals from the organiser and show that the BMP antagonists noggin and chordin
are important for maintaining XHex and cerberus expression. Finally, ventral
injection of XHex mRNA can induce ectopic cerberus. Our results indicate that
endodermal and mesodermal patterning are closely coordinated and that the AE is
likely to be specified by the combined action of dorsal Wnt/beta-catenin signals 
and endoderm-specific factors mediated by TGF-beta signalling. These results
provide a starting point for understanding the molecular events underlying the
progressive determination of endodermally derived organs, such as the liver and
foregut.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10328921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biochem J. 1999 Apr 1;339 ( Pt 1):111-7.

cDNA cloning and expression of rat homeobox gene, Hex, and functional
characterization of the protein.

Tanaka T(1), Inazu T, Yamada K, Myint Z, Keng VW, Inoue Y, Taniguchi N, Noguchi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

We isolated two cDNA clones of rat Hex, a homeobox protein, studied its
expression in rat liver and various cells, and characterized the protein. The
levels of Hex mRNA were only slightly increased in liver of rats refed with a
high-carbohydrate diet or after partial hepatectomy. Whereas the expression of
Hex mRNA was detected in hepatocytes isolated from adult rat liver and also in
highly differentiated hepatoma cells, no Hex mRNA was detected in poorly
differentiated hepatoma cells. Hex mRNA was also detected in liver from embryo
aged 15 days. Expression of Hex was increased in F9 cells during differentiation 
into visceral endoderm cells by treatment with retinoic acid. This stimulation
occurred prior to an increase in the level of alpha-fetoprotein mRNA. When
fusion-protein expression vectors of GAL4 DNA-binding domain and Hex were
co-transfected with luciferase reporter plasmid, with or without five copies of
the GAL4-binding site, into HepG2 cells, the luciferase activities were decreased
in concentration- and GAL4-binding site-dependent manners. This repression did
not require the presence of the homeodomain, which is located between the amino
acid residues 137 and 196. Its repression domain was mapped between the residues 
45 and 136 in the proline-rich N-terminal region. In addition, the homeodomain
was responsible for DNA-binding of Hex. These results indicate that Hex functions
as a transcriptional repressor and may be involved in the differentiation and/or 
maintenance of the differentiated state in hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC1220134
PMID: 10085234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. FEBS Lett. 1998 Apr 17;426(2):183-6.

Expression of Hex mRNA in early murine postimplantation embryo development.

Keng VW(1), Fujimori KE, Myint Z, Tamamaki N, Nojyo Y, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Fukui Medical University, Japan.

The onset of Hex expression and its role in early murine development was analyzed
using in situ hybridization. Hex mRNA was first detected in the chorion of the
ectoplacental cavity and weakly at the visceral endoderm of the future yolk sac
at embryonic age (E) 7.5. Expression in embryonic tissues was detected
exclusively in the hepatic anlage and thyroid primordium at E 9.5. At E 12.5 and 
E 15.5, Hex expression persisted in the fetal liver and thyroid, and was also
detected in the fetal lung. These results suggest that Hex has its role in
differentiation and/or organogenesis of several embryonic tissues.

PMID: 9599004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Development. 1998 Jan;125(1):85-94.

Hex: a homeobox gene revealing peri-implantation asymmetry in the mouse embryo
and an early transient marker of endothelial cell precursors.

Thomas PQ(1), Brown A, Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)MRC National Institute for Medical Research, London, UK.

The divergent homeobox gene Hex exhibits three notable expression patterns during
early mouse development. Initially Hex is expressed in the primitive endoderm of 
the implanting blastocyst but by 5.5 dpc its transcripts are present only in a
small patch of visceral endoderm at the distal tip of the egg cylinder. Lineage
analysis shows that these cells move unilaterally to assume an anterior position 
while continuing to express Hex. The primitive streak forms on the opposite side 
of the egg cylinder from this anterior Hex expression domain approximately 24
hours after the initial anterior movement of the distal visceral endoderm. Thus, 
Hex expression marks the earliest unequivocal molecular anteroposterior asymmetry
in the mouse embryo and indicates that the anteroposterior axis of the embryo
develops from conversion of a proximodistal asymmetry established in the
primitive endoderm lineage. Subsequently, Hex is expressed in the earliest
definitive endoderm to emerge from the streak and its expression within the gut
strongly suggests that the ventral foregut is derived from the most anterior
definitive endoderm and that the liver is probably the most anterior gut
derivative. Hex is also an early marker of the thyroid primordium. Within the
mesoderm, Hex is transiently expressed in the nascent blood islands of the
visceral yolk sac and later in embryonic angioblasts and endocardium. Comparison 
with flk-1 (T. P. Yamaguchi et al., Development 118, 489-498, 1993) expression
indicates that Hex is also an early marker of endothelial precursors but its
expression in this progenitor population is much more transient than that of
flk-1, being downregulated once endothelial cell differentiation commences.

PMID: 9389666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mech Dev. 1997 Aug;66(1-2):83-93.

The XHex homeobox gene is expressed during development of the vascular
endothelium: overexpression leads to an increase in vascular endothelial cell
number.

Newman CS(1), Chia F, Krieg PA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin,
78712, USA.

The Hex/Prh homeobox gene is expressed in a subset of adult blood cell types and 
may play a role in the differentiation of the myeloid and B-cell lineages. In a
search for homeobox genes involved in cardiovascular development, we have
independently isolated a Xenopus laevis cDNA which appears to be the amphibian
orthologue of Hex/Prh. Based on high sequence similarity in a number of regions, 
particularly the critical homeobox, we have named this gene XHex. This
developmentally regulated gene is first expressed in the dorsal endomesoderm of
the gastrula stage embryo. This tissue goes on to contribute to the structures of
the embryonic liver and XHex continues to be expressed in the liver throughout
development. From the tailbud stage, XHex is expressed in vascular endothelial
cells throughout the developing vascular network. Vascular expression of XHex is 
transient and commences slightly after expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase
gene, flk-1, which is known to be essential for vascular development. This
observation raises the possibility that XHex is one of the transcription factors 
that responds to the VEGF/Flk-1 signal transduction pathway leading to
differentiation of vascular endothelial cells. XHex is unique amongst homeobox
genes in displaying expression in the endothelial layer throughout the developing
vasculature. Overexpression of XHex sequences in the frog embryo causes
disruption to developing vascular structures and an increase in the number of
vascular endothelial cells, suggesting a possible role in regulation of cell
proliferation.

PMID: 9376326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Blood. 1995 Mar 1;85(5):1237-45.

Differential expression of a novel proline-rich homeobox gene (Prh) in human
hematolymphopoietic cells.

Manfioletti G(1), Gattei V, Buratti E, Rustighi A, De Iuliis A, Aldinucci D,
Goodwin GH, Pinto A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica Chimica delle Macromolecole, Università 
di Trieste, Italy.

Proline-rich homeobox (Prh) is a novel human homeobox-containing gene recently
isolated from the CD34+ cell line KG-1A, and whose expression appears mainly
restricted to hematopoietic tissues. To define the pattern of Prh expression
within the human hematopoietic system, we have analyzed its constitutive
expression in purified cells obtained from normal hematopoietic tissues, its
levels of transcription in a number of leukemia/lymphoma cell lines representing 
different lineages and stages of hematolymphopoietic differentiation, and its
regulation during in vitro maturation of human leukemic cell lines. Prh
transcripts were not detected in leukemic cells of T-lymphoid lineage,
irrespective of their maturation stage, and in resting or activated normal T
cells from peripheral blood and lymphoid tissues. In contrast, high levels of Prh
expression were shown in cells representing early stages of B lymphoid
maturation, being maintained up to the level of circulating and tissue mature B
cells. Terminal B-cell differentiation appeared to be conversely associated with 
the deactivation of the gene, since preplasmacytic and plasmocytoma cell lines
were found not to express Prh mRNA. Prh transcripts were also shown in human cell
lines of early myelomonocytic, erythromegakaryocytic, and preosteoclast
phenotypes. Prh expression was lost upon in vitro differentiation of leukemic
cell lines into mature monocyte-macrophages and megakaryocytes, whereas it was
maintained or upregulated after induction of maturation to granulocytes and
osteoclasts. Accordingly, circulating normal monocytes did not display Prh mRNA, 
which was conversely detected at high levels in purified normal granulocytes. Our
data, which show that the acquisition of the differentiated phenotype is
associated to Prh downregulation in certain hematopoietic cells but not in
others, also suggest that a dysregulated expression of this gene might contribute
to the process of leukemogenesis within specific cell lineages.

PMID: 7858254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. FEBS Lett. 1994 May 30;345(2-3):93-8.

A homology-based molecular model of the proline-rich homeodomain protein Prh,
from haematopoietic cells.

Neidle S(1), Goodwin GH.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Biomolecular Structure Unit, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey,
UK.

A molecular structural model for the homeodomain of the haematopoietic protein
Prh together with its DNA recognition sequence, has been built using the known
crystal structure of the MAT alpha 2 homeodomain as a starting-point. The
modelling procedure used main and side-chain optimisations by means of molecular 
mechanics/simulated annealing procedures to obtain stereochemically plausible
geometries. The resulting structure has a number of specific interactions in both
major and minor grooves of the DNA that serve to define the consensus binding
sequence for Prh. In particular, the side-chain of glutamine 50 is postulated to 
be involved in hydrogen bonds to adjacent adenine and cytosine bases within the
consensus sequence.

PMID: 7911091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Nov 11;20(21):5661-7.

Identification of a novel vertebrate homeobox gene expressed in haematopoietic
cells.

Crompton MR(1), Bartlett TJ, MacGregor AD, Manfioletti G, Buratti E, Giancotti V,
Goodwin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Chester Beatty Laboratories, Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.

This paper describes the characterisation of a novel chicken homeobox gene, Prh, 
whose encoded homeodomain sequence differs significantly from those of other
factors which have been described. As expected, a portion of the encoded protein,
containing the homeodomain, is capable of sequence-specific DNA-binding. Outside 
the homeodomain, Prh, possesses an N-terminal region extremely rich in proline
residues and a C-terminal acidic portion, either of which may function as
transcription regulatory domains. Since, among the chicken tissues tested, its
transcription is restricted to haematopoietic cells, lung and liver, it may
function in tissue-specific patterns of gene regulation. Human and murine Prh
homologues have also been identified; so it is likely that such genes are a
general feature of vertebrate genomes.

PMCID: PMC334400
PMID: 1360645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


