
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Feb 15. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13318. [Epub ahead of
print]

Unique features associated with hepatic oxidative DNA damage and DNA methylation 
in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.

Nishida N(1), Yada N(1), Hagiwara S(1), Sakurai T(1), Kitano M(1), Kudo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kinki University Faculty of
Medicine, 377-2 Ohno-higashi, Osaka-sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is an increasing
cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Previously, we reported that DNA
oxidation induced epigenetic alteration of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) and
contributed to HCC emergence. Here, we examine the associations between
clinicopathological characteristics of NAFLD and advanced oxidative DNA damage
that is associated with TSG methylation in the NAFLD liver.
METHODS: Liver biopsies from 65 NAFLD patients were analyzed for
clinicopathological features and oxidative DNA damage using immunohistochemistry 
of 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG). Abnormal DNA methylation in the promoters of
6 TSGs, HIC1, GSTP1, SOCS1, RASSF1, CDKN2A, and APC, was examined using
MethyLight. Associations between clinicopathological characteristics, methylation
of TSGs, and accumulation of 8-OHdG were analyzed.
RESULTS: We found that aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase ratio,
the fibrosis-4 index, and serum a-fetoprotein (AFP) level were associated with
degree of 8-OHdG, and AFP was an independent factor among them (p = 0.0271).
Regarding pathological findings, hepatocellular ballooning and stage of fibrosis 
were also associated with oxidative DNA damage (p = 0.0021 and 0.0054);
ballooning was an independent risk for detecting high degree of 8-OHdG in
hepatocytes (odds ratio 7.38, 95% confidence interval 1.41-49.13, p = 0.0171).
Accumulation of methylated TSGs was significantly associated with deposition of
8-OHdG (p = 0.0362).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with high serum AFP and high degree of ballooning showed
accumulation of oxidative DNA damage that could be a seed of DNA methylation
responsible for hepatocarcinogenesis. These characteristics could be risk of HCC;
such patients require urgent intervention such as lifestyle modification. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26875698  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Leuk Res. 2016 Mar;42:68-74. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2016.01.004. Epub 2016 Jan
15.

Association between early promoter-specific DNA methylation changes and outcome
in older acute myeloid leukemia patients.

Achille NJ(1), Othus M(2), Phelan K(3), Zhang S(1), Cooper K(3), Godwin JE(4),
Appelbaum FR(5), Radich JP(5), Erba HP(6), Nand S(3), Zeleznik-Le NJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Institute, Loyola University Health Sciences Division,
Maywood, IL 60153, United States. (2)SWOG Statistical Center, Seattle, WA 98109, 
United States. (3)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, United States. (4)Earle A.
Chiles Research Institute, Providence Cancer Center, Portland, OR 97213, United
States. (5)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, United
States. (6)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Department of Medicine, University 
of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35294, United States. (7)Oncology Research Institute, 
Loyola University Health Sciences Division, Maywood, IL 60153, United States;
Division of Hematology & Oncology, Department of Medicine, Loyola University
Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, United States. Electronic address:
nzelezn@luc.edu.

Treatment options for older patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) range from
supportive care alone to full-dose chemotherapy. Identifying factors that predict
response to therapy may help increase efficacy and avoid toxicity. The phase II
SWOG S0703 study investigated the use of hydroxyurea and azacitidine with
gemtuzumab ozogamicin in the elderly AML population and found survival rates
similar to those expected with standard AML regimens, with less toxicity. As part
of this study, global DNA methylation along with promoter DNA methylation and
expression analysis of six candidate genes (CDKN2A, CDKN2B, HIC1, RARB, CDH1 and 
APAF1) were determined before and during therapy to investigate whether very
early changes are prognostic for clinical response. Global DNA methylation was
not associated with a clinical response. Samples after 3 or 4 days of treatment
with azacitidine showed significantly decreased CDKN2A promoter DNA methylation
in patients achieving complete remission (CR) compared to those who did not.
Samples from day 7 of treatment showed significantly decreased RARB, CDKN2B and
CDH1 promoter DNA methylation in responders compared to nonresponders.
Gene-specific DNA methylation analysis of peripheral blood samples may help early
identification of those older AML patients most likely to benefit from
demethylating agent therapy.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4779662 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26818573  [PubMed - in process]


3. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015 Dec 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Methylation of the Tumor Suppressor Genes HIC1 and RassF1A Clusters Independently
From the Methylation of Polycomb Target Genes in Colon Cancer.

Chen HC(1), Huang HY(1), Chen YL(2,)(3), Lee KD(4,)(5), Chu YR(4,)(5,)(6), Lin
PY(2), Hsu CC(6), Chu PY(7), Huang TH(8), Hsiao SH(6), Leu YW(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Changhua Christian
Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan. (2)Transplant Medicine & Surgery Research Centre,
Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan. (3)School of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, 
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, 
Taoyuan, Taiwan. (5)Chang Gung Institute of Technology, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Life Science, Human Epigenomics Center, Institute of Molecular
Biology and Institute of Biomedical Science, National Chung Cheng University,
Chia-Yi, Taiwan. (7)Department of Pathology, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital,
Changhua, Taiwan. (8)Department of Molecular Medicine and Institute of
Biotechnology, School of Medicine, Cancer Therapy and Research Center, The
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(9)Department of Life Science, Human Epigenomics Center, Institute of Molecular
Biology and Institute of Biomedical Science, National Chung Cheng University,
Chia-Yi, Taiwan. bioywl@ccu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Methylation changes within tumor suppressor (TS) genes or polycomb
group target (PcG) genes alter cell fates. Chromatin associated with PcG targets 
is bivalent in stem cells, while TS genes are not normally bivalent. PcG target
methylation changes have been identified in tumor stem cells, and abnormal
methylation is found in TS genes in cancers. If the epigenetic states of genes
influence DNA methylation, then methylation of PcG targets and TS genes may
evolve differently during cancer development. More importantly, methylation
changes may be part of a sequence in tumorigenesis.
METHODS: Chromatin and methylation states of 4 PcG targets and 2 TS genes were
determined in colon cancer cells. The methylation states were also detected in
100 pairs of colon cancer samples. Principle component analysis (PCA) was used to
reveal whether TS methylation or PcG methylation was the main methylation change 
associated with colon cancers.
RESULTS: Chromatin and methylation states differ in colon cancer cell lines. The 
methylation states within PcG targets clustered independently from the
methylation states in TS genes, a finding we previously reported in liver
cancers. PCA in colon cancers revealed the strongest association with methylation
changes in 2 TS genes, HIC1 and RassF1A. Loss of HIC1 methylation correlated with
decreased tumor migration.
CONCLUSIONS: PcG and TS methylation states cluster independently from each other.
The deduced principle component correlated better with TS methylation than PcG
methylation in colon cancer. Abnormal methylation changes may represent a
sequential biomarker profile to identify developing colon cancer.

PMID: 26671036  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Feb;1859(2):294-305. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.11.010. Epub 2015 Nov 24.

HDAC4 mediates IFN-<U+03B3> induced disruption of energy expenditure-related gene
expression by repressing SIRT1 transcription in skeletal muscle cells.

Fang M(1), Fan Z(2), Tian W(2), Zhao Y(2), Li P(2), Xu H(2), Zhou B(2), Zhang
L(3), Wu X(4), Xu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Pathophysiology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China; Department of Nursing, Jiangsu
Jiankang Vocational University, Nanjing, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Pathophysiology, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease,
Department of Pathophysiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
Electronic address: wxy@njmu.edu.cn. (5)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease,
Department of Pathophysiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
Electronic address: yxu2005@gmail.com.

Metabolic homeostasis is achieved through balanced energy storage and output.
Impairment of energy expenditure is a hallmark event in patients with obesity and
type 2 diabetes. Previously we have shown that the pro-inflammatory cytokine
interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) disrupts energy expenditure in skeletal muscle cells via
hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1)-class II transactivator (CIITA) dependent
repression of SIRT1 transcription. Here we report that repression of SIRT1
transcription by IFN-<U+03B3> paralleled loss of histone acetylation on the SIRT1
promoter region with simultaneous recruitment of histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4).
IFN-<U+03B3> activated HDAC4 in vitro and in vivo by up-regulating its expression and
stimulating its nuclear accumulation. HIC1 and CIITA recruited HDAC4 to the SIRT1
promoter and cooperated with HDAC4 to repress SIRT1 transcription. HDAC4
depletion by small interfering RNA or pharmaceutical inhibition normalized
histone acetylation on the SIRT1 promoter and restored SIRT1 expression in the
presence of IFN-<U+03B3>. Over-expression of HDAC4 suppressed the transcription of genes
involved in energy expenditure in a SIRT1-dependent manner. In contrast, HDAC4
knockdown/inhibition neutralized the effect of IFN-<U+03B3> on cellular metabolism by
normalizing SIRT1 expression. Therefore, our data reveal a role for HDAC4 in
regulating cellular energy output and as such provide insights into rationalized 
design of novel anti-diabetic therapeutics.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26619800  [PubMed - in process]


5. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):38151-65. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5832.

Epigenetic silencing of HIC1 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
drives progression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Li P(1), Liu X(2), Dong ZM(1), Ling ZQ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, 450052, China. (2)Zhejiang Cancer Research Institute,
Zhejiang Province Cancer Hospital, Zhejiang Cancer Center, Hangzhou 310022,
China.

Downregulation of the novel tumor suppressor gene HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer
1) occurs frequently in various tumors where it causes tumor progression and
metastasis. In this study, we investigated a role of HIC1 in esophageal squamous 
cell carcinoma (ESCC) and the underlying mechanisms. Downregulation of HIC1
occurred in approximately 70% of primary ESCCs at both mRNA and protein level
where it was associated significantly with vascular invasion, advanced clinical
stage, lymph node metastasis, and poor disease free survival (DFS). The promoter 
methylation analyses suggested that loss of HIC1 expression was mediated by
epigenetic mechanisms. Functional studies established that ectopic re-expression 
of HIC1 in ESCC cells inhibited cell proliferation, clonogenicity, cell motility,
tumor formation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Our results decipher
the mechanism through which HIC1 deficiency induce ESCC cells to undergo EMT and 
promote tumor progression and metastasis through activation of EphA2 signaling
pathway. Together, loss of the regulation of EphA2 pathway through HIC1
epigenetic silencing could be an important mechanism in the ESCC progression. We 
identify a novel pathway that linking HIC1 downregulation to EphA2-inducing EMT
in ESCC cells and may shed light on the development of novel anti-tumor
therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4741990
PMID: 26510908  [PubMed - in process]


6. Tumour Biol. 2015 Oct 26. [Epub ahead of print]

The combination of thymoquinone and paclitaxel shows anti-tumor activity through 
the interplay with apoptosis network in triple-negative breast cancer.

Sakalar Ç(1,)(2), Izgi K(3,)(4), Iskender B(5,)(3), Sezen S(5,)(3), Aksu
H(5,)(3), Çakir M(5,)(3), Kurt B(5,)(3), Turan A(5,)(3), Canatan H(5,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Erciyes University, 38039, 
Melikgazi, Kayseri, Turkey. sakalar11@hotmail.com. (2)Genome and Stem Cell
Center, Erciyes University, Melikgazi, Kayseri, Turkey. sakalar11@hotmail.com.
(3)Genome and Stem Cell Center, Erciyes University, Melikgazi, Kayseri, Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Erciyes University,
Melikgazi, Kayseri, Turkey. (5)Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine,
Erciyes University, 38039, Melikgazi, Kayseri, Turkey.

Thymoquinone (TQ) is the active ingredient of Nigella sativa which has a
therapeutic potential in cancer therapy and prevention. In this study, TQ has
been shown to induce specific cytotoxicity and apoptosis and to inhibit wound
healing in triple-negative breast cancer cell line. TQ also inhibited cancer
growth in a mouse tumor model. Moreover, TQ and paclitaxel (Pac) combination
inhibited cancer growth in cell culture and in mice. Genes involved in TQ and
TQ-Pac-mediated cytotoxicity were studied using focused real-time PCR arrays.
After bioinformatic analysis, genes in apoptosis, cytokine, and p53 signaling
categories were found to be modulated with a high significance in TQ-treated
cells (p<U+2009><<U+2009>10(-28), p<U+2009><<U+2009>10(-8), and p<U+2009><<U+2009>10(-6), respectively). Important to note,
TQ has been found to regulate the genes involved in the induction of apoptosis
through death receptors (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>5.5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)). Additionally, tumor suppressor genes 
such as p21, Brca1, and Hic1 were highly upregulated by TQ and TQ-Pac
combination. Interestingly, when cells were treated with high dose TQ, several
growth factors such as Vegf and Egf were upregulated and several pro-apoptotic
factors such as caspases were downregulated possibly pointing out key pathways
manipulated by cancer cells to resist against TQ. In cells treated with the
combination of TQ and Pac, genes in apoptosis cascade (p<U+2009><<U+2009>10(-12)), p53
signaling (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>10(-5)), and JAK-STAT signaling (p<U+2009><<U+2009>10(-3)) were differentially
expressed. TQ has also been shown to induce protein levels of cleaved Caspase-3, 
Caspase-7, and Caspase-12 and PARP and to reduce phosphorylated p65 and Akt1. The
in vivo therapeutic potential of TQ-Pac combination and the genetic network
involved in this synergy have been shown for the first time to the best of our
knowledge.

PMID: 26500095  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. J Biomed Res. 2015 Jul;29(4):308-15. doi: 10.7555/JBR.29.20150055. Epub 2015 Jun 
30.

Class II transactivator (CIITA) mediates transcriptional repression of pdk4 gene 
by interacting with hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1).

Fang M(1,)(2), Li P(1,)(3), Wu X(1,)(4), Xu Y(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Pathophysiology.
(2)Department of Nursing, Jiangsu Jiankang Vocational University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Second Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210011, China.
(4)Laboratory Center for Basic Medical Sciences, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. wxy@njmu.edu.cn. (5)Laboratory Center for Basic
Medical Sciences, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.
yjxu@njmu.edu.cn.

Increased accumulation and/or impaired utilization of fatty acid in extra-adipose
tissues are implicated in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance and type 2
diabetes. Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (Pdk4) is a key enzyme involved in
fatty oxidation and energy expenditure, and its expression can be repressed by
pro-inflammatory stimuli. Previously, we have shown that class II transactivator 
(CIITA) mediates the adverse effect of interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) in skeletal
muscle cells by cooperating with hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) to repress
silent information regulator 1 (SIRT1) transcription. Building upon this finding,
we report here that CIITA interacted with HIC1 via the GTP-binding domain (GBD)
while HIC1 interacted with CIITA via the BTB/POZ domain. The GBD domain was
required for CIITA to repress SIRT1 transcription probably acting as a bridge for
CIITA to bind to HIC1 and consequently to bind to the SIRT1 promoter. IFN-<U+03B3>
stimulation, CIITA over-expression, or HIC1 over-expression repressed Pdk4
promoter activity while silencing either CIITA or HIC1 normalized Pdk4 expression
in the presence of IFN-<U+03B3>. An increase in SIRT1 expression or activity partially
rescued Pdk4 expression in the presence of CIITA, but SIRT1 inhibition abrogated 
Pdk4 normalization even in the absence of CIITA. Taken together, our data have
identified a HIC1-CIITA-SIRT1 axis that regulates Pdk4 transcription in response 
to IFN-<U+03B3> stimulation.

© 2015 the Journal of Biomedical Research. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4547379
PMID: 26243517  [PubMed]


8. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 24;10(7):e0133258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133258.
eCollection 2015.

De Novo Assembly of the Donkey White Blood Cell Transcriptome and a Comparative
Analysis of Phenotype-Associated Genes between Donkeys and Horses.

Xie FY(1), Feng YL(2), Wang HH(1), Ma YF(2), Yang Y(3), Wang YC(4), Shen W(1),
Pan QJ(5), Yin S(1), Sun YJ(3), Ma JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive Science, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao,
Shandong, 266109, China; Key Laboratory of Animal Reproduction and Germplasm
Enhancement in Universities of Shandong, Qingdao Agricultural University,
Qingdao, Shandong, 266109, China; College of Animal Science and Technology,
Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong, 266109, China. (2)College of 
Animal Science and Technology, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao,
Shandong, 266109, China; Black Donkey Research Institute, Shandong Dongeejiao
Company Limited, Liaocheng, Shandong, 252000, China. (3)College of Animal Science
and Technology, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong, 266109,
China. (4)Black Donkey Research Institute, Shandong Dongeejiao Company Limited,
Liaocheng, Shandong, 252000, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Animal Reproduction and 
Germplasm Enhancement in Universities of Shandong, Qingdao Agricultural
University, Qingdao, Shandong, 266109, China; College of Animal Science and
Technology, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong, 266109, China.

Prior to the mechanization of agriculture and labor-intensive tasks, humans used 
donkeys (Equus africanus asinus) for farm work and packing. However, as
mechanization increased, donkeys have been increasingly raised for meat, milk,
and fur in China. To maintain the development of the donkey industry, breeding
programs should focus on traits related to these new uses. Compared to
conventional marker-assisted breeding plans, genome- and transcriptome-based
selection methods are more efficient and effective. To analyze the coding genes
of the donkey genome, we assembled the transcriptome of donkey white blood cells 
de novo. Using transcriptomic deep-sequencing data, we identified 264,714
distinct donkey unigenes and predicted 38,949 protein fragments. We annotated the
donkey unigenes by BLAST searches against the non-redundant (NR) protein
database. We also compared the donkey protein sequences with those of the horse
(E. caballus) and wild horse (E. przewalskii), and linked the donkey protein
fragments with mammalian phenotypes. As the outer ear size of donkeys and horses 
are obviously different, we compared the outer ear size-associated proteins in
donkeys and horses. We identified three ear size-associated proteins, HIC1,
PRKRA, and KMT2A, with sequence differences among the donkey, horse, and wild
horse loci. Since the donkey genome sequence has not been released, the de novo
assembled donkey transcriptome is helpful for preliminary investigations of
donkey cultivars and for genetic improvement.

PMCID: PMC4514889
PMID: 26208029  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Cancer. 2015 Jun 25;6(8):740-9. doi: 10.7150/jca.11691. eCollection 2015.

Methylation Profiling of Multiple Tumor Suppressor Genes in Hepatocellular
Carcinoma and the Epigenetic Mechanism of 3OST2 Regulation.

Chen H(1), Zhang T(2), Sheng Y(2), Zhang C(2), Peng Y(2), Wang X(2), Zhang C(2).

Author information: 
(1)1. Institute of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Shandong University School of
Medicine, Jinan 250012, P. R. China ; 2. Department of Pathology, Shandong
Provincial Chest Hospital, Jinan 250012, P. R. China. (2)1. Institute of
Pathology and Pathophysiology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan
250012, P. R. China.

DNA methylation is considered as a significant mechanism that silences tumor
suppressor genes (TSGs) and could be used in the early diagnosis of cancer.
Histone modifications often work together with DNA methylation; however, how
these epigenetic alterations regulate TSGs remains unclear. Here, we determined
the methylation status of ten TSGs (3OST2, ppENK, CHFR, LKB1, THBS1, HIC1, SLIT2,
EDNRB, COX2, and CLDN7) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and corresponding
noncancerous tissues. Methylation profiling revealed that four genes had very
high frequencies of methylation in HCCs, but interestingly, similar high
frequencies were also detected in corresponding noncancerous tissues (97.9% vs
95.8% for SLIT2, 93.8% vs 81.3% for EDNRB, 66.7% vs 85.4% for HIC1, and 56.3% vs 
56.3% for ppENK, P > 0.05). Only the 3OST2 gene was frequently methylated in HCCs
and there was significant difference between HCCs and corresponding noncancerous 
tissues (68.8% vs 37.5%, P < 0.05). 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR) or
trichostatin A (TSA) alone could partially reverse 3OST2 methylation, and their
combination resulted in complete reversal. UHRF1 and histone H3R8me2s were both
enriched on the hypermethylated 3OST2 promoter, but H3R8me2a was not. After
5-Aza-CdR or TSA treatment, the UHRF1 and H3R8me2s enrichment was decreased,
while H3R8me2a enrichment increased. We demonstrated that 3OST2 methylation may
play a critical role in the earliest steps of hepatocarcinogenesis and is
directly regulated by UHRF1. Furthermore, H3R8me2s acted as a repressive mark,
while H3R8me2a was correlated with 3OST2 transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC4504110
PMID: 26185536  [PubMed]


10. BMC Genet. 2015 Jul 14;16:80. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0238-4.

Analysis of an independent tumor suppressor locus telomeric to Tp53 suggested
Inpp5k and Myo1c as novel tumor suppressor gene candidates in this region.

Hedberg Oldfors C(1), Dios DG(2), Linder A(3), Visuttijai K(4,)(5), Samuelson
E(6), Karlsson S(7), Nilsson S(8), Behboudi A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska Academy, University
of Gothenburg, SE-40530, Gothenburg, Sweden. carola.oldfors@gu.se. (2)Department 
of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 
SE-40530, Gothenburg, Sweden. dagarciadios@gmail.com. (3)Department of Medical
and Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE-40530,
Gothenburg, Sweden. anna.linder@gu.se. (4)Department of Medical and Clinical
Genetics, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE-40530, Gothenburg,
Sweden. kittichate.visuttijai@his.se. (5)Tumor Biology Research Group, School of 
Bioscience, University of Skövde, SE-54128, Skövde, Sweden.
kittichate.visuttijai@his.se. (6)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE-40530, Gothenburg, Sweden.
emma.samuelson@gu.se. (7)Tumor Biology Research Group, School of Bioscience,
University of Skövde, SE-54128, Skövde, Sweden. sandra.karlsson@his.se.
(8)Institute of Mathematical Statistics, Chalmers University of Technology,
SE-41296, Gothenburg, Sweden. steffan.nilsson@chalmers.se. (9)Tumor Biology
Research Group, School of Bioscience, University of Skövde, SE-54128, Skövde,
Sweden. afrouz.behboudi@his.se.

BACKGROUND: Several reports indicate a commonly deleted chromosomal region
independent from, and distal to the TP53 locus in a variety of human tumors. In a
previous study, we reported a similar finding in a rat tumor model for
endometrial carcinoma (EC) and through developing a deletion map, narrowed the
candidate region to 700 kb, harboring 19 genes. In the present work real-time
qPCR analysis, Western blot, semi-quantitative qPCR, sequencing, promoter
methylation analysis, and epigenetic gene expression restoration analyses
(5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and/or trichostatin A treatments) were used to analyze
the 19 genes located within the candidate region in a panel of experimental
tumors compared to control samples.
RESULTS: Real-time qPCR analysis suggested Hic1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1),
Inpp5k (inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase K; a.k.a. Skip, skeletal muscle and 
kidney enriched inositol phosphatase) and Myo1c (myosin 1c) as the best targets
for the observed deletions. No mutation in coding sequences of these genes was
detected, hence the observed low expression levels suggest a haploinsufficient
mode of function for these potential tumor suppressor genes. Both Inpp5k and
Myo1c were down regulated at mRNA and/or protein levels, which could be rescued
in gene expression restoration assays. This could not be shown for Hic1.
CONCLUSION: Innp5k and Myo1c were identified as the best targets for the
deletions in the region. INPP5K and MYO1C are located adjacent to each other
within the reported independent region of tumor suppressor activity located at
chromosome arm 17p distal to TP53 in human tumors. There is no earlier report on 
the potential tumor suppressor activity of INPP5K and MYO1C, however, overlapping
roles in phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinase/Akt signaling, known to be vital for the 
cell growth and survival, are reported for both. Moreover, there are reports on
tumor suppressor activity of other members of the gene families that INPP5K and
MYO1C belong to. Functional significance of these two candidate tumor suppressor 
genes in cancerogenesis pathways remains to be investigated.

PMCID: PMC4501283
PMID: 26170120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Clin Pathol. 2015 Oct;68(10):771-87. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203186. Epub
2015 Jul 10.

Clinicopathological correlates of hyperparathyroidism.

Duan K(1), Gomez Hernandez K(2), Mete O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Endocrine Oncology Site Group, Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Medicine, University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Pathology, University Health 
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Endocrine Oncology 
Site Group, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Hyperparathyroidism is a common endocrine disorder with potential complications
on the skeletal, renal, neurocognitive and cardiovascular systems. While most
cases (95%) occur sporadically, about 5% are associated with a hereditary
syndrome: multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes (MEN-1, MEN-2A, MEN-4),
hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumour syndrome (HPT-JT), familial hypocalciuric
hypercalcaemia (FHH-1, FHH-2, FHH-3), familial hypercalciuric hypercalcaemia,
neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism and isolated familial hyperparathyroidism.
Recently, molecular mechanisms underlying possible tumour suppressor genes (MEN1,
CDC73/HRPT2, CDKIs, APC, SFRPs, GSK3ß, RASSF1A, HIC1, RIZ1, WT1, CaSR, GNA11,
AP2S1) and proto-oncogenes (CCND1/PRAD1, RET, ZFX, CTNNB1, EZH2) have been
uncovered in the pathogenesis of hyperparathyroidism. While bi-allelic
inactivation of CDC73/HRPT2 seems unique to parathyroid malignancy, aberrant
activation of cyclin D1 and Wnt/ß-catenin signalling has been reported in benign 
and malignant parathyroid tumours. Clinicopathological correlates of primary
hyperparathyroidism include parathyroid adenoma (80-85%), hyperplasia (10-15%)
and carcinoma (<1-5%). Secondary hyperparathyroidism generally presents with
diffuse parathyroid hyperplasia, whereas tertiary hyperparathyroidism reflects
the emergence of autonomous parathyroid hormone (PTH)-producing neoplasm(s) from 
secondary parathyroid hyperplasia. Surgical resection of abnormal parathyroid
tissue remains the only curative treatment in primary hyperparathyroidism, and
parathyroidectomy specimens are frequently encountered in this setting. Clinical 
and biochemical features, including intraoperative PTH levels, number, weight and
size of the affected parathyroid gland(s), are crucial parameters to consider
when rendering an accurate diagnosis of parathyroid proliferations. This review
provides an update on the expanding knowledge of hyperparathyroidism and
highlights the clinicopathological correlations of this prevalent disease.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26163537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Oncol Lett. 2015 May;9(5):2299-2302. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Expression of the tumor suppressor gene hypermethylated in cancer 1 in laryngeal 
carcinoma.

Markowski J(1), Sieron AL(2), Kasperczyk K(1), Ciupinska-Kajor M(3),
Augusciak-Duma A(4), Likus W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laryngology, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical University 
of Silesia, Katowice 40-027, Poland. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice
40-752, Poland ; CoE Research and Teaching of Molecular Biology of Matrix and
Nanotechnology, Network of CoE BioMedTech Silesia, Katowice 40-752, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathomorphology, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical
University of Silesia, Katowice 40-752, Poland. (4)Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical University of
Silesia, Katowice 40-752, Poland. (5)Department of Human Anatomy, School of
Medicine in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice 40-752, Poland.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) is a putative suppressor gene, cooperating
with TP53 in the regulation of apoptosis. The promoter site of this gene contains
CpG islands susceptible to methylation. Altered methylation leads to the
silencing of HIC1. Persistent loss of HIC1 function reflects the attenuation of
proapoptotic characteristics of TP53 and may constitute the background for
carcinogenesis. Altered methylation profiles along with diminished expression of 
HIC1 were documented in a number of solid neoplasms. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the expression of the HIC1 gene in laryngeal carcinoma. RNA was
extracted from samples of laryngeal cancer and corresponding healthy tissues of
21 patients with advanced laryngeal cancer (T3-T4). The amount of RNA (cDNA) was 
evaluated using reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction with
GADPH as the reference gene. Data demonstrated that HIC1 expression was
significantly reduced in laryngeal cancer tissues. The relative expression of
HIC1 was found to be ~40% lower in tumor samples compared to that in healthy
controls. The median tumor/normal tissue ratio for HIC1 was 0.615. These results 
suggest that low HIC1 expression may be associated with neoplastic transformation
in the larynx.

PMCID: PMC4467338
PMID: 26137060  [PubMed]


13. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Jun;56(6):3801-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-16008.

DNA Methylation Analysis of Human Trabecular Meshwork Cells During Dexamethasone 
Stimulation.

Matsuda A, Asada Y, Takakuwa K, Sugita J, Murakami A, Ebihara N.

PURPOSE: We investigated the changes in the DNA methylation status of cultured
human trabecular meshwork (TM) cells during glucocorticoid exposure, and
evaluated the effect of epigenetic modification on the gene expression of TM
cells.
METHODS: Three batches of primary culture TM cells were treated with and without 
100 nM dexamethasone (DEX) for 14 days. Genome-wide methylation analysis was done
using Illumina 450 K methylation chips. The gene expression profile of the TM
cells also was examined. The epigenetic effect of DEX stimulation on gene
expression in TM cells was further verified by treatment with the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) and subsequent
real-time PCR analysis.
RESULTS: After DEX stimulation, we found demethylated cytosine-phosphate-guanine 
(CpG) sites within the FKBP5, ZBTB16, and SCNN1A gene promoter regions with
increases of corresponding gene expression for all three TM batches, and
methylated CpG sites within the ARSI, HIC1, GREM2, and MATN2 gene promoter
regions with decreases of corresponding of gene expression for all three batches.
Inhibition of DNA methylation by 5-aza-dC treatment induced a further increase of
FKBP5 and SCNN1A mRNA expression under DEX stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: The DEX stimulation induces alteration of the DNA methylation status
in human TM cells. Epigenetic modification could affect the TM gene expression
profile.

PMID: 26066748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 9;10(6):e0129452. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129452.
eCollection 2015.

Methylated Host Cell Gene Promoters and Human Papillomavirus Type 16 and 18
Predicting Cervical Lesions and Cancer.

Milutin Gaperov N(1), Sabol I(1), Planinic P(2), Grubiic G(3), Fistonic I(4),
Coruic A(2), Grce M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Division of Molecular Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Clinic for Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Clinical Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. (3)Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Clinic, Clinical Hospital "Sestre milosrdnice," Zagreb, Croatia. (4)Private
Gynaecological Clinic, Zagreb, Croatia.

Change in the host and/or human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA methylation profile is
probably one of the main factors responsible for the malignant progression of
cervical lesions to cancer. To investigate those changes we studied 173 cervical 
samples with different grades of cervical lesion, from normal to cervical cancer.
The methylation status of nine cellular gene promoters, CCNA1, CDH1, C13ORF18,
DAPK1, HIC1, RARß2, hTERT1, hTERT2 and TWIST1, was investigated by Methylation
Specific Polymerase Chain Reaction (MSP). The methylation of HPV18 L1-gene was
also investigated by MSP, while the methylated cytosines within four regions, L1,
5'LCR, enhancer, and promoter of the HPV16 genome covering 19 CpG sites were
evaluated by bisulfite sequencing. Statistically significant methylation
biomarkers distinguishing between cervical precursor lesions from normal cervix
were primarily C13ORF18 and secondly CCNA1, and those distinguishing cervical
cancer from normal or cervical precursor lesions were CCNA1, C13ORF18, hTERT1,
hTERT2 and TWIST1. In addition, the methylation analysis of individual CpG sites 
of the HPV16 genome in different sample groups, notably the 7455 and 7694 sites, 
proved to be more important than the overall methylation frequency. The majority 
of HPV18 positive samples contained both methylated and unmethylated L1 gene, and
samples with L1-gene methylated forms alone had better prognosis when correlated 
with the host cell gene promoters' methylation profiles. In conclusion, both
cellular and viral methylation biomarkers should be used for monitoring cervical 
lesion progression to prevent invasive cervical cancer.

PMCID: PMC4461273
PMID: 26057381  [PubMed - in process]


15. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Jul;13(7):1139-48. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0033. Epub 
2015 May 1.

HIC1 Tumor Suppressor Loss Potentiates TLR2/NF-<U+03BA>B Signaling and Promotes Tissue
Damage-Associated Tumorigenesis.

Janeckova L(1), Pospichalova V(1), Fafilek B(1), Vojtechova M(1), Tureckova J(1),
Dobes J(1), Dubuissez M(2), Leprince D(2), Baloghova N(1), Horazna M(1), Hlavata 
A(1), Stancikova J(1), Sloncova E(1), Galuskova K(1), Strnad H(1), Korinek V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Prague, Czech Republic. (2)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille,
Université Lille Nord de France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille Cedex, France. 
(3)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Prague, Czech Republic. korinek@img.cas.cz.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) represents a prototypic tumor suppressor gene 
frequently inactivated by DNA methylation in many types of solid tumors. The gene
encodes a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor controlling expression of
several genes involved in cell cycle or stress control. In this study, a Hic1
allele was conditionally deleted, using a Cre/loxP system, to identify genes
influenced by the loss of Hic1. One of the transcripts upregulated upon Hic1
ablation is the toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2). Tlr2 expression levels increased in 
Hic1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) and cultured intestinal
organoids or in human cells upon HIC1 knockdown. In addition, HIC1 associated
with the TLR2 gene regulatory elements, as detected by chromatin
immunoprecipitation, indicating that Tlr2 indeed represents a direct Hic1 target.
The Tlr2 receptor senses "danger" signals of microbial or endogenous origin to
trigger multiple signaling pathways, including NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Interestingly,
Hic1 deficiency promoted NF-<U+03BA>B pathway activity not only in cells stimulated with
Tlr2 ligand, but also in cells treated with NF-<U+03BA>B activators that stimulate
different surface receptors. In the intestine, Hic1 is mainly expressed in
differentiated epithelial cells and its ablation leads to increased Tlr2
production. Finally, in a chemical-induced mouse model of carcinogenesis, Hic1
absence resulted in larger Tlr2-positive colonic tumors that showed increased
proportion of proliferating cells.IMPLICATIONS: The tumor-suppressive function of
Hic1 in colon is related to its inhibitory action on proproliferative signaling
mediated by the Tlr2 receptor present on tumor cells.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25934696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Endocrine. 2015 Jun;49(2):324-32. doi: 10.1007/s12020-015-0555-4. Epub 2015 Feb
27.

Epigenetic alterations in human parathyroid tumors.

Verdelli C(1), Forno I, Vaira V, Corbetta S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato
Milanese, MI, Italy.

Epigenetics alterations are involved in tumorigenesis and have been identified in
endocrine neoplasia. In particular, DNA methylation, microRNAs deregulations and 
histone methylation impairment are detected in tumors of the parathyroid glands. 
Parathyroid tumors are the second most common endocrine neoplasia following
thyroid cancer in women, and it is associated with primary hyperparathyroidism, a
disease sustained by PTH hypersecretion. Despite the hallmark of global promoter 
hypomethylations was not detectable in parathyroid tumors, increase of
hypermethylation in specific CpG islands was detected in the progression from
benign to malignant parathyroid tumors. Furthermore, deregulation of a panel of
embryonic-related microRNAs (miRNAs) was documented in parathyroid tumors
compared with normal glands. Impaired expression of the histone
methyltransferases EZH2, BMI1, and RIZ1 have been described in parathyroid
tumors. Moreover, histone methyltransferases have been shown to be modulated by
the oncosuppressors HIC1, MEN1, and HRPT2/CDC73 gene products that characterize
tumorigenesis of parathyroid adenomas and carcinomas, respectively. The
epigenetic scenario in parathyroid tumors have just began to be decoded but
emerging data highlight the involvement of an embryonic gene signature in
parathyroid tumor development.

PMID: 25722013  [PubMed - in process]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 17;112(7):E819. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1501052112. 
Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Retraction for Zhang et al., Metabolic regulation of SIRT1 transcription via a
HIC1:CtBP corepressor complex.

Zhang Q, Wang SY, Fleuriel C, Dominique L, Rocheleau JV, Piston DW, Goodman RH.

Retraction of
    Zhang Q, Wang SY, Fleuriel C, Leprince D, Rocheleau JV, Piston DW, Goodman RH.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 16;104(3):829-33.

PMCID: PMC4343113
PMID: 25646486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. RNA Biol. 2014;11(11):1347-54. doi: 10.4161/rna.32093.

Comprehensive silencing of target-sharing microRNAs is a mechanism for SIRT1
overexpression in cancer.

Kiga K(1), Fukuda-Yuzawa Y, Tanabe M, Tsuji S, Sasakawa C, Fukao T.

Author information: 
(1)a Max-Planck-Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics ; Freiburg , Germany.

Overexpression of SIRT1 is frequently observed in various types of cancers,
suggesting its potential role in malignancies. However, the molecular basis of
how SIRT1 is elevated in cancer is less understood. Here we show that
cancer-related SIRT1 overexpression is due to evasion of Sirt1 mRNA from
repression by a group of Sirt1-targeting microRNAs (miRNAs) that might be
robustly silenced in cancer. Our comprehensive library-based screening and
subsequent miRNA gene profiling revealed a housekeeping gene-like broad
expression pattern and strong CpG island-association of the Sirt1-targeting miRNA
genes. This suggests aberrant CpG DNA methylation as the mechanistic background
for malignant SIRT1 elevation. Our work also provides an example where epigenetic
mechanisms cause the group-wide regulation of miRNAs sharing a common key target.

PMCID: PMC4615778
PMID: 25483038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e102764. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102764.
eCollection 2014.

Differential peripheral blood gene expression profile based on Her2 expression on
primary tumors of breast cancer patients.

Tudoran O(1), Virtic O(2), Balacescu L(1), Pop L(2), Dragla F(1), Eniu A(1),
Fetica B(3), Balacescu O(1), Berindan-Neagoe I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology
Institute I. Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (2)Research Center for Functional
Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Iuliu Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (3)Department of Pathology, The
Oncology Institute I. Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (4)Department of
Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology Institute I.
Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; Research Center for Functional Genomics,
Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; Department of Immunology, Iuliu Hatieganu
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e110962.

Breast cancer prognosis and treatment is highly dependent on the molecular
features of the primary tumors. These tumors release specific molecules into the 
environment that trigger characteristic responses into the circulatory cells. In 
this study we investigated the expression pattern of 84 genes known to be
involved in breast cancer signaling in the peripheral blood of breast cancer
patients with ER-, PR- primary tumors. The patients were grouped according to
Her2 expression on the primary tumors in Her2+ and Her2- cohorts. Transcriptional
analysis revealed 15 genes to be differentially expressed between the two groups 
highlighting that Her2 signaling in primary tumors could be associated with
specific blood gene expression. We found CCNA1 to be up-regulated, while ERBB2,
RASSF1, CDH1, MKI67, GATA3, GLI1, SFN, PTGS2, JUN, NOTCH1, CTNNB1, KRT8, SRC, and
HIC1 genes were down-regulated in the blood of triple negative breast cancer
patients compared to Her2+ cohort. IPA network analysis predicts that the
identified genes are interconnected and regulate each other. These genes code for
cell cycle regulators, cell adhesion molecules, transcription factors or signal
transducers that modulate immune signaling, several genes being also associated
with cancer progression and treatment response. These results indicate an altered
immune signaling in the peripheral blood of triple negative breast cancer
patients. The involvement of the immune system is necessary in favorable
treatment response, therefore these results could explain the low response rates 
observed for triple negative breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4113305
PMID: 25068292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Biotechnol. 2014 Nov;56(11):1040-8. doi: 10.1007/s12033-014-9783-8.

Molecular cloning and expression of high GC-rich novel tumor suppressor gene
HIC-1.

Kumar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Science Centre, Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of
Medicine, University of Central Florida, Bld 20, 4110 Libra Drive, Orlando, FL,
32816, USA, sanjay.kumar@ucf.edu.

Hypermethylated in Cancer-1 (HIC-1) is a novel tumor suppressor plays crucial
role in tumor formation through loss of function by hypermethylation. HIC-1 is
known as transcriptional factor whereas little known about its structure and
function. Requirement felt to clone and express full coding protein and reveal
various domains and binding pattern onto promoters conducting biophysical studies
which lack in current scenario. Production of sufficient amounts of protein is
frequent bottleneck in structural biology. Cloning full-length HIC-1 with >73 %
GC content poses a daunting task with sequencing and expression adds more to the 
challenge. We describe the methodology for specific amplification, cloning,
sequencing, and expression of HIC-1 in E. coli. Standardization using 1.5 U pfu
polymerase in (NH4)2SO4 containing buffer gave specific amplification with 10 %
DMSO and 1.5 mM MgCl2. Sequencing achieved using base analog 7-de aza dGTP (0.2
mM) or denaturant like DMSO (10 %) or betaine (1 M). Expression using strains of 
E. coli induced by different concentrations of IPTG (0.5-5.0 mM) for time points 
of 4, 8, 16, 20, and 24 h at different temperatures 25, 30, and 37 °C.
Full-length clone successfully expressed in BL21-Codon Plus-RP using 1 mM
concentration of IPTG for 8 h at 37 °C gave prominent band of 74 kDa.

PMID: 25001210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Oct;395(1-2):281-90. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2137-9. Epub 
2014 Jul 4.

P53 induction accompanying G2/M arrest upon knockdown of tumor suppressor HIC1 in
U87MG glioma cells.

Kumar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Science Centre, Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of
Medicine, University of Central Florida, Bld 20, 4110 Libra Drive, Orlando, FL,
32816, USA, sanjay.kumar@ucf.edu.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) is a novel tumor suppressor gene (tsg)
frequently silenced by epigenetic modification, predominantly by methylation in
different tumors. HIC1 functionally co-operates with p53 in cultured cells as
well as in transgenic animals to suppress tumors and has binding site on its
promoter. Its over expression often leads to cell cycle arrests. Although HIC1
proven to have role as tsg, its regulation to cell cycle and dependency upon p53 
is grossly unknown. In this study, we investigated the role of HIC1 in cell cycle
and proliferation of glioma cell line U87MG which has wild type p53, in both
serum-containing and serum-deprived medium. Microscopic analysis and MTT assay
showed reduced cell number and rate of proliferation upon HIC1 knock down
compared to control siRNA (p = 0.025) and untreated cells (p = 0.03) in
serum-containing medium and serum-free medium (p = 0.014 vs control siRNA;
p = 0.018 vs untreated cells). Cell cycle analysis revealed an arrest at G2/M
phase of cell cycle with no demonstrable increase in apoptosis with both medium. 
An increased expression of p53 concomitant with HIC1 knockdown was observed.
Furthermore P21, a p53 responsive gene, along with p27 was significantly
increased in comparison with controls. Our results demonstrated an important role
of HIC1 for the normal progression of cell cycle, and at molecular level, it
could affect the homeostasis of p53 as well as number of cell cycle-related
genes, which may or may not be directly linked to p53.

PMID: 24992983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Genome Med. 2014 Apr 30;6(4):34. doi: 10.1186/gm551. eCollection 2014.

Early aberrant DNA methylation events in a mouse model of acute myeloid leukemia.

Sonnet M(1), Claus R(2), Becker N(3), Zucknick M(3), Petersen J(1), Lipka DB(1), 
Oakes CC(1), Andrulis M(4), Lier A(5), Milsom MD(5), Witte T(1), Gu L(6),
Kim-Wanner SZ(1), Schirmacher P(4), Wulfert M(7), Gattermann N(7), Lübbert M(8), 
Rosenbauer F(9), Rehli M(10), Bullinger L(11), Weichenhan D(1), Plass C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department of Epigenomics and
Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany ; Department of Hematology/Oncology, University Medical Center, D-79106
Freiburg, Germany. (3)Division of Biostatistics, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Department of General Pathology,
Institute of Pathology, University Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Division of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Department of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk
Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany ;
Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical
Immunology, Heinrich-Heine University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. (8)Department
of Hematology/Oncology, University Medical Center, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Institute of Molecular Tumor Biology, Westfälische Wilhelms Universität,
D-48149 Münster, Germany. (10)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University
Hospital Regensburg, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany. (11)Department of Internal
Medicine III, University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is frequently found in human malignancies
including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While most studies focus on later disease
stages, the onset of aberrant DNA methylation events and their dynamics during
leukemic progression are largely unknown.
METHODS: We screened genome-wide for aberrant CpG island methylation in three
disease stages of a murine AML model that is driven by hypomorphic expression of 
the hematopoietic transcription factor PU.1. DNA methylation levels of selected
genes were correlated with methylation levels of CD34+ cells and lineage
negative, CD127-, c-Kit+, Sca-1+ cells; common myeloid progenitors;
granulocyte-macrophage progenitors; and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors.
RESULTS: We identified 1,184 hypermethylated array probes covering 762 associated
genes in the preleukemic stage. During disease progression, the number of
hypermethylated genes increased to 5,465 in the late leukemic disease stage.
Using publicly available data, we found a significant enrichment of PU.1 binding 
sites in the preleukemic hypermethylated genes, suggesting that shortage of PU.1 
makes PU.1 binding sites in the DNA accessible for aberrant methylation. Many
known AML associated genes such as RUNX1 and HIC1 were found among the
preleukemic hypermethylated genes. Nine novel hypermethylated genes, FZD5, FZD8, 
PRDM16, ROBO3, CXCL14, BCOR, ITPKA, HES6 and TAL1, the latter four being
potential PU.1 targets, were confirmed to be hypermethylated in human normal
karyotype AML patients, underscoring the relevance of the mouse model for human
AML.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified early aberrantly methylated genes as potential 
contributors to onset and progression of AML.

PMCID: PMC4062060
PMID: 24944583  [PubMed]


23. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;53:320-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.05.037.
Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Physical and functional interaction of the proto-oncogene EVI1 and tumor
suppressor gene HIC1 deregulates Bcl-xL mediated block in apoptosis.

Pradhan AK(1), Halder A(1), Chakraborty S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Department of Gene Function and Regulation, Nalco 
Square, Bhubaneswar, Orissa 751023, India. (2)Institute of Life Sciences,
Department of Gene Function and Regulation, Nalco Square, Bhubaneswar, Orissa
751023, India. Electronic address: soumen_ils@yahoo.co.in.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 was originally identified as a retroviral
integration site in murine leukemias. Several studies have established ecotropic 
viral integration site 1 as both a transcription factor and an interacting
partner that presumably regulates gene expression. Using coimmunoprecipitation
and fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis, we found that the N-terminal
domain of hypermethylated in cancer 1 interacts with the proximal set of zinc
fingers of ecotropic viral integration site 1. This interaction not only
abolishes the DNA binding activity of ecotropic viral integration site 1 but also
disrupts the transcriptional activity of an anti-apoptotic gene promoter
selectively targeted by ecotropic viral integration site 1. By using flow
cytometry and western blotting, here we show that hypermethylated in cancer 1 can
deregulate ecotropic viral integration site 1-mediated blockage of apoptosis. We 
hypothesize that therapeutic upregulation of hypermethylated in cancer 1 may
provide an important means of targeting ecotropic viral integration site
1-positive cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24907396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Epigenetics. 2014 Jul;9(7):987-97. doi: 10.4161/epi.28936. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Global hypomethylation and promoter methylation in small intestinal
neuroendocrine tumors: an in vivo and in vitro study.

Fotouhi O(1), Adel Fahmideh M(2), Kjellman M(3), Sulaiman L(1), Höög A(1),
Zedenius J(3), Hashemi J(1), Larsson C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology; Karolinska Institutet; Karolinska University
Hospital; Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Unit of Epidemiology; Institute of Environmental 
Medicine; Karolinska Institutet; Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Department of Molecular
Medicine and Surgery; Endocrine and Sarcoma Surgery Unit; Karolinska Institutet; 
Karolinska University Hospital; Stockholm, Sweden.

Aberrant DNA methylation is a feature of human cancer affecting gene expression
and tumor phenotype. Here, we quantified promoter methylation of candidate genes 
and global methylation in 44 small intestinal-neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs)
from 33 patients by pyrosequencing. Findings were compared with gene expression, 
patient outcome and known tumor copy number alterations. Promoter methylation was
observed for WIF1, RASSF1A, CTNNB1, CXCL14, NKX2-3, P16, LAMA1, and CDH1. By
contrast APC, CDH3, HIC1, P14, SMAD2, and SMAD4 only had low levels of
methylation. WIF1 methylation was significantly increased (P = 0.001) and WIF1
expression was reduced in SI-NETs vs. normal references (P = 0.003). WIF1,
NKX2-3, and CXCL14 expression was reduced in metastases vs. primary tumors
(P<0.02). Low expression of RASSF1A and P16 were associated with poor overall
survival (P = 0.045 and P = 0.011, respectively). Global methylation determined
by pyrosequencing of LINE1 repeats was reduced in tumors vs. normal references,
and was associated with loss in chromosome 18. The tumors fell into three
clusters with enrichment of WIF1 methylation and LINE1 hypomethylation in Cluster
I and RASSF1A and CTNNB1 methylation and loss in 16q in Cluster II. In Cluster
III, these alterations were low-abundant and NKX2-3 methylation was low. Similar 
analyses in the SI-NET cell lines HC45 and CNDT2 showed methylation for CDH1 and 
WIF1 and/or P16, CXCL14, NKX2-3, LAMA1, and CTNNB1. Treatment with the
demethylating agent 5-azacytidine reduced DNA methylation and increased
expression of these genes in vitro. In conclusion, promoter methylation of tumor 
suppressor genes is associated with suppressed gene expression and DNA copy
number alterations in SI-NETs, and may be restored in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4143414
PMID: 24762809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Circ Res. 2014 Jun 20;115(1):23-31. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.303300. Epub 2014
Apr 18.

HIC2 is a novel dosage-dependent regulator of cardiac development located within 
the distal 22q11 deletion syndrome region.

Dykes IM(1), van Bueren KL(1), Ashmore RJ(1), Floss T(1), Wurst W(1), Szumska
D(1), Bhattacharya S(1), Scambler PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, University
College London, London, United Kingdom (I.M.D., K.L.v.B., R.J.A., P.J.S.);
Institute of Developmental Genetics (T.F., W.W.) and Technische Universität
München-Weihenstephan, Institute of Developmental Genetics (T.F., W.W.),
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany; German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Site Munich, Munich, Germany (W.W.); Munich
Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Adolf Butenandt Institute,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany (W.W.); and Departments
of Cardiovascular Medicine (D.S., S.B.) and Cardiovascular Medicine (I.M.D.),
University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Headington,
Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)From the Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom (I.M.D., K.L.v.B.,
R.J.A., P.J.S.); Institute of Developmental Genetics (T.F., W.W.) and Technische 
Universität München-Weihenstephan, Institute of Developmental Genetics (T.F.,
W.W.), Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany; German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Site Munich, Munich, Germany (W.W.); Munich
Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Adolf Butenandt Institute,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany (W.W.); and Departments
of Cardiovascular Medicine (D.S., S.B.) and Cardiovascular Medicine (I.M.D.),
University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Headington,
Oxford, United Kingdom. p.scambler@ucl.ac.uk.

RATIONALE: 22q11 deletion syndrome arises from recombination between low-copy
repeats on chromosome 22. Typical deletions result in hemizygosity for TBX1
associated with congenital cardiovascular disease. Deletions distal to the
typically deleted region result in a similar cardiac phenotype but lack in
extracardiac features of the syndrome, suggesting that a second haploinsufficient
gene maps to this interval.
OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor HIC2 is lost in most distal deletions, as
well as in a minority of typical deletions. We used mouse models to test the
hypothesis that HIC2 hemizygosity causes congenital heart disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We created a genetrap mouse allele of Hic2. The genetrap
reporter was expressed in the heart throughout the key stages of cardiac
morphogenesis. Homozygosity for the genetrap allele was embryonic lethal before
embryonic day E10.5, whereas the heterozygous condition exhibited a partially
penetrant late lethality. One third of heterozygous embryos had a cardiac
phenotype. MRI demonstrated a ventricular septal defect with over-riding aorta.
Conditional targeting indicated a requirement for Hic2 within the Nkx2.5+ and
Mesp1+ cardiovascular progenitor lineages. Microarray analysis revealed increased
expression of Bmp10.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate a novel role for Hic2 in cardiac
development. Hic2 is the first gene within the distal 22q11 interval to have a
demonstrated haploinsufficient cardiac phenotype in mice. Together our data
suggest that HIC2 haploinsufficiency likely contributes to the cardiac defects
seen in distal 22q11 deletion syndrome.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24748541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1839(6):476-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.04.010.
Epub 2014 Apr 18.

Transcriptional regulation of the human thromboxane A2 receptor gene by Wilms'
tumor (WT)1 and hypermethylated in cancer (HIC) 1 in prostate and breast cancers.

Keating GL(1), Reid HM(1), Eivers SB(1), Mulvaney EP(1), Kinsella BT(2).

Author information: 
(1)UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences, UCD Conway Institute of
Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield Dublin 
4, Ireland. (2)UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences, UCD Conway
Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin,
Belfield Dublin 4, Ireland. Electronic address: Therese.Kinsella@UCD.IE.

The prostanoid thromboxane (TX) A(2) plays a central role in hemostasis and is
increasingly implicated in neoplastic disease, including prostate and breast
cancers. In humans, TXA(2) signals through the TPa and TPß isoforms of the T
prostanoid receptor, two structurally related receptors transcriptionally
regulated by distinct promoters, Prm1 and Prm3, respectively, within the TP gene.
Focusing on TPa, the current study investigated its expression and
transcriptional regulation through Prm1 in prostate and breast cancers.
Expression of TPa correlated with increasing prostate and breast tissue tumor
grade while the TXA(2) mimetic U46619 promoted both proliferation and migration
of the respective prostate (PC3) and breast (MCF-7 and MDA-MD-231)
derived-carcinoma cell lines. Through 5' deletional and genetic reporter
analyses, several functional upstream repressor regions (URRs) were identified
within Prm1 in PC3, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells while site-directed mutagenesis
identified the tumor suppressors Wilms' tumor (WT)1 and hypermethylated in cancer
(HIC) 1 as the trans-acting factors regulating those repressor regions. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies confirmed that WT1 binds in vivo to multiple
GC-enriched WT1 cis-elements within the URRs of Prm1 in PC3, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
cells. Furthermore, ChIP analyses established that HIC1 binds in vivo to the
HIC1((b))cis-element within Prm1 in PC3 and MCF-7 cells but not in the MDA-MB-231
carcinoma line. Collectively, these data establish that WT1 and HIC1, both tumor 
suppressors implicated in prostate and breast cancers, transcriptionally repress 
TPa expression and thereby provide a strong genetic basis for understanding the
role of TXA2 in the progression of certain human cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24747176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 28;9(1):e86486. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086486. eCollection
2014.

Small activating RNA restores the activity of the tumor suppressor HIC-1 on
breast cancer.

Zhao F(1), Pan S(2), Gu Y(1), Guo S(1), Dai Q(1), Yu Y(2), Zhang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Ninth People's Hospital of Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Surgery,
Shanghai Ruijin Hospital of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

HIC-1 is a gene that is hypermethylated in cancer, and commonly downregulated in 
human breast cancer. However, the precise mechanisms and molecular pathways
regulated by HIC-1 remain unclear. We assessed HIC-1 expression on a tissue
microarray containing 80 cases of breast cancer. We also analyzed its biological 
function by restoring HIC-1 expression using 5-aza-2' deoxycytidine (5-CdR) and
small-activating RNAs for the reversal of HIC-1 tumor suppressive effects on
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. An Agilent Q44h global expressing microarray was
probed after restoring the expression of HIC-1. Data demonstrated that HIC-1
expression was reduced significantly in breast cancer tissues. HIC-1
immunohistochemistry resulted in mean staining scores in cancer tissue and normal
ductal epithelia of 3.54 and 8.2, respectively (p<0.01). 5-CdR partially reversed
HIC-1 expression, and modulated cell growth and apoptosis. dsHIC1-2998, an saRNA,
showed activating efficacy in breast cancer cells. A group of differentially
expressed genes were characterized by cDNA microarray. Upon saRNA treatment,
genes upregulated included those involved in immune activation, cell cycle
interference, the induction of apoptosis, anti-metastasis, and cell
differentiation. Downregulated genes included oncogenes and those that play roles
in cell invasion, cell growth, and cell division. Our findings may provide
valuable resources not only for gene functional studies, but also for potential
clinical applications to develop novel drug targets.

PMCID: PMC3904905
PMID: 24489730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cancer Res. 2014 Feb 1;74(3):862-72. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2420. Epub
2013 Dec 2.

HIC1 silencing in triple-negative breast cancer drives progression through
misregulation of LCN2.

Cheng G(1), Sun X, Wang J, Xiao G, Wang X, Fan X, Zu L, Hao M, Qu Q, Mao Y, Xue
Y, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, 
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine; and Comprehensive Breast Health Center, Rui
Jin Hospital, Shanghai, China.

The tumor suppressor gene HIC1 is frequently deleted or epigenetically silenced
in human cancer, where its restoration may improve cancer prognosis. Here, we
report results illuminating how HIC1 silencing alters effect or signals in
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which are crucial for its pathogenesis.
HIC1 expression was silenced only in TNBC compared with other molecular subtypes 
of breast cancer. Restoring HIC1 expression in TNBC cells reduced cell migration,
invasion, and metastasis, whereas RNAi-mediated silencing of HIC1 in
untransformed human breast cells increased their invasive capabilities.
Mechanistic investigations identified the small-secreted protein lipocalin-2
(LCN2), as a critical downstream target of HIC1 in TNBC cells. Elevating LCN2
expression in cells expressing HIC1 partially rescued its suppression of cell
invasion and metastasis. Notably, autocrine secretion of LCN2 induced by loss of 
HIC1 activated the AKT pathway through the neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin receptor, which is associated with TNBC progression. Taken together,
our findings revealed that the HIC1-LCN2 axis may serve as a subtype-specific
prognostic biomarker, providing an appealing candidate target for TNBC therapy.

PMID: 24295734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Nov 19;32:94. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-32-94.

DNA Methylation profiles as predictors of recurrence in non muscle invasive
bladder cancer: an MS-MLPA approach.

Casadio V(1), Molinari C, Calistri D, Tebaldi M, Gunelli R, Serra L, Falcini F,
Zingaretti C, Silvestrini R, Amadori D, Zoli W.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Laboratory, Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e la Cura
dei Tumori (IRST) IRCCS, Via P, Maroncelli 40, Meldola 47014, Italy.
w.zoli@irst.emr.it.

BACKGROUND: Although non muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) generally has a
good long-term prognosis, up to 80% of patients will nevertheless experience
local recurrence after the primary tumor resection. The search for markers
capable of accurately identifying patients at high risk of recurrence is ongoing.
We retrospectively evaluated the methylation status of a panel of 24 tumor
suppressor genes (TIMP3, APC, CDKN2A, MLH1, ATM, RARB, CDKN2B, HIC1, CHFR, BRCA1,
CASP8, CDKN1B, PTEN, BRCA2, CD44, RASSF1, DAPK1, FHIT, VHL, ESR1, TP73, IGSF4,
GSTP1 and CDH13) in primary lesions to obtain information about their role in
predicting local recurrence in NMIBC.
METHODS: Formaldehyde-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples from 74 patients
operated on for bladder cancer were analyzed by methylation-specific multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA): 36 patients had relapsed and 38
were disease-free at the 5-year follow up. Methylation status was considered as a
dichotomous variable and genes showing methylation =20% were defined as
"positive".
RESULTS: Methylation frequencies were higher in non recurring than recurring
tumors. A statistically significant difference was observed for HIC1 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03), 
GSTP1 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02) and RASSF1 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). The combination of the three genes showed
78% sensitivity and 66% specificity in identifying recurrent patients, with an
overall accuracy of 72%.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary data suggest a potential role of HIC1, GSTP1 and
RASSF1 in predicting local recurrence in NMIBC. Such information could help
clinicians to identify patients at high risk of recurrence who require close
monitoring during follow up.

PMCID: PMC4176288
PMID: 24252461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jan;137(1):47-54. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft241. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Aberrant methylation of hypermethylated-in-cancer-1 and exocyclic DNA adducts in 
tobacco smokers.

Peluso ME(1), Munnia A, Bollati V, Srivatanakul P, Jedpiyawongse A, Sangrajrang
S, Ceppi M, Giese RW, Boffetta P, Baccarelli AA.

Author information: 
(1)* Cancer Risk Factor Branch, Cancer Prevention and Research Institute,
Florence, Italy;

Tobacco smoke has been shown to produce both DNA damage and epigenetic
alterations. However, the potential role of DNA damage in generating epigenetic
changes is largely underinvestigated in human studies. We examined the effects of
smoking on the levels of DNA methylation in genes for tumor protein p53,
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor2A, hypermethylated-in-cancer-1 (HIC1),
interleukin-6, Long Interspersed Nuclear Element type1, and Alu retrotransposons 
in blood of 177 residents in Thailand using bisulfite-PCR andpyrosequencing.
Then, we analyzed the relationship of this methylation with the oxidative DNA
adduct, M1dG (a malondialdehyde adduct), measured by ³²P-postlabeling.
Multivariate statistical analyses showed that HIC1 methylation levels were
significantly increased in smokers compared with nonsmokers (p = .05). A dose
response was observed, with the highest HIC1 methylation levels in smokers of =
10 cigarettes/day relative to nonsmokers and intermediate values in smokers of
1-9 cigarettes/day (p for trend = .001). No additional relationships were
observed. We also evaluated correlations between M1dG and the methylation changes
at each HIC1 CpG site individually. The levels of this adduct in smokers showed a
significant linear correlation with methylation at one of the 3 CpGs evaluated in
HIC1: hypermethylation at position 1904864340 was significantly correlated with
the adduct M1dG (covariate-adjusted regression coefficient (ß) = .224 ± .101
[SE], p = .05). No other correlations were detected. Our study extends prior work
by others associating hypermethylation of HIC1 with smoking; shows that a very
specific hypermethylation event can arise from smoking; and encourages future
studies that explore a possible role for M1dG in connecting smoking to this
latter hypermethylation.

PMCID: PMC3871933
PMID: 24154486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e70878. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070878. eCollection
2013.

Association of promoter methylation of VGF and PGP9.5 with ovarian cancer
progression.

Brait M(1), Maldonado L, Noordhuis MG, Begum S, Loyo M, Poeta ML, Barbosa A,
Fazio VM, Angioli R, Rabitti C, Marchionni L, de Graeff P, van der Zee AG, Wisman
GB, Sidransky D, Hoque MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America ; Clinical
Research Coordination, Instituto Nacional de Câncer (INCA)-Brazilian National
Cancer Institute, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(10).
doi:10.1371/annotation/ccd51e37-fdf3-466e-b79f-2c390df9ab28.
    PLoS One. 2013;8(10).
doi:10.1371/annotation/5d2e13d4-cb4e-44b1-a836-dff9b4144b5b. Noordhuis, Maartje
[corrected to Noordhuis, Maartje G].

PURPOSE: To elucidate the role of biological and clinical impact of aberrant
promoter hypermethylation (PH) in ovarian cancer (OC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: PH of PGP9.5, HIC1, AIM1, APC, PAK3, MGMT, KIF1A, CCNA1,
ESR1, SSBP2, GSTP1, FKBP4 and VGF were assessed by quantitative methylation
specific PCR (QMSP) in a training set. We selected two genes (VGF and PGP9.5) for
further QMSP analysis in a larger independent validation (IV) set with available 
clinical data. Biologic relevance of VGF gene was also evaluated.
RESULTS: PH frequency for PGP9.5 and VGF were 85% (316/372) and 43% (158/366)
respectively in the IV set of samples while no PH was observed in controls. In
372 OC cases with available follow up, PGP9.5 and VGF PH were correlated with
better patient survival [Hazard Ratios (HR) for overall survival (OS) were 0.59
(95% Confidence Intervals (CI) <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.42-0.84, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004), and 0.73
(95%CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.55-0.97, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.028) respectively, and for disease specific survival
(DSS) were 0.57 (95%CI 0.39-0.82, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003) and 0.72 (95%CI 0.54-0.96,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.027). In multivariate analysis, VGF PH remained an independent prognostic
factor for OS (HR 0.61, 95%CI 0.43-0.86, p<0.005) and DSS (HR 0.58, 95%CI
0.41-0.83, p<0.003). Furthermore, PGP9.5 PH was significantly correlated with
lower grade, early stage tumors, and with absence of residual disease. Forced
expression of VGF in OC cell lines inhibited cell growth.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that VGF and PGP9.5 PH are potential biomarkers
for ovarian carcinoma. Confirmatory cohorts with longitudinal follow-up are
required in future studies to define the clinical impact of VGF and PGP9.5 PH
before clinical application.

PMCID: PMC3785492
PMID: 24086249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 25;440(3):424-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.091. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

The Reelin receptors ApoER2 and VLDLR are direct target genes of HIC1
(Hypermethylated In Cancer 1).

Dubuissez M(1), Faiderbe P, Pinte S, Dehennaut V, Rood BR, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université de Lille Nord de
France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, IFR 142, 1 rue Calmette, BP447, 59017 Lille
Cedex, France.

The tumor suppressor gene HIC1 (Hypermethylated In Cancer 1) is located in
17p13.3 a region frequently hypermethylated or deleted in tumors and in a
contiguous-gene syndrome, the Miller-Dieker syndrome which includes classical
lissencephaly (smooth brain) and severe developmental defects. HIC1 encodes a
transcriptional repressor involved in the regulation of growth control, DNA
damage response and cell migration properties. We previously demonstrated that
the membrane-associated G-protein-coupled receptors CXCR7, ADRB2 and the tyrosine
kinase receptor EphA2 are direct target genes of HIC1. Here we show that ectopic 
expression of HIC1 in U2OS and MDA-MB-231 cell lines decreases expression of the 
ApoER2 and VLDLR genes, encoding two canonical tyrosine kinase receptors for
Reelin. Conversely, knock-down of endogenous HIC1 in BJ-Tert normal human
fibroblasts through RNA interference results in the up-regulation of these two
Reelin receptors. Finally, through chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in
BJ-Tert fibroblasts, we demonstrate that HIC1 is a direct transcriptional
repressor of ApoER2 and VLDLR. These data provide evidence that HIC1 is a new
regulator of the Reelin pathway which is essential for the proper migration of
neuronal precursors during the normal development of the cerebral cortex, of
Purkinje cells in the cerebellum and of mammary epithelial cells. Deregulation of
this pathway through HIC1 inactivation or deletion may contribute to its role in 
tumor promotion. Moreover, HIC1, through the direct transcriptional repression of
ATOH1 and the Reelin receptors ApoER2 and VLDLR, could play an essential role in 
normal cerebellar development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24076391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 15;12(14):2266-76. doi: 10.4161/cc.25365.

HIC1 interacts with and modulates the activity of STAT3.

Lin YM(1), Wang CM, Jeng JC, Leprince D, Shih HM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene, expression of
which is frequently suppressed in human cancers. Very little is known about the
molecular basis of HIC1 in antagonizing oncogenic pathways. Here, we report that 
HIC1 forms complexes with the signal transducers and activators of transcription 
3 (STAT3) and attenuates STAT3-mediated transcription. STAT3 was identified as a 
HIC1-interacting protein by affinity capture and followed by mass spectrometry
analysis. Overexpression or depletion of HIC1 resulted in decreased or increased 
levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6)/oncostatin M (OSM)-induced STAT3-mediated reporter
activity and expression of target genes such as VEGF and c-Myc, respectively.
Furthermore, HIC1 suppressing the VEGF and c-Myc promoter activity and the colony
formation of MDA-MB 231 cells were STAT3-dependent. Further studies showed that
HIC1 interacts with the DNA binding domain of STAT3 and suppresses the binding of
STAT3 to its target gene promoters. Domain mapping study revealed that HIC1
C-terminal domain binds to STAT3. HIC1 mutant defective in STAT3 interaction
reduced its repressive effect on STAT3 DNA binding activity, the reporter
activity and gene expression of the VEGF and c-Myc genes, and cell growth in
MDA-MB 231 cells. Altogether, our findings not only provide a novel role of HIC1 
in antagonizing STAT3-mediated activation of VEGF and c-Myc gene expression and
cell growth, but also elucidate a molecular basis underlying the inhibitory
effect of HIC1 on STAT3 transcriptional potential.

PMCID: PMC3755077
PMID: 24067369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2013 Jul;33(7):963-6.

[Effect of buqi tongluo jiedu recipe on HIC1 methylation level of pancreatic
cancer model mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu B(1), Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)The Postdoctoral Research Station of Union Hospital Affiliated to Tongji
Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022,
China. hubo760913@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of Buqi Tongluo Jiedu Recipe (BTJR) on HIC1
methylation of pancreatic cancer mouse model.
METHODS: Totally 30 nude mice were randomly divided into the normal group, the
model group, and the treatment group, 10 in each group. The model was induced by 
cancer cell subcutaneous planting method. Mice in the treatment group were
administered with BTJR (60 g crude drugs/kg, 3 mL/100 g) by gastrogavage. Equal
volume of normal saline was given to those in the normal group and the model
group by gastrogavage. All the intervention lasted for 14 successive days. The
mice were sacrificed to death. Their tumor tissues were taken out. The HIC1 gene 
methylation level of each specimen was detected by nested methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction (N-MSP) method.
RESULTS: Compared with the model group, the HIC1 gene methylation level was lower
in the treatment group (P < 0.01). Compared with the model, the HIC1 gene
methylation level was even lower in the normal group (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: BTJR could reduce HIC1 gene methylation degree of model mice, thus
playing a role of molecular biologic effect in treating pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 24063222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Carcinog. 2013 Jul 26;12:15. doi: 10.4103/1477-3163.115720. eCollection 2013.

Restoration of the methylation status of hypermethylated gene promoters by
microRNA-29b in human breast cancer: A novel epigenetic therapeutic approach.

Starlard-Davenport A(1), Kutanzi K, Tryndyak V, Word B, Lyn-Cook B.

Author information: 
(1)Office of the Associate Director for Regulatory Activities, Jefferson, AR
72079, USA.

It is well established that transcriptional silencing of critical
tumor-suppressor genes by DNA methylation is a fundamental component in the
initiation of breast cancer. However, the involvement of microRNAs (miRNAs) in
restoring abnormal DNA methylation patterns in breast cancer is not well
understood. Therefore, we investigated whether miRNA-29b, due to its
complimentarity to the 3'- untranslated region of DNA methyltransferase 3A
(DNMT3A) and DNMT3B, could restore normal DNA methylation patterns in human
breast cancers and breast cancer cell lines. We demonstrated that transfection of
pre-miRNA-29b into less aggressive MCF-7 cells, but not MDA-MB-231 mesenchymal
cells, inhibited cell proliferation, decreased DNMT3A and DNMT3B messenger RNA
(mRNA), and decreased promoter methylation status of ADAM23 , CCNA1, CCND2, CDH1,
CDKN1C, CDKN2A, HIC1, RASSF1, SLIT2, TNFRSF10D, and TP73 tumor-suppressor genes. 
Using methylation polymerase chain reaction (PCR) arrays and real-time PCR, we
also demonstrated that the methylation status of several critical
tumor-suppressor genes increased as stage of breast disease increased, while
miRNA-29b mRNA levels were significantly decreased in breast cancers versus
normal breast. This increase in methylation status was accompanied by an increase
in DNMT1 and DNMT3B mRNA in advanced stage of human breast cancers and in MCF-7, 
MDA-MB-361, HCC70, Hs-578T, and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells as compared to
normal breast specimens and MCF-10-2A, a non-tumorigenic breast cell line,
respectively. Our findings highlight the potential for a new epigenetic approach 
in improving breast cancer therapy by targeting DNMT3A and DNMT3B through
miRNA-29b in non-invasive epithelial breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3746452
PMID: 23961262  [PubMed]


36. Cell Signal. 2013 Oct;25(10):1939-48. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.06.007. Epub
2013 Jun 11.

Antagonistic crosstalk between NF-<U+03BA>B and SIRT1 in the regulation of inflammation 
and metabolic disorders.

Kauppinen A(1), Suuronen T, Ojala J, Kaarniranta K, Salminen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FIN-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

Recent studies have indicated that the regulation of innate immunity and energy
metabolism are connected together through an antagonistic crosstalk between NF-<U+03BA>B
and SIRT1 signaling pathways. NF-<U+03BA>B signaling has a major role in innate immunity
defense while SIRT1 regulates the oxidative respiration and cellular survival.
However, NF-<U+03BA>B signaling can stimulate glycolytic energy flux during acute
inflammation, whereas SIRT1 activation inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B signaling and enhances
oxidative metabolism and the resolution of inflammation. SIRT1 inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling directly by deacetylating the p65 subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B complex. SIRT1
stimulates oxidative energy production via the activation of AMPK, PPARa and
PGC-1a and simultaneously, these factors inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B signaling and suppress
inflammation. On the other hand, NF-<U+03BA>B signaling down-regulates SIRT1 activity
through the expression of miR-34a, IFN<U+03B3>, and reactive oxygen species. The
inhibition of SIRT1 disrupts oxidative energy metabolism and stimulates the
NF-<U+03BA>B-induced inflammatory responses present in many chronic metabolic and
age-related diseases. We will examine the molecular mechanisms of the
antagonistic signaling between NF-<U+03BA>B and SIRT1 and describe how this crosstalk
controls inflammatory process and energy metabolism. In addition, we will discuss
how disturbances in this signaling crosstalk induce the appearance of chronic
inflammation in metabolic diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23770291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Gene. 2013 Sep 15;527(1):102-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.05.034. Epub 2013 Jun
12.

Inactivation of tumor suppressor gene HIC1 in gastric cancer is reversed via
small activating RNAs.

Pan S(1), Wang Z, Chen Y, Chen X, Ji J, Zhang J, Li J, Cai Q, Liu B, Zhu Z, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Surgery, Shanghai
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Gastric Neoplasms, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, School of Medicine, Ruijin er Road, No. 197, 200025 Shanghai,
China.

HIC1 is a tumor suppressor gene that is down-expressed in different malignancies,
in part, because of promoter hypermethylation. However, the biological function
of HIC1 in gastric cancer remains unclear. It is known that small double-stranded
RNAs can induce gene expression by targeting promoter sequences. In the present
study, we examined the expression levels of HIC1 in gastric cancer tissue.
Several pieces of small double-stranded RNAs were used for the activation of
HIC1. Tissue microarray analysis of gastric cancer indicated that down-regulation
of HIC1 in gastric cancer tissue was dramatic compared with the adjacent gastric 
mucosa. Gastric cancer cell lines also showed down-regulated HIC1 expression
compared with a human immortalized gastric mucosa cell line. One out of four
dsRNAs produced activation of HIC1 as assessed by real-time PCR and Western
blotting. Use of a cell counting kit 8 and clonogenicity assays indicated that
dsRNA-mediated re-expression of HIC1 inhibited cell proliferation and
clonogenicity in gastric cancer. Reactivation of HIC1 suppressed cell migration
and induced cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase, as well as induced apoptosis.
These results suggest that HIC1 is a potential target of gene therapy against
gastric cancer, and that dsRNAs could function as a therapeutic option for
up-regulating tumor suppressor genes in gastric cancer and other malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23769968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Dig Dis Sci. 2013 Oct;58(10):2850-7. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2742-6. Epub 2013
Jun 14.

Methylation pattern of THBS1, GATA-4, and HIC1 in pediatric and adult patients
infected with Helicobacter pylori.

Alvarez MC(1), Ladeira MS, Scaletsky IC, Pedrazzoli J Jr, Ribeiro ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade Integrada de Farmacologia e Gastroenterologia, Universidade São
Francisco, Av. São Francisco de Assis, 218. Jd. São José, Bragança Paulista, SP, 
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori infection is usually acquired in childhood and
persists into adulthood if untreated. The bacterium induces a chronic
inflammatory response, which is associated with epigenetic alterations in
oncogenes, tumor-suppressor genes, cell-cycle regulators, and cell-adhesion
molecules.
AIM: The aim of this study was to analyze the effect of H. pylori infection on
the methylation status of Thrombospondin-1 (THBS1), Hypermethylated in cancer 1
(HIC1) and Gata binding protein-4 (GATA-4) in gastric biopsy samples from
children and adults infected or uninfected with the bacterium and in samples
obtained from gastric cancer patients.
METHODS: The methylation pattern was analyzed with methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: Our results showed that H. pylori infection was associated with
methylation of the promoter regions of the THBS1 and GATA-4 genes in pediatric
and adult samples (p < 0.01). HIC1 showed the lowest level of methylation, which 
was not an early event during gastric carcinogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: The results from this study indicate that methylation of THBS1 and
GATA-4 occurs in the early stages of chronic gastritis and gastric cancer in
association with H. pylori infection; however, in gastric cancer samples, other
mechanisms cooperate with the down-regulation of these genes. Methylation of HIC1
may not be the principal mechanism implicated in its down-regulation in gastric
cancer samples.

PMID: 23765259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Oral Pathol Med. 2014 Jan;43(1):20-7. doi: 10.1111/jop.12087. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Genome-wide analysis of recurrent copy-number alterations and copy-neutral loss
of heterozygosity in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Marescalco MS(1), Capizzi C, Condorelli DF, Barresi V.

Author information: 
(1)Scuola Superiore di Catania, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the eighth most
commonly diagnosed malignancy worldwide, and it is generally characterized by a
poor prognosis. The aim of our study has been to identify possible recurring
genomic abnormalities in this malignancy, likely to have a key role in
pathogenesis.
METHODS: The single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-array data relative to 19 HNSCC
samples (submitted by Poage et al., PloS ONE 2010; 5: e9651), accessible at NCBI 
GEO database (GSE20939), were analyzed using criteria that take into account both
genotyping and intensity data. By this method, we determined the number and
localization of recurrent copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (CN-LOH) regions
and compared them with recurrent somatic copy-number alterations (CNAs).
RESULTS: Single-nucleotide polymorphism-array data analysis allowed us to detect,
for the first time in HNSCC, chromosomal segment of CN-LOHs in addition to CNAs. 
Chromosomal alterations have been detected in 14 (73.7%) of 19 samples, and the
12.1% of all alterations observed (LOHs, gains, and CN-LOHs) were CN-LOHs. The
most recurrent gain events, occurring in 78.5% of cases (11 samples), were
harbored within 8q21.11-q21.13 and 8q23.1-q24.22 loci, while the most recurrent
loss and CN-LOH events were present at 3p21.31-p21.1 (57.1%; 8 samples) and
17p13.3-p13.1 (28.6%; 4 samples) loci, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The investigated chromosomal regions, in particular those with
CN-LOH, harbored some interesting genes, such as HIC1, DOCK8, KANK1, and NOTCH1
whose role, mutations and epigenetic modifications in HNSCC deserve to be
investigated, in order to understand the significance of CN-LOH events in HNSCC
pathogenesis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23750501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Jun 19;105(12):887-98. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt118. Epub
2013 May 23.

A SUMOylation-dependent pathway regulates SIRT1 transcription and lung cancer
metastasis.

Sun L(1), Li H, Chen J, Dehennaut V, Zhao Y, Yang Y, Iwasaki Y, Kahn-Perles B,
Leprince D, Chen Q, Shen A, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Pathophysiology, 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a pivotal role in
lung cancer metastasis. The class III deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) possesses
both pro- and anticarcinogenic properties. The role of SIRT1 in lung cancer EMT
is largely undefined.
METHODS: The effect of SIRT1 on migration of lung cancer cells was evaluated by
wound healing assay in vitro and metastasis assay in nude mice in vivo. Protein
expression in human lung cancers and cultured lung cancer cells was assessed by
western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Interaction between protein and DNA
was measured by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. SIRT1 promoter activity was 
determined by reporter assay.
RESULTS: SIRT1 activation antagonized migration of lung cancer cells by
suppressing EMT in vitro. Activation of SIRT1 by resveratrol also statistically
significantly hampered (by 68.33%; P < .001, two-sided test) lung cancer cell
metastasis in vivo. Hypoxia repressed SIRT1 transcription through promoting the
competition between Sp1 and HIC1 on the SIRT1 proximal promoter in a
SUMOylation-dependent manner. Disruption of SUMOylation by targeting either Ubc9 
or PIASy restored SIRT1 expression in and favored an epithelial-like phenotype of
cancer cells, thereby preventing metastasis. Decreased SIRT1 combined with
elevated PIASy expression was implicated in more-invasive types of lung cancers
in humans.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel pathway that links SIRT1 down-regulation 
to hypoxia-induced EMT in lung cancer cells and may shed light on the development
of novel antitumor therapeutics.

PMID: 23704280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2013 Jul;17(7):811-27. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2013.788152. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

Deciphering HIC1 control pathways to reveal new avenues in cancer therapeutics.

Rood BR(1), Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's National Medical Center,
Division of Oncology, 111 Michigan Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The tumor suppressor gene HIC1 (Hypermethylated in Cancer 1), which
encodes a transcriptional repressor with multiple partners and multiple targets, 
is epigenetically silenced but not mutated in tumors. HIC1 has broad biological
roles during normal development and is implicated in many canonical processes of 
cancer such as control of cell growth, cell survival upon genotoxic stress, cell 
migration, and motility.
AREAS COVERED: The HIC1 literature herein discussed includes its discovery as a
candidate tumor suppressor gene hypermethylated or deleted in many human tumors, 
animal models establishing it as tumor suppressor gene, its role as a
sequence-specific transcriptional repressor recruiting several chromatin
regulatory complexes, its cognate target genes, and its functional roles in
normal tissues. Finally, this review discusses how its loss of function
contributes to the early steps in tumorigenesis.
EXPERT OPINION: Given HIC1's ability to direct repressive complexes to
sequence-specific binding sites associated with its target genes, its loss
results in specific changes in the transcriptional program of the cell. An
understanding of this program through identification of HIC1's target genes and
their involvement in feedback loops and cell process regulation will yield the
ability to leverage this knowledge for therapeutic translation.

PMCID: PMC3683369
PMID: 23566242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e56609. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056609. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Chordoma characterization of significant changes of the DNA methylation pattern.

Rinner B(1), Weinhaeusel A, Lohberger B, Froehlich EV, Pulverer W, Fischer C,
Meditz K, Scheipl S, Trajanoski S, Guelly C, Leithner A, Liegl B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Research, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria.
beate.rinner@medunigraz.at

Chordomas are rare mesenchymal tumors occurring exclusively in the midline from
clivus to sacrum. Early tumor detection is extremely important as these tumors
are resistant to chemotherapy and irradiation. Despite continuous research
efforts surgical excision remains the main treatment option. Because of the often
challenging anatomic location early detection is important to enable complete
tumor resection and to reduce the high incidence of local recurrences. The aim of
this study was to explore whether DNA methylation, a well known epigenetic
marker, may play a role in chordoma development and if hypermethylation of
specific CpG islands may serve as potential biomarkers correlated with SNP
analyses in chordoma. The study was performed on tumor samples from ten chordoma 
patients. We found significant genomic instability by Affymetrix 6.0. It was
interesting to see that all chordomas showed a loss of 3q26.32 (PIK 3CA) and
3q27.3 (BCL6) thus underlining the potential importance of the PI3K pathway in
chordoma development. By using the AITCpG360 methylation assay we elucidated 20
genes which were hyper/hypomethylated compared to normal blood. The most
promising candidates were nine hyper/hypomethylated genes C3, XIST, TACSTD2,
FMR1, HIC1, RARB, DLEC1, KL, and RASSF1. In summary, we have shown that chordomas
are characterized by a significant genomic instability and furthermore we
demonstrated a characteristic DNA methylation pattern. These findings add new
insights into chordoma development, diagnosis and potential new treatment
options.

PMCID: PMC3606365
PMID: 23533570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Mar 21;4:e553. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.69.

Decreased vitamin B12 availability induces ER stress through impaired
SIRT1-deacetylation of HSF1.

Ghemrawi R(1), Pooya S, Lorentz S, Gauchotte G, Arnold C, Gueant JL,
Battaglia-Hsu SF.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U954, Nutrition Génétique et Exposition aux Risques Environnementaux,
Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lorraine, Vanduvre les Nancy, France.

Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is a key determinant of S-adenosyl methionine
(SAM)-dependent epigenomic cellular regulations related to
methylation/acetylation and its deficiency produces neurodegenerative disorders
by elusive mechanisms. Sirtuin 1 deacetylase (SIRT1) triggers cell response to
nutritional stress through endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Recently, we have
established a N1E115 dopaminergic cell model by stable expression of a
transcobalamin-oleosin chimera (TO), which impairs cellular availability of
vitamin B12, decreases methionine synthase activity and SAM level, and reduces
cell proliferation. In contrast, oleosin-transcobalamin chimera (OT) does not
modify the phenotype of transfected cells. Presently, the impaired cellular
availability of vitamin B12 in TO cells activated irreversible ER stress
pathways, with increased P-eIF-2a, P-PERK, P-IRE1a, ATF6, ATF4, decreased
chaperon proteins and increased pro-apoptotic markers, CHOP and cleaved caspase
3, through reduced SIRT1 expression and consequently greater acetylation of
heat-shock factor protein 1 (HSF1). Adding either B12, SIRT1, or HSF1 activators 
as well as overexpressing SIRT1 or HSF1 dramatically reduced the activation of ER
stress pathways in TO cells. Conversely, impairing SIRT1 and HSF1 by siRNA,
expressing a dominant negative form of HSF1, or adding a SIRT1 inhibitor led to
B12-dependent ER stress in OT cells. Addition of B12 abolished the activation of 
stress transducers and apoptosis, and increased the expression of protein
chaperons in OT cells subjected to thapsigargin, a strong ER stress stimulator.
AdoX, an inhibitor of methyltransferase activities, produced similar effects than
decreased B12 availability on SIRT1 and ER stress by a mechanism related to
increased expression of hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1). Taken together, these
data show that cellular vitamin B12 has a strong modulating influence on ER
stress in N1E115 dopaminergic cells. The impaired cellular availability in
vitamin B12 induces irreversible ER stress by greater acetylation of HSF1 through
decreased SIRT1 expression, whereas adding vitamin B12 produces protective
effects in cells subjected to ER stress stimulation.

PMCID: PMC3615730
PMID: 23519122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cell Cycle. 2013 Apr 1;12(7):1058-70. doi: 10.4161/cc.24050. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

Genome-wide methylation profiling and the PI3K-AKT pathway analysis associated
with smoking in urothelial cell carcinoma.

Brait M(1), Munari E, LeBron C, Noordhuis MG, Begum S, Michailidi C,
Gonzalez-Roibon N, Maldonado L, Sen T, Guerrero-Preston R, Cope L, Parrella P,
Fazio VM, Ha PK, Netto GJ, Sidransky D, Hoque MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 May 15;12(10):1483.

Urothelial cell carcinoma (UCC) is the second most common genitourinary malignant
disease in the USA, and tobacco smoking is the major known risk factor for UCC
development. Exposure to carcinogens, such as those contained in tobacco smoke,
is known to directly or indirectly damage DNA, causing mutations, chromosomal
deletion events and epigenetic alterations in UCC. Molecular studies have shown
that chromosome 9 alterations and P53, RAS, RB and PTEN mutations are among the
most frequent events in UCC. Recent studies suggested that continuous tobacco
carcinogen exposure drives and enhances the selection of epigenetically altered
cells in UCC, predominantly in the invasive form of the disease. However, the
sequence of molecular events that leads to UCC after exposure to tobacco smoke is
not well understood. To elucidate molecular events that lead to UCC oncogenesis
and progression after tobacco exposure, we developed an in vitro cellular model
for smoking-induced UCC. SV-40 immortalized normal HUC1 human bladder epithelial 
cells were continuously exposed to 0.1% cigarette smoke extract (CSE) until
transformation occurred. Morphological alterations and increased cell
proliferation of non-malignant urothelial cells were observed after 4 months (mo)
of treatment with CSE. Anchorage-independent growth assessed by soft agar assay
and increase in the migratory and invasive potential was observed in urothelial
cells after 6 mo of CSE treatment. By performing a PCR mRNA expression array
specific to the PI3K-AKT pathway, we found that 26 genes were upregulated and 22 
genes were downregulated after 6 mo of CSE exposure of HUC1 cells. Among the
altered genes, PTEN, FOXO1, MAPK1 and PDK1 were downregulated in the transformed 
cells, while AKT1, AKT2, HRAS, RAC1 were upregulated. Validation by RT-PCR and
western blot analysis was then performed. Furthermore, genome-wide methylation
analysis revealed MCAM, DCC and HIC1 are hypermethylated in CSE-treated
urothelial cells when compared with non-CSE exposed cells. The methylation status
of these genes was validated using quantitative methylation-specific PCR (QMSP), 
confirming an increase in methylation of CSE-treated urothelial cells compared to
untreated controls. Therefore, our findings suggest that a tobacco signature
could emerge from distinctive patterns of genetic and epigenetic alterations and 
can be identified using an in vitro cellular model for the development of
smoking-induced cancer.

PMCID: PMC3646862
PMID: 23435205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 12;288(15):10254-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.421610. Epub
2013 Feb 15.

DNA double-strand breaks lead to activation of hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1)
by SUMOylation to regulate DNA repair.

Dehennaut V(1), Loison I, Dubuissez M, Nassour J, Abbadie C, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 8161, Université de Lille Nord de France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 
IFR 142, 1 rue Calmette, BP447, 59017 Lille Cedex, France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene frequently
epigenetically silenced in human cancers. HIC1 encodes a transcriptional
repressor involved in the regulation of growth control and DNA damage response.
We previously demonstrated that HIC1 can be either acetylated or SUMOylated on
lysine 314. This deacetylation/SUMOylation switch is governed by an unusual
complex made up of SIRT1 and HDAC4 which deacetylates and thereby favors
SUMOylation of HIC1 by a mechanism not yet fully deciphered. This switch
regulates the interaction of HIC1 with MTA1, a component of the NuRD complex and 
potentiates the repressor activity of HIC1. Here, we show that HIC1 silencing in 
human fibroblasts impacts the repair of DNA double-strand breaks whereas ectopic 
expression of wild-type HIC1, but not of nonsumoylatable mutants, leads to a
reduced number of <U+03B3>H2AX foci induced by etoposide treatment. In this way, we
demonstrate that DNA damage leads to (i) an enhanced HDAC4/Ubc9 interaction, (ii)
the activation of SIRT1 by SUMOylation (Lys-734), and (iii) the SUMO-dependent
recruitment of HDAC4 by SIRT1 which permits the deacetylation/SUMOylation switch 
of HIC1. Finally, we show that this increase of HIC1 SUMOylation favors the
HIC1/MTA1 interaction, thus demonstrating that HIC1 regulates DNA repair in a
SUMO-dependent way. Therefore, epigenetic HIC1 inactivation, which is an early
step in tumorigenesis, could contribute to the accumulation of DNA mutations
through impaired DNA repair and thus favor tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3624409
PMID: 23417673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 15;19(6):1400-10. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2888.
Epub 2013 Jan 22.

HIC1 modulates prostate cancer progression by epigenetic modification.

Zheng J(1), Wang J, Sun X, Hao M, Ding T, Xiong D, Wang X, Zhu Y, Xiao G, Cheng
G, Zhao M, Zhang J, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, China.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths among men
in Western counties, which has also occurred in Chinese male with markedly
increasing incidence in recent years. Although the mechanism underlying its
progression still remains unclear, epigenetic modifications are important
ethological parameters. The purpose of this study is to determine the methylation
status and function of hypermethylatioted in cancer 1 (HIC1) in prostate cancer
progression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The methylation status of HIC1 promoter was assayed in cell 
lines, tissues, and plasma of patients with prostate cancer by using
methylation-specific PCR and bisulfate sequencing PCR. The ability of HIC1 to
regulate proliferation, migration, and invasion was assessed by MTT,
scratch-healing assay, and reconstituted extracellular matrices in porous culture
chambers. Tumorigenesis, metastases, and bone destruction were analyzed in mice
bearing prostate cancer cells restoring HIC1 by using Xenogen IVIS with
radiographic system and small-animal positron emission tomography computed
tomographic images. Microarrays were searched for genes that had correlated
expression with HIC1 mRNA. Reporter gene assays were used to determine whether
HIC1 affected the expression of CXCR7, and chromatin immunoprecipitation was used
to determine whether HIC1 bound to CXCR7 promoters. All P values were determined 
using 2-sided tests.
RESULTS: The methylation status of 11 CpG sites within HIC1 promoter was
abundantly methylated in cell lines, tissues, and plasma of patients with
prostate cancer compared with those of respective normal controls. Restoring HIC1
expression in prostate cancer cells markedly inhibited proliferation, migration, 
and invasion and induced the apoptosis in these cells. Moreover, mice bearing
prostate cancer-restoring HIC1 cells had a marked effect on reducing tumor
growth, multiple tissue metastases, and bone destruction. Notably, we also
identified that the chemokine receptor CXCR7 is a direct downstream target gene
of HIC1. Finally, we showed that CXCR7 promoter in prostate cancer cells is
negatively regulated by HIC1, which may be responsible for prostate cancer
progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show for the first time that hypermethylation of HIC1
promoter results in loss of its repressive function, responsible for prostate
cancer progression and invasion. These findings suggest that therapies targeting 
epigenetic events regulating HIC1 expression may provide a more effective
strategy for prostate cancer treatment.

PMID: 23340301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 30;31:100. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-100.

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization for genomic-wide screening of DNA
copy number alterations in aggressive bone tumors.

Kanamori M(1), Sano A, Yasuda T, Hori T, Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Science, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama city,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan. kanamori@med.u-toyama.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The genetic pathways of aggressive changes of bone tumors are still
poorly understood. It is very important to analyze DNA copy number alterations
(DCNAs), to identify the molecular events in the step of progression to the
aggressive change of bone tissue.
METHODS: Genome-wide array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH)
was used to investigate DCNAs of 14 samples from 13 aggressive bone tumors, such 
as giant cell tumors (GCTs) and osteosarcoma (OS), etc.
RESULTS: Primary aggressive bone tumors had copy number gains of 17.8±12.7% in
the genome, and losses of 17.3±11.4% in 287 target clones (threshold for each
DCNA: <U+2266>085, 1.15<U+2266>). Genetic unstable cases, which were defined by the total DCNAs
aberration <U+2267>30%, were identified in 9 of 13 patients (3 of 7 GCTs and all
malignant tumors). High-level amplification of TGFß2, CCND3, WI-6509, SHGC-5557, 
TCL1A, CREBBP, HIC1, THRA, AFM217YD10, LAMA3, RUNX1 and D22S543, were commonly
observed in aggressive bone tumors. On the other hand, NRAS, D2S447, RAF1, ROBO1,
MYB, MOS, FGFR2, HRAS, D13S319, D13S327, D18S552, YES1 and DCC, were commonly
low. We compared genetic instability between a primary OS and its metastatic site
in Case #13. Metastatic lesion showed increased 9 DCNAs of remarkable change (m/p
ratio <U+2267>1.3 folds), compared to a primary lesion. D1S214, D1S1635, EXT1,
AFM137XA11, 8 M16/SP6, CCND2, IGH, 282 M15/SP6, HIC1 and LAMA3, were
overexpressed. We gave attention to HIC1 (17p13.3), which was common high
amplification in this series.
CONCLUSION: Our results may provide several entry points for the identification
of candidate genes associated with aggressive change of bone tumors. Especially, 
the locus 17p11-13 including HIC1 close to p53 was common high amplification in
this series and review of the literature.

PMCID: PMC3576288
PMID: 23199169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 4;430(1):49-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.045. Epub 2012 Nov 22.

Identification of p21 (CIP1/WAF1) as a direct target gene of HIC1
(Hypermethylated In Cancer 1).

Dehennaut V(1), Loison I, Boulay G, Van Rechem C, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université de Lille Nord de
France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, IFR 142, 1 rue Calmette, BP447, 59017 Lille
Cedex, France.

The tumor suppressor gene HIC1 (Hypermethylated In Cancer 1) encodes a
transcriptional repressor involved in the regulation of growth control and DNA
damage response. We previously demonstrated that p57Kip2; a member of the CIP/KIP
family of CDK (cyclin dependent kinase) inhibitors (CKI); is a direct target gene
of HIC1 in quiescent cells. Here we show that ectopic expression of HIC1 in
MDA-MB-231 cells or its overexpression in BJ-Tert fibroblasts induces decreased
mRNA and protein expression of p21 (CIP1/WAF1) another member of this CKI family 
that plays essential roles in the p53-mediated DNA damage response. Conversely,
knock-down of endogenous HIC1 in BJ-Tert through RNA interference up-regulates
p21 in basal conditions and further potentiates this CKI in response to apoptotic
etoposide-induced DNA damage. Through promoter luciferase activity and chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we demonstrate that HIC1 is a direct transcriptional 
repressor of p21. Thus, our results further demonstrate that HIC1 is a key player
in the regulation of the DNA damage response.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23178572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Int J Epidemiol. 2012 Dec;41(6):1753-60; discussion 1761-3. doi:
10.1093/ije/dys129. Epub 2012 Oct 13.

DNA methylation differences in exposed workers and nearby residents of the Ma Ta 
Phut industrial estate, Rayong, Thailand.

Peluso M(1), Bollati V, Munnia A, Srivatanakul P, Jedpiyawongse A, Sangrajrang S,
Piro S, Ceppi M, Bertazzi PA, Boffetta P, Baccarelli AA.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Risk Factor Branch, Cancer Prevention and Research Institute, Florence,
Italy.

Comment in
    Int J Epidemiol. 2012 Dec;41(6):1761-3.

BACKGROUND: Adverse biological effects from airborne pollutants are a primary
environmental concern in highly industrialized areas. Recent studies linked air
pollution exposures with altered blood Deoxyribo-nucleic acid (DNA) methylation, 
but effects from industrial sources and underlying biological mechanisms are
still largely unexplored.
METHODS: The Ma Ta Phut industrial estate (MIE) in Rayong, Thailand hosts one of 
the largest steel, oil refinery and petrochemical complexes in south-eastern
Asia. We measured a panel of blood DNA methylation markers previously associated 
with air pollution exposures, including repeated elements [long interspersed
nuclear element-1 (LINE-1) and Alu] and genes [p53, hypermethylated-in-cancer-1
(HIC1), p16 and interleukin-6 (IL-6)], in 67 MIE workers, 65 Ma Ta Phut residents
and 45 rural controls. To evaluate the role of DNA damage and oxidation, we
correlated DNA methylation measures with bulky DNA and
3-(2-deoxy-ß-D-erythro-pentafuranosyl)pyrimido[1,2-a]purin-10(3H)-one
deoxyguanosine (M(1)dG) adducts.
RESULTS: In covariate-adjusted models, MIE workers, compared with rural
residents, showed lower LINE-1 (74.8% vs 78.0%; P < 0.001), p53 (8.0% vs 15.7%; P
< 0.001) and IL-6 methylation (39.2% vs 45.0%; P = 0.027) and higher HIC1
methylation (22.2% vs 15.3%, P < 0.001). For all four markers, Ma Ta Phut
residents exhibited methylation levels intermediate between MIE workers and rural
controls (LINE-1, 75.7%, P < 0.001; p53, 9.0%, P < 0.001; IL-6, 39.8%, P = 0.041;
HIC1, 17.8%, P = 0.05; all P-values vs rural controls). Bulky DNA adducts showed 
negative correlation with p53 methylation (P = 0.01). M(1)dG showed negative
correlations with LINE-1 (P = 0.003) and IL-6 methylation (P = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that industrial exposures may induce
alterations of DNA methylation patterns detectable in blood leucocyte DNA.
Correlation of DNA adducts with DNA hypomethylation suggests potential mediation 
by DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC3535756
PMID: 23064502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2012 Nov;21(11):2069-75. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-12-0755. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Methylation of the polycomb group target genes is a possible biomarker for
favorable prognosis in colorectal cancer.

Dallol A(1), Al-Maghrabi J, Buhmeida A, Gari MA, Chaudhary AG, Schulten HJ,
Abuzenadah AM, Al-Ahwal MS, Sibiany A, Al-Qahtani MH.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Fahad Medical Research
Center, King Abdulaziz University, P.O. Box 80216, 21589 Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. adallol@kau.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common cancer in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with ever increasing incidence rates. DNA methylation is 
a common event in CRC where it is now considered an important phenomenon in CRC
carcinogenesis and useful for the classification and prognosis of CRC.
METHODS: To gain insight into the molecular mechanisms underpinning CRC in Saudi 
Arabian patients, we profiled the DNA methylation frequency of key genes (MLH1,
MSH2, RASSF1A, SLIT2, HIC1, MGMT, SFRP1, MYOD1, APC, CDKN2A, as well as five CIMP
markers) in 120 sporadic CRC cases. CRC tumors originating from the rectum, left,
and right colons are represented in this cohort of formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissues.
RESULTS: The most common methylation frequency was detected in the polycomb group
target genes (PCGT) including SFRP1 (70%), MYOD1 (60.8%), HIC1 (61.7%), and SLIT2
(56.7%). In addition, MGMT methylation was detected at a high frequency (68.3%). 
RASSF1A, APC, and CDKN2A methylation frequencies were 42.5%, 25%, and 32.8%,
respectively. K-means clustering analysis of the methylation events results in
the clustering of the CRC samples into three groups depending on the level of
methylation detected.
CONCLUSION: Group II (PCGT methylation and CIMP-negative) methylation signature
carried a favorable prognosis for male patients, whereas older patients with
group I rare methylation signature have a potentially poorer clinical outcome.
IMPACT: Methylation of the PCGT genes along with RASSF1A, APC, and MGMT can be
potentially used as a new biomarker for the classification and prognosis of CRC
tumors and independently of where the tumor has originated.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 23010642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;754:195-211. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-9967-2_10.

Epigenetic reprogramming of mesenchymal stem cells.

Leu YW(1), Huang TH, Hsiao SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi 621,
Taiwan. bioywl@ccu.edu.tw

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent stem cells of mesodermal origin
that can be isolated from various sources and induced into different cell types. 
Although MSCs possess immune privilege and are more easily obtained than
embryonic stem cells, their propensity to tumorigenesis has not been fully
explored. Epigenomic changes in DNA methylation and chromatin structure have been
hypothesized to be critical in the determination of lineage-specific
differentiation and tumorigenesis of MSCs, but this has not been formally proven.
We applied a targeted DNA methylation method to methylate a Polycomb group
protein-governed gene, Trip10, in MSCs, which accelerated the cell fate
determination of MSCs. In addition, targeted methylation of HIC1 and RassF1A,
both tumor suppressor genes, transformed MSCs into tumor stem cell-like cells.
This new method will allow better control of the differentiation of MSCs and
their use in downstream applications.

PMID: 22956503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Anticancer Drugs. 2012 Nov;23(10):1054-66.

Valproic acid shows a potent antitumor effect with alteration of DNA methylation 
in neuroblastoma.

Gu S(1), Tian Y, Chlenski A, Salwen HR, Lu Z, Raj JU, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Epigenetic aberrations and a CpG island methylator phenotype are associated with 
poor outcome in children with neuroblastoma (NB). Previously, we have shown that 
valproic acid (VPA), a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, exerts antitumor
effects in an NB xenograft model. However, the underlying antitumor molecular
mechanisms are largely unknown. In this study, we examined the role of HDAC in
cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, gene expression patterns, and
epigenome in NB. Cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, caspase activity,
RNA and protein expression, quantitative methylation, and global DNA methylation 
were examined in NBL-W-N and LA1-55n NB cell lines. Our studies showed that
inhibition of HDAC decreased NB proliferation, and induced caspase activity and
G1 growth arrest. Expression patterns of cancer-related genes were modulated by
VPA. The expression of THBS1, CASP8, SPARC, CDKN1A, HIC1, CDKN1B, and HIN1 was
upregulated, and that of MYCN and TIG1 was downregulated. HDAC inhibition
decreased methylation levels of THBS1 and RASSF1A promoters. Inhibition of HDAC
increased acetylation of histone 4 and overall DNA methylation levels. Our
studies showed that inhibition of HDAC blocked cell proliferation and cell cycle 
progression in relation to alteration in cancer-related genes, increased overall 
DNA methylation, and decreased methylation of tumor suppressor genes. Further
studies examining the antitumor effects of VPA in NB are warranted.

PMCID: PMC3710400
PMID: 22863973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 24;425(2):290-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.084. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

Clustered DNA methylation changes in polycomb target genes in early-stage liver
cancer.

Chen YL(1), Ko CJ, Lin PY, Chuang WL, Hsu CC, Chu PY, Pai MY, Chang CC, Kuo MH,
Chu YR, Tung CH, Huang TH, Leu YW, Hsiao SH.

Author information: 
(1)Transplant Medicine & Surgery Research Centre, Changhua Christian Hospital,
Changhua, Taiwan.

Polycomb-group proteins mark specific chromatin conformations in embryonic and
somatic stem cells that are critical for maintenance of their "stemness". These
proteins also mark altered chromatin modifications identified in various cancers.
In normal differentiated cells or advanced cancerous cells, these
polycomb-associated loci are frequently associated with increased DNA
methylation. It has thus been hypothesized that changes in DNA methylation status
within polycomb-associated loci may dictate cell fate and that abnormal
methylation within these loci may be associated with tumor development. To assess
this, we examined the methylation states of four polycomb target loci -Trip10,
Casp8AP2, ENSA, and ZNF484 - in liver cancer. These four targets were selected
because their methylation levels are increased during mesenchymal stem
cell-to-liver differentiation. We found that these four loci were hypomethylated 
in most early-stage liver cancer specimens. For comparison, two non-polycomb
tumor suppressor genes, HIC1 and RassF1A, were also examined. Whereas the
methylation level of HIC1 did not differ significantly between normal and tumor
samples, RassF1A was significantly hypermethylated in liver tumor samples.
Unsupervised clustering analysis classified the methylation changes within
polycomb and non-polycomb targets to be independent, indicating independent
epigenetic evolution. Thus, pre-deposited polycomb marks within somatic stem
cells may contribute to the determination of methylation changes during hepatic
tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22842566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Head Neck Pathol. 2013 Mar;7(1):76-84. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0379-y. Epub 2012 
Jun 28.

Mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinoma of the nasal cavity: clinico-pathologic
and molecular study of a case and review of the literature.

La Rosa S(1), Furlan D, Franzi F, Battaglia P, Frattini M, Zanellato E, Marando
A, Sahnane N, Turri-Zanoni M, Castelnuovo P, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, viale Borri 57, 21100 Varese,
Italy. stefano.larosa@ospedale.varese.it

Sinonasal intestinal-type adenocarcinomas (ITACs) are rare neoplasms
histologically resembling intestinal adenocarcinomas. Although a neuroendocrine
differentiation in ITACs has been described, true mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine
carcinomas, neoplasms in which each component represents at least 30 % of the
lesion, are extremely rare and their molecular alterations are largely unknown.
We describe herein the clinico-pathologic features, the methylation profile,
chromosomal gains and losses, and mutation analysis of KRAS, BRAF and p53 in a
nasal mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinoma resected in a 79-year-old man. The 
tumor was composed of an ITAC and a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinoma. Both exocrine and neuroendocrine components were CK8, CK20, CDX2 and
p53 positive, and CK7 and TTF1 negative. The neuroendocrine component also showed
immunoreactivity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, serotonin and glicentin.
Gains and losses were found at following chromosome regions: 17p13 (TP53), 14q24 
(MLH3), 19q13 (KLK3), 5q21 (APC), 7q21 (CDK6), 9q34 (DAPK1), 12p13 (TNFRSF 1A,
CDKN1B), 13q12 (BRCA2), 17p13.3 (HIC1), 18q21 (BCL2), and 22q12 (TIMP3). Aberrant
methylation was detected only in the neuroendocrine component and involved APC
and DAPK1 genes. No mutation of KRAS (exons 2-4), BRAF (exon 15), and p53 (exons 
4-10) was found in both components. The results suggest a monoclonal origin of
the tumor from a pluripotent cell undergoing a biphenotypic differentiation and
that the neuroendocrine differentiation may be from an exocrine to an endocrine
pathway. We have also reviewed the literature on sinonasal mixed
exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinomas to give to the reader a comprehensive overview
of these very rare tumor types.

PMCID: PMC3597157
PMID: 22740238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Oct;369(1-2):1-7. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1362-3. Epub
2012 Jun 23.

Cervical cancer pathogenesis is associated with one-carbon metabolism.

Pathak S(1), Bhatla N, Singh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi, India.

Cervical cancer is the most common cancer among women in India and a leading
cause of death in these women. Most cases of cervical cancer are associated with 
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection of the high-risk type. It has been reported 
that aberrant DNA methylation can be associated with HPV infection and cervical
cancer, and folate is directly involved in DNA methylation via one-carbon
metabolism. We aimed to study the importance of one-carbon metabolism in the
progression of cervical carcinogenesis by examining serum levels of vitamin B(12)
(cobalamin), homocysteine, and folate and DNA methylation of tumor suppressor
genes CDH1, HIC1, and Retinoic acid receptor beta (RARß) amid these women ranging
from normal to squamous intraepithelial neoplastic lesions (SIL) to cervical
cancer. Blood and tissue samples were collected from normal (n = 35), SILs (n =
27), and cervical cancer patients (n = 38) in the age group of 26-70 years.
Measurement of serum vitamin B(12), folate, and homocysteine were done using kits
(Immulite). Promoter methylation was examined using methylation-specific PCR. The
frequency of promoter hypermethylation for all the three tumor suppressor genes
CDH1, HIC1, and RARß showed an increasing trend from normal to dysplastic to
invasive cervical cancer (p < 0.05). We observed that lower folate and vitamin
B(12) status were associated with HPV infection. Taken together, our findings
suggest a role of folate and vitamin B(12) in modulating the risk of cervical
cancer and HPV infection. CDH1, HIC1, and RARß genes can be used as potential
biomarkers of cervical cancer risk assessment.

PMID: 22729741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oncotarget. 2012 Apr;3(4):450-61.

Methylation profiling of normal individuals reveals mosaic promoter methylation
of cancer-associated genes.

Kristensen LS(1), Raynor MP, Candiloro I, Dobrovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Research and Development Laboratory, Department of
Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia.

Epigenetic silencing by promoter methylation of genes associated with cancer
initiation and progression is a hallmark of tumour cells. As a consequence,
testing for DNA methylation biomarkers in plasma or other body fluids shows great
promise for detection of malignancies at early stages and/or for monitoring
response to treatment. However, DNA from normal leukocytes may contribute to the 
DNA in plasma and will affect biomarker specificity if there is any methylation
in the leukocytes. DNA from 48 samples of normal peripheral blood mononuclear
cells was evaluated for the presence of methylation of a panel of DNA methylation
biomarkers that have been implicated in cancer. SMART-MSP, a methylation specific
PCR (MSP) methodology based on real time PCR amplification, high-resolution
melting and strategic primer design, enabled quantitative detection of low levels
of methylated DNA. Methylation was observed in all tested mononuclear cell DNA
samples for the CDH1 and HIC1 promoters and in majority of DNA samples for the
TWIST1 and DAPK1 promoters. APC and RARB promoter methylation, at a lower average
level, was also detected in a substantial proportion of DNA samples. We found no 
BRCA1, CDKN2A, GSTP1 and RASSF1A promoter methylation in this sample set. Several
individuals had higher levels of methylation at several loci suggestive of a
methylator phenotype. In conclusion, methylation of many potential DNA
methylation biomarkers can be detected in normal peripheral blood mononuclear
cells, and is likely to affect their specificity for detecting low level disease.
However, we found no evidence of promoter methylation for other genes indicating 
that panels of analytically sensitive and specific methylation biomarkers in body
fluids can be obtained.

PMCID: PMC3380579
PMID: 22570110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Dec;20 Suppl 3:S301-11. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2364-9. Epub
2012 May 3.

Hypermethylation of HIC1 promoter and aberrant expression of HIC1/SIRT1 might
contribute to the carcinogenesis of pancreatic cancer.

Zhao G(1), Qin Q, Zhang J, Liu Y, Deng S, Liu L, Wang B, Tian K, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Pancreatic Disease Institute, Union Hospital, Wuhan City, Hubei Province,
China, zhaogang1427@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: DNA hypermethylation is proved to be involved in carcinogenesis.
Because chronic pancreatitis (CP) is a consistent risk factor for pancreatic
cancer, the possible alteration and tumor contribute effects of hypermethylated
in cancer-1 (HIC1) promoter methylation in CP was investigated.
METHODS: Methylation of HIC1 promoter HIC1 and SIRT1 expression were detected in 
human normal pancreas (NP), CP and pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues.
Furthermore, HIC1/SIRT1 pathway was regulated by demethylating reagent and
exogenous expression in PANC-1, BxPC-3 and AsPC-1 cell lines, cell biology
behavior including proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle and senescence were
detected.
RESULTS: The methylation of HIC1 promoter was demonstrated in 70.3 % pancreatic
carcinoma (45 of 64), 47.5 % CP (19 of 40) and 11.4 % NP tissues (4 of 35).
Moreover, hypermethylation of HIC1 promoter and deregulation of HIC1 expression
in pancreatic cancer were significantly related to high-stage tumor and older
patient age. HIC1 promoter hypermethylation was also observed in pancreatic
cancer cell lines including PANC-1, BxPC-3 and AsPC-1. Restoration of HIC1
function with 5-aza-dC treatment or pCDNA3FlagHIC1 plasmid transfection leaded to
a reduction in cell proliferation, obvious cell senescence, cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, accompanied with acetylated p53 and p21(WAF1 of Cip1) upregulation.
While after further transfected with pCDNA3FlagSIRT1 plasmid, the growth
inhibition, senescence and cycle arrest without apoptosis were partially rescued 
with deregulated acetylated p53 and p21(WAF1 of Cip1).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that hypermethylation of HIC1 promoter in CP
may contribute to the aberrant expression of HIC1/SIRT1 pathway and then involve 
in the pancreatic carcinogenesis.

PMID: 22552606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jul;97(7):E1307-15. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3136. Epub
2012 Apr 27.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), a tumor suppressor gene epigenetically
deregulated in hyperparathyroid tumors by histone H3 lysine modification.

Svedlund J(1), Koskinen Edblom S, Marquez VE, Åkerström G, Björklund P, Westin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University
Hospital, Entrance 70, third floor, SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

CONTEXT: Primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT) resulting from parathyroid tumors is 
a common endocrine disorder with incompletely understood etiology. In renal
failure, secondary hyperparathyroidism (sHPT) occurs with multiple tumor
development as a result of calcium and vitamin D regulatory disturbance.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate whether HIC1 may act as a
tumor suppressor in the parathyroid glands and whether deregulated expression
involves epigenetic mechanisms.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Parathyroid tumors from patients with pHPT included single 
adenomas, multiple tumors from the same patient, and cancer. Hyperplastic
parathyroid glands from patients with sHPT and hypercalcemia and normal
parathyroid tissue specimens were included in the study. Quantitative RT-PCR,
bisulfite pyrosequencing, colony formation assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, 
and RNA interference was used.
RESULTS: HIC1 was generally underexpressed regardless of the hyperparathyroid
disease state including multiple parathyroid tumors from the same patient, and
overexpression of HIC1 led to a decrease in clonogenic survival of parathyroid
tumor cells. Only the carcinomas showed a high methylation level and reduced HIC1
expression. Cell culture experiments, including use of primary parathyroid tumor 
cells prepared directly after operation, the general histone methyltransferase
inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and RNA
interference of DNA methyltransferases and EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2),
supported a role of repressive histone H3 modifications (H3K27me2/3) rather than 
DNA methylation in repression of HIC1.
CONCLUSIONS: The results strongly support a growth-regulatory role of HIC1 in the
parathyroid glands and suggest that perturbed expression of HIC1 may represent an
early event during tumor development. Repressive histone modification H3K27me2/3 
is involved in repression of HIC1 expression in hyperparathyroid tumors.

PMID: 22544915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cancer Microenviron. 2012 Dec;5(3):285-93. doi: 10.1007/s12307-012-0103-1. Epub
2012 Apr 13.

Signification of Hypermethylated in Cancer 1 (HIC1) as Tumor Suppressor Gene in
Tumor Progression.

Zheng J(1), Xiong D, Sun X, Wang J, Hao M, Ding T, Xiao G, Wang X, Mao Y, Fu Y,
Shen K, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cell Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1(HIC1) was identified as a strong suppressor gene in
chromosome region 17p13.3 telomeric to TP53. This gene encodes a transcriptional 
repressor and is ubiquitously expressed in normal tissues but downexpressed in
different tumor tissues where it is hypermethylated. The hypermethylation of this
chromosomal region leads to epigenetic inactivation of HIC1, which would prompt
cancer cells to alter survival and signaling pathways or specific transcription
factors during the period of tumorigenesis. In vitro, HIC1 function is mainly a
sequence-specific transcriptional repressor interacting with a still growing
range of histone deacetylase(HDAC)-dependent and HDAC-independent corepressor
complexes. Furthermore, a role for HIC1 in tumor development is firmly supported 
by Hic1 deficient mouse model and two double heterozygote models cooperate with
p53 and Ptch1. Notably, our findings suggest that potential factors derived from 
tumor microenviroment may play a role in modulating HIC1 expression in tumor
cells by epigenetic modification, which is responsible for tumor progression. In 
this review, we will describe genomic and proteinic structure of HIC1, and
summary the potential role of HIC1 in human various solid tumors and leukemia,
and explore the influence of tumor microenviroment on inducing HIC1 expression in
tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC3460058
PMID: 22528874  [PubMed]


60. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 4;421(2):384-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.026. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Molecular dissection of the interaction between HIC1 and SIRT1.

Dehennaut V(1), Loison I, Pinte S, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université de Lille Nord de
France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, IFR 142, 1 rue Calmette, BP447, 59017 Lille
Cedex, France.

HIC1 (Hypermethylated in Cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene frequently
epigenetically silenced in human cancers. HIC1 encodes a transcriptional
repressor involved in the regulation of growth control, cell survival and DNA
damage response. The deacetylase SIRT1 regulates the repressive capacity of HIC1 
in several fashions. First SIRT1 interacts with the BTB/POZ domain of HIC1 to
form a transcriptional repression complex that prevents the transcription of
SIRT1 itself. SIRT1 is also responsible of the deacetylation of the lysine 314 of
HIC1 that allows its subsequent SUMOylation which in turn favors its interaction 
with the NuRD complex. To better understand the interplay between HIC1 and SIRT1,
we performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments to define the domains essential
for the HIC1/SIRT1 interaction. We demonstrated that the isolated four last zinc 
fingers of HIC1 were capable to interact with SIRT1 and that the amino-acids
610-677 of SIRT1 encompassing the ESA region of the deacetylase were crucial for 
the HIC1/SIRT1 interaction and HIC1 deacetylation. Finally we demonstrated that
this interaction mainly depends on CKII-mediated phosphorylation of SIRT1 serine 
659/661 which occurs upon DNA damage. Therefore, our results demonstrate that the
activating acetylation to SUMOylation switch of HIC1 is favored by genotoxic
stresses to regulate the DNA damage response.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22510409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hepatology. 2012 Sep;56(3):994-1003. doi: 10.1002/hep.25706. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Characteristic patterns of altered DNA methylation predict emergence of human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Nishida N(1), Kudo M, Nagasaka T, Ikai I, Goel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. ajay.goel@baylorhealth.edu

We aimed to identify the specific subset of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) that
are methylation-silenced during the earliest steps of hepatocarcinogenesis, and
to further evaluate whether these genes can serve as predictive biomarkers of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) emergence. A total of 482 liver tissues including 
177 pairs of HCCs and matched nontumor livers and 128 liver biopsies from chronic
hepatitis C (CHC) patients were analyzed for quantitative methylation analysis in
24 TSG promoters and three MINT loci. The tumors were classified as early,
less-progressed, and highly progressed HCCs using histology and radiological
approaches. A subset of TSGs that harbored distinctly high levels of methylation 
in early HCCs were selected. Based on the methylation profiles of these genes,
Kaplan-Meier analyses were performed to determine time-to-HCC occurrence in CHC
patients. Subsequently, multivariate analysis was performed using age, gender,
fibrosis stage, and number of methylated TSGs as covariates. Among TSGs analyzed,
a subset of eight TSGs (HIC1, GSTP1, SOCS1, RASSF1, CDKN2A, APC, RUNX3, and
PRDM2) demonstrated a distinct cluster by hierarchical clustering and receiver
operating characteristic analyses. This subset of TSGs showed significantly
higher methylation levels in the early HCCs (P < 0.0001). In the CHC patients,
methylation frequencies in these TSGs were associated with shorter time-to-HCC
occurrence (P < 0.0001), and number of methylated genes was an independent risk
factor for HCC (hazard ratio = 5.21, 95% confidence interval = 2.25-11.76, P =
0.0002).CONCLUSION: Epigenetic inactivation of a subset of TSGs plays a critical 
role in the earliest steps of hepatocarcinogenesis. Furthermore, epigenetic
inactivation of these genes in CHC provides a prognostic value for determining
the risk for developing HCC later in life.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22407776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Int J Oncol. 2012 May;40(5):1650-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1367. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Prognostic and diagnostic relevance of hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) CpG
island methylation in renal cell carcinoma.

Eggers H(1), Steffens S, Grosshennig A, Becker JU, Hennenlotter J, Stenzl A,
Merseburger AS, Kuczyk MA, Serth J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

The tumour suppressor gene hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) is a
transcriptional repressor, which functionally cooperates with p53. Loss of HIC1
function is associated with the development of various tumor entities. The aim of
this study was to elucidate the relevance of CpG island (CGI) methylation of HIC1
in renal cell carcinoma (RCC). DNA methylation of HIC1 was analysed in a total of
98 tumor and 70 tumor adjacent normal specimens. After conducting bisulfite
conversion, relative methylation levels were quantitated using pyrosequencing.
Relative methylation values were compared for paired tumor and normal specimen
and for correlation with clinico-pathologic and follow-up data of patients.
Tumor-specific hypermethylation could not be detected for the subregion of the
HIC1 - CGI analyzed in this study. Comparing the level of methylation in tumors
to clinicopathological data solely, patients without lymph node metastases
demonstrated a higher level of methylation compared to patients with lymph node
metastases (p=0.030). Patients recurrence-free survival (p=0.0074) both in
univariate as well as bivariate cox regression analysis. This study identifies
HIC1 hypermethylation in tumors as an independent predictor of reduced
recurrence-free survival, which fits into our current understanding of
hypermethylated HIC1 being a marker for poor prognosis. Therefore, HIC1 - CGI
methylation could be a candidate marker to improve individualized therapy and
risk stratification.

PMID: 22327210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 23;287(13):10509-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.320234. Epub
2012 Feb 7.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) recruits polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
to a subset of its target genes through interaction with human polycomb-like
(hPCL) proteins.

Boulay G(1), Dubuissez M, Van Rechem C, Forget A, Helin K, Ayrault O, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Université Lille Nord de France, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Lille 59021, France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene epigenetically
silenced or deleted in many human cancers. HIC1 is involved in regulatory loops
modulating p53- and E2F1-dependent cell survival, growth control, and stress
responses. HIC1 is also essential for normal development because Hic1-deficient
mice die perinatally and exhibit gross developmental defects throughout the
second half of development. HIC1 encodes a transcriptional repressor with five
C(2)H(2) zinc fingers mediating sequence-specific DNA binding and two repression 
domains: an N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and a central region recruiting CtBP and
NuRD complexes. By yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the Polycomb-like
protein hPCL3 as a novel co-repressor for HIC1. Using multiple biochemical
strategies, we demonstrated that HIC1 interacts with hPCL3 and its paralog PHF1
to form a stable complex with the PRC2 members EZH2, EED, and Suz12. Confirming
the implication of HIC1 in Polycomb recruitment, we showed that HIC1 shares some 
of its target genes with PRC2, including ATOH1. Depletion of HIC1 by siRNA
interference leads to a partial displacement of EZH2 from the ATOH1 promoter.
Furthermore, in vivo, ATOH1 repression by HIC1 is associated with Polycomb
activity during mouse cerebellar development. Thus, our results identify HIC1 as 
the first transcription factor in mammals able to recruit PRC2 to some target
promoters through its interaction with Polycomb-like proteins.

PMCID: PMC3323039
PMID: 22315224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cells Tissues Organs. 2012;196(2):129-36. doi: 10.1159/000332988. Epub 2012 Jan
24.

Pancreatic ductal cells acquire mesenchymal characteristics through cell fusion
with bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and SIRT1 attenuates the
apoptosis of hybrid cells.

Gou S(1), Liu T, Li X, Cui J, Wan C, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Pancreatic Disease Institute, Department of General Surgery, Union Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China.

Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (bMSCs) contribute to tissue repair
and regeneration. Cell fusion between somatic cells and bMSCs to form hybrid
cells may have an important role in tissue repair through the subsequent
reprogramming of the somatic cell nucleus. Few studies have assessed the
mesenchymal characteristics of fusion-induced hybrid cells and their survival
mechanisms. In this study, we investigated the effect of cell fusion on the
biological characteristics of pancreatic ductal cells (PDCs) and on the survival 
mechanism of hybrid cells. To this end, we generated mouse-mouse hybrid cells in 
vitro by polyethylene glycol-mediated fusion of primary mouse bMSCs with primary 
mouse PDCs. Hybrid cells showed an enhanced capacity for proliferation and
self-renewal compared with PDCs. No PDC had the capacity for
anchorage-independent growth or invasion into Matrigel, but some hybrid cells
were able to form colonies in soft agar and invade Matrigel. Expression of the
tumor suppressor protein p53, which initiates apoptosis, was detected in hybrid
cells but not in PDCs or bMSCs. However, the p53 deacetylase, sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), 
was also detected in hybrid cells, and the level of acetylated p53, the active
form, was low. The addition of nicotinamide (Nam) inhibited the deacetylation
activity of SIRT1 on p53 and induced cell apoptosis in hybrid cells. This study
demonstrated that PDCs could obtain high proliferation rates, self-renewal
capabilities, and mesenchymal characteristics by fusion with bMSCs. SIRT1
expression in the hybrid cells attenuated their apoptosis.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22269821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5379-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.304287. Epub 2011 
Dec 22.

Loss of Hypermethylated in Cancer 1 (HIC1) in breast cancer cells contributes to 
stress-induced migration and invasion through ß-2 adrenergic receptor (ADRB2)
misregulation.

Boulay G(1), Malaquin N, Loison I, Foveau B, Van Rechem C, Rood BR, Pourtier A,
Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, CNRS-Université de Lille 1-Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille
59021, France.

The transcriptional repressor HIC1 (Hypermethylated in Cancer 1) is a tumor
suppressor gene inactivated in many human cancers including breast carcinomas. In
this study, we show that HIC1 is a direct transcriptional repressor of ß-2
adrenergic receptor (ADRB2). Through promoter luciferase activity, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and sequential ChIP experiments, we demonstrate that
ADRB2 is a direct target gene of HIC1, endogenously in WI-38 cells and following 
HIC1 re-expression in breast cancer cells. Agonist-mediated stimulation of ADRB2 
increases the migration and invasion of highly malignant MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells but these effects are abolished following HIC1 re-expression or specific
down-regulation of ADRB2 by siRNA treatment. Our results suggest that early
inactivation of HIC1 in breast carcinomas could predispose to stress-induced
metastasis through up-regulation of the ß-2 adrenergic receptor.

PMCID: PMC3285317
PMID: 22194601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Brain Pathol. 2012 Sep;22(5):625-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2011.00561.x. Epub 
2012 Feb 13.

Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors (ATRTs): the British Columbia's Children's
Hospital's experience, 1986-2006.

Fleming AJ(1), Hukin J, Rassekh R, Fryer C, Kim J, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Birks
DK, Huang A, Yip S, Dunham C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, British
Columbia Children's Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

As "atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors" (ATRTs) may mimic "small round blue cell
tumors" (SRBCT), we reexamined our ATRT experience focusing upon INI-1
immunohistochemistry (IHC). All high-grade pediatric brain tumors occurring from 
1986-2006 at our institution underwent INI-1 IHC. Clinicopathologic data from
each INI-1 immunonegative case were reviewed. Additional genetic, epigenetic and 
IHC analyses (including interrogation of INI-1 and CLDN6) were performed on a
subset of the INI-1 immunonegative cases. Twelve INI-1 IHC negative tumors were
identified retrospectively, of which only two previously carried the diagnosis of
ATRT. Overall, the clinicopathologic and genetic data supported the assertion
that all 12 cases represented ATRT. Unexpectedly, three long-term survivors (4.2,
7.0 and 8.5 years) were identified. As hypothesized, "teratoid" and "rhabdoid"
histologic features were relatively infrequent despite gross total resections in 
some cases. Methylation specific polymer chain reaction (PCR) (MSP) revealed a
uniform methylation pattern across all cases and gene promoters tested (ie, MGMT,
HIC1, MLH3 and RASSF1); notably, all cases demonstrated unmethylated MGMT
promoters. Our data demonstate that a primitive non-rhabdoid histophenotype is
common among ATRTs and highlights the diagnostic importance of INI-1 IHC.
Epigenetically, the MGMT promoter is usually unmethylated in ATRT, suggesting
that potential temozolomide-based chemotherapy may be of limited efficacy.

© 2011 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2011 International Society of
Neuropathology.

PMID: 22188464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5366-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.329466. Epub 2011 
Dec 19.

The receptor tyrosine kinase EphA2 is a direct target gene of hypermethylated in 
cancer 1 (HIC1).

Foveau B(1), Boulay G, Pinte S, Van Rechem C, Rood BR, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, CNRS-Institut Pasteur de Lille-Université de Lille 1, 59021
Lille Cedex, France.

The tumor suppressor gene hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), which encodes a
transcriptional repressor, is epigenetically silenced in many human tumors. Here,
we show that ectopic expression of HIC1 in the highly malignant MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cell line severely impairs cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in 
vitro. In parallel, infection of breast cancer cell lines with a retrovirus
expressing HIC1 also induces decreased mRNA and protein expression of the
tyrosine kinase receptor EphA2. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
and sequential ChIP experiments demonstrate that endogenous HIC1 proteins are
bound, together with the MTA1 corepressor, to the EphA2 promoter in WI38 cells.
Taken together, our results identify EphA2 as a new direct target gene of HIC1.
Finally, we observe that inactivation of endogenous HIC1 through RNA interference
in normal breast epithelial cells results in the up-regulation of EphA2 and is
correlated with increased cellular migration. To conclude, our results involve
the tumor suppressor HIC1 in the transcriptional regulation of the tyrosine
kinase receptor EphA2, whose ligand ephrin-A1 is also a HIC1 target gene. Thus,
loss of the regulation of this Eph pathway through HIC1 epigenetic silencing
could be an important mechanism in the pathogenesis of epithelial cancers.

PMCID: PMC3285316
PMID: 22184117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28223. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028223. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

A systematic analysis on DNA methylation and the expression of both mRNA and
microRNA in bladder cancer.

Zhu J(1), Jiang Z, Gao F, Hu X, Zhou L, Chen J, Luo H, Sun J, Wu S, Han Y, Yin G,
Chen M, Han Z, Li X, Huang Y, Zhang W, Zhou F, Chen T, Fa P, Wang Y, Sun L, Leng 
H, Sun F, Liu Y, Ye M, Yang H, Cai Z, Gui Y, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation aberration and microRNA (miRNA) deregulation have
been observed in many types of cancers. A systematic study of methylome and
transcriptome in bladder urothelial carcinoma has never been reported.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The DNA methylation was profiled by modified
methylation-specific digital karyotyping (MMSDK) and the expression of mRNAs and 
miRNAs was analyzed by digital gene expression (DGE) sequencing in tumors and
matched normal adjacent tissues obtained from 9 bladder urothelial carcinoma
patients. We found that a set of significantly enriched pathways disrupted in
bladder urothelial carcinoma primarily related to "neurogenesis" and "cell
differentiation" by integrated analysis of -omics data. Furthermore, we
identified an intriguing collection of cancer-related genes that were deregulated
at the levels of DNA methylation and mRNA expression, and we validated several of
these genes (HIC1, SLIT2, RASAL1, and KRT17) by Bisulfite Sequencing PCR and
Reverse Transcription qPCR in a panel of 33 bladder cancer samples.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We characterized the profiles between methylome and
transcriptome in bladder urothelial carcinoma, identified a set of significantly 
enriched key pathways, and screened four aberrantly methylated and expressed
genes. Conclusively, our findings shed light on a new avenue for basic bladder
cancer research.

PMCID: PMC3227661
PMID: 22140553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. DNA Cell Biol. 2012 May;31(5):826-32. doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.1431. Epub 2011 Dec
2.

Alterations in promoter methylation status of tumor suppressor HIC1, SFRP2, and
DAPK1 genes in prostate carcinomas.

Kilinc D(1), Ozdemir O, Ozdemir S, Korgali E, Koksal B, Uslu A, Gultekin YE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas,
Turkey.

Hypermethylated genomic DNA is a common feature in tumoral tissues, although the 
prevalence of this modification remains poorly understood. We aimed to determine 
the frequency of five tumor suppressor (TS) genes in prostate cancer and the
correlation between promoter hypermethylation of these genes and low and high
grade of prostate carcinomas. A total of 30 prostate tumor specimens were
investigated for promoter methylation status of TS hypermethylated in cancer 1
(HIC1), death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1), secreted frizzled-related
protein 2 (SFRP2), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (p16), and
O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) genes by using bisulfite modifying
method. A high frequency of promoter hypermethylation was found in HIC1 (70.9%), 
SFRP2 (58.3%), and DAPK1 (33.3%) genes in tumor samples that were examined. The
current data show high frequency of hypermethylation changes in HIC1, SFRP2, and 
DAPK1 genes in prostate carcinomas of high Gleason Score (GS).

PMID: 22136354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Mar;29(3):505-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.843. Epub 2011 Nov
21.

Pharmacological genome demethylation increases radiosensitivity of head and neck 
squamous carcinoma cells.

Brieger J(1), Mann SA, Pongsapich W, Koutsimpelas D, Fruth K, Mann WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhino-laryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz Building 102, 2nd floor, Part 
D Langenbeckstrasse 1, D-55101 Mainz, Germany.
juergen.brieger@unimedizin-mainz.de

Aberrant inactivation of tumor suppressor genes by promoter hypermethylation has 
been recognized as a crucial step of tumor development and is related to
aggressiveness and therapy resistance. To identify potential novel treatment
strategies, we evaluated pharmacological genome demethylation for the increase of
irradiation treatment effectiveness in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) in this in vitro study. HNSCC cells were cultured with 2 different
concentrations of 5-azacytidine (5-Aza) for 72 h, followed by a single fraction
irradiation with 4 or 50 Gy, respectively. To show successful genome
demethylation, the methylation status of the tumor suppressor gene hic1
(hypermethylated in cancer) promoter was analyzed by methylation specific PCR
(MSP) as well as hic1 transcription by quantitative RT-PCR. Survival, apoptosis, 
viability, and migration of the tumor cells were analyzed as functional
parameters of combined treatment response. After 5-Aza treatment the hic1
promoter was demethylated and gene transcription restored demonstrating genome
demethylation. 5-Aza treated cells tended to be less viable and showed decreased 
survival indicated by lower colony numbers. Apoptosis and migration were not
affected. The combined application of irradiation and 5-Aza significantly reduced
survival compared to the single treatments. Accordingly, apoptosis was strongly
increased after combined 4 Gy/5-Aza treatment. Viability was not additionally
affected by combined treatment. Migration was affected weakly by combined high
dosage irradiation/5-Aza treatment. Our data show that the combined application
of 5-Aza and irradiation is effective in vitro. A demethylating concept prior to 
irradiation should be further evaluated for its potential to reduce irradiation
resistance.

PMID: 22109647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Feb;40(4):1609-20. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr984. Epub 2011 Nov
7.

Interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) disrupts energy expenditure and metabolic homeostasis by
suppressing SIRT1 transcription.

Li P(1), Zhao Y, Wu X, Xia M, Fang M, Iwasaki Y, Sha J, Chen Q, Xu Y, Shen A.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Department of
Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease,The Second Affiliated
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Chronic inflammation impairs metabolic homeostasis and is intimately correlated
with the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. The pro-inflammatory cytokine IFN-<U+03B3> is 
an integral part of the metabolic inflammation circuit and contributes
significantly to metabolic dysfunction. The underlying mechanism, however,
remains largely unknown. In the present study, we report that IFN-<U+03B3> disrupts the 
expression of genes key to cellular metabolism and energy expenditure by
repressing the expression and activity of SIRT1 at the transcription level.
Further analysis reveals that IFN-<U+03B3> requires class II transactivator (CIITA) to
repress SIRT1 transcription. CIITA, once induced by IFN-<U+03B3>, is recruited to the
SIRT1 promoter by hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) and promotes down-regulation
of SIRT1 transcription via active deacetylation of core histones surrounding the 
SIRT1 proximal promoter. Silencing CIITA or HIC1 restores SIRT1 activity and
expression of metabolic genes in skeletal muscle cells challenged with IFN-<U+03B3>.
Therefore, our data delineate an IFN-<U+03B3>/HIC1/CIITA axis that contributes to
metabolic dysfunction by suppressing SIRT1 transcription in skeletal muscle cells
and as such shed new light on the development of novel therapeutic strategies
against type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3287208
PMID: 22064865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int J Cancer. 2012 Sep 1;131(5):1153-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26484. Epub 2011 Nov 19.

DNA methylation patterns in blood of patients with colorectal cancer and
adenomatous colorectal polyps.

Cassinotti E(1), Melson J, Liggett T, Melnikov A, Yi Q, Replogle C, Mobarhan S,
Boni L, Segato S, Levenson V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Minimally Invasive Surgery Research Center,
University of Insubria, Varese, Italy.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) screening rates are currently suboptimal. Blood-based
screening could improve rates of earlier detection for CRC and adenomatous
colorectal polyps. In this study, we evaluated the feasibility of plasma-based
detection of early CRC and adenomatous polyps using array-mediated analysis
methylation profiling of 56 genes implicated in carcinogenesis. Methylation of 56
genes in patients with Stages I and II CRC (N=30) and those with adenomatous
polyps (N=30) were compared with individuals who underwent colonoscopy and were
found to have neither adenomatous changes nor CRC. Composite biomarkers were
developed for adenomatous polyps and CRC, and their sensitivity and specificity
was estimated using five-fold cross validation. Six promoters (CYCD2, HIC1, PAX
5, RASSF1A, RB1 and SRBC) were selected for the biomarker, which differentiated
CRC patients and controls with 84% sensitivity and 68% specificity. Three
promoters (HIC1, MDG1 and RASSF1A) were selected for the biomarker, which
differentiated patients with adenomatous polyps and controls with sensitivity of 
55% and specificity of 65%. Methylation profiling of plasma DNA can detect early 
CRC with significant accuracy and shows promise as a methodology to develop
biomarkers for CRC screening.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3288808
PMID: 22020530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Oncogene. 2011 Oct 20;30(42):4374. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.388.

Retraction. Requirement for chromatin-remodeling complex in novel tumor
suppressor HIC1-mediated transcriptional repression and growth control.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Zhang B, Chambers KJ, Leprince D, Faller DV, Wang S. Oncogene. 2009 Feb
5;28(5):651-61.

PMCID: PMC3378254
PMID: 22011759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Sep;25(9):1676.

Retraction. HIC1 regulates tumor cell responses to endocrine therapies.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Zhang B, Faller DV, Wang S. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Dec;23(12):2075-85.

PMCID: PMC3165916
PMID: 21984988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Anticancer Res. 2011 Sep;31(9):2975-81.

RASSF1A methylation is predictive of poor prognosis in female breast cancer in a 
background of overall low methylation frequency.

Buhmeida A(1), Merdad A, Al-Maghrabi J, Al-Thobaiti F, Ata M, Bugis A, Syrjänen
K, Abuzenadah A, Chaudhary A, Gari M, Al-Qahtani M, Dallol A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Erratum in
    Anticancer Res. 2011 Oct;31(10):3637. El-Maghrabi, Joudah [corrected to
Al-Maghrabi, Judah].

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer worldwide. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia is no exception, with ever increasing incidence rates. An interesting
feature of this disease is the relatively young age of the affected women. The
average age in the present cohort of 100 sporadic cases of invasive ductal
carcinomas was 45 years, with a median of 46 years (range between 19-81 years).
In an effort to understand the molecular signature of BC in the Saudi population,
we undertook this study to profile the methylation events in a series of key
genes including Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member 1 isoform a
(RASSF1A), hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 
2A (CDKN2A), retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB2), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1),
progesterone receptor (PGR), paired-like homeodomain 2 (PITX2), secreted
frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), myogenic differentiation 1 (MYOD1), and slit 
homolog 2 (SLIT2), using MethyLight analysis in archival tumour samples.
Interestingly, the overall methylation levels were low in this cohort, with only 
84% of the cases displaying methylation in one or more of the analysed genes. The
frequency of RASSF1A methylation was the highest (65%), while there was almost
complete absence of methylation of the ESR1 and the CDH1 genes (1% and 3%,
respectively). Several statistically significant correlations were identified
between specific methylation events and clinical parameters which gained more
significance when analysis was limited to the estrogen receptor positive samples.
Although there was no significant correlations between any methylation event and 
disease-specific survival, methylation of MYOD1 or RASSF1A was associated with
lower disease-free survival and increased chance of disease recurrence.
Furthermore, multivariate (Cox) regression analysis identified RASSF1A as an
independent predictor of poor prognosis in terms of disease-free survival in this
cohort. Our findings provide further evidence on the usefulness of RASSF1A
methylation status as an informative prognostic biomarker in BC in a Saudi
population.

PMID: 21868547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):11146-58. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05499-11. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Systems analysis of immune responses in Marek's disease virus-infected chickens
identifies a gene involved in susceptibility and highlights a possible novel
pathogenicity mechanism.

Smith J(1), Sadeyen JR, Paton IR, Hocking PM, Salmon N, Fife M, Nair V, Burt DW, 
Kaiser P.

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush,
Midlothian EH25 9RG, United Kingdom. Jacqueline.smith@roslin.ed.ac.uk

Marek's disease virus (MDV) is a highly contagious oncogenic alphaherpesvirus
that causes disease that is both a cancer model and a continuing threat to the
world's poultry industry. This comprehensive gene expression study analyzes the
host response to infection in both resistant and susceptible lines of chickens
and inherent expression differences between the two lines following the infection
of the host. A novel pathogenicity mechanism, involving the downregulation of
genes containing HIC1 transcription factor binding sites as early as 4 days
postinfection, was suggested from this analysis. HIC1 drives antitumor
mechanisms, suggesting that MDV infection switches off genes involved in
antitumor regulation several days before the expression of the MDV oncogene meq. 
The comparison of the gene expression data to previous QTL data identified
several genes as candidates for involvement in resistance to MD. One of these
genes, IRG1, was confirmed by single nucleotide polymorphism analysis to be
involved in susceptibility. Its precise mechanism remains to be elucidated,
although the analysis of gene expression data suggests it has a role in
apoptosis. Understanding which genes are involved in susceptibility/resistance to
MD and defining the pathological mechanisms of the disease gives us a much
greater ability to try to reduce the incidence of this virus, which is costly to 
the poultry industry in terms of both animal welfare and economics.

PMCID: PMC3194948
PMID: 21865384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021102. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

B vitamins, methionine and alcohol intake and risk of colon cancer in relation to
BRAF mutation and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP).

Schernhammer ES(1), Giovannucci E, Baba Y, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
eva.schernhammer@channing.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: One-carbon metabolism appears to play an important role in DNA
methylation reaction. Evidence suggests that a low intake of B vitamins or high
alcohol consumption increases colorectal cancer risk. How one-carbon nutrients
affect the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) or BRAF mutation status in
colon cancer remains uncertain.
METHODS: Utilizing incident colon cancers in a large prospective cohort of women 
(the Nurses' Health Study), we determined BRAF status (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>386) and CIMP status
(N<U+200A>=<U+200A>375) by 8 CIMP-specific markers [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, 
NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1], and 8 other CpG islands (CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT,
MINT-1, MINT-31, p14, and WRN). We examined the relationship between intake of
one-carbon nutrients and alcohol and colon cancer risk, by BRAF mutation or CIMP 
status.
RESULTS: Higher folate intake was associated with a trend towards low risk of
CIMP-low/0 tumors [total folate intake =400 µg/day vs. <200 µg/day; the
multivariate relative risk<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.73; 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.53-1.02], whereas total folate
intake had no influence on CIMP-high tumor risks (P(heterogeneity)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.73).
Neither vitamin B(6), methionine or alcohol intake appeared to differentially
influence risks for CIMP-high and CIMP-low/0 tumors. Using the 16-marker CIMP
panel did not substantially alter our results. B vitamins, methionine or alcohol 
intake did not affect colon cancer risk differentially by BRAF status.
CONCLUSIONS: This molecular pathological epidemiology study suggests that low
level intake of folate may be associated with an increased risk of CIMP-low/0
colon tumors, but not that of CIMP-high tumors. However, the difference between
CIMP-high and CIMP-low/0 cancer risks was not statistically significant, and
additional studies are necessary to confirm these observations.

PMCID: PMC3124479
PMID: 21738611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;32(4):254-8.

[Detection of methylation levels of multi-genes by real-time PCR in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang YC(1), DU X, Geng SX, Li YY, Weng JY, Lu ZS, Zhong LY, Deng CX, Lai PL,
Huang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou
510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the promoter methylation levels of p15, CDH1, DAPK and HICI
genes of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and explore the
relationship between the level of methylation and clinical features.
METHODS: DNA methylation levels of p15, CDH1, DAPK and HICI in peripheral blood
(PB) or bone marrow (BM) samples from 52 MDS patients were detected by real-time 
quantitative PCR. The correlation of the methylation level with clinical features
and hematological findings was analyzed. 38 de novo AML patients and 46 normal
individuals served as controls.
RESULTS: The methylation levels of p15, CDH1, DAPK and HICI were 16.23 ± 21.69,
6.59 ± 9.39, 0.14 ± 0.11 and 7.81 ± 9.70 in BM, and 14.96 ± 20.16, 6.00 ± 9.26,
0.12 ± 0.14 and 6.74 ± 9.72 in PB, respectively from 18 MDS patients, and the
difference between BM and PB was not statistically significant (P > 0.05). The
methylation levels of p15 (14.70 ± 18.17) and CDH1 (6.61 ± 8.79) genes in high
risk (RAEBI/II) MDS were significantly higher than in low risk (RCMD/RARS/5q-,
p15: 1.99 ± 1.59, CDH1: 1.23 ± 1.14 and RCMD, p15: 3.02 ± 3.42, CDH1:1.53 ± 2.06)
MDS or control (p15: 1.69 ± 1.82, CDH1: 1.01 ± 1.12) (P < 0.05). The methylation 
levels of DAPK gene had no difference among subtypes of MDS, and that of HIC1
gene only differed between RAEB I/II (9.16 ± 11.95) and control (2.49 ± 2.26) (P 
= 0.042). The difference of methylation levels of p15, CDH1, DAPK and HICI in BM 
was statistically significant among subtypes of MDS (P = 0.001, 0.003, 0.039,
0.023, respectively). And so did of p15 and DAPK in PB (P = 0.013, 0.006,
respectively). The methylation level of p15 and CDH1 was significantly correlated
with IPSS classification and blasts percentage in BM.
CONCLUSIONS: p15 and CDH1 genes are special hypermethylation genes in MDS.
Methylation level of HIC1 gene showed an upward tendency from low risk to high
risk MDS.

PMID: 21569709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cells. 2011 Jul;32(1):47-55. doi: 10.1007/s10059-011-2316-4. Epub 2011 Apr
20.

Identification of novel subregions of LOH in gastric cancer and analysis of the
HIC1 and TOB1 tumor suppressor genes in these subregions.

Yu J(1), Liu P, Cui X, Sui Y, Ji G, Guan R, Sun D, Ji W, Liu F, Liu A, Zhao Y, Yu
Y, Jin Y, Bai J, Geng J, Xue Y, Qi J, Lee KY, Fu S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150081,
China.

Previously, we identified 3 overlapping regions showing loss of heterozygosity
(LOH, R(1)-R(3) from 11 to 30 cM) on chromosome 17 in 45 primary gastric cancers 
(GCs). The data indicated the presence of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) on
chromosome 17 involved in GC. Among the putative TSGs in these regions, HIC1 (in 
SR(1)) and TOB1 (in SR(3)) remain to be examined in GC. By immunohistochemistry
(IHC), methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and western blot, we evaluated the
expression and regulation status for HIC1 and TOB1 protein in GC. We narrowed
down the deletion intervals on chromosome 17 and defined five smaller LOH
subregions, SR(1)-SR(5) (0.54 to 3.42 cM), in GC. We found that HIC1 had
downregulated expression in 86% (91/106) and was methylated in 87% (26/30) of
primary GCs. Of the primary GCs showing downregulation of HIC1 protein, 75%
(18/24) had methylated HIC1 gene. TOB1 was either absent or expressed at reduced 
levels in 75% (73/97) of the GC samples. In addition, a general reduction was
found in total and the ratio of unphosphorylated to phosphorylated TOB1 protein
levels in the differentiated GC cell lines. Further analysis revealed significant
simultaneous downregulation of both HIC1 and TOB1 protein in GC tissue microarray
samples (67%, 52/78) and in primary GCs (65%, 11/17). These results indicate that
silencing of HIC1 and TOB1 expression is a common occurrence in GC and may
contribute to the development and progression of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3855460
PMID: 21533545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;71(13):4653-63. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3418. Epub
2011 Apr 25.

Targeted methylation of two tumor suppressor genes is sufficient to transform
mesenchymal stem cells into cancer stem/initiating cells.

Teng IW(1), Hou PC, Lee KD, Chu PY, Yeh KT, Jin VX, Tseng MJ, Tsai SJ, Chang YS, 
Wu CS, Sun HS, Tsai KD, Jeng LB, Nephew KP, Huang TH, Hsiao SH, Leu YW.

Author information: 
(1)Human Epigenomics Center, Department of Life Science, Institute of Molecular
Biology and Institute of Biomedical Science, National Chung Cheng University;
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan.

Although DNA hypermethylation within promoter CpG islands is highly correlated
with tumorigenesis, it has not been established whether DNA hypermethylation
within a specific tumor suppressor gene (TSG) is sufficient to fully transform a 
somatic stem cell. In this study, we addressed this question using a novel
targeted DNA methylation technique to methylate the promoters of HIC1 and
RassF1A, two well-established TSGs, along with a two-component reporter system to
visualize successful targeting of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem
cells (MSC) as a model cell system. MSCs harboring targeted promoter methylations
of HIC1/RassF1A displayed several features of cancer stem/initiating cells
including loss of anchorage dependence, increased colony formation capability,
drug resistance, and pluripotency. Notably, inoculation of immunodeficient mice
with low numbers of targeted MSC resulted in tumor formation, and subsequent
serial xenotransplantation and immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of
stem cell markers and MSC lineage in tumor xenografts. Consistent with the
expected mechanism of TSG hypermethylation, treatment of the targeted MSC with a 
DNA methyltransferase inhibitor reversed their tumorigenic phenotype. To our
knowledge, this is the first direct demonstration that aberrant TSG
hypermethylation is sufficient to transform a somatic stem cell into a fully
malignant cell with cancer stem/initiating properties.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21518779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Br J Cancer. 2011 Apr 12;104(8):1313-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.102. Epub 2011 Mar 
29.

CpG-island methylation study of liver fluke-related cholangiocarcinoma.

Sriraksa R(1), Zeller C, El-Bahrawy MA, Dai W, Daduang J, Jearanaikoon P, Chau-In
S, Brown R, Limpaiboon T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Genetic changes have been widely reported in association with
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), while epigenetic changes are poorly characterised. We
aimed to further evaluate CpG-island hypermethylation in CCA at candidate loci,
which may have potential as diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers.
METHODS: We analysed methylation of 26 CpG-islands in 102 liver fluke related-CCA
and 29 adjacent normal samples using methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Methylation 
of interest loci was confirmed using pyrosequencing and/or combined bisulfite
restriction analysis, and protein expression by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: A number of CpG-islands (OPCML, SFRP1, HIC1, PTEN and DcR1) showed
frequency of hypermethylation in >28% of CCA, but not adjacent normal tissues.
The results showed that 91% of CCA were methylated in at least one CpG-island.
The OPCML was the most frequently methylated locus (72.5%) and was more
frequently methylated in less differentiated CCA. Patients with methylated DcR1
had significantly longer overall survival (Median; 41.7 vs 21.7 weeks, P=0.027). 
Low-protein expression was found in >70% of CCA with methylation of OPCML or
DcR1.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant hypermethylation of certain loci is a common event in liver 
fluke-related CCA and may potentially contribute to cholangiocarcinogenesis. The 
OPCML and DcR1 might serve as methylation biomarkers in CCA that can be readily
examined by MSP.

PMCID: PMC3078588
PMID: 21448164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Clin Epigenetics. 2010 Sep 1;1(1-2):61-69.

DNA hypermethylation markers of poor outcome in laryngeal cancer.

Stephen JK(1), Chen KM, Shah V, Havard S, Kapke A, Lu M, Benninger MS, Worsham
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, MI, 48202.

This study examined molecular (DNA hypermethylation), clinical,
histopathological, demographical, smoking, and alcohol variables to assess
diagnosis (early versus late stage) and prognosis (survival) outcomes in a
retrospective primary laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) cohort. The study 
cohort of 79 primary LSCC was drawn from a multi-ethnic (37% African American),
primary care patient population, diagnosed by surgical biopsies in the Henry Ford
Health System from 1991-2004, and followed from 5-18 years (through 2009). Of the
41 variables, univariate risk factors of p<0.10 were tested in multivariate
models (logistic regression {diagnosis} and Cox {survival} models {p<0.05}).
Aberrant methylation of ESR1 (p=0.01), race as African American (p=0.04), and
tumor necrosis (extensive) (p=0.02) were independent predictors of late stage
LSCC. Independent predictors of poor survival included presence of vascular
invasion (p=0.0009), late stage disease (p=0.03) and methylation of the HIC1 gene
(p=0.0002). Aberrant methylation of ESR1 and HIC1 signified independent markers
of poorer outcome. In this multi-ethnic, primary LSCC cohort, race remained a
predictor of late stage disease supporting disparate diagnosis outcomes for
African American patients with LSCC.

PMCID: PMC3037188
PMID: 21318053  [PubMed]


83. Genesis. 2011 Mar;49(3):142-51. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20719.

Generation of two modified mouse alleles of the Hic1 tumor suppressor gene.

Pospichalova V(1), Tureckova J, Fafilek B, Vojtechova M, Krausova M, Lukas J,
Sloncova E, Takacova S, Divoky V, Leprince D, Plachy J, Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics,
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene located on
chromosome 17p13.3, a region frequently hypermethylated or deleted in human
neoplasias. In mouse, Hic1 is essential for embryonic development and exerts an
antitumor role in adult animals. Since Hic1-deficient mice die perinatally, we
generated a conditional Hic1 null allele by flanking the Hic1-coding region by
loxP sites. When crossed to animals expressing Cre recombinase in a cell-specific
manner, the Hic1 conditional mice will provide new insights into the function of 
Hic1 in developing and mature tissues. Additionally, we used gene targeting to
replace sequence-encoding amino acids 186-893 of Hic1 by citrine fluorescent
protein cDNA. We demonstrate that the distribution of Hic1-citrine fusion
polypeptide corresponds to the expression pattern of wild-type Hic1.
Consequently, Hic1-citrine "reporter" mice can be used to monitor the activity of
the Hic1 locus using citrine fluorescence.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21309068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Oncogene. 2011 Jun 9;30(23):2659-69. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.633. Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Loss of a single Hic1 allele accelerates polyp formation in Apc(<U+0394>716) mice.

Mohammad HP(1), Zhang W, Prevas HS, Leadem BR, Zhang M, Herman JG, Hooker CM,
Watkins DN, Karim B, Huso DL, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Institute at Johns Hopkins, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutations have been implicated in familial 
and sporadic gastrointestinal (GI) cancers. APC mutations are associated with
autosomal dominant inheritance of disease in humans. Similarly, mice that contain
a single mutant APC gene encoding a protein truncated at residue 716 (Apc(<U+0394>716)) 
develop multiple polyps throughout the GI tract as early as 4 weeks after birth. 
Inactivation of another tumor suppressor gene, Hypermethylated in Cancer 1
(HIC1), often occurs in human colon cancers, among others, via CpG island
hypermethylation. Homozygous deletion of Hic1 in mice results in major
developmental defects and embryonic lethality. Hic1 heterozygotes have previously
been shown to develop tumors of a variety of tissue types. We now report that
loss of a single Hic1 allele can promote crypt hyperplasia and neoplasia of the
GI tract, and Hic1(+/-), Apc(+/<U+0394>716) double heterozygotes (DH) develop increased 
numbers of polyps throughout the GI tract at 60 days. Hic1 expression is absent
in polyps from DH mice, with concomitant increased expression of two
transcriptional repression targets of Hic1, Sirt1 and Sox9. Together, our data
suggest that loss of a gene frequently silenced via epigenetic mechanisms, Hic1, 
can cooperate with loss of a gene mutated in GI cancer, Apc, to promote
tumorigenesis in an in vivo model of multiple intestinal neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC3114184
PMID: 21297660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Apr;1815(2):241-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2011.01.002. 
Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Protected from the inside: endogenous histone deacetylase inhibitors and the road
to cancer.

Di Marcotullio L(1), Canettieri G, Infante P, Greco A, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a crucial role in several physiological and
pathological cell functions, including cell development and cancer, by
deacetylating both histones and others proteins. HDACs belong to a large family
of enzymes including Class I, II and IV as well as Class III or sirtuins
subfamilies, that undergo a complex transcriptional and post-translational
regulation. In current years, antitumor therapy is attempting to exploit several 
chemical classes of inhibitors that target HDACs, frequently reported to be
misregulated in cancer. Nevertheless, the identity of gene products directly
involved in tumorigenesis and preventing HDAC misregulation in cancer is still
poorly understood. Recent evidence has demonstrated that the tumor suppressors
HIC1 and DBC1 induce direct repression of Sirt1 function, whereas Chfr and
REN(KCTD11/KASH family) downregulate HDAC1, by inducing its ubiquitin-dependent
degradation. Loss of these gene products leads to imbalanced enhancement of HDAC 
activity and subsequently to oncogenesis. All these genes are frequently deleted 
or silenced in human cancers, highlighting the role of endogenous HDAC inhibitors
to counteracts HDAC-mediated tumorigenesis. Thus, endogenous HDAC inhibitors
represent a promising class of "antitumor agents" thanks to which oncogenic
addiction pathways may be selectively therapeutically targeted.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21277938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Tumour Biol. 2011 Oct;32(5):845-52. doi: 10.1007/s13277-011-0156-7. Epub 2011 Jan
28.

Promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A, MGMT, and HIC-1 genes in benign and
malignant colorectal tumors.

Abouzeid HE(1), Kassem AM, Abdel Wahab AH, El-mezayen HA, Sharad H, Abdel Rahman 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Radio-Biological Applications Department, Nuclear Research Center, Atomic
Energy Authority, Cairo, Egypt. [corrected]

Erratum in
    Tumour Biol. 2011 Oct;32(5):1055. Abouzeid, Hamdy E [added]; Kassem, Abdel Meguid
[added].

Hypermethylation at the promoter region is an important epigenetic mechanism
underlying the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and frequently occurs as an
early event in the development of different types of cancer including colorectal 
carcinoma (CRC). The aim of the present study is the detection of methylation
status for some tumor suppressor genes including RASSF1A, MGMT, and HIC-1 in both
cancerous and precancerous lesions of colorectal mucosa to evaluate the
possibility of developing epigenetic biomarker for early detection of Egyptian
CRC. Tissue biopsy was collected from 72 patients (36 CRC, 17 adenomatous polyps,
and 19 ulcerative colitis), and in addition, adjacent normal-appearing tissues
were collected as control. Promoter hypermethylation status for RSSAF1A, MGMT,
and HIC-1 genes was detected after isolation of genomic DNA from the tissues
samples using methylation-specific PCR technique. High frequency of methylation
at MGMT, RASSFA, and HIC-1 was detected in CRC patients (25%, 47.2%, and 41.7%
respectively). The highest methylation detected in adenomatous polyps patients
was in MGMT gene (47.1%) followed by 35.3% for HIC-1 and only 5.9% for RASSF1A
gene. HIC-1 gene exhibited highest frequency of methylation in ulcerative colitis
patients (57.8%) whereas it was 26.3% for both RASSF1A and MGMT genes. A
nonsignificant association was recorded between the methylation status in
different genes examined with the clinicopathological factors except the
association between methylation at RASSF1A gene with gender (p=0.005), and it was
significant. In conclusion, aberrant hypermethylation at promoter region of
RASSFA, MGMT, and HIC-1 genes is involved in Egyptian CRCs. Hypermethylation of
MGMT and HIC-1 genes plays an important role in the initiation of disease
especially ulcerative colitis-carcinoma pathway.

PMID: 21274674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mutagenesis. 2011 Jan;26(1):27-32. doi: 10.1093/mutage/geq074.

Transcriptomic network analysis of micronuclei-related genes: a case study.

van Leeuwen DM(1), Pedersen M, Knudsen LE, Bonassi S, Fenech M, Kleinjans JC,
Jennen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Risk Analysis and Toxicology, Maastricht University, PO
Box 616, 6200 MD, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Mechanistically relevant information on responses of humans to xenobiotic
exposure in relation to chemically induced biological effects, such as
micronuclei (MN) formation can be obtained through large-scale transcriptomics
studies. Network analysis may enhance the analysis and visualisation of such
data. Therefore, this study aimed to develop a 'MN formation' network based on a 
priori knowledge, by using the pathway tool MetaCore. The gene network contained 
27 genes and three gene complexes that are related to processes involved in MN
formation, e.g. spindle assembly checkpoint, cell cycle checkpoint and
aneuploidy. The MN-related gene network was tested against a transcriptomics case
study associated with MN measurements. In this case study, transcriptomic data
from children and adults differentially exposed to ambient air pollution in the
Czech Republic were analysed and visualised on the network. Six genes from the
network, i.e. BAX, DMNT1, PCNA, HIC1, p21 and CDC20, were retrieved. Based on
these six genes and in combination with p53 and IL-6, a dedicated network was
created. This dedicated network is possibly suited for the development of a
reporter gene assay that could be used to screen populations complementary to the
current MN test assay. In conclusion, we have shown that network analysis of
transcriptomics data in relation to the formation of MN is possible and provides 
a novel mechanistic hypothesis by indicating which genes are regulated and
influence others.

PMID: 21164179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Swiss Med Wkly. 2010 Nov 1;140:w13106. doi: 10.4414/smw.2010.13106.

Inactivation of the hypermethylated in cancer 1 tumour suppressor--not just a
question of promoter hypermethylation?

Jenal M(1), Britschgi C, Fey MF, Tschan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology/Haematology Experimental Oncology/Haematology, MEM E829,
Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern, Murtenstrasse 35, 3010 Bern,
CH. m.jenal@nki.nl

The chromosomal region 17p13.3 is frequently deleted or epigenetically silenced
in a variety of human cancers. It includes the hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1)
gene placed telomerically to the p53 tumour suppressor gene. HIC1 encodes a
transcriptional repressor, and its targets identified to date are genes involved 
in proliferation, tumour growth and angiogenesis. In addition, HIC1 functionally 
cooperates with p53 to suppress cancer development. Frequent allelic loss at
position 17p13.1 in human cancers often points to mutations of the tumour
suppressor p53. However, in a variety of cancer types, allelic loss of the short 
arm of chromosome 17 may hit regions distal to p53 and, interestingly, without
leading to p53 mutations. Furthermore, the neighbouring region 17p13.3 often
shows loss of heterozygosity or DNA hypermethylation in various types of solid
tumours and leukaemias. In line with this concept, Wales et al. described a new
potential tumour suppressor in this region and named it hypermethylated in cancer
1 (HIC1). Further, it was shown that in the majority of cases hypermethylation of
this chromosomal region leads to epigenetic inactivation of HIC1. A role for HIC1
in tumour development is further supported by a mouse model, since various
spontaneous, age- and gender-specific malignant tumours occur in heterozygous
Hic1+/- knockout mice. Furthermore, exogenously delivered HIC1 leads to a
significant decrease in clonogenic survival in cancer cell lines. This review
highlights the role of HIC1 inactivation in solid tumours and particularly in
leukaemia development.

PMID: 21104471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Am J Pathol. 2010 Dec;177(6):2731-40. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100361. Epub 2010 
Oct 29.

Novel application of structural equation modeling to correlation structure
analysis of CpG island methylation in colorectal cancer.

Tanaka N(1), Huttenhower C, Nosho K, Baba Y, Shima K, Quackenbush J, Haigis KM,
Giovannucci E, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP-high, CIMP1) is a distinct phenotype
associated with microsatellite instability (MSI) and BRAF mutation in colon
cancer. Recent evidence suggests the presence of KRAS mutation-associated CIMP
subtype (CIMP-low, CIMP2). We used cluster analysis, principal component analysis
(PCA), and structural equation modeling (SEM), a novel strategy, to decipher the 
correlation structure of CpG island hypermethylation. Using a database of 861
colon and rectal cancers, DNA methylation at 16 CpG islands [CACNA1G, CDKN2A
(p16/ink4a), CHFR, CRABP1, HIC1, IGF2, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT-1, MINT-31, MLH1,
NEUROG1, p14 (CDKN2A/arf), RUNX3, SOCS1, and WRN] was quantified by real-time
PCR. Tumors were categorized into three groups: Group 1 with wild-type KRAS/BRAF 
(N = 440); Group 2 with mutant KRAS and wild-type BRAF (N = 308); and Group 3
with wild-type KRAS and mutant BRAF (N = 107). Tumors with mutant KRAS/BRAF (N = 
6) were excluded. In unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, all but six
markers (CACNA1G, IGF2, RUNX3, MGMT, MINT-1, and SOCS1) were differentially
clustered with CIMP-high and CIMP-low according to KRAS and BRAF status. In SEM, 
the correlation structures between CIMP, locus-specific CpG island methylation,
and MSI differed according to KRAS and BRAF status, which was consistent with PCA
results. In conclusion, KRAS and BRAF mutations appear to differentially
influence correlation structure of CpG island methylation. Our novel data suggest
two distinct perturbations, resulting in differential locus-specific propensity
of CpG methylation.

PMCID: PMC2993288
PMID: 21037082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Yi Chuan. 2010 Oct;32(10):1003-8.

[Mechanism of regulating deacetylase SIRT1 expression and activity.].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang WJ(1), Wang DL, Zhu WG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
ywjsunshine@126.com

SIRT1 is an NAD+-dependent deacetylase in mammalian cells and plays important
roles in senescence, cell death and tumorigenesis. To clarify the regulation of
SIRT1 expression and activity is crucial for scientists to understand the
biological function of SIRT1. This review mainly focuses on the mechanisms by
which SIRT1 expression and activity are regulated.

PMID: 20943487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Oral Oncol. 2010 Sep;46(9):678-83. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.06.016. Epub 
2010 Aug 21.

Demethylation treatment restores hic1 expression and impairs aggressiveness of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Brieger J(1), Pongsapich W, Mann SA, Hedrich J, Fruth K, Pogozelski B, Mann WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical Center
of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
brieger@mail.uni-mainz.de

Promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes is a common feature of
primary cancer cells. However, at date the somatic epigenetic events that occur
in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tumorigenesis are not yet been
well defined. In the present study we analysed the methylation status of the gene
hypermethylated in cancer-1 (hic1), a gene located on chromosome 17p13.3, a
region frequently lost in HNSCC. We analysed 22 HNSCC samples and three cell
lines using methylation specific PCR (MSP). We found hic1 methylated in 21 out of
22 samples and in all three cell lines. Treatment of the cell lines with the
demethylating agent 5-Azacytidin (5-Aza) resulted in the demethylation of the
hic1 promoter and reactivation of hic1 expression as determined by MSP, qPCR and 
Western blot. Functional analyses revealed decreased proliferative activity and
colony forming ability of treated cells. In summary, we found in HNSCC hic1
regulated by promoter methylation. 5-Aza application resulted in the reexpression
of hic1 and was followed by decreased aggressiveness of the cancer cells. Our
data indicate that hic1 might be a player in HNSCC development and suggest
further evaluation of 5-Aza for HNSCC treatment.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20729134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Nov 1;19(21):4123-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq331. Epub 2010 Aug 
6.

A single-nucleotide variation in a p53-binding site affects nutrient-sensitive
human SIRT1 expression.

Naqvi A(1), Hoffman TA, DeRicco J, Kumar A, Kim CS, Jung SB, Yamamori T, Kim YR, 
Mehdi F, Kumar S, Rankinen T, Ravussin E, Irani K.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, University 
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

The SIRTUIN1 (SIRT1) deacetylase responds to changes in nutrient availability and
regulates mammalian physiology and metabolism. Human and mouse SIRT1 are
transcriptionally repressed by p53 via p53 response elements in their proximal
promoters. Here, we identify a novel p53-binding sequence in the distal human
SIRT1 promoter that is required for nutrient-sensitive SIRT1 transcription. In
addition, we show that a common single-nucleotide (C/T) variation in this
sequence affects nutrient deprivation-induced SIRT1 transcription, and calorie
restriction-induced SIRT1 expression. The p53-binding sequence lies in a region
of the SIRT1 promoter that also binds the transcriptional repressor
Hypermethylated-In-Cancer-1 (HIC1). Nutrient deprivation increases occupancy by
p53, while decreasing occupancy by HIC1, of this region of the promoter. HIC1 and
p53 compete with each other for promoter occupancy. In comparison with the T
variation, the C variation disrupts the mirror image symmetry of the p53-binding 
sequence, resulting in decreased binding to p53, decreased nutrient sensitivity
of the promoter and impaired calorie restriction-stimulated tissue expression of 
SIRT1 and SIRT1 target genes AMPKa2 and PGC-1ß. Thus, a common SNP in a novel
p53-binding sequence in the human SIRT1 promoter affects nutrient-sensitive SIRT1
expression, and could have a significant impact on calorie restriction-induced,
SIRT1-mediated, changes in human metabolism and physiology.

PMCID: PMC2951863
PMID: 20693263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Sep;201(2):128-32. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.05.019.

Gene methylation of SFRP2, P16, DAPK1, HIC1, and MGMT and KRAS mutations in
sporadic colorectal cancer.

Pehlivan S(1), Artac M, Sever T, Bozcuk H, Kilincarslan C, Pehlivan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Gaziantep University, Turkey.
psacide@hotmail.com

The aim of this study was to investigate the methylation of the SFRP2, P16,
DAPK1, HIC1, and MGMT genes, as well as the mutation of amino acid codons 12 and 
13 of the KRAS gene in normal and tumor tissue DNA of patients diagnosed with
sporadic colorectal cancer (SCRC). The methylation of gene regions and the KRAS
mutations of normal (N) and tumor tissue (T) DNA obtained from 17 patients
diagnosed with SCRC and 20 healthy controls were investigated using the
polymerase chain reaction and reverse-hybridization methods. There was an Asp
mutation in four patients, an Asp and Ser mutations in one patient in codon 12 of
the KRAS gene, and an Asp mutation in codon 13 in eight patients. Overall
promoter methylation (OPM) in the SFRP2 gene was observed in one N and four T,
whereas partial promoter methylation (PPM) was observed in two N and five T. OPM 
in the P16 gene was present in one T. In the DAPK1 gene, OPM existed in seven T
and five N, while PPM was present in two N. In the HIC1 gene, OPM was
demonstrated in three T, while PPM was noted in two N; however, no methylation
existed in N. In the MGMT gene, OPM occurred in five T and two N, and PPM was
present in one T. KRAS mutations in Turkish patients with SCRC are similar to
those of other population groups. Methylations in the genes, which underwent
methylation analysis, were higher in T in comparison with N, and it has been
suggested that significant results would be obtained by making a study with a
larger population.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20682398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2010 Oct 28;29(43):5861-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.319. Epub 2010 Aug 2.

Characterization of <U+0394>Np73 expression and regulation in gastric and esophageal
tumors.

Vilgelm AE(1), Hong SM, Washington MK, Wei J, Chen H, El-Rifai W, Zaika A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

p73 is a member of the p53 protein family. Although the tumor suppressor function
of p53 is clearly defined, the role of p73 in tumorigenesis is still a matter of 
debate. A complex pattern of expression of p73 isoforms makes it difficult to
unambiguously interpret the experimental results. Previously, we along with
others have found that the N-terminally truncated isoform of p73, <U+0394>Np73, has
potent anti-apoptotic and oncogenic properties in vitro and in vivo. In this
study, we analyzed, for the first time, the regulation of <U+0394>Np73 in a large number
of gastric, gastroesophageal junction and esophageal tumors. We found that
expression of <U+0394>Np73 mRNA and protein is increased in these neoplasms.
Furthermore, the upregulation of the <U+0394>Np73 protein is significantly associated
with poor patient survival. Oncogenic properties of <U+0394>Np73 were further confirmed 
by finding that <U+0394>Np73 facilitates anchorage-independent growth of gastric
epithelial cells in soft agar. As little is currently known about the regulation 
of <U+0394>Np73 transcription, we investigated the alternative p73 gene promoter that
mediates the <U+0394>Np73 expression. Analyzing the <U+0394>Np73 promoter in silico as well as 
by using chromatin immunoprecipitation, site-directed mutagenesis and deletion
analyses, we identified the evolutionary conserved region within the <U+0394>Np73
promoter that contains binding sites for HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer)
protein. We found that HIC1 negatively regulates <U+0394>Np73 transcription in mucosal
epithelial cells. This leads to a decrease in <U+0394>Np73 protein levels and may
normally control the oncogenic potential of the <U+0394>Np73 isoform.

PMCID: PMC4152004
PMID: 20676143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Feb;56(2):387-96. doi: 10.1007/s10620-010-1312-4. Epub 2010 Jul
16.

DNA methylation in the rectal mucosa is associated with crypt proliferation and
fecal short-chain fatty acids.

Worthley DL(1), Whitehall VL, Le Leu RK, Irahara N, Buttenshaw RL, Mallitt KA,
Greco SA, Ramsnes I, Winter J, Hu Y, Ogino S, Young GP, Leggett BA.

Author information: 
(1)Conjoint Gastroenterology Laboratory, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital
Research Foundation Clinical Research Centre, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
daniel.worthley@uqconnect.edu.au

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation varies throughout the normal colorectal mucosa and
DNA methylation in normal appearing mucosa is associated with serrated and
adenomatous neoplasia elsewhere within the colorectum.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to measure luminal chemistry, rectal
proliferation and mucosal DNA methylation and thus determine whether regional and
pathological patterns of DNA methylation could be explained by luminal and
epithelial factors.
METHODS: Twenty healthy subjects had normal rectal mucosal biopsies and a 24-h
fecal collection. Rectal biopsies were analyzed for epithelial proliferation
(Ki67 immunohistochemistry) and DNA methylation at 17 different markers,
including "type A" markers (ESR1, GATA5, HIC1, HPP1, SFRP1), "type C" markers
(MGMT, MLH1, CDKN2A, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, IGF2, CACNA1G, NEUROG1, SOCS1, RUNX3),
and LINE-1. Fecal analysis included short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), pH and
ammonia. Mean "type A" and CIMP panel methylation Z-scores were calculated.
RESULTS: Rectal proliferation was significantly correlated with methylation at
ESR1 (<U+03C1> = 0.81, P = 0.003) and GATA5 (<U+03C1> = 0.78, P = 0.012). LINE-1 methylation
was 71.7 vs. 74.1%, in patients with "low" and "high" fecal total SCFA
concentration (defined by the median value), respectively (P = 0.0019). On
multivariate linear regression "type A" methylation was independently associated 
with rectal proliferation (P = 0.001). LINE-1 methylation was directly associated
with rectal proliferation (P = 0.038) and total fecal SCFA concentration (P =
0.002), and inversely associated with fecal NH(3) concentrations (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation in normal rectal mucosa is associated with crypt
proliferation and fecal SCFA concentration. These associations may help to
explain regional differences in DNA methylation as well as providing a possible
link between the colorectal lumen and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20635146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 9;5(7):e11493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011493.

Maternal genes and facial clefts in offspring: a comprehensive search for genetic
associations in two population-based cleft studies from Scandinavia.

Jugessur A(1), Shi M, Gjessing HK, Lie RT, Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, Christensen K,
Boyles AL, Daack-Hirsch S, Nguyen TT, Christiansen L, Lidral AC, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Fetal conditions can in principle be affected by the mother's
genotype working through the prenatal environment.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genotypes for 1536 SNPs in 357 cleft candidate
genes were available from a previous analysis in which we focused on fetal gene
effects. After data-cleaning, genotypes for 1315 SNPs in 334 autosomal genes were
available for the current analysis of maternal gene effects. Two complementary
statistical methods, TRIMM and HAPLIN, were used to detect multi-marker effects
in population-based samples from Norway (562 case-parent and 592 control-parent
triads) and Denmark (235 case-parent triads). We analyzed isolated cleft lip with
or without cleft palate (iCL/P) and isolated cleft palate only (iCP) separately
and assessed replication by looking for genes detected in both populations by
both methods. In iCL/P, neither TRIMM nor HAPLIN detected more genes than
expected by chance alone; furthermore, the selected genes were not replicated
across the two methods. In iCP, however, FLNB was identified by both methods in
both populations. Although HIC1 and ZNF189 did not fully satisfy our stringency
criterion for replication, they were strongly associated with iCP in TRIMM
analyses of the Norwegian triads.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Except for FLNB, HIC1 and ZNF189, maternal genes did not
appear to influence the risk of clefting in our data. This is consistent with
recent epidemiological findings showing no apparent difference between
mother-to-offspring and father-to-offspring recurrence of clefts in these two
populations. It is likely that fetal genes make the major genetic contribution to
clefting risk in these populations, but we cannot rule out the possibility that
maternal genes can affect risk through interactions with specific teratogens or
fetal genes.

PMCID: PMC2901336
PMID: 20634891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jun 30;9:172. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-172.

The tumor suppressor gene KCTD11REN is regulated by Sp1 and methylation and its
expression is reduced in tumors.

Mancarelli MM(1), Zazzeroni F, Ciccocioppo L, Capece D, Po A, Murgo S, Di Camillo
R, Rinaldi C, Ferretti E, Gulino A, Alesse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila 67100,
Italy.

A hallmark of several human cancers is loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of chromosome
17p13. The same chromosomal region is also frequently hypermethylated in cancer. 
Although loss of 17p13 has been often associated with p53 genetic alteration or
Hypermethylated in Cancer 1 (HIC1) gene hypermethylation, other tumor suppressor 
genes (TSGs) located in this region have critical roles in tumorigenesis. A novel
TSG mapping on human chromosome 17p13.2 is KCTD11REN (KCTD11). We have recently
demonstrated that KCTD11 expression is frequently lost in human medulloblastoma
(MB), in part by LOH and in part by uncharacterized epigenetic events. Using a
panel of human 177 tumor samples and their normal matching samples representing
18 different types of cancer, we show here that the down-regulation of KCTD11
protein level is a specific and a diffusely common event in tumorigenesis.
Additionally, in order to characterize the regulatory regions in KCTD11 promoter,
we identified a CpG island and several Sp1 binding sites on this promoter, and
demonstrated that Sp1 transcription factor and DNA methylation contribute, at
least in part, to regulate KCTD11 expression. Our findings identify KCTD11 as a
widely down-regulated gene in human cancers, and provide a basis to understand
how its expression might be deregulated in tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC2913982
PMID: 20591193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Aug;30(16):4045-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00582-09. Epub 2010 Jun 
14.

Differential regulation of HIC1 target genes by CtBP and NuRD, via an
acetylation/SUMOylation switch, in quiescent versus proliferating cells.

Van Rechem C(1), Boulay G, Pinte S, Stankovic-Valentin N, Guérardel C, Leprince
D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université Lille Nord de France,
Institut Pasteur de Lille, IFR 142, 1 Rue Calmette, 59017 Lille Cedex, France.

The tumor suppressor gene HIC1 encodes a transcriptional repressor involved in
regulatory loops modulating P53-dependent and E2F1-dependent cell survival,
growth control, and stress responses. Despite its importance, few HIC1
corepressors and target genes have been characterized thus far. Using a yeast
two-hybrid approach, we identify MTA1, a subunit of the NuRD complex, as a new
HIC1 corepressor. This interaction is regulated by two competitive
posttranslational modifications of HIC1 at lysine 314, promotion by SUMOylation, 
and inhibition by acetylation. Consistent with the role of HIC1 in growth
control, we demonstrate that HIC1/MTA1 complexes bind on two new target genes,
Cyclin D1 and p57KIP2 in quiescent but not in growing WI38 cells. In addition,
HIC1/MTA1 and HIC1/CtBP complexes differentially bind on two mutually exclusive
HIC1 binding sites (HiRE) on the SIRT1 promoter. SIRT1 transcriptional activation
induced by short-term serum starvation coincides with loss of occupancy of the
distal sites by HIC1/MTA1 and HIC1/CtBP. Upon longer starvation, both complexes
are found but on a newly identified proximal HiRE that is evolutionarily
conserved and specifically enriched with repressive histone marks. Our results
decipher a mechanistic link between two competitive posttranslational
modifications of HIC1 and corepressor recruitment to specific genes, leading to
growth control.

PMCID: PMC2916445
PMID: 20547755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Br J Haematol. 2010 Aug;150(3):293-302. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08235.x.
Epub 2010 May 20.

Maintenance treatment with azacytidine for patients with high-risk
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) or acute myeloid leukaemia following MDS in
complete remission after induction chemotherapy.

Grövdal M(1), Karimi M, Khan R, Aggerholm A, Antunovic P, Astermark J, Bernell P,
Engström LM, Kjeldsen L, Linder O, Nilsson L, Olsson A, Holm MS, Tangen JM,
Wallvik J, Oberg G, Hokland P, Jacobsen SE, Porwit A, Hellström-Lindberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, Department of Medicine, Centre for Experimental
Haematology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge,
Stockholm, Sweden. michael.grovdal@ki.se

This prospective Phase II study is the first to assess the feasibility and
efficacy of maintenance 5-azacytidine for older patients with high-risk
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia and MDS-acute
myeloid leukaemia syndromes in complete remission (CR) after induction
chemotherapy. Sixty patients were enrolled and treated by standard induction
chemotherapy. Patients that reached CR started maintenance therapy with
subcutaneous azacytidine, 5/28 d until relapse. Promoter-methylation status of
CDKN2B (P15 ink4b), CDH1 and HIC1 was examined pre-induction, in CR and 6, 12 and
24 months post CR. Twenty-four (40%) patients achieved CR after induction
chemotherapy and 23 started maintenance treatment with azacytidine. Median CR
duration was 13.5 months, >24 months in 17% of the patients, and 18-30.5 months
in the four patients with trisomy 8. CR duration was not associated with CDKN2B
methylation status or karyotype. Median overall survival was 20 months.
Hypermethylation of CDH1 was significantly associated with low CR rate, early
relapse, and short overall survival (P = 0.003). 5-azacytidine treatment, at a
dose of 60 mg/m(2) was well tolerated. Grade III-IV thrombocytopenia and
neutropenia occurred after 9.5 and 30% of the cycles, respectively, while
haemoglobin levels increased during treatment. 5-azacytidine treatment is safe,
feasible and may be of benefit in a subset of patients.

PMID: 20497178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Anim Genet. 2010 Oct;41(5):548-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2010.02041.x.

Origin of Hungarian indigenous chicken breeds inferred from mitochondrial DNA
D-loop sequences.

Revay T(1), Bodzsar N, Mobegi VE, Hanotte O, Hidas A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Animal Breeding and Nutrition, Meheszet, Godollo,
Hungary.

In this study, we assessed the maternal origin of six Hungarian indigenous
chicken breeds using mitochondrial DNA information. Sequences of Hungarian
chickens were compared with the D-loop chicken sequences annotated in the GenBank
and to nine previously described reference haplotypes representing the main
haplogroups of chicken. The first 530 bases of the D-loop region were sequenced
in 74 chickens of nine populations. Eleven haplotypes (HIC1-HIC11) were observed 
from 17 variable sites. Three sequences (HIC3,HIC8 and HIC9) of our chickens were
found as unique to Hungary when searched against the NCBI GenBank database.
Hungarian domestic chicken mtDNA sequences could be assigned into three clades
and probably two maternal lineages. Results indicated that 86%of the Hungarian
haplotypes are related to the reference sequence that likely originated from the 
Indian subcontinent, while the minor part of our sequences presumably derive from
South East Asia, China and Japan.

PMID: 20412127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Leukemia. 2010 May;24(5):932-41. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.41. Epub 2010 Mar 18.

Gene-specific and global methylation patterns predict outcome in patients with
acute myeloid leukemia.

Deneberg S(1), Grövdal M, Karimi M, Jansson M, Nahi H, Corbacioglu A, Gaidzik V, 
Döhner K, Paul C, Ekström TJ, Hellström-Lindberg E, Lehmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. stefan.deneberg@ki.se

This study was designed to analyze the effect of global and gene-specific DNA
methylation patterns on the outcome of patients with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Methylation of CDKN2B (p15), E-cadherin (CDH) and hypermethylated in
cancer 1 (HIC1) promoters and global DNA methylation by luminometric methylation 
assay (LUMA) was analyzed in 107 AML patients and cytogenetic and molecular
mutational analysis was performed. In addition, genome-wide promoter-associated
methylation was assessed using the Illumina HumanMethylation27 array in a
proportion of the patients. Promoter methylation was discovered in 66, 66 and 51%
of the patients for p15, CDH and HIC1, respectively. In multivariate analysis,
low global DNA methylation was associated with higher complete remission rate
(hazard ratio (HR) 5.9, P=0.005) and p15 methylation was associated with better
overall (HR 0.4, P=0.001) and disease-free survival (HR 0.4, P=0.016). CDH and
HIC1 methylation were not associated with clinical outcome. Mutational status and
karyotype were not significantly associated with gene-specific methylation or
global methylation. Increased genome-wide promoter-associated methylation was
associated with better overall and disease-free survival as well as with LUMA
hypomethylation. We conclude that global and gene-specific methylation patterns
are independently associated with the clinical outcome in AML patients.

PMID: 20237504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 29;29(17):2467-76. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.12. Epub 2010 Feb 15.

A potential tumor suppressor role for Hic1 in breast cancer through
transcriptional repression of ephrin-A1.

Zhang W(1), Zeng X, Briggs KJ, Beaty R, Simons B, Chiu Yen RW, Tyler MA, Tsai HC,
Ye Y, Gesell GS, Herman JG, Baylin SB, Watkins DN.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Oncology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

The tumor suppressor gene hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), which encodes a
transcriptional repressor, is epigenetically inactivated in various human
cancers. In this study, we show that HIC1 is a direct transcriptional repressor
of the gene encoding ephrin-A1, a cell surface ligand implicated in the
pathogenesis of epithelial cancers. We also show that mouse embryos lacking both 
Hic1 alleles manifest developmental defects spatially associated with the
misexpression of ephrin-A1, and that overexpression of ephrin-A1 is a feature of 
tumors arising in Hic1 heterozygous mice in which the remaining wild-type allele 
is epigenetically silenced. In breast cancer, we find that ephrin-A1 expression
is common in vivo, but that in cell culture, expression of the EphA receptors is 
predominant. Restoration of HIC1 function in breast cancer cells leads to a
reduction in tumor growth in vivo, an effect that can be partially rescued by
co-overexpression of ephrin-A1. Interestingly, overexpression of ephrin-A1 in
vitro triggers downregulation of EphA2 and EphA4 levels, resulting in an
expression pattern similar to that seen in vivo. We conclude that Hic1 spatially 
restricts ephrin-A1 expression in development, and that upregulated expression of
ephrin-A1 resulting from epigenetic silencing of HIC1 in cancer cells may be an
important mechanism in epithelial malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3025282
PMID: 20154726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Acta Histochem. 2011 May;113(3):340-8. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2010.01.005. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

Relationship between down-regulation of HIC1 and PTEN genes and dysfunction of
pancreatic islet cells in diabetic rats.

Liu HL(1), Yang HY, Liu LX, Chen Y, Kuang HY, Zhang HJ, Yin HQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Clinical College of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, PR China.

The aim of the study was to investigate the protein expression of hypermethylated
in cancer 1 (HIC1 ) and phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) genes and to
study their mRNA expressions in normal and diabetic pancreatic islet cells in
rats in order to try and identify the functions of these genes in the development
and advancement of diabetes. We further aimed to analyze the expression of
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), which is regulated by PTEN and to
investigate the possible mechanism of PTEN affecting the function of diabetic
islet cells. The expressions of HIC1, PTEN and mTOR genes were examined in the
pancreatic islets of 20 normal male Wistar rats and 47 diabetic male Wistar rats 
by immunohistochemistry, Western blot, RT-PCR and real-time RT-PCR. Results
showed that expressions of HIC1 and PTEN in protein and mRNA levels were lower in
pancreatic islets of diabetic rats than in normal rats. Expressions of mTOR in
protein and mRNA levels were higher in pancreatic islets of diabetic rats than in
the normal rats. Marked apoptosis of pancreatic islet cells was observed in 29
cases (29/47, 61.7%) in diabetic rats, but not in the remaining 18 (18/47, 38.3%)
diabetic rats. The down-regulation of HIC1 and PTEN and up-regulation of mTOR in 
protein and mRNA level are positively correlated with functional impairment of
islet cells in diabetic rats. From this study we conclude that HIC1, PTEN and
mTOR cannot be recognized as the key influencing factors promoting pancreatic
islet cells apoptosis of diabetic rats; however, lower expressions of HIC1 and
PTEN and higher expression of mTOR may affect the function of the pancreatic
islet cells in diabetic rats.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20129651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 18;29(11):1653-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.449. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

DNA methylation within the normal colorectal mucosa is associated with
pathway-specific predisposition to cancer.

Worthley DL(1), Whitehall VL, Buttenshaw RL, Irahara N, Greco SA, Ramsnes I,
Mallitt KA, Le Leu RK, Winter J, Hu Y, Ogino S, Young GP, Leggett BA.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital Research Foundation Clinical Research
Centre, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. daniel.worthley@uqconnect.edu.au

There are two major molecular pathways to sporadic colorectal cancer, the
chromosomal instability (CIN) and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)
pathways. This study recruited 166 patients undergoing colonoscopy. Biopsy
samples were collected from the cecum, transverse colon, sigmoid colon and
rectum. DNA methylation was quantified at 'type A' (ESR1, GATA5, HIC1, HPP1,
SFRP1) and 'type C' markers (MGMT, MLH1, CDKN2A, MINT2, MINT31, IGF2, CACNA1G,
NEUROG1, SOCS1, RUNX3), and LINE-1. 'Type A' genes are frequently methylated in
normal and neoplastic tissues, proportional to tissue age. 'Type C' methylation
is more specific for neoplasia. The last five 'type C' markers comprise a CIMP
panel. The mean 'type A' and CIMP-panel methylation Z-scores were calculated. In 
all, 88 patients had adenomatous lesions, 32 had proximal serrated polyps (PSPs) 
and 50 were normal. Most 'type A' genes showed direct correlations between
methylation and age (ESR1, rho=0.66, P<0.0001), with higher methylation distally 
(ESR1, P<0.0001). On multivariate analysis, 'type A' methylation was inversely
associated with colorectal adenomas (odds ratio=0.23, P<0.001), the precursor to 
CIN cancers. CIMP-panel methylation was significantly associated with advanced
PSPs (odds ratio=5.1, P=0.009), the precursor to CIMP cancers. DNA methylation in
normal mucosa varied with age and region and was associated with pathway-specific
pathology. In the future, the colorectal field could yield important information 
and potentially inform clinical practice.

PMID: 19966864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Iran Biomed J. 2009 Oct;13(4):199-206.

Association between HIC1 and RASSF1A promoter hypermethylation with MTHFD1 G1958A
polymorphism and clinicopathological features of breast cancer in Iranian
patients.

Rasti M(1), Tavasoli P, Monabati A, Entezam M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry, Medical School, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran. rasti31@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Ras-associated domain family 1 (RASSF1A) and hypermethylated in
cancer (HIC1) genes are methylated more frequently in breast cancer. Genetic
factors that alter the DNA methylation levels in normal and tumor tissues could
therefore influence the susceptibility to this tumor phenotype. objective: We
determined the frequency of aberrant methylation of HIC1 and RASSF1A gene
promoters and their association with methylene tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase
(MTHFD1) G1958A polymorphism and major clinical and pathological features of
breast cancer in Iranian women.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from 81 primary breast tumors and 100 control blood
samples. Gene promoter methylation was analyzed by methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Eighty four percent of the breast cancer samples showed total
methylation in at least one of two tested loci. We detected HIC1 hypermethylation
in 79% of invasive and metastasis tumors and RASSF1A gene hypermethylation in 51%
of them. We found no association between HIC1 and RASSF1A gene hypermethylation
and MTHFD1 G1958A polymorphism, but a significant correlation between methylation
of HIC1 and RASSF1A promoters was indicated (r = 0.24, P = 0.02). There was a
combination between hypermethylation of HIC1 locus and nodal involvement in the
studied population (p=0.03). We found a significant association between total
methylation and nodal involvement (P = 0.01) as well as tumor size more than 2 cm
in all cases (P = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Methylation of HIC1 and RASSF1A promoters can be used as epigenetic
markers to detect the malignant progression of breast carcinoma in Iranian women 
patients.

PMID: 19946345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Bull Cancer. 2009 Nov;96(11):E66-72. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2009.0959.

Implication of HIC1 (Hypermethylated In Cancer 1) in the DNA damage response.

Dehennaut V(1), Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université de Lille-Nord de
France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, IFR 142, 1, rue Calmette, BP447, 59017, Lille 
Cedex, France. vanessa.dehennaut@ibl.fr

HIC1 (Hypermethylated In Cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene which is
epigenetically inactivated in many human cancers. HIC1 encodes a transcriptional 
repressor comprising an N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and a C-terminal DNA binding
domain containing five Krüppel-like C(2)H(2) zinc fingers. To date, few HIC1
target genes are known and the regulation of HIC1 activity is not fully
deciphered. However, a growing list of studies, summarized in this review,
strongly suggest that HIC1 plays a central role in the DNA damage response
through the establishment of several complex regulatory loops involving HIC1,
p53, SIRT1 and E2F1.

PMID: 19822477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Dec;23(12):2075-85. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0231. Epub 2009 Oct
9.

HIC1 regulates tumor cell responses to endocrine therapies.

Zhang B(1), Faller DV, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Cancer Research Center, Massachusetts
02118, USA.

Retraction in
    Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Sep;25(9):1676.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2011 Aug 12;:NOT-OD-11-103.

An intractable problem impeding breast cancer treatment by the most frequently
prescribed endocrine therapy tamoxifen is the inevitable development of
resistance, and the molecular mechanisms underlying this loss of responsiveness
by breast cancers have been under intense investigation but are not yet fully
elucidated. Our recent reports demonstrated that the tumor suppressor heavily
methylated in cancers 1 (HIC1) plays an essential role in growth suppression
mediated by external stimuli. We report here that novel tumor suppressor HIC1 is 
required for growth suppression by estrogen antagonists in breast cancer cells.
We also find that HIC1 expression is dramatically induced by exposure to estrogen
antagonists in sensitive cells, via a c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1) and
prohibitin-mediated signaling pathway. This induction is lost in spontaneously
antagonist-resistant breast cancer cells. Furthermore, reintroducing HIC1 into
resistant breast cancer cells restored their sensitivity to the estrogen
antagonists, indicating the existence of a novel regulatory mechanism for growth 
control of breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2796148
PMID: 19819984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Oct;18(10):2782-9. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0493. Epub 2009 Sep 15.

Folate status and aberrant DNA methylation are associated with HPV infection and 
cervical pathogenesis.

Flatley JE(1), McNeir K, Balasubramani L, Tidy J, Stuart EL, Young TA, Powers HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Human Nutrition Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sheffield, Beech Hill
Road, Sheffield, S10 2RX, United Kingdom.

Aberrant DNA methylation is a recognized feature of human cancers, and folate is 
directly involved in DNA methylation via one-carbon metabolism. Previous reports 
also suggest that folate status is associated with the natural history of human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection. A cross-sectional study was conducted to test the
hypothesis that folate status and aberrant DNA methylation show a progressive
change across stages of cervical pathology from normal cells to cervical cancer. 
Additionally, we postulated that a gene-specific hypermethylation profile might
be used as a predictive biomarker of cervical cancer risk. DNA hypermethylation
of seven tumor suppressor genes, global DNA hypomethylation, systemic folate
status, and HPV status were measured in 308 women with a diagnosis of normal
cervix (n = 58), low-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN1; n = 68),
high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN2, n = 56; and CIN3, n = 76),
or invasive cervical cancer (ICC; n = 50). Lower folate status was associated
with high-risk HPV infection (P = 0.031) and with a diagnosis of cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia or invasive cervical cancer (P < 0.05). Global DNA
hypomethylation was greater in women with invasive cervical cancer than all other
groups (P < 0.05). A cluster of three tumor suppressor genes, CDH1, DAPK, and
HIC1, displayed a significantly increased frequency of promoter methylation with 
progressively more severe cervical neoplasia (P < 0.05). These findings are
compatible with a role for folate in modulating the risk of cervical cancer,
possibly through an influence over high-risk HPV infection. DAPK, CDH1, and HIC1 
genes are potential biomarkers of cervical cancer risk.

PMID: 19755648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Gastroenterology. 2009 Nov;137(5):1609-20.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.08.002. Epub 2009 Aug 14.

A prospective cohort study shows unique epigenetic, genetic, and prognostic
features of synchronous colorectal cancers.

Nosho K(1), Kure S, Irahara N, Shima K, Baba Y, Spiegelman D, Meyerhardt JA,
Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2009 Nov;137(5):1559-62.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Synchronous colorectal neoplasias (2 or more primary
carcinomas identified in the same patient) are caused by common genetic and
environmental factors and can be used to study the field effect. Synchronous
colon cancers have not been compared with control solitary cancers in a
prospective study.
METHODS: We analyzed data collected from 47 patients with synchronous colorectal 
cancers and 2021 solitary colorectal cancers (controls) in 2 prospective cohort
studies. Tumors samples were analyzed for methylation in LINE-1 and 16 CpG
islands (CACNA1G, CDKN2A [p16], CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3, SOCS1, CHFR, 
HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, p14 [ARF], and WRN); microsatellite
instability (MSI); the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP); 18q loss of
heterozygosity; KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA mutations; and expression of beta-catenin,
p53, p21, p27, cyclin D1, fatty acid synthase, and cyclooxygenase-2.
RESULTS: Compared with patients with solitary colorectal cancer, synchronous
colorectal cancer patients had reduced overall survival time (log-rank, P =
.0048; hazard ratio [HR], 1.71; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.17-2.50; P =
.0053; multivariate HR, 1.47; 95% CI: 1.00-2.17; P = .049). Compared with
solitary tumors, synchronous tumors more frequently contained BRAF mutations (P =
.0041), CIMP-high (P = .013), and MSI-high (P = .037). Methylation levels of
LINE-1 (Spearman r = 0.82; P = .0072) and CpG island methylation (P < .0001)
correlated between synchronous cancer pairs from the same individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Synchronous colorectal cancers had more frequent mutations in BRAF, 
were more frequently CIMP- and MSI-high, and had a worse prognosis than solitary 
colorectal cancers. Similar epigenomic and epigenetic events were frequently
observed within a synchronous cancer pair, suggesting the presence of a field
defect.

PMCID: PMC2859181
PMID: 19686742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Hematop. 2008 Sep;1(2):85-95. doi: 10.1007/s12308-008-0008-6. Epub 2008 Jul 5.

Genomic deletion and promoter methylation status of Hypermethylated in Cancer 1
(HIC1) in mantle cell lymphoma.

Stöcklein H(1), Hutter G, Kalla J, Hartmann E, Zimmermann Y, Katzenberger T, Adam
P, Leich E, Höller S, Müller-Hermelink HK, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Dreyling M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.

Mantle cell lymphomas (MCL), characterized by the t(11;14)(q13;q32), frequently
carry secondary genetic alterations such as deletions in chromosome 17p involving
the TP53 locus. Given that the association between TP53-deletions and concurrent 
mutations of the remaining allele is weak and based on our recent report that the
Hypermethylated in Cancer 1 (HIC1) gene, that is located telomeric to the TP53
gene, may be targeted by deletions in 17p in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), we investigated whether HIC1 inactivations might also occur in MCL.
Monoallelic deletions of the TP53 locus were detected in 18 out of 59 MCL (31%), 
while overexpression of p53 protein occurred in only 8 out of 18 of these MCL
(44%). In TP53-deleted MCL, the HIC1 gene locus was co-deleted in 11 out of 18
cases (61%). However, neither TP53 nor HIC1 deletions did affect survival of MCL 
patients. In most analyzed cases, no hypermethylation of the HIC1 exon 1A
promoter was observed (17 out of 20, 85%). However, in MCL cell lines without
HIC1-hypermethylation, the mRNA expression levels of HIC1 were nevertheless
significantly reduced, when compared to reactive lymph node specimens, pointing
to the occurrence of mechanisms other than epigenetic or genetic events for the
inactivation of HIC1 in this entity.

PMCID: PMC2713485
PMID: 19669207  [PubMed]


111. Neoplasia. 2009 Aug;11(8):763-70.

Distinct HIC1-SIRT1-p53 loop deregulation in lung squamous carcinoma and
adenocarcinoma patients.

Tseng RC(1), Lee CC, Hsu HS, Tzao C, Wang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101,
Taiwan, ROC.

A HIC1-SIRT1-p53 circular loop in which hypermethylation in cancer 1 (HIC1)
represses the transcription of SIRT1 that deacetylates and inactivates p53 thus
leading to HIC1 inactivation has been identified in cell and animal models.
However, the alteration and prognostic effects of HIC1-SIRT1-p53 circular loop
have never been demonstrated in human cancer patients. We examine the
HIC1-SIRT1-p53 alterations in 118 lung cancer patients to define their
etiological roles in tumorigenesis. We found that patients with lung squamous
cell carcinoma with low p53 acetylation and SIRT1 expression mostly showed low
HIC1 expression, confirming deregulation of HIC1-SIRT1-p53 circular loop in the
clinical model. Interestingly, the expression of deleted in breast cancer 1
(DBC1), which blocks the interaction between SIRT1 deacetylase and p53, led to
acetylated p53 in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. However, epigenetic
alteration of HIC1 promoter by posttranslational modifications of histones and
promoter hypermethylation favoring the compacted chromatin production attenuated 
the transcriptional induction by acetylated p53. Importantly, lung cancer
patients with altered HIC1-SIRT1-p53 circular regulation showed poor prognosis.
Our data show the first valid clinical evidence of the deregulation of
HIC1-SIRT1-p53 loop in lung tumorigenesis and prognosis. Distinct status of p53
acetylation/deacetylation and HIC1 alteration mechanism result from different
SIRT1-DBC1 control and epigenetic alteration in lung squamous cell carcinoma and 
lung adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2713589
PMID: 19649206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 15;125(8):1985-91. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24431.

TGFbetaR2 aberrant methylation is a potential prognostic marker and therapeutic
target in multiple myeloma.

de Carvalho F(1), Colleoni GW, Almeida MS, Carvalho AL, Vettore AL.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Hematology and Hemotherapy, Universidade Federal de São Paulo,
UNIFESP/EPM, São Paulo, Brazil.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematological malignancy. Different studies
demonstrated the occurrence of genetic and epigenetic alterations in MM. The
aberrant methylation is one of the most frequent epigenetic alterations in human 
genome. This study evaluated the aberrant methylation status of 20 genes in 51 MM
samples by quantitative methylation-specific PCR (QMSP) and compared the
methylation profile with clinicopathological characteristics of the patients. The
QMSP analyses showed that PTGS2 (100.0%), SFN (100.0%), CDKN2B (90.2%), CDH1
(88.2%), ESR1 (72.5%), HIC1 (70.5%), CCND2 (62.7%), DCC (45.1%) and TGFbetaR2
(39.2%) are frequently hypermethylated in MM while aberrant methylation of
RARbeta (16.6%), MGMT (12.5%), AIM1 (12.5%), CDKN2A (8.3%), SOCS1 (8.3%), CCNA1
(8.3%) and THBS1 (4.1%) are rare events. There was no methylation of GSTP1,
MINT31, p14ARF and RB1 in the samples tested. Hypermethylation of ESR1 was
correlated positively with isotype IgA, while aberrant methylation of THBS1
correlated negatively with isotype IgG. Furthermore, hypermethylation of DCC and 
TGFbetaR2 were correlated with poor survival. The multivariate analysis showed
ISS and TGFbetaR2 hypermethylation strongly correlated with poor outcome. This
study represents the first quantitative evaluation of promoter methylation in MM 
and our data provide evidence that TGFbetaR2 hypermethylation, besides ISS, may
be useful as prognostic indicator in this disease.

PMID: 19548309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 31;284(31):20927-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.022350. Epub
2009 Jun 12.

Scavenger chemokine (CXC motif) receptor 7 (CXCR7) is a direct target gene of
HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1).

Van Rechem C(1), Rood BR, Touka M, Pinte S, Jenal M, Guérardel C, Ramsey K, Monté
D, Bégue A, Tschan MP, Stephan DA, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161 Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université de Lille NORD de
France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 59017 Lille, France.

The tumor suppressor gene HIC1 (Hypermethylated in Cancer 1) that is
epigenetically silenced in many human tumors and is essential for mammalian
development encodes a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor. The few genes 
that have been reported to be directly regulated by HIC1 include ATOH1, FGFBP1,
SIRT1, and E2F1. HIC1 is thus involved in the complex regulatory loops modulating
p53-dependent and E2F1-dependent cell survival and stress responses. We performed
genome-wide expression profiling analyses to identify new HIC1 target genes,
using HIC1-deficient U2OS human osteosarcoma cells infected with adenoviruses
expressing either HIC1 or GFP as a negative control. These studies identified
several putative direct target genes, including CXCR7, a G-protein-coupled
receptor recently identified as a scavenger receptor for the chemokine
SDF-1/CXCL12. CXCR7 is highly expressed in human breast, lung, and prostate
cancers. Using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR analyses, we demonstrated
that CXCR7 was repressed in U2OS cells overexpressing HIC1. Inversely,
inactivation of endogenous HIC1 by RNA interference in normal human WI38
fibroblasts results in up-regulation of CXCR7 and SIRT1. In silico analyses
followed by deletion studies and luciferase reporter assays identified a
functional and phylogenetically conserved HIC1-responsive element in the human
CXCR7 promoter. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and ChIP upon ChIP
experiments demonstrated that endogenous HIC1 proteins are bound together with
the C-terminal binding protein corepressor to the CXCR7 and SIRT1 promoters in
WI38 cells. Taken together, our results implicate the tumor suppressor HIC1 in
the transcriptional regulation of the chemokine receptor CXCR7, a key player in
the promotion of tumorigenesis in a wide variety of cell types.

PMCID: PMC2742858
PMID: 19525223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 1;125(7):1692-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24492.

Global and gene-specific promoter methylation changes are related to
anti-B[a]PDE-DNA adduct levels and influence micronuclei levels in polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon-exposed individuals.

Pavanello S(1), Bollati V, Pesatori AC, Kapka L, Bolognesi C, Bertazzi PA,
Baccarelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Occupational Health Section, Department of Environmental Medicine and Public
Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. sofia.pavanello@unipd.it

We investigated the effect of chronic exposure to polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) on DNA methylation states (percentage of methylated cytosines
(%mC)) in Polish male nonsmoking coke-oven workers and matched controls.
Methylation states of gene-specific promoters (p53, p16, HIC1 and IL-6) and of
Alu and LINE-1 repetitive elements, as surrogate measures of global methylation, 
were quantified by pyrosequencing in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs). DNA
methylation was evaluated in relation to PAH exposure, assessed by urinary
1-pyrenol and anti-benzo[a]pyrene diolepoxide (anti-B[a]PDE)-DNA adduct levels, a
critical genetic damage from B[a]P. We also evaluated whether PAH-induced DNA
methylation states were in turn associated with micronuclei in PBLs, an indicator
of chromosomal instability.

PMID: 19521983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Jun;7(6):916-22. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0359. Epub
2009 Jun 2.

The tumor suppressor gene hypermethylated in cancer 1 is transcriptionally
regulated by E2F1.

Jenal M(1), Trinh E, Britschgi C, Britschgi A, Roh V, Vorburger SA, Tobler A,
Leprince D, Fey MF, Helin K, Tschan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern, Switzerland.

The Hypermethylated in Cancer 1 (HIC1) gene encodes a zinc finger transcriptional
repressor that cooperates with p53 to suppress cancer development. We and others 
recently showed that HIC1 is a transcriptional target of p53. To identify
additional transcriptional regulators of HIC1, we screened a set of transcription
factors for regulation of a human HIC1 promoter reporter. We found that E2F1
strongly activates the full-length HIC1 promoter reporter. Promoter deletions and
mutations identified two E2F responsive elements in the HIC1 core promoter
region. Moreover, in vivo binding of E2F1 to the HIC1 promoter was shown by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in human TIG3 fibroblasts expressing
tamoxifen-activated E2F1. In agreement, activation of E2F1 in TIG3-E2F1 cells
markedly increased HIC1 expression. Interestingly, expression of E2F1 in the
p53(-/-) hepatocellular carcinoma cell line Hep3B led to an increase of
endogenous HIC1 mRNA, although bisulfite genomic sequencing of the HIC1 promoter 
revealed that the region bearing the two E2F1 binding sites is hypermethylated.
In addition, endogenous E2F1 induced by etoposide treatment bound to the HIC1
promoter. Moreover, inhibition of E2F1 strongly reduced the expression of
etoposide-induced HIC1. In conclusion, we identified HIC1 as novel E2F1
transcriptional target in DNA damage responses.

PMID: 19491197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Aug 7;385(4):586-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.115. Epub 2009 May 30.

HIC1 interacts with a specific subunit of SWI/SNF complexes, ARID1A/BAF250A.

Van Rechem C(1), Boulay G, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de LILLE, Université de Lille Nord de
FRANCE, Institut PASTEUR de LILLE, IFR 142, 1 Rue Calmette, 59017 LILLE Cedex,
France.

HIC1, a tumor suppressor gene epigenetically silenced in many human cancers
encodes a transcriptional repressor involved in regulatory loops modulating
p53-dependent and E2F1-dependent cell survival and stress responses. HIC1 is also
implicated in growth control since it recruits BRG1, one of the two alternative
ATPases (BRM or BRG1) of SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes to repress
transcription of E2F1 in quiescent fibroblasts. Here, through yeast two-hybrid
screening, we identify ARID1A/BAF250A, as a new HIC1 partner. ARID1A/BAF250A is
one of the two mutually exclusive ARID1-containing subunits of SWI/SNF complexes 
which define subsets of complexes endowed with anti-proliferative properties.
Co-immunoprecipitation assays in WI38 fibroblasts and in BRG1-/- SW13 cells
showed that endogenous HIC1 and ARID1A proteins interact in a BRG1-dependent
manner. Furthermore, we demonstrate that HIC1 does not interact with BRM.
Finally, sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-reChIP) experiments
demonstrated that HIC1 represses E2F1 through the recruitment of
anti-proliferative SWI/SNF complexes containing ARID1A.

PMID: 19486893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 1;15(11):3663-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2383.
Epub 2009 May 26.

DNMT3B expression might contribute to CpG island methylator phenotype in
colorectal cancer.

Nosho K(1), Shima K, Irahara N, Kure S, Baba Y, Kirkner GJ, Chen L, Gokhale S,
Hazra A, Spiegelman D, Giovannucci EL, Jaenisch R, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: DNA methyltransferase-3B (DNMT3B) plays an important role in de novo CpG
island methylation. Dnmt3b can induce colon tumor in mice with methylation in
specific CpG islands. We hypothesized that cellular DNMT3B level might influence 
the occurrence of widespread CpG island methylation (i.e., the CpG island
methylator phenotype, CIMP) in colon cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Utilizing 765 colorectal cancers in two cohort studies, we
detected DNMT3B expression in 116 (15%) tumors by immunohistochemistry. We
assessed microsatellite instability, quantified DNA methylation in repetitive
long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) by Pyrosequencing, eight
CIMP-specific promoters [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3, and SOCS1], and eight other CpG islands (CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, 
MINT31, p14, and WRN) by real-time PCR (MethyLight).
RESULTS: Tumoral DNMT3B overexpression was significantly associated with
CIMP-high [> or =6/8 methylated CIMP-specific promoters; odds ratio (OR), 3.34;
95% confidence interval, 2.11-5.29; P < 0.0001]. The relations between DNMT3B and
methylation in 16 individual CpG islands varied substantially (OR, 0.80-2.96),
suggesting variable locus-to-locus specificities of DNMT3B activity. DNMT3B
expression was not significantly related with LINE-1 hypomethylation. In
multivariate logistic regression, the significant relation between DNMT3B and
CIMP-high persisted (OR, 2.39; 95% confidence interval, 1.11-5.14; P = 0.026)
after adjusting for clinical and other molecular features, including p53,
beta-catenin, LINE-1, microsatellite instability, KRAS, PIK3CA, and BRAF. DNMT3B 
expression was unrelated with patient outcome, survival, or prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumoral DNMT3B overexpression is associated with CIMP-high in
colorectal cancer. Our data support a possible role of DNMT3B in nonrandom de
novo CpG island methylation leading to colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2866637
PMID: 19470733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mod Pathol. 2009 Jul;22(7):922-32. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.49. Epub 2009 May 
8.

SIRT1 histone deacetylase expression is associated with microsatellite
instability and CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal cancer.

Nosho K(1), Shima K, Irahara N, Kure S, Firestein R, Baba Y, Toyoda S, Chen L,
Hazra A, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

The class III histone deacetylase SIRT1 (sir2) is important in epigenetic gene
silencing. Inhibition of SIRT1 reactivates silenced genes, suggesting a possible 
therapeutic approach of targeted reversal of aberrantly silenced genes. In
addition, SIRT1 may be involved in the well-known link between obesity, cellular 
energy balance and cancer. However, a comprehensive study of SIRT1 using human
cancer tissue with clinical outcome data is currently lacking, and its prognostic
significance is uncertain. Using the database of 485 colorectal cancers in two
independent prospective cohort studies, we detected SIRT1 overexpression in 180
(37%) tumors by immunohistochemistry. We examined its relationship to the CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP), related molecular events, clinical features
including body mass index, and patient survival. We quantified DNA methylation in
eight CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G, CDKN2A, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3, and SOCS1) and eight other CpG islands (CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1,
MINT31, p14, and WRN) by MethyLight. SIRT1 overexpression was associated with
CIMP-high (> or =6 of 8 methylated CIMP-specific promoters, P=0.002) and
microsatellite instability (MSI)-high phenotype (P<0.0001). In both univariate
and multivariate analyses, SIRT1 overexpression was significantly associated with
the CIMP-high MSI-high phenotype (multivariate odds ratio, 3.20; 95% confidence
interval, 1.35-7.59; P=0.008). In addition, mucinous component (P=0.01), high
tumor grade (P=0.02), and fatty acid synthase overexpression (P=0.04) were
significantly associated with SIRT positivity in multivariate analysis. SIRT1 was
not significantly related with age, sex, tumor location, stage, signet ring
cells, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), LINE-1 hypomethylation, KRAS, BRAF, BMI, PIK3CA,
HDAC, p53, beta-catenin, COX-2, or patient prognosis. In conclusion, SIRT1
expression is associated with CIMP-high MSI-high colon cancer, suggesting
involvement of SIRT1 in gene silencing in this unique tumor subtype.

PMCID: PMC2704253
PMID: 19430421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 1;18(7):1332-42. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp033. Epub 2009 Jan
19.

Gene-body hypermethylation of ATM in peripheral blood DNA of bilateral breast
cancer patients.

Flanagan JM(1), Munoz-Alegre M, Henderson S, Tang T, Sun P, Johnson N, Fletcher
O, Dos Santos Silva I, Peto J, Boshoff C, Narod S, Petronis A.

Author information: 
(1)CR-UK Viral Oncology Group, UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK.
j.flanagan@ucl.ac.uk

Bilaterality of breast cancer is an indicator of constitutional cancer
susceptibility; however, the molecular causes underlying this predisposition in
the majority of cases is not known. We hypothesize that epigenetic misregulation 
of cancer-related genes could partially account for this predisposition. We have 
performed methylation microarray analysis of peripheral blood DNA from 14 women
with bilateral breast cancer compared with 14 unaffected matched controls
throughout 17 candidate breast cancer susceptibility genes including BRCA1,
BRCA2, CHEK2, ATM, ESR1, SFN, CDKN2A, TP53, GSTP1, CDH1, CDH13, HIC1, PGR, SFRP1,
MLH1, RARB and HSD17B4. We show that the majority of methylation variability is
associated with intragenic repetitive elements. Detailed validation of the tiled 
region around ATM was performed by bisulphite modification and pyrosequencing of 
the same samples and in a second set of peripheral blood DNA from 190 bilateral
breast cancer patients compared with 190 controls. We show significant
hypermethylation of one intragenic repetitive element in breast cancer cases
compared with controls (P = 0.0017), with the highest quartile of methylation
associated with a 3-fold increased risk of breast cancer (OR 3.20, 95% CI
1.78-5.86, P = 0.000083). Increased methylation of this locus is associated with 
lower steady-state ATM mRNA level and correlates with age of cancer patients but 
not controls, suggesting a combined age-phenotype-related association. This
research demonstrates the potential for gene-body epigenetic misregulation of ATM
and other cancer-related genes in peripheral blood DNA that may be useful as a
novel marker to estimate breast cancer risk. ACCESSION NUMBERS: The microarray
data and associated .BED and .WIG files can be accessed through Gene Expression
Omnibus accession number: GSE14603.

PMCID: PMC2655767
PMID: 19153073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Neoplasia. 2009 Jan;11(1):87-95.

JC virus T-antigen in colorectal cancer is associated with p53 expression and
chromosomal instability, independent of CpG island methylator phenotype.

Nosho K(1), Shima K, Kure S, Irahara N, Baba Y, Chen L, Kirkner GJ, Fuchs CS,
Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

JC virus has a transforming gene encoding JC virus T-antigen (JCVT). JCVT may
inactivate wild-type p53, cause chromosomal instability (CIN), and stabilize
beta-catenin. A link between JCVT and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) has 
been suggested. However, no large-scale study has examined the relations of JCVT 
with molecular alterations, clinical outcome, or prognosis in colon cancer. We
detected JCVT expression (by immunohistochemistry) in 271 (35%) of 766 colorectal
cancers. We quantified DNA methylation in eight CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G,
CDKN2A, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1) and eight other loci
(CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, p14, WRN) by MethyLight. We examined
loss of heterozygosity in 2p, 5q, 17q, and 18q. JCVT was significantly associated
with p53 expression (P < .0001), p21 loss (P < .0001), CIN (>/=2 chromosomal
segments with LOH; P < .0001), nuclear beta-catenin (P = .006), LINE-1
hypomethylation (P = .002), and inversely with CIMP-high (P = .0005) and
microsatellite instability (MSI) (P < .0001), but not with PIK3CA mutation. In
multivariate logistic regression analysis, the associations of JCVT with p53
[adjusted odds ratio (OR), 8.45; P < .0001], CIN (adjusted OR, 2.53; P = .003),
cyclin D1 (adjusted OR, 1.57; P = .02), LINE-1 hypomethylation (adjusted OR, 1.97
for a 30% decline as a unit; P = .03), BRAF mutation (adjusted OR, 2.20; P =
.04), and family history of colorectal cancer (adjusted OR, 0.64; P = .04)
remained statistically significant. However, JCVT was no longer significantly
associated with CIMP, MSI, beta-catenin, or cyclooxygenase-2 expression in
multivariate analysis. JCVT was unrelated with patient survival. In conclusion,
JCVT expression in colorectal cancer is independently associated with p53
expression and CIN, which may lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2606122
PMID: 19107235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Gynecol Oncol. 2009 Feb;112(2):293-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2008.10.012. Epub 2008
Dec 2.

Utility of methylation markers in cervical cancer early detection: appraisal of
the state-of-the-science.

Wentzensen N(1), Sherman ME, Schiffman M, Wang SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 6120 
Executive Blvd, Room 5012, Rockville, MD 20854-7234, USA. wentzenn@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Gynecol Oncol. 2009 Feb;112(2):291-2.

OBJECTIVE: We wanted to identify the most promising methylation marker candidates
for cervical cancer early detection.
METHODS: A systematic literature review was performed in Medline and weighted
average frequencies for methylated genes stratified by tissue source and methods 
used were computed.
RESULTS: 51 studies were identified analyzing 68 different genes for methylation 
in 4376 specimens across all stages of cervical carcinogenesis. 15 genes, DAPK1, 
RASSF1, CDH1, CDKN2A, MGMT, RARB, APC, FHIT, MLH1, TIMP3, GSTP1, CADM1, CDH13,
HIC1, and TERT have been analyzed in 5 or more studies. The published data on
these genes is highly heterogeneous; 7 genes (CDH1, FHIT, TERT, CDH13, MGMT,
TIMP3, and HIC1) had a reported range of methylation frequencies in cervical
cancers of greater than 60% between studies. Stratification by analysis method
did not resolve the heterogeneity. Three markers, DAPK1, CADM1, and RARB, showed 
elevated methylation in cervical cancers consistently across studies.
CONCLUSIONS: There is currently no methylation marker that can be readily
translated for use in cervical cancer screening or triage settings. Large,
well-conducted methylation profiling studies of cervical carcinogenesis could
yield new candidates that are more specific for HPV-related carcinogenesis. New
candidate markers need to be thoroughly validated in highly standardized assays.

PMCID: PMC2673716
PMID: 19054549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Oncogene. 2009 Feb 5;28(5):651-61. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.419. Epub 2008 Nov 17.

Requirement for chromatin-remodeling complex in novel tumor suppressor
HIC1-mediated transcriptional repression and growth control.

Zhang B(1), Chambers KJ, Leprince D, Faller DV, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

Retraction in
    Oncogene. 2011 Oct 20;30(42):4374.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2011 Aug 12;:NOT-OD-11-103.

HIC1 is a newly discovered tumor suppressor and transcriptional repressor that is
frequently silenced in human tumors. HIC1 protein expression has been linked to
better outcomes in breast cancers. The molecular mechanism underlying
HIC1-mediated transcriptional and growth suppression, and the relevant targets of
HIC1-mediated transcriptional modulation, is currently unclear. We have
identified an HIC1 DNA-binding site in E2F-responsive gene promoters and
demonstrate that HIC1 targets E2F-responsive genes for transcriptional regulation
and growth suppression. We and others have recently discovered that Brg1, a
central component of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling family, is required for the
transcriptional regulation of multiple cell cycle control-related genes,
including E2F-responsive promoters. We studied HIC1 interactions with, and
dependence upon, Brg1 activity, and found that HIC1 can recruit Brg1 to
E2F-responsive promoters and that its transcriptional repression of these genes
is dependent upon Brg1. These data indicate that HIC1 is a central molecule in a 
novel mechanism controlling cell growth and that the disruption of this
HIC1-mediated pathway may lead to abnormal cell proliferation and, ultimately,
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2636853
PMID: 19015639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003698. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Comprehensive biostatistical analysis of CpG island methylator phenotype in
colorectal cancer using a large population-based sample.

Nosho K(1), Irahara N, Shima K, Kure S, Kirkner GJ, Schernhammer ES, Hazra A,
Hunter DJ, Quackenbush J, Spiegelman D, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is a distinct phenotype
associated with microsatellite instability (MSI) and BRAF mutation in colon
cancer. Recent investigations have selected 5 promoters (CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, 
RUNX3 and SOCS1) as surrogate markers for CIMP-high. However, no study has
comprehensively evaluated an expanded set of methylation markers (including these
5 markers) using a large number of tumors, or deciphered the complex clinical and
molecular associations with CIMP-high determined by the validated marker panel.
METHOLODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: DNA methylation at 16 CpG islands [the above 5 
plus CDKN2A (p16), CHFR, CRABP1, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, MLH1, p14
(CDKN2A/ARF) and WRN] was quantified in 904 colorectal cancers by real-time PCR
(MethyLight). In unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, the 5 markers
(CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1), CDKN2A, CRABP1, MINT31, MLH1, p14 and 
WRN were generally clustered with each other and with MSI and BRAF mutation. KRAS
mutation was not clustered with any methylation marker, suggesting its
association with a random methylation pattern in CIMP-low tumors. Utilizing the
validated CIMP marker panel (including the 5 markers), multivariate logistic
regression demonstrated that CIMP-high was independently associated with older
age, proximal location, poor differentiation, MSI-high, BRAF mutation, and
inversely with LINE-1 hypomethylation and beta-catenin (CTNNB1) activation.
Mucinous feature, signet ring cells, and p53-negativity were associated with
CIMP-high in only univariate analysis. In stratified analyses, the relations of
CIMP-high with poor differentiation, KRAS mutation and LINE-1 hypomethylation
significantly differed according to MSI status.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides valuable data for standardization of the use of
CIMP-high-specific methylation markers. CIMP-high is independently associated
with clinical and key molecular features in colorectal cancer. Our data also
suggest that KRAS mutation is related with a random CpG island methylation
pattern which may lead to CIMP-low tumors.

PMCID: PMC2579485
PMID: 19002263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;68(21):8654-6. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1904.

Just say no to ATOH: how HIC1 methylation might predispose medulloblastoma to
lineage addiction.

Briggs KJ(1), Eberhart CG, Watkins DN.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Hypermethylated in cancer-1 (HIC1) is a tumor suppressor frequently targeted for 
promoter hypermethylation in medulloblastoma, an embryonal tumor of the
cerebellum. Recently, we showed that HIC1 is a direct transcriptional repressor
of ATOH1, a proneural transcription factor required for normal cerebellar
development, as well as for medulloblastoma cell viability. Because demethylating
agents can induce reexpression of silenced tumor suppressors, restoring HIC1
function may present an attractive therapeutic avenue in medulloblastoma by
exploiting an apparent addiction to ATOH1.

PMCID: PMC2702666
PMID: 18974104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Gut. 2009 Jan;58(1):90-6. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.155473. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

CpG island methylator phenotype, microsatellite instability, BRAF mutation and
clinical outcome in colon cancer.

Ogino S(1), Nosho K, Kirkner GJ, Kawasaki T, Meyerhardt JA, Loda M, Giovannucci
EL, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA.
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), characterised by
widespread promoter methylation, is associated with microsatellite instability
(MSI) and BRAF mutation in colorectal cancer. The independent effect of CIMP, MSI
and BRAF mutation on prognosis remains uncertain.
METHODS: Utilising 649 colon cancers (stage I-IV) in two independent cohort
studies, we quantified DNA methylation in eight CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G,
CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1) as well as CHFR,
HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, p14, and WRN by using MethyLight technology.
We examined MSI, KRAS and BRAF status. Cox proportional hazard models computed
hazard ratios (HRs) for colon cancer-specific and overall mortalities, adjusting 
for patient characteristics and tumoral molecular features.
RESULTS: After adjustment for other predictors of patient survival, patients with
CIMP-high cancers (126 (19%) tumours with >or=6/8 methylated CIMP-specific
promoters) experienced a significantly low colon cancer-specific mortality
(multivariate HR 0.44, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.22 to 0.88), whereas the
BRAF mutation was significantly associated with a high cancer-specific mortality 
(multivariate HR 1.97, 95% CI 1.13 to 3.42). A trend toward a low cancer-specific
mortality was observed for MSI-high tumours (multivariate HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.36 to
1.37). In stratified analyses, CIMP-high tumours were associated with a
significant reduction in colon cancer-specific mortality, regardless of both MSI 
and BRAF status. The relation between CIMP-high and lower mortality appeared to
be consistent across all stages. KRAS mutation was unrelated to prognostic
significance.
CONCLUSION: CIMP-high appears to be an independent predictor of a low colon
cancer-specific mortality, while BRAF mutation is associated with a high colon
cancer-specific mortality.

PMCID: PMC2679586
PMID: 18832519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Cancer. 2008 Dec 1;123(11):2587-93. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23840.

Distinct CpG island methylation profiles and BRAF mutation status in serrated and
adenomatous colorectal polyps.

Kim YH(1), Kakar S, Cun L, Deng G, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Laboratory (151M2), Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

A subset of colorectal cancers with CpG island methylator phenotype-high (CIMP-H)
is frequently associated with MSI and BRAF V600E mutation. Since limited data are
available on different histological types of colorectal polyps, we compared the
pattern and the frequency of promoter methylation, CIMP-H, MSI, KRAS and BRAF
V600E mutations and the relationship among these molecular parameters and the
clinicopathologic characteristics in 110 serrated polyps (48 hyperplastic polyps,
32 sessile serrated adenomas and 30 serrated adenomas) and 32 tubular adenomas
using 7 commonly used tumor-associated gene loci. No significant difference in
the frequency of overall methylation frequency (86% vs. 100%) and CIMP-H (39% vs.
28%) between serrated polyps and tubular adenomas was observed, but proximally
located serrated polyps showed more frequent methylation at 5 of 7 loci examined,
and were more likely to be CIMP-H (62% vs. 22%). MGMT methylation was more common
in tubular adenomas while MLH1 and HIC1 were more frequently methylated in
serrated polyps. BRAF mutation was frequently present in all types of serrated
polyps (80%), but was absent in tubular adenomas and was not associated with CIMP
or MSI status. These results show comparable frequencies of promoter methylation 
of tumor-associated genes and CIMP-H, but distinct differences in gene-specific
or colonic site-specific methylation profiles occur in serrated polyps and
tubular adenomas. BRAF mutation occurs independently of CIMP and MSI in all types
of serrated polyps and may serve as a marker of serrated pathway of colorectal
carcinogenesis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18798261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Gynecol Oncol. 2008 Nov;111(2):320-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2008.07.036. Epub 2008
Aug 30.

DNA hypermethylation, Her-2/neu overexpression and p53 mutations in ovarian
carcinoma.

Feng Q(1), Deftereos G, Hawes SE, Stern JE, Willner JB, Swisher EM, Xi L,
Drescher C, Urban N, Kiviat N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To define patterns of aberrant DNA methylation, p53 mutation and
Her-2/neu overexpression in tissues from benign (n=29), malignant (n=100), and
border line malignant ovaries (n=10), as compared to normal (n=68) ovarian
tissues. Further, to explore the relationship between the presence of genetic and
epigenetic abnormalities in ovarian cancers, and assess the association between
epigenetic changes and clinical stage of malignancy at presentation and response 
to therapy.
METHODS: The methylation status of 23 genes that were previously reported
associated with various epithelial malignancies was assessed in normal and
abnormal ovarian tissues by methylation-specific PCR. The presence of p53
mutation (n=82 cases) and Her-2/neu overexpression (n=51 cases) were assessed by 
DNA sequencing and immunohistochemistry, respectively.
RESULTS: Methylation of four genes (MINT31, HIC1, RASSF1, and CABIN1) was
significantly associated with ovarian cancer but not other ovarian pathology.
Her-2/neu overexpression was associated with aberrant methylation of three genes 
(MINT31, RASSF1, and CDH13), although aberrant methylation was not associated
with p53 mutations. Methylation of RASSF1 and HIC1 was more frequent in early
compared to late stage ovarian cancer, while methylation of CABIN1 and RASSF1 was
associated with response to chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes is a frequent event in
ovarian cancer, and in some cases is associated with Her-2/neu overexpression.
Methylation of CABIN1 and RASSF1 may have the utility to predict response to
therapy.

PMCID: PMC2642648
PMID: 18757082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;41(1):26-33. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.05.028.
Epub 2008 Aug 3.

HIC1 (Hypermethylated in Cancer 1) epigenetic silencing in tumors.

Fleuriel C(1), Touka M, Boulay G, Guérardel C, Rood BR, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lille 1 et de Lille 2, Institut PASTEUR de LILLE, 59017 Lille
Cedex, France.

HIC1 (Hypermethylated in Cancer 1), as it name implied, was originally isolated
as a new candidate tumor suppressor gene located at 17p13.3 because it resides in
a CpG island that is hypermethylated in many types of human cancers. HIC1 encodes
a transcription factor associating an N-terminal BTB/POZ domain to five
C-terminal Krüppel-like C(2)H(2) zinc finger motifs. In this review, we will
begin by providing an overview of the current knowledge on HIC1 function, mainly 
gained from in vitro studies, as a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor
interacting with a still growing range of HDAC-dependent and HDAC-independent
corepressor complexes. We will then summarize the studies that have demonstrated 
frequent hypermethylation changes or losses of heterozygosity of the HIC1 locus
in human cancers. Next, we will review animal models which have firmly
established HIC1 as a bona fide tumor suppressor gene epigenetically silenced and
functionally cooperating notably with p53 within a complex HIC1-p53-SIRT1
regulatory loop. Finally, we will discuss how this epigenetic inactivation of
HIC1 might "addict" cancer cells to altered survival and signaling pathways or to
lineage-specific transcription factors during the early stages of tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2631403
PMID: 18723112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Arch Toxicol. 2008 Aug;82(8):513-24. doi: 10.1007/s00204-008-0331-9. Epub 2008
Jul 25.

Cadmium, cobalt and lead cause stress response, cell cycle deregulation and
increased steroid as well as xenobiotic metabolism in primary normal human
bronchial epithelial cells which is coordinated by at least nine transcription
factors.

Glahn F(1), Schmidt-Heck W, Zellmer S, Guthke R, Wiese J, Golka K, Hergenröder R,
Degen GH, Lehmann T, Hermes M, Schormann W, Brulport M, Bauer A, Bedawy E,
Gebhardt R, Hengstler JG, Foth H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Toxicology, Martin-Luther-University,
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany. felix.glahn@medizin.uni-halle.de

Workers occupationally exposed to cadmium, cobalt and lead have been reported to 
have increased levels of DNA damage. To analyze whether in vivo relevant
concentrations of heavy metals cause systematic alterations in RNA expression
patterns, we performed a gene array study using primary normal human bronchial
epithelial cells. Cells were incubated with 15 microg/l Cd(II), 25 microg/l
Co(II) and 550 microg/l Pb(II) either with individual substances or in
combination. Differentially expressed genes were filtered out and used to
identify enriched GO categories as well as KEGG pathways and to identify
transcription factors whose binding sites are enriched in a given set of
promoters. Interestingly, combined exposure to Cd(II), Co(II) and Pb(II) caused a
coordinated response of at least seven stress response-related transcription
factors, namely Oct-1, HIC1, TGIF, CREB, ATF4, SRF and YY1. A stress response was
further corroborated by up regulation of genes involved in glutathione
metabolism. A second major response to heavy metal exposure was deregulation of
the cell cycle as evidenced by down regulation of the transcription factors ELK-1
and the Ets transcription factor GABP, as well as deregulation of genes involved 
in purine and pyrimidine metabolism. A third and surprising response was up
regulation of genes involved in steroid metabolism, whereby promoter analysis
identified up regulation of SRY that is known to play a role in sex
determination. A forth response was up regulation of xenobiotic metabolising
enzymes, particularly of dihydrodiol dehydrogenases 1 and 2 (AKR1C1, AKR1C2).
Incubations with individual heavy metals showed that the response of AKR1C1 and
AKR1C2 was predominantly caused by lead. In conclusion, we have shown that in
vivo relevant concentrations of Cd(II), Co(II) and Pb(II) cause a complex and
coordinated response in normal human bronchial epithelial cells. This study gives
an overview of the most responsive genes.

PMID: 18654764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 15;68(8):2689-98. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6398.

Novel and highly recurrent chromosomal alterations in Sézary syndrome.

Vermeer MH(1), van Doorn R, Dijkman R, Mao X, Whittaker S, van Voorst Vader PC,
Gerritsen MJ, Geerts ML, Gellrich S, Söderberg O, Leuchowius KJ, Landegren U,
Out-Luiting JJ, Knijnenburg J, Ijszenga M, Szuhai K, Willemze R, Tensen CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

This study was designed to identify highly recurrent genetic alterations typical 
of Sézary syndrome (Sz), an aggressive cutaneous T-cell lymphoma/leukemia,
possibly revealing pathogenetic mechanisms and novel therapeutic targets.
High-resolution array-based comparative genomic hybridization was done on
malignant T cells from 20 patients. Expression levels of selected biologically
relevant genes residing within loci with frequent copy number alteration were
measured using quantitative PCR. Combined binary ratio labeling-fluorescence in
situ hybridization karyotyping was done on malignant cells from five patients.
Minimal common regions with copy number alteration occurring in at least 35% of
patients harbored 15 bona fide oncogenes and 3 tumor suppressor genes. Based on
the function of the identified oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, at least
three molecular mechanisms are relevant in the pathogenesis of Sz. First, gain of
cMYC and loss of cMYC antagonists (MXI1 and MNT) were observed in 75% and 40% to 
55% of patients, respectively, which were frequently associated with deregulated 
gene expression. The presence of cMYC/MAX protein heterodimers in Sézary cells
was confirmed using a proximity ligation assay. Second, a region containing TP53 
and genome maintenance genes (RPA1/HIC1) was lost in the majority of patients.
Third, the interleukin 2 (IL-2) pathway was affected by gain of STAT3/STAT5 and
IL-2 (receptor) genes in 75% and 30%, respectively, and loss of TCF8 and DUSP5 in
at least 45% of patients. In sum, the Sz genome is characterized by gross
chromosomal instability with highly recurrent gains and losses. Prominent among
deregulated genes are those encoding cMYC, cMYC-regulating proteins, mediators of
MYC-induced apoptosis, and IL-2 signaling pathway components.

PMID: 18413736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 15;22(6):770-85. doi: 10.1101/gad.1640908.

Cooperation between the Hic1 and Ptch1 tumor suppressors in medulloblastoma.

Briggs KJ(1), Corcoran-Schwartz IM, Zhang W, Harcke T, Devereux WL, Baylin SB,
Eberhart CG, Watkins DN.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2008 May 15;22(10):1410.

Medulloblastoma is an embryonal tumor thought to arise from the granule cell
precursors (GCPs) of the cerebellum. PATCHED (PTCH), an inhibitor of Hedgehog
signaling, is the best-characterized tumor suppressor in medulloblastoma.
However, <20% of medulloblastomas have mutations in PTCH. In the search for other
tumor suppressors, interest has focused on the deletion events at the 17p13.3
locus, the most common genetic defect in medulloblastoma. This chromosomal region
contains HYPERMETHYLATED IN CANCER 1 (HIC1), a transcriptional repressor that is 
a frequent target of epigenetic gene silencing in medulloblastoma. Here we use a 
mouse model of Ptch1 heterozygosity to reveal a critical tumor suppressor
function for Hic1 in medulloblastoma. When compared with Ptch1 heterozygous
mutants, compound Ptch1/Hic1 heterozygotes display a fourfold increased incidence
of medulloblastoma. We show that Hic1 is a direct transcriptional repressor of
Atonal Homolog 1 (Atoh1), a proneural transcription factor essential for
cerebellar development, and show that ATOH1 expression is required for human
medulloblastoma cell growth in vitro. Given that Atoh1 is also a putative target 
of Hh signaling, we conclude that the Hic1 and Ptch1 tumor suppressors cooperate 
to silence Atoh1 expression during a critical phase in GCP differentiation in
which malignant transformation may lead to medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC2275430
PMID: 18347096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Br J Haematol. 2008 Apr;141(2):179-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.06992.x.
Epub 2008 Mar 3.

HIC1 tumour suppressor gene is suppressed in acute myeloid leukaemia and induced 
during granulocytic differentiation.

Britschgi C(1), Jenal M, Rizzi M, Mueller BU, Torbett BE, Andres AC, Tobler A,
Fey MF, Tschan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology/Haematology, Department of Clinical Research, University
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

A hallmark of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is a block in differentiation caused 
by deregulated gene expression. The tumour suppressor Hypermethylated In Cancer 1
(HIC1) is a transcriptional repressor, which is epigenetically silenced in solid 
cancers. HIC1 mRNA expression was found to be low in 128 patient samples of AML
and CD34+ progenitor cells when compared with terminally differentiated
granulocytes. HIC1 mRNA was induced in a patient with t(15;17)-positive acute
promyelocytic leukaemia receiving all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) therapy. We
therefore investigated whether HIC1 plays a role in granulocytic differentiation 
and whether loss of function of this gene might contribute to the differentiation
block in AML. We evaluated HIC1 mRNA levels in HL-60 and U-937 cells upon
ATRA-induced differentiation and in CD34+ progenitor cells after granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor-induced differentiation. In both models of granulocytic
differentiation, we observed significant HIC1 induction. When HIC1 mRNA was
suppressed in HL-60 cells using stably expressed short hairpin RNA targeting
HIC1, granulocytic differentiation was altered as assessed by CD11b expression.
Bisulphite sequencing of GC-rich regions (CpG islands) in the HIC1 promoter
provided evidence that the observed suppression in HL-60 cells was not because of
promoter hypermethylation. Our findings indicate a role for the tumour suppressor
gene HIC1 in granulocytic differentiation. Low expression of HIC1 may very well
contribute to pathogenic events in leukaemogenesis.

PMID: 18318772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Mar;82(3):723-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.01.007. Epub 2008
Feb 28.

Identification of susceptibility genes for cancer in a genome-wide scan: results 
from the colon neoplasia sibling study.

Daley D(1), Lewis S, Platzer P, MacMillen M, Willis J, Elston RC, Markowitz SD,
Wiesner GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University Hospitals of
Cleveland/Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
ddaley@mrl.ubc.ca

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer in Americans 
and is the second leading cause of cancer mortality. Only a minority (
approximately 5%) of familial CRC can be explained by known genetic variants. To 
identify susceptibility genes for familial colorectal neoplasia, the colon
neoplasia sibling study conducted a comprehensive, genome-wide linkage scan of
194 kindreds. Clinical information (histopathology, size and number of polyps,
and other primary cancers) was used in conjunction with age at onset and family
history for classification of the families into five phenotypic subgroups (severe
histopathology, oligopolyposis, young, colon/breast, and multiple cancer) prior
to analysis. By expanding the traditional affected-sib-pair design to include
unaffected and discordant sib pairs, analytical power and robustness to type I
error were increased. Sib-pair linkage statistics and Haseman-Elston regression
identified 19 linkage peaks, with interesting results for chromosomes 1p31.1,
15q14-q22, 17p13.3, and 21. At marker D1S1665 (1p31.1), there was strong evidence
for linkage in the multiple-cancer subgroup (p = 0.00007). For chromosome
15q14-q22, a linkage peak was identified in the full-sample (p = 0.018),
oligopolyposis (p = 0.003), and young (p = 0.0009) phenotypes. This region
includes the HMPS/CRAC1 locus associated with hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome
(HMPS) in families of Ashkenazi descent. We provide compelling evidence linking
this region in families of European descent with oligopolyposis and/or young age 
at onset (<or=51) phenotypes. We found linkage to BRCA2 in the colon/breast
phenotypic subgroup and identified a second locus in the region of D21S1437
segregating with, but distinct from, BRCA2. Linkage to 17p13.3 at marker D17S1308
in the breast/colon subgroup identified HIC1 as a candidate gene. We demonstrated
that using clinical information, unaffected siblings, and family history can
increase the analytical power of a linkage study.

PMCID: PMC2427227
PMID: 18313025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mod Pathol. 2008 Mar;21(3):245-55. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3800982. Epub 2008 Jan 
18.

CpG island methylator phenotype-low (CIMP-low) colorectal cancer shows not only
few methylated CIMP-high-specific CpG islands, but also low-level methylation at 
individual loci.

Kawasaki T(1), Ohnishi M, Nosho K, Suemoto Y, Kirkner GJ, Meyerhardt JA, Fuchs
CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP or CIMP-high) with widespread promoter 
methylation is a distinct phenotype in colorectal cancer. However, the concept of
CIMP-low with less extensive CpG island methylation is still evolving. Our aim is
to examine whether density of methylation in individual CpG islands was different
between CIMP-low and CIMP-high tumors. Utilizing MethyLight technology and 889
population-based colorectal cancers, we quantified DNA methylation (methylation
index, percentage of methylated reference) at 14 CpG islands, including 8
CIMP-high-specific loci (CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3 and SOCS1). Methylation positivity in each locus was defined as methylation
index>4. Low-level methylation (methylation index>0, <20) in each
CIMP-high-specific locus was significantly more common in 340 CIMP-low tumors
(1/8-5/8 methylation-positive loci) than 133 CIMP-high tumors (> or =6/8
methylation-positive loci) and 416 CIMP-0 tumors (0/8 methylation-positive loci) 
(P< or =0.002). In the other six loci (CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT31 and WRN),
which were not highly specific for CIMP-high, low-level methylation, was not
persistently more prevalent in CIMP-low tumors. In conclusion, compared to
CIMP-high and CIMP-0 tumors, CIMP-low colorectal cancers show not only few
methylated CIMP-high-specific CpG islands, but also more frequent low-level
methylation at individual loci. Our data may provide supporting evidence for a
difference in pathogenesis of DNA methylation between CIMP-low and CIMP-high
tumors.

PMID: 18204436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Dec 1;13(23):7107-12.

Negative effect of DNA hypermethylation on the outcome of intensive chemotherapy 
in older patients with high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid
leukemia following myelodysplastic syndrome.

Grövdal M(1), Khan R, Aggerholm A, Antunovic P, Astermark J, Bernell P, Engström 
LM, Kjeldsen L, Linder O, Nilsson L, Olsson A, Wallvik J, Tangen JM, Oberg G,
Jacobsen SE, Hokland P, Porwit A, Hellström-Lindberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Stockholm, Denmark.

PURPOSE: Promoter hypermethylation of, for example, tumor-suppressor genes, is
considered to be an important step in cancerogenesis and a negative risk factor
for survival in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS); however, its role 
for response to therapy has not been determined. This study was designed to
assess the effect of methylation status on the outcome of conventional induction 
chemotherapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Sixty patients with high-risk MDS or acute myeloid leukemia 
following MDS were treated with standard doses of daunorubicin and
1-beta-d-arabinofuranosylcytosine. Standard prognostic variables and methylation 
status of the P15(ink4b) (P15), E-cadherin (CDH), and hypermethylated in cancer 1
(HIC) genes were analyzed before treatment.
RESULTS: Forty percent of the patients achieved complete remission (CR). CR rate 
was lower in patients with high WBC counts (P = 0.03) and high CD34 expression on
bone marrow cells (P = 0.02). Whereas P15 status alone was not significantly
associated with CR rate (P = 0.25), no patient with hypermethylation of all three
genes achieved CR (P = 0.03). Moreover, patients with CDH methylation showed a
significantly lower CR rate (P = 0.008), and CDH methylation retained its
prognostic value also in the multivariate analysis. Hypermethylation was
associated with increased CD34 expression, but not with other known predictive
factors for response, such as cytogenetic profile.
CONCLUSIONS: We show for the first time a significant effect of methylation
status on the outcome of conventional chemotherapy in high-risk MDS and acute
myelogenous leukemia following MDS. Provided confirmed in an independent study,
our results should be used as a basis for therapeutic decision-making in this
patient group.

PMID: 18056190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. APMIS. 2007 Oct;115(10):1147-60.

The epigenome of testicular germ cell tumors.

Lind GE(1), Skotheim RI, Lothe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Rikshospitalet - Radiumhospitalet Medical
Centre, Montebello and Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway.

Gene expression is tightly regulated in normal cells, and epigenetic changes
disturbing this regulation are a common mechanism in the development of cancer.
Testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT) is the most common malignancy among young males
and can be classified into two main histological subgroups: seminomas, which are 
basically devoid of DNA methylation, and nonseminomas, which in general have
methylation levels comparable with other tumor tissues, as shown by restriction
landmark genome scanning (RLGS). In general, DNA methylation seems to increase
with differentiation, and among the nonseminomas, the pluripotent and
undifferentiated embryonal carcinomas harbor the lowest levels of DNA promoter
hypermethylation, whereas the well-differentiated teratomas display the highest. 
In this regard, TGCTs resemble the early embryogenesis. So far, only a limited
number of tumor suppressor genes have been shown to be inactivated by DNA
promoter hypermethylation in more than a minor percentage of TGCTs, including
MGMT, SCGB3A1, RASSF1A, HIC1, and PRSS21. In addition, imprinting defects, DNA
hypomethylation of testis/cancer associated genes, and the presence of
unmethylated XIST are frequent in TGCTs. Aberrant DNA methylation has the
potential to improve current diagnostics by noninvasive testing and might also
serve as a prognostic marker for treatment response.

PMID: 18042148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Oncogene. 2008 Apr 17;27(18):2613-25. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Detailed mapping of chromosome 17p deletions reveals HIC1 as a novel tumor
suppressor gene candidate telomeric to TP53 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Stöcklein H(1), Smardova J, Macak J, Katzenberger T, Höller S, Wessendorf S,
Hutter G, Dreyling M, Haralambieva E, Mäder U, Müller-Hermelink HK, Rosenwald A, 
Ott G, Kalla J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Germany.

Deletions in the short arm of chromosome 17 (17p) involving the tumor suppressor 
TP53 occur in up to 20% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). Although
inactivation of both alleles of a tumor suppressor gene is usually required for
tumor development, the overlap between TP53 deletions and mutations is poorly
understood in DLBCLs, suggesting the possible existence of additional tumor
suppressor genes in 17p. Using a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) and Phage 
1 artificial chromosome (PAC) contig, we here define a minimally deleted region
in DLBCLs encompassing approximately 0.8 MB telomeric to the TP53 locus. This
genomic region harbors the tumor suppressor Hypermethylated in Cancer 1 (HIC1).
Methylation-specific PCR demonstrated hypermethylation of HIC1 exon 1a in a
substantial subset of DLBCLs, which is accompanied by simultaneous HIC1 deletion 
of the second allele in 90% of cases. In contrast, HIC1 inactivation by
hypermethylation was rarely encountered in DLBCLs without concomitant loss of the
second allele. DLBCL patients with complete inactivation of both HIC1 and TP53
may be characterized by an even inferior clinical course than patients with
inactivation of TP53 alone, suggesting a functional cooperation between these two
proteins. These findings strongly imply HIC1 as a novel tumor suppressor in a
subset of DLBCLs.

PMID: 17982487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Hum Pathol. 2008 Jan;39(1):30-6. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

CpG island methylation is frequently present in tubulovillous and villous
adenomas and correlates with size, site, and villous component.

Kakar S(1), Deng G, Cun L, Sahai V, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Veteran Affairs Medical Center and University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. sanjay.kakar@ucsf.edu

CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) pathway in colorectal cancer is
characterized by methylation of promoter regions of multiple putative tumor
suppressor genes. Aberrant methylation also occurs in serrated and adenomatous
polyps. We examined 32 tubulovillous/villous adenomas and 30 tubular adenomas for
BRAF/KRAS mutations and methylation at hMLH1, p16, HIC1, RASSF2, MGMT, MINT1, and
MINT31. CIMP-positive status (methylation at 3 or more loci) was observed in 44% 
tubulovillous/villous adenomas compared with 8 (27%) of 30 tubular adenomas (P = 
.08). Tubulovillous/villous adenomas showed significantly higher methylation than
tubular adenomas at MGMT (87% vs 37%, P < .01) and RASSF2 (94% vs 70%, P = .02). 
There was no significant difference in methylation of HIC1, MINT1, MINT31, and
p16. hMLH1 methylation was absent in all tubulovillous/villous adenomas and seen 
in only 2 (7%) tubular adenomas. CIMP-positive status correlated with large size,
right-sided location, and amount of villous component in tubulovillous/villous
adenomas. BRAF V600E mutation was not observed in any tubular adenoma or
tubulovillous/villous adenoma. KRAS mutations were seen in 9% of
tubulovillous/villous adenomas and 10% of tubular adenomas. In conclusion,
CIMP-positive phenotype is common in tubulovillous/villous adenomas and increases
with large size, right-sided location, and amount of villous component.
Methylation of MGMT and RASSF2 increases during the progression from tubular
adenoma to tubulovillous/villous adenoma. BRAF mutations are absent in
tubulovillous/villous adenomas.

PMID: 17950780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2007 Jul;133(7):684-92.

An epigenetically derived monoclonal origin for recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis.

Stephen JK(1), Vaught LE, Chen KM, Shah V, Schweitzer VG, Gardner G, Benninger
MS, Worsham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital, 1
Ford Pl, 1D, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the contribution of promoter methylation-mediated
epigenetic events in recurrent respiratory papillomatosis tumorigenesis.
DESIGN: Archival tissue DNA, extracted from microdissected papilloma lesions, was
interrogated for methylation status by means of the novel, multigene
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay.
SUBJECTS: Fifteen subjects with recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, 3 females
and 12 males, all with adult onset of illness (age range, 23-73 years) except for
1 female patient with juvenile onset (1 year old).
RESULTS: Promoter hypermethylation was recorded in 14 of 15 cases, and 19 of 22
unique methylation-prone cancer genes in the multigene panel had altered DNA
methylation in at least 1 laryngeal papilloma biopsy specimen. Identical
abnormally methylated genes were found in 5 of 15 recurrent cases, of which the
CDKN2B gene was hypermethylated in all 5 cases. Dissimilar epigenetic events were
noted in the remaining cases.
CONCLUSIONS: A clonal origin was derived for 5 of 15 recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis biopsy specimens based on identical epigenetic events. The high
frequency of epigenetic events, characterized by consistent promoter
hypermethylation of multiple tumor suppressor genes, points to the use of gene
silencing mechanisms in the pathogenesis of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis.

PMID: 17638782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell Biol Int. 2007 Jun;31(6):636-7. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Human SIRT1: a potential biomarker for tumorigenesis?

Lim CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
lim@vt.edu

Accumulating body of evidence reveals that hSIRT1, an NAD(+)-dependent protein
deacetylase, is involved in regulating numerous biological processes. Therefore
cellular functions of hSIRT1 are highly pleiotropic. The integrated hypothetical 
mechanisms of hSIRT1 action contributing to regulating cellular senescence and
longevity have been proposed. Based on recent evidence, I propose that hSIRT1 is 
a potential biomarker for tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17433727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2007 Jan-Feb;41(1):79-85.

[Abberant methylation of p16, HIC1, N33 and GSTP1 genes in tumor epitelium and
tumor-associated stromal cells of prostate cancer].

[Article in Russian]

Kekeeva TV, Popova OP, Shegai PV, Alekseev BIa, Adnreeva IuIu, Zaletaev DV,
Nemtsova MV.

The methylation status of four genes significant in prostate carcinogenesis p16, 
HIC1, N33 and GSTP1, were evaluated using quantitative methylationsensitive
polymerase chain reaction. Tumor epithelia, tumor-associated stroma, normal
epithelia, foci of PIN and benign prostate hyperplasia, and stroma adjacent to
tumor tissues were isolated from whole-mount prostatectomy specimens of patients 
with localized prostate cancer by using laser capture microdissection. We found
high levels of gene methylation in the tumor epithelium and tumor-associated
stromal cells and some methylation in both hyperplastic epithelium and stromal
cells in normal-appearing tissues located adjacent to tumors. Promoter
methylation in the non-neoplastic cells of the prostate tumor microenvironment
may play an important role in cancer development and progression. We examined the
promoter methylation status of pl6, HIC1, N33 and GSTP1 in prostate biopsy
fragments and prostate tissues after radical prostatectomy from patients with
adenocarcinoma without laser capture microdissection. Methylation frequencies of 
all genes in tumor samples were considerably lower than frequencies in
microdissected tumour samples (HIC1, 71 versus 89%; p16, 22 versus 78%; GSTP1, 32
versus 100%; N33, 20 versus 33%). The laser capture microdissection is required
procedure in methylation studies taking into account multifocality and
heterogenity of prostate cancer tissue.

PMID: 17380894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;27(7):2661-75. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

An acetylation/deacetylation-SUMOylation switch through a phylogenetically
conserved psiKXEP motif in the tumor suppressor HIC1 regulates transcriptional
repression activity.

Stankovic-Valentin N(1), Deltour S, Seeler J, Pinte S, Vergoten G, Guérardel C,
Dejean A, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue
Calmette, BP 447, 59017 Lille Cedex, France.

Tumor suppressor HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a gene that is essential
for mammalian development, epigenetically silenced in many human tumors, and
involved in a complex pathway regulating P53 tumor suppression activity. HIC1
encodes a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor containing five
Krüppel-like C(2)H(2) zinc fingers and an N-terminal BTB/POZ repression domain.
Here, we show that endogenous HIC1 is SUMOylated in vivo on a phylogenetically
conserved lysine, K314, located in the central region which is a second
repression domain. K314R mutation does not influence HIC1 subnuclear localization
but significantly reduces its transcriptional repression potential, as does the
mutation of the other conserved residue in the psiKXE consensus, E316A, or the
overexpression of the deSUMOylase SSP3/SENP2. Furthermore, HIC1 is acetylated in 
vitro by P300/CBP. Strikingly, the K314R mutant is less acetylated than wild-type
HIC1, suggesting that this lysine is a target for both SUMOylation and
acetylation. We further show that HIC1 transcriptional repression activity is
positively controlled by two types of deacetylases, SIRT1 and HDAC4, which
increase the deacetylation and SUMOylation, respectively, of K314. Knockdown of
endogenous SIRT1 by the transfection of short interfering RNA causes a
significant loss of HIC1 SUMOylation. Thus, this dual-deacetylase complex induces
either a phosphorylation-dependent acetylation-SUMOylation switch through a
psiKXEXXSP motif, as previously shown for MEF2, or a phosphorylation-independent 
switch through a psiKXEP motif, as shown here for HIC1, since P317A mutation
severely impairs HIC1 acetylation. Finally, our results demonstrate that HIC1 is 
a target of the class III deacetylase SIRT1 and identify a new posttranslational 
modification step in the P53-HIC1-SIRT1 regulatory loop.

PMCID: PMC1899900
PMID: 17283066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 16;104(3):829-33. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Metabolic regulation of SIRT1 transcription via a HIC1:CtBP corepressor complex.

Zhang Q(1), Wang SY, Fleuriel C, Leprince D, Rocheleau JV, Piston DW, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, 3181 Southwest Sam
Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA. zhangq@ohsu.edu

Retraction in
    Zhang Q, Wang SY, Fleuriel C, Dominique L, Rocheleau JV, Piston DW, Goodman RH.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 17;112(7):E819.

The Sir2 histone deacetylases are important for gene regulation, metabolism, and 
longevity. A unique feature of these enzymes is their utilization of NAD(+) as a 
cosubstrate, which has led to the suggestion that Sir2 activity reflects the
cellular energy state. We show that SIRT1, a mammalian Sir2 homologue, is also
controlled at the transcriptional level through a mechanism that is specific for 
this isoform. Treatment with the glycolytic blocker 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG)
decreases association of the redox sensor CtBP with HIC1, an inhibitor of SIRT1
transcription. We propose that the reduction in transcriptional repression
mediated by HIC1, due to the decrease of CtBP binding, increases SIRT1
expression. This mechanism allows the specific regulation of SIRT1 in response to
nutrient deprivation.

PMCID: PMC1783399
PMID: 17213307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2007 May;133(5):331-41. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Methylation profile in benign, borderline and malignant ovarian tumors.

Tam KF(1), Liu VW, Liu SS, Tsang PC, Cheung AN, Yip AM, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Gynaecologic Oncology Division, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The 
University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, 102, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR, 
China. tamkfa@netvigator.com

PURPOSE: Promoter hypermethylation is a common phenomenon in neoplasm. The aims
of this study were (a) to compare the methylation profiles in different types of 
ovarian tumors and (b) to determine the possible relationship between the
methylation status and different clinicopathologic characteristics.
METHODS: We examined the promoter methylation status of 9 tumor suppressor genes 
(RARbeta2, TMS1, RIZ1, P15, P16, PTEN, MINT31, APC and HIC1) in 89 ovarian
cancers, 16 borderline ovarian tumors, 19 benign ovarian tumors, 16 normal
ovarian tissue and 5 ovarian cancer cell lines. The methylation status was
examined with respect to clinicopathologic characteristics of the ovarian cancer 
patients.
RESULTS: Methylation indices for ovarian cancer, borderline ovarian tumor, benign
ovarian tumor, normal ovarian tissue and ovarian cancer cell lines were 28.8,
20.1, 10.5, 11.8 and 42.2%, respectively. It was significantly higher in ovarian 
cancer, borderline ovarian tumor and ovarian cancer cell lines (X (2) test, P <
0.001, P = 0.01 and P < 0.001, respectively) than benign or normal ovarian
tissues. In ovarian cancer, concurrent methylation of at least two genes (CM2)
was associated with early stage disease (X (2) test, P = 0.035) and less
recurrence (X (2) test, P = 0.020). When the methylation statuses of the nine
genes as well as CM2 were included in multivariate Cox Regression analysis, CM2
was the only independent predictor for survival (P = 0.013).
CONCLUSION: CM2 was an independent predictor for survival in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 17177027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Mar;85(3):293-304. Epub 2006 Dec 2.

Array CGH identifies distinct DNA copy number profiles of oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes in chromosomal- and microsatellite-unstable sporadic colorectal 
carcinomas.

Lassmann S(1), Weis R, Makowiec F, Roth J, Danciu M, Hopt U, Werner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Breisacherstr. 115a,
79110, Freiburg, Germany. silke.lassmann@uniklinik-freiburg.de

DNA copy number changes represent molecular fingerprints of solid tumors and are 
as such relevant for better understanding of tumor development and progression.
In this study, we applied genome-wide array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) to identify gene-specific DNA copy number changes in chromosomal (CIN)-
and microsatellite (MIN)-unstable sporadic colorectal cancers (sCRC). Genomic DNA
was extracted from microdissected, matching normal colorectal epithelium and
invasive tumor cells of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues of 22 cases 
with colorectal cancer (CIN = 11, MIN = 11). DNA copy number changes were
determined by aCGH for 287 target sequences in tumor cell DNAs, using pooled
normal DNAs as reference. aCGH data of tumor cell DNAs was confirmed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for three genes on serial tissues as
those used for aCGH. aCGH revealed DNA copy number changes previously described
by metaphase CGH (gains 7, 8q, 13q, and 20q; losses 8p, 15q, 18q, and 17p).
However, chromosomal regions 20q, 13q, 7, and 17p were preferentially altered in 
CIN-type tumors and included DNA amplifications of eight genes on chromosome 20q 
(TOP1, AIB1, MYBL2, CAS, PTPN1, STK15, ZNF217, and CYP24), two genes on
chromosome 13q (BRCA2 and D13S25), and three genes on chromosome 7 (IL6, CYLN2,
and MET) as well as DNA deletions of two genes on chromosome 17p (HIC1 and
LLGL1). Finally, additional CIN-tumor-associated DNA amplifications were
identified for EXT1 (8q24.11) and MYC (8q24.12) as well as DNA deletions for
MAP2K5 (15q23) and LAMA3 (18q11.2). In contrast, distinct MIN-tumor-associated
DNA amplifications were detected for E2F5 (8p22-q21.3), GARP (11q13.5-q14), ATM
(11q22.3), KAL (Xp22.3), and XIST (Xq13.2) as well as DNA deletions for RAF1
(3p25), DCC (18q21.3), and KEN (21q tel). aCGH revealed distinct DNA copy number 
changes of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in CIN- and MIN-type sporadic
colorectal carcinomas. The identified candidate genes are likely to have distinct
functional roles in the carcinogenesis and progression of CIN- and MIN-type
sporadic CRCs and may be involved in the differential response of CIN- and
MIN-type tumor cells to (adjuvant) therapy, such as 5-fluorouracil.

PMID: 17143621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Gastroenterology. 2007 Jan;132(1):127-38. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

The CpG island methylator phenotype and chromosomal instability are inversely
correlated in sporadic colorectal cancer.

Goel A(1), Nagasaka T, Arnold CN, Inoue T, Hamilton C, Niedzwiecki D, Compton C, 
Mayer RJ, Goldberg R, Bertagnolli MM, Boland CR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine and Baylor
Charles A. Sammons Cancer Center, Baylor University Medical Center, 3500 Gaston
Avenue, Dallas, TX 75246, USA. ajayg@baylorhealth.edu

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is one of the
mechanisms involved in colorectal carcinogenesis (CRC). Although CIMP is probably
the cause of high-frequency microsatellite instability (MSI-H) sporadic CRCs, its
role in microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors is debated. The majority of MSS CRCs
demonstrate chromosomal instability (CIN) with frequent loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) at key tumor suppressor genes. We hypothesized that the majority of
sporadic CRCs without CIN would be associated with CIMP.
METHODS: We tested 126 sporadic CRCs for MSI and LOH and categorized tumors into 
MSI, LOH, or MSI-/LOH- subgroups. Methylation status was evaluated using 6
CIMP-related markers (MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, p16(INK4alpha), p14(ARF), and hMLH1) 
and 6 tumor suppressor genes (PTEN, TIMP3, RUNX3, HIC1, APC, and RARbeta2). BRAF 
V600E mutation analysis was performed using allele-specific polymerase chain
reaction and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: We observed frequent methylation at all 12 loci in all CRCs. BRAF V600E 
mutations correlated with the MSI (P < .0001) and MSI-/LOH- (P = .03) subgroups. 
MSI and MSI-/LOH- tumors exhibited more promoter methylation than CRCs with LOH
(P < .0001). We also found an inverse correlation between the frequencies of
methylation and LOH (rho = -0.36; P < .0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The associations between methylation frequencies at CIMP-related
markers and MSI or MSI-/LOH- sporadic CRCs suggest that the majority of these
tumors evolve through CIMP. These findings suggest that CIN and CIMP represent 2 
independent and inversely related mechanisms of genetic and epigenetic
instability in sporadic CRCs and confirm that MSI cancers arise as a consequence 
of CIMP.

PMID: 17087942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;66(21):10466-77.

Identification and functional characterization of a novel unspliced transcript
variant of HIC-1 in human cancer cells exposed to adverse growth conditions.

Mondal AM(1), Chinnadurai S, Datta K, Chauhan SS, Sinha S, Chattopadhyay P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi, India.

The wild-type p53 gene has been widely implicated in the regulation of
hypermethylated in cancer-1 (HIC-1) transcription, a master growth regulatory
gene with multiple promoters and, consequently, multiple alternatively spliced
transcripts. We investigated the role of p53 (wild type and mutant, both
endogenous and exogenous) in modulating the various HIC-1 transcripts. We
discovered a novel unspliced HIC-1 transcript, identified as "f" in leukocytes
and in the human cell lines U87MG (wild-type p53), U373MG (mutant p53), MCF-7
(wild-type p53), HeLa (p53 degraded by HPV18-E6 oncoprotein), and Saos-2 (p53
null). This transcript is initiated from a new transcription start site and has
an intervening stop codon that would result in a possibly truncated 22-amino-acid
polypeptide. When U87MG (wild-type p53) and MCF-7 cells (wild-type p53) were
exposed to adverse growth conditions of serum starvation or treated with the
chemotherapeutic agent cisplatin, cells underwent apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
accompanied by increase in p53 and HIC-1 transcript levels. Although the increase
of the HIC-1-spliced transcripts followed the increase of p53, increase in f
transcript coincided with declining p53 and HIC-1 transcript and protein levels. 
Moreover, the levels of HIC-1 f transcript were not induced by exogenously
transfected wild-type p53 in p53-mutated U373MG and p53-null Saos-2 cells, unlike
the spliced transcripts that code for full-length HIC-1 protein. These findings
suggest a working model wherein the status of f transcript, which is not under
direct transcriptional control of wild-type p53, may influence the level of HIC-1
protein in cancer cells.

PMID: 17079468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Oct 1;170(1):24-8.

KCTD11 expression in medulloblastoma is lower than in adult cerebellum and higher
than in neural stem cells.

Zawlik I(1), Zakrzewska M, Witusik M, Golanska E, Kulczycka-Wojdala D, Szybka M, 
Piaskowski S, Wozniak K, Zakrzewski K, Papierz W, Liberski PP, Rieske P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology and Neuropathology, Chair of Oncology,
Medical University of Lodz, Czechoslowacka 8/10, 92-216 Lodz, Poland.
izazawlik@yahoo.com

Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood, and
the most frequent associated genetic alteration is loss of heterozygosity on
chromosome region 7p13. Two genes mapping to this region, KCTD11 (alias REN) and 
HIC1, have been proposed as involved in MB pathogenesis. We used real-time
polymerase chain reaction in 20 tissue samples of primary MB to examine the
transcriptional level of the two genes, with reference to two types of controls: 
adult cerebellum and fetal neural stem cells. A significant reduction of KCTD11
expression relative to adult normal cerebellum was detected in 14 of 20 (70%) of 
MB samples. Neural stem cells had even lower levels of KCTD11 expression than did
MB. HIC1 gene expression was low ( approximately 100 times lower than KCTD11
expression) in MB, and low also in both adult cerebellum and neural stem cells.
Hypermethylation of the 5'UTR or the central region of HIC1 (or both) was
detected in a significant number of MB samples, as well as in cerebellum and
neural stem cells. Our data suggest that KCTD11 may play an important role in MB 
tumorigenesis, but do not support the role of HIC1 in this tumor development. We 
argue that recognition of the gene or genes important in MB tumorigenesis depends
in part on defining an appropriate control.

PMID: 16965951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Oct;18(4):547-57.

Promoter hypermethylation of the 14-3-3 sigma, SYK and CAGE-1 genes is related to
the various phenotypes of urinary bladder carcinomas and associated with
progression of transitional cell carcinomas.

Kunze E(1), Wendt M, Schlott T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Osteopathology and Haematopathology, University of Göttingen,
D-37099 Göttingen, Germany. ekunze@med.uni-goettingen.de

To explore the significance of epigenetic mechanisms in urinary bladder
carcinogenesis mediated by methylation of cytosine in CpG dinucleotides at 5'
promoter regions, we analysed the methylation status of a broad panel of
different genes in transitional cell carcinomas (TCC) and nonurothelial cancers, 
among which the 14-3-3 sigma, SYK and CAGE-1 genes were recognised as promising
target genes. Using methylation-specific PCR, the rate of DNA hypermethylation
proved to be related to the various histopathological cancer subtypes. The higher
frequency of promoter methylation of the 14-3-3 sigma (57.1%) and SYK (64.3%)
genes in high-grade, high-stage TCC in association with a reduced or even lacking
immunohistochemical protein expression than in low-grade, low-stage TCC (28.6%
and 42.9%, respectively), indicates that aberrant methylation of these genes
plays an essential role in the progression of TCC. The importance of DNA
hypermethylation in the conversion of TCC from a low to a high malignant
potential was strongly supported by the finding that, unlike superficial
low-grade TCC, advanced muscle invasive TCC showed a concurrent promoter
methylation of the 14-3-3 sigma, SYK and CAGE-1 genes. Squamous cell carcinomas
revealed a peak incidence of hypermethylation of the 14-3-3 sigma gene (80%), and
conversely, the lowest methylation frequency of the SYK gene (13.3%).
Undifferentiated small cell carcinomas disclosed a promoter methylation of the
14-3-3 sigma, SYK and CAGE-1 genes in only a quarter each for the cases. Although
a correlation between the methylation status and gene activity in squamous cell
and undifferentiated small cell carcinomas was not observed, the underexpression 
of the SYK protein products in both cancer types and additionally of the 14-3-3
sigma protein in small cell carcinomas appeared to be related to the aggressive
clinical behaviour of both these nonurothelial bladder carcinomas. The relevance 
of the high frequency of DNA hypermethylation of the CAGE-1 antigen in TCC and
squamous cell carcinomas merits further study, particularly in relation to
anticancer immunotherapy. The methylation status of the PTEN, COX-2, RUNX-3 and
HIC-1 genes was found to be unaltered. In conclusion, the different patterns of
aberrant methylation of the 14-3-3 sigma, SYK and CAGE-1 genes in the various
histopathological cancer types of the urinary bladder point to a role in tumor
cell differentiation, resulting in the phenotypical conversion of TCC into
nonurothelial carcinomas and in the progression of TCC to a more malignant
potential.

PMID: 16964403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. FEBS J. 2006 Jul;273(13):2879-90. Epub 2006 Jun 7.

A L225A substitution in the human tumour suppressor HIC1 abolishes its
interaction with the corepressor CtBP.

Stankovic-Valentin N(1), Verger A, Deltour-Balerdi S, Quinlan KG, Crossley M,
Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer) is a tumour suppressor gene located in 17p13.3, 
a region frequently hypermethylated or deleted in many types of prevalent human
tumour. HIC1 is also a candidate for a contiguous-gene syndrome, the
Miller-Dieker syndrome, a severe form of lissencephaly accompanied by
developmental anomalies. HIC1 encodes a BTB/POZ-zinc finger transcriptional
repressor. HIC1 represses transcription via two autonomous repression domains, an
N-terminal BTB/POZ and a central region, by trichostatin A-insensitive and
trichostatin A-sensitive mechanisms, respectively. The HIC1 central region
recruits the corepressor CtBP (C-terminal binding protein) through a conserved
GLDLSKK motif, a variant of the consensus C-terminal binding protein interaction 
domain PxDLSxK/R. Here, we show that HIC1 interacts with both CtBP1 and CtBP2 and
that this interaction is stimulated by agents increasing NADH levels.
Furthermore, point mutation of two CtBP2 residues forming part of the structure
of the recognition cleft for a PxDLS motif also ablates the interaction with a
GxDLS motif. Conversely, in perfect agreement with the structural data and the
universal conservation of this residue in all C-terminal binding
protein-interacting motifs, mutation of the central leucine residue (leucine 225 
in HIC1) abolishes the interaction between HIC1 and CtBP1 or CtBP2. As expected
from the corepressor activity of CtBP, this mutation also impairs the
HIC1-mediated transcriptional repression. These results thus demonstrate a strong
conservation in the binding of C-terminal binding protein-interacting domains
despite great variability in their amino acid sequences. Finally, this L225A
point mutation could also provide useful knock-in animal models to study the role
of the HIC1-CtBP interaction in tumorigenesis and in development.

PMID: 16762039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. EMBO J. 2006 Jun 7;25(11):2326-37. Epub 2006 May 25.

HIC1 attenuates Wnt signaling by recruitment of TCF-4 and beta-catenin to the
nuclear bodies.

Valenta T(1), Lukas J, Doubravska L, Fafilek B, Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Prague, Czech Republic.

The hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) gene is epigenetically inactivated in
cancer, and in addition, the haploinsufficiency of HIC1 is linked to the
development of human Miller-Dieker syndrome. HIC1 encodes a zinc-finger
transcription factor that acts as a transcriptional repressor. Additionally, the 
HIC1 protein oligomerizes via the N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and forms discrete
nuclear structures known as HIC1 bodies. Here, we provide evidence that HIC1
antagonizes the TCF/beta-catenin-mediated transcription in Wnt-stimulated cells. 
This appears to be due to the ability of HIC1 to associate with TCF-4 and to
recruit TCF-4 and beta-catenin to the HIC1 bodies. As a result of the
recruitment, both proteins are prevented from association with the TCF-binding
elements of the Wnt-responsive genes. These data indicate that the intracellular 
amounts of HIC1 protein can modulate the level of the transcriptional stimulation
of the genes regulated by canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

PMCID: PMC1478201
PMID: 16724116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 30;345(2):595-601. Epub 2006 Apr 25.

Mechanism of fibroblast growth factor-binding protein 1 repression by TGF-beta.

Briones VR(1), Chen S, Riegel AT, Lechleider RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is the prototypical member of a family
of growth factors that play important roles in normal development and human
diseases. We identified the gene for fibroblast growth factor-binding protein 1
(FGF-BP1) as being significantly repressed following TGF-beta treatment. FGF-BP1 
is an extracellular matrix bound protein that enhances fibroblast growth factor
(FGF) signaling. We demonstrate here that TGF-beta signaling significantly
represses FGF-BP1 expression in mesenchymal and neural crest cells undergoing in 
vitro smooth muscle differentiation. Analysis of the downstream signaling
pathways shows that Smad2/3 are crucial for efficient FGF-BP1 repression by
TGF-beta. Furthermore, we identified a novel element in the region from -785 to
-782 bp of the FGF-BP1 promoter, which represents a known binding site for
Hypermethylation in Cancer-1 (Hic-1), necessary for repression of FGF-BP1 by
TGF-beta. These data define the molecular mechanism of transcriptional repression
of an important target of TGF-beta signaling during angiogenesis.

PMID: 16690027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Br J Cancer. 2006 May 22;94(10):1492-5.

Cell-free and cell-bound circulating DNA in breast tumours: DNA quantification
and analysis of tumour-related gene methylation.

Skvortsova TE(1), Rykova EY, Tamkovich SN, Bryzgunova OE, Starikov AV, Kuznetsova
NP, Vlassov VV, Laktionov PP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, SD RAS, 8, Lavrentiev 
ave., Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.

Tumour development is characterised by the increased circulating DNA (cirDNA)
concentration and by tumour-related changes in blood plasma DNA. Concentration of
cirDNA and methylation of RARbeta2, RASSF1A and HIC-1 gene promoters were
investigated in cell-free and cell-surface-bound fractions from healthy donors,
patients with breast cancer, and patients with breast fibroadenoma. Tumour
development was shown to lead to significant changes in the distribution of
cirDNA between cell-free and cell-surface-bound fractions. Analysis of RARbeta2
and RASSF1A methylation in the total cirDNA provides 95% diagnostic coverage in
breast cancer patients, 60% in patients with benign lesions, and is without
false-positive results in healthy women. Results of the study indicate that
methylation-specific PCR of RARbeta2 and RASSF1A genes based on the total cirDNA 
combined with the quantitative analysis of cirDNA distribution between cell-bound
and cell-free fractions in blood provide the sensitive and accurate detection and
discrimination of malignant and benign breast tumours.

PMCID: PMC2361269
PMID: 16641902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2006 Mar-Apr;40(2):224-30.

[Aberrant methylation of tumor suppressor genes and allelic imbalance in cervical
intraepitelial neoplasia].

[Article in Russian]

Kekeeva TV, Zhevlova AI, Podisov IuI, Solov'eva IuV, Zaletataev DV, Nemtsova MV.

We analysed 42 high-grade CIN or CIN3 samples, 42 nondysplasia tissues adjacent
to CIN3. 35 smears from women without gynecological pathology were also
evaluated. Methylation status of six genes (p16, MLH1, HIC1, MGMT, N33 and RB1)
was determined using methylation-sensitive PCR. There is some insignificant level
of methylation determined in normal smears. Methylation percentages of the genes 
in CIN3 were: p16, 58%; MLH1, 51%; HIC1, 84%; N33, 27%. Methylation percentages
of the genes in nondysplasia adjacent tissues were also high. There is no
significant difference in methylation frequencies of MGMT and RB1 determined
between dysplasia and control. We identified allelic imbalance at chromosomes
5q11-q14 and 13q14 in 21% cases (9/42). The incidence of LOH was investigated in 
7% (3/42) cases at region 13q14.

PMID: 16637262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Hum Genet. 2006;51(4):368-74. Epub 2006 Jan 25.

Microarray analysis of promoter methylation in lung cancers.

Fukasawa M(1), Kimura M, Morita S, Matsubara K, Yamanaka S, Endo C, Sakurada A,
Sato M, Kondo T, Horii A, Sasaki H, Hatada I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Science, Biosignal Genome Resource Center, Department of 
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Gunma University, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, Maebashi
371-8512, Japan.

Aberrant DNA methylation is an important event in carcinogenesis. Of the various 
regions of a gene that can be methylated in cancers, the promoter is the most
important for the regulation of gene expression. Here, we describe a microarray
analysis of DNA methylation in the promoter regions of genes using a newly
developed promoter-associated methylated DNA amplification DNA chip (PMAD). For
each sample, methylated Hpa II-resistant DNA fragments and Msp I-cleaved
(unmethylated+methylated) DNA fragments were amplified and labeled with Cy3 and
Cy5 respectively, then hybridized to a microarray containing the promoters of 288
cancer-related genes. Signals from Hpa II-resistant (methylated) DNA (Cy3) were
normalized to signals from Msp I-cleaved (unmethylated+methylated) DNA fragments 
(Cy5). Normalized signals from lung cancer cell lines were compared to signals
from normal lung cells. About 10.9% of the cancer-related genes were
hypermethylated in lung cancer cell lines. Notably, HIC1, IRF7, ASC, RIPK3,
RASSF1A, FABP3, PRKCDBP, and PAX3 genes were hypermethylated in most lung cancer 
cell lines examined. The expression profiles of these genes correlated to the
methylation profiles of the genes, indicating that the microarray analysis of DNA
methylation in the promoter region of the genes is convenient for epigenetic
study. Further analysis of primary tumors indicated that the frequency of
hypermethylation was high for ASC (82%) and PAX3 (86%) in all tumor types, and
high for RIPK3 in small cell carcinoma (57%). This demonstrates that our PMAD
method is effective at finding epigenetic changes during cancer.

PMID: 16435073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Dec 1;43(23):1528-32.

[Hypermethylation of Ras association domain family protein 1A, hypermethylated in
cancer 1 and p73 genes in hepatocellular carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao ZH(1), Geng XP, Zhu LX, Li HM, Liew CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230022, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the status of promoter hypermethylation of Ras association
domain family protein 1A (RASSF1A), hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) and p73
genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and to explore the correlation with
clinicopathological features.
METHODS: Forty cases of HCC and their corresponding non-tumor liver tissues,
other 2 cases of healthy donor livers were detected using methylation specific
polymorphism chain reaction (MSP) method.
RESULTS: The frequency of promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A showed 90.0% and
72.5% in tumor and corresponding non-tumor tissues respectively, and there was
significant difference between them (P < 0.05). The frequency of promoter
hypermethylation of HIC1 showed 77.5% and 70.0% in tumor and corresponding
non-tumor tissues respectively. The frequency of hypermethylation of HIC1 in
non-tumor liver tissues showed significant correlation between younger and older 
patients. The frequency of promoter hypermethylation of p73 showed 5.0% in tumor 
tissues. However, none of hypermethylation of the gene was detected in
corresponding non-tumor liver tissues. There was none of hypermethylation of the 
three genes showed in two cases of healthy donor livers.
CONCLUSION: Promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A and HIC1 genes are common event 
in HCC and play an important role in the pathogenesis and may be used to develop 
novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for HCC in the future.

PMID: 16412291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Neurosurg Focus. 2005 Nov 15;19(5):E10.

Epigenetic events in medulloblastoma development.

Lindsey JC(1), Anderton JA, Lusher ME, Clifford SC.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, University of Newcastle, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Over the last decade, the analysis of genetic defects in primary tumors has been 
central to the identification of molecular events and biological pathways
involved in the pathogenesis of medulloblastoma, the most common malignant brain 
tumor of childhood. Despite this, understanding of the molecular basis of the
majority of cases remains poor. In recent years, the emerging field of
epigenetics, which describes heritable alterations in gene expression that occur 
in the absence of DNA sequence changes, has forced a revision of the
understanding of the mechanisms of gene disruption in cancer. Accumulating
evidence indicates a significant involvement for epigenetic events in
medulloblastoma development. Recent studies have identified a series of candidate
tumor suppressor genes (for example, RASSF1A, CASP8, and HIC1) that are each
specifically epigenetically inactivated in a large proportion (> 30%) of
medulloblastomas by promoter hypermethylation, leading to the silencing of their 
gene expression. These findings shed new light on medulloblastoma and offer great
potential for an improved understanding of its molecular pathology. The authors
review the current understanding of epigenetic events in cancer and their
contribution to medulloblastoma development. Their nature, origins, and
functional role(s) in tumorigenesis are considered, and the authors assess the
potential utility of these events as a basis for novel diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches.

PMID: 16398460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Jan;22(1):54-61.

[Chromosome arm 17p13.3: could HIC1 be the one ?].

[Article in French]

Chopin V(1), Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)ERI-8 Inserm, Signalisation des facteurs de croissance dans le cancer du sein,
Protéomique fonctionnelle, UPRES EA 1033, IFR 118, Bâtiment SN3, Université des
Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.
valerie.chopin@univ-lille1.fr

Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the short arm of chromosome 17 (17p) is one of
the most frequent genetic alterations in human cancers. Most often, allelic
losses coincide with p53 mutations at 17p13.1. However, in many types of solid
tumors including sporadic breast cancers, ovarian cancers, medulloblastomas and
small cell lung carcinomas, frequent LOH or DNA methylation changes occur in a
more telomeric region at 17p13.3, in absence of any p53 genetic alterations.
These results suggest that one or more tumor suppressor genes located at 17p13.3 
could be involved in tumorigenesis. In addition, the 17p13.3 region has also been
implicated in the Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS), a severe form of lissencephaly
accompanied by developmental anomalies caused by heterozygous gene deletions.
Analyses of deletion mapping and CpG island methylation patterns have resulted in
the identification of two tumor suppressor genes at 17p13.3, HIC1
(hypermethylated in cancer 1) and OVCA1 (ovarian cancer gene 1). HIC1 is a tumor 
suppressor gene that encodes a transcriptional repressor with five Krüppel-like
C2H2 zinc finger motifs and a N-terminal BTB/POZ domain. Clues to the tumor
suppressor function of HIC1 have come from the study of heterozygous Hic1+/-
mice, which develop spontaneous malignant tumors of different types. Generation
of double heterozygous knockout mice Hic1+/- p53+/- provides strong evidence that
epigenetically silenced genes such as HIC1 can significantly influence
tumorigenesis driven by mutations of classic tumor suppressor genes. This
functional cooperation between HIC1 and p53 is interesting and recently, its has 
been demonstrated that HIC1 was involved in a certain feedback regulation for p53
in tumor suppression through the histone deacetylase SIRT1. However, despite the 
fact that epigenetic oncogenesis is one of the most vibrant areas of biologic
research, the determinants between genetic versus epigenetic routes of tumor
suppressor gene inactivation remain elusive.

PMID: 16386221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Eur J Haematol. 2006 Jan;76(1):23-32.

Promoter hypermethylation of p15INK4B, HIC1, CDH1, and ER is frequent in
myelodysplastic syndrome and predicts poor prognosis in early-stage patients.

Aggerholm A(1), Holm MS, Guldberg P, Olesen LH, Hokland P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
bioanni@biology.au.dk

The propensity of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) to transform into acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) suggests the existence of common pathogenic components for these
malignancies. Here, four genes implicated in the development of AML were examined
for promoter CpG island hypermethylation in cells from 37 patients with different
stages of MDS. Aberrant methylation was detected by polymerase chain reaction
amplification of bisulfite-treated DNA followed by denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis. The highest rate of methylation was found for p15INK4B (51%),
followed by HIC1 (32%), CDH1 (27%), and ER (19%). Concurrent hypermethylation of 
> or = 3 genes was more frequent in advanced compared with early-stage MDS (P <
or = 0.05), and hypermethylation of p15INK4B was associated with leukemic
transformation in early MDS (P < or = 0.05). The median overall survival was 17
months for cases showing hypermethylation of > or = 1 genes vs. 67 months for
cases without hypermethylation (P = 0.002). Specifically, promoter
hypermethylation identified a subgroup of early MDS with a particularly poor
prognosis (median overall survival 20 months vs. 102 months; P = 0.004). In
multivariate analysis including stage and thrombocyte count, hypermethylation of 
> or = 1 genes was an independent negative prognostic factor (P < 0.05). These
data suggest that hypermethylation of p15INK4B, HIC1, CDH1, and ER contribute to 
the development and outcome of MDS.

PMID: 16343268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 30;25(14):2030-9.

Identification of the p53 family-responsive element in the promoter region of the
tumor suppressor gene hypermethylated in cancer 1.

Britschgi C(1), Rizzi M, Grob TJ, Tschan MP, Hügli B, Reddy VA, Andres AC,
Torbett BE, Tobler A, Fey MF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology/Hematology, Inselspital and Department of Clinical
Research, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

The tumor suppressor gene hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), located on human
chromosome 17p13.3, is frequently silenced in cancer by epigenetic mechanisms.
Hypermethylated in cancer 1 belongs to the bric à brac/poxviruses and zinc-finger
family of transcription factors and acts by repressing target gene expression. It
has been shown that enforced p53 expression leads to increased HIC1 mRNA, and
recent data suggest that p53 and Hic1 cooperate in tumorigenesis. In order to
elucidate the regulation of HIC1 expression, we have analysed the HIC1 promoter
region for p53-dependent induction of gene expression. Using progressively
truncated luciferase reporter gene constructs, we have identified a
p53-responsive element (PRE) 500 bp upstream of the TATA-box containing promoter 
P0 of HIC1, which is sequence specifically bound by p53 in vitro as assessed by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. We demonstrate that this HIC1
p53-responsive element (HIC1.PRE) is necessary and sufficient to mediate
induction of transcription by p53. This result is supported by the observation
that abolishing endogenous wild-type p53 function prevents HIC1 mRNA induction in
response to UV-induced DNA damage. Other members of the p53 family, notably
TAp73beta and DeltaNp63alpha, can also act through this HIC1.PRE to induce
transcription of HIC1, and finally, hypermethylation of the HIC1 promoter
attenuates inducibility by p53.

PMID: 16301995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Trends Mol Med. 2005 Dec;11(12):537-45. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

Hedgehog checkpoints in medulloblastoma: the chromosome 17p deletion paradigm.

Ferretti E(1), De Smaele E, Di Marcotullio L, Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, La Sapienza University,
Viale Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Medulloblastomas often activate Hedgehog signaling inappropriately. The finding
that mutations in components of this pathway are present only in few tumors
suggests that additional genetic or epigenetic lesions can also lead to Hedgehog 
dysregulation. Chromosome 17p deletion, the most frequently detected genetic
lesion in medulloblastoma, has recently been identified as a cause of
unrestrained Hedgehog signaling. Such a deletion leads to the loss of
REN(KCTD11), a novel Hedgehog antagonist, thus removing a checkpoint of
Hedgehog-dependent events during cerebellum development and tumorigenesis. The
disruption of additional Hedgehog modulators that map to 17p suggests a rationale
for a multitargeted therapeutic strategy aimed at interrupting the cooperative
activation of the Hedgehog pathway.

PMID: 16290230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cell. 2005 Nov 4;123(3):437-48.

Tumor suppressor HIC1 directly regulates SIRT1 to modulate p53-dependent
DNA-damage responses.

Chen WY(1), Wang DH, Yen RC, Luo J, Gu W, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) is an epigenetically regulated transcriptional
repressor that functionally cooperates with p53 to suppress age-dependent
development of cancer in mice. Here we show that the mechanism by which the loss 
of HIC1 function promotes tumorigenesis is via activating the stress-controlling 
protein SIRT1 and thereby attenuating p53 function. HIC1 forms a transcriptional 
repression complex with SIRT1 deacetylase, and this complex directly binds the
SIRT1 promoter and represses its transcription. Inactivation of HIC1 results in
upregulated SIRT1 expression in normal or cancer cells; this deacetylates and
inactivates p53, allowing cells to bypass apoptosis and survive DNA damage.
Inhibition of SIRT1 function in cells without HIC1 abolishes the resistance to
apoptosis. Since aging increases promoter hypermethylation and epigenetic
silencing of HIC1, we speculate that the resultant upregulation of SIRT1 may be a
double-edged sword that both promotes survival of aging cells and increases
cancer risk in mammals.

PMID: 16269335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 1;65(19):8961-7.

CpG island methylation of DNA damage response genes in advanced ovarian cancer.

Teodoridis JM(1), Hall J, Marsh S, Kannall HD, Smyth C, Curto J, Siddiqui N,
Gabra H, McLeod HL, Strathdee G, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oncology and Applied Pharmacology, Cancer Research UK Beatson
Laboratories, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

We have determined the methylation frequencies of 24 CpG islands of genes
associated with DNA damage responses or with ovarian cancer in 106 stage III/IV
epithelial ovarian tumors. We have analyzed this data for whether there is
evidence of a CpG island methylator phenotype or associations of CpG island
methylation with response to chemotherapy in advanced ovarian cancer. Frequent
methylation was observed for OPCML, DCR1, RASSF1A, HIC1, BRCA1, and MINT25
(33.3%, 30.7%, 26.4%, 17.3%, 12.3%, and 12.0%, respectively), whereas no
methylation was observed for APAF-1, DAPK, FANCF, FAS, P14, P21, P73, SOCS-3, and
SURVIVIN. The remaining genes showed only a low frequency of methylation, <10%.
Unsupervised gene shaving identified a nonrandom pattern of methylation for
OPCML, DCR1, RASSF1A, MINT25, HIC1, and SFRP1, supporting the concept of
concordant methylation of these genes in ovarian cancer. Methylation of at least 
one of the group of genes involved in DNA repair/drug detoxification (BRCA1,
GSTP1, and MGMT) was associated with improved response to chemotherapy (P =
0.013). We have examined the frequency of a polymorphism in the DNA
methyltransferase gene DNMT3b6, which has been previously reported to affect gene
transcription and cancer risk. The genetic polymorphism in the DNMT3b6 gene
promoter (at position -149) is not significantly associated with the concordant
methylation observed, but is weakly associated with the overall frequency of
methylation at the genes examined (P = 0.04, n = 56). This supports the
hypothesis that genetic factors affecting function of DNMT genes may underlie the
propensity of tumors to acquire aberrant CpG island methylation.

PMID: 16204069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 15;11(18):6544-9.

DNA methylation in anal intraepithelial lesions and anal squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhang J(1), Martins CR, Fansler ZB, Roemer KL, Kincaid EA, Gustafson KS, Heitjan 
DF, Clark DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

PURPOSE: Anal intraepithelial neoplasia is associated with human papillomavirus
infection and may progress to invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), which is
increasing in immunocompromised patients. We hypothesize that anal
intraepithelial neoplasia is associated with abnormal DNA methylation and that
detection of these events may be used to improve screening programs.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Seventy-six patients were identified who underwent anal
cytology screening and subsequent biopsy at our institution between 1999 and
2004. The specimens from these patients included 184 anal biopsies [normal, n =
57; low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL), n = 74; high-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion (HSIL), n = 41; and invasive SCC, n = 12] and 37 residual 
liquid-based anal cytology specimens (normal, n = 11; LSIL, n = 12; HSIL, n =
14). The methylation status of the following genes was determined for each biopsy
and cytology sample using real-time methylation-specific PCR: HIC1, RASSF1, RARB,
CDKN2A, p14, TP73, APC, MLH1, MGMT, DAPK1, and IGSF4.
RESULTS: Methylation-specific PCR analysis of biopsy samples revealed that DNA
methylation was more common in SCC and HSIL than LSIL and normal mucosa.
Specifically, methylation of IGSF4 and DAPK1 was prevalent in SCC (75% and 75% of
cases, respectively) and HSIL (59% and 71%, respectively) but was absent in LSIL 
and normal biopsy samples. Methylation profiles of cytologic samples were similar
to those found in the biopsy samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant DNA methylation is a frequent event in anal HSIL and SCC.
Methylation of IGSF4 and DAPK1 is specific for HSIL and SCC, and may serve as a
useful molecular biomarker.

PMID: 16166431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 15;11(12):4571-9.

Enhancement of in vitro and in vivo tumor cell radiosensitivity by the DNA
methylation inhibitor zebularine.

Dote H(1), Cerna D, Burgan WE, Carter DJ, Cerra MA, Hollingshead MG, Camphausen
K, Tofilon PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Radiation Therapeutics Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.

Aberrant DNA hypermethylation is a frequent finding in tumor cells, which has
suggested that inhibition of DNA methylation may be an effective cancer treatment
strategy. Because DNA methylation affects gene expression and chromatin
structure, parameters considered to influence radioresponse, we investigated the 
effects of the DNA methylation inhibitor zebularine on the radiosensitivity of
human tumor cells. Three human tumor cell lines were used in this study (MiaPaCa,
DU145, and U251) and the methylation status of three genes frequently
hypermethylated in tumor cells (RASSF1A, HIC-1, and 14-3-3sigma) was determined
as a function of zebularine exposure. Zebularine resulted in DNA demethylation in
a time-dependent manner, with the maximum loss of methylation detected by 48
hours. Treatment of cells with zebularine for 48 hours also resulted in an
increase in radiosensitivity with dose enhancement factors of >1.5. As a measure 
of radiation-induced DNA damage, gammaH2AX expression was determined. Whereas
zebularine had no effect on radiation-induced gammaH2AX foci at 1 hour, the
number of gammaH2AX foci per cell was significantly greater in the
zebularine-treated cells at 24 hours after irradiation, suggesting the presence
of unrepaired DNA damage. Zebularine administration to mice reactivated gene
expression in U251 xenografts; irradiation of U251 tumors in mice treated with
zebularine resulted in an increase in radiation-induced tumor growth delay. These
results indicate that zebularine can enhance tumor cell radiosensitivity in vitro
and in vivo and suggest that this effect may involve an inhibition of DNA repair.

PMID: 15958643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cancer Lett. 2005 May 10;222(1):75-81.

HIC1 promoter methylation and 17p13.3 allelic loss in invasive ductal carcinoma
of the breast.

Parrella P(1), Scintu M, Prencipe M, Poeta ML, Gallo AP, Rabitti C, Rinaldi M,
Tommasi S, Paradiso A, Schittulli F, Valori VM, Toma S, Altomare V, Fazio VM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Therapy and Oncology, IRCCS, Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, Viale Padre Pio, 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy.
pparrella@operapadrepio.it

The HIC1 gene is a transcriptional regulator commonly methylated in a variety of 
human cancer. Thirty-three invasive ductal carcinomas of the breast and 21
matched normal breast tissues were analysed for HIC1 promoter methylation, and
allelic loss of a 700 kb region spanning the gene locus. At least one genetic or 
epigenetic abnormality was found in 27 of the carcinomas tested (82%). Promoter
methylation was demonstrated in 21 carcinomas (64%), and nine normal tissues
(43%), whereas 18 malignant tumors (54%) showed allelic loss. Concomitant loss of
heterozigosity and promoter hypermethylation in the region spanning HIC1 was
detected in eight carcinomas (24%) suggesting that in this subset of tumors both 
copies of the gene are functionally lost. These observations support a role for
the HIC1 gene in the pathogenesis of breast ductal carcinomas.

PMID: 15837543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2005 Mar;12(1):161-72.

Epigenetic analysis of HIC1, CASP8, FLIP, TSP1, DCR1, DCR2, DR4, DR5, KvDMR1, H19
and preferential 11p15.5 maternal-allele loss in von Hippel-Lindau and sporadic
phaeochromocytomas.

Margetts CD(1), Astuti D, Gentle DC, Cooper WN, Cascon A, Catchpoole D, Robledo
M, Neumann HP, Latif F, Maher ER.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Department of Paediatrics and Child
Health, University of Birmingham, The Medical School, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15
2TT, UK.

Phaeochromocytoma is a neural-crest-derived tumour that may be a feature of
several familial cancer syndromes including von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease,
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and
germline succinate dehydrogenase subunit (SDHB and SDHD) mutations. However the
somatic genetic and epigenetic events that occur in phaeochromocytoma
tumourigenesis are not well defined. Epigenetic events including de novo promoter
methylation of tumour-suppressor genes are frequent in many human neoplasms. As
neuroblastoma and phaeochromocytoma are both neural-crest-derived tumours, we
postulated that some epigenetic events might be implicated in both tumour types
and wished to establish how somatic epigenetic alterations compared in
VHL-associated and sporadic phaeochromocytomas. We identified frequent aberrant
methylation of HIC1 (82%) and CASP8 (31%) in phaeochromocytoma, but both genes
were significantly more methylated in VHL phaeochromocytomas than in sporadic
cases. Of four tumour necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
receptors analysed, DR4 was most commonly methylated (41%; compared with DcR2
(26%), DcR1 (23%) and DR5 (10%)). Gene methylation patterns in phaeochromocytoma 
and neuroblastoma did not differ significantly suggesting overlapping mechanisms 
of tumourigenesis. We also investigated the role of 11p15.5-imprinted genes in
phaeochromocytoma. We found that in 10 sporadic and VHL phaeochromocytomas with
11p15.5 allele loss, the patterns of methylation of 11p15.5-differentially
methylated regions were consistent with maternal, rather than, paternal
chromosome loss in all cases (P<0.001). This suggests that 11p15.5-imprinted
genes may be implicated in the pathogenesis of both familial (germline VHL and
SDHD mutations) and sporadic phaeochromocytomas.

PMID: 15788647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005 Feb;3(2):142-9.

Analysis of promoter methylation in stool: a novel method for the detection of
colorectal cancer.

Lenhard K(1), Bommer GT, Asutay S, Schauer R, Brabletz T, Göke B, Lamerz R,
Kolligs FT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Detection of tumor-derived DNA alterations in stool is an
intriguing new approach with high potential for the noninvasive detection of
colorectal cancer (CRC). Because of heterogeneity of tumors, usually multiple
markers distributed throughout the human genome need to be analyzed. This is
labor intensive and does not allow for high through-put screening. Therefore,
markers with high sensitivity and good specificity are needed. We explored the
potential of a single epigenetic marker in comparison with fecal occult blood
testing (FOBT) for the discrimination of patients with CRCs and adenomas from
those without.
METHODS: Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed to
analyze hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) promoter methylation status in a
blinded fashion in stool samples from 26 patients with CRC, 13 with adenoma > or 
=1 cm, 9 with hyperplastic polyps, 9 with chronic inflammatory bowel disease, and
32 with endoscopically normal colon.
RESULTS: Ninety-seven percent of the stool samples contained amplifiable DNA.
Forty-two percent of the samples from patients with CRC and 31% of the samples
from patients with colorectal adenoma > or =1 cm were positive for HIC1 promoter 
methylation. No methylated HIC1 promoter DNA was detected in the fecal DNA from
patients with endoscopically normal colon or hyperplastic polyps.
CONCLUSIONS: The epigenetic marker HIC1 promoter methylation carries high
potential for the remote detection of CRCs. We postulate that a panel of merely a
few genetic and epigenetic markers will be required for the highly sensitive and 
specific detection of CRCs and adenomas in fecal samples from affected patients.

PMID: 15704048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cell Cycle. 2005 Jan;4(1):10-2. Epub 2005 Jan 11.

Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes: choice between genetic and epigenetic
routes.

Chen WY(1), Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes can occur via epigenetic or genetic
mechanisms. The reasons underlying this choice of gene inactivation routes during
tumorigenesis have not been clarified, nor have the precise roles in cancer
evolution for genes which are solely affected by epigenetically mediated loss of 
function. Here we discuss a mouse model in which the disruption of Hic1, a gene
solely involved with epigenetic silencing in human cancer, can markedly influence
the disruption of the powerful tumor suppressor gene, p53, in determining
malignant tumor incidence, spectrum and virulence. Furthermore, the mechanism for
inactivation of Hic1 in tumors produced can be switched from an epigenetic to a
genetic mode depending on how the Hic1 and p53 knockouts are localized on mouse
chromosome 11. The value of such a model and the implications of the findings for
choice of epigenetically versus genetically determined loss of gene function in
cancer are discussed.

PMID: 15611624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Mol Diagn. 2004 Nov;6(4):326-34.

Promoter hypermethylation of multiple genes in hydatidiform mole and
choriocarcinoma.

Xue WC(1), Chan KY, Feng HC, Chiu PM, Ngan HY, Tsao SW, Cheung AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hong Kong Jockey Club Clinical Research Centre, The
University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China.

The methylation status of genes in hydatidiform mole and choriocarcinoma and its 
significance is relatively unexplored. We investigated the methylation status of 
the promoter regions of six genes, p16, HIC-1, TIMP3, GSTP1, death-associated
protein kinase (DAPK), and E-cadherin in 54 hydatidiform moles, five
choriocarcinomas, and 10 first trimester placenta by methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Immunohistochemical expression of p16, TIMP3,
and E-cadherin, and quantitative real-time RT-PCR of p16 was also performed.
Among the six genes examined, the promoter region of four genes (E-cadherin,
HIC-1, p16, TIMP3) in choriocarcinoma and three genes (E-cadherin, HIC-1, p16) in
hydatidiform mole exhibited aberrant methylation whereas none was hypermethylated
in normal placenta. There was a significant correlation between methylation and
reduced expression of p16, E-cadherin, and TIMP3 (P < 0.001). Fifteen of the 54
patients with hydatidiform mole developed gestational trophoblastic neoplasia
requiring chemotherapy. Promoter hypermethylation of p16 alone, or combined with 
E-cadherin, was significantly correlated to such development (P = 0.001, 0.0005, 
respectively). Hypermethylation of multiple genes, especially p16, might be
related to the subsequent development of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC1867494
PMID: 15507671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Hematol. 2004 Nov;77(3):233-40.

Aberrant methylation of multiple tumor suppressor genes in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Ekmekci CG(1), Gutiérrez MI, Siraj AK, Ozbek U, Bhatia K.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

Hypermethylator phenotype, a propensity of tumors to incur nonrandom concurrent
methylation, has been described in several tumors, including acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). More recent studies identified methylation of other tumor
suppressor genes, DAP-kinase and SOCS1, singly in AML. We therefore assessed the 
methylation status of these genes concurrently with other known targets of
methylation. We used methylation-specific PCR or COBRA to determine the extent of
methylation of 10 genes in 28 AML samples from Turkey. In addition to DAP-kinase 
and SOCS1, we included ER, p15, and E-cadherin (reported to be frequently
methylated) as well as p16, GSTP1, and HIC1 (reported as rarely methylated). We
also included RARbeta and p73 for which only minimal data in AML is available.
All samples were methylated at least in one locus and all except one demonstrated
methylation of DAP-kinase, SOCS1, p15, and/or ER. DAP-kinase is the most
frequently methylated gene in both pediatric (70%) and adult AML (55%). RARbeta
is methylated in 18% and p73 in 10% of AMLs. Methylation of E-cadherin and
RARbeta occurs preferentially in AMLs with high methylation index (MI), while
epigenetic lesions in SOCS1, DAP-kinase, and p15 appear to be independent. MI may
be age-dependent, with a peak in young adults. FAB M3 demonstrated a higher
extent of methylation than M2/M4. This study provides an impetus for larger
studies to define if the extent and pattern of methylation in subgroups of AML
are clinically relevant.

PMID: 15495254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cancer Cell. 2004 Oct;6(4):387-98.

Epigenetic and genetic loss of Hic1 function accentuates the role of p53 in
tumorigenesis.

Chen W(1), Cooper TK, Zahnow CA, Overholtzer M, Zhao Z, Ladanyi M, Karp JE,
Gokgoz N, Wunder JS, Andrulis IL, Levine AJ, Mankowski JL, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 1650 Orleans
Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

The gene hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) is epigenetically inactivated, but
not mutated, in cancer. Here we show that cooperative loss of Hic1 with p53, but 
not INK4a, yields distinct tumor phenotypes in mice. Germline deletion of one
allele of each gene on the opposite chromosome yields breast and ovarian
carcinomas and metastatic osteosarcomas with epigenetic inactivation of the
wild-type Hic1 allele. Germline deletion of the two genes on the same chromosome 
results in earlier appearance and increased prevalence and aggressiveness of
osteosarcomas with genetic deletion of both wild-type genes. In human
osteosarcomas, hypermethylation of HIC1 is frequent only in tumors with p53
mutations. Our results indicate the importance of genes altered only through
epigenetic mechanisms in cancer progression in conjunction with genetically
modified tumor suppressor genes.

PMID: 15488761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Oct;271(19):3843-54.

The tumor suppressor HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is O-GlcNAc glycosylated.

Lefebvre T(1), Pinte S, Guérardel C, Deltour S, Martin-Soudant N, Slomianny MC,
Michalski JC, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8526 du CNRS, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Lille Cédex BP447, France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a transcriptional repressor containing five
Krüppel-like C(2)H(2) zinc fingers and an N-terminal dimerization and autonomous 
repression domain called BTB/POZ. Here, we demonstrate that full-length HIC1
proteins are modified both in vivo and in vitro with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine
(O-GlcNAc). This is a highly dynamic glycosylation found within the cytosolic and
the nuclear compartments of eukaryotes. Analysis of [(3)H]Gal-labeled tryptic
peptides indicates that HIC1 has three major sites for O-GlcNAc glycosylation.
Using C-terminal deletion mutants, we have shown that O-GlcNAc modification of
HIC1 proteins occurred preferentially in the DNA-binding domain. Nonglycosylated 
and glycosylated forms of full-length HIC1 proteins separated by wheat germ
agglutinin affinity purification, displayed the same specific DNA-binding
activity in electrophoretic mobility shift assays proving that the O-GlcNAc
modification is not directly implicated in the specific DNA recognition of HIC1. 
Intriguingly, N-terminal truncated forms corresponding to BTB-POZ-deleted
proteins exhibited a strikingly differential activity, as the glycosylated
truncated forms are unable to bind DNA whereas the unglycosylated ones do.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays performed with separated pools of
glycosylated and unglycosylated forms of a construct exhibiting only the
DNA-binding domain and the C-terminal tail of HIC1 (residues 399-714) and
supershift experiments with wheat germ agglutinin or RL-2, an antibody raised
against O-GlcNAc residues, fully corroborated these results. Interestingly, these
truncated proteins are O-GlcNAc modified in their C-terminal tail (residues
670-711) and not in the DNA-binding domain, as for the full-length proteins.
Thus, the O-GlcNAc modification of HIC1 does not affect its specific DNA-binding 
activity and is highly sensitive to conformational effects, notably its
dimerization through the BTB/POZ domain.

PMID: 15373830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Cancer. 2004 Aug 25;102(4):259-68.

DNA methylation profiling of cervical squamous intraepithelial lesions using
liquid-based cytology specimens: an approach that utilizes receiver-operating
characteristic analysis.

Gustafson KS(1), Furth EE, Heitjan DF, Fansler ZB, Clark DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. kgustaf1@jhmi.edu

BACKGROUND: Cervical carcinoma is a common malignancy among women worldwide, and 
its pathogenesis is related causally to human papillomavirus infection. The
progression from precursor squamous intraepithelial lesions to cervical carcinoma
requires additional genetic and epigenetic alterations that have not been
characterized fully. The authors examined aberrant promoter methylation of
multiple tumor suppressor genes in precursor squamous intraepithelial lesions.
METHODS: A multiplex, nested, methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction
approach was used to examine promoter methylation of 15 tumor suppressor genes in
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL, n = 11), low-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions (LSIL, n = 17), and negative tissues (n = 11) from
liquid-based cytology samples. The area under the receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) curve was determined for individual methylated tumor
suppressor genes and for gene combinations to evaluate test performance for the
ability of methylation profiles to distinguish HSIL cytology samples from
combined LSIL/negative cytology samples.
RESULTS: Aberrant promoter methylation of DAPK1 and IGSF4 occurred at a high
frequency in HSIL samples and was absent in LSIL and negative samples. There was 
a significant trend toward increased methylation with the increased severity of
lesions, and the mean number of methylated genes was significantly higher in HSIL
samples compared with LSIL and negative samples. Using the area under the ROC
curve as a measure of test performance, the methylation of IGSF4 and DAPK1 had
areas that were significantly greater than 0.5; thus, each had the ability to
distinguish HSIL samples from combined LSIL/negative samples. The areas under the
curve for the best two-gene combination (IGSF4/DAPK1) and the best three-gene
combination (IGSF4/DAPK1/HIC1) were not statistically different from the best
individual tumor suppressor gene (IGSF4) in distinguishing HSIL samples from
combined LSIL/negative samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes is an
epigenetic alteration that occurs during neoplastic progression to cervical
carcinoma. The methylation status of multiple tumor suppressor genes can be
evaluated using ROC analysis to determine methylation profiles that can
distinguish HSIL samples from combined LSIL/negative samples.

PMID: 15368319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;10(16):5349-54.

Nonrandom distribution of aberrant promoter methylation of cancer-related genes
in sporadic breast tumors.

Parrella P(1), Poeta ML, Gallo AP, Prencipe M, Scintu M, Apicella A, Rossiello R,
Liguoro G, Seripa D, Gravina C, Rabitti C, Rinaldi M, Nicol T, Tommasi S,
Paradiso A, Schittulli F, Altomare V, Fazio VM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Therapy and Oncology, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), 
Italy. pparrella@operapadrepio.it

PURPOSE: In an effort to additionally determine the global patterns of CpG island
hypermethylation in sporadic breast cancer, we searched for aberrant promoter
methylation at 10 gene loci in 54 primary breast cancer and 10 breast benign
lesions.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genomic DNA sodium bisulfate converted from benign and
malignant tissues was used as template in methyl-specific PCR for BRCA1, p16,
ESR1, GSTP1, TRbeta1, RARbeta2, HIC1, APC, CCND2, and CDH1 genes.
RESULTS: The majority of the breast cancer (85%) showed aberrant methylation in
at least 1 of the loci tested with half of them displaying 3 or more methylated
genes. The highest frequency of aberrant promoter methylation was found for HIC1 
(48%) followed by ESR1 (46%), and CDH1 (39%). Similar methylation frequencies
were detected for breast benign lesions with the exception of the CDH1 gene (P = 
0.02). The analysis of methylation distribution indicates a statistically
significant association between methylation of the ESR1 promoter, and methylation
at CDH1, TRbeta1, GSTP1, and CCND2 loci (P < 0.03). Methylated status of the
BRCA1 promoter was inversely correlated with methylation at the RARbeta2 locus (P
< 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a nonrandom distribution for promoter
hypermethylation in sporadic breast cancer, with tumor subsets characterized by
aberrant methylation of specific cancer-related genes. These breast cancer
subgroups may represent separate biological entities with potential differences
in sensitivity to therapy, occurrence of metastasis, and overall prognosis.

PMID: 15328171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Jun;1022:217-20.

Extracellular DNA in breast cancer: Cell-surface-bound, tumor-derived
extracellular DNA in blood of patients with breast cancer and nonmalignant
tumors.

Rykova EY(1), Laktionov PP, Skvortsova TE, Starikov AV, Kuznetsova NP, Vlassov
VV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Division of
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia. rykova@niboch.nsc.ru

A methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction technique was used to
investigate aberrant promoter methylation of RASSF1A and HIC-1 genes in
circulating extracellular DNA (exDNA) from the blood of breast cancer and
fibroadenoma patients. Methylated DNA could be detected in the exDNA eluted from 
the surface of erythrocytes and leukocytes, even in the samples where no
methylated DNA could be detected in plasma. The data obtained demonstrate that
cell surface bound exDNA provides a valuable source of material for early
noninvasive cancer diagnostics and monitoring.

PMID: 15251963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Jun;1022:44-9.

Prognostic DNA methylation marker in serum of cancer patients.

Müller HM(1), Fiegl H, Widschwendter A, Widschwendter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Transplant Surgery, Innsbruck Medical University,
A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Changes in the status of DNA methylation are among the most common molecular
alterations in human neoplasia. Recent demonstrations of tumor-derived methylated
DNA in the blood stream of cancer patients allow the use of these epigenetic
markers for risk assessment in cancer patients. We were interested in evaluating 
the prognostic value of several methylated genes in the serum of cancer patients.
Using MethyLight, a high-throughput DNA methylation assay, we analyzed 215 serum 
samples from patients with cervical (n = 93) or breast cancer (n = 122) for DNA
methylation changes. In cervical cancer, hypermethylation of three genes (MYOD1, 
CDH1, and CDH13) in pretreatment sera was statistically significantly associated 
with a poorer disease outcome. Additionally, for the first time we used a
so-called gene evaluation set to identify the most important DNA methylation
changes in the serum of breast cancer patients from a long list of candidate
genes. In the gene evaluation set, we detected five genes (ESR1, APC, HSD17B4,
HIC1, and RASSF1A) using our criteria for further analysis. Finally, two of the
evaluated genes (APC and RASSF1A) proved to be independent prognostic parameters 
in breast cancer patients. In summary, we detected several prognostic DNA
methylation markers in the serum of cervical and breast cancer patients. This
finding indicates great potential for the use of these epigenetic markers in
clinical, routine risk assessment in patients with various malignancies.

PMID: 15251938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 10;279(37):38313-24. Epub 2004 Jul 1.

The tumor suppressor gene HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a
sequence-specific transcriptional repressor: definition of its consensus binding 
sequence and analysis of its DNA binding and repressive properties.

Pinte S(1), Stankovic-Valentin N, Deltour S, Rood BR, Guérardel C, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue
Calmette, Lille Cedex 59017, France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene located at
chromosome 17p13.3, a region frequently hypermethylated or deleted in human
tumors and in a contiguous-gene syndrome, the Miller-Dieker syndrome. HIC1 is a
transcriptional repressor containing five Krüppel-like C(2)H(2) zinc fingers and 
an N-terminal dimerization and autonomous repression domain called BTB/POZ.
Although some of the HIC1 transcriptional repression mechanisms have been
recently deciphered, target genes are still to be discovered. In this study, we
determined the consensus binding sequence for HIC1 and investigated its DNA
binding properties. Using a selection and amplification of binding sites
technique, we identified the sequence 5'-(C)/(G)NG(C)/(G)GGGCA(C)/(A) CC-3' as an
optimal binding site. In silico and functional analyses fully validated this
consensus and highlighted a GGCA core motif bound by zinc fingers 3 and 4. The
BTB/POZ domain inhibits the binding of HIC1 to a single site but mediates
cooperative binding to a probe containing five concatemerized binding sites, a
property shared by other BTB/POZ proteins. Finally, full-length HIC1 proteins
transiently expressed in RK13 cells and more importantly, endogenous HIC1
proteins from the DAOY medulloblastoma cell line, repress the transcription of a 
reporter gene through their direct binding to these sites, as confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. The definition of the HIC1-specific
DNA binding sequence as well as the requirement for multiple sites for optimal
binding of the full-length protein are mandatory prerequisites for the
identification and analyses of bona fide HIC1 target genes.

PMID: 15231840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cancer. 2004 May 18;3:16.

Role of promoter hypermethylation in Cisplatin treatment response of male germ
cell tumors.

Koul S(1), McKiernan JM, Narayan G, Houldsworth J, Bacik J, Dobrzynski DL, Assaad
AM, Mansukhani M, Reuter VE, Bosl GJ, Chaganti RS, Murty VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians & Surgeons of Columbia
University, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA. sk1276@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Male germ cell tumor (GCT) is a highly curable malignancy, which
exhibits exquisite sensitivity to cisplatin treatment. The genetic pathway(s)
that determine the chemotherapy sensitivity in GCT remain largely unknown.
RESULTS: We studied epigenetic changes in relation to cisplatin response by
examining promoter hypermethylation in a cohort of resistant and sensitive GCTs. 
Here, we show that promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A and HIC1 genes is
associated with resistance. The promoter hypermethylation and/or the
down-regulated expression of MGMT is seen in the majority of tumors. We
hypothesize that these epigenetic alterations affecting MGMT play a major role in
the exquisite sensitivity to cisplatin, characteristic of GCTs. We also
demonstrate that cisplatin treatment induce de novo promoter hypermethylation in 
vivo. In addition, we show that the acquired cisplatin resistance in vitro alters
the expression of specific genes and the highly resistant cells fail to
reactivate gene expression after treatment to demethylating and histone
deacetylase inhibiting agents.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A and
HIC1 genes play a role in resistance of GCT, while the transcriptional
inactivation of MGMT by epigenetic alterations confer exquisite sensitivity to
cisplatin. These results also implicate defects in epigenetic pathways that
regulate gene transcription in cisplatin resistant GCT.

PMCID: PMC420487
PMID: 15149548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2004 Mar-Apr;38(2):213-23.

[Diagnostics for epigenetic pathology in hereditary and oncologic diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Zaletaev DV(1), Nemtsova MV, Strel'nikov VV, Babenko OV, Vasil'ev EV, Zemliakova 
VV, Zhevlova AI, Drozd OV.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetic Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Sechenov Medical Academy, Ministry of Health of 
the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia. zalnem@online.ru

The review considers the epigenetic defects and their diagnostics in several
hereditary disorders and tumors. Aberrant methylation of the promoter or
regulatory region of a gene results in its functional inactivation, which is
phenotypically similar to structural deletion. Screening tests were developed for
Prader-Willi, Angelman, Wiedemann-Beckwith, and Martin-Bell syndromes and mental 
retardation FRAXE. The tests are based on allele methylation analysis by
methylation-specific or methylation-sensitive PCR. Carcinogenesis-associated
genes (RB1, CDKN2A, ARF14, HIC1, CDI, etc.) are often methylated in tumors.
Tumors differ in methylation frequencies, allowing differential diagnostics.
Aberrant methylation of tumor suppressor genes occurs in early carcinogenesis,
and its detection may be employed in presymptomatic diagnostics of tumors.

PMID: 15125225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int J Cancer. 2004 Jul 1;110(4):542-9.

Analysis of HIC-1 methylation and transcription in human ependymomas.

Waha A(1), Koch A, Hartmann W, Mack H, Schramm J, Sörensen N, Berthold F,
Wiestler OD, Pietsch T, Waha A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
awaha1@uni-bonn.de

Ependymomas are among the most common brain tumors in children. They develop from
ependymal cells lining the ventricular system of the CNS. Previous studies have
demonstrated a significant rate of allelic loss at chromosome 17p13.3. The HIC-1 
putative tumor-suppressor gene, which exhibits hypermethylation and loss of
expression in various tumor entities including medulloblastomas and gliomas, maps
to the affected region. In the present study, we analyzed HIC-1 in ependymomas.
Therefore, we applied methylation-specific PCR of the 5'-untranslated region as
well as of a central region of HIC-1 and bisulfite sequencing to determine the
methylation status in 52 ependymomas of different histologic subtypes, grades and
locations. In addition, we used a competitive RT-PCR approach for sensitive
assessment of HIC-1 transcripts. Hypermethylation of at least one of the 2
analyzed regions was found in 43/52 (83%) cases. There was a significant
correlation between hypermethylation of HIC-1 and nonspinal localization (p =
0.019) as well as age. Of 27 ependymomas, 22 (81%) showed absent or low
expression of HIC-1. The elevated methylation of HIC-1 in nonspinal ependymomas
supports the hypothesis that spinal and nonspinal ependymomas represent
genetically distinct entities.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15122586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Apr 16;1678(1):57-66.

Identification and developmental expression of the zebrafish orthologue of the
tumor suppressor gene HIC1.

Bertrand S(1), Pinte S, Stankovic-Valentin N, Deltour-Balerdi S, Guérardel C,
Bégue A, Laudet V, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 5161 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46 Allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon
Cedex 07, France.

Hypermethylated in Cancer 1 (HIC1) is a human tumor suppressor gene located at
chromosome 17p13.3 which is frequently hypermethylated and transcriptionally
silent in many types of tumors. In addition, its location in the Miller-Dieker
syndrome's (MDS) deletion region, its embryonic expression pattern in mice and
the phenotype of the HIC1-deficient mice have provided strong evidence for its
implication in this contiguous-gene syndrome. HIC1 encodes a five C2H2-type zinc 
finger transcriptional repressor belonging to the BTB/POZ family. We have
isolated the true zebrafish orthologue of human HIC1 since it has a comparable
intron-exon structure and since its predicted gene product, ZfHIC1 displays much 
higher sequence similarities in its overall sequence (737 residues) with human
HIC1 (714 residues) than the 454 residues encoded by the only zebrafish HIC1
sequence (AF111712) described so far, which has been renamed ZfHIC1alpha.
Notably, the C-terminal end and one zinc finger in the DNA-binding domain are
missing in ZfHIC1alpha. As a consequence, ZfHIC1 proteins bind the human HIC1
consensus DNA-binding sequence in vitro, whereas ZfHIC1alpha cannot. Analyses of 
the expression pattern of ZfHIC1 and of its paralogue ZfHRG22 (HIC1 related gene 
on chromosome 22) show that they share expression domains with their respective
orthologous vertebrate genes. ZfHRG22 is prominently expressed in the brain and
in neural tissues. Interestingly, the predominant expression of ZfHIC1 in the
mesenchyme of the head, around the nose and the eye and in the branchial arches
is possibly consistent with some of the abnormalities seen in the HIC1-deficient 
mice and provides another clue for the implication of HIC1 in MDS.

PMID: 15093138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Diagn. 2003;7(3-4):201-7.

Multigene methylation analysis of gastrointestinal tumors: TPEF emerges as a
frequent tumor-specific aberrantly methylated marker that can be detected in
peripheral blood.

Sabbioni S(1), Miotto E, Veronese A, Sattin E, Gramantieri L, Bolondi L, Calin
GA, Gafà R, Lanza G, Carli G, Ferrazzi E, Feo C, Liboni A, Gullini S, Negrini M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, University of Ferrara,
Ferrara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Gene promoter methylation is a mechanism for tumor suppressor gene
silencing and inactivation. The development of highly sensitive methods for
revealing aberrant cancer-associated DNA methylation allows the identification of
tumor markers not only in tumor samples, but also in body fluid, an approach that
can be useful in the early detection of neoplasms.
METHODS: We analyzed the methylation status at 16 loci in tumor samples of the
gastrointestinal tract and in early or pre-neoplastic lesions of the colon.
RESULTS: Tumor samples revealed that methylation at the transmembrane protein
containing epidermal growth factor and follistatin domains (TPEF) locus had the
best ratio of discrimination between tumor samples versus normal tissues (83
versus 0%). Its combination with hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1),
death-associated protein kinase (DAPK) and O-6-methylguanine DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT), allowed the detection of aberrant methylation in 98% of
colorectal carcinomas and 100% of gastric carcinomas. The same alterations were
also detected in colon adenomas and tissues surrounding the adenomas, indicating 
that hypermethylation at these loci occurred early in tumor progression. Analysis
of DNA from peripheral blood revealed that TPEF methylation was detectable in
colorectal tumor patients and patients with early or pre-neoplastic lesions, but 
not in healthy volunteers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identify TPEF as a tumor marker that could be useful in 
the follow-up of gastrointestinal cancer patients or the screening of individuals
at risk of developing gastrointestinal neoplasms.

PMID: 15068392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Oncogene. 2004 May 13;23(22):4023-31.

Identification of a second G-C-rich promoter conserved in the human, murine and
rat tumor suppressor genes HIC1.

Pinte S(1), Guérardel C, Deltour-Balerdi S, Godwin AK, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue
Calmette, 59017 Lille, France.

The BTB/POZ transcriptional repressor HIC1 (Hypermethylated in Cancer 1) is a
tumor suppressor gene located at chromosome 17p13.3, a region frequently
hypermethylated or deleted in human tumors and in a contiguous-gene syndrome, the
Miller-Dieker syndrome. The human and murine HIC1 genes are composed of two
alternative 5' exons, 1a and 1b fused to a large second coding exon 2. Exon 1a is
a noncoding exon associated with a major G-C-rich promoter whereas exon 1b is a
downstream coding exon associated with a minor TATA box promoter. By human-mouse 
genome comparison, we have identified a short upstream conserved sequence
containing G-C boxes which were shown to be functional. Transcripts initiating
from this new promoter were detected in various human and mouse tissues and
contained a long 5'-UTR sequence, called 1c which encompass the G-C-rich promoter
associated with exon 1a and uses the same splice donor site. RT-PCR analyses of
two primary breast epithelial cell lines identified two other 5'-UTRs generated
by alternative splicing within exon 1c. Our results thus highlight the existence 
of an unexpected complex transcriptional regulation of HIC1.

PMID: 15007385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2003 Nov-Dec;37(6):983-8.

[Profile of methylation of certain tumor growth suppressing genes in non-small
cell lung cancer].

[Article in Russian]

Zemliakova VV(1), Zhevlova AI, Zborovskaia IB, Strel'nikov VV, Laktionov KK,
Zaletaev DV, Nemtsova MV.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetic Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, 
115478 Russia.

Multiplex methylation-sensitive PCR was employed in studying the methylation of
CpG islands in the RB1, p16/CDKN2A, p15/CDKN2B, p14/ARF, CDH1, HIC1, and N33 5'
regions in non-small cell lung cancer (51 tumors). Methylation was observed for
the two suppressor genes involved in controlling the cell cycle through the
Cdk-Rb-E2F signaling pathway, RB1 (10/51, 19%) and p16 (20/51, 39%). The highest 
methylation frequencies were established for CDH1 (72%) and HIC1 (82%). The CpG
islands of p14 and p15 proved to be nonmethylated. At least one gene was
methylated in 90% (46/51) tumors and no gene, in 10% (5/51) tumors. In addition, 
the genes were tested for methylation in peripheral blood lymphocytes of healthy 
subjects. Methylation frequency significantly differed between tumors and normal 
cells in the case of RB1, p16, CDH1, HIC1, and N33. Gene methylation frequency
was tested for association with histological type of the tumor and stage of tumor
progression. Methylation index of a panel of tumor suppressor genes was
established for groups of tumors varying in clinical and morphological
parameters.

PMID: 14714493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Carcinogenesis. 2004 May;25(5):661-8. Epub 2003 Dec 19.

Identification of tumour-specific epigenetic events in medulloblastoma
development by hypermethylation profiling.

Lindsey JC(1), Lusher ME, Anderton JA, Bailey S, Gilbertson RJ, Pearson AD,
Ellison DW, Clifford SC.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle, Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.

Medulloblastoma arises in the cerebellum and is the most common malignant brain
tumour of childhood, however its molecular basis is not well understood. To
assess the role of aberrant epigenetic events in medulloblastoma and identify
critical genes in its development, we profiled the promoter methylation status of
11 candidate tumour-suppressor genes (TSGs; p14(ARF), p15(INK4b), p16(INK4a),
CASP8, HIC1, EDNRB, TIMP3, TP73, TSLC1, RIZ1 and RASSF1A) in medulloblastoma cell
lines, primary tumours and the normal cerebellum. Gene-specific TSG methylation
was a significant feature of both medulloblastomas and the cerebellum. Extensive 
hypermethylation of RASSF1A was detected frequently in medulloblastomas but not
in the normal cerebellum (41/44 primary tumours versus 0/5 normal cerebella). In 
contrast, complete methylation of HIC1 and CASP8 in a subset of primary tumours
(17/44 and 14/39) occurred against a consistent background of partial methylation
in the normal cerebellum. These data therefore indicate that extensive
methylation of RASSF1A, HIC1 and CASP8 are tumour-specific events in
medulloblastoma. Moreover, methylation of these genes in medulloblastoma cell
lines was associated with their epigenetic transcriptional silencing and
methylation-dependent re-expression following treatment with the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. The remaining genes studied 
showed either low frequency methylation (p14(ARF), p16(INK4a), RIZ1; <7% of
cases), no evidence of methylation (p15(INK4b), TIMP3, TP73, TSLC1), or
comparable patterns of methylation in the normal cerebellum (EDNRB), suggesting
that their hypermethylation does not play a major role in medulloblastoma. Our
data demonstrate that tumour-specific hypermethylation affects only a subset of
genes, and does not support the existence of a concordant methylation phenotype
in this disease. We conclude that epigenetic TSG inactivation is a significant
feature of medulloblastoma, and identify RASSF1A, HIC1 and CASP8 as potentially
critical genes in its pathogenesis. Furthermore, methylation observed in the
normal cerebellum emphasises the requirement for appropriate control tissues when
assessing the tumour-specificity of TSG hypermethylation.

PMID: 14688019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Res. 2003 Nov 15;63(22):7641-5.

DNA methylation in serum of breast cancer patients: an independent prognostic
marker.

Müller HM(1), Widschwendter A, Fiegl H, Ivarsson L, Goebel G, Perkmann E, Marth
C, Widschwendter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Innsbruck University Hospital,
University of Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Changes in the status of DNA methylation are one of the most common molecular
alterations in human neoplasia. Because it is possible to detect these epigenetic
alterations in the bloodstream of patients, we investigated whether aberrant DNA 
methylation in patient pretherapeutic sera is of prognostic significance in
breast cancer. Using MethyLight, a high-throughput DNA methylation assay, we
analyzed 39 genes in a gene evaluation set, consisting of 10 sera from
metastasized patients, 26 patients with primary breast cancer, and 10 control
patients. To determine the prognostic value of genes identified within the gene
evaluation set, we finally analyzed pretreatment sera of 24 patients having had
no adjuvant treatment (training set) to determine their prognostic value. An
independent test set consisting of 62 patients was then used to test the validity
of genes and combinations of genes, which in the training set were found to be
good prognostic markers. In the gene evaluation set we identified five genes
(ESR1, APC, HSD17B4, HIC1, and RASSF1A). In the training set, patients with
methylated serum DNA for RASSF1A and/or APC had the worst prognosis (P < 0.001). 
This finding was confirmed by analyzing serum samples from the independent test
set (P = 0.007). When analyzing all 86 of the investigated patients, multivariate
analysis showed methylated RASSF1A and/or APC serum DNA to be independently
associated with poor outcome, with a relative risk for death of 5.7. DNA
methylation of particular genes in pretherapeutic sera of breast cancer patients,
especially of RASSF1A/APC, is more powerful than standard prognostic parameters.

PMID: 14633683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Sep 1;9(10 Pt 1):3674-8.

Aberrant methylation of the HIC1 promoter is a frequent event in specific
pediatric neoplasms.

Rathi A(1), Virmani AK, Harada K, Timmons CF, Miyajima K, Hay RJ, Mastrangelo D, 
Maitra A, Tomlinson GE, Gazdar AF.

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the role of methylation of HIC1, a candidate tumor
suppressor gene on 17p13.3, in various types of pediatric tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined the methylation status of the HIC1 promoter by
methylation specific PCR in 157 pediatric tumors and 27 nonmalignant tissues. We 
correlated methylation with mRNA expression by reverse transcription-PCR in eight
tumor-derived cell lines.
RESULTS: HIC1 methylation was frequent in medulloblastomas (80%, 12 of 15),
retinoblastomas (67%, 6 of 9), rhabdomyosarcomas (59%, 13 of 22), germ cell
tumors (55%, 6 of 11), and neurouroblastic tumors (36%, 14 of 39); neuroblastomas
(43%, 12 of 28); ganglioneuromas (17%, 1 of 6); and ganglioneuroblastomas (20%, 1
of 5). In contrast, a low incidence of methylation was observed in osteosarcomas 
(17%, 2 of 12), Ewing's tumors (9%, 1 of 11), Wilms' tumors (3%, 1 of 31), and
hepatoblastomas (0%, 0 of 7). HIC1 methylation was more frequent in the
aggressive alveolar subtype of rhabdomyosarcomas (100%, 8 of 8) than the
embryonal subtype (33%, 4 of 12; P < 0.005) and was rare in the nonmalignant
tissues examined. Methylation was also demonstrated by sequencing in nine
randomly selected tumor samples. Seven of eight pediatric tumor cell lines
examined were methylated and showed loss or reduced HIC1 mRNA. Expression was
strongly induced in all cell lines by treatment with the demethylating agent
5-aza 2'deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that aberrant methylation of HIC1 may play a role
in the pathogenesis of specific pediatric tumors.

PMID: 14506157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2003 Jul-Aug;37(4):696-703.

[Abnormal methylation of several tumor suppressor genes in sporadic breast
cancer].

[Article in Russian]

Zemliakova VV(1), Zhevlova AI, Strel'nikov VV, Liubchenko LN, Vishnevskaia IaV,
Tret'iakova VA, Zaletaev DV, Nemtsova MV.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetic Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, 
115478 Russia. valzem@mail.com

Multiplex methylation-sensitive PCR was employed in studying the methylation of
CpG islands in the RB1, p16/CDKN2A, p15/CDKN2B, p14/ARF, CDH1, MGMT, HIC1, and
N33 promoter regions in breast carcinoma (105 tumors). Methylation was often
observed for the two major suppressor genes involved in cell-cycle control
through the Cdk-Rb-E2F signaling pathway, RB1 (18/105, 17%) and p16 (59/105,
56%); both genes were methylated in 13 tumors. Methylation involved p15 in two
(2%) tumors; CDH1, in 83 (79%) tumors; MGMT, in eight (8%) tumors, and N33, in
nine (9%) tumors. The p14 promoter was not methylated in the tumors examined.

PMID: 12942643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Methods Mol Biol. 2001;181:205-16.

A PCR-based method for studying DNA methylation.

Ariel M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Hadassah Medical
School, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.

DNA methylation is a mechanism for regulation of gene expression in animals
(1-3). The addition of a methyl group at the 5-position of cytosine bases occurs 
exclusively at CpG dinucleotides. CpG dinucleotides in the vertebrate genome are 
underrepresented and amount to 1% of the genome (4). However, in some regions of 
the genome, CpG residues amount to 6% or more of the dinucleotides in the genome.
These regions, known as CpG islands, are usually associated with the promoter
regions of housekeeping genes and, in contrast to CpGs throughout the genome, are
unmethylated (5,6). Methylation of CpG islands occurs only in silenced genes on
the inactive X chromosome and in parentally imprinted genes (7). In addition, CpG
islands may become methylated upon oncogenic transformation. These alterations in
the methylation profile are correlated with silencing of tumor suppressor genes
such as p15, p16, Rb, VHL, e-cadherin, ER, and HIC1 (8).

PMID: 12843452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Int J Cancer. 2003 Aug 10;106(1):66-73.

Role of hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation in drug resistance to 5-fluorouracil in
colorectal cancer cell lines.

Arnold CN(1), Goel A, Boland CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
USA.

Loss of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) occurs in 10-15% of sporadic colorectal cancer,
is usually caused by hMLH1 hypermethylation, and has been shown to confer
resistance to various chemotherapeutic reagents, including 5-fluorouracil (5-FU).
We tested the hypothesis that demethylation of the hMLH1 promoter in
hypermethylated colorectal cancer cells would restore MMR proficiency and drug
sensitivity to 5-FU. We used the MMR-deficient cell lines SW48, HCT116,
HCT116+chr2 and the -proficient cell line HCT116+chr3. After treatment with the
demethylating agent 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5 aza-dC), hMLH1 mRNA and protein
expression were determined by RT-PCR and immunoblots. The methylation status for 
hMLH1 was investigated by methylation-specific PCR. Cells were subsequently
treated with 5-FU and the growth characteristics ascertained by clonogenic
assays. hMLH1 hypermethylation was reverted in SW48 cells 24 hr after treatment
with 5 aza-dC and was accompanied by hMLH1 mRNA and protein reexpression. While 5
aza-dC alone did not affect the growth of SW48 cells, all other cell lines
responded with a pronounced growth inhibition. 5-FU treatment strongly reduced
the colony formation of HCT116+chr3 cells. These effects were significantly less 
in the MMR-deficient cells. Combined treatment of SW48 cells resulted in a
similar growth pattern as seen in 5-FU only treated HCT116+chr3 cells. We
demonstrate that in vitro resistance to 5-FU can be overcome by reexpression of
hMLH1 protein through 5 aza-dC-induced demethylation in hypermethylated cell
lines. Induction of the expression of methylated tumor suppressor or MMR genes
could have a significant impact on the development of future chemotherapy
strategies.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12794758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Int J Cancer. 2003 Aug 10;106(1):52-9.

Distinct methylation profiles of glioma subtypes.

Uhlmann K(1), Rohde K, Zeller C, Szymas J, Vogel S, Marczinek K, Thiel G,
Nürnberg P, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Universitätsklinikum Charité,
Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, Germany.

Gliomas are tumors of the central nervous system with a wide spectrum of
different tumor types. They range from pilocytic astrocytoma, with a generally
good prognosis, to the extremely aggressive malignant glioblastoma. In addition
to these 2 types of contrasting neoplasms, several other subtypes can be
distinguished, each characterized by specific phenotypic, as well as genotypic
features. Recently, the epigenotype, as evident from differentially methylated
DNA loci, has been proposed to be useful as a further criterion to distinguish
between tumor types. In our study, we screened 139 tissue samples, including 33
pilocytic astrocytomas, 46 astrocytomas of different grades, 7 oligoastrocytomas,
10 oligodendrogliomas, 10 glioblastoma multiforme samples and 33 control tissues,
for methylation at CpG islands of 15 different gene loci. We used the
semiquantitative high throughput method MethyLight to analyze a gene panel
comprising ARF, CDKN2B, RB1, APC, CDH1, ESR1, GSTP1, TGFBR2, THBS1, TIMP3, PTGS2,
CTNNB1, CALCA, MYOD1 and HIC1. Seven of these loci showed tumor specific
methylation changes. We found tissue as well as grade specific methylation
profiles. Interestingly, pilocytic astrocytomas showed no evidence of CpG island 
hypermethylation, but were significantly hypomethylated, relative to control
tissues, at MYOD1. Our results show that glioma subtypes have characteristic
methylation profiles and, with the exception of pilocytic astrocytomas, show both
locus specific hyper- as well as hypomethylation.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12794756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Cancer. 2003 May 13;2:24.

Frequent promoter methylation of CDH1, DAPK, RARB, and HIC1 genes in carcinoma of
cervix uteri: its relationship to clinical outcome.

Narayan G(1), Arias-Pulido H, Koul S, Vargas H, Zhang FF, Villella J, Schneider
A, Terry MB, Mansukhani M, Murty VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
gn110@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer (CC), a leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
women worldwide, has been causally linked to genital human papillomavirus (HPV)
infection. Although a host of genetic alterations have been identified, molecular
basis of CC development is still poorly understood.
RESULTS: We examined the role of promoter hypermethylation, an epigenetic
alteration that is associated with the silencing tumor suppressor genes in human 
cancer, by studying 16 gene promoters in 90 CC cases. We found a high frequency
of promoter methylation in CDH1, DAPK, RARB, and HIC1 genes. Correlation of
promoter methylation with clinical characteristics and other genetic changes
revealed the following: a) overall promoter methylation was higher in more
advanced stage of the disease, b) promoter methylation of RARB and BRCA1
predicted worse prognosis, and c) the HIC1 promoter methylation was frequently
seen in association with microsatellite instability. Promoter methylation was
associated with gene silencing in CC cell lines. Treatment with methylation or
histone deacetylation-inhibiting agents resulted in profound reactivation of gene
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results may have implications in understanding the underlying 
epigenetic mechanisms in CC development, provide prognostic indicators, and
identify important gene targets for treatment.

PMCID: PMC156646
PMID: 12773202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nat Genet. 2003 Feb;33(2):197-202. Epub 2003 Jan 21.

Heterozygous disruption of Hic1 predisposes mice to a gender-dependent spectrum
of malignant tumors.

Chen WY(1), Zeng X, Carter MG, Morrell CN, Chiu Yen RW, Esteller M, Watkins DN,
Herman JG, Mankowski JL, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Biology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 1650 Orleans Street, Baltimore, Maryland
21231, USA.

The gene hypermethylated in cancer-1 (HIC1) encodes a zinc-finger transcription
factor that belongs to a group of proteins known as the POZ family. HIC1 is
hypermethylated and transcriptionally silent in several types of human cancer.
Homozygous disruption of Hic1 impairs development and results in embryonic and
perinatal lethality in mice. Here we show that mice disrupted in the germ line
for only one allele of Hic1 develop many different spontaneous malignant tumors, 
including a predominance of epithelial cancers in males and lymphomas and
sarcomas in females. The complete loss of Hic1 function in the heterozygous mice 
seems to involve dense methylation of the promoter of the remaining wild-type
allele. We conclude that HIC1 is a candidate tumor-suppressor gene for which loss
of function in both mouse and human cancers is associated only with epigenetic
modifications.

PMID: 12539045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cancer. 2002 Nov 28;1:8.

Characteristic promoter hypermethylation signatures in male germ cell tumors.

Koul S(1), Houldsworth J, Mansukhani MM, Donadio A, McKiernan JM, Reuter VE, Bosl
GJ, Chaganti RS, Murty VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians & Surgeons of Columbia
University, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA. sk1276@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Human male germ cell tumors (GCTs) arise from undifferentiated
primordial germ cells (PGCs), a stage in which extensive methylation
reprogramming occurs. GCTs exhibit pluripotentiality and are highly sensitive to 
cisplatin therapy. The molecular basis of germ cell (GC) transformation,
differentiation, and exquisite treatment response is poorly understood.
RESULTS: To assess the role and mechanism of promoter hypermethylation, we
analyzed CpG islands of 21 gene promoters by methylation-specific PCR in
seminomatous (SGCT) and nonseminomatous (NSGCT) GCTs. We found 60% of the NSGCTs 
demonstrating methylation in one or more gene promoters whereas SGCTs showed a
near-absence of methylation, therefore identifying distinct methylation patterns 
in the two major histologies of GCT. DNA repair genes MGMT, RASSF1A, and BRCA1,
and a transcriptional repressor gene HIC1, were frequently methylated in the
NSGCTs. The promoter hypermethylation was associated with gene silencing in most 
methylated genes, and reactivation of gene expression occurred upon treatment
with 5-Aza-2' deoxycytidine in GCT cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results, therefore, suggest a potential role for epigenetic
modification of critical tumor suppressor genes in pathways relevant to GC
transformation, differentiation, and treatment response.

PMCID: PMC149411
PMID: 12495446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Clin Cancer Res. 2002 Nov;8(11):3324-31.

Methylation profiles of sporadic ovarian tumors and nonmalignant ovaries from
high-risk women.

Rathi A(1), Virmani AK, Schorge JO, Elias KJ, Maruyama R, Minna JD, Mok SC,
Girard L, Fishman DA, Gazdar AF.

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75930, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this research was to examine the DNA methylation profiles
of primary sporadic ovarian cancers and ovarian tissues from high-risk women.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed the DNA methylation status of nine
cancer-related genes in 49 primary ovarian tumors, 39 nonmalignant ovarian
tissues obtained from 16 women with no known risk and from 23 high-risk women
with a strong family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer or BRCA1 germ-line
mutations, and 11 ovarian cancer cell lines, by methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: Our findings are as follows: (a) methylation rates of four of nine
genes, RASSF1A (41%), HIC1 (35%), E-cadherin (29%), and APC (18%) were
significantly higher in tumors compared with controls. At least one of the four
genes was methylated in 76% of the tumors; (b) a low frequency of methylation was
present in nonmalignant tissues; (c) no significant differences in methylation
frequencies were seen between the nonmalignant ovarian tissues from women at
high-risk and those with no known risk of developing ovarian cancer; (d)
methylation of the BRCA1 gene was found in 10% of sporadic tumors but in none of 
the samples from women with a germ-line BRCA1 mutation; and (e) ovarian cancer
cell lines showed a similar frequency of methylation to ovarian tumors except for
the HIC1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that aberrant methylation of specific genes,
including two not described previously, may be important in ovarian cancer
pathogenesis but not in ovaries at risk for cancer development.

PMID: 12429618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cancer Res. 2002 Jul 1;62(13):3794-7.

Hypermethylation of HIC-1 and 17p allelic loss in medulloblastoma.

Rood BR(1), Zhang H, Weitman DM, Cogen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Research Institute,
Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC. 20010, USA.

Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children. Chromosome 
arm 17p13.3 is reduced to homozygosity in 35-50% of medulloblastomas,making it
the most frequent genetic alteration in these tumors. HIC-1 (hypermethylated in
cancer) is a putative tumor suppressor gene located in the area of common
deletion. HIC-1 resides in a CpG island and is hypermethylated in many different 
tumor types. Therefore, we studied a series of tumor specimens for
hypermethylation and deletion of the region containing the HIC-1 gene to
determine whether these two mechanisms of gene inactivation play a complimentary 
role in medulloblastoma. Southern blotting was performed using the
methylation-sensitive restriction endonuclease NotI. Methylation of NotI
restriction sites located in HIC-1 was demonstrated in 26 (72%) of 36 tumors and 
11 (92%) of 12 specimens of normal brain. Of these 26 tumors, 23 differed
significantly from normal brain. A greater proportion of the cells from the
tumors showed methylated alleles of the HIC-1 gene. A group of 15 (42%) of 36
tumors exhibited loss of heterozygosity (LOH) for DNA sequences located on
chromosome arm 17p. There was no significant correlation between LOH and
methylation status (P = 0.19). Methylation in tumors beyond that seen in normal
brain predicted poor overall survival independent of clinical risk category (P = 
0.014). The results of our study show that methylation of the CpG island that
contains the HIC-1 gene is common in medulloblastoma and, together with LOH of
17p, may be a critical event in the formation and aggressiveness of this tumor.

PMID: 12097291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(13):4890-901.

The human candidate tumor suppressor gene HIC1 recruits CtBP through a degenerate
GLDLSKK motif.

Deltour S(1), Pinte S, Guerardel C, Wasylyk B, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 59017
Lille Cedex, France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer) and its close relative HRG22 (HIC1-related gene 
on chromosome 22) encode transcriptional repressors with five C(2)H(2) zinc
fingers and an N-terminal BTB/POZ autonomous transcriptional repression domain
that is unable to recruit histone deacetylases (HDACs). Alignment of the HIC1 and
HRG22 proteins from various species highlighted a perfectly conserved GLDLSKK/R
motif highly related to the consensus CtBP interaction motif (PXDLSXK/R), except 
for the replacement of the virtually invariant proline by a glycine. HIC1
strongly interacts with mCtBP1 both in vivo and in vitro through this conserved
GLDLSKK motif, thus extending the CtBP consensus binding site. The BTB/POZ domain
does not interact with mCtBP1, but the dimerization of HIC1 through this domain
is required for the interaction with mCtBP1. When tethered to DNA by fusion with 
the Gal4 DNA-binding domain, the HIC1 central region represses transcription
through interactions with CtBP in a trichostatin A-sensitive manner. In
conclusion, our results demonstrate that HIC1 mediates transcriptional repression
by both HDAC-independent and HDAC-dependent mechanisms and show that CtBP is a
HIC1 corepressor that is recruited via a variant binding site.

PMCID: PMC133903
PMID: 12052894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Br J Cancer. 2001 Dec 14;85(12):1878-82.

Expression of the Hypermethylated in Cancer gene (HIC-1) is associated with good 
outcome in human breast cancer.

Nicoll G(1), Crichton DN, McDowell HE, Kernohan N, Hupp TR, Thompson AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Molecular Oncology, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1
9SY, UK.

A new cancer gene, HIC-1 (Hypermethylated in Cancer) telomeric to p53 on
chromosome 17p may be of clinical importance in sporadic breast cancer. Regional 
DNA hypermethylation of 17p13.3 resulting in suppression of gene expression has
been shown to precede 17p structural changes in human carcinogenesis. In
addition, loss of heterozygosity studies have suggested clinically significant
involvement of a gene on 17p13.3 associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer.
Using RT-PCR analysis, we demonstrate that the MCF7 (wild type p53) cell line
expressed HIC-1 transcripts but the MDAMB231 (mutant p53) cell line did not,
suggesting loss of HIC-1 expression and p53 malfunction may be synergistic events
in sporadic breast cancer. HIC-1 expression was examined using RT-PCR on RNA
extracted from 50 primary untreated, human breast cancers and was detected in
only 7/50 (14%) cancers. All seven patients with HIC-1 expression were alive
without disease recurrence after 8 years follow-up and 5/7 had detectable p53
wild type mRNA expression. This suggests that retained HIC-1 expression may offer
a survival advantage. However the seven cancers had 17p13.3 loss of
heterozygosity (LOH; four patients), a feature previously associated with poor
prognosis, or were homozygous (three patients) suggesting there may be two genes 
at 17p13.3 involved in breast carcinogenesis. Using a demethylating drug
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DeoxyC), HIC-1 expression was restored in the MDAMB231
cells, also suggesting restoration of HIC-1 function by reversing HIC-1
hypermethylation may offer a therapeutic avenue in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2363999
PMID: 11747329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Sep 21;287(2):427-34.

Characterization of HRG22, a human homologue of the putative tumor suppressor
gene HIC1.

Deltour S(1), Pinte S, Guérardel C, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue
Calmette, 59017 Lille Cedex, France.

Database searches identified on chromosome 22q11.2, a region subject to
translocations, an homologue of the HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer) candidate
tumor suppressor gene located at 17p13.3. This gene was termed HRG22 for
HIC1-related gene on chromosome 22. We have characterized a new HRG22 upstream
coding exon and defined the complete coding sequence of the human and zebrafish
HRG22 genes. Alignment of the HRG22 and HIC1 proteins from various species
revealed high sequence homology in their N-terminal BTB/POZ and five C-terminal
C(2)H(2) zinc finger domains and highlighted a conserved GLDLSKK/R peptide in
their middle region. The full-length HRG22 and HIC1 proteins colocalize onto
nuclear dots and share several functional properties since their BTB/POZ domains 
heterodimerize and are autonomous transcriptional repression domain insensitive
to Trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. Thus, HIC1 and HRG22
define a subgroup of BTB/POZ domains unable to recruit repressing complexes
containing an HDAC activity.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11554746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Jul;7(7):1982-6.

Promoter hypermethylation of multiple genes in carcinoma of the uterine cervix.

Dong SM(1), Kim HS, Rha SH, Sidransky D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Head and Neck Cancer
Research Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205-2196, USA.

Promoter hypermethylation is an important pathway for the repression of gene
transcription in cancer. We investigated promoter hypermethylation of six genes, 
p16, APC, HIC-1, death-associated protein kinase (DAPK),
O(6)-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT), and E-cadherin, in uterine
cervical carcinoma from 53 patients including 31 cases of squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) and 22 cases of adenocarcinoma (AC). Aberrant methylation of at least one
of these genes was detected in 79% (42 of 53) of cases including 71% (22 of 31)
of SCC and 91% (20 of 22) of AC cases. No aberrant methylation was detected in
normal cervical tissue from 24 control hysterectomy specimens. There was no
correlation between promoter hypermethylation at any gene and the presence of
human papillomavirus-16 or -18 E7 DNA. In AC cases, promoter hypermethylation of 
the APC and HIC-1 genes was detected at a statistically significant higher
frequency than in the SCC cases (APC, 60% versus 13%, P < 0.001; HIC-1, 63%
versus 32%, P < 0.03). Conversely, promoter hypermethylation of p16 and DAPK was 
more common in SCC cases than in AC cases. Our results suggest that promoter
hypermethylation is a frequent epigenetic event in cervical carcinoma. The
pattern of gene promoter hypermethylation is distinctly different between AC and 
SCC. The absence of these epigenetic alterations in normal cervical tissue
suggests that they may also be valuable as cancer markers.

PMID: 11448914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2001 Feb;39(2):121-8.

Heterogeneity of DNA methylation status analyzed by bisulfite-PCR-SSCP and
correlation with clinico-pathological characteristics in colorectal cancer.

Maekawa M(1), Sugano K, Ushiama M, Fukayama N, Nomoto K, Kashiwabara H, Fujita S,
Kakizoe T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
mmaekawa@hama-med.ac.jp

Aberrant DNA methylation has been identified as an important mechanism for
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and mismatch repair genes during
carcinogenesis. We used bisulfite treatment and the PCR-single strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) (BiPS) technique to analyze methylation status
of the promoter regions of the hMLH1, p16, and HIC1 genes in several cancer cell 
lines and colorectal cancer tissues. The methylation of the hMLH1, p16 and HIC1
genes was observed in 2, 8, and 13 of 13 cancer cell lines, respectively. The
SSCP for p16 and HIC1 in each of the methylation-positive cell lines were
similar, indicating relative homogeneity of methylation status and complete
methylation in the cell lines. Methylation was observed in 8, 5, and 21 of 25
colorectal cancer tissues for the hMLH1, p16, and HIC1 genes, respectively. The
methylated bands revealed by BiPS analysis of the hMLH1 gene were homogeneous,
whereas those of the p16 and HIC1 genes were different in each case. The
methylation of the promoter region of the HIC1 gene in colorectal cancer was
observed most frequently and could serve as a sensitive marker for colorectal
cancer. Methylation status of the hMLH1 and p16 gene promoters was correlated
with microsatellite instability status, tumor location, and differentiation but
not with K-ras mutation or allelic loss of p53.

PMID: 11341745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 15;61(8):3410-8.

Epigenetic patterns in the progression of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Eads CA(1), Lord RV, Wickramasinghe K, Long TI, Kurumboor SK, Bernstein L, Peters
JH, DeMeester SR, DeMeester TR, Skinner KA, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA.

Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) arises after normal squamous mucosa undergoes
metaplasia to specialized columnar epithelium (intestinal metaplasia or Barrett's
esophagus), which can then ultimately progress to dysplasia and subsequent
malignancy. Epigenetic studies of this model have thus far been limited to the
DNA methylation analysis of a few genes. In this study, we analyzed a panel of 20
genes using a quantitative, high-throughput methylation assay, METHYLIGHT: We
used this broader approach to gain insight into concordant methylation behavior
between genes and to generate epigenomic fingerprints for the different
histological stages of EAC. Our study included a total of 104 tissue specimens
from 51 patients with different stages of Barrett's esophagus and/or associated
adenocarcinoma. We screened 84 of these samples with the full panel of 20 genes
and found distinct classes of methylation patterns in the different types of
tissue. The most informative genes were those with an intermediate frequency of
significant hypermethylation [ranging from 15% (CDKN2A) to 60% (MGMT) of the
samples]. This group could be further subdivided into three classes, according to
the absence (CDKN2A, ESR1, and MYOD1) or presence (CALCA, MGMT, and TIMP3) of
methylation in normal esophageal mucosa and stomach, or the infrequent
methylation of normal esophageal mucosa accompanied by methylation in all normal 
stomach samples (APC). The other genes were less informative, because the
frequency of hypermethylation was below 5% (ARF, CDH1, CDKN2B, GSTP1, MLH1,
PTGS2, and THBS1), completely absent (CTNNB1, RB1, TGFBR2, and TYMS1), or
ubiquitous (HIC1 and MTHFR), regardless of tissue type. Each class undergoes
unique epigenetic changes at different steps of disease progression of EAC,
suggesting a step-wise loss of multiple protective barriers against CpG island
hypermethylation. The aberrant hypermethylation occurs at many different loci in 
the same tissues, suggestive of an overall deregulation of methylation control in
EAC tumorigenesis. However, we did not find evidence for a distinct group of
tumors with a CpG island methylator phenotype. Finally, we found that normal and 
metaplastic tissues from patients with evidence of associated dysplasia or cancer
had a significantly higher incidence of hypermethylation than similar tissues
from patients with no further progression of their disease. The fact that the
samples from these two groups of patients were histologically indistinguishable, 
yet molecularly distinct, suggests that the occurrence of such hypermethylation
may provide a clinical tool to identify patients with premalignant Barrett's who 
are at risk for further progression.

PMID: 11309301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Anticancer Res. 2001 Jan-Feb;21(1B):535-40.

Reduced HIC-1 gene expression in non-small cell lung cancer and its clinical
significance.

Hayashi M(1), Tokuchi Y, Hashimoto T, Hayashi S, Nishida K, Ishikawa Y, Nakagawa 
K, Tsuchiya S, Okumura S, Tsuchiya E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Diagnosis and Therapy, Saitama Cancer Center Research
Institute, Saitama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: HIC-1 (hypermethylated in cancer-1) is a candidate tumor suppressor
gene, identified in a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity on chromosome
17p13.3, which is telomeric from TP53 and often deleted in surgically resected
lung cancers. To determine the significance of HIC-1 in lung cancer, we assessed 
its expression status and prognostic association in 47 adenocarcinomas and
squamous cell carcinomas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RNA was extracted from tumors and corresponding normal
tissues of surgically resected lungs, and the amount of HIC-1 mRNA was determined
by means of semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: HIC-1 expression in tumors was less than that in normal lung tissues in 
40 of 47 patients (85%), indicating frequent partial silencing. Median
tumor/normal lung tissue (T/L) ratios for HIC-1 expression were 0.51 and 0.75 for
adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas, respectively. No significant
difference of median T/L ratio was observed between the two histological types,
or among clinical stages of the patients. However, the reduced expression of
HIC-1 gene in the tumor had a direct link with the clinical outcome: lower T/L
ratios (< 0.5) were significantly associated with short survival (P = 0.034), an 
association also observed in cases restricted to stage I (P = 0.047).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that low HIC-1 expression is involved in
malignant progression of non-small cell lung cancer.

PMID: 11299800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Am J Pathol. 2001 Mar;158(3):1121-7.

Primary ovarian carcinomas display multiple methylator phenotypes involving known
tumor suppressor genes.

Strathdee G(1), Appleton K, Illand M, Millan DW, Sargent J, Paul J, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Campaign Department of Medical Oncology, CRC Beatson
Laboratories, Glasgow University, Glasgow G61 1BD, United Kingdom.

Mounting evidence suggests that aberrant methylation of CpG islands is a major
pathway leading to the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and the development
of cancer. Recent studies on colorectal and gastric cancer have defined a CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP), which involves the targeting of multiple
genes by promoter hypermethylation. To determine the role of methylation in
ovarian cancer, we have investigated the methylation status of 93 primary ovarian
tumors at ten loci using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP).
Seven of the loci (BRCA1, HIC1, MINT25, MINT31, MLH1, p73 and hTR) were found to 
be methylated in a significant proportion of the ovarian tumors, and methylation 
of at least one of these was found in the majority (71%) of samples. Although
concurrent methylation of multiple genes was commonly seen, this did not seem to 
be due to a single CIMP phenotype. Instead the results suggest the presence of at
least three groups of tumors, two CIMP-positive groups, each susceptible to
methylation of a different subset of genes, and a further group of tumors not
susceptible to CpG island methylation, at least at the loci studied.

PMCID: PMC1850352
PMID: 11238060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Genomics. 2000 Nov 15;70(1):26-33.

Physical and transcriptional mapping of the 17p13.3 region that is frequently
deleted in human cancer.

Hoff C(1), Seranski P, Mollenhauer J, Korn B, Detzel T, Reinhardt R, Ramser J,
Poustka A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Genomanalyse, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany.

Studies of chromosomal losses at 17p13 have suggested the presence of at least
two distinct regions for tumor suppressor genes, the TP53 region at 17p13.1 and a
more distal region at 17p13.3. Within the latter region, Hypermethylated in
Cancer 1 (HIC1) is located, a likely candidate for a tumor suppressor gene that
has also been suggested to play a role in the pathogenesis of Miller-Diecker
syndrome (MDS). However, single-gene isolation efforts have retrieved additional 
genes from 17p13.3 that could play a role in tumorigenesis. This indicates that
the full potential of this chromosomal region with respect to disease-related
genes has not yet been exhausted and that there may exist still unknown genes
that contribute to tumorigenesis or to the complex MDS phenotype. To provide a
basis for the systematic isolation and evaluation of such genes, we established a
physical map over 1.5 Mb of 17p13.3 and assigned 29 transcriptional units within 
this region.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 2;276(5):3078-89. Epub 2000 Nov 9.

Identification in the human candidate tumor suppressor gene HIC-1 of a new major 
alternative TATA-less promoter positively regulated by p53.

Guerardel C(1), Deltour S, Pinte S, Monte D, Begue A, Godwin AK, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue
Calmette, 59017 Lille, Cedex, France.

HIC-1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1), a BTB/POZ transcriptional repressor, was
isolated as a candidate tumor suppressor gene located at 17p13.3, a region
hypermethylated or subject to allelic loss in many human cancers and in the
Miller-Dieker syndrome. The human HIC-1 gene is composed of two exons, a short
5'-untranslated exon and a large second coding exon. Recently, two murine HIC-1
isoforms generated by alternative splicing have been described. To determine
whether such isoforms also exist in human, we have further analyzed the human
HIC-1 locus. Here, we describe and extensively characterize a novel alternative
noncoding upstream exon, exon 1b, associated with a major GC-rich promoter. We
demonstrate using functional assays that the murine exon 1b previously described 
as coding from computer analyses of genomic sequences is in fact a noncoding exon
highly homologous to its human counterpart. In addition, we report that the human
untranslated exon is presumably a coding exon, renamed exon 1a, both in mice and 
humans. Both types of transcripts are detected in various normal human tissues
with a predominance for exon 1b containing transcripts and are up-regulated by
TP53, confirming that HIC-1 is a TP53 target gene. Thus, HIC-1 function in the
cell is controlled by a complex interplay of transcriptional and translational
regulation, which could be differently affected in many human cancers.

PMID: 11073960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Feb 12;9(3):413-9.

Mice deficient in the candidate tumor suppressor gene Hic1 exhibit developmental 
defects of structures affected in the Miller-Dieker syndrome.

Carter MG(1), Johns MA, Zeng X, Zhou L, Zink MC, Mankowski JL, Donovan DM, Baylin
SB.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

HIC1 is a candidate tumor suppressor gene which is frequently hypermethylated in 
human tumors, and its location within the Miller-Dieker syndrome's critical
deletion region at chromosome 17p13.3 makes it a candidate gene for involvement
in this gene deletion syndrome. To study the function of murine Hic1 in
development, we have created Hic1 -deficient mice. These animals die perinatally 
and exhibit varying combinations of gross developmental defects throughout the
second half of development, including acrania, exencephaly, cleft palate, limb
abnormalities and omphalocele. These findings demonstrate a role for Hic1 in the 
development of structures affected in the Miller-Dieker syndrome, and provide
functional evidence to strengthen its candidacy as a gene involved in this
disorder.

PMID: 10655551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Dec 21;96(26):14831-6.

Recruitment of SMRT/N-CoR-mSin3A-HDAC-repressing complexes is not a general
mechanism for BTB/POZ transcriptional repressors: the case of HIC-1 and
gammaFBP-B.

Deltour S(1), Guerardel C, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 8526,
Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue Calmette, 59017
Lille Cedex, France.

Hypermethylated in cancer (HIC-1), a new candidate tumor suppressor gene located 
in 17p13.3, encodes a protein with five C(2)H(2) zinc fingers and an N-terminal
broad complex, tramtrack, and bric à brac/poxviruses and zinc-finger (BTB/POZ)
domain found in actin binding proteins or transcriptional regulators involved in 
chromatin modeling. In the human B cell lymphoma (BCL-6) and promyelocityc
leukemia (PLZF) oncoproteins, this domain mediates transcriptional repression
through its ability to recruit a silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid
hormone receptor (SMRT)/nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR)-mSin3A-histone
deacetylase (HDAC) complex, a mechanism shared with numerous transcription
factors. HIC-1 appears unique because it contains a 13-aa insertion acquired late
in evolution, because it is not found in its avian homologue, gammaF1-binding
protein isoform B (gammaFBP-B), a transcriptional repressor of the
gammaF-crystallin gene. This insertion, located in a conserved region involved in
the dimerization and scaffolding of the BTB/POZ domain, mainly affects slightly
the ability of the HIC-1 and gammaFBP-B BTB/POZ domains to homo- and
heterodimerize in vivo, as shown by mammalian two-hybrid experiments. Both the
HIC-1 and gammaFBP-B BTB/POZ domains behave as autonomous transcriptional
repression domains. However, in striking contrast with BCL-6 and PLZF, both HIC-1
and gammaFBP-B similarly fail to interact with members of the HDAC complexes
(SMRT/N-CoR, mSin3A or HDAC-1) in vivo and in vitro. In addition, a general and
specific inhibitor of HDACs, trichostatin A, did not alleviate the HIC-1- and
gammaFBP-B-mediated transcriptional repression, as previously shown for BCL-6.
Taken together, our studies show that the recruitment onto target promoters of an
HDAC complex is not a general property of transcriptional repressors containing a
conserved BTB/POZ domain.

PMCID: PMC24733
PMID: 10611298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cancer Res. 1999 Aug 1;59(15):3730-40.

Concurrent DNA hypermethylation of multiple genes in acute myeloid leukemia.

Melki JR(1), Vincent PC, Clark SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Kanematsu Laboratories, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, New South
Wales, Australia.

Hypermethylation in cancer often occurs in CpG islands that span the promoter
regions of tumor suppressor genes. However, it is not clear if hypermethylation
is limited to single target genes or if multiple genes are simultaneously
methylated. To understand the extent of aberrant de novo methylation, we have
analyzed the methylation pattern of a number of tumor-related genes in leukemia
from the same cohort of patients. We used bisulfite genomic sequencing to
characterize the methylation pattern of the CpG islands associated with the
calcitonin, estrogen receptor, E-cadherin, p15, p16, Rb, GST-Pi, and HIC1 genes
in the bone marrow from 9 normal and 20 patients with acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML). All of the normal control samples were essentially unmethylated for each
of the eight tumor-related genes studied. In contrast, 19 of 20 (95%) of the AML 
patients had an abnormal methylation pattern in at least one gene, and 15 of 20
(75%) had abnormal methylation patterns in two or more of the target genes. We
conclude that there is a general deregulation of CpG island methylation in
leukemia and that hypermethylation is not limited to single genes, but a number
of genes are methylated concurrently. Moreover, the subset of genes that are
commonly methylated in leukemia appear to be cancer type specific.

PMID: 10446989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. FEBS Lett. 1999 May 28;451(3):253-6.

Evolutionary divergence in the broad complex, tramtrack and bric à
brac/poxviruses and zinc finger domain from the candidate tumor suppressor gene
hypermethylated in cancer.

Guerardel C(1), Deltour S, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

Hypermethylated in cancer, a new candidate tumor suppressor gene located in
17p13.3, encodes a protein with five Krüppel-like C2H2 zinc finger motifs and a
N-terminal protein/protein interaction domain called broad complex, tramtrack and
bric à brac/poxviruses and zinc finger domain. Hypermethylated in cancer appears 
unique in the broad complex, tramtrack and bric à brac/poxviruses and zinc finger
family since it contains a 13 amino acid insertion located in a loop between the 
conserved beta-strand beta5 and helix alpha5 which are involved in dimerization
and scaffolding of the broad complex, tramtrack and bric à brac/poxviruses and
zinc finger domain. Cloning and sequencing of a murine hypermethylated in cancer 
gene suggests that this insertion has been acquired late in the evolution since
it is present in two mammalian hypermethylated in cancer genes but absent in its 
zebrafish and avian counterparts. This is a unique example of a high divergence
of the same broad complex, tramtrack and bric à brac/poxviruses and zinc finger
domain in different species.

PMID: 10371200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Leukemia. 1999 Jun;13(6):877-83.

Cancer-specific region of hypermethylation identified within the HIC1 putative
tumour suppressor gene in acute myeloid leukaemia.

Melki JR(1), Vincent PC, Clark SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Kanematsu Laboratories, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, NSW
Australia.

Abnormal DNA methylation has been found to be a common feature in cancer cells,
although the mechanism of this alteration remains poorly understood. HIC1 is a
putative tumour suppressor gene on chromosome 17p13.3 and is hypermethylated in a
number of cancers including leukaemia. In this study, using bisulphite genomic
sequencing, we have identified a 'boundary' sequence within the HIC1 CpG island
that shows a marked junction between methylated and unmethylated DNA in normal
haematopoietic cells. Surprisingly, this boundary of differential methylation
lies exactly between the intron 2 and exon 3 junction. In contrast to normal
haematopoietic cells, hypermethylation extends past this boundary at a high
frequency (83%) in newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukaemias (AML). Identification
of the hypermethylated boundary sequence not only provides the first step in
understanding the mechanisms that normally protect CpG islands from de novo
methylation but also may prove to be a useful cancer-specific marker.

PMID: 10360376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Apr;8(4):697-710.

Isolation and embryonic expression of the novel mouse gene Hic1, the homologue of
HIC1, a candidate gene for the Miller-Dieker syndrome.

Grimm C(1), Spörle R, Schmid TE, Adler ID, Adamski J, Schughart K, Graw J.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Mammalian Genetics, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

The human gene HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer) maps to chromosome 17p13.3 and is
deleted in the contiguous gene disorder Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS) [Makos-Wales
et al. (1995) Nature Med., 1, 570-577; Chong et al. (1996) Genome Res., 6,
735-741]. We isolated the murine homologue Hic1, encoding a zinc-finger protein
with a poxvirus and zinc-finger (POZ) domain and mapped it to mouse chromosome 11
in a region exhibiting conserved synteny to human chromosome 17. Comparison of
genomic and cDNA sequences predicts two exons for the murine Hic1. The second
exon exhibits 88% identity to the human HIC1 on DNA level. During embryonic
development, Hic1 is expressed in mesenchymes of the sclerotomes, lateral body
wall, limb and cranio-facial regions embedding the outgrowing peripheral nerves
during their differentiation. During fetal development, Hic1 additionally is
expressed in mesenchymes apposed to precartilaginous condensations, at many
interfaces to budding epithelia of inner organs, and weakly in muscles. We
observed activation of Hic1 expression in the embryonic anlagen of many tissues
displaying anomalies in MDS patients. Besides lissencephaly, MDS patients exhibit
facial dysmorphism and frequently additional birth defects, e.g. anomalies of the
heart, kidney, gastrointestinal tract and the limbs (OMIM 247200). Thus, HIC1
activity may correlate with the defective development of the nose, jaws,
extremities, gastrointestinal tract and kidney in MDS patients.

PMID: 10072440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Hepatology. 1999 Mar;29(3):703-9.

DNA hypermethylation at the D17S5 locus and reduced HIC-1 mRNA expression are
associated with hepatocarcinogenesis.

Kanai Y(1), Hui AM, Sun L, Ushijima S, Sakamoto M, Tsuda H, Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

To examine the significance of aberrant DNA methylation in hepatocarcinogenesis, 
the DNA methylation status at the D17S5 locus and mRNA expression of a candidate 
tumor suppressor gene, HIC-1 (hypermethylated-in-cancer), which was identified at
the D17S5 locus, in primary hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and their
corresponding noncancerous liver tissues were assessed. DNA hypermethylation at
the D17S5 locus was detected in 44% of the noncancerous liver tissues showing
chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis, which are widely considered to be precancerous
conditions, but was not observed in noncancerous liver tissues showing no
remarkable histological findings. The incidence of DNA hypermethylation at this
locus was significantly higher in HCCs (90%) than noncancerous liver tissues (P
<.001). Loss of heterozygosity at the D17S5 locus, which was preceded by DNA
hypermethylation at the same locus, was detected in 54% of HCCs. The HIC-1 mRNA
expression level of noncancerous liver tissues showing chronic hepatitis or
cirrhosis was significantly lower than that of noncancerous liver tissues showing
no remarkable histological findings (P <.01), and that of HCCs was even lower
than that of noncancerous liver tissues (P <.05). Poorly differentiated HCCs
showed lower expression levels than well- to moderately differentiated HCCs.
Mutation of the p53 gene may be involved in HIC-1 inactivation. Moreover,
wild-type p53 did not overcome DNA hypermethylation at the D17S5 locus to
activate HIC-1 in HCCs. These data suggest that aberrant DNA methylation at this 
locus and reduced HIC-1 mRNA expression participate in hepatocarcinogenesis
during both early developmental stages and malignant progression of HCCs.

PMID: 10051471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Nov 26;1443(1-2):230-2.

The carboxy-terminal end of the candidate tumor suppressor gene HIC-1 is
phylogenetically conserved.

Deltour S(1), Guerardel C, Stehelin D, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue
Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex, France.

HIC-1 (hypermethylated in cancer), a new candidate tumor suppressor gene located 
in 17p13.3, encodes a protein with five Krüppel-like C2H2 zinc finger motifs and 
a N-terminal protein-protein interaction domain called BTB/POZ. These two domains
appeared as the only conserved regions found between human HIC-1 and its avian
homologue, gammaFBP-B, isolated as a transcriptional repressor of the
gammaF-Crystallin gene. We have recloned the HIC-1 gene and found four nucleotide
differences within the 3' part of its published coding sequence. The corrected
HIC-1 C-terminal end exhibits now significant homology (70%) to the chicken
gammaFBP-B C-terminal end and appears thus as a third phylogenetically conserved 
domain that may serve an important, yet unknown function in HIC-1.

PMID: 9838134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Oncogene. 1998 Jun 18;16(24):3197-202.

Concordant methylation of the ER and N33 genes in glioblastoma multiforme.

Li Q(1), Jedlicka A, Ahuja N, Gibbons MC, Baylin SB, Burger PC, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)The Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Methylation of promoter-associated CpG islands appears to be a potential way by
which tumor suppressor genes are inactivated in cancer. Using Southern blot
analysis, we have studied the methylation of several genes in glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM), trying to determine their contribution to tumorigenesis. Genes 
studied included the estrogen receptor (ER), N33, the candidate tumor-suppressors
P15, P16 and HIC1 and a control gene, c-abl. Hypermethylation of N33, ER, HIC1,
P16, P15 and c-abl were found in 61%, 59%, 60%, 5%, 2% and 0% of GBM
respectively. HIC1 methylation was detected in normal brain as well, but appeared
to be more extensive in tumors. ER and N33 methylation were significantly more
frequent in tumors from individuals over the age of 40 (70% and 88% vs 36% and
14%). In addition, there was a strong association between ER and N33 methylation,
which were concordant in 81% of the cases (P<0.01). ER and N33 methylation in GBM
may therefore appear as a result of shared etiologic factors, which may relate in
part to aging cell populations in the brain.

PMID: 9671399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Oncogene. 1998 Apr 23;16(16):2159-64.

Methylation of the HIC-1 candidate tumor suppressor gene in human breast cancer.

Fujii H(1), Biel MA, Zhou W, Weitzman SA, Baylin SB, Gabrielson E.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

HIC-1 (hypermethylated in cancer) is a candidate tumor suppressor gene which is
located at 17p13.3, a region which frequently undergoes allelic loss in breast
and other human cancers. HIC-1 is proposed to be commonly inactivated in human
cancers by hypermethylation of a normally unmethylated dense CpG island which
encompasses the entire gene. To study whether HIC-1 inactivation may be important
to the development of breast cancer, we first measured methylation of the HIC-1
gene in normal breast ductal tissues from microdissected frozen breast tissues
and from epithelial cells purified from mammoplasty specimens. Surprisingly, in
all normal breast ductal tissues we found approximately equal amounts of densely 
methylated HIC-1 and completely unmethylated HIC-1. This is in contrast to most
normal tissues, in which all copies of HIC-1 are completely unmethylated. We then
evaluated 39 primary breast cancer tissues and found virtually complete
methylation of the HIC-1 gene in 26 (67%) of the cases. We also found loss of
heterozygosity at the telomeric portion of chromosomal arm 17p in 22 of the 26
cases with strongly methylated HIC-1, suggesting that loss of an unmethylated
HIC-1 allele may contribute to the inactivation of HIC-1 in cells with a
pre-existing methylated allele. Finally, by RNase protection analysis, HIC-1 was 
found to be expressed in microdissected normal breast ductal tissues and
unmethylated tumors but not in tumors with hypermethylation of the HIC-1 gene.
These results indicate that hypermethylation of HIC-1 and associated loss of
HIC-1 expression is common in primary breast cancer. Furthermore, the HIC-1 gene 
is densely methylated in approximately one-half of the alleles in normal breast
epithelium, which may predispose this tissue to inactivation of this gene by loss
of heterozygosity.

PMID: 9572497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Prostate. 1997 Dec 1;33(4):271-80.

Localization of prostate cancer metastasis-suppressor activity on human
chromosome 17.

Chekmareva MA(1), Hollowell CM, Smith RC, Davis EM, LeBeau MM, Rinker-Schaeffer
CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in American
men. Currently, it is difficult to accurately predict the clinical course of
histologically localized prostatic cancer in the individual patient.
Identification of markers for metastatic potential of prostate cancer may improve
the diagnosis and treatment of this disease. We have previously demonstrated that
human chromosome 17 (17pter-q23) suppresses the metastatic ability of AT6.1 rat
prostatic cancer cells. In this study we report on the further localization of
the metastasis suppressor activity encoded by human chromosome 17.
METHODS: A series of AT6.1-17 microcell hybrids was constructed using
microcell-mediated chromosomal transfer of human chromosome 17 into highly
metastatic AT6.1 cells. Hybrids which had spontaneously deleted regions of
chromosome 17 were analyzed by PCR for the presence of 32 sequence-tagged sites
(STS) markers as well as the prostate cancer tumor-suppressor loci reported on
17q. In addition, we examined a number of candidate genes and markers that
previously have been mapped to chromosome 17. The in vivo metastatic potential of
these AT6.1-17 deletion hybrids was determined.
RESULTS: We have localized metastasis-suppressor activity to a approximately
70-centiMorgan (cM) portion of chromosome 17, consisting of three distinct
regions of 30 cM (D17S952-->D17S805), 6 cM (D17S930-->D17S797), and 34 cM
(D17S944-->D17S784). Three of the four markers on 17p13, including HIC1 and TP53,
and 12 of the 13 markers in 17q21-23, including BRCA1 (D17S855) and NM23 (NME1), 
were not retained in the conserved approximately 70-cM metastasis-suppressor
region.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support a role for a novel metastasis-suppressor
gene(s) or a novel metastasis-suppressor function on chromosome 17. Complementary
candidate gene and positional cloning approaches are being used to identify the
gene(s) within the approximately 70-cM conserved region responsible for
metastasis suppression.

PMID: 9397200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cancer Res. 1997 May 1;57(9):1678-81.

HIC1 hypermethylation is a late event in hematopoietic neoplasms.

Issa JP(1), Zehnbauer BA, Kaufmann SH, Biel MA, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

HIC1, a candidate tumor suppressor gene on 17p13.3, is hypermethylated and
silenced in a large number of solid tumors. To determine its potential role in
leukemias, we studied its methylation status in normal and neoplastic
hematopoietic cells. We found HIC1 to be unmethylated in peripheral blood cells, 
bone marrow cells, and CD34+ cells. HIC1 was rarely methylated in newly diagnosed
acute myelogenous leukemias (10%) but was relatively frequently methylated in
newly diagnosed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (25%), acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL;
53%), and chronic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia (50%). By contrast, HIC1 was
hypermethylated in 100% of recurrent ALL and 100% of blast crisis chronic
myelogenous leukemia. In two patients with ALL for whom paired diagnosis/relapse 
samples were available, HIC1 was unmethylated at diagnosis but was highly
methylated at relapse after a chemotherapy-induced complete remission. HIC1
methylation, therefore, seems to be a progression event in hematopoietic
neoplasms.

PMID: 9135007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Leukemia. 1997 Mar;11 Suppl 1:S7-11.

DNA methylation changes in hematologic malignancies: biologic and clinical
implications.

Issa JP(1), Baylin SB, Herman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21231, USA.

DNA methylation changes are among the most common detectable abnormalities in
human neoplasia. Hypermethylation within the promoters of selected genes appears 
to be especially common in all types of human hematopoietic neoplasms, and is
usually associated with inactivation of the involved gene(s). Such
hypermethylation-associated silencing of gene expression has been shown for
several genes regulating the growth and differentiation of hematopoietic cells,
including the estrogen receptor (ER) gene, P15, P16 and others. Hypermethylation 
within the promoters of some genes appear to be an early event in the
pathogenesis of neoplasia (ER, P15), while other genes seem to become methylated 
during the progression of leukemias (HIC1, c-abl). The high prevalence of
promoter methylation suggests that this molecular abnormality can be used to
monitor disease activity during therapy. In addition, new technology allows the
sensitive identification of gene hypermethylation in a background of normal
cells, suggesting possible new strategies for the detection of minimal residual
disease. Finally, reactivation of tumor-suppressor gene expression through
pharmacologic inhibition of DNA methyltransferase and resultant DNA demethylation
appears to be a promising new avenue of therapy in acute leukemia.

PMID: 9130685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nat Med. 1995 Jun;1(6):570-7.

p53 activates expression of HIC-1, a new candidate tumour suppressor gene on
17p13.3.

Wales MM(1), Biel MA, el Deiry W, Nelkin BD, Issa JP, Cavenee WK, Kuerbitz SJ,
Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

For several human tumour types, allelic loss data suggest that one or more tumour
suppressor genes reside telomeric to the p53 gene at chromosome 17p13.1. In the
present study we have used a new strategy, involving molecular analysis of a DNA 
site hypermethylated in tumour DNA, to identify a candidate gene in this region
(17p13.3). Our approach has led to identification of HIC-1 (hypermethylated in
cancer), a new zinc-finger transcription factor gene which is ubiquitously
expressed in normal tissues, but underexpressed in different tumour cells where
it is hypermethylated. Multiple characteristics of this gene, including the
presence of a p53 binding site in the 5' flanking region, activation of the gene 
by expression of a wild-type p53 gene and suppression of G418 selectability of
cultured brain, breast and colon cancer cells following insertion of the gene,
make HIC-1 gene a strong candidate for a tumour suppressor gene in region
17p13.3.

PMID: 7585125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


