
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Aug 18;43(14):6969-82. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv646. Epub 2015
Jun 27.

Redefining the transcriptional regulatory dynamics of classically and
alternatively activated macrophages by deepCAGE transcriptomics.

Roy S(1), Schmeier S(2), Arner E(1), Alam T(3), Parihar SP(4), Ozturk M(4),
Tamgue O(4), Kawaji H(5), de Hoon MJ(1), Itoh M(5), Lassmann T(1), Carninci P(1),
Hayashizaki Y(6), Forrest AR(1), Bajic VB(3), Guler R(4); Fantom Consortium(7),
Brombacher F(8), Suzuki H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science
Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (2)Massey
University, Institute of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland, New
Zealand. (3)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC), Computer, Electrical and
Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division (CEMSE), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(4)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape
Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of Cape Town, Health Science
Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine (IDM), Division 
of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa. (5)Division of Genomic Technologies,
RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis
Innovation Program (PMI), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. (6)Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan Riken Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program (PMI),
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (7)Division of Genomic 
Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Massey University, Institute of
Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland, New Zealand King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology (KAUST), Computational Bioscience Research Center
(CBRC), Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division
(CEMSE), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of
Cape Town, Health Science Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular
Medicine (IDM), Division of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa Riken Preventive 
Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program (PMI), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (8)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of
Cape Town, Health Science Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular
Medicine (IDM), Division of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa
harukazu@gsc.riken.jp. (9)Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life
Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan
Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan harukazu@gsc.riken.jp.

Classically or alternatively activated macrophages (M1 and M2, respectively) play
distinct and important roles for microbiocidal activity, regulation of
inflammation and tissue homeostasis. Despite this, their transcriptional
regulatory dynamics are poorly understood. Using promoter-level expression
profiling by non-biased deepCAGE we have studied the transcriptional dynamics of 
classically and alternatively activated macrophages. Transcription factor (TF)
binding motif activity analysis revealed four motifs, NFKB1_REL_RELA, IRF1,2,
IRF7 and TBP that are commonly activated but have distinct activity dynamics in
M1 and M2 activation. We observe matching changes in the expression profiles of
the corresponding TFs and show that only a restricted set of TFs change
expression. There is an overall drastic and transient up-regulation in M1 and a
weaker and more sustainable up-regulation in M2. Novel TFs, such as Thap6, Maff, 
(M1) and Hivep1, Nfil3, Prdm1, (M2) among others, were suggested to be involved
in the activation processes. Additionally, 52 (M1) and 67 (M2) novel
differentially expressed genes and, for the first time, several differentially
expressed long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcriptome markers were identified. In 
conclusion, the finding of novel motifs, TFs and protein-coding and lncRNA genes 
is an important step forward to fully understand the transcriptional machinery of
macrophage activation.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4538831
PMID: 26117544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):713-29. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02570-14. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

High-throughput RNA sequencing-based virome analysis of 50 lymphoma cell lines
from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia project.

Cao S(1), Strong MJ(1), Wang X(1), Moss WN(2), Concha M(1), Lin Z(1), O'Grady
T(1), Baddoo M(1), Fewell C(1), Renne R(3), Flemington EK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tulane Health Sciences Center and Tulane Cancer Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics Microbiology, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA. (4)Tulane Health Sciences Center and Tulane
Cancer Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA eflemin@tulane.edu.

Using high-throughput RNA sequencing data from 50 common lymphoma cell culture
models from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia project, we performed an unbiased
global interrogation for the presence of a panel of 740 viruses and strains known
to infect human and other mammalian cells. This led to the findings of previously
identified infections by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus
(KSHV), and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1). In addition, we also
found a previously unreported infection of one cell line (DEL) with a murine
leukemia virus. High expression of murine leukemia virus (MuLV) transcripts was
observed in DEL cells, and we identified four transcriptionally active
integration sites, one being in the TNFRSF6B gene. We also found low levels of
MuLV reads in a number of other cell lines and provided evidence suggesting
cross-contamination during sequencing. Analysis of HTLV-1 integrations in two
cell lines, HuT 102 and MJ, identified 14 and 66 transcriptionally active
integration sites with potentially activating integrations in immune regulatory
genes, including interleukin-15 (IL-15), IL-6ST, STAT5B, HIVEP1, and IL-9R.
Although KSHV and EBV do not typically integrate into the genome, we investigated
a previously identified integration of EBV into the BACH2 locus in Raji cells.
This analysis identified a BACH2 disruption mechanism involving splice donor
sequestration. Through viral gene expression analysis, we detected expression of 
stable intronic RNAs from the EBV BamHI W repeats that may be part of long
transcripts spanning the repeat region. We also observed transcripts at the EBV
vIL-10 locus exclusively in the Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line, Hs 611.T, the
expression of which were uncoupled from other lytic genes. Assessment of the KSHV
viral transcriptome in BCP-1 cells showed expression of the viral immune
regulators, K2/vIL-6, K4/vIL-8-like vCCL1, and K5/E2-ubiquitin ligase 1 that was 
significantly higher than expression of the latency-associated nuclear antigen.
Together, this investigation sheds light into the virus composition across these 
lymphoma model systems and provides insights into common viral mechanistic
principles.IMPORTANCE: Viruses cause cancer in humans. In lymphomas the
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) and human
T-lymphotropic virus type 1 are major contributors to oncogenesis. We assessed
virus-host interactions using a high throughput sequencing method that
facilitates the discovery of new virus-host associations and the investigation
into how the viruses alter their host environment. We found a previously unknown 
murine leukemia virus infection in one cell line. We identified cellular genes,
including cytokine regulators, that are disrupted by virus integration, and we
determined mechanisms through which virus integration causes deregulation of
cellular gene expression. Investigation into the KSHV transcriptome in the BCP-1 
cell line revealed high-level expression of immune signaling genes. EBV
transcriptome analysis showed expression of vIL-10 transcripts in a Hodgkin's
lymphoma that was uncoupled from lytic genes. These findings illustrate unique
mechanisms of viral gene regulation and to the importance of virus-mediated host 
immune signaling in lymphomas.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4301145
PMID: 25355872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 9. pii: jbc.M113.516062. [Epub ahead of print]

WITHDRAWN: Modulation of TLR3, TLR4 and TLR7 mediated IFN-ß, Rantes and TNFa
production by HIVEP1.

Butt AQ(1), Miggin SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)NUIM, Ireland; (2)Institute of Immunology sinead.miggin@nuim.ie.

The manuscript was withdrawn by the author.

Copyright © 2014, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 24719322  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 4;289(14):9865-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.520585. Epub 2014 
Feb 21.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 enhancer-binding protein 3 is essential for
the expression of asparagine-linked glycosylation 2 in the regulation of
osteoblast and chondrocyte differentiation.

Imamura K(1), Maeda S, Kawamura I, Matsuyama K, Shinohara N, Yahiro Y, Nagano S, 
Setoguchi T, Yokouchi M, Ishidou Y, Komiya S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Medical Joint Materials and.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 enhancer-binding protein 3 (Hivep3)
suppresses osteoblast differentiation by inducing proteasomal degradation of the 
osteogenesis master regulator Runx2. In this study, we tested the possibility of 
cooperation of Hivep1, Hivep2, and Hivep3 in osteoblast and/or chondrocyte
differentiation. Microarray analyses with ST-2 bone stroma cells demonstrated
that expression of any known osteochondrogenesis-related genes was not commonly
affected by the three Hivep siRNAs. Only Hivep3 siRNA promoted osteoblast
differentiation in ST-2 cells, whereas all three siRNAs cooperatively suppressed 
differentiation in ATDC5 chondrocytes. We further used microarray analysis to
identify genes commonly down-regulated in both MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and ST-2
cells upon knockdown of Hivep3 and identified asparagine-linked glycosylation 2
(Alg2), which encodes a mannosyltransferase residing on the endoplasmic
reticulum. The Hivep3 siRNA-mediated promotion of osteoblast differentiation was 
negated by forced Alg2 expression. Alg2 suppressed osteoblast differentiation and
bone formation in cultured calvarial bone. Alg2 was immunoprecipitated with
Runx2, whereas the combined transfection of Runx2 and Alg2 interfered with Runx2 
nuclear localization, which resulted in suppression of Runx2 activity.
Chondrocyte differentiation was promoted by Hivep3 overexpression, in concert
with increased expression of Creb3l2, whose gene product is the endoplasmic
reticulum stress transducer crucial for chondrogenesis. Alg2 silencing suppressed
Creb3l2 expression and chondrogenesis of ATDC5 cells, whereas infection of
Alg2-expressing virus promoted chondrocyte maturation in cultured cartilage
rudiments. Thus, Alg2, as a downstream mediator of Hivep3, suppresses
osteogenesis, whereas it promotes chondrogenesis. To our knowledge, this study is
the first to link a mannosyltransferase gene to osteochondrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3975031
PMID: 24563464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Brain Behav Immun. 2014 Jul;39:130-41. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.10.023. Epub 2013 
Oct 26.

Exhaustive exercise modifies different gene expression profiles and pathways in
LPS-stimulated and un-stimulated whole blood cultures.

Abbasi A(1), Hauth M(2), Walter M(3), Hudemann J(4), Wank V(5), Niess AM(4),
Northoff H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Exercise Immunology & Genetics, Institute of Clinical and
Experimental Transfusion Medicine (IKET), University Hospital Tuebingen,
Tuebingen, Germany; Institute of Sports Science, Eberhard Karls University,
Tuebingen, Germany. Electronic address: ashgar.abbasi@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Division of Exercise Immunology & Genetics, Institute of Clinical and
Experimental Transfusion Medicine (IKET), University Hospital Tuebingen,
Tuebingen, Germany. (3)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (4)Department of Sports Medicine, University
Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (5)Institute of Sports Science, Eberhard 
Karls University, Tuebingen, Germany. (6)Division of Exercise Immunology &
Genetics, Institute of Clinical and Experimental Transfusion Medicine (IKET),
University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. Electronic address:
hinnak.northoff@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

Exhaustive exercise can interfere with immunity, causing transient
immunosuppression and infections/inflammation in athletes. We used microarray
technology to analyze the gene expression profiles of whole blood in short time
(1h) LPS-stimulated and un-stimulated cultures drawn before, 30min after, 3h
after and 24h after a half-marathon run. Four male and 4 female athletes
participated. Exercise induced differential expression of genes known to be
involved in innate immunity/inflammatory response, metabolic response, DNA
methylation, apoptosis and regulation of brain function. Several genes with
prominent anti-inflammatory function were up-regulated in un-stimulated cultures,
including ARG-1, SOCS3, DUSP-1, ORMs, IRAK3, and GJB6. Some of these genes were
also strongly up-regulated in LPS-stimulated cultures (ARG-1, ORM2, and GJB6).
Some genes were strongly up-regulated through exercise in LPS-stimulated
cultures, but not in un-stimulated cultures (TNIP3, PLAU, and HIVEP1). There was 
also a row of genes, which were strongly down-regulated by exercise in
LPS-stimulated cultures, notably IFN-ß1 and CXCL10. Exercise also significantly
changed the expression of genes (OLIG2, TMEM106B) which are known to be related
to brain function and expression of which has never been documented in peripheral
blood. In summary, exhaustive exercise, in addition to modifying gene expression 
in un-stimulated cells, could also interfere with the early gene expression
response to endotoxin. There was an anti-inflammatory bias of gene regulation by 
exercise, including genes involved in the negative regulation of TLRs signalling.
The results of the present study demonstrate that some potentially important
effects of exercise can only be detected in relation to pathogen stimulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24513876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025581. Epub 2011 Sep 27.

Genetics of venous thrombosis: insights from a new genome wide association study.

Germain M(1), Saut N, Greliche N, Dina C, Lambert JC, Perret C, Cohen W,
Oudot-Mellakh T, Antoni G, Alessi MC, Zelenika D, Cambien F, Tiret L, Bertrand M,
Dupuy AM, Letenneur L, Lathrop M, Emmerich J, Amouyel P, Trégouët DA, Morange PE.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR_S 937; ICAN Institute, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6,
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Venous Thrombosis (VT) is a common multifactorial disease associated 
with a major public health burden. Genetics factors are known to contribute to
the susceptibility of the disease but how many genes are involved and their
contribution to VT risk still remain obscure. We aimed to identify genetic
variants associated with VT risk.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We conducted a genome-wide association study
(GWAS) based on 551,141 SNPs genotyped in 1,542 cases and 1,110 controls. Twelve 
SNPs reached the genome-wide significance level of 2.0×10(-8) and encompassed
four known VT-associated loci, ABO, F5, F11 and FGG. By means of haplotype
analyses, we also provided novel arguments in favor of a role of HIVEP1, PROCR
and STAB2, three loci recently hypothesized to participate in the susceptibility 
to VT. However, no novel VT-associated loci came out of our GWAS. Using a
recently proposed statistical methodology, we also showed that common variants
could explain about 35% of the genetic variance underlying VT susceptibility
among which 3% could be attributable to the main identified VT loci. This
analysis additionally suggested that the common variants left to be identified
are not uniformly distributed across the genome and that chromosome 20, itself,
could contribute to ~7% of the total genetic variance.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study might also provide a valuable source of
information to expand our understanding of biological mechanisms regulating
quantitative biomarkers for VT.

PMCID: PMC3181335
PMID: 21980494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Apr 9;86(4):592-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.011. Epub
2010 Mar 11.

A follow-up study of a genome-wide association scan identifies a susceptibility
locus for venous thrombosis on chromosome 6p24.1.

Morange PE(1), Bezemer I, Saut N, Bare L, Burgos G, Brocheton J, Durand H,
Biron-Andreani C, Schved JF, Pernod G, Galan P, Drouet L, Zelenika D, Germain M, 
Nicaud V, Heath S, Ninio E, Delluc A, Münzel T, Zeller T, Brand-Herrmann SM,
Alessi MC, Tiret L, Lathrop M, Cambien F, Blankenberg S, Emmerich J, Trégouët DA,
Rosendaal FR.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR_S 626, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, F-13385 France.
pierre.morange@ap-hm.fr

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Apr 9;86(4):655.

To identify genetic susceptibility factors conferring increased risk of venous
thrombosis (VT), we conducted a multistage study, following results of a
previously published GWAS that failed to detect loci for developing VT. Using a
collection of 5862 cases with VT and 7112 healthy controls, we identified the
HIVEP1 locus on chromosome 6p24.1 as a susceptibility locus for VT. Indeed, the
HIVEP1 rs169713C allele was associated with an increased risk for VT, with an
odds ratio of 1.20 (95% confidence interval 1.13-1.27, p = 2.86 x 10(-9)). HIVEP1
codes for a protein that participates in the transcriptional regulation of
inflammatory target genes by binding specific DNA sequences in their promoter and
enhancer regions. The current results provide the identification of a locus
involved in VT susceptibility that lies outside the traditional
coagulation/fibrinolysis pathway.

(c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2850428
PMID: 20226436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Nov 1;315(18):3086-98. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.08.017. Epub 
2009 Sep 2.

Cirhin up-regulates a canonical NF-kappaB element through strong interaction with
Cirip/HIVEP1.

Yu B(1), Mitchell GA, Richter A.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Médicale, Centre de Recherche CHU Sainte-Justine, Département de
Pédiatrie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.

North American Indian childhood cirrhosis (NAIC/CIRH1A) is a severe autosomal
recessive intrahepatic cholestasis. All NAIC patients have a homozygous mutation 
in CIRH1A that changes conserved Arg565 to Trp (R565W) in Cirhin, a nucleolar
protein of unknown function. Subcellular localization is unaffected by the
mutation. Yeast two-hybrid screening identified Cirip (Cirhin interaction
protein) and found that interaction between Cirip and R565W-Cirhin was weakened. 
Co-immunoprecipitation of the two proteins from nuclear extracts of HeLa cells
strongly supports the yeast two hybrid results. Cirip has essentially the same
sequence as the C-terminal of HIVEP1, a regulator of a canonical NF-kappaB
sequence. Since Cirip has the zinc fingers required for this interaction, we
developed an in vitro assay based on this element in mammalian cells to
demonstrate functional Cirhin-Cirip interaction. The strong positive effect of
Cirip on the NF-kappaB sequence was further increased by both Cirhin and
R565W-Cirhin. Importantly, the effect of R565W-Cirhin was weaker than that of the
wild type protein. We observed increased levels of Cirhin-Cirip complex in
nuclear extracts in the presence of this NF-kappaB sequence. Our hypothesis is
that Cirhin is a transcriptional regulatory factor of this NF-kappaB sequence and
could be a participant in the regulation of other genes with NF-kappaB responsive
elements. Since the activities of genes regulated through NF-kappaB responsive
elements are especially important during development, this interaction may be a
key to explain the perinatal appearance of NAIC.

PMID: 19732766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Med Sci (Paris). 2007 Nov;23(11):1002-7.

[North American Indian childhood cirrhosis (NAIC)].

[Article in French]

Richter A(1), Mitchell GA, Rasquin A.

Author information: 
(1)Services de Génétique Médicale et de Gastroentérologie, Hôpital Sainte
Justine, Département de Pédiatrie, Université de Montréal, 3175, chemin de la
Côte Sainte-Catherine, Montréal (Québec) H3T 1C5, Canada.
andrea.richter@umontreal.ca

North American Indian childhood cirrhosis is a distinct form of neonatal familial
cholestasis. To date, it has only been described in aboriginal children from
northwestern Quebec. The disease rapidly evolves into cirrhosis with early portal
hypertension and bleeding from esophageal varices. Twelve of 36 children followed
at l'Hôpital Ste-Justine since 1970 received a liver transplant. As of now, there
are 17 living NAIC patients, 6 of whom had liver transplantation. We mapped NAIC 
to chromosome 16q22, and identified mutations in CIRH1A in patients. All are
homozygous for the R565W mutation in cirhin, a WD40 repeat protein of unknown
function. We showed that cirhin is a resident in the nucleolus. Cirhin interacts 
with Cirip, a functional, alternative splice variant of the HIVEP1 protein. Their
interaction indicates synergistic action. The complete inactivation of mouse
homolog, tex292 is likely embryonic lethal. The continued collaboration between
patients, their families, clinicians and researchers that has helped to identify 
the disease gene and to develop a diagnostic test now focuses on finding a new
treatment for this unique disease affecting First Nations children from Québec.

PMID: 18021715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Development. 2006 Oct;133(20):4025-34.

Schnurri transcription factors from Drosophila and vertebrates can mediate Bmp
signaling through a phylogenetically conserved mechanism.

Yao LC(1), Blitz IL, Peiffer DA, Phin S, Wang Y, Ogata S, Cho KW, Arora K,
Warrior R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, and the Developmental Biology
Center, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (Bmps) are secreted growth factors that play crucial 
roles in animal development across the phylogenetic spectrum. Bmp signaling
results in the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Smads, downstream
signal transducers that bind DNA. In Drosophila, the zinc finger protein Schnurri
(Shn) plays a key role in signaling by the Bmp2/Bmp4 homolog Decapentaplegic
(Dpp), by forming a Shn/Smad repression complex on defined promoter elements in
the brinker (brk) gene. Brk is a transcriptional repressor that downregulates Dpp
target genes. Thus, brk inhibition by Shn results in the upregulation of
Dpp-responsive genes. We present evidence that vertebrate Shn homologs can also
mediate Bmp responsiveness through a mechanism similar to Drosophila Shn. We find
that a Bmp response element (BRE) from the Xenopus Vent2 promoter drives
Dpp-dependent expression in Drosophila. However, in sharp contrast to its
activating role in vertebrates, the frog BRE mediates repression in Drosophila.
Remarkably, despite these opposite transcriptional polarities, sequence changes
that abolish cis-element activity in Drosophila also affect BRE function in
Xenopus. These similar cis requirements reflect conservation of trans-acting
factors, as human Shn1 (hShn1; HIVEP1) can interact with Smad1/Smad4 and assemble
an hShn1/Smad complex on the BRE. Furthermore, both Shn and hShn1 activate the
BRE in Xenopus embryos, and both repress brk and rescue embryonic patterning
defects in shn mutants. Our results suggest that vertebrate Shn proteins function
in Bmp signal transduction, and that Shn proteins recruit coactivators and
co-repressors in a context-dependent manner, rather than acting as dedicated
activators or repressors.

PMID: 17008448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):18710-6. Epub 2005 Mar 18.

Mint represses transactivation of the type II collagen gene enhancer through
interaction with alpha A-crystallin-binding protein 1.

Yang X(1), Li J, Qin H, Yang H, Li J, Zhou P, Liang Y, Han H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Developmental Biology, State Key Laboratory
of Cancer Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xian 710032, China.

Collagen type II is an extracellular matrix protein important for cartilage and
bone formation, and its expression is controlled by multiple cis- and
trans-acting elements, including the zinc finger transcription factor alpha
A-crystallin-binding protein 1 (CRYBP1). Here we show that MSX2-interacting
nuclear target protein (MINT), a conserved transcriptional repressor, associates 
with CRYBP1 and negatively regulates the transactivation of the collagen type II 
gene (Col2a1) enhancer. We identified CRYBP1 as a binding partner of MINT by
screening a mouse embryonic cDNA library using the yeast two-hybrid system. We
demonstrated that the C terminus of MINT interacts with the C terminus of CRYBP1 
using the mammalian cell two-hybrid assay, glutathione S-transferase pull-down,
and co-immunoprecipitation analyses. Furthermore, MINT and CRYBP1 form a complex 
on the Col2a1 enhancer, as shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel shift
assays. In the presence of CRYBP1, overexpression of MINT or its C-terminal
fragment in cells repressed a reporter construct driven by the Col2a1 enhancer
elements. This transcription repression is dependent on histone deacetylase, the 
main co-repressor recruited by MINT. The present study shows that MINT is
involved in CRYBP1-mediated Col2a1 gene repression and may play a role in
regulation of cartilage development.

PMID: 15778499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;65(3):718-21.

Carboxyl-terminal repressor domain of MBP-1 is sufficient for regression of
prostate tumor growth in nude mice.

Ghosh AK(1), Steele R, Ray RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Center, Saint Louis University, 1402 South 
Grand Boulevard, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in men and the second
leading cause of male cancer death in the United States. Early detection and
improved procedures for surgical intervention and radiation therapy have reduced 
the fatalities; however, there is no effective cure for men with advanced disease
and additional therapy is urgently needed. We have previously shown that MBP-1
acts as a general transcriptional repressor and exerts an antiproliferative
effect on several human cancer cells. MBP-1 possesses two repressor domains,
located at the amino and carboxyl termini. In this study, we have examined the
potential of the repressor domains of MBP-1 as a gene therapeutic candidate in
regression of prostate tumor growth. Our results suggested that
replication-deficient adenovirus-mediated delivery of amino-terminal (MBP-AR) or 
carboxyl-terminal (MBP-CR) repressor domain of MBP-1 exerted an antiproliferative
effect, like the full-length MBP-1, and induced caspase-independent apoptosis in 
prostate cancer cells. Next, we investigated the therapeutic effectiveness of
MBP-1 repressor domain on prostate tumors. When tested in human tumor xenografts 
in nude mice, MBP-CR suppressed prostate tumor growth more effectively than
full-length MBP-1, whereas MBP-AR delayed prostate tumor growth. Together, these 
results suggested that MBP-CR expression has an antiproliferative effect in human
prostate cancer cells, being more effective than the full-length MBP-1 in
preventing tumor growth.

PMID: 15705866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Biotechnol. 2004 Sep;28(1):1-8.

Oligonucleotide decoy mimicking alphaA-crystallin-binding protein 1 binding site 
on mouse Col2a1 enhancer stimulates transcription from the adjacent Col2a1
promoter in chondrogenic ATDC5 cell.

Yamagiwa H(1), Yamada Y, Bolander ME, Sarkar G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

A 48-bp sequence element in intron 1 of the alpha1(II) collagen gene (Col2a1)
acts as an enhancer of Col2a1 transcription and contains binding sites for the
transcription activator SOX9 and repressor alphaA-crystallin-binding protein 1
(CRYBP1). We hypothesized that abrogating CRYBP1 binding should increase
transcription from a promoter associated with the Col2a1 enhancer. We tested this
hypothesis by cotransfecting an oligonucleotide (ODN) decoy for CRYBP1 and a
luciferase-based reporter vector under the transcriptional control of the Col2a1 
promoter linked to the 100-bp enhancer in chondrogenic ATDC5 cells. As a control,
we used decoy ODN corresponding to the SOX9 binding site. Transfection with
CRYBP1 decoy increased luciferase activity by >2.5-fold in the absence or
presence of insulin, whereas SOX9 decoy ODN decreased luciferase activity to
about 50% under similar conditions. In addition, the repressive effect of
interleukin-1 on Col2a1 transcription through decreasing SOX9 messenger
ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression and increasing CRYBP1 mRNA expression, was
counteracted by CRYBP1 decoy ODN. These results provide a rationale for gene
therapy in degenerative joint diseases by elevating Col2a1 expression in
chondrocytes through oligomimetics of repressor binding sites.

PMID: 15456958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Mar;271(6):1135-44.

Isolation and characterization of the Xenopus HIVEP gene family.

Dürr U(1), Henningfeld KA, Hollemann T, Knöchel W, Pieler T.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Entwicklungsbiochemie, Universität Göttingen, Germany.

The HIVEP gene family encodes for very large sequence-specific DNA binding
proteins containing multiple zinc fingers. Three mammalian paralogous genes have 
been identified, HIVEP1, -2 and -3, as well as the closely related Drosophila
gene, Schnurri. These genes have been found to directly participate in the
transcriptional regulation of a variety of genes. Mammalian HIVEP members have
been implicated in signaling by TNF-alpha and in the positive selection of
thymocytes, while Schnurri has been shown to be an essential component of the
TGF-beta signaling pathway. In this study, we describe the isolation of Xenopus
HIVEP1, as well as partial cDNAs of HIVEP2 and -3. Analysis of the temporal and
spatial expression of the XHIVEP transcripts during early embryogenesis revealed 
ubiquitous expression of the transcripts. Assays using Xenopus oocytes mapped
XHIVEP1 domains that are responsible for nuclear export and import activity. The 
DNA binding specificity of XHIVEP was characterized using a PCR-mediated
selection and gel mobility shift assays.

PMID: 15009192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2001 Jun;2(2):107-21.

Fusion proteins from artificial and natural structural modules.

Liu N(1), Caderas G, Deillon C, Hoffmann S, Klauser S, Cui T, Gutte B.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisches Institut der Universität Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
Switzerland.

The purpose of preparing fusion proteins from designed and natural sequences is
mainly twofold; it aims at the stabilization of structure and at the modification
of biological activity. Fusion with beta-galactosidase, for example, can increase
the intracellular stability and DDT-degrading activity of an artificial
DDT-binding peptide, and fusions with a leucine zipper produce mono- and
bifunctional single-chain variable domain antibody fragments or homodimeric and
heterodimeric DNA-binding proteins like an artificial homodimeric HIV-1
enhancer-binding protein with increased binding specificity and repressor
activity. Of importance are also short leader sequences that mediate the
translocation of proteins across the cytoplasmic and the nuclear membrane. An
interesting by-product of the leucine zipper-mediated dimerization of an HIV-1
enhancer-binding protein was the synthesis and the structural as well as
functional characterization of a retro-leucine zipper.

PMID: 12370019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 25;21(18):2775-84.

MBP-1 mediated apoptosis involves cytochrome c release from mitochondria.

Ghosh AK(1), Majumder M, Steele R, Liu TJ, Ray RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, MO
63104, USA.

MBP-1, a cellular factor, appears to be involved in multiple functions, including
transcriptional modulation, apoptosis and cell growth regulation. In this study, 
we have investigated the signaling pathway involved in MBP-1 mediated apoptotic
cell death. Human carcinoma cells infected with a replication deficient
adenovirus expressing MBP-1 (AdMBP-1) induced apoptosis, when compared with cells
infected by replication-defective adenovirus (dl312) as a negative control.
Transduction of MBP-1 in carcinoma cells releases cytochrome c from mitochondria 
into the cytosol leading to activation of procaspase-9, procaspase-3 and PARP
cleavage. We previously observed that MBP-1 mediated apoptosis can be protected
by Bcl-2, although MBP-1 does not share a homology with the BH domain of the
Bcl-2 family member of proteins. To further understand the mechanism of MBP-1
mediated apoptosis, we examined whether MBP-1 modulates the Bcl-2 gene family.
Our results demonstrated that human breast carcinoma cells infected with AdMBP-1 
selectively reduced Bcl-xL mRNA and protein expression when compared with dl312
infected negative control cells. An in vitro transient reporter assay also
suggested repression of the Bcl-x promoter activity by MBP-1. Additional studies 
indicated that MBP-1 modulates Ets family protein function, thereby
downregulating Bcl-xL expression. Taken together, our results suggest that MBP-1 
selectively represses Bcl-xL expression in MCF-7 cells and induces mitochondrial 
involvement in the apoptotic process.

PMID: 11973636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Leukemia. 2001 Nov;15(11):1721-8.

Distinct gene expression profiling in chronic lymphocytic leukemia with 11q23
deletion.

Aalto Y(1), El-Rifa W, Vilpo L, Ollila J, Nagy B, Vihinen M, Vilpo J, Knuutila S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute and Helsinki University
Central Hospital, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a heterogeneous disease with regard to its 
clinical course. The limitations of the methods currently available for
prognostic assessment in CLL do not allow accurate prediction of the risk of
disease progression in individual patients. The recently developed cDNA array
technique provides a unique opportunity to study gene expression in various
malignancies. To identify new molecular markers for prognostication of CLL
patients, we analyzed cDNA arrays by using hierarchical clustering and standard
statistic t-test on 34 CLL patients. We found significant expression differences 
in 78 genes compared to the reference tonsillar B lymphocytes. A cluster of
genes, LCP1, PARP, BLR1, DEK, NPM, MCL1, SLP76, STAM, HIVEP1, EVI2B, CD25, HTLF, 
HIVEP2, BCL2, MNDA, PBX3, EB12, TCF1, CGRP, CD14, ILB, GZMK, GPR17 and CD79B, was
associated (P < 0.05) with the unfavorable 11q deletion and also with the
unfavorable Binet stages B and C. We present here gene expression profiling that 
is associated with CLL patients with the 11q23 deletion. Many of the genes in the
cluster have not previously been shown to be related to the initiation or
progression of CLL. These novel findings provide fundamental information for
further attempts to understand the interaction of the clustered genes in the
leukomogenesis of CLL in order to better design treatments aimed at specific
molecular target(s).

PMID: 11681413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Immunol. 2001 Nov;2(11):1048-53.

Murine Schnurri-2 is required for positive selection of thymocytes.

Takagi T(1), Harada J, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, CREST Research
Project of JST, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2001 Nov;2(11):989-91.

A key step in T cell development involves the positive selection of cells that
recognize antigen presented by self-major histocompatibility complex. Yet, the
signals that are activated by T cell receptor engagement and lead to cell
survival remain unclear. We show here that mice lacking the transcription factor 
Schnurri-2 (Shn-2), a large metal-finger protein, had severely defective positive
selection of CD4+ and CD8+ cells. Drosophila Shn acts as a cofactor of Smad
homolog and is required for Decapentaplegic signaling. Vertebrates have at least 
three Shn orthologs (Shn-1, Shn-2 and Shn-3), which are thought to act as nuclear
targets in the bone morphogenetic protein-transforming growth factor-beta-activin
signaling pathways. These data raised the possibility that the Smad-Shn-2 complex
is involved in the thymic selection of T cells.

PMID: 11668343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2001;487:219-28.

Neurodegeneration-associated proteins and inflammation in sporadic inclusion-body
myositis.

Lampe JB(1), Walter MC, Reichmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Technical University of Dresden, Germany.

PMID: 11403162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Genomics. 2001 Jan 1;71(1):89-100.

Structure of the human zinc finger protein HIVEP3: molecular cloning, expression,
exon-intron structure, and comparison with paralogous genes HIVEP1 and HIVEP2.

Hicar MD(1), Liu Y, Allen CE, Wu LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, College of
Medicine and Public Health, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Here we report the cloning and characterization of HIVEP3, the newest member in
the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 enhancer-binding protein family that
encodes large zinc finger proteins and regulates transcription via the kappaB
enhancer motif. The largest open reading frame of HIVEP3 contains 2406 aa. and is
approximately 80% identical to the mouse counterpart. The HIVEP3 gene is located 
in the chromosomal region 1p34 and is at least 300 kb with 10 exons. RNA studies 
show that multiple HIVEP3 transcripts are differentially expressed and regulated.
Additionally, transcription termination occurs in the ultimate exon, exon 10, or 
in exon 6. Therefore, HIVEP3 may produce protein isoforms that contain or exclude
the carboxyl DNA binding domain and the leucine zipper by alternative RNA
splicing and differential polyadenylation. Sequence homologous to HIVEP3 exon 6
is not found in mouse nor are the paralogous genes HIVEP1 and HIVEP2. Zoo-blot
analysis suggests that sequences homologous to the human exon 6 are present only 
in primates and cow. Therefore, a foreign DNA harboring a termination exon likely
was inserted into the HIVEP3 locus relatively recently in evolution, resulting in
the acquisition of novel gene regulatory mechanisms as well as the generation of 
structural and functional diversity.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11161801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jun;20(12):4428-35.

A zinc finger transcription factor, alphaA-crystallin binding protein 1, is a
negative regulator of the chondrocyte-specific enhancer of the alpha1(II)
collagen gene.

Tanaka K(1), Matsumoto Y, Nakatani F, Iwamoto Y, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial Developmental Biology and Regeneration Branch, National Institute
of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Retraction in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;29(12):3453.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2009 Feb 20;:NOT-OD-09-051.

Partial retraction in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jul;26(13):5202.

Transcription of the type II collagen gene (Col2a1) is regulated by multiple
cis-acting sites. The enhancer element, which is located in the first intron, is 
necessary for high-level and cartilage-specific expression of Col2a1. A mouse
limb bud cDNA expression library was screened by the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
one-hybrid screening method to identify protein factors bound to the enhancer. A 
zinc finger protein, alphaA-crystallin binding protein 1 (CRYBP1), which had been
reported to bind to the mouse alphaA-crystallin gene promoter, was isolated. We
herein demonstrate that CRYBP1 is involved in the negative regulation of Col2a1
enhancer activity. CRYBP1 mRNA expression was downregulated during chondrocyte
differentiation in vitro. In situ hybridization analysis of developing mouse
cartilage showed that CRYBP1 mRNA was also downregulated during mesenchymal
condensation and that CRYBP1 mRNA was highly expressed by hypertrophic
chondrocytes, but at very low levels by resting and proliferating chondrocytes.
Expression of recombinant CRYBP1 in a transfected rat chondrosarcoma cell line
inhibited Col2a1 enhancer activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed 
that CRYBP1 bound a specific sequence within the Col2a1 enhancer and inhibited
the binding of Sox9, an activator for Col2a1, to the enhancer. Cotransfection of 
CRYBP1 with Sox9 into BALB/c 3T3 cells inhibited activation of the Col2a1
enhancer by Sox9. These results suggest a novel mechanism that negatively
regulates cartilage-specific expression of Col2a1.

PMCID: PMC85810
PMID: 10825206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Genomics. 1998 Jan 15;47(2):171-9.

Gene hunting without sequencing genomic clones: finding exon boundaries in cDNAs.

Xu G(1), Sze SH, Liu CP, Pevzner PA, Arnheim N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, University of Southern California, Los Angeles
90089-1340, USA.

We propose a new experimental protocol, ExonPCR, which is able to identify exon
boundaries in a cDNA even in the absence of any genomic clones. ExonPCR can
bypass the isolation, characterization, and DNA sequencing of subclones of
genomic DNA to determine exon boundaries: a major effort in the process of
positional cloning. Given a cDNA sequence, ExonPCR uses a series of "adaptive"
steps to analyze the PCR products from cDNA and genomic DNA thereby revealing the
approximate positions of "hidden" exon boundaries in the cDNA. The nucleotide
sequence of adjacent intronic regions is determined by ligation-mediated PCR.
Primers adjacent to the "hidden" exon boundaries are used to amplify genomic DNA 
followed by limited DNA sequencing of the PCR product. The method was
successfully tested on the 3-kb hMSH2 cDNA with 16 known exons and the 9-kb
PRDII-BF1 cDNA with a previously unknown number of exons. We subsequently
developed the ExonPCR algorithm and software to direct the experimental protocol 
using a strategy that is analogous to that used in the game "Twenty Questions."
Through the use of ExonPCR, the search for disease-causing mutations can be
initiated almost immediately after cDNA clones in a genetically mapped region
become available. This approach would be most valuable in gene discovery
strategies that focus initially on cDNA isolation.

PMID: 9479489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Mar 15;64(4):565-72.

Inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication by a cellular
transcriptional factor MBP-1.

Ray RB(1), Srinivas RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Louis University, Missouri 63110-0250,
USA. Rayrb@sluvca.slu.edu

A cellular transcriptional factor initially identified as the c-myc promoter
binding protein (MBP-1) was subsequently characterized as a cell regulatory
protein with multifunctional activities. In this study, the role of MBP-1 on
human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) transcriptional activity was
investigated. MBP-1 showed inhibition of HIV-1 long terminal repeat
(LTR)-directed chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) activity in a transient
cotransfection assay. Deletion of upstream elements of the HIV-1 LTR, including
the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) and Sp1 binding sites, did not affect the
MBP-1 mediated suppression of HIV-1 LTR. The core promoter of the HIV-1 appeared 
to be the primary sequence involved in MBP-1 mediated inhibition. In the presence
of HIV-1 TAR sequence and Tat protein, MBP-1 did not inhibit the viral promoter
activity. In addition, cotransfection experiments with HIV-1 LTR and deletion
mutants of MBP-1 suggested that the carboxyl terminal half of MBP-1 suppresses
the HIV-1 promoter activity. Exogenous expression of MBP-1 showed suppression of 
HIV-1 replication in acutely infected cells and in cells cotransfected with a
molecular clone of HIV-1. These results suggest that exogenous expression of
MBP-1 plays an important role in the regulation of HIV-1 replication in infected 
cells.

PMID: 9093905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 13;271(37):22528-37.

Multiple signaling pathways control the activation of the CEF-4/9E3 cytokine gene
by pp60v-src.

Bojovic B(1), Rodrigues N, Dehbi M, Bédard PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, North York, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada.

The CEF-4/9E3 cytokine gene is expressed aberrantly in chicken embryo fibroblasts
(CEF) transformed by the Rous sarcoma virus. The expression of CEF-4 is dependent
on both transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms of regulation. The
characterization of the promoter region indicated that three distinct regulatory 
elements corresponding to an AP-1 binding site (or TRE), a PRDII/kappaB domain,
and a CAAT box are involved in the activation by pp60(v-)src. In this report we
investigate the signaling pathways controlling the expression of the TRE and
PRDII domain. The expression of a dominant negative mutant of p21(ras) reduced
the activity of both elements. In contrast a similar mutant of c-Raf-1 affected
modestly the activation dependent on the TRE but not PRDII. The stress-activated 
protein kinase (SAPK)/Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway was important for the
activity of PRDII and the TRE but was not markedly stimulated by pp60(v-)src. The
addition of calphostin C and the inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) diminished 
the accumulation of the CEF-4 mRNA and reduced the activity of a TRE-controlled
promoter. Likewise, the depletion of PKC by chronic treatment with phorbol esters
inhibited the activation of the TRE. Rous sarcoma virus-transformed CEF treated
with calphostin C were also flatter, did not display a high degree of
criss-crossing, and appeared morphologically normal. Hence PKC was important for 
the activation of AP-1 and the morphological transformation of CEF. The
constitutive expression of CEF-4 was correlated with transformation only when
dependent on the TRE. This was not true for PRDII, which was the only element
required for the constitutive activation to the CEF-4 promoter in nontransformed 
cells treated chronically with phorbol esters.

PMID: 8798420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genes Dev. 1996 Aug 1;10(15):1953-65.

The Caenorhabditis elegans gene sem-4 controls neuronal and mesodermal cell
development and encodes a zinc finger protein.

Basson M(1), Horvitz HR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes, Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge 02139, USA.

Neuronal and mesodermal cell types are generated in separate cell lineages during
the larval development of Caenorhabditis elegans. Here we demonstrate that the
gene sem-4 is required in both types of lineages for the normal development of
neuronal and mesodermal cell types. The sem-4 gene encodes a protein containing
seven zinc finger motifs of the C2H2 class, four of which are arranged in two
pairs widely separated in the primary sequence of the protein. These pairs of
zinc fingers are similar to pairs of zinc fingers in the protein encoded by the
Drosophila homeotic gene spalt and in the human transcription factor PRDII-BF1.
Analysis of sem-4 alleles suggests that different zinc fingers in the SEM-4
protein may function differentially in neuronal and mesodermal cell types. We
propose that sem-4 interacts with different transcription factors in different
cell types to control the transcription of genes that function in the processes
of neuronal and mesodermal cell development.

PMID: 8756352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Med Chem. 1996 Jan 19;39(2):503-7.

Metal-chelating inhibitors of a zinc finger protein HIV-EP1. Remarkable
potentiation of inhibitory activity by introduction of SH groups.

Fujita M(1), Otsuka M, Sugiura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Japan.

HIV-EP1 is a C2H2 type zinc finger protein which binds to DNA kappa B site
present in the long terminal repeat of HIV provirus. Previously we have reported 
zinc chelators having histidine--pyridine--histidine skeleton and were successful
in inhibiting the DNA binding of HIV-EP1 by removing zinc from the zinc finger
domain. Aiming at the potentiation of the inhibitory activity of our previous
zinc chelators, herein synthesized were novel chelators comprising pyridine and
aminoalkanethiol. These showed marked inhibitory activity on the DNA binding of
HIV-EP1. In particular, one of them having a bis(2-mercaptoethyl) amino side
chain showed inhibitory activity (IC50, approximately 4 microM) 10 times stronger
than that of the strongest inhibitor that we reported previously. It appeared
that these inhibited the DNA binding of HIV-EP1 by a mechanism distinct from that
of the previous histidine-based inhibitors.

PMID: 8558519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Sep;6(9):1089-96.

Induction of cell death in murine fibroblasts by a c-myc promoter binding
protein.

Ray RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, Missouri 63110, USA.

The c-myc promoter binding protein (MBP-1) was identified previously from a human
cervical carcinoma cell (HeLa) cDNA expression library (R. Ray and D. M. Miller, 
Mol. Cell. Biol., 11: 2154-2161, 1991). This study demonstrated that MBP-1 binds 
to the mouse c-myc P2 TATA box sequences and exerts a negative regulatory role on
c-myc transcription. The role of MBP-1 on cell growth was initially examined by
transfection of fibroblast cells with MBP-1 cDNA and resulted in rapid cell
death. Subsequently, MBP-1 cDNA bearing an inducible promoter was introduced in
murine fibroblast cells (NIH3T3) to control the expression of the exogenous
MBP-1. Upon induction of exogenous MBP-1 expression, stable transfectants showed 
reduced c-myc expression, cell death, and DNA fragmentation. To further analyze
whether c-myc inhibition mediates or complements the effect of MBP-1, the
exogenous MBP-1 when introduced into NIH3T3 cells expressing deregulated human
c-myc gene, cell death was interrupted. This study suggested that exogenous
expression of MBP-1 induces cell death in fibroblasts by blocking cell
proliferation.

PMID: 8519685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Med Chem. 1995 Aug 18;38(17):3264-70.

Novel zinc chelators with dual activity in the inhibition of the kappa B
site-binding proteins HIV-EP1 and NF-kappa B.

Otsuka M(1), Fujita M, Aoki T, Ishii S, Sugiura Y, Yamamoto T, Inoue J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Japan.

Both HIV-EP1 (also called PRDII-BF1 or MBP-1), a zinc finger protein, and
NF-kappa B, a Rel family protein, bind to kappa B site present in the enhancer of
multiple cellular and viral genes involved in immune function and inflammatory
response including HIV-1 LTR and human interferon beta gene. When cells are
exposed to extracellular stimuli such as virus or phorbol ester, the activity of 
both HIV-EP1 and NF-kappa B is induced. Thus, kappa B site-directed transcription
could be regulated by two distinct proteins in a cooperative way. Novel
heterocyclic compounds comprising (dimethylamino)pyridine and histidine units,
i.e., 1-4, have been designed and synthesized, aiming at inhibition of these
kappa B site-binding proteins to discriminate their functions. These compounds
exhibited remarkable zinc-binding capability as revealed by NMR study. Compounds 
1 and 2 showed a marked inhibitory effect on the DNA binding activity of HIV-EP1 
by removing zinc without interfering with the DNA binding activity of NF-kappa B.
Since it has been demonstrated that zinc somehow influences the DNA binding of
NF-kappa B, the effect of these heterocyclic compounds and their zinc complexes
on NF-kappa B was examined. Zinc complexes of 3 and 4 exhibited the inhibitory
effect on the DNA binding of NF-kappa B and/or homodimeric complexes of p50 and
p65 subunits of NF-kappa B without affecting HIV-EP1. Thus, it became possible to
inhibit either one of the two kappa B site-binding proteins without inhibiting
the other.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7650680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell. 1995 Jun 2;81(5):791-800.

Schnurri is required for Drosophila Dpp signaling and encodes a zinc finger
protein similar to the mammalian transcription factor PRDII-BF1.

Grieder NC(1), Nellen D, Burke R, Basler K, Affolter M.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, Universität Basel, Switzerland.

Cytokines of the TGF beta superfamily regulate many aspects of cellular function 
by activating receptor complexes consisting of two distantly related
serine/threonine kinases. Previous studies have indicated that Drosophila dpp
uses similar signaling complexes and strictly requires the punt and thick veins
receptors to transduce the signal across the membrane. Here, we show that the
schnurri (shn) gene is required for many aspects of dpp signaling. Genetic
epistasis experiments indicate that shn functions downstream of the dpp signal
and its receptors. The shn gene encodes a large protein similar to a family of
mammalian zinc finger transcription factors. The shn protein might therefore act 
as a nuclear target in the dpp signaling pathway directly regulating the
expression of dpp-responsive genes.

PMID: 7774018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biochemistry. 1995 Mar 14;34(10):3438-45.

The c-myc promoter binding protein (MBP-1) and TBP bind simultaneously in the
minor groove of the c-myc P2 promoter.

Chaudhary D(1), Miller DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham 35294-3300.

The c-myc promoter binding protein (MBP-1) is a DNA binding protein which
negatively regulates the expression of the human c-myc gene. MBP-1 binds to a
sequence which overlaps the binding site for the general transcription factor
TBP, within the c-myc P2 promoter region. Since TBP binds in the minor groove,
MBP-1 might inhibit c-myc transcription by preventing the formation of a
functional preinitiation complex. In support of this hypothesis, we have
demonstrated that MPB-1 is a minor groove binding protein. In order to
characterize MBP-1 binding, we substituted A-T base pairs in the MBP-1 binding
site with I-C base pairs, which changes the major groove surface without altering
the minor groove surface. This substitution did not inhibit the sequence-specific
binding of MBP-1 and TBP. On the other hand, G-C to I-C substitution within the
MBP-1 binding site alters the minor groove and prevents MBP-1 binding.
Competitive electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to show that berenil,
distamycin, and mithramycin, all of which bind in the minor groove, compete with 
MBP-1 for binding to the MPB-1 binding site. These minor groove binding ligands
also effectively inhibit the simultaneous DNA binding activity of both MBP-1 and 
TBP. We conclude that both MBP-1 and TBP can bind simultaneously in the minor
groove of the TATA motif on the c-myc P2 promoter. This suggests that MBP-1 may
negatively regulate c-myc gene expression by preventing efficient transcription
initiation.

PMID: 7880838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 20;270(3):1221-9.

Murine transcription factor alpha A-crystallin binding protein I. Complete
sequence, gene structure, expression, and functional inhibition via antisense
RNA.

Brady JP(1), Kantorow M, Sax CM, Donovan DM, Piatigorsky J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, NEI, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

alpha A-crystallin binding protein I (alpha A-CRYBP1) is a ubiquitously expressed
DNA binding protein that was previously identified by its ability to interact
with a functionally important sequence in the mouse alpha A-crystallin gene
promoter. Here, we have cloned a single copy gene with 10 exons spanning greater 
than 70 kb of genomic DNA that encodes alpha A-CRYBP1. The mouse alpha A-CRYBP1
gene specifies a 2,688-amino acid protein with 72% amino acid identity to its
human homologue, PRDII-BF1. Both the human and the mouse proteins contain two
sets of consensus C2H2 zinc fingers at each end as well a central nonconsensus
zinc finger. The alpha A-CRYBP1 gene produces a 9.5-kb transcript in 11 different
tissues as well as a testis-specific, 7.7-kb transcript. alpha A-CRYBP1 cDNA
clones were isolated from adult mouse brain and testis as well as from cell lines
derived from mouse lens (alpha TN4-1) and muscle (C2C12). A single clone isolated
from the muscle C2C12 library contains an additional exon near the 5'-end that
would prevent production of a functional protein if the normal translation start 
site were utilized; however, there is another potential initiation codon located 
downstream that is in frame with the rest of the coding region. In addition, we
identified multiple cDNAs from the testis in which the final intron is still
present. Finally, we used an antisense expression construct derived from an alpha
A-CRYBP1 cDNA clone to provide the first functional evidence that alpha A-CRYBP1 
regulates gene expression. When introduced into the alpha TN4-1 mouse lens cell
line, the antisense construct significantly inhibited expression from a
heterologous promoter that utilized the alpha A-CRYBP1 binding site as an
enhancer.

PMID: 7836383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Med Chem. 1994 Dec 9;37(25):4267-9.

Novel zinc chelators which inhibit the binding of HIV-EP1 (HIV enhancer binding
protein) to NF-kappa B recognition sequence.

Otsuka M(1), Fujita M, Sugiura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Japan.

PMID: 7996537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Virol. 1994 Feb;68(2):1002-9.

Transcription factor PRDII-BF1 activates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gene
expression.

Seeler JS(1), Muchardt C, Suessle A, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas 75235.

Gene expression of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is modulated by both
cellular transcription factors, which bind to cis-acting regulatory elements in
the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) and the viral transactivator, tat. The
enhancer element in the HIV-1 LTR which extends from -103 to -82 is critical for 
gene expression. This region contains two identical 10-bp direct repeats which
serve as binding sites for members of the NF-kappa B family of transcription
factors. However, several other cellular transcription factors, including a group
of zinc finger DNA-binding proteins, also bind to NF-kappa B and related motifs. 
A member of this family of transcription factors, designated PRDII-BF1 or MBP-1, 
is a 300-kDa cellular protein which contains two widely separated zinc finger DNA
binding domains. Each of these binding domains is capable of binding to NF-kappa 
B or related recognition motifs. Since no functional role for this protein has
been demonstrated in the regulation of viral and cellular promoters, we began
studies to determine whether PRDII-BF1 could modulate HIV-1 gene expression.
DNase I footprinting of the HIV-1 LTR indicated that PRDII-BF1 bound to both
NF-kappa B and TAR transactivation response DNA elements. Both in vitro
translation and vaccinia virus expression of PRDII-BF1 cDNA resulted in the
synthesis of the full-length 300-kDa PRDII-BF1 protein. Transfection experiments,
using both eucaryotic expression vectors and antisense constructs, indicated that
PRDII-BF1 activated HIV-1 gene expression in both the presence and absence of
tat. These results are consistent with a role for PRDII-BF1 in activating HIV-1
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC236538
PMID: 8289330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Virology. 1993 Oct;196(2):442-50.

Regulatory elements involved in tax-mediated transactivation of the HTLV-I LTR.

Seeler JS(1), Muchardt C, Podar M, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Microbiology, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, 
Texas 75235.

HTLV-I is the etiologic agent of adult T-cell leukemia. In this study, we
investigated the regulatory elements and cellular transcription factors which
function in modulating HTLV-I gene expression in response to the viral
transactivator protein, tax. Transfection experiments into Jurkat cells of a
variety of site-directed mutants in the HTLV-1 LTR indicated that each of the
three motifs A, B, and C within the 21-bp repeats, the binding sites for the Ets 
family of proteins, and the TATA box all influenced the degree of tax-mediated
activation. Tax is also able to activate gene expression of other viral and
cellular promoters. Tax activation of the IL-2 receptor and the HIV-1 LTR is
mediated through NF-kappa B motifs. Interestingly, sequences in the 21-bp repeat 
B and C motifs contain significant homology with NF-kappa B regulatory elements. 
We demonstrated that an NF-kappa B binding protein, PRDII-BF1, but not the rel
protein, bound to the B and C motifs in the 21-bp repeat. PRDII-BF1 was also able
to stimulate activation of HTLV-I gene expression by tax. The role of the Ets
proteins on modulating tax activation was also studied. Ets 1 but not Ets 2 was
capable of increasing the degree of tax activation of the HTLV-I LTR. These
results suggest that tax activates gene expression by either direct or indirect
interaction with several cellular transcription factors that bind to the HTLV-I
LTR.

PMID: 8372429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochemistry. 1992 Apr 28;31(16):3907-17.

High-resolution solution structure of the double Cys2His2 zinc finger from the
human enhancer binding protein MBP-1.

Omichinski JG(1), Clore GM, Robien M, Sakaguchi K, Appella E, Gronenborn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The high-resolution three-dimensional structure of a synthetic 57-residue peptide
comprising the double zinc finger of the human enhancer binding protein MBP-1 has
been determined in solution by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy on the
basis of 1280 experimental restraints. A total of 30 simulated annealing
structures were calculated. The backbone atomic root-mean-square distributions
about the mean coordinate positions are 0.32 and 0.33 A for the N- and C-terminal
fingers, respectively, and the corresponding values for all atoms, excluding
disordered surface side chains, are 0.36 and 0.40 A. Each finger comprises an
irregular antiparallel sheet and a helix, with the zinc tetrahedrally coordinated
to two cysteines and two histidines. The overall structure is nonglobular in
nature, and the angle between the long axes of the helices is 47 +/- 5 degrees.
The long axis of the antiparallel sheet in the N-terminal finger is approximately
parallel to that of the helix in the C-terminal finger. Comparison of this
structure with the X-ray structure of the Zif-268 triple finger complexed with
DNA indicates that the relative orientation of the individual zinc fingers is
clearly distinct in the two cases. This difference can be attributed to the
presence of a long Lys side chain in the C-terminal finger of MBP-1 at position
40, instead of a short Ala or Ser side chain at the equivalent position in
Zif-268. This finding suggests that different contacts may be involved in the
binding of the zinc fingers of MBP-1 and Zif-268 to DNA, consistent with the
findings from methylation interference experiments that the two fingers of MBP-1 
contact 10 base pairs, while the three fingers of Zif-268 contact only 9 base
pairs.

PMID: 1567844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Virol. 1992 Jan;66(1):244-50.

Regulation of human immunodeficiency virus enhancer function by PRDII-BF1 and
c-rel gene products.

Muchardt C(1), Seeler JS, Nirula A, Shurland DL, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas 75235.

The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enhancer element is important in the
regulation of HIV gene expression. A number of cellular proteins have been
demonstrated to bind to the NF-kappa B motifs in this element. The genes encoding
several of these proteins, including members of the rel family and PRDII-BF1,
have been cloned. We characterized the binding of proteins encoded by the human
c-rel and PRDII-BF1 genes to HIV NF-kappa B motifs and related enhancer elements.
Both the human c-rel protein and two proteins derived from the PRDII-BF1 gene by 
alternative splicing bound specifically to the HIV NF-kappa B motif and related
enhancer elements found in the immunoglobulin kappa, class I major
histocompatibility complex, and interleukin-2 receptor genes. To determine the
role of these factors in regulating HIV gene expression, we fused the cDNAs
encoding either of the two proteins derived by alternative splicing of the
PRDII-BF1 gene or the c-rel gene to the DNA binding region of the yeast
transcription factor GAL4. GAL4 binding sites were inserted in place of the
native HIV enhancer sequences in an HIV long terminal repeat chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase construct. Cotransfection of these constructs revealed that
c-rel was a strong activator of basal HIV gene expression but did not result in
synergistic effects in the presence of tat. PRDII-BF1-derived cDNAs did not
result in stimulation of either basal or tat-induced activated gene expression.
These results indicate that multiple enhancer binding proteins may potentially
regulate HIV in both a positive and negative manner.

PMCID: PMC238281
PMID: 1727488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 May 11;19(9):2514.

MspI RFLP detected by a ZNF-40 cDNA sequence.

Fountain JW(1), Dracopoli NC, Housman DE, Baldwin AS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139.

PMCID: PMC329482
PMID: 1710360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 1991 May 5;266(13):8590-4.

HIV-EP2, a new member of the gene family encoding the human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 enhancer-binding protein. Comparison with HIV-EP1/PRDII-BF1/MBP-1.

Nomura N(1), Zhao MJ, Nagase T, Maekawa T, Ishizaki R, Tabata S, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Nippon Medical School, Kanagawa, Japan.

At least two different types of proteins, NF-kappa B/KBF1 and
HIV-EP1/PRDII-BF1/MBP-1, which are members of a family of rel oncoproteins and
metal-finger proteins, respectively, bind to the human immunodeficiency virus
type (HIV-1) enhancer. As a new member of a HIV-EP1 family that is expressed at a
high level in T cells, we have isolated cDNA clones of HIV-EP2 by
cross-hybridization with HIV-EP1 cDNA. HIV-EP2 protein consists of 1,833 amino
acids and has a molecular weight of 211,000. HIV-EP2 protein is highly homologous
with HIV-EP1/PRDII-BF1/MBP-1 in three regions. These three regions contain the
potential nuclear localization signal followed by a Ser/Thr-rich region, the
DNA-binding domain consisting of a metal-finger structure, and a cluster of
acidic amino acids. The DNA-binding property of HIV-EP2 was similar to that of
HIV-EP1. Northern blot analysis of HIV-EP2 mRNA indicated relatively high
expression in the T cell line Molt-4 and in some tumor cell lines. Furthermore,
like HIV-EP1, expression of HIV-EP2 mRNA was greatly induced by mitogen and
phorbol ester treatment of Jurkat T cells, suggesting that HIV-EP2 acts in HIV
production from latently infected T cells.

PMID: 2022670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Genomics. 1991 Apr;9(4):758-61.

Localization of the zinc finger DNA-binding protein HIV-EP1/MBP-1/PRDII-BF1 to
human chromosome 6p22.3-p24.

Gaynor RB(1), Muchardt C, Diep A, Mohandas TK, Sparkes RS, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

A variety of cellular proteins have been found to bind to related DNA sequences
in the enhancer elements of the human immunodeficiency virus, the kappa
immunoglobulin gene, the class I major histocompatibility complex gene, and the
beta-interferon gene. Recently, lambda gt11 gene expression cloning using ligated
oligonucleotide probes complementary to these DNA binding motifs has been
performed. An identical cDNA clone encoding a cellular protein, referred to as
HIV-EP1, MBP-1, or PRDII-BF1, that binds to each of these sequences has been
identified. This cDNA potentially encodes a 298-kDa cellular protein with two
widely separated zinc finger binding domains, each of which binds to the same DNA
sequence. As part of an effort to examine the chromosomal organization of
cellular genes encoding transcription factors, we report the chromosomal mapping 
of the gene encoding this zinc finger protein (ZNF40) to chromosome 6p22.3-24.

PMID: 2037300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Apr;10(4):1406-14.

A large protein containing zinc finger domains binds to related sequence elements
in the enhancers of the class I major histocompatibility complex and kappa
immunoglobulin genes.

Baldwin AS Jr(1), LeClair KP, Singh H, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

A cDNA from a B-cell library was previously isolated that encodes a
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein with affinities for related sites in a
class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and kappa immunoglobulin gene
enhancers. We report here approximately 6.5 kilobases of sequence of the MBP-1
(MHC enhancer binding protein 1) cDNA. MBP-1 protein has a molecular weight
predicted to be greater than 200,000. A DNA-binding domain with high affinity for
the MHC enhancer sequence TGGGGATTCCCCA was localized to an 118-amino-acid
protein fragment containing two zinc fingers of the class Cys2-X12-His2. Analysis
of expression of MBP-1 mRNA revealed relatively high expression in HeLa cells and
in a human retinal cell line, with lower levels in Jurkat T cells and in two
B-cell lines. Interestingly, expression of MBP-1 mRNA was inducible by mitogen
and phorbol ester treatment of Jurkat T cells and by serum treatment of confluent
serum-deprived human fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC362243
PMID: 2108316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genes Dev. 1990 Jan;4(1):29-42.

A DNA-binding protein containing two widely separated zinc finger motifs that
recognize the same DNA sequence.

Fan CM(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

We have isolated a full-length cDNA clone encoding a protein (PRDII-BF1) that
binds specifically to a positive regulatory domain (PRDII) of the human IFN-beta 
gene promoter, and to a similar sequence present in a number of other promoters
and enhancers. The sequence of this protein reveals two novel structural
features. First, it is the largest sequence-specific DNA-binding protein reported
to date (298 kD). Second, it contains two widely separated sets of C2-H2-type
zinc fingers. Remarkably, each set of zinc fingers binds to the same DNA sequence
motif with similar affinities and methylation interference patterns. Thus, this
protein may act by binding simultaneously to reiterated copies of the same
recognition sequence. Although the function of PRDII-BF1 is not known, the level 
of its mRNA is inducible by serum and virus, albeit with different kinetics.

PMID: 2106471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


