
1. Haematologica. 2016 Apr;101(4):407-16. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.141101.

New and emerging prognostic and predictive genetic biomarkers in B-cell precursor
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Moorman AV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Northern Institute for Cancer Research,
Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK anthony.moorman@newcastle.ac.uk.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a heterogeneous disease at the genetic
level. Chromosomal abnormalities are used as diagnostic, prognostic and
predictive biomarkers to provide subtype, outcome and drug response information. 
t(12;21)/ETV6-RUNX1and high hyper-diploidy are good-risk prognostic biomarkers
whereasKMT2A(MLL) translocations, t(17;19)/TCF3-HLF, haploidy or low hypodiploidy
are high-risk biomarkers. t(9;22)/BCR-ABL1patients require targeted treatment
(imatinib/dasatinib), whereas iAMP21 patients achieve better outcomes when
treated intensively. High-risk genetic biomarkers are four times more prevalent
in adults compared to children. The application of genomic technologies to cases 
without an established abnormality (B-other) reveals copy number alterations
which can be used either individually or in combination as prognostic biomarkers.
Transcriptome sequencing studies have identified a network of fusion genes
involving kinase genes -ABL1,ABL2,PDGFRB,CSF1R,CRLF2,JAK2andEPORIn vitroandin
vivostudies along with emerging clinical observations indicate that patients with
a kinase-activating aberration may respond to treatment with small molecular
inhibitors like imatinib/dasatinib and ruxolitinib. Further work is required to
determine the true frequency of these abnormalities across the age spectrum and
the optimal way to incorporate such inhibitors into protocols. In conclusion,
genetic biomarkers are playing an increasingly important role in the management
of patients with ALL.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMID: 27033238  [PubMed - in process]


2. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2016 Mar 31. [Epub ahead of print]

Live Cell MicroRNA Imaging Using Exonuclease III-Aided Recycling Amplification
Based on Aggregation-Induced Emission Luminogens.

Min X(1), Zhang M(1), Huang F(1), Lou X(1), Xia F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic Chemistry and Materia Medica, School of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China.

Enzyme-assisted detection strategies of microRNAs (miRNAs) in vitro have
accomplished both great sensitivity and specificity. However, low expression of
miRNAs and a complex environment in cells induces big challenges for monitoring
and tracking miRNAs in vivo. The work reports the attempt to carry miRNA imaging 
into live cells, by enzyme-aided recycling amplification. We utilize facile
probes based yellow aggregation-induced emission luminogens (AIEgens) with super 
photostable property but without quencher, which are applied to monitor miRNAs
not only from urine sample extracts (in vitro) but also in live cells (in vivo). 
The assay could distinguish the cancer patients' urine samples from the healthy
urine due to the good specificity. Moreover, the probe showed much higher
fluorescence intensity in breast cancer cells (MCF-7) (miR-21 in high expression)
than that in cervical cancer cells (HeLa) and human lung fibroblast cells (HLF)
(miR-21 in low expression) in more than 60 min, which showed the good performance
and super photostability for the probe in vivo. As controls, another two probes
with FAM/Cy3 and corresponding quenchers, respectively, could perform miRNAs
detections in vitro and parts of in vivo tests but were not suitable for the
long-term cell tracking due to the photobleach phenomena, which also demonstrates
that the probe with AIEgens is a potential candidate for the accurate
identification of cancer biomarkers.

PMID: 27011025  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Phytomedicine. 2016 Apr 15;23(4):350-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2016.01.011. Epub
2016 Feb 9.

Protective role of gambogic acid in experimental pulmonary fibrosis in vitro and 
in vivo.

Qu Y(1), Zhang G(1), Ji Y(1), Zhua H(1), Lv C(2), Jiang W(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prescription Effect and
Clinical Evaluation of State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
School of Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, P.R. China. (2)The Key
Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Prescription Effect and Clinical
Evaluation of State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, School of
Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, P.R. China. Electronic address:
Lucky_lcj@sina.com. (3)The Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Prescription Effect and Clinical Evaluation of State Administration of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, School of Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical University,
Yantai, P.R. China. Electronic address: jwl518@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive disorder with
poor prognosis. The treatment options for IPF are very limited. Gambogic acid
(GA) has anticancer effect and anti-proliferative activity which is extracted
from a dried yellow resin of the Garcinia hanburyi Hook.f. [Clusiaceae
(Guttiferae)] in Southeast Asia. However, the anti-fibrotic activities of GA have
not been previously investigated.
METHODS: In this study, the effects of GA on TGF-ß1-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in A549 cells and endothelial-mesenchymal
transition (EndoMT) in human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HPMECs), 
on the proliferation of human lung fibroblasts (HLF-1) were investigated in
vitro, and on bleomycin (BLM)-induced pulmonary fibrosis was investigated in
vivo.
RESULTS: In TGF-ß1 stimulated A549 cells, treatment with GA resulted in a
reduction of EMT with a decrease in vimentin and p-Smad3 and an increase in
E-cadherin instead. In TGF-ß1 stimulated HPMECs, treatment with GA resulted in a 
reduction of EndoMT with a decrease in vimentin, and an increase in VE-cadherin
instead. In the hypoxic HPMECs, treatment with GA reduced Vasohibin-2 (VASH-2),
whereas increased VASH-1. In TGF-ß1 stimulated HLF-1, treatment with GA reduced
HLF-1 proliferation with a decrease in platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and 
fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2) expressions. In vivo, treatment with GA for 2
weeks resulted in an amelioration of the BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats
with a lower VASH-2. Instead, it was observed a higher VASH-1 expression at early
stage of fibrosis at 1mg/kg, with reductions of the pathological score, collagen 
deposition, a-SMA, PDGF and FGF-2 expressions at fibrotic stage at 0.5mg/kg and
1mg/kg.
CONCLUSION: In summary, GA reversed EMT and EndoMT, as well as HLF-1
proliferation in vitro and prevented pulmonary fibrosis in vivo by modulating
VASH-2/VASH-1 and suppressing the TGF-ß1/Smad3 pathway.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27002405  [PubMed - in process]


4. Cancer Lett. 2016 Mar 17. pii: S0304-3835(16)30173-2. doi:
10.1016/j.canlet.2016.03.023. [Epub ahead of print]

An integrin beta4-EGFR unit promotes hepatocellular carcinoma lung metastases by 
enhancing anchorage independence through activation of FAK-AKT pathway.

Leng C(1), Zhang ZG(1), Chen WX(1), Luo HP(1), Song J(1), Dong W(1), Zhu XR(1),
Chen XP(1), Liang HF(2), Zhang BX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatic Surgery Centre, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, 430030 Wuhan, Hubei, China. (2)Hepatic
Surgery Centre, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, 430030 Wuhan, Hubei, China. Electronic address:
lianghuifang1997@126.com. (3)Hepatic Surgery Centre, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 430030 Wuhan,
Hubei, China. Electronic address: bixiangzhang@163.com.

Anoikis, a form of programmed cell death, occurs when the cells are detached from
the appropriate extracellular matrix. Anoikis resistance or anchorage
independence is necessary for distant metastases of cancer. The mechanisms by
which hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells become resistant to anoikis are not
fully understood. Integrin beta4 (ITGB4, also known as CD104) is associated with 
progression of many human cancers. In this study, we demonstrate that ITGB4 is
over-expressed in HCC tissues and aggressive HCC cell lines. To explore the role 
of ITGB4 in HCC, we inhibited its expression using small interfering RNA in two
HCC cell lines: HCCLM3 and HLF. We show that knockdown of ITGB4 significantly
enhanced susceptibility to anoikis through inhibition of AKT/PKB signaling.
Moreover, ITGB4 interacts with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in a
ligand independent manner. Inactivation of EGFR inhibits the anchorage
independence and AKT pathway promoted by ITGB4. Further investigation proved that
the ITGB4-EGFR unit triggers the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) to activate the AKT 
signaling pathway. Finally, we demonstrate that over-expression of ITGB4 is
positively associated with tumor growth and lung metastases of HCC in vivo.
Collectively, we demonstrate for the first time that ITGB4 is overexpressed in
HCC tissues and promotes metastases of HCC by conferring anchorage independence
through EGFR-dependent FAK-AKT activation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26996299  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Oncol Rep. 2016 Mar 16. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4681. [Epub ahead of print]

Loss of Runt-related transcription factor 3 induces resistance to 5-fluorouracil 
and cisplatin in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kataoka J(1), Shiraha H(1), Horiguchi S(1), Sawahara H(1), Uchida D(1), Nagahara 
T(1), Iwamuro M(1), Morimoto H(1), Takeuchi Y(1), Kuwaki K(1), Onishi H(1),
Nakamura S(1), Takaki A(1), Nouso K(1), Yagi T(2), Yamamoto K(3), Okada H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan. (2)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Transplant and Surgical
Oncology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, Okayama Saiseikai General Hospital, Okayama 700-8511, Japan.

Runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) is known to function as a tumor
suppressor in gastric cancer and other types of cancers, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). However, its role has not been fully elucidated. In the present 
study, we aimed to evaluate the role of RUNX3 in HCC. We used the human HCC cell 
lines Hep3B, Huh7 and HLF; RUNX3 cDNA was introduced into Hep3B and Huh7 cells,
which were negative for endogenous RUNX3 expression, and RUNX3 siRNA was
transfected into HLF cells, which were positive for endogenous RUNX3. We analyzed
the expression of RUNX3 and multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP) by
immunoblotting. MTT assays were used to determine the effects of RUNX3 expression
on 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin (CDDP) sensitivity. Finally, 23 HCC
specimens resected from patients with HCC at Okayama University Hospital were
analyzed, and correlations among immunohistochemical expression of RUNX3 protein 
and MRP protein were evaluated in these specimens. Exogenous RUNX3 expression
reduced the expression of MRP1, MRP2, MRP3 and MRP5 in the RUNX3-negative cells, 
whereas knockdown of RUNX3 in the HLF cells stimulated the expression of these
MRPs. An inverse correlation between RUNX3 and MRP expression was observed in the
HCC tissues. Importantly, loss of RUNX3 expression contributed to 5-FU and CDDP
resistance by inducing MRP expression. These data have important implications in 
the study of chemotherapy resistance in HCC.

PMID: 26985715  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 7. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7950. [Epub ahead of print]

Exogenous hepatitis B virus envelope proteins induce endoplasmic reticulum
stress: involvement of cannabinoid axis in liver cancer cells.

Montalbano R(1), Honrath B(1), Wissniowski TT(2), Elxnat M(1), Roth S(1), Ocker
M(3,)(4), Quint K(3), Churin Y(5), Roederfeld M(5), Schroeder D(5), Glebe D(6),
Roeb E(5), Di Fazio P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Philipps University of 
Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (2)Division of Gastroenterology, Philipps University
of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (3)Institute for Surgical Research, Philipps
University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (4)Present address: Department of
Gastroenterology CBF, Charité University Medicine Berlin and Bayer Pharma AG,
Experimental Medicine Oncology, Berlin, Germany. (5)Department of
Gastroenterology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany. (6)Institute of
Medical Virology, National Reference Centre for Hepatitis B and D Viruses, Justus
Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.

HBV represents the most common chronic viral infection and major cause of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), although its exact role in liver tumorigenesis is
unclear. Massive storage of the small (SHBs), middle (MHBs) and large surface
(LHBs) HBV envelope proteins leads to cell stress and sustained inflammatory
responses. Cannabinoid (CB) system is involved in the pathogenesis of liver
diseases, stimulating acute and chronic inflammation, liver damage and
fibrogenesis; it triggers endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. The aim of 
our work was to investigate the activation of ER stress pathway after ectopic HBV
envelope proteins expression, in liver cancer cells, and the role exerted by CB
receptors. PCR, immunofluorescence and western blotting showed that exogenous
LHBs and MHBs induce a clear ER stress response in Huh-7 cells expressing CB1
receptor. Up-regulation of the chaperone BiP/GRP78 (Binding Immunoglobulin
Protein/Glucose-Regulated Protein 78) and of the transcription factor
CHOP/GADD153 (C/EBP Homologous Protein/Growth Arrest and DNA Damage inducible
gene 153), phosphorylation of PERK (PKR-like ER Kinase) and eIF2a (Eukaryotic
Initiation Factor 2a) and splicing of XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1) was
observed. CB1-/- HepG2 cells did not show any ER stress activation. Inhibition of
CB1 receptor counteracted BiP expression in transfected Huh-7 and in HBV+
PLC/PRF/5 cells; whereas no effect was observed in HBV- HLF cells. These results 
suggest that HBV envelope proteins are able to induce the ER stress pathway. CB1 
expression is directly correlated with ER stress function. Further investigations
are needed to clarify the involvement of cannabinoid in HCC progression after HBV
infection.

PMID: 26967385  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 10;6:22947. doi: 10.1038/srep22947.

Large-scale production of functional human lysozyme from marker-free transgenic
cloned cows.

Lu D(1,)(2), Liu S(1), Ding F(1), Wang H(1), Li J(1), Li L(1), Dai Y(1), Li N(1).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory for Agro-biotechnology, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China. (2)Shanghai Institute of Medical Genetics, Shanghai
Children's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Human lysozyme is an important natural non-specific immune protein that is highly
expressed in breast milk and participates in the immune response of infants
against bacterial and viral infections. Considering the medicinal value and
market demand for human lysozyme, an animal model for large-scale production of
recombinant human lysozyme (rhLZ) is needed. In this study, we generated
transgenic cloned cows with the marker-free vector pBAC-hLF-hLZ, which was shown 
to efficiently express rhLZ in cow milk. Seven transgenic cloned cows, identified
by polymerase chain reaction, Southern blot, and western blot analyses, produced 
rhLZ in milk at concentrations of up to 3149.19<U+2009>±<U+2009>24.80<U+2009>mg/L. The purified rhLZ
had a similar molecular weight and enzymatic activity as wild-type human lysozyme
possessed the same C-terminal and N-terminal amino acid sequences. The
preliminary results from the milk yield and milk compositions from a naturally
lactating transgenic cloned cow 0906 were also tested. These results provide a
solid foundation for the large-scale production of rhLZ in the future.

PMCID: PMC4785527
PMID: 26961596  [PubMed - in process]


8. Int J Oncol. 2016 Feb 19. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3403. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatocellular carcinoma cell sensitivity to V<U+03B3>9Vd2 T lymphocyte-mediated killing
is increased by zoledronate.

Sugai S(1), Yoshikawa T(1), Iwama T(1), Tsuchiya N(1), Ueda N(2), Fujinami N(1), 
Shimomura M(1), Zhang R(1), Kaneko S(2), Uemura Y(1), Nakatsura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Immunotherapy, Exploratory Oncology Research and Clinical
Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. (2)Shin Kaneko
Laboratory, Department of Cell Growth and Differentiation, Center for iPS Cell
Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

The limited efficacy of vaccines in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), due to the
low frequency of tumor-infiltrating cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), indicates the
importance of innate immune surveillance, which assists acquired immunity by
directly recognizing and eliminating HCC. Innate V<U+03B3>9Vd2 T cells have major
histocompatibility complex-unrestricted antitumor activity and are activated by
phosphoantigens, which are upregulated in cancer cells by the nitrogen-containing
bisphosphonate, zoledronate (Zol). A better understanding of HCC susceptibility
to Zol and downstream <U+03B3>d T cell-mediated killing is essential to optimize
<U+03B3>d T cell-mediated immunotherapy. This study systematically examined the
interactions between <U+03B3>d T cells and Zol-treated HCC cell lines (HepG2, HLE, HLF, 
HuH-1, JHH5, JHH7, and Li-7) in vitro. All HCC cell lines expressed the DNAX
accessory molecule-1 ligands, poliovirus receptor, and Nectin-2, and <U+03B3>d
T cell-mediated killing of these cells was significantly enhanced by Zol. Small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of these ligands did not affect the
susceptibility to <U+03B3>d T cell lysis. This killing activity was partly inhibited by 
mevastatin, an inhibitor of the mevalonate pathway, and markedly reduced by a
monoclonal antibody to <U+03B3>- and d-chain T cell receptor, indicating that this is
crucial for Zol-induced HCC killing. In addition, Zol-treated HCC cell lines
triggered <U+03B3>d T cell proliferation and induced production of Th1 and Th2, but not 
Th17, cytokines. The Zol concentration that enhanced HCC cell susceptibility to
<U+03B3>d T cell killing was lower than that required to directly inhibit HCC
proliferation. Thus, <U+03B3>d T cells may be important effector cells in the presence
of Zol, especially where there are insufficient number of cancer antigen-specific
CTLs to eliminate HCC. Our in vitro data support the proposal that Zol-treatment,
combined with adaptive <U+03B3>d T cell immunotherapy, may provide a feasible and
effective approach for treatment of HCC.

PMID: 26936487  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Oncol Lett. 2015 Dec;10(6):3515-3518. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Niclosamide suppresses migration of hepatocellular carcinoma cells and
downregulates matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Ishige N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization Shimoshizu
Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology, National
Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital,
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of Rheumatology, National
Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital, 
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, National
Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

Metastasis negatively affects the prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In
the present study, niclosamide, which is known to suppress the proliferation of
HCC cells, was investigated for possible suppressant effects on the migration of 
HCC cells. HLF and PLC/PRF/5 HCC cells were cultured in the presence of
niclosamide. Cell proliferation was analyzed using the MTS assay. Cell migration 
was measured by performing a scratch assay. Expression levels of cyclin D1 and
matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) were analyzed by performing revers
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Compared with the control
treatment, treatment with 10 µm niclosamide suppressed the proliferation of the
HLF and PRL/PRF/5 cells to 49.9±3.7 and 17.9±11.5% (P<0.05), respectively.
Furthermore, compared with the control treatment, treatment with 1.0 µM
niclosamide downregulated the expression of cyclin D1 to 52.4±4.4 and 23.9±5.4%
(P<0.05) in the HLF and PRL/PRF/5 cells, respectively. In the scratch assay,
treatment of the HLF cells with niclosamide (1.0 µm) decreased the distance of
the scratched line from the growing edge to 4.6±1.0 mm compared with the 9.2±1.4 
mm observed with the control treatment (P<0.05). Similarly, treatment of the
PRL/PRF/5 cells with niclosamide (1.0 µm) also decreased the distance of the
scratched line from the growing edge to 3.0±0.8 mm compared with the 5.5±0.9 mm
observed with the control treatment (P<0.05). Further, MMP9 expression levels in 
the HLF cells treated with 1.0 µm niclosamide decreased to 22.4±1.76% (P<0.05)
compared with those in the untreated control HLF cells. Similarly, expression
level of MMP9 in the PRL/PRF/5 cells treated with 1.0 µm niclosamide deceased to 
18.7±10.7% (P<0.05) compared with those in the untreated control PRL/PRF/5 cells.
Overall, niclosamide downregulated the expression of MMP9 in and suppressed the
migration of HCC cells.

PMCID: PMC4665752
PMID: 26788160  [PubMed]


10. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2016 Jan 15:ajplung.00185.2015. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00185.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

FGF9 and FGF18 in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis promote survival and migration
and inhibit myofibroblast differentiation of human lung fibroblasts in vitro.

Joannes A(1), Brayer S(1), Besnard V(2), Marchal-Sommé J(1), Jaillet M(3),
Mordant P(4), Mal H(5), Borie R(4), Crestani B(6), Mailleux AA(7).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1152. (2)INSERM UMR1152. (3)INSERMU1152. (4)Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Bichat. (5)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris. (6)University Paris Diderot bruno.crestani@bch.aphp.fr. (7)University
Paris Diderot Paris 7.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is characterized by an accumulation of
extracellular matrix proteins and fibroblasts in the distal airways. Key
developmental lung signaling pathways are reactivated in IPF. For instances,
Fibroblast growth factor 9 (FGF9) and FGF18, involved in epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions, are critical for lung development. We evaluated the expression of
FGF9, FGF18 and FGF receptors (FGFR) in lung tissue from controls and IPF
patients and assessed their effect on proliferation, survival, migration and
differentiation of control and IPF human lung fibroblasts (HLF). FGF9, FGF18 and 
all FGFRs were present in the remodeled alveolar epithelium close to the
fibroblast foci in IPF lungs. FGFR3 was generally detected in fibroblast foci by 
immunohistochemistry. In vitro, HLFs mainly expressed mesenchyme-associated FGFR 
isoforms (FGFR1c and FGFR3c) and FGFR4. FGF9 did not affect fibroblast
proliferation, whereas FGF18 inhibited cell growth in control fibroblasts. FGF9
and FGF18 decreased Fas-ligand-induced apoptosis in control but not in IPF
fibroblasts. FGF9 prevented TGF-ß1-induced myofibroblast differentiation. FGF9
and FGF18 increased the migratory capacities of HLF, and FGF9 actively modulated 
matrix metalloproteinase activity. In addition, FGFR3 inhibition by siRNA
impacted pERK activation by FGF9 and FGF18 and their effects on differentiation
and migration. These results identify FGF9 as an anti-apoptotic and pro-migratory
growth factor on HLF, maintaining fibroblasts in an undifferentiated state. The
biological effects of FGF9 and FGF18 were partially driven by FGFR3. FGF18 was a 
less potent molecule. Both growth factors likely contribute to the fibrotic
process in vivo.

Copyright © 2015, American Journal of Physiology - Lung Cellular and Molecular
Physiology.

PMID: 26773067  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 15;8(10):17295-307. eCollection 2015.

Hawthorn leaf flavonoids alleviate nonalcoholic fatty liver disease by enhancing 
the adiponectin/AMPK pathway.

Li Z(1), Xu J(2), Zheng P(2), Xing L(2), Shen H(3), Yang L(2), Zhang L(2), Ji
G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Diseases, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine725 South Wanping Road, Shanghai 200032, China;
Research Center for Health and Nutrition, Shanghai University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine1200 Cailun Road, Shanghai 201203, China. (2)Institute of
Digestive Diseases, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine 725 South Wanping Road, Shanghai 200032, China. (3)Research Center for
Health and Nutrition, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine 1200
Cailun Road, Shanghai 201203, China. (4)Institute of Digestive Diseases, Longhua 
Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine725 South Wanping
Road, Shanghai 200032, China; E-Institute of Shanghai Municipal Education
Commission, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese MedicineShanghai 201203,
China.

Hawthorn (Crataeguspinnatifida) belongs to the genus Rosaceae family of plants.
The hawthorn leaf, Crataeguspinnatifida Bunge, is used for both condiment and
medicinal purposes to prevent and treat metabolic dysfunctions, such as
hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease in traditional Chinese
medicine. However, its effects on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) remain
obscure. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the protective
effect of hawthorn leaf flavonoids (HLF), the dominant bioactive extracts of
hawthorn leaves, on high fat diet (HFD)-induced hepatic steatosis and to
elucidate its underlying mechanisms. HLF supplementation significantly lowered
body weight, liver weight, liver/body weight ratio, improved serum parameters and
liver dysfunction and markedly decreased hepatic lipid accumulation in HFD-fed
rats. In addition, HLF intervention dramatically increased circulating
adiponectin levels and up-regulated the expression of adiponectin receptors,
particularly adiponectin receptor 2 (AdipoR2) in the liver. Moreover, adenosine
monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (AMPK) was also activated, as well
as AMPK-mediated alteration of sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c
(SREBP-1c), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa) and their
downstream targets. Taken together, our data suggest that HLF ameliorates hepatic
steatosis by enhancing the adiponectin/AMPK pathway in the liver of HFD-induced
NAFLD rats.

PMCID: PMC4694222
PMID: 26770322  [PubMed]


12. Food Funct. 2016 Feb 17;7(2):665-78. doi: 10.1039/c5fo01217a.

Milk with and without lactoferrin can influence intestinal damage in a pig model 
of malnutrition.

Garas LC(1), Feltrin C(2), Kristina Hamilton M(3), Hagey JV(1), Murray JD(4),
Bertolini LR(2), Bertolini M(2), Raybould HE(3), Maga EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis, USA.
eamaga@ucdavis.edu. (2)Molecular and Developmental Biology Lab, University of
Fortaleza, Fortaleza CE, Brazil. (3)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Cell
Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, USA.
(4)Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis, USA.
eamaga@ucdavis.edu and Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School
of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, USA.

Malnutrition remains a leading contributor to the morbidity and mortality of
children under the age of five worldwide. However, the underlying mechanisms are 
not well understood necessitating an appropriate animal model to answer
fundamental questions and conduct translational research into optimal
interventions. One potential intervention is milk from livestock that more
closely mimics human milk by increased levels of bioactive components that can
promote a healthy intestinal epithelium. We tested the ability of cow milk and
milk from transgenic cows expressing human lactoferrin at levels found in human
milk (hLF milk) to mitigate the effects of malnutrition at the level of the
intestine in a pig model of malnutrition. Weaned pigs (3 weeks old) were fed a
protein and calorie restricted diet for five weeks, receiving cow, hLF or no milk
supplementation daily from weeks 3-5. After three weeks, the restricted diet
induced changes in growth, blood chemistry and intestinal structure including
villous atrophy, increased ex vivo permeability and decreased expression of tight
junction proteins. Addition of both cow and hLF milk to the diet increased growth
rate and calcium and glucose levels while promoting growth of the intestinal
epithelium. In the jejunum hLF milk restored intestinal morphology, reduced
permeability and increased expression of anti-inflammatory IL-10. Overall, this
pig model of malnutrition mimics salient aspects of the human condition and
demonstrates that cow milk can stimulate the repair of damage to the intestinal
epithelium caused by protein and calorie restriction with hLF milk improving this
recovery to a greater extent.

PMID: 26751615  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Genet. 2015 Dec;94(4):697-704.

Genetic diversity and population structure of endangered Aquilaria malaccensis
revealed potential for future conservation.

Singh P(1), Nag A, Parmar R, Ghosh S, Bhau BS, Sharma RK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology,
P.O. Box 6, Palampur 176 061, India. rksharma.ihbt@gmail.com.

The endangered Aquilaria malaccensis,is an important plant with high economic
values. Characterization of genetic diversity and population structure is
receiving tremendous attention for effective conservation of genetic resources.
Considering important repositories of biological diversity, the genetic
relationships of 127 A. malaccensis accessions from 10 home gardens of three
states of northeast India were assessed using amplified fragment length
polymorphism (AFLP). Of the 1153 fragments amplified with four AFLP primer
combinations, 916 (79.4%) were found to be polymorphic. Polymorphic information
content (PIC) and marker index (MI) of each primer combination correlate
significantly with the number of genotypes resolved. Overall, a high genetic
diversity (avg. 71.85%) was recorded. Further, high gene flow (Nm: 3.37), low
genetic differentiation (FST: 0.069) and high within population genetic variation
(93%) suggests that most of the genetic diversity is restricted within
population. Neighbour joining (NJ), principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) and
Bayesian-based STRUCTURE grouped all the accessions in two clusters with
significant intermixing between populations, therefore, revealed that two
genetically distinct gene pools are operating in the A. malaccensis populations
cultivated in home gardens. Based on the various diversity inferences, five
diverse populations (JOH, FN, HLF, DHM and ITN) were identified, which can be
potentially exploited to develop conservation strategies for A. malaccensis.

PMID: 26690525  [PubMed - in process]


14. Nutr Diabetes. 2015 Dec 14;5:e188. doi: 10.1038/nutd.2015.40.

A comparison of effects of lard and hydrogenated vegetable shortening on the
development of high-fat diet-induced obesity in rats.

Kubant R(1), Poon AN(1), Sánchez-Hernández D(1), Domenichiello AF(1), Huot PS(1),
Pannia E(1), Cho CE(1), Hunschede S(1), Bazinet RP(1), Anderson GH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Obesity is associated with increased consumption and preference for
dietary fat. Experimental models of fat-induced obesity use either lard or
vegetable shortening. Yet, there are no direct comparisons of these commonly used
fat sources, or the influence of their fatty acid composition, on the development
of diet-induced obesity.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the effects of lard and hydrogenated vegetable-shortening
diets, which differ in their fatty acid composition, on weight gain and the
development of obesity and insulin resistance in rats.
METHODS AND DESIGN: Male Wistar rats were fed ad libitum for 14 weeks high-fat
diets containing either (1) high vegetable fat (HVF, 60<U+2009>kcal% from vegetable
shortening) or (2) high lard fat (HLF, 60<U+2009>kcal% from lard). Rats fed normal-fat
(NF, 16<U+2009>kcal% from vegetable shortening) diet served as control. Body weight,
food intake, adipose tissue mass, serum 25[OH]D3, glucose, insulin and fatty acid
composition of diets were measured.
RESULTS: Rats fed either of the two high-fat diets had higher energy intake,
weight gain and fat accretion than rats fed normal-fat diet. However, rats fed
the HLF diet consumed more calories and gained more weight and body fat with
greater increases of 32% in total (158.5±8.2 vs 120.2±6.6<U+2009>g, P<0.05), 30% in
visceral (104.4±5.2 vs 80.3±4.2<U+2009>g, P<0.05) and 36% in subcutaneous fat mass
(54.1±3.6 vs 39.9±3.1<U+2009>g, P<0.05), compared with rats fed the HVF diet. Higher
visceral adiposity was positively correlated with serum insulin (r=0.376, P<0.05)
and homeostatic model assessment insulin resistance (r=0.391, P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that lard-based high-fat diets accentuate the increase in
weight gain and the development of obesity and insulin resistance more than
hydrogenated vegetable-shortening diets. These results further point to the
importance of standardizing fatty acid composition and type of fat used in
determining outcomes of consuming high-fat diets.

PMCID: PMC4735054
PMID: 26657014  [PubMed]


15. Epilepsy Res. 2016 Jan;119:20-3. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2015.11.016. Epub 2015
Dec 1.

Hlf is a genetic modifier of epilepsy caused by voltage-gated sodium channel
mutations.

Hawkins NA(1), Kearney JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Searle 8-520, 320 East Superior St., Chicago, IL 60091, United States; 
Neuroscience Program, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, United States. 
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Searle 8-520, 320 East Superior St., Chicago, IL 60091, United States; 
Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, United
States. Electronic address: jennifer.kearney@northwestern.edu.

Mutations in voltage-gated sodium channel genes cause several types of human
epilepsies. Often, individuals with the same sodium channel mutation exhibit
diverse phenotypes. This suggests that factors beyond the primary mutation
influence disease severity, including genetic modifiers. Mouse epilepsy models
with voltage-gated sodium channel mutations exhibit strain-dependent phenotype
variability, supporting a contribution of genetic modifiers in epilepsy. The
Scn2a(Q54) (Q54) mouse model has a strain-dependent epilepsy phenotype. Q54 mice 
on the C57BL/6J (B6) strain exhibit delayed seizure onset and improved survival
compared to [B6xSJL/J]F1.Q54 mice. We previously mapped two dominant modifier
loci that influence Q54 seizure susceptibility and identified Hlf (hepatic
leukemia factor) as a candidate modifier gene at one locus. Hlf and other PAR
bZIP transcription factors had previously been associated with spontaneous
seizures in mice thought to be caused by down-regulation of the pyridoxine
pathway. An Hlf targeted knockout mouse model was used to evaluate the effect of 
Hlf deletion on Q54 phenotype severity. Hlf(KO/KO);Q54 double mutant mice
exhibited elevated frequency and reduced survival compared to Q54 controls. To
determine if direct modulation of the pyridoxine pathway could alter the Q54
phenotype, mice were maintained on a pyridoxine-deficient diet for 6 weeks.
Dietary pyridoxine deficiency resulted in elevated seizure frequency and
decreased survival in Q54 mice compared to control diet. To determine if Hlf
could modify other epilepsies, Hlf(KO/+) mice were crossed with the Scn1a(KO/+)
Dravet syndrome mouse model to examine the effect on premature lethality.
Hlf(KO/+);Scn1a(KO/+) offspring exhibited decreased survival compared to
Scn1a(KO/+) controls. Together these results demonstrate that Hlf is a genetic
modifier of epilepsy caused by voltage-gated sodium channel mutations and that
modulation of the pyridoxine pathway can also influence phenotype severity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4698075 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26656780  [PubMed - in process]


16. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 14;10(12):e0144516. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144516.
eCollection 2015.

Ulinastatin Protects against Acute Kidney Injury in Infant Piglets Model
Undergoing Surgery on Hypothermic Low-Flow Cardiopulmonary Bypass.

Wang X(1,)(2), Xue Q(2), Yan F(2), Liu J(3), Li S(4), Hu S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, the Second
Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, 
Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. (3)Department 
of Cardiopulmonary Bypass, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai 
Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. (4)Department of
Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National
Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Infants are more vulnerable to kidney injuries induced by inflammatory
response syndrome and ischemia-reperfusion injury following cardiopulmonary
bypass especially with prolonged hypothermic low-flow (HLF). This study aims to
evaluate the protective role of ulinastatin, an anti-inflammatory agent, against 
acute kidney injuries in infant piglets model undergoing surgery on HLF
cardiopulmonary bypass.
METHODS: Eighteen general-type infant piglets were randomly separated into the
ulinastatin group (Group U, n = 6), the control group (Group C, n = 6), and the
sham operation group (Group S, n = 6), and anaesthetized. The groups U and C
received following experimental procedure: median thoracotomy, routine CPB and
HLF, and finally weaned from CPB. The group S only underwent sham median
thoracotomy. Ulinastatin at a dose of 5,000 units/kg body weight and a certain
volume of saline were administrated to animals of the groups U and C at the
beginning of CPB and at aortic declamping, respectively. Venous blood samples
were collected at 3 different time points: after anesthesia induction in all
experimental groups, 5 minutes, and 120 minutes after CPB in the Groups U and C. 
Markers for inflammation and acute kidney injury were tested in the collected
plasma. N-acetyl-ß-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) from urine, markers of oxidative
stress injury and TUNEL-positive cells in kidney tissues were also detected.
RESULTS: The expressions of plasma inflammatory markers and acute kidney injury
markers increased both in Group U and Group C at 5 min and 120 min after CPB.
Also, numbers of TUNEL-positive cells and oxidative stress markers in kidney rose
in both groups. At the time point of 120-min after CPB, compared with the Group
C, some plasma inflammatory and acute kidney injury markers as well as
TUNEL-positive cells and oxidative stress markers in kidney were significantly
reduced in the Group U. Histologic analyses showed that HLF promoted acute
tubular necrosis and dilatation.
CONCLUSIONS: HLF cardiopulmonary bypass surgery could intensify systemic
inflammatory responses and oxidative stress on infant piglets, thus causing acute
kidney injury. Ulinastatin might reduce such inflammatory response and oxidative 
stress and the extent of kidney injury.

PMCID: PMC4684368
PMID: 26656098  [PubMed - in process]


17. Int J Oncol. 2016 Jan;48(1):123-9. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3259. Epub 2015 Nov 20.

Suppression of hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation by short hairpin RNA
of frizzled 2 with Sonazoid-enhanced irradiation.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Ishige N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu
Hospital, Yotsukaido City, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology,
National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido City, Chiba
284-0003, Japan. (3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization,
Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido City, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of
Rheumatology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido
City, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital
Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido City, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu
Hospital, Yotsukaido City, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

Short-hairpin RNA of frizzled-2 (shRNA-Fz2) is known to suppress the
proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells; however, its effect on HCC
cell motility is unknown. In this study, suppression of HCC cell motility by
shRNA-Fz2 was analyzed, and introduction of shRNA-Fz2 into HCC cells was
facilitated with ultrasound (US) irradiation generated from a diagnostic US
device, which was enhanced by the contrast-enhanced US reagent Sonazoid. The HCC 
cell lines HLF and PLC/PRF/5 that were transfected with shRNA-Fz2 were plated to 
form monolayers, following which the cell monolayers were scratched with a
sterile razor. After 48 h, the cells were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and
the distance between the growing edge of the cell layer and the scratch lines was
measured. Total RNA from the cells was isolated and subjected to real-time
quantitative PCR to quantify matrix metalloproteinase 9 expression at 48 h after 
transfection of shRNA-Fz2. Starch-iodide method was applied to analyze the
generation of H2O2 following US irradiation with the addition of Sonazoid in the 
liquid, and cell proliferation was analyzed 72 h later. The distances between the
growing edge of the cell layer and the scratch lines and MMP9 expression levels
were significantly decreased with transfection of shRNA-Fz2 (P<0.05). In the
starch-iodide method, absorbance significantly decreased with the addition of
Sonazoid (P<0.05), which suggested that US irradiation with Sonazoid generated
H2O2 and enhanced sonoporation. ShRNA-Fz2 suppressed cell proliferation of both
cell lines at a mechanical index of 0.4. Motility of HLF cells and PLC/PRF/5
cells was suppressed by shRNA-FZ2. Sonazoid enhanced sonoporation of the cells
with the diagnostic US device and the suppression of proliferation of both HCC
cell lines by shRNA-Fz2.

PMID: 26648389  [PubMed - in process]


18. Oral Dis. 2016 Mar;22(2):148-54. doi: 10.1111/odi.12401. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

Human lactoferrin protects against Streptococcus mutans-induced caries in mice.

Velusamy SK(1), Markowitz K(1), Fine DH(1), Velliyagounder K(1).

Author information: 
(1)RUTGERS School of Dental Medicine, Newark, NJ, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study is to evaluate the importance of human
lactoferrin (hLF) in an experimental caries induced by Streptococcus mutans in a 
lactoferrin-knockout (LFKO(-/-) ) mouse model compared with C576J/BL wild-type
(WT) mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The WT and LFKO(-/-) mice were infected with S. mutans
(1 × 10(8)  cells) and/or sham infection. Furthermore, the effect of hLF
administration was evaluated in LFKO(-/-) mice infected with S. mutans. Mice were
assessed for colonization, salivary pH, and caries development.
RESULTS: The results showed that the lactoferrin-knockout infected (LFKO(-/-) I) 
mice had significantly higher colonization with S. mutans (P = 0.02), lower
salivary pH (P = 0.01), and more carious lesions (P = 0.01) when compared to
wild-type infected (WTI) mice. In addition, the administration of hLF did not
show any evidence of S. mutans colonization as well as carious lesions
(P = 0.001) in LFKO(-/-) I mice when compared to untreated LFKO(-/-) I mice.
CONCLUSION: These results show that endogenous LF protects against
S. mutans-induced caries and that exogenous hLF can exert a protective effect
against caries development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26601919  [PubMed - in process]


19. Acta Paediatr. 2016 Mar;105(3):281-5. doi: 10.1111/apa.13278. Epub 2015 Dec 16.

End user bag-mask ability and perceptions of two infant resuscitation mannequins.

Hawkes GA(1,)(2), Malik Y(1), Livingstone V(2,)(3), Dempsey EM(1,)(2), Ryan
CA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland. (2)Irish Centre for Fetal and Neonatal Translational Research (INFANT), 
Cork, Ireland. (3)Neonatal Brain Research Group, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland.

AIM: To examine user ability and preference in performing bag-mask ventilation
(BMV) with four different configurations of infant mannequins.
METHODS: Participants provided a 30-second period of BMV to a Resusci Baby
mannequin (RB), NeoNatalie mannequin (NN), NN filled with air (NNA), NN filled
with water (NNW) and NN filled with 50% air and 50% water mix (NNAW).
Participants rated the fidelity of each configuration.
RESULTS: Of the 20 participants, 65% rated NNW as having a high level of fidelity
(HLF) 'to hold' (50% for NNAW, 10% for RB and 0% for NNA) (p < 0.001). Half rated
NNAW as having a HLF in 'tone' (40% for NNW, 20% for RB and 5% for NNA) (p =
0.008). About 45% of participants rated NNAW as having a HLF in 'appearance' (45%
for the RB, 20% for NNA and 15% for NNW) (p = 0.035). About 35% of participants
rated NNAW as having a HLF in how it 'felt to touch' (30% for NNW, 15% for RB and
10% for NNA) (p = 0.008). Half of participants rated NNAW as having a HLF in
terms of 'weight' (45% for NNW, 40% for RB and 0% for NNA) (p = 0.003).
Participants delivered the greatest number of effective ventilations to the NNW
mannequin.
CONCLUSION: The NNW and NNAW configurations had the highest fidelity and had the 
highest percentage of effective ventilations delivered.

©2015 Foundation Acta Paediatrica. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26589651  [PubMed - in process]


20. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 20;10(11):e0143216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143216.
eCollection 2015.

Conditional Expression of E2A-HLF Induces B-Cell Precursor Death and
Myeloproliferative-Like Disease in Knock-In Mice.

Duque-Afonso J(1), Smith KS(1), Cleary ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Chromosomal translocations are driver mutations of human cancers, particularly
leukemias. They define disease subtypes and are used as prognostic markers, for
minimal residual disease monitoring and therapeutic targets. Due to their low
incidence, several translocations and their biological consequences remain poorly
characterized. To address this, we engineered mouse strains that conditionally
express E2A-HLF, a fusion oncogene from the translocation t(17;19) associated
with 1% of pediatric B-cell precursor ALL. Conditional oncogene activation and
expression were directed to the B-cell compartment by the Cre driver promoters
CD19 or Mb1 (Iga, CD79a), or to the hematopoietic stem cell compartment by the
Mx1 promoter. E2A-HLF expression in B-cell progenitors induced hyposplenia and
lymphopenia, whereas expression in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells was
embryonic lethal. Increased cell death was detected in E2A-HLF expressing cells, 
suggesting the need for cooperating genetic events that suppress cell death for
B-cell oncogenic transformation. E2A-HLF/Mb1.Cre aged mice developed a fatal
myeloproliferative-like disorder with low frequency characterized by
leukocytosis, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly and organ-infiltration by mature
myelocytes. In conclusion, we have developed conditional E2A-HLF knock-in mice,
which provide an experimental platform to study cooperating genetic events and
further elucidate translational biology in cross-species comparative studies.

PMCID: PMC4654581
PMID: 26588248  [PubMed - in process]


21. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Mar;5(2):113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.01.003. Epub
2015 Feb 2.

Circadian rhythms in liver metabolism and disease.

Ferrell JM(1), Chiang JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University,
Rootstown OH 44272, USA.

Mounting research evidence demonstrates a significant negative impact of
circadian disruption on human health. Shift work, chronic jet lag and sleep
disturbances are associated with increased incidence of metabolic syndrome, and
consequently result in obesity, type 2 diabetes and dyslipidemia. Here, these
associations are reviewed with respect to liver metabolism and disease.

PMCID: PMC4629216
PMID: 26579436  [PubMed]


22. Apoptosis. 2016 Feb;21(2):163-73. doi: 10.1007/s10495-015-1199-9.

Human lactoferrin triggers a mitochondrial- and caspase-dependent regulated cell 
death in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Acosta-Zaldívar M(1,)(2), Andrés MT(1), Rego A(3), Pereira CS(3), Fierro
JF(1,)(2), Côrte-Real M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Microbiología Oral, Escuela de Estomatología, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain. (2)Departamento de Biología
Funcional (Microbiología), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo,
Spain. (3)CBMA - Centro de Biologia Molecular e Ambiental, Departamento de
Biologia, Universidade do Minho, Campus Gualtar, Braga, Portugal. (4)CBMA -
Centro de Biologia Molecular e Ambiental, Departamento de Biologia, Universidade 
do Minho, Campus Gualtar, Braga, Portugal. mcortereal@bio.uminho.pt.

We have previously shown that the antifungal activity of human lactoferrin (hLf) 
against Candida albicans relies on its ability to induce cell death associated
with apoptotic markers. To gain a deeper understanding of the mechanisms
underlying hLf-induced apoptosis, we characterized this cell death process in the
well-established Saccharomyces cerevisiae model. Our results indicate that hLf
induces cell death in S. cerevisiae in a manner that requires energy and de novo 
protein synthesis. Cell death is associated with nuclear chromatin condensation, 
preservation of plasma membrane integrity, and is Yca1p metacaspase-dependent.
Lactoferrin also caused mitochondrial dysfunction associated with ROS
accumulation and release of cytochrome c. Pre-incubation with oligomycin, an
oxidative phosphorylation inhibitor, increased resistance to hLf and,
accordingly, mutants deficient in the F1F0-ATP synthase complex were more
resistant to death induced by hLf. This indicates that mitochondrial energetic
metabolism plays a key role in the killing effect of hLf, though a direct role of
F1F0-ATP synthase cannot be precluded. Overexpression of the anti-apoptotic
protein Bcl-xL or pre-incubation with N-acetyl cysteine reduced the intracellular
level of ROS and increased resistance to hLf, confirming a ROS-mediated
mitochondrial cell death process. Mitochondrial involvement was further
reinforced by the higher resistance of cells lacking mitochondrial DNA, or other 
known yeast mitochondrial apoptosis regulators, such as, Aif1p, Cyc3p and
Aac1/2/3p. This study provides new insights into a detailed understanding at the 
molecular level of hLf-induced apoptosis, which may allow the design of new
strategies to overcome the emergence of resistance of clinically relevant fungi
to conventional antifungals.

PMID: 26577769  [PubMed - in process]


23. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan;35(1):59-63. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4370. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Suppressive effects of 3-bromopyruvate on the proliferation and the motility of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Ishige N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu
Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of Rheumatology, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital,
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

The compound 3-bromopyruvate (3BP) is an analogue of pyruvate, which is the final
product of glycolysis that enters the citric acid cycle. The present study aimed 
to investigate the suppressive effects of 3BP on the proliferation and motility
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. HLF and PLC/PRF/5 cells were cultured
with 3BP and subjected to an MTS assay. Apoptosis was analyzed by hematoxylin and
eosin staining. Cell motility was analyzed using a scratch assay. Real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed to determine the
expression levels of cyclin D1 and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)9. Proliferation
of both cell lines was significantly suppressed by 3BP at 100 µM (P<0.05). The
expression level of cyclin D1 was decreased after 3BP treatment at 100 µM in both
cell lines (P<0.05). Pyknotic nuclei were observed in the cells cultured with 3BP
at 100 µM. These results revealed that 3BP suppressed cell proliferation,
decreased the expression of cyclin D1, and induced apoptosis in HCC cells. 3BP
significantly suppressed motility in both cell lines (P<0.05). The expression
level of MMP9 was significantly decreased (P<0.05). 3BP suppressed the
proliferation and motility of HCC cells by decreasing the expression of cyclin D1
and MMP9.

PMID: 26530887  [PubMed - in process]


24. Int J Oncol. 2016 Jan;48(1):110-4. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3220. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

FH535 suppresses the proliferation and motility of hepatocellular carcinoma
cells.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Ishige N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu
Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of Rheumatology, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital,
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

The Wnt signaling pathway is activated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). This
study investigated the effects of FH535, an inhibitor of the Wnt signaling
pathway, on the proliferation and motility of HCC cells. HLF cells and PLC/PRF/5 
cells, HCC cells, were subjected to
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetr
azolium, inner salt (MTS) assay with the addition of FH535. RNA was isolated from
the cells and subjected to real-time quantitative PCR. Hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) staining was performed to analyze apoptosis. A scratch assay was performed 
to analyze cell motility. Cell proliferation significantly decreased (P<0.05).
The expression levels of cyclin D1 significantly decreased in both cell lines
(P<0.05). Pyknotic nuclei were observed in the cells cultured with FH535 (50 µM).
In the scratch assay, the distance between the growing edges of cells and the
scratched line significantly decreased with the addition of FH535 at 50 µM
(P<0.05). The expression levels of matrix metalloproteinase 9 significantly
decreased at 50 µM (P<0.05). FH535 suppressed the proliferation of HCC cells by
downregulating the expression of cyclin D1 and by inducing apoptosis. Further, it
suppressed cell motility by downregulating the expression of matrix
metalloproteinase.

PMID: 26530115  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Vis Exp. 2015 Oct 1;(104). doi: 10.3791/53053.

Immunofluorescence to Monitor the Cellular Uptake of Human Lactoferrin and its
Associated Antiviral Activity Against the Hepatitis C Virus.

Allaire A(1), Picard-Jean F(1), Bisaillon M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biochimie, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé,
Université de Sherbrooke. (2)Département de biochimie, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke; Martin.Bisaillon@usherbrooke.ca.

Immunofluorescence is a laboratory technique commonly used to study many aspects 
of biology. It is typically used to visualize the distribution and/or
localization of a target molecule in cells and tissues. Immunofluorescence relies
on the specificity of fluorescent-labelled antibodies against their corresponding
antigens within a cell. Both direct and indirect immunofluorescence approaches
can be used which rely on the use of antibodies linked with a fluorochrome.
Direct immunofluorescence is less frequently used because it provides lower
signal, involves higher cost and less flexibility. In contrast, indirect
immunofluorescence is more commonly used because of its high sensitivity and
provides an amplified signal since more than one secondary antibody can attach to
each primary antibody. In this manuscript, both epifluorescence microscopy and
confocal microscopy were used to monitor the internalization of human
lactoferrin, an important component of the immune system, into hepatic cells.
Moreover, we monitored the inhibitory potential of hLF on the intracellular
replication of the Hepatitis C virus using immunofluorescence. Both the
advantages and disadvantages associated with these approaches are discussed.

PMID: 26485289  [PubMed - in process]


26. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2016 Jan;178(1):44-57. doi: 10.1007/s12010-015-1857-y.
Epub 2015 Sep 23.

Comparison of Proliferative Effect of Human Lactoferrin and Its Proteolytic
Peptide on Normal and Transformed Epithelial Cells.

Hwang SM(1), Chung IY(2,)(3), Jo JH(4), Yoon TJ(4), Lee HH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bionano Technology, Hanyang University, Ansan, Gyeonggi-do,
426-791, South Korea. (2)Department of Bionano Technology, Hanyang University,
Ansan, Gyeonggi-do, 426-791, South Korea. iychu@hanyang.ac.kr. (3)Korea and
Department of Molecular and Life Sciences, College of Science and Technology,
Hanyang University, Ansan, Gyeonggi-do, 426-791, South Korea.
iychu@hanyang.ac.kr. (4)Research Institute, LSM Co., Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do,
462-807, South Korea. (5)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology and Protein
Research Center of GRRC, College of Natural Sciences, Hankuk University of
Foreign Studies, Yongin, Gyeonggi-do, 449-791, South Korea. hyunelee@hufs.ac.kr.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is an iron-binding glycoprotein with a variety of
functions. hLF undergoes proteolytic cleavage to smaller peptides in the stomach 
following ingestion. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of hLF and
its proteolytic product, human lactoferrin peptide (hLFP), on the proliferation
of two epithelial cells, HEK293 normal cells and KATO III gastric carcinoma
cells, using an MTT assay and expression of proliferative nuclear cell antigen
(PCNA), a notable proliferation marker. When the two epithelial cells were
stimulated with hLF and hLFP in the presence of fetal bovine serum (FBS), hLFP
stimulated proliferation of both cell types at lower concentrations than hLF by
two orders of magnitude. The cancer cells exhibited proliferative responses to
both hLF and hLFP at lower concentrations by 2~3 orders of magnitude than the
normal cells. Either hLF or hLFP alone did not support appreciable proliferation 
of these cell lines in the absence or low concentrations of FBS. Bovine serum
albumin or its proteolytic product failed to promote cellular proliferation even 
in the presence of 10 % FBS, indicating the specificity of the proliferative
activity of hLF and hLFP. These data highlight feasibility of hLF and its peptide
for adjuvants for tissue culture medium.

PMID: 26400493  [PubMed - in process]


27. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Sep 11;7(1):98. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0133-x.
eCollection 2015.

Induction of active demethylation and 5hmC formation by 5-azacytidine is TET2
dependent and suggests new treatment strategies against hepatocellular carcinoma.

Sajadian SO(1), Ehnert S(1), Vakilian H(2), Koutsouraki E(3), Damm G(4), Seehofer
D(4), Thasler W(5), Dooley S(6), Baharvand H(2), Sipos B(7), Nussler AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eberhard-Karls University Tübingen, BG Trauma Clinic, SWI, Schnarrenbergstraße
95, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. (2)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental
Biology at the Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. (3)Centre for Clinical Brain
Sciences, Chancellor's Building 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of General, Visceral, Transplantation, Vascular, and Thoracic
Surgery, University of Munich, Campus Grosshadern, Munich, Germany. (6)Section
Molecular Hepatology, Department of Medicine II, Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Department of Pathology,
Eberhard-Karls University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Global deregulation of DNA methylation is one of the crucial causes
of hepato cellular carcinoma (HCC). It has been reported that the anti-cancer
drug 5-azacytidine (5-AZA) mediates the activation of tumor suppressor genes
through passive demethylation by inhibiting DNMT1. Recent evidence suggests that 
active demethylation which is mediated by ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins
may also be an important step to control global methylation. However, there
exists a controversial discussion in which TET proteins are involved in the
demethylation process in HCC. Therefore, we firstly wanted to identify which of
the TETs are involved in demethylation and later to study whether or not 5-AZA
could trigger the TET-dependent active demethylation process in HCC. HCC cell
lines (Huh-7, HLE, HLF), primary human hepatocytes (hHeps), and tissues from both
healthy (55 patients) and HCC patients (55 patients) were included in this study;
mRNA levels of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH1, 2) and TETs (TET1-3) were studied 
via qPCR and confirmed by Western blot. The expression of 5hmC/5mC was determined
by immunohistochemistry in human HCC tissues and the corresponding adjacent
healthy liver. HCC cell lines were stimulated with 5-AZA (0-20 µM) and viability 
(Resazurin conversion), toxicity (LDH release), proliferation (PCNA), and
5hmC/5mC distribution were assessed. In addition, knockdown experiments on TET
proteins in HCC cell lines using short interference RNAs (siRNAs), in the
presence and absence of 5-AZA, were performed.
RESULTS: Our data applying qPCR, immunofluorescence, and Western blotting clearly
show that TET2 and TET3 but not TET1 were significantly decreased in HCC tissue
and different HCC cell lines compared to non-tumor liver tissues and hHeps. In
addition, we show here for the first time applying knockdown experiments that
5-AZA is able to trigger an active TET2-dependent demethylation process with
concomitant significant changes in 5hmC/5mC in HCC cell lines and hHeps.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data clearly show that the expression and activity of TET2 and
TET3 proteins but not TET1 are impaired in hepatocellular carcinoma leading to
the reduction of 5hmC in HCCs. Furthermore, this study identified a novel
function of 5-azacytidine in promoting a TET-mediated generation of 5hmC
suggesting that the availability of 5-AZA in cancer cells will have various
effects on different epigenetic targets. These findings may open new therapeutic 
strategies for epigenetic drugs to treat HCC.

PMCID: PMC4567821
PMID: 26366235  [PubMed]


28. Front Immunol. 2015 Aug 20;6:404. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00404. eCollection
2015.

Antimicrobial Peptides in Human Sepsis.

Martin L(1), van Meegern A(1), Doemming S(1), Schuerholz T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care and Intermediate Care, University Hospital RWTH
Aachen , Aachen , Germany.

Nearly 100<U+2009>years ago, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) were identified as an
important part of innate immunity. They exist in species from bacteria to mammals
and can be isolated in body fluids and on surfaces constitutively or induced by
inflammation. Defensins have anti-bacterial effects against Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria as well as anti-viral and anti-yeast effects. Human
neutrophil peptides (HNP) 1-3 and human beta-defensins (HBDs) 1-3 are some of the
most important defensins in humans. Recent studies have demonstrated higher
levels of HNP 1-3 and HBD-2 in sepsis. The bactericidal/permeability-increasing
protein (BPI) attenuates local inflammatory response and decreases systemic
toxicity of endotoxins. Moreover, BPI might reflect the severity of organ
dysfunction in sepsis. Elevated plasma lactoferrin is detected in patients with
organ failure. HNP 1-3, lactoferrin, BPI, and heparin-binding protein are
increased in sepsis. Human lactoferrin peptide 1-11 (hLF 1-11) possesses
antimicrobial activity and modulates inflammation. The recombinant form of
lactoferrin [talactoferrin alpha (TLF)] has been shown to decrease mortality in
critically ill patients. A phase II/III study with TLF in sepsis did not confirm 
this result. The growing number of multiresistant bacteria is an ongoing problem 
in sepsis therapy. Furthermore, antibiotics are known to promote the liberation
of pro-inflammatory cell components and thus augment the severity of sepsis.
Compared to antibiotics, AMPs kill bacteria but also neutralize pathogenic
factors such as lipopolysaccharide. The obstacle to applying naturally occurring 
AMPs is their high nephro- and neurotoxicity. Therefore, the challenge is to
develop peptides to treat septic patients effectively without causing harm. This 
overview focuses on natural and synthetic AMPs in human and experimental sepsis
and their potential to provide significant improvements in the treatment of
critically ill with severe infections.

PMCID: PMC4542572
PMID: 26347737  [PubMed]


29. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Oct;34:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2015.07.004. Epub 2015 
Aug 5.

Ponatinib ameliorates pulmonary fibrosis by suppressing TGF-ß1/Smad3 pathway.

Qu Y(1), Zhang L(1), Kang Z(1), Jiang W(2), Lv C(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai 264003, 
PR China. (2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Binzhou Medical University,
Yantai 264003, PR China. Electronic address: jwl518@163.com. (3)School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai 264003, PR China.
Electronic address: Lucky_lcj@sina.com.

TGF-ß1/Smad3 pathway plays a key role in the pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis, including lung fibroblasts proliferation and epithelial cell aberrant
activation. Ponatinib is a multi-targeted tyrosine-kinase inhibitor. However,
whether Ponatinib has anti-fibrotic functions is unknown. In this study, the
effects of Ponatinib on TGF-ß1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
in A549 cells, on the proliferation of human lung fibroblasts (HLF-1), on the
apoptosis of human type I alveolar epithelial cells (AT I) in vitro, and on
bleomycin (BLM)-induced pulmonary fibrosis was investigated in vivo. Treatment
with Ponatinib resulted in a reduction of EMT in A549 cells with a decrease in
vimentin and p-Smad3, whereas an increase in E-cadherin. Apoptosis of AT I was
attenuated with an increase in the Bcl-2/Bax ratio. HLF-1 proliferation was
reduced with a decrease in PDGF-BB and FGF-2 expressions. Treatment with
Ponatinib resulted in an amelioration of the BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis in
rats with reductions of the pathological score, collagen deposition, p-Smad3,
a-SMA, PDGF-BB and FGF-2 expression. In summary, Ponatinib reversed the EMT,
inhibited the apoptosis of AT I, as well as HLF-1 proliferation and prevented
pulmonary fibrosis by suppressing the TGF-ß1/Smad3 pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26254990  [PubMed - in process]


30. Oncol Rep. 2015 Oct;34(4):1650-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4171. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

NOTCH2 signaling confers immature morphology and aggressiveness in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Hayashi Y(1), Osanai M(1), Lee GH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kochi University School of Medicine, Kohasu, Oko-cho,
Nankoku, Kochi 783-8505, Japan.

The NOTCH family of membranous receptors plays key roles during development and
carcinogenesis. Since NOTCH2, yet not NOTCH1 has been shown essential for murine 
hepatogenesis, NOTCH2 rather than NOTCH1 may be more relevant to human
hepatocarcinogenesis; however, no previous studies have supported this
hypothesis. We therefore assessed the role of NOTCH2 in human hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) by immunohistochemistry and cell culture. Immunohistochemically, 
19% of primary HCCs showed nuclear staining for NOTCH2, indicating activated
NOTCH2 signaling. NOTCH2-positive HCCs were on average in more advanced clinical 
stages, and exhibited more immature cellular morphology, i.e. higher
nuclear-cytoplasmic ratios and nuclear densities. Such features were not evident 
in NOTCH1-positive HCCs. In human HCC cell lines, abundant NOTCH2 expression was 
associated with anaplasia, represented by loss of E-cadherin. When NOTCH2
signaling was stably downregulated in HLF cells, an anaplastic HCC cell line, the
cells were attenuated in potential for in vitro invasiveness and migration, as
well as in vivo tumorigenicity accompanied by histological maturation. Generally,
inverse results were obtained for a differentiated HCC cell line, Huh7,
manipulated to overexpress activated NOTCH2. These findings suggested that the
NOTCH2 signaling may confer aggressive behavior and immature morphology in human 
HCC cells.

PMCID: PMC4564075
PMID: 26252838  [PubMed - in process]


31. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1020-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.3362. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Genomics and drug profiling of fatal TCF3-HLF-positive acute lymphoblastic
leukemia identifies recurrent mutation patterns and therapeutic options.

Fischer U(1), Forster M(2), Rinaldi A(3), Risch T(4), Sungalee S(5), Warnatz
HJ(4), Bornhauser B(3), Gombert M(1), Kratsch C(6), Stütz AM(5), Sultan M(4),
Tchinda J(3), Worth CL(4), Amstislavskiy V(4), Badarinarayan N(2), Baruchel A(7),
Bartram T(8), Basso G(9), Canpolat C(10), Cario G(8), Cavé H(11), Dakaj D(3),
Delorenzi M(12,)(13), Dobay MP(13), Eckert C(14), Ellinghaus E(2), Eugster S(3), 
Frismantas V(3), Ginzel S(1,)(15), Haas OA(16), Heidenreich O(17),
Hemmrich-Stanisak G(2), Hezaveh K(1), Höll JI(1), Hornhardt S(18), Husemann P(1),
Kachroo P(2), Kratz CP(19), Kronnie GT(9), Marovca B(3), Niggli F(3), McHardy
AC(6), Moorman AV(17), Panzer-Grümayer R(16), Petersen BS(2), Raeder B(5), Ralser
M(4), Rosenstiel P(2), Schäfer D(1), Schrappe M(8), Schreiber S(2), Schütte
M(20), Stade B(2), Thiele R(15), Weid Nv(21), Vora A(22), Zaliova M(19,)(23),
Zhang L(1,)(24), Zichner T(5), Zimmermann M(19), Lehrach H(4,)(20,)(25),
Borkhardt A(1), Bourquin JP(3), Franke A(2), Korbel JO(5), Stanulla M(19), Yaspo 
ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Medical
Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. (2)Institute of Clinical
Molecular Biology, Christian Albrechts University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Pediatric Oncology, Children's Research Centre, University Children's Hospital
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (4)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. (5)European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory (EMBL), Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Department of
Algorithmic Bioinformatics, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(7)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Immunology, Hôpital Robert Debré and Paris
Diderot University, Paris, France. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Christian
Albrechts University of Kiel and University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein,
Kiel, Germany. (9)Department of Pediatrics, Laboratory of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (10)Department of
Pediatrics, Acy`badem University Medical School, Atas¸ehir, Istanbul, Turkey.
(11)Department of Genetics, Hôpital Robert Debré and Paris Diderot University,
Paris, France. (12)Ludwig Center for Cancer Research, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland. (13)Swiss Institute for Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne,
Switzerland. (14)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Charité University Hospital, 
Berlin, Germany. (15)Department of Computer Science, Bonn Rhine Sieg University
of Applied Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany. (16)Children's Cancer Research
Institute, Vienna, Austria. (17)Northern Institute of Cancer Research, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (18)Federal Office for Radiation
Protection, Oberschleissheim, Germany. (19)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (20)Alacris Theranostics GmbH,
Berlin, Germany. (21)Universitäts-Kinderspital beider Basel (UKBB), Basel,
Switzerland. (22)Sheffield Children's Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(23)Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague (CLIP), Department of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic. (24)Department of Hematology, Union Hospital, Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou, China. (25)Dahlem Centre for Genome Research and
Medical Systems Biology, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Sep;12(9):504.

TCF3-HLF-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is currently incurable.
Using an integrated approach, we uncovered distinct mutation, gene expression and
drug response profiles in TCF3-HLF-positive and treatment-responsive
TCF3-PBX1-positive ALL. We identified recurrent intragenic deletions of PAX5 or
VPREB1 in constellation with the fusion of TCF3 and HLF. Moreover somatic
mutations in the non-translocated allele of TCF3 and a reduction of PAX5 gene
dosage in TCF3-HLF ALL suggest cooperation within a restricted genetic context.
The enrichment for stem cell and myeloid features in the TCF3-HLF signature may
reflect reprogramming by TCF3-HLF of a lymphoid-committed cell of origin toward a
hybrid, drug-resistant hematopoietic state. Drug response profiling of matched
patient-derived xenografts revealed a distinct profile for TCF3-HLF ALL with
resistance to conventional chemotherapeutics but sensitivity to glucocorticoids, 
anthracyclines and agents in clinical development. Striking on-target sensitivity
was achieved with the BCL2-specific inhibitor venetoclax (ABT-199). This
integrated approach thus provides alternative treatment options for this deadly
disease.

PMCID: PMC4603357
PMID: 26214592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Acta Crystallogr B Struct Sci Cryst Eng Mater. 2015 Aug;71(Pt 4):437-46. doi:
10.1107/S2052520615011191. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

From a binary salt to salt co-crystals of antibacterial agent lomefloxacin with
improved solubility and bioavailability.

Zhang ZH(1), Zhang Q(1), Zhang QQ(1), Chen C(1), He MY(1), Chen Q(1), Song GQ(2),
Xuan XP(3), Huang XF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Catalytic Materials and Technology,
Changzhou University, Changzhou 213164, People's Republic of China. (2)School of 
Pharmaceutical Engineering and Life Science, Changzhou University, Changzhou
213164, People's Republic of China. (3)Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Media and
Reactions, Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, People's Republic of China.

The cocrystallization of lomefloxacin (Lf) with barbituric acid (HBA) and/or
isophthalic acid (H2ip) leads to novel binary and ternary salts via
hydrogen-bonding recognition. X-ray single-crystal diffraction analyses show that
zwitterionic lomefloxacin can adjust itself to fulfill a different supramolecular
array in either binary salts or ternary salt co-crystals, formulated as
[HLf]·[Hip]·H2O (1), [HLf]·[BA]·[HBA]·H2O (2) and [HLf]·[BA]·[H2ip]·CH3OH·H2O
(3). These pharmaceutical agents present uniform charge-assisted hydrogen-bonding
networks between HLf cations and acidic coformers with the lattice capturing
water molecules. Structural comparison of (2) and (3) indicated that a delicate
balance of geometries and hydrogen-bonding partners is required for stacking to
favor the formation of ternary salt co-crystals. Cocrystallization was able to
overcome the water insolubility of lomefloxacin. Both the salt co-crystals
display enhanced solubility and better pharmaceutical applicability.

PMID: 26208624  [PubMed - in process]


33. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 May 1;8(5):4791-8. eCollection 2015.

SRPX2 promotes cell migration and invasion via FAK dependent pathway in
pancreatic cancer.

Gao Z(1), Zhang J(1), Bi M(1), Han X(1), Han Z(1), Wang H(1), Ou Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of BengBu Medical
College Bengbu 233003, Anhui, P. R. China.

Sushi repeat-containing protein, X-linked 2, abbreviated as SRPX2, is a candidate
downstream target protein for E2A-HLF and involved in disorders of language
cortex and cognition. Recent studies have demonstrated that elevated SRPX2
exhibits crucial roles in gastric cancer, however, underlying clinical
significance and biological function of SRPX2 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC), remains unclear. Data from Oncomine database showed that higher SRPX2
expression is more commonly observed in PDAC compared with normal pancreatic
duct, similar results were also found in 12 matched PDAC tissue samples, 7 PDAC
cell lines and a tissue microarray containing 81 PDAC specimens as demonstrated
by real-time quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry, respectively. Besides,
higher SRPX2 expression was closely correlated with advanced TNM stage. Silencing
of endogenous SRPX2 expression reduced abilities of cell migration and invasion
of PDAC cells. Further studies revealed that SRPX2 expression in PDAC tissues
significantly correlated with the phosphorylation levels of FAK, indicating that 
FAK dependent pathway may be account for the effect of SRPX2 on cell migration
and invasion in PDAC. Collectively, this study reveals that frequently elevated
SRPX2 contributes to cell migration and invasion in PDAC and SRPX2-related
pathways might be a potential therapeutic target for PDAC.

PMCID: PMC4503041
PMID: 26191169  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Neurosurg. 2015 Oct;123(4):1026-35. doi: 10.3171/2014.12.JNS14512. Epub 2015
Jul 17.

In vitro and in vivo effect of human lactoferrin on glioblastoma growth.

Arcella A(1), Oliva MA(1), Staffieri S(1), Aalberti S(1), Grillea G(1), Madonna
M(1), Bartolo M(1), Pavone L(1), Giangaspero F(1,)(2), Cantore G(1), Frati
A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS Neuromed, Località Camerelle, Pozzilli; and. (2)University of Rome La
Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

OBJECT: Human lactoferrin (HLF) is a natural protein with antitumor activity. The
aim of this study was to investigate the effects of HLF alone and in combination 
with temozolomide (TMZ), a conventional chemotherapeutic, on human glioblastoma
(GBM) cells.
METHODS: The authors cultured fresh human primary cell lines NMD and FN and the
continuous cell line U87MG to evaluate proliferation in the presence of HLF alone
at different doses (1, 10, and 100 mg/ml, and 1 mg/ml) and in combination with
TMZ. In in vivo experiments they assessed tumor size reduction in CD1 nude mice
carrying an orthotopic GBM xenograft and orally treated with HLF.
RESULTS: Lactoferrin causes growth inhibition in the NMD and FN primary cell
lines and in the U87MG continuous cell line. This inhibition seemed to be
modulated by the downregulation of cyclin D1 and D4. Western blot and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis showed inhibition of the cell cycle 
in G0/G1 and G2 phases. When administered in nude mice, HLF (60 mg/kg/day)
decreased tumor size about 30%, as shown in both histological analyses and
high-field brain MRI. Administration of HLF with TMZ enhanced the effect of
chemotherapy both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that HLF can inhibit GBM cell growth,
suggesting that this nontoxic substance may have a role in potentiating the
effect of current TMZ treatment of GBM.

PMID: 26186026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Urology. 2015 Aug;86(2):230-5. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2015.04.017. Epub 2015 Jul 
11.

Evaluation of 16 New Holmium:Yttrium-Aluminum-Garnet Laser Optical Fibers for
Ureteroscopy.

Akar EC(1), Knudsen BE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH. (2)Department of Urology, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH. Electronic address: bodo.knudsen@osumc.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To test the performance of 16 new single-use
holmium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (YAG) laser fibers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Small and medium core fibers were evaluated for
flexibility, true diameter, connector temperature, and failure threshold. A
flexible ureteroscope was deflected with the fiber in the working channel to
measure flexibility. Diameter was measured by micrometer and connector
temperature by infrared thermometer. Failure threshold was determined by bending 
the fiber to 180°, beginning with a radius of 1.25 cm. A 100 W holmium:YAG laser 
was operated at 1.2 J/10 Hz for 30 seconds or until fiber fracture. The radius
was decreased in 0.25-cm increments until a minimum bend radius of 0.4 cm was
attained or until fiber fracture.
RESULTS: Of the small core-fibers, the Cook-HLF-S150 (Cook Medical) had the
smallest diameter and the Flexiva TracTip 200 (Boston Scientific) the largest.
The Cook-HLF-S150 and S200 were the most flexible and the SlimLine EZ200
(Lumenis) the least. The SlimLine EZ200 failed at the largest bend radius,
whereas the Flexiva 200 and Flexiva TracTip 200 did not fracture. Of the
medium-core fibers, the ScopeSafe 300 had the smallest diameter and the Flexiva
365 the largest. The ScopeSafe 300 was the most flexible and the SlimLine 365 the
least. The ScopeSafe 365 failed at the largest radius of 1.25 cm, and the Flexiva
365 did not fail in 6 of 9 trials at the tightest radius.
CONCLUSION: Performance characteristics of these new holmium:YAG optical fibers
differed significantly but performance was on par or better than historical
controls.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26169001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jul 14;113(2):252-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.170. Epub 2015 Jun
30.

miR-9-3p plays a tumour-suppressor role by targeting TAZ (WWTR1) in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Higashi T(1), Hayashi H(1), Ishimoto T(1), Takeyama H(1), Kaida T(1), Arima K(1),
Taki K(1), Sakamoto K(1), Kuroki H(1), Okabe H(1), Nitta H(1), Hashimoto D(1),
Chikamoto A(1), Beppu T(1), Baba H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Science,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The inactivation of the Hippo pathway lead to TAZ (PDZ-binding
motif)/YAP (yes-associated protein) overexpression, and is associated with worse 
prognostic outcomes in various cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 
Although there are several reports of microRNA (miR) targeting for YAP, miR
targeting for TAZ remains unclear. The aim of this study is to identify the miR
targeting TAZ expression in HCC.
METHODS: MicroRNA expression was analysed using the Human miFinder 384HC miScript
miR PCR array, and was compared between low and high TAZ expression cell lines.
Then, we extracted miR-9-3p as a tumour-suppressor miR targeting TAZ. We examined
the functional role of miR-9-3p using miR-9-3p mimic and inhibitor in HCC cell
lines).
RESULTS: In HCC cell lines and HCC clinical samples, there was the inverse
correlation between miR-9-3p and TAZ expressions. TAZ expression was induced by
treatment of miR-9-3p inhibitor and was downregulated by treatment of miR-9-3p
mimic. Treatment of miR-9-3p mimic inhibited cell proliferative ability with
downregulated phosphorylations of Erk1/2, AKT, and ß-catenin in HLF. Inversely,
treatment of miR-9-3p inhibitor accelerated cell growth compared with control in 
HuH1.
CONCLUSIONS: MicroRNA-9-3p was identified as the tumour-suppressor miR targetting
TAZ expression in HCC cells.

PMCID: PMC4506379 [Available on 2016-07-14]
PMID: 26125451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(3):937-46. doi: 10.1159/000430268. Epub 2015 Jun
12.

Platelet-Derived Growth Factor and Transforming Growth Factor ß1 Regulate
ARDS-Associated Lung Fibrosis Through Distinct Signaling Pathways.

Deng X(1), Jin K, Li Y, Gu W, Liu M, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, the Central Hospital of Minhang District,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Severe acute lung injury (ALI) often develops into acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Previous studies have shown that
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and transforming growth factor ß1 (TGFß1)
participate in the pathogenesis of ARDS by stimulation of fibroblast
proliferation, leading to the development of pulmonary fibrosis. However, the
exact pathways downstream of PDGF and TGFß receptor signaling have not been
completely elucidated.
METHOD: We treated human lung fibroblasts (HLF) with PDGF, or TGFß1, or combined,
and examined the activation of p38 MAPK, p42/p44 MAPK and SMAD3. We used a
specific inhibitor PD98059 to antagonize phosphorylation of p42/p44 MAPK, or used
a specific inhibitor SN203580 to antagonize phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, or used 
a specific inhibitor SIS3 to antagonize phosphorylation of SMAD3. We then
examined the effects of these inhibitors on the activation of collagen I and
a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) induced by PDGF or TGFß1 stimulation.
RESULTS: PDGF activated p38 MAPK and p42/p44 MAPK, but not SMAD3 in HLF cells.
TGFß1 activated p38 MAPK and SMAD3, but not p42/p44 MAPK in HLF cells. Activation
of p38 MAPK by either PDGF or TGFß1 induced a-SMA but not collagen I in HLF
cells, while activation of p42/p44 MAPK by PDGF induced collagen I but not a-SMA 
in HLF cells. Activation of SMAD3 by TGFß1 did not affect either collagen I or
a-SMA in HLF cells.
CONCLUSION: PDGF and TGFß1 regulate ARDS-associated lung fibrosis through
distinct signaling pathway-mediated activation of fibrosis-related proteins.
Treatments with both PDGF and TGFß1 antagonists may result in a better
anti-fibrotic outcome for ALI-induced lung fibrosis.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26088859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Int J Oncol. 2015 Aug;47(2):535-42. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3036. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

MicroRNA profiles in cisplatin-induced apoptosis of hepatocellular carcinoma
cells.

Miyata M(1), Morishita A(1), Sakamoto T(1), Katsura A(1), Kato K(1), Nishioka
T(1), Toyota Y(1), Fujita K(1), Maeda E(1), Nomura T(1), Tani J(1), Miyoshi H(1),
Yoneyama H(1), Kobara H(1), Fujiwara S(1), Nishiyama N(1), Iwama H(2), Himoto
T(3), Hirashima M(1), Masaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Neurology, Kagawa University Faculty of
Medicine, Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan. (2)Life Science Research
Center, Kagawa University Faculty of Medicine, Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa
761-0793, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Technology, Kagawa Prefectural
University of Health Sciences, Mure-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0123, Japan.

Cisplatin [cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)], is a platinum coordination
compound that is commonly used to treat hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It is
also one of the most compelling anticancer drugs. Recent studies suggest that
cisplatin may reduce cancer risk and improve prognosis. However, the antitumor
mechanism of cisplatin in several types of cancers, including HCC, has not been
elucidated. The goal of the present study was to evaluate the effects of
cisplatin on the proliferation of HCC cells in vitro and to determine which
microRNAs (miRNAs) are associated with the anticancer effects of cisplatin in
vitro. We used various human HCC-derived cell lines to study the effects of
cisplatin on human HCC cells. Cisplatin led to a strong dose- and time- dependent
inhibition of cell proliferation in HLE, HLF, HuH7, Li-7, Hep3B and HepG2 cells
in vitro. Cisplatin also blocked the progression of the cell cycle in the G0/G1
phase, which inhibited cyclin D1 and induced apoptosis. In addition, miRNA
expression was markedly altered by treatment with cisplatin in vitro. Therefore, 
various miRNAs induced by cisplatin may also contribute to the suppression of
cellular proliferation and apoptosis. Our results demonstrate that cisplatin
inhibits the growth of HCC, possibly through the induction of G1 cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis through the alteration of microRNA expression.

PMID: 26060089  [PubMed - in process]


39. Anal Chem. 2015 Jul 7;87(13):6822-7. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b01099. Epub 2015
Jun 22.

Real-Time, Quantitative Lighting-up Detection of Telomerase in Urines of Bladder 
Cancer Patients by AIEgens.

Lou X(1), Zhuang Y(1), Zuo X(2), Jia Y(1), Hong Y(3), Min X(1), Zhang Z(1), Xu
X(1), Liu N(1), Xia F(1), Tang BZ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Large-Format Battery Materials and System, Ministry of
Education, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan 430074, China. (2)§Division of Physical
Biology and Bioimaging Center, Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai 
Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Science, Shanghai 201800, China.
(3)<U+2225>School of Chemistry, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia. (4)<U+22A5>Department of Chemistry, HKUST Jockey Club Institute for Advanced 
Study Division of Life Science, Institute of Molecular Functional Materials and
Division of Biomedical Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (HKUST), Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

As a biomarker for early cancer diagnosis, telomerase are one of the promising
targets for cancer therapeutics. Inspired by the fluorescent emission principle
of aggregation-induced emission fluorogens, we creatively designed an AIE-based
turn-on method to detect telomerase activity from cell extracts. A positively
charged fluorogen (TPE-Z) is not fluorescent when freely diffused in solution.
The fluorescence of TPE-Z is enhanced with the elongation of the DNA strand which
could light up telomere elongation process. By exploitation of it, we can detect 
telomerase activity from different cell lines (E-J, HeLa, MCF-7, and HLF) with
high sensitivity and specificity. Moreover, our method is successfully employed
to demonstrate the applications in bladder cancer diagnosis (41 urine specimens
from bladder cancer patients and 15 urine specimens from normal people are
detected). The AIE-based method provides a simple one-pot technique for
quantification and monitoring of the telomerase activity and shows great
potential for future use in clinical tests.

PMID: 26059095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Sci Rep. 2015 May 21;5:10482. doi: 10.1038/srep10482.

Gene targeting by TALEN-induced homologous recombination in goats directs
production of ß-lactoglobulin-free, high-human lactoferrin milk.

Cui C(1), Song Y(1), Liu J(1), Ge H(1), Li Q(1), Huang H(1), Hu L(1), Zhu H(1),
Jin Y(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, 
Shaanxi, China [2] Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of
Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China.

ß-Lactoglobulin (BLG) is a major goat's milk allergen that is absent in human
milk. Engineered endonucleases, including transcription activator-like effector
nucleases (TALENs) and zinc-finger nucleases, enable targeted genetic
modification in livestock. In this study, TALEN-mediated gene knockout followed
by gene knock-in were used to generate BLG knockout goats as mammary gland
bioreactors for large-scale production of human lactoferrin (hLF). We introduced 
precise genetic modifications in the goat genome at frequencies of approximately 
13.6% and 6.09% for the first and second sequential targeting, respectively, by
using targeting vectors that underwent TALEN-induced homologous recombination
(HR). Analysis of milk from the cloned goats revealed large-scale hLF expression 
or/and decreased BLG levels in milk from heterozygous goats as well as the
absence of BLG in milk from homozygous goats. Furthermore, the TALEN-mediated
targeting events in somatic cells can be transmitted through the germline after
SCNT. Our result suggests that gene targeting via TALEN-induced HR may expedite
the production of genetically engineered livestock for agriculture and
biomedicine.

PMID: 25994151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2015 Jun;48(6):545-52. doi: 10.1590/1414-431X20144301. Epub 
2015 May 8.

Protective roles of pulmonary rehabilitation mixture in experimental pulmonary
fibrosis in vitro and in vivo.

Zhang L(1), Ji YX(1), Jiang WL(1), Lv CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, China.

Abnormal high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1) activation is involved in the
pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmonary rehabilitation mixture (PRM), which
combines extracts from eight traditional Chinese medicines, has very good lung
protection in clinical use. However, it is not known if PRM has anti-fibrotic
activity. In this study, we investigated the effects of PRM on transforming
growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)-mediated and bleomycin (BLM)-induced pulmonary fibrosis
in vitro and in vivo. The effects of PRM on TGF-ß1-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in A549 cells, on the proliferation of
human lung fibroblasts (HLF-1) in vitro, and on BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis in
vivo were investigated. PRM treatment resulted in a reduction of EMT in A549
cells that was associated with attenuating an increase of vimentin and a decrease
of E-cadherin. PRM inhibited the proliferation of HLF-1 at an IC50 of 0.51 µg/mL.
PRM ameliorated BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats, with reduction of
histopathological scores and collagen deposition, and a decrease in a-smooth
muscle actin (a-SMA) and HMGB1 expression. An increase in receptor for advanced
glycation end-product (RAGE) expression was found in BLM-instilled lungs. PRM
significantly decreased EMT and prevented pulmonary fibrosis through decreasing
HMGB1 and regulating RAGE in vitro and in vivo. PRM inhibited TGF-ß1-induced EMT 
via decreased HMGB1 and vimentin and increased RAGE and E-cadherin levels. In
summary, PRM prevented experimental pulmonary fibrosis by modulating the
HMGB1/RAGE pathway.

PMCID: PMC4470314
PMID: 25992646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015 Jun 15;28(6):1224-33. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.5b00055.
Epub 2015 May 20.

Analysis of different fates of DNA adducts in adipocytes post-sulfur mustard
exposure in vitro and in vivo using a simultaneous UPLC-MS/MS quantification
method.

Wang P(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen J(1), Guo L(1), Xu B(1), Wang L(2), Xu H(1), Xie
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Toxicology and Medical Countermeasures, and
Laboratory of Toxicant Analysis, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Academy of Military Medical Sciences, 27 Taiping Road, Haidian District, 100850, 
Beijing, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Toxicology and Medical
Countermeasures, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Academy of Military
Medical Sciences, 27 Taiping Road, Haidian District, 100850, Beijing, China.

Sulfur mustard (SM) is a powerful alkylating vesicant that can rapidly penetrate 
skin, ocular, and lung bronchus mucous membranes and react with numerous
nucleophiles in vivo. Although the lesion mechanisms of SM remain unclear, DNA
damage is believed to be the most crucial factor in initiating SM-induced
toxicity. Four major DNA adducts were identified for retrospective detection and 
DNA lesion evaluation, namely, N(7)-[2-[(2-hydroxyethyl)thio]-ethyl]guanine
(N(7)-HETEG), bis(2-ethyl-N(7)-guanine)thioether (Bis-G),
N(3)-(2-hydroxyethylthioethyl)-2'-adenine (N(3)-HETEA), and
O(6)-[2-[(2-hydroxyethyl)thio]-ethyl]guanine (O(6)-HETEG). Because of previous
observations that the levels of SM-DNA adducts were relatively higher in
adipose-rich organs, such as the brain, we focused on the in vitro and in vivo
fates of the DNA adducts in exposed adipocytes. A UPLC-MS/MS method developed in 
our laboratory was used to profile the N(7)-HETEG, Bis-G, and N(3)-HETEA levels
in human mature adipocytes (HA-s) that had differentiated from human subcutaneous
preadipocytes (HPA-s). This method was also used to profile three other cell
lines related to the targeting of major tissues, including human keratinocytes
(HaCaT), human hepatocytes (L-02), and human lung fibroblasts (HLF). Long-lasting
adduct persistence and a high proportion of Bis-G were found in exposed
adipocytes in vitro. The survival properties of exposed adipocytes were also
tested. At the same time, the fate of SM-DNA adducts in vivo was characterized
using a rat model exposed to 1 and 10 mg/kg doses of SM. The level of DNA adducts
in the exposed adipose tissue (AT) was much lower than those in other organs
studied in our previous work. The adduct persistence behavior was observed in AT 
with an extremely high proportion of Bis-G, which was higher than N(7)-HETEG. In 
light of these results, we suggest that an adipose-rich environment may promote
the formation of Bis-G and that adipocyte-specific DNA repair mechanisms may
result in adduct persistence and the survival of adipocytes after SM exposure.
These conclusions should be further investigated.

PMID: 25955432  [PubMed - in process]


43. PLoS One. 2015 May 8;10(5):e0123551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123551.
eCollection 2015.

Production of transgenic-cloned pigs expressing large quantities of recombinant
human lysozyme in milk.

Lu D(1), Liu S(1), Shang S(1), Wu F(2), Wen X(3), Li Z(3), Li Y(3), Hu X(1), Zhao
Y(1), Li Q(1), Li N(1).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory for Agro-biotechnology, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan
Agricultural University, Kunming, China. (3)Beijing Genfucare Biotechnology
Company, Beijing, China.

Human lysozyme is a natural non-specific immune factor in human milk that plays
an important role in the defense of breastfed infants against pathogen infection.
Although lysozyme is abundant in human milk, there is only trace quantities in
pig milk. Here, we successfully generated transgenic cloned pigs with the
expression vector pBAC-hLF-hLZ-Neo and their first generation hybrids (F1). The
highest concentration of recombinant human lysozyme (rhLZ) with in vitro
bioactivity was 2759.6 ± 265.0 mg/L in the milk of F0 sows. Compared with
wild-type milk, rhLZ milk inhibited growth of Escherichia coli K88 during the
exponential growth phase. Moreover, rhLZ in milk from transgenic sows was
directly absorbed by the intestine of piglets with no observable anaphylactic
reaction. Our strategy may provide a powerful tool for large-scale production of 
this important human protein in pigs to improve resistance to pathogen infection.

PMCID: PMC4425539
PMID: 25955256  [PubMed - in process]


44. Arch Pediatr. 2015 Jun;22(6):608-12. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2015.03.005. Epub 2015
Apr 18.

[Life-threatening hypercalcemia as the initial presentation of childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in French]

Poirée M(1), Dupont A(2), Gondon E(2), Boyer C(3), Dupont D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Départment d'hématologie-oncologie pédiatrique, hôpital Archet 2, CHU de Nice,
151, route Saint-Antoine-de-Ginestière, 06202 Nice, France. Electronic address:
poiree.m@chu-nice.fr. (2)Départment de réanimation pédiatrique, CHU Lenval,
avenue de la Californie, 06000 Nice, France. (3)Départment de radiologie
pédiatrique, CHU de Nice, hôpital Archet 2, 151, route
Saint-Antoine-de-Ginestières, 06202 Nice, France.

Hypercalcemia in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is a well-known
but uncommon complication. Here, we report a case of B-ALL in which the first
signs were life-threatening hypercalcemia associated with diffuse osteolytic
lesions with no hematologic abnormalities. We draw attention to the difficulties 
formally establishing the ALL diagnosis. Bone marrow examinations must be
repeated if necessary. Furthermore, biological, cytogenetic, and molecular
aspects need to be investigated. Measurement of intact PTH can exclude
hyperparathyroidism. PTHrP is possibly involved in hypercalcemia processes
induced by tumor cells. The t(17;19) translocation and its E2A-HLF transcript
fusion, which have been thought to be a poor prognostic factor, must be
determined. Regarding severe hypercalcemia control, treatment is based on both
underlying disease management and serum calcium level reduction with aggressive
hydration and if necessary bisphosphonates.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25896627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 11;15:260. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1297-7.

Identification of a unique hepatocellular carcinoma line, Li-7, with CD13(+)
cancer stem cells hierarchy and population change upon its differentiation during
culture and effects of sorafenib.

Yamada T(1,)(2), Abei M(3), Danjoh I(4), Shirota R(5), Yamashita T(6), Hyodo
I(7), Nakamura Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan. t.yamada718@gmail.com.
(2)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, 305-0074, Japan. t.yamada718@gmail.com. (3)Division of Gastroenterology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
305-8575, Japan. m-abei@md.tsukuba.ac.jp. (4)Functional Evaluation of Genomic
Polymorphisms, Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization, Sendai, Japan.
inaho.danjoh@megabank.tohoku.ac.jp. (5)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN
BioResource Center, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0074, Japan.
ryoko.mail.932102@gmail.com. (6)Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa
University Hospital, 13-1, Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 920-8641, Japan.
taroy@m-kanazawa.jp. (7)Division of Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan.
ihyodo@md.tsukuba.ac.jp. (8)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, 
3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0074, Japan. yukionak@brc.riken.jp.

BACKGROUNDS: Cancer stem cell (CSC) research has highlighted the necessity of
developing drugs targeting CSCs. We investigated a hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
cell line that not only has CSC hierarchy but also shows phenotypic changes
(population changes) upon differentiation of CSC during culture and can be used
for screening drugs targeting CSC.
METHODS: Based on a hypothesis that the CSC proportion should decrease upon its
differentiation into progenitors (population change), we tested HCC cell lines
(HuH-7, Li-7, PLC/PRF/5, HLF, HLE) before and after 2 months culture for several 
markers (CD13, EpCAM, CD133, CD44, CD90, CD24, CD166). Tumorigenicity was tested 
using nude mice. To evaluate the CSC hierarchy, we investigated reconstructivity,
proliferation, ALDH activity, spheroid formation, chemosensitivity and microarray
analysis of the cell populations sorted by FACS.
RESULTS: Only Li-7 cells showed a population change during culture: the
proportion of CD13 positive cells decreased, while that of CD166 positive cells
increased. The high tumorigenicity of the Li-7 was lost after the population
change. CD13(+)/CD166(-) cells showed slow growth and reconstructed the bulk Li-7
populations composed of CD13(+)/CD166(-), CD13(-)/CD166(-) and CD13(-)/CD166(+)
fractions, whereas CD13(-)/CD166(+) cells showed rapid growth but could not
reproduce any other population. CD13(+)/CD166(-) cells showed high ALDH activity,
spheroid forming ability and resistance to 5-fluorouracil. Microarray analysis
demonstrated higher expression of stemness-related genes in CD166(-) than
CD166(+) fraction. These results indicated a hierarchy in Li-7 cells, in which
CD13(+)/CD166(-) and CD13(-)/CD166(+) cells serve as slow growing CSCs and rapid 
growing progenitors, respectively. Sorafenib selectively targeted the CD166(-)
fraction, including CD13(+) CSCs, which exhibited higher mRNA expression for FGF3
and FGF4, candidate biomarkers for sorafenib. 5-fluorouracil followed by
sorafenib inhibited the growth of bulk Li-7 cells more effectively than the
reverse sequence or either alone.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a unique HCC line, Li-7, which not only shows
heterogeneity for a CD13(+) CSC hierarchy, but also undergoes a "population
change" upon CSC differentiation. Sorafenib targeted the CSC in vitro, supporting
the use of this model for screening drugs targeting the CSC. This type of
"heterogeneous, unstable" cell line may prove more useful in the CSC era than
conventional "homogeneous, stable" cell lines.

PMCID: PMC4396571
PMID: 25885470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Apr 3;16:112. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0543-y.

Differential co-expression and regulation analyses reveal different mechanisms
underlying major depressive disorder and subsyndromal symptomatic depression.

Xu F(1,)(2), Yang J(3), Chen J(4,)(5), Wu Q(6,)(7), Gong W(8,)(9), Zhang
J(10,)(11), Shao W(12), Mu J(13), Yang D(14), Yang Y(15), Li Z(16), Xie
P(17,)(18,)(19).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China. frank_cqmu@126.com. (2)Institute of Neuroscience, Chongqing
Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Chongqing,
China. frank_cqmu@126.com. (3)School of Biotechnology, East China University of
Science and Technology, Shanghai, China. liuk8628@163.com. (4)Department of
Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, No. 1
Youyi Road, Chongqing, 400016, China. 570572292@qq.com. (5)Institute of
Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. 570572292@qq.com. (6)Department of Neurology, the
First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 Youyi Road,
Chongqing, 400016, China. zxn020@163.com. (7)Institute of Neuroscience, Chongqing
Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Chongqing,
China. zxn020@163.com. (8)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China. czs027@163.com. (9)Institute of
Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. czs027@163.com. (10)Department of Neurology,
Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
dyjianguo@163.com. (11)Institute of Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University,
and Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Chongqing, China.
dyjianguo@163.com. (12)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 Youyi Road, Chongqing, 400016, China.
tyl0871@163.com. (13)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 Youyi Road, Chongqing, 400016, China.
ylx8623@163.com. (14)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China. bjj0550@163.com. (15)Institute of
Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. fzx023@163.com. (16)Department of Neurology,
Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
zhiwei_li023@163.com. (17)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China. xiepeng@cqmu.edu.cn. (18)Department of
Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, No. 1
Youyi Road, Chongqing, 400016, China. xiepeng@cqmu.edu.cn. (19)Institute of
Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. xiepeng@cqmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Recent depression research has revealed a growing awareness of how to
best classify depression into depressive subtypes. Appropriately subtyping
depression can lead to identification of subtypes that are more responsive to
current pharmacological treatment and aid in separating out depressed patients in
which current antidepressants are not particularly effective. Differential
co-expression analysis (DCEA) and differential regulation analysis (DRA) were
applied to compare the transcriptomic profiles of peripheral blood lymphocytes
from patients with two depressive subtypes: major depressive disorder (MDD) and
subsyndromal symptomatic depression (SSD).
RESULTS: Six differentially regulated genes (DRGs) (FOSL1, SRF, JUN, TFAP4, SOX9,
and HLF) and 16 transcription factor-to-target differentially co-expressed gene
links or pairs (TF2target DCLs) appear to be the key differential factors in MDD;
in contrast, one DRG (PATZ1) and eight TF2target DCLs appear to be the key
differential factors in SSD. There was no overlap between the MDD target genes
and SSD target genes. Venlafaxine (Efexor, Effexor) appears to have a
significant effect on the gene expression profile of MDD patients but no
significant effect on the gene expression profile of SSD patients.
CONCLUSION: DCEA and DRA revealed no apparent similarities between the
differential regulatory processes underlying MDD and SSD. This bioinformatic
analysis may provide novel insights that can support future antidepressant R&D
efforts.

PMCID: PMC4434877
PMID: 25880836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Respir Res. 2015 Feb 13;16:21. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0185-7.

Fibroblast-myofibroblast transition is differentially regulated by bronchial
epithelial cells from asthmatic children.

Reeves SR, Kolstad T, Lien TY, Herrington-Shaner S, Debley JS.

BACKGROUND: Airway remodeling is a proposed mechanism that underlies the
persistent loss of lung function associated with childhood asthma. Previous
studies have demonstrated that human lung fibroblasts (HLFs) co-cultured with
primary human bronchial epithelial cells (BECs) from asthmatic children exhibit
greater expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) components compared to
co-culture with BECs derived from healthy children. Myofibroblasts represent a
population of differentiated fibroblasts that have greater synthetic activity. We
hypothesized co-culture with asthmatic BECs would lead to greater fibroblast to
myofibroblast transition (FMT) compared to co-culture with healthy BECs.
METHODS: BECs were obtained from well-characterized asthmatic and healthy
children and were proliferated and differentiated at an air-liquid interface
(ALI). BEC-ALI cultures were co-cultured with HLFs for 96 hours. RT-PCR was
performed in HLFs for alpha smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) and flow cytometry was
used to assay for a-SMA antibody labeling of HLFs. RT-PCR was also preformed for 
the expression of tropomyosin-I as an additional marker of myofibroblast
phenotype. In separate experiments, we investigated the role of TGFß2 in BEC-HLF 
co-cultures using monoclonal antibody inhibition.
RESULTS: Expression of a-SMA by HLFs alone was greater than by HLFs co-cultured
with healthy BECs, but not different than a-SMA expression by HLFs co-cultured
with asthmatic BECs. Flow cytometry also revealed significantly less a-SMA
expression by healthy co-co-cultures compared to asthmatic co-cultures or HLF
alone. Monoclonal antibody inhibition of TGFß2 led to similar expression of a-SMA
between healthy and asthmatic BEC-HLF co-cultures. Expression of topomyosin-I was
also significantly increased in HLF co-cultured with asthmatic BECs compared to
healthy BEC-HLF co-cultures or HLF cultured alone.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest dysregulation of FMT in HLF co-cultured with
asthmatic as compared to healthy BECs. Our results suggest TGFß2 may be involved 
in the differential regulation of FMT by asthmatic BECs. These findings further
illustrate the importance of BEC-HLF cross-talk in asthmatic airway remodeling.

PMCID: PMC4333174
PMID: 25849331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int J Oncol. 2015 May;46(5):2216-22. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2928. Epub 2015 Mar
16.

Effects of fucoidan on proliferation, AMP-activated protein kinase, and
downstream metabolism- and cell cycle-associated molecules in poorly
differentiated human hepatoma HLF cells.

Kawaguchi T(1), Hayakawa M(2), Koga H(1), Torimura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Kurume University School
of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. (2)Liver Cancer Division, Research Center for
Innovative Cancer Therapy, Kurume University, Kurume, Japan.

Survival rates are low in patients with poorly differentiated hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Fucoidan, a sulfated polysaccharide derived from brown seaweed, 
has anticancer activity; however, the effects of fucoidan on poorly
differentiated HCC remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the effects of 
fucoidan on AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a proliferation regulator, and
its downstream metabolism- and cell cycle-related molecules in a poorly
differentiated human hepatoma HLF cell line. HLF cells were treated with fucoidan
(10, 50, or 100 µg/ml; n=4) or phosphate buffered saline (control; n=4) for 96 h.
Proliferation was evaluated by counting cells every 24 h. AMPK, TSC2, mTOR,
GSK3ß, acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), ATP-citrate lyase, p53, cyclin D1,
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4, and CDK6 expression and/or phosphorylation were 
examined by immunoblotting 24 h after treatment with 100 µg/ml fucoidan. Cell
cycle progression was analyzed by fluorescence-activated cell sorter 48 h after
treatment. Treatment with 50 or 100 µg/ml fucoidan significantly and dose- and
time-dependently suppressed HLF cell proliferation (P<0.0001). Fucoidan induced
AMPK phosphorylation on Ser172 24 h after treatment. Although no differences were
seen in expression and phosphorylation levels of TSC2, mTOR, GSK3ß, ATP-citrate
lyase, and p53 between the control and fucoidan-treated HLF cells, fucoidan
induced ACC phosphorylation on Ser79. Moreover, fucoidan decreased cyclin D1,
CDK4 and CDK6 expression 24 h after treatment. Furthermore, HLF cells were
arrested in the G1/S phase 48 h after fucoidan treatment. We demonstrated that
fucoidan suppressed HLF cell proliferation with AMPK phosphorylation. We showed
that fucoidan phosphorylated ACC and downregulated cyclin D1, CDK4 and CDK6
expression. Our findings suggest that fucoidan inhibits proliferation through
AMPK-associated suppression of fatty acid synthesis and G1/S transition in HLF
cells.

PMID: 25776104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Blood. 2015 Apr 16;125(16):2544-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-09-599258. Epub 2015 
Mar 4.

MEIS1 regulates an HLF-oxidative stress axis in MLL-fusion gene leukemia.

Roychoudhury J(1), Clark JP(1), Gracia-Maldonado G(1), Unnisa Z(1), Wunderlich
M(2), Link KA(2), Dasgupta N(3), Aronow B(4), Huang G(2), Mulloy JC(2), Kumar
AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency. (2)Division of 
Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology. (3)Division of Human Genetics, and.
(4)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH.

Leukemias with MLL translocations are often found in infants and are associated
with poor outcomes. The pathogenesis of MLL-fusion leukemias has been linked to
upregulation of HOX/MEIS1 genes. The functions of the Hox/Meis1 complex in
leukemia, however, remain elusive. Here, we used inducible Meis1-knockout mice
coupled with MLL-AF9 knockin mice to decipher the mechanistic role of Meis1 in
established MLL leukemia. We demonstrate that Meis1 is essential for maintenance 
of established leukemia. In addition, in both the murine model and human leukemia
cells, we found that Meis1 loss led to increased oxidative stress, oxygen flux,
and apoptosis. Gene expression and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies revealed
hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) as a target gene of Meis1. Hypoxia or HLF
expression reversed the oxidative stress, rescuing leukemia development in
Meis1-deficient cells. Thus, the leukemia-promoting properties of Meis1 are at
least partly mediated by a low-oxidative state, aided by HLF. These results
suggest that stimulants of oxidative metabolism could have therapeutic potential 
in leukemia treatment.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4400291 [Available on 2016-04-16]
PMID: 25740828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Sci. 2015 May;106(5):567-75. doi: 10.1111/cas.12633. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase by retinoic acid sensitizes
hepatocellular carcinoma cells to apoptosis induced by sorafenib.

Ishijima N(1), Kanki K(1), Shimizu H(1), Shiota G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Department of Genetic Medicine and
Regenerative Therapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine, Tottori University,
Yonago, Japan.

To improve the outcome of cancer chemotherapy, strategies to enhance the efficacy
of anticancer drugs are required. Sorafenib is the only drug to prolong overall
survival of the patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), however, the
outcome is still not satisfactory. Retinoids, vitamin A derivatives, have been
known to exhibit inhibitory effects on various cancers including HCC. In this
study, we investigated the effects of combined treatment using sorafenib and
retinoids including all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), NIK-333, and Am80 on HCC
cells. Cell viability assays in six HCC cell lines, HepG2, PLC/PRF/5, HuH6, HLE, 
HLF, and Hep3B, revealed that 5 and 10 µM ATRA, concentrations that do not exert 
cytotoxic effects, enhanced the cytotoxicity of sorafenib, being much more
effective than NIK-333 and Am80. We found that ATRA induced AMP-activated protein
kinase activation, which was followed by reduced intracellular ATP level. Gene
expression analysis revealed that ATRA decreased the expression of glycolytic
genes such as GLUT-1 and LDHA. In the combination treatment using ATRA and
sorafenib, increased apoptosis, followed by the activation of p38 MAPK and JNK,
the upregulation and translocation of Bax to mitochondria, and the activation of 
caspase-3, was observed. Suppression of AMP-activated protein kinase by siRNA
restored the viability of the cells treated with ATRA and sorafenib. Our results 
thus indicate that ATRA is useful for enhancing the cytotoxicity of sorafenib
against HCC cells by regulating the energy metabolism of HCC cells.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4452157
PMID: 25683251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Physiol Rep. 2015 Feb 6;3(2). pii: e12295. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12295. Print 2015
Feb 1.

Activation of protease-activated receptors (PARs)-1 and -2 promotes alpha-smooth 
muscle actin expression and release of cytokines from human lung fibroblasts.

Asokananthan N(1), Lan RS(2), Graham PT(2), Bakker AJ(3), Tokanovic A(2), Stewart
GA(2).

Author information: 
(1)School Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Western Australia, 35 
Stirling Highway, CrawleyPerth, WA, Australia School of Psychology and Clinical
Sciences, Charles Darwin University, Ellengowan Drive, CasuarinaDarwin, NT,
Australia. (2)School Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Western
Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, CrawleyPerth, WA, Australia. (3)School of
Anatomy, Physiology and Human Biology, University of Western Australia, 35
Stirling Highway, CrawleyPerth, WA, Australia.

Previous studies have shown that protease-activated receptors (PARs) play an
important role in various physiological processes. In the present investigation, 
we determined the expression of PARs on human lung fibroblasts (HLF-1) and
whether they were involved in cellular differentiation and pro-inflammatory
cytokine and prostaglandin (PGE2) secretion. PAR-1, PAR-2, PAR-3, and PAR-4 were 
detected in fibroblasts using RT-PCR, immunocytochemistry, and flow cytometry.
Increased expression of PAR-4, but not other PARs, was observed in fibroblasts
stimulated with phorbol myristate acetate. The archetypical activators of PARs,
namely, thrombin and trypsin, as well as PAR-1 and PAR-2 agonist peptides,
stimulated transient increases in intracellular Ca(2+), and promoted increased
a-smooth muscle actin expression. The proteolytic and peptidic PAR activators
also stimulated the release of IL-6 and IL-8, as well as PGE2, with a rank order 
of potency of PAR-1 > PAR-2. The combined stimulation of PAR-1 and PAR-2 resulted
in an additive release of both IL-6 and IL-8. In contrast, PAR-3 and PAR-4
agonist peptides, as well as all the PAR control peptides examined, were
inactive. These results suggest an important role for PARs associated with
fibroblasts in the modulation of inflammation and remodeling in the airway.

© 2015 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4393203
PMID: 25663523  [PubMed]


52. Clin Sci (Lond). 2015 Jun;128(11):761-74. doi: 10.1042/CS20140606.

Smad7 regulates compensatory hepatocyte proliferation in damaged mouse liver and 
positively relates to better clinical outcome in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Feng T(1), Dzieran J(1), Gu X(2), Marhenke S(3), Vogel A(3), Machida K(4), Weiss 
TS(5), Ruemmele P(6), Kollmar O(7), Hoffmann P(8), Grässer F(8), Allgayer H(9),
Fabian J(1), Weng HL(1), Teufel A(10), Maass T(10), Meyer C(1), Lehmann U(11),
Zhu C(12), Mertens PR(12), Gao CF(2), Dooley S(1), Meindl-Beinker NM(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Molecular Hepatology Alcohol Associated Diseases, Dept. of Medicine II,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Eastern Hepatobiliary Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology and Endocrinology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(4)§Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and Southern California
Research Center for ALPD and Cirrhosis, Los Angeles, CA, U.S.A. (5)¦Department of
Pediatrics and Juvenile Medicine, Center for Liver Cell Research, University of
Regensburg Hospital, Regensburg, Germany. (6)¶Institute of Pathology, University 
of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (7)**Department of General, Visceral,
Vascular and Pediatric Surgery, University of Saarland, Homburg/Saar, Germany.
(8)Saarland University Medical School, Institute of Virology, Homburg/Saar,
Germany. (9)Department of Experimental Surgery, University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim and Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)§§Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin I, Universitätsklinikum
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (11)¦¦Institute of Pathology, Medical School
Hannover, Hannover, Germany. (12)¶¶Department of Nephrology and Hypertension,
Diabetes and Endocrinology, Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg, Magdeburg,
Germany.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) is cytostatic towards damage-induced
compensatory hepatocyte proliferation. This function is frequently lost during
hepatocarcinogenesis, thereby switching the TGF-ß role from tumour suppressor to 
tumour promoter. In the present study, we investigate Smad7 overexpression as a
pathophysiological mechanism for cytostatic TGF-ß inhibition in liver damage and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Transgenic hepatocyte-specific Smad7
overexpression in damaged liver of fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH)-deficient 
mice increased compensatory proliferation of hepatocytes. Similarly, modulation
of Smad7 expression changed the sensitivity of Huh7, FLC-4, HLE and HLF HCC cell 
lines for cytostatic TGF-ß effects. In our cohort of 140 HCC patients, Smad7
transcripts were elevated in 41.4% of HCC samples as compared with adjacent
tissue, with significant positive correlation to tumour size, whereas low Smad7
expression levels were significantly associated with worse clinical outcome.
Univariate and multivariate analyses indicate Smad7 levels as an independent
predictor for overall (P<0.001) and disease-free survival (P=0.0123). Delineating
a mechanism for Smad7 transcriptional regulation in HCC, we identified cold-shock
Y-box protein-1 (YB-1), a multifunctional transcription factor. YB-1 RNAi reduced
TGF-ß-induced and endogenous Smad7 expression in Huh7 and FLC-4 cells
respectively. YB-1 and Smad7 mRNA expression levels correlated positively
(P<0.0001). Furthermore, nuclear co-localization of Smad7 and YB-1 proteins was
present in cancer cells of those patients. In summary, the present study provides
a YB-1/Smad7-mediated mechanism that interferes with
anti-proliferative/tumour-suppressive TGF-ß actions in a subgroup of HCC cells
that may facilitate aspects of tumour progression.

PMID: 25602745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):7027-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.606343. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans mediate factor XIIa binding to the cell surface.

Wujak L(1), Didiasova M(1), Zakrzewicz D(1), Frey H(2), Schaefer L(2), Wygrecka
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of Giessen Lung Center,
Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392 Giessen, Germany and. (2)the Institute of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, Goethe University School of Medicine, University Hospital, 60590 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of
Giessen Lung Center, Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392 Giessen, Germany and
malgorzata.wygrecka@innere.med.uni-giessen.de.

Hageman factor (FXIIa) initiates the intrinsic coagulation pathway and triggers
the kallikrein-kinin and the complement systems. In addition, it functions as a
growth factor by expressing promitogenic activities toward several cell types.
FXIIa binds to the cell surface via a number of structurally unrelated surface
receptors; however, the underlying mechanisms are not yet fully understood. Here,
we demonstrate that FXIIa utilizes cell membrane-bound glycosaminoglycans to
interact with the cell surface of human lung fibroblasts (HLF). The combination
of enzymatic, inhibitory, and overexpression approaches identified a heparan
sulfate (HS) component of proteoglycans as an important determinant of the FXIIa 
binding capacity of HLF. Moreover, cell-free assays and competition experiments
revealed preferential binding of FXIIa to HS and heparin over dextran sulfate,
dermatan sulfate, and chondroitin sulfate A and C. Finally, we demonstrate that
fibroblasts isolated from the lungs of the patients suffering from idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) exhibit enhanced FXIIa binding capacity. Increased
sulfation of HS resulting from elevated HS 6-O-sulfotransferase-1 expression in
IPF HLF accounted, in part, for this phenomenon. Application of RNA interference 
technology and inhibitors of intracellular sulfation revealed the cooperative
action of cell surface-associated HS and urokinase-type plasminogen activator
receptor in the accumulation of FXIIa on the cell surface of IPF HLF. Moreover,
FXIIa stimulated IPF HLF migration, which was abrogated by pretreatment of cells 
with heparinase I. Collectively, our study uncovers a novel role of HS-type
glycosaminoglycans in a local accumulation of FXIIa on the cell membrane. The
enhanced association of FXIIa with IPF HLF suggests its contribution to
fibrogenesis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358126
PMID: 25589788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Feb 15;283(1):50-6. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.01.001.
Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Protocatechuic aldehyde ameliorates experimental pulmonary fibrosis by modulating
HMGB1/RAGE pathway.

Zhang L(1), Ji Y(2), Kang Z(3), Lv C(4), Jiang W(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, P.R.
China. Electronic address: countryspring@sina.com. (2)School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, P.R. China. Electronic address:
413499057@qq.com. (3)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Binzhou Medical
University, Yantai, P.R. China. Electronic address: davidjiangwl@163.com.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, P.R.
China. Electronic address: Lucky_lcj@sina.com. (5)School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, P.R. China. Electronic address:
jwl518@163.com.

An abnormal high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) activation and a decrease in
receptor for advanced glycation end-product (RAGE) play a key role in the
pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis. Protocatechuic aldehyde (PA) is a naturally
occurring compound, which is extracted from the degradation of phenolic acids.
However, whether PA has anti-fibrotic functions is unknown. In this study, the
effects of PA on the transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in A549 cells, on the apoptosis of human 
type I alveolar epithelial cells (AT I), on the proliferation of human lung
fibroblasts (HLF-1) in vitro, and on bleomycin (BLM)-induced pulmonary fibrosis
in vivo were investigated. PA treatment resulted in a reduction of EMT in A549
cells with a decrease in vimentin and HMGB, an increase of E-cadherin and RAGE, a
reduction of HLF-1 proliferation with a decrease of fibroblast growth factor 2
(FGF-2) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Apoptosis of AT I was
attenuated with an increase of RAGE. PA ameliorated BLM-induced pulmonary
fibrosis in rats with a reduction of histopathological scores and collagen
deposition, and a lower FGF-2, PDGF, a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) and HMGB1
expression, whereas higher RAGE was found in BLM-instilled lungs. Through the
decrease of HGMB1 and the regulation of RAGE, PA reversed the EMT, inhibited
HLF-1 proliferation as well as reduced apoptosis in AT I, and prevented pulmonary
fibrosis in vivo. Collectively, our results demonstrate that PA prevents
experimental pulmonary fibrosis by modulating HMGB1/RAGE pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25582705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2014;2014:2237-40. doi:
10.1109/EMBC.2014.6944064.

Macro-motion detection using ultra-wideband impulse radar.

Xin Li, Dengyu Qiao, Ye Li.

Radar has the advantage of being able to detect hidden individuals, which can be 
used in homeland security, disaster rescue, and healthcare monitoring-related
applications. Human macro-motion detection using ultra-wideband impulse radar is 
studied in this paper. First, a frequency domain analysis is carried out to show 
that the macro-motion yields a bandpass signal in slow-time. Second, the FTFW
(fast-time frequency windowing), which has the advantage of avoiding the
measuring range reduction, and the HLF (high-pass linear-phase filter), which can
preserve the motion signal effectively, are proposed to preprocess the radar
echo. Last, a threshold decision method, based on the energy detector structure, 
is presented.

PMID: 25570432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Talanta. 2015 Jan;132:945-53. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2014.05.061. Epub 2014 Jun
10.

Retention behavior of microparticles in gravitational field-flow fractionation
(GrFFF): effect of ionic strength.

Woo IS(1), Jung EC(2), Lee S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Hannam University, Daejeon 305-811, Korea Republic.
(2)Nuclear Chemistry Research Center, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute,
Daejeon 305-353, Korea Republic. (3)Department of Chemistry, Hannam University,
Daejeon 305-811, Korea Republic. Electronic address: slee@hannam.kr.

Retention behavior of micron-sized particles in gravitational field-flow
fractionation (GrFFF) was studied in this study. Effects of ionic strength and
flow rate as well as the viscosity of the GrFFF carrier liquid was investigated
on the size-based selectivity (Sd), retention ratio (R), and plate height (H) of 
micron-sized particles using polystyrene latex beads as model particles. It was
found that the retention ratio of microparticles increases with increasing flow
rate or the viscosity of the carrier liquid as the particles are forced away from
the accumulation wall by increased hydrodynamic lift forces (HLF). On the other
hand, the retention time increases (retention ratio decreases) with increasing
ionic strength of the carrier liquid at the same flow rate, due to decreased
repulsive interaction between the particles and the channel accumulation wall
(glass in this study) allowing the particles approach closer to the wall. Results
suggest the ionic strength of the carrier liquid plays a critical role in
determining retention of microparticles in GrFFF as well as the viscosity or the 
flow rate of the carrier liquid. It was found that the resolution and the
separation time could be improved by increasing the carrier viscosity and by
carefully adjusting the ionic strength of the carrier liquid.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25476401  [PubMed]


57. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2015 Jan 25;67:136-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2014.11.005. Epub
2014 Nov 26.

Recombinant human lactoferrin-Fc fusion with an improved plasma half-life.

Shiga Y(1), Oshima Y(1), Kojima Y(1), Sugimoto A(1), Tamaki N(1), Murata D(1),
Takeuchi T(2), Sato A(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo University of Technology, 1404-1
Katakura, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0982, Japan. (2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, 
Tottori University, 4-101 Koyama-Minami, Tottori 680-8553, Japan. (3)School of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo University of Technology, 1404-1 Katakura,
Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0982, Japan. Electronic address: atsato@stf.teu.ac.jp.

Lactoferrin (LF), an 80-kDa iron-binding glycoprotein found in mammalian exocrine
secretions, has potential therapeutic efficacy due to its extensive
health-promoting effects. However, LF is rapidly cleared from the circulation
(~12.6min half-life for recombinant human LF [rhLF] in rats), which limits its
therapeutic potential. Therefore, to improve plasma stability, we developed a
recombinant human LF (hLF)-immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) fragment crystallizable
domain (Fc) fusion (hLF-hinge-CH2-CH3) expressed in a Chinese Hamster Ovary cell 
(CHO) expression system and evaluated the in vitro bioactivities and
pharmacokinetic properties of the purified fusion. CHO DG44 cells were
transfected with an expression vector coding for recombinant hLF-hinge-CH2-CH3.
Iron binding, Caco-2 uptake, and thermal stability were investigated in vitro,
and pharmacokinetic parameters were investigated in vivo. hLF-hinge-CH2-CH3 was
significantly expressed in CHO cells (~100mg/l culture), was readily purified,
and exhibited 98.3% of the non-fused rhLF iron-binding activity. Caco-2 uptake
and thermal stability were improved for hLF-Fc fusion relative to rhLF. Moreover,
hLF-hinge-CH2-CH3 demonstrated a plasma half-life that was 9.1-fold longer than
that of rhLF as well as longer than that of the PEGylated bovine LFs that we
previously developed. Thus, CHO-derived hLF-hinge-CH2-CH3, with enhanced
pharmacokinetic properties, is a promising candidate drug for potential
parenteral administration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25433245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Tissue Eng Part C Methods. 2015 Jun;21(6):576-84. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEC.2014.0458.
Epub 2014 Dec 17.

Limbal Fibroblasts Maintain Normal Phenotype in 3D RAFT Tissue Equivalents
Suggesting Potential for Safe Clinical Use in Treatment of Ocular Surface
Failure.

Massie I(1), Dale SB(1), Daniels JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocular Biology and Therapeutics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology,
London, United Kingdom.

Limbal epithelial stem cell deficiency can cause blindness, but transplantation
of these cells on a carrier such as human amniotic membrane can restore vision.
Unfortunately, clinical graft manufacture using amnion can be inconsistent.
Therefore, we have developed an alternative substrate, Real Architecture for 3D
Tissue (RAFT), which supports human limbal epithelial cells (hLE) expansion.
Epithelial organization is improved when human limbal fibroblasts (hLF) are
incorporated into RAFT tissue equivalent (TE). However, hLF have the potential to
transdifferentiate into a pro-scarring cell type, which would be incompatible
with therapeutic transplantation. The aim of this work was to assess the scarring
phenotype of hLF in RAFT TEs in hLE+ and hLE- RAFT TEs and in nonairlifted and
airlifted RAFT TEs. Diseased fibroblasts (dFib) isolated from the fibrotic
conjunctivae of ocular mucous membrane pemphigoid (Oc-MMP) patients were used as 
a pro-scarring positive control against which hLF were compared using surrogate
scarring parameters: matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, de novo collagen
synthesis, a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) expression, and transforming growth
factor-ß (TGF-ß) secretion. Normal hLF and dFib maintained different phenotypes
in RAFT TE. MMP-2 and -9 activity, de novo collagen synthesis, and a-SMA
expression were all increased in dFib cf. normal hLF RAFT TEs, although TGF-ß1
secretion did not differ between normal hLF and dFib RAFT TEs. Normal hLF do not 
progress toward a scarring-like phenotype during culture in RAFT TEs and,
therefore, may be safe to include in therapeutic RAFT TE, where they can support 
hLE, although in vivo work is required to confirm this. dFib RAFT TEs (used in
this study as a positive control) may be useful toward the development of an ex
vivo disease model of Oc-MMP.

PMCID: PMC4442587
PMID: 25380529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Chromatogr Sci. 2015 Jul;53(6):909-14. doi: 10.1093/chromsci/bmu143. Epub 2014 
Nov 3.

Simultaneous Determination of Seven Components from Hawthorn Leaves Flavonoids in
Rat Plasma by LC-MS/MS.

Zhu S(1), Yan H(2), Niu K(3), Zhang S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical College,
Weifang 261031, PR China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, The First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun 130021, PR China. (3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head
and Neck Surgery, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun 130021, PR
China. (4)Department of Pharmacy, The First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun 130021, PR China sxzhang1981@126.com.

In this study, a simple, sensitive, and throughout liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method was developed for the simultaneous
determination of seven flavonoid compounds, namely, rutin,
vitexin-4<U+2033>-O-glucoside, vitexin-2<U+2033>-O-rhamnoside, hyperoside, vitexin,
shanyenoside A and quercetin in rat plasma after intravenous administration of
hawthorn leaves flavonoids (HLF) using lysionotin as an internal standard (IS).
The target compounds were extracted using protein precipitation by methanol. The 
detection was achieved by LC-MS/MS in multiple reaction monitoring mode. The
optimal mass transition ion pairs (m/z) for quantitation were 609.3/300.1 for
rutin, 593.1/413.2 for vitexin-4<U+2033>-O-glucoside, 577.3/413.2 for
vitexin-2<U+2033>-O-rhamnoside, 463.2/300.1 for hyperoside, 431.2/311.2 for vitexin,
407.2/245.1 for shanyenoside A, 301.1/151.1 for quercetin and 343.2/313.1 for the
IS, respectively. The method was fully validated with respect to specificity,
sensitivity, linearity, precision, accuracy, recovery and stability experiments. 
A sufficiently sensitive and selective LC-MS/MS method was first developed in
this study to simultaneously evaluate the pharmacokinetics of seven flavonoids in
rat plasma following intravenous administration of HLF.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25368407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014 Nov;33(11):2072-6. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2014.0850.

Social determinants of health and community needs: implications for health legacy
foundations.

Niggel SJ(1), Brandon WP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sabrina Jones Niggel (s.niggel@uncc.edu) is a research assistant professor in 
the College of Health and Human Services, University of North Carolina, in
Charlotte. (2)William P. Brandon is the Metrolina Medical Foundation
Distinguished Professor of Public Policy on Health in the Department of Political
Science and Public Administration, University of North Carolina, in Charlotte.

Mergers and acquisitions of nonprofit hospitals are on the rise. Proceeds from
many of these transactions will endow new health legacy foundations (HLFs). These
philanthropic entities have substantial potential for charitable investment in US
communities. Research indicates that the greatest improvements in population
health can be achieved by addressing underlying social factors. Determining
whether communities served by HLFs are characterized by poor social determinants 
of health would provide new information for developing effective grant-making
strategies. Our study compared socioeconomic, demographic, and health care access
indicators in HLF versus non-HLF counties. Compared with non-HLF counties, HLF
counties had significantly higher proportions of racial minorities and multiple
socioeconomic factors that rendered them more vulnerable to health disparities
and poor health. However, HLF counties had better access to health care. These
findings have direct implications for HLF leadership, planning, and grant making.

Project HOPEThe People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.

PMID: 25368003  [PubMed - in process]


61. J Appl Microbiol. 2015 Jan;118(1):212-21. doi: 10.1111/jam.12666. Epub 2014 Nov
25.

Oral lactoferrin protects against experimental candidiasis in mice.

Velliyagounder K(1), Alsaedi W, Alabdulmohsen W, Markowitz K, Fine DH.

Author information: 
(1)RUTGERS School of Dental Medicine, Newark, NJ, USA.

AIMS: To determine the role of human lactoferrin (hLF) in protecting the oral
cavities of mice against Candida albicans infection in lactoferrin knockout
(LFKO(-/-)) mice was compared to wild-type (WT) mice. We also aim to determine
the protective role of hLF in LFKO(-/-) mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Antibiotic-treated immunosuppressed mice were inoculated
with C. albicans (or sham infection) by oral swab and evaluated for the severity 
of infection after 7 days of infection. To determine the protective role of hLF, 
we added 0·3% solution of hLF to the drinking water given to some of the mice.
CFU count, scoring of lesions and microscopic observations were carried out to
determine the severity of infection. LFKO(-/-) I mice showed a 2 log (P = 0·001) 
higher CFUs of C. albicans in the oral cavity compared to the WT mice infected
with C. albicans (WTI). LFKO(-/-) I mice given hLF had a 3 log (P = 0·001)
reduction in CFUs in the oral cavity compared to untreated LFKO(-/-) I mice. The 
severity of infection, observed by light microscopy, revealed that the tongue of 
the LFKO(-/-) I mice showed more white patches compared to WTI and LFKO(-/-) I + 
hLF mice. Scanning electron microscopic observations revealed that more filiform 
papillae were destroyed in LFKO(-/-) I mice when compared to WTI or LFKO(-/-) I +
hLF mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Human LF is important in protecting mice from oral C. albicans
infection. Administered hLF may be used to prevent C. albicans infection.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Human LF, a multifunctional iron-binding
glycoprotein can be used as a therapeutic active ingredient in oral healthcare
products against C. albicans.

© 2014 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

PMCID: PMC4469205
PMID: 25319508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Oncol Lett. 2014 Nov;8(5):2023-2026. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Picropodophyllin and sorafenib synergistically suppress the proliferation and
motility of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Sueishi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu
Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of Rheumatology, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital,
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

Resistance is one limitation of sorafenib in the treatment of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) is involved in
cancer cell proliferation. To assess the potential synergistic antitumor effects 
of picropodophyllin (PPP), an IGF-1R inhibitor, HLF and PLC/PRL/5, HCC cells were
treated with PPP alone or PPP in combination with sorafenib, a multikinase
inhibitor. Normal human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were also used 
to analyze the antiangiogenic effects of the drugs. HCC cells and HUVECs were
cultured on 96-well plates, and then treated with PPP, with and without the
addition of sorafenib. A
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetr
azolium inner salt assay and hematoxylin and eosin staining were then performed
48 h later. The HCC cells were also analyzed using scratch assays and hematoxylin
and eosin staining after 48 h. The proliferation of HLF, PLC/PRF/5 and HUVEC
cells was suppressed by the combination of 0.2 µM PPP and 3 µM sorafenib more
effectively than by 10 µM sorafenib alone. The motility of HLF and PLC/PRF/5
cells was also suppressed to a greater extent with the combination of PPP at 0.2 
µM and sorafenib at 3 µM than with sorafenib at 10 µM alone. The cells that had
been treated with 0.2 µM PPP and 3 µM sorafenib also exhibited pyknotic nuclei,
which is characteristic of apoptosis. In conclusion, PPP enhanced
sorafenib-mediated suppression of proliferation and motility in HCC cells.
Therefore, the combination of PPP and sorafenib may exert antitumor and
antiangiogenic effects.

PMCID: PMC4186500
PMID: 25289088  [PubMed]


63. Biomed Rep. 2014 Nov;2(6):799-803. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

Co-culture of hepatocellular carcinoma cells and human umbilical endothelial
cells damaged by SU11274.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Ishige N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization Shimoshizu
Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology, National
Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital,
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of Rheumatology, National
Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital, 
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, National
Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

Mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (c-Met) is a receptor that binds to the 
hepatocyte growth factor and is upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
The anti-tumor effects of (3Z)-N-(3-chlorophenyl)-3-({3,5-dimethyl-4-[(4-
methyl-piperazin-1-yl)carbonyl]-1H-pyrrol-2-yl}methylene)-N-me-
thyl-2-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indole-5-sulfonamide (SU11274), a c-Met inhibitor, were
investigated in the present study. HCC cells (HLE, HLF, PLC/PRL/5, Hep3B, Huh-6
and HepG2) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were used.
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was performed to detect the expression
level of c-Met in HCC and HUVECs, and cyclin D1 in HCC. The
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-car-boxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tet
razolium inner salt assay was performed to assess the proliferation of the HCC
cells and HUVECs cultured with SU11274. Co-culture of HLF or PLC/PRL/5 cells and 
HUVECs was established as an in vitro model of HCC tissues. The expression levels
of c-Met in HLE, HLF, PLC/PRL/5, Hep3B, Huh-6 and HepG2, adult healthy liver and 
HUVECs were 4.43±0.50, 1.61±0.18, 3.70±0.08, 0.81±0.18, 6.60±1.29, 1.06±0.35,
1.00±0.09 and 88.8±17.3 (mean ± standard deviation), respectively. SU11274 (30
µM) suppressed the proliferation of HLF, PLC/PRL/5 and HUVECs to 11.0±9.4,
46.5±30.7 and 29.4±5.0%, respectively. SU11274 (30 µM) decreased the expression
levels of cyclin D1 in HLF and PLC/PRL/5 cells to 45.1±11.6 and 30.1±10.3%,
respectively. SU11274, at a concentration of 30 µM damaged the morphology of the 
co-cultures of HLF or PLC/PRL/5 cells with HUVECs and all the cells died. c-Met
is highly expressed in HUVECs and HCC cells, but not in Hep3B. At a 30-µM
concentration, SU11274 suppresses the proliferation of HLF, PLC/PRL/5 and HUVECs.
SU11274 (30 µM) damages the co-cultures of HLF or PLC/PRL/5 cells with HUVECs.

PMCID: PMC4179721
PMID: 25279148  [PubMed]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Dec 1;34(23):4272-84. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00791-14. Epub 2014
Sep 29.

CstF64: cell cycle regulation and functional role in 3' end processing of
replication-dependent histone mRNAs.

Romeo V(1), Griesbach E(2), Schümperli D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland Graduate
School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland. (2)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
daniel.schuemperli@izb.unibe.ch.

The 3' end processing of animal replication-dependent histone mRNAs is activated 
during G1/S-phase transition. The processing site is recognized by stem-loop
binding protein and the U7 snRNP, but cleavage additionally requires a
heat-labile factor (HLF), composed of cleavage/polyadenylation specificity
factor, symplekin, and cleavage stimulation factor 64 (CstF64). Although HLF has 
been shown to be cell cycle regulated, the mechanism of this regulation is
unknown. Here we show that levels of CstF64 increase toward the S phase and its
depletion affects histone RNA processing, S-phase progression, and cell
proliferation. Moreover, analyses of the interactions between CstF64, symplekin, 
and the U7 snRNP-associated proteins FLASH and Lsm11 indicate that CstF64 is
important for recruiting HLF to histone precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA)-resident
proteins. Thus, CstF64 is central to the function of HLF and appears to be at
least partly responsible for its cell cycle regulation. Additionally, we show
that misprocessed histone transcripts generated upon CstF64 depletion mainly
accumulate in the nucleus, where they are targets of the exosome machinery, while
a small cytoplasmic fraction is partly associated with polysomes.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4248742
PMID: 25266659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Bioinformation. 2014 Aug 30;10(8):512-7. doi: 10.6026/97320630010512. eCollection
2014.

In silico characterization of a RNA binding protein of cattle filarial parasite
Setaria digitata.

Nagaratnam N(1), Karunanayake EH(1), Tennekoon KH(1), Samarakoon SR(1), Mayan
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of 
Colombo 90, Cumaratunga Munidasa Mawatha, Colombo 03, Sri Lanka.

Human lymphatic filariasis (HLF) is a neglected tropical disease which threatens 
nearly 1.4 billion people in 73 countries worldwide. Wuchereria bancrofti is the 
major causative agent of HLF and it closely resembles cattle filarial parasite
Setaria digitata. Due to difficulties in procuring W. bancrofti parasite
material, S. digitata cDNA library has been constructed to identify novel drug
targets against HLF and many of the cDNA sequences are yet to be assigned
structure and function. In this study, a 549 bp long cDNA (sdrbp) has been
sequenced and characterized in silico. The shortest ORF of 249 bp from the
isolated cDNA encodes a polypeptide of 82 amino acids and shows an amino acid
identity of 54% with the RRM domain of human cleavage stimulation factor-64 kDa
subunit (CstF-64). Structure of the protein (sdRBP) obtained by homology
modelling using RRM of CstF-64 as template adopts classical RRM topology
(ß1a1ß2ß3a2ß4). sdRBP model built was validated by superimposition tools and
Ramachandran plot analysis. CstF-64 plays an important role in pre-mRNA
polyadenylation by interacting with specific GU-rich downstream sequence element.
Molecular docking studies of sdRBP with different RNA molecules revealed that
sdRBP has greater binding affinity to GU-rich RNA and comparable results were
obtained upon similar docking of RRM of CstF-64 with the same RNA molecules.
Therefore, sdRBP is likely to perform homologous function in S. digitata. This
study brings new dimensions to the functional analysis of RNA binding proteins of
S. digitata and their evaluation as new drug targets against HLF.

PMCID: PMC4166771
PMID: 25258487  [PubMed]


66. BMC Genomics. 2014 Sep 25;15:814. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-814.

High dose ionizing radiation regulates micro RNA and gene expression changes in
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Beer L, Seemann R, Ristl R, Ellinger A, Kasiri MM, Mitterbauer A, Zimmermann M,
Gabriel C, Gyöngyösi M, Klepetko W, Mildner M(1), Ankersmit HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel
18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria. michael.mildner@meduniwien.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: High dose ionizing radiation (IR) induces potent toxic cell effects
mediated by either direct DNA damage or the production of reactive oxygen species
(ROS). IR-induced modulations in multiple biological processes have been proposed
to be partly regulated by radiosensitive microRNA (miRNA). In order to gain new
insights into the role of miRNAs in the regulation of biological processes after 
IR, we have investigated changes in mRNA and miRNA expression after high dose IR.
RESULTS: IR induced changes in the mRNA and miRNA profiles of human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). When comparing non-irradiated and irradiated
samples, we detected a time-dependent increase in differentially expressed mRNAs 
and miRNAs, with the highest differences detectable 20 hours after exposure. Gene
ontology analysis revealed that very early events (up to 4 hours) after
irradiation were specifically associated with p53 signaling and apoptotic
pathways, whereas a large number of diverse cellular processes were deregulated
after 20 hours. Transcription factor analysis of all up-regulated genes confirmed
the importance of p53 in the early post-irradiation phase. When analyzing miRNA
expression, we found 177 miRNAs that were significantly regulated in the late
post-irradiation phase. Integrating miRNA and target gene expression data, we
found a significant negative correlation between miRNA-mRNA and identified
hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) as a transcription factor down-regulated in the
response to IR. These regulated miRNAs and the HLF target genes were involved in 
modulating radio-responsive pathways, such as apoptosis, the MAKP signaling
pathway, endocytosis, and cytokine-cytokine interactions.
CONCLUSION: Using a large dataset of mRNA and miRNA expression profiles, we
describe the interplay of mRNAs and miRNAs in the regulation of gene expression
in response to IR at a posttranscriptional level and their involvement in the
modulation of radiation-induced biological pathways.

PMCID: PMC4182888
PMID: 25257395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Rhythms. 2014 Aug;29(4):243-56. doi: 10.1177/0748730414544741.

USP2 regulates the intracellular localization of PER1 and circadian gene
expression.

Yang Y(1), Duguay D(2), Fahrenkrug J(3), Cermakian N(2), Wing SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Polypeptide Laboratory, Department of Medicine, McGill University and McGill
University Health Centre Research Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Chronobiology, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada. (3)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Bispebjerg
Hospital, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Polypeptide Laboratory, Department of Medicine, McGill University and McGill
University Health Centre Research Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada
simon.wing@mcgill.ca.

Endogenous 24-h rhythms in physiology are driven by a network of circadian clocks
located in most tissues. The molecular clock mechanism is based on feedback loops
involving clock genes and their protein products. Posttranslational
modifications, including ubiquitination, are important for regulating the clock
feedback mechanism. Recently, we showed that the deubiquitinating enzyme
ubiquitin-specific peptidase 2 (USP2) associates with clock proteins and
deubiquitinates PERIOD1 (PER1) but does not affect its overall stability. Mice
devoid of USP2 display defects in clock function. Here, we show that USP2
regulates nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and nuclear retention of PER1 and its
repressive role on the clock transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1. The rhythm of
nuclear entry of PER1 in Usp2 knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) was
advanced but with reduced nuclear accumulation of PER1. Although Per1 mRNA
expression rhythm remained intact in the Usp2 KO MEFs, the expression profiles of
other core clock genes were altered. This was also true for the expression of
clock-controlled genes (e.g., Dbp, Tef, Hlf, E4bp4). A similar phase advance of
PER1 nuclear localization rhythm and alteration of clock gene expression profiles
were also observed in livers of Usp2 KO mice. Taken together, our results
demonstrate a novel function of USP2 in the molecular clock in which it regulates
PER1 function by gating its nuclear entry and accumulation.

© 2014 The Author(s).

PMID: 25238854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Transgenic Res. 2015 Apr;24(2):365-73. doi: 10.1007/s11248-014-9835-7. Epub 2014 
Sep 19.

Generation of bi-transgenic pigs overexpressing human lactoferrin and lysozyme in
milk.

Cui D(1), Li J, Zhang L, Liu S, Wen X, Li Q, Zhao Y, Hu X, Zhang R, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, 100193, People's Republic of China.

Intensive swine production industry uses antibiotics to treat diseases and
improve pig growth. This can not only cause antibiotic resistance, but can also
pollute the environment or eventually affect human public health. To date, human 
lactoferrin (hLF) and human lysozyme (hLZ) have been known as non-adaptive but
interactive antimicrobial members and could act in concert against bacteria,
which contribute to host defense. Therefore, their expression in pigs might be an
alternative strategy for replacing antibiotics in the pig production industry. In
our study, we produced hLF and hLZ bi-transgenic pigs and assessed the milk's
antibacterial ability. Integration of both transgenes was confirmed by PCR and
southern blot. Both the hLF and hLZ were expressed in the mammary gland of
bi-transgenic pigs, as detected by western blotting. The expression amounts were 
6.5 g/L for hLF and 1.1 mg/L for hLZ using ELISA. Interestingly, pig milk
containing hLF and hLZ had synergistic antimicrobial activity. Our results
suggest an alternative approach for avoiding the use of antibiotics in the pig
industry, which would be of great benefit to the commercial swine production.

PMID: 25236863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncol Lett. 2014 Oct;8(4):1519-1522. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Short hairpin RNA of frizzled-2 suppresses the proliferation of hepatocellular
carcinoma cells.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Sueishi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu
Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of Rheumatology, National
Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital,
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

In the present study, Frizzled-2 (Fz2), a receptor of the Wnt ligand, was
investigated as a potential target of molecular therapy for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed to
determine the expression levels of Fz2. A surgical specimen of HCC was
immunostained with an Fz2 antibody. A
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetr
azolium inner salt assay was performed on HCC cell lines, including HLF and
Hep3B, 72 h after the transfection of the short hairpin (sh)RNA of Fz2
(shRNA-Fz2). RNA was isolated from the Hep3B and HLF cells 48 h after
transfection and subjected to quantitative PCR. All cell lines had elevated
levels of Fz2 compared with those in an adult liver. The highest and lowest
expression levels of Fz2 were 246.9±15.7 in the HLF cells and 5.8±1.4 in the
Hep3B cells, respectively. Fz2 was expressed in the tumorous HCC tissue, but not 
in the surrounding non-tumorous tissue. Cell proliferation was suppressed to
28.6±6.4% in the HLF cells and to 29.8±4.3% in the Hep3B cells at 100 ng
shRNA-Fz2 per well. Levels of cyclin D1 expression decreased to 65.2±5.9% in the 
HLF cells and to 60.8±14.6% in the Hep3B cells at 2.5 µg per well. In conclusion,
Fz2 was upregulated in the HCC cells. shRNA-Fz2 suppressed the proliferation of
the Hep3B and HLF cells, decreasing Fz2 expression. As it was not expressed in
the surrounding non-tumorous tissue, Fz2 may be an ideal molecular therapeutic
target for HCC.

PMCID: PMC4156231
PMID: 25202360  [PubMed]


70. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Sep;30(9):975-9.

[IL-33/ST2 promotes airway remodeling in asthma by activating the expression of
fibronectin 1 and type 1 collagen in human lung fibroblasts].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo Z(1), Wu J(2), Zhao J(2), Liu F(2), Chen Y(3), Bi L(3), Dong L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University,
Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Jinan Military General Hospital, Jinan 250031, 
China. (2)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University,
Jinan 250031, China. (3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Jinan 250031, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the IL-33-induced production of fibronectin 1 (FN1) and
type 1 collagen (Col1) from human lung fibroblasts (HLF-1).
METHODS: The study enrolled 28 patients with asthma (asthma group) and 25 healthy
controls. The IL-33 in serum was measured by ELISA. Airway remodeling and the
expression of IL-33 were observed by HE staining and immunohistochemistry in
biopsied specimens from 8 asthma patients and 8 controls. In vitro experiments,
the production of FN1 and Col1 from HLF-1 stimulated with IL-33 at different
concentrations was evaluated by real-time quantitative PCR and Western blotting.
RESULTS: The IL-33 level in the sera of asthma patients was significantly higher 
than that in controls (P<0.01). Different degrees of basement membrane thickness 
were present in patients with asthma, and a correlation analysis showed that the 
level of IL-33 in serum was positively correlated with the average thickness of
basement membrane in asthma patients (r=0.829, P<0.05). The immunohistochemical
results showed that IL-33 was mostly derived from injured airway epithelium. In
vitro experiments, the production of FN1 and Col1 from HLF-1 stimulated with
IL-33 was significantly elevated in a concentration-dependent manner (P<0.05).
The IL-33-induced production of FN1 and Col1 from HLF-1 was significantly
suppressed by the pretreatment with fluticasone propionate and anti-ST2 antibody 
(P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The IL-33/ST2 pathway may promote airway remodeling in asthma through
activating HLF-1 to over-express FN1 and Col1.

PMID: 25200162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Antiviral Res. 2014 Nov;111:13-22. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Sep 1.

The intracellular inhibition of HCV replication represents a novel mechanism of
action by the innate immune Lactoferrin protein.

Picard-Jean F(1), Bouchard S(1), Larivée G(1), Bisaillon M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1E 4K8, Canada. (2)Département de
Biochimie, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1E 4K8, Canada. Electronic address:
Martin.Bisaillon@USherbrooke.ca.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major public-health problem with 130-170 million
individuals chronically infected worldwide. In order to halt the epidemic,
therapy against HCV will need to be both effective and widely available. Studies 
focusing on safe and affordable natural product active against HCV have revealed 
the antiviral activity of the human Lactoferrin (hLF) protein which binds and
neutralizes the circulating virion. In the current study, investigation of hLF
activity on the HCV subgenomic replicon system, which is independent from viral
entry and shedding, revealed a distinct antireplicative activity of hLF against
HCV. Hepatocellular uptake of hLF was confirmed and correlated with qualitative
HCV staining reduction. Quantitative dose-response inhibition assays confirmed an
hLF-mediated and dose-dependent HCV replication reduction reaching up to 60%. The
in cellulo anti-HCV activity of hLF was additive to both Ribavirin and
Interferon-a-2b. Further investigation of hLF activity against the essential
viral proteins involved in HCV genome replication revealed an inhibitory activity
against the HCV ATPase/Helicase NS3 protein but not against the HCV RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase (NS5B protein). NS3 inhibition was mediated by a direct and
specific interaction between hLF and an allosteric binding site on NS3. Taken
together, our findings reveal a new antiviral mechanism of action by which hLF
inhibits intracellular HCV replication.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25193851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 1;74(21):5963-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0225. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

Network modeling of TGFß signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition reveals joint sonic hedgehog and Wnt pathway
activation.

Steinway SN(1), Zañudo JG(2), Ding W(3), Rountree CB(4), Feith DJ(5), Loughran TP
Jr(5), Albert R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, 
Pennsylvania. ssteinway@hmc.psu.edu. (2)Department of Physics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Penn
State College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania. (4)Department of Pediatric
Gastroenterology, Bon Secours St. Mary's Hospital, Richmond, Virginia.
(5)University of Virginia Cancer Center, University of Virginia School of
Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental process hijacked by
cancer cells to leave the primary tumor site, invade surrounding tissue, and
establish distant metastases. A hallmark of EMT is the loss of E-cadherin
expression, and one major signal for the induction of EMT is TGFß, which is
dysregulated in up to 40% of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We have constructed 
an EMT network of 70 nodes and 135 edges by integrating the signaling pathways
involved in developmental EMT and known dysregulations in invasive HCC. We then
used discrete dynamic modeling to understand the dynamics of the EMT network
driven by TGFß. Our network model recapitulates known dysregulations during the
induction of EMT and predicts the activation of the Wnt and Sonic hedgehog (SHH) 
signaling pathways during this process. We show, across multiple murine (P2E and 
P2M) and human HCC cell lines (Huh7, PLC/PRF/5, HLE, and HLF), that the TGFß
signaling axis is a conserved driver of mesenchymal phenotype HCC and confirm
that Wnt and SHH signaling are induced in these cell lines. Furthermore, we
identify by network analysis eight regulatory feedback motifs that stabilize the 
EMT process and show that these motifs involve cross-talk among multiple major
pathways. Our model will be useful in identifying potential therapeutic targets
for the suppression of EMT, invasion, and metastasis in HCC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25189528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016 Jan;75(1):124-30. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2014-205877. Epub 
2014 Sep 3.

Twenty-eight loci that influence serum urate levels: analysis of association with
gout.

Phipps-Green AJ(1), Merriman ME(1), Topless R(1), Altaf S(1), Montgomery GW(2),
Franklin C(3), Jones GT(4), van Rij AM(4), White D(5), Stamp LK(6), Dalbeth N(3),
Merriman TR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(2)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. (5)Waikato 
District Health Board, Hamilton, New Zealand. (6)Department of Medicine,
University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.

OBJECTIVES: Twenty-eight genetic loci are associated with serum urate levels in
Europeans. Evidence for association with gout at most loci is absent, equivocal
or not replicated. Our aim was to test the loci for association with gout meeting
the American College of Rheumatology gout classification criteria in New Zealand 
European and Polynesian case-control sample sets.
METHODS: 648 European cases and 1550 controls, and 888 Polynesian (Ma¯ori and
Pacific) cases and 1095 controls were genotyped. Association with gout was tested
by logistic regression adjusting for age and sex. Power was adequate (>0.7) to
detect effects of OR>1.3.
RESULTS: We focused on 24 loci without previous consistent evidence for
association with gout. In Europeans, we detected association at seven loci, one
of which was the first report of association with gout (IGF1R). In Polynesian,
association was detected at three loci. Meta-analysis revealed association at
eight loci-two had not previously been associated with gout (PDZK1 and MAF). In
participants with higher Polynesian ancestry, there was association in an
opposing direction to Europeans at PRKAG2 and HLF (HLF is the first report of
association with gout). There was obvious inconsistency of gout association at
four loci (GCKR, INHBC, SLC22A11, SLC16A9) that display very similar effects on
urate levels.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first evidence for association with gout at four loci
(IGF1R, PDZK1, MAF, HLF). Understanding why there is lack of correlation between 
urate and gout effect sizes will be important in understanding the aetiology of
gout.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 25187157  [PubMed - in process]


74. Meat Sci. 2014 Dec;98(4):828-34. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2014.07.001. Epub 2014
Jul 13.

Influence of extraction technique on the anti-oxidative potential of hawthorn
(Crataegus monogyna) extracts in bovine muscle homogenates.

Shortle E(1), O'Grady MN(2), Gilroy D(1), Furey A(3), Quinn N(4), Kerry JP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Cork Institute of Technology, Bishopstown, 
Cork, Ireland. (2)Food Packaging Group, School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, 
College of Science, Engineering and Food Science, University College, Cork,
Ireland. (3)Department of Chemistry, Cork Institute of Technology, Bishopstown,
Cork, Ireland. (4)Department of Mathematics, Cork Institute of Technology,
Bishopstown, Cork, Ireland. (5)Food Packaging Group, School of Food and
Nutritional Sciences, College of Science, Engineering and Food Science,
University College, Cork, Ireland. Electronic address: Joe.Kerry@ucc.ie.

Six extracts were prepared from hawthorn (Crataegus monogyna) leaves and flowers 
(HLF) and berries (HB) using solid-liquid [traditional (T) (HLFT, HBT), sonicated
(S) (HLFS, HBS)] and supercritical fluid (C) extraction (HLFC, HBC) techniques.
The antioxidant activities of HLF and HB extracts were characterised using in
vitro antioxidant assays (TPC, DPPH, FRAP) and in 25% bovine muscle (longissimus 
lumborum) homogenates (lipid oxidation (TBARS), oxymyoglobin (% of total
myoglobin)) after 24h storage at 4°C. Hawthorn extracts exhibited varying degrees
of antioxidant potency. In vitro and muscle homogenate (TBARS) antioxidant
activity followed the order: HLFS>HLFT and HBT>HBS. In supercritical fluid
extracts, HLFC>HBC (in vitro antioxidant activity) and HLFCHBC (TBARS). All
extracts (except HBS) reduced oxymyoglobin oxidation. The HLFS extract had the
highest antioxidant activity in all test systems. Supercritical fluid extraction 
(SFE) exhibited potential as a technique for the manufacture of functional
ingredients (antioxidants) from hawthorn for use in muscle foods.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25170819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Sep 10;136(36):12592-5. doi: 10.1021/ja507321j. Epub 2014 Aug
29.

A unified approach to ent-atisane diterpenes and related alkaloids: synthesis of 
(-)-methyl atisenoate, (-)-isoatisine, and the hetidine skeleton.

Cherney EC(1), Lopchuk JM, Green JC, Baran PS.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla,
California 92037, United States.

A unified approach to ent-atisane diterpenes and related atisine and hetidine
alkaloids has been developed from ent-kaurane (-)-steviol (1). The conversion of 
the ent-kaurane skeleton to the ent-atisane skeleton features a Mukaiyama
peroxygenation with concomitant cleavage of the C13-C16 bond. Conversion to the
atisine skeleton (9) features a C20-selective C-H activation using a Suárez
modification of the Hofmann-Löffler-Freytag (HLF) reaction. A cascade sequence
involving azomethine ylide isomerization followed by Mannich cyclization forms
the C14-C20 bond in the hetidine skeleton (8). Finally, attempts to form the N-C6
bond of the hetisine skeleton (7) with a late-stage HLF reaction are discussed.
The synthesis of these skeletons has enabled the completion of (-)-methyl
atisenoate (3) and (-)-isoatisine (4).

PMCID: PMC4160278
PMID: 25159015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Microbes Infect. 2014 Sep;16(9):762-7. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2014.07.009. Epub
2014 Aug 11.

Prophylactic effect of human lactoferrin against Streptococcus mutans bacteremia 
in lactoferrin knockout mice.

Velusamy SK(1), Fine DH(1), Velliyagounder K(2).

Author information: 
(1)RUTGERS School of Dental Medicine, Newark, NJ, USA. (2)RUTGERS School of
Dental Medicine, Newark, NJ, USA. Electronic address: velliyka@sdm.rutgers.edu.

Streptococcus mutans is the primary agent of dental caries, which is often
detected in transient bacteremia. Lactoferrin is a multifunctional glycoprotein
showing antibacterial activities against several Streptococcus species. We
reported here the prophylactic effect of human lactoferrin (hLF) in a lactoferrin
knockout mouse (LFKO-/-) bacteremic model. The hLF treatment significantly
cleared S. mutans from the blood and organs of bacteremic mice when compared to
the non-hLF treated mice. Further, analysis of serum cytokines, spleen and liver 
cytokine mRNA levels revealed that hLF prophylaxis modulates their release
differently when compared to the non-hLF treated group. C-reactive protein level 
(P = 0.003) also decreased following hLF prophylaxis in S. mutans induced
bacteremic mice. Additional quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed that hLF
prophylaxis significantly decreased the expression level of IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, IL-1ß, 
IL-6, MPO and iNOS in spleen and liver. These results suggested that the hLF
protects the host against S. mutans-induced experimental bacteremia.

Copyright © 2014 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4252812
PMID: 25124544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Exp Eye Res. 2014 Oct;127:196-205. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2014.07.024. Epub 2014 Aug
7.

Response of human limbal epithelial cells to wounding on 3D RAFT tissue
equivalents: effect of airlifting and human limbal fibroblasts.

Massie I(1), Levis HJ(2), Daniels JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocular Biology and Therapeutics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology,
11-43 Bath Street, London, EC1V 9EL, UK. Electronic address: i.massie@ucl.ac.uk. 
(2)Department of Ocular Biology and Therapeutics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology,
11-43 Bath Street, London, EC1V 9EL, UK. Electronic address: h.levis@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Ocular Biology and Therapeutics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology,
11-43 Bath Street, London, EC1V 9EL, UK. Electronic address: j.daniels@ucl.ac.uk.

Limbal epithelial stem cell deficiency can cause blindness but may be treated by 
human limbal epithelial cell (hLE) transplantation, normally on human amniotic
membrane. Clinical outcomes using amnion can be unreliable and so we have
developed an alternative tissue equivalent (TE), RAFT (Real Architecture for 3D
Tissue), which supports hLE expansion, and stratification when airlifted. Human
limbal fibroblasts (hLF) may be incorporated into RAFT TEs, where they support
overlying hLE and improve phenotype. However, the impact of neither airlifting
nor hLF on hLE function has been investigated. hLE on RAFT TEs (±hLF and
airlifting) were wounded using heptanol and re-epithelialisation (fluorescein
diacetate staining), and percentage putative stem cell marker p63a and
proliferative marker Ki67 expression (wholemount immunohistochemistry), measured.
Airlifted, hLF- RAFT TEs were unable to close the wound and p63a expression was 7
± 0.2% after wounding. Conversely, non-airlifted, hLF- RAFT TEs closed the wound 
within 9 days and p63a expression was higher at 22 ± 5% (p < 0.01). hLE on both
hLF- and hLF+ RAFT TEs (non-airlifted) closed the wound and p63a expression was
26 ± 8% and 36 ± 3% respectively (ns). Ki67 expression by hLE increased from 1.3 
± 0.5% before wounding to 7.89 ± 2.53% post-wounding for hLF- RAFT TEs (p <
0.01), and 0.8 ± 0.08% to 17.68 ± 10.88% for hLF+ RAFT TEs (p < 0.05), suggesting
that re-epithelialisation was a result of proliferation. These data suggest that 
neither airlifting nor hLF are necessarily required to maintain a functional
epithelium on RAFT TEs, thus simplifying and shortening the production process.
This is important when working towards clinical application of regenerative
medicine products.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25108221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Aug 29;451(3):382-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.07.103. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Correlation of glucocorticoid-mediated E4BP4 upregulation with altered expression
of pro- and anti-apoptotic genes in CEM human lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Beach JA(1), Nary LJ(2), Hovanessian R(3), Medh RD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, California State University Northridge, Northridge, CA 
91330-8303, USA. Electronic address: jessica.beach@cshs.org. (2)Department of
Biology, California State University Northridge, Northridge, CA 91330-8303, USA. 
Electronic address: ljnary@gmail.com. (3)Department of Biology, California State 
University Northridge, Northridge, CA 91330-8303, USA. Electronic address:
rebeka888@gmail.com. (4)Department of Biology, California State University
Northridge, Northridge, CA 91330-8303, USA. Electronic address:
rheem.medh@csun.edu.

In Caenorhabditiselegans, motorneuron apoptosis is regulated via a
ces-2-ces-1-egl-1 pathway. We tested whether human CEM lymphoblastic leukemia
cells undergo apoptosis via an analogous pathway. We have previously shown that
E4BP4, a ces-2 ortholog, mediates glucocorticoid (GC)-dependent upregulation of
BIM, an egl-1 ortholog, in GC-sensitive CEM C7-14 cells and in CEM C1-15mE#3
cells, which are sensitized to GCs by ectopic expression of E4BP4. In the present
study, we demonstrate that the human ces-1 orthologs, SLUG and SNAIL, are not
significantly repressed in correlation with E4BP4 expression. Expression of E4BP4
homologs, the PAR family genes, especially HLF, encoding a known anti-apoptotic
factor, was inverse to that of E4BP4 and BIM. Expression of pro- and
anti-apoptotic genes in CEM cells was analyzed via an apoptosis PCR Array. We
identified BIRC3 and BIM as genes whose expression paralleled that of E4BP4,
while FASLG, TRAF4, BCL2A1, BCL2L1, BCL2L2 and CD40LG as genes whose expression
was opposite to that of E4BP4.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4150740
PMID: 25101525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biometals. 2014 Oct;27(5):857-74. doi: 10.1007/s10534-014-9779-7. Epub 2014 Aug
1.

Effects of lactoferrin on intestinal epithelial cell growth and differentiation: 
an in vivo and in vitro study.

Blais A(1), Fan C, Voisin T, Aattouri N, Dubarry M, Blachier F, Tomé D.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 914 INRA- AgroParisTech Nutrition Physiology and Ingestive Behaviour, 16
rue Claude Bernard, 75005, Paris, France, blais@agroparistech.fr.

This study was designed to analyse the effects of human (h) and bovine
lactoferrin (bLF) on the growth and differentiation of intestinal cells using the
mice model supplemented with Lactoferrin (LF) and the enterocyte-like model of
Caco-2 cells which spontaneously differentiate after confluency. In mice, bLF
supplementation increased jejunal villus height and the expression of several
intestinal brush border membrane enzymes activities. Addition of bLF or hLF to
undifferentiated Caco-2 cells was able to increase cell proliferation with
confluency being reached more rapidly. Moreover, when Caco-2 cells were grown in 
the presence of LF for 3 weeks, brush-border membrane-associated enzyme
activities i.e. sucrase, alkaline phosphatase and neutral aminopeptidase, as well
as the L-glutamate transporter expression were all increased indicating an
increased Caco-2 cell differentiation. Accordingly, cDNA Atlas array and Western 
blot analysis of cell cycle proteins shown a decreased expression of Cdck2 and an
increased TAF1 expression; these proteins being implicated in the regulation of
numerous genes related to cellular proliferation and differentiation. These
modifications were associated with an inhibition of Caco-2 cell spontaneous
apoptosis. Altogether, our results indicate that LF increase in vivo and in vitro
enterocyte differentiation. In addition, LF was found to increase in vitro
enterocyte proliferation resulting in higher cell density in cell flasks, an
effect that was likely partly due to a reduction of the cellular apoptosis. The
different stimulation patterns observed for the different parameters associated
with cell differentiation in relationship with specific gene regulation is
discussed.

PMID: 25082351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2014 Sep;47(9):738-45. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

Putative role of ischemic postconditioning in a rat model of limb ischemia and
reperfusion: involvement of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a expression.

Wang T(1), Zhou YT(2), Chen XN(3), Zhu AX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Shuyang People's Hospital, JiangSu, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Shuyang People's Hospital, JiangSu, China.
(3)Institute of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, LanZhou
University, Lanzhou, Gansu, China. (4)Department of Pharmacy, Shuyang People's
Hospital, JiangSu, China.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) is one of the most potent angiogenic growth 
factors. It improves angiogenesis and tissue perfusion in ischemic skeletal
muscle. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that ischemic
postconditioning is effective for salvaging ischemic skeletal muscle resulting
from limb ischemia-reperfusion injury, and that the mechanism involves expression
of HIF-1a. Wistar rats were randomly divided into three groups (n=36 each):
sham-operated (group S), hindlimb ischemia-reperfusion (group IR), and ischemic
postconditioning (group IPO). Each group was divided into subgroups (n=6)
according to reperfusion time: immediate (0 h, T0), 1 h (T1), 3 h (T3), 6 h (T6),
12 h (T12), and 24 h (T24). In the IPO group, three cycles of 30-s reperfusion
and 30-s femoral aortic reocclusion were carried out before reperfusion. At all
reperfusion times (T0-T24), serum creatine kinase (CK) and lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH) activities, as well as interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, and tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a) concentrations, were measured in rats after they were killed.
Histological and immunohistochemical methods were used to assess the skeletal
muscle damage and HIF-1a expression in skeletal muscle ischemia. In groups IR and
IPO, serum LDH and CK activities and TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-10 concentrations were
all significantly increased compared to group S, and HIF-1a expression was
up-regulated (P<0.05 or P<0.01). In group IPO, serum LDH and CK activities and
TNF-a and IL-6 concentrations were significantly decreased, IL-10 concentration
was increased, HlF-1a expression was down-regulated (P<0.05 or P<0.01), and the
pathological changes were reduced compared to group IR. The present study
suggests that ischemic postconditioning can reduce skeletal muscle damage caused 
by limb ischemia-reperfusion and that its mechanisms may be related to the
involvement of HlF-1a in the limb ischemia-reperfusion injury-triggered
inflammatory response.

PMCID: PMC4143200
PMID: 25075575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Circulation. 2014 Jul 1;130(1):10-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.005445. Epub
2014 Apr 28.

Healthy lifestyle change and subclinical atherosclerosis in young adults:
Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) study.

Spring B(1), Moller AC(2), Colangelo LA(2), Siddique J(2), Roehrig M(2), Daviglus
ML(2), Polak JF(2), Reis JP(2), Sidney S(2), Liu K(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University, Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL (B.S., A.C.M., L.A.C., J.S., M.R., M.L.D., K.L.);
Department of Radiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
(J.F.P.); Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, Bethesda, MD (J.P.R.); and Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente
Northern California, Oakland, CA (S.S.). bspring@northwestern.edu. (2)From the
Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL (B.S., A.C.M., L.A.C., J.S., M.R., M.L.D., K.L.);
Department of Radiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
(J.F.P.); Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, Bethesda, MD (J.P.R.); and Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente
Northern California, Oakland, CA (S.S.).

BACKGROUND: The benefits of healthy habits are well established, but it is
unclear whether making health behavior changes as an adult can still alter
coronary artery disease risk.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults
(CARDIA) prospective cohort study (n=3538) assessed 5 healthy lifestyle factors
(HLFs) among young adults aged 18 to 30 years (year 0 baseline) and 20 years
later (year 20): not overweight/obese, low alcohol intake, healthy diet,
physically active, nonsmoker. We tested whether change from year 0 to 20 in a
continuous composite HLF score (HLF change; range, -5 to +5) is associated with
subclinical atherosclerosis (coronary artery calcification and carotid
intima-media thickness) at year 20, after adjustment for demographics,
medications, and baseline HLFs. By year 20, 25.3% of the sample improved (HLF
change =+1); 40.4% deteriorated (had fewer HLFs); 34.4% stayed the same; and
19.2% had coronary artery calcification (>0). Each increase in HLFs was
associated with reduced odds of detectable coronary artery calcification (odds
ratio=0.85; 95% confidence interval, 0.74-0.98) and lower intima-media thickness 
(carotid bulb ß=-0.024, P=0.001), and each decrease in HLFs was predictive to a
similar degree of greater odds of coronary artery calcification (odds ratio=1.17;
95% confidence interval, 1.02-1.33) and greater intima-media thickness (ß=+0.020,
P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Healthy lifestyle changes during young adulthood are associated with
decreased risk and unhealthy lifestyle changes are associated with increased risk
for subclinical atherosclerosis in middle age.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4615574
PMID: 24982115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Sep;134(3):663-670.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2014.04.007. Epub 2014 May 27.

Asthmatic airway epithelial cells differentially regulate fibroblast expression
of extracellular matrix components.

Reeves SR(1), Kolstad T(2), Lien TY(2), Elliott M(1), Ziegler SF(3), Wight TN(3),
Debley JS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of
Washington, Seattle, Wash; Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle
Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Wash. (2)Center for Immunity and
Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Wash.
(3)Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, Wash. (4)Division of Pulmonary Medicine,
Seattle Children's Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash; Center for 
Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle,
Wash. Electronic address: jason.debley@seattlechildrens.org.

BACKGROUND: Airway remodeling might explain lung function decline among asthmatic
children. Extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition by human lung fibroblasts (HLFs) 
is implicated in airway remodeling. Airway epithelial cell (AEC) signaling might 
regulate HLF ECM expression.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to determine whether AECs from asthmatic children
differentially regulate HLF expression of ECM constituents.
METHODS: Primary AECs were obtained from well-characterized atopic asthmatic (n =
10) and healthy (n = 10) children intubated during anesthesia for an elective
surgical procedure. AECs were differentiated at an air-liquid interface for 3
weeks and then cocultured with HLFs from a healthy child for 96 hours. Collagen I
(COL1A1), collagen III (COL3A1), hyaluronan synthase (HAS) 2, and fibronectin
expression by HLFs and prostaglandin E2 synthase (PGE2S) expression by AECs were 
assessed by using RT-PCR. TGF-ß1 and TGF-ß2 concentrations in media were measured
by using ELISA.
RESULTS: COL1A1 and COL3A1 expression by HLFs cocultured with AECs from asthmatic
patients was greater than that by HLFs cocultured with AECs from healthy subjects
(2.2-fold, P < .02; 10.8-fold, P < .02). HAS2 expression by HLFs cocultured with 
AECs from asthmatic patients was 2.5-fold higher than that by HLFs cocultured
with AECs from healthy subjects (P < .002). Fibronectin expression by HLFs
cocultured with AECs from asthmatic patients was significantly greater than that 
by HLFs alone. TGF-ß2 activity was increased in cocultures of HLFs with AECs from
asthmatic patients (P < .05), whereas PGES2 was downregulated in AEC-HLF
cocultures (2.2-fold, P < .006).
CONCLUSIONS: HLFs cocultured with AECs from asthmatic patients showed
differential expression of the ECM constituents COL1A1 and COL3A1 and HAS2
compared with HLFs cocultured with AECs from healthy subjects. These findings
support a role for altered ECM production in asthmatic airway remodeling,
possibly regulated by unbalanced AEC signaling.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4149938
PMID: 24875618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biometals. 2014 Oct;27(5):1017-29. doi: 10.1007/s10534-014-9747-2. Epub 2014 May 
28.

Inhibition of intestinal polyp growth by oral ingestion of bovine lactoferrin and
immune cells in the large intestine.

Iigo M(1), Alexander DB, Xu J, Futakuchi M, Suzui M, Kozu T, Akasu T, Saito D,
Kakizoe T, Yamauchi K, Abe F, Takase M, Sekine K, Tsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Nanotoxicology Project, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.

Studies using animal models have demonstrated that ingestion of bovine
lactoferrin (bLF) inhibits carcinogenesis in the colon and other organs of
experimental animals. As a result of these studies, a blinded, randomized,
controlled clinical trial was conducted in the National Cancer Center Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan to determine whether ingestion of bLF had an effect on the growth of
colorectal polyps in humans. Patients with colorectal polyps =5 mm diameter and
likely to be adenomas ingested 0, 1.5, or 3.0 g bLF daily for 1 year. Ingestion
of 3.0 g bLF suppressed the growth of colorectal polyps and increased the level
of serum human lactoferrin in trial participants 63 years old or younger. The
purpose of the present study was to investigate correlations between immune
parameters and changes in polyp size. Trial participants with regressing polyps
had increased NK cell activity, increased serum hLF levels (indicating increased 
neutrophil activity), and increased numbers of CD4+ cells in the polyps. These
findings are consistent with a correlation between higher immune activity and
suppression of colorectal polyps. In addition, participants with regressing
polyps had lower numbers of PMNs and increased numbers of S100A8+ cells in the
polyps, consistent with a correlation between lower inflammatory potential in the
colon and suppression of colorectal polyps. Trial participants ingesting bLF had 
increased serum hLF levels, a possible increase in systemic NK cell activity, and
increased numbers of CD4+ and CD161+ cells in the polyps. Taken together, our
findings suggest that bLF suppressed colorectal polyps by enhancing immune
responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC4155176
PMID: 24867408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biometals. 2014 Oct;27(5):831-41. doi: 10.1007/s10534-014-9746-3. Epub 2014 May
16.

Transcriptomic profiling of intestinal epithelial cells in response to human,
bovine and commercial bovine lactoferrins.

Jiang R(1), Lönnerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA.

Lactoferrin (Lf) is an iron-binding glycoprotein present in high concentration in
human milk. It is a pleiotropic protein and involved in diverse bioactivities,
such as stimulation of cell proliferation and immunomodulatory activities. Lf is 
partly resistant to proteolysis in the gastrointestinal tract. Thus, Lf may play 
important roles in intestinal development. Due to differences in amino acid
sequences and isolation methods, Lfs from human and bovine milk as well as
commercially available bovine Lf (CbLf) may differ functionally or exert their
functions via various mechanisms. To provide a potential basis for further
applications of CbLf, we compared effects of Lfs on intestinal transcriptomic
profiling using an intestinal epithelial cell model, human intestinal epithelial 
crypt-like cells (HIEC). All Lfs significantly stimulated proliferation of HIEC
and no significant differences were found among these three proteins. Microarray 
assays were used to investigate transcriptomic profiling of intestinal epithelial
cells in response to Lfs. Selected genes were verified by RT-PCR with a high
validation rate. Genes significantly regulated by hLf, bLf, and CbLf were 150,
395 and 453, respectively. Fifty-four genes were significantly regulated by both 
hLf and CbLf, whereas 129 genes were significantly modulated by bLf and CbLf.
Although only a limited number of genes were regulated by all Lfs, the three Lfs 
positively influenced cellular development and immune functions based on pathway 
analysis using IPA (Ingenuity). Lfs stimulate cellular and intestinal development
and immune functions via various signaling pathways, such as Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling, interferon signaling and IL-8 signaling.

PMID: 24831230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncotarget. 2014 May 15;5(9):2404-17.

Alternative splicing of FBP-interacting repressor coordinates c-Myc,
P27Kip1/cyclinE and Ku86/XRCC5 expression as a molecular sensor for
bleomycin-induced DNA damage pathway.

Rahmutulla B(1), Matsushita K, Satoh M, Seimiya M, Tsuchida S, Kubo S, Shimada H,
Ohtsuka M, Miyazaki M, Nomura F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnosis, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba City, Chiba, Japan.

The far-upstream element-binding protein-interacting repressor (FIR) is a c-myc
transcriptional suppressor. FIR is alternatively spliced to lack the
transcriptional repression domain within exon 2 (FIR<U+0394>exon2) in colorectal
cancers. FIR and FIR<U+0394>exon2 form homo- or heterodimers that complex with SAP155.
SAP155, a subunit of the essential splicing factor 3b subcomplex in the
spliceosome, is required for proper P27Kip1 pre-mRNA splicing, and P27Kip1
arrests cells at G1. In contrast, FIR was co-immunoprecipitated with Ku86 and
DNA-PKcs. siRNA against Ku86/Ku70 decreased FIR and P27Kip1 expression, whereas
siRNA against FIR decreased Ku86/XRCC5 and P27Kip1 expression. Thus the
mechanical interaction of FIR/FIR<U+0394>exon2/SAP155 bridges c-myc and P27Kip1
expression, potentially integrates cell-cycle progression and c-myc transcription
in cell. Bleomycin(BLM) is an anticancer agent that introduces DNA breaks.
Because DNA breaks generate the recruitment of Ku86/Ku70 to bind to the broken
DNA ends, the possible involvement of FIR and Ku86/Ku70 interaction in the
BLM-induced DNA damage repair response was investigated in this study. First, BLM
treatment reduced SAP155 expression and increased FIR and FIR<U+0394>exon2 mRNA
expression as well as the ratio of FIR<U+0394>exon2:FIR in hepatoblastoma cells (HLE and
HLF). Second, FIR or FIR<U+0394>exon2 adenovirus vectors (Ad-FIR or Ad-FIR<U+0394>exon2)
increased Ku86/Ku70 and P27Kip1 expression in vitro. Third, BLM decreased P27Kip1
protein expression, whereas increased P27Kip1 and <U+03B3>H2AX expression with
Ad-FIR<U+0394>exon2. Together, the interaction of FIR/SAP155 modulates FIR splicing and 
involves in cell-cycle control or cell fate via P27Kip1 and c-myc in BLM-induced 
DNA damage pathway. This novel function of FIR splicing will contribute to
clinical studies of cancer management through elucidating the mechanical
interaction of FIR/FIR<U+0394>exon2/SAP155 as a potential target for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4058014
PMID: 24811221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Asthma. 2014 Oct;51(8):863-9. doi: 10.3109/02770903.2014.921196. Epub 2014 Jun 
5.

IL-33 promotes airway remodeling and is a marker of asthma disease severity.

Guo Z(1), Wu J, Zhao J, Liu F, Chen Y, Bi L, Liu S, Dong L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University , Jinan
, China .

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the function of interleukin-33 (IL-33) in the asthmatic
airway remodeling and the relationship between IL-33 and asthma severity.
METHODS: IL-33 levels, sputum eosinophils percentage (EOS%), pulmonary function
and total immunoglobulin (IgE) were measured for 45 patients with asthma and 40
non-allergic controls. Asthma severity was assessed. The expressions of IL-33 and
reticular basement membrane (RBM) on bronchial biopsy specimens from eight asthma
patients and eight non-allergic controls were observed after hematoxylin-eosin
staining (HE) and immunohistochemical staining. In vitro experiments, real-time
polymerase chain reactions and western blotting analysis were used to identify
the specific effects of IL-33 administration.
RESULTS: Serum IL-33 levels in patients with asthma were higher than those in
non-allergic controls. Moreover, in asthmatic patients, serum IL-33 levels were
negatively correlated to forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1, %
predicted), and positively correlated to asthma severity. Increased expression of
IL-33 and RBM thickening were observed on bronchial biopsy specimens obtained
from patients with asthma. Serum IL-33 levels were positively correlated to
basement membrane thickness. The production of fibronectin1 and type I collagen
in human lung fibroblasts (HLF-1) increased at 24 h after IL-33 treatment in
vitro. Pre-treatment with anti-ST2 antibody or fluticasone propionate (FP)
suppressed the production of fibronectin1 and types I collagen induced by IL-33.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-33 is a marker of asthma severity, and may contribute to airway
remodeling in asthma by acting on human lung fibroblasts.

PMID: 24796648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell. 2014 Apr 24;157(3):549-64. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.04.006.

Reprogramming committed murine blood cells to induced hematopoietic stem cells
with defined factors.

Riddell J(1), Gazit R(1), Garrison BS(1), Guo G(2), Saadatpour A(3), Mandal
PK(1), Ebina W(1), Volchkov P(1), Yuan GC(3), Orkin SH(4), Rossi DJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, MA 02116, USA. (2)Dana
Farber/Boston Children's Hospital Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA
02116, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Biostatistics, Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Dana Farber/Boston Children's
Hospital Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA 02116, USA; Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
(5)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, MA 02116, USA; Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic address:
derrick.rossi@childrens.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2014 Jul 3;158(1):226.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Jul 17;33(14):1511-3.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 May 1;14(5):555-6.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) sustain blood formation throughout life and are
the functional units of bone marrow transplantation. We show that transient
expression of six transcription factors Run1t1, Hlf, Lmo2, Prdm5, Pbx1, and Zfp37
imparts multilineage transplantation potential onto otherwise committed lymphoid 
and myeloid progenitors and myeloid effector cells. Inclusion of Mycn and Meis1
and use of polycistronic viruses increase reprogramming efficacy. The
reprogrammed cells, designated induced-HSCs (iHSCs), possess clonal multilineage 
differentiation potential, reconstitute stem/progenitor compartments, and are
serially transplantable. Single-cell analysis revealed that iHSCs derived under
optimal conditions exhibit a gene expression profile that is highly similar to
endogenous HSCs. These findings demonstrate that expression of a set of defined
factors is sufficient to activate the gene networks governing HSC functional
identity in committed blood cells. Our results raise the prospect that blood cell
reprogramming may be a strategy for derivation of transplantable stem cells for
clinical application.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4060823
PMID: 24766805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 16;9(4):e95482. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095482. eCollection
2014.

Laminoplasty and laminectomy hybrid decompression for the treatment of cervical
spondylotic myelopathy with hypertrophic ligamentum flavum: a retrospective
study.

Ding H(1), Xue Y(1), Tang Y(1), He D(1), Li Z(1), Zhao Y(1), Zong Y(1), Wang
Y(1), Wang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Heping
District, Tianjin, China.

OBJECTIVE: To report the outcomes of a posterior hybrid decompression protocol
for the treatment of cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM) associated with
hypertrophic ligamentum flavum (HLF).
BACKGROUND: Laminoplasty is widely used in patients with CSM; however, for CSM
patients with HLF, traditional laminoplasty does not include resection of a
pathological ligamentum flavum.
METHODS: This study retrospectively reviewed 116 CSM patients with HLF who
underwent hybrid decompression with a minimum of 12 months of follow-up. The
procedure consisted of reconstruction of the C4 and C6 laminae using CENTERPIECE 
plates with spinous process autografts, and resection of the C3, C5, and C7
laminae. Surgical outcomes were assessed using Japanese Orthopedic Association
(JOA) score, recovery rate, cervical lordotic angle, cervical range of motion,
spinal canal sagittal diameter, bone healing rates on both the hinge and open
sides, dural sac expansion at the level of maximum compression, drift-back
distance of the spinal cord, and postoperative neck pain assessed by visual
analog scale.
RESULTS: No hardware failure or restenosis was noted. Postoperative JOA score
improved significantly, with a mean recovery rate of 65.3 ± 15.5%. Mean cervical 
lordotic angle had decreased 4.9 degrees by 1 year after surgery (P<0.05).
Preservation of cervical range of motion was satisfactory postoperatively. Bone
healing rates 6 months after surgery were 100% on the hinge side and 92.2% on the
open side. Satisfactory decompression was demonstrated by a significantly
increased sagittal canal diameter and cross-sectional area of the dural sac
together with a significant drift-back distance of the spinal cord. The dural sac
was also adequately expanded at the time of the final follow-up visit.
CONCLUSION: Hybrid laminectomy and autograft laminoplasty decompression using
Centerpiece plates may facilitate bone healing and produce a comparatively
satisfactory prognosis for CSM patients with HLF.

PMCID: PMC3989326
PMID: 24740151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Nucl Med. 2014 May;55(5):799-804. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.113.132118. Epub 2014 Mar
13.

Glypican-3-targeted 89Zr PET imaging of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Sham JG(1), Kievit FM, Grierson JR, Miyaoka RS, Yeh MM, Zhang M, Yeung RS,
Minoshima S, Park JO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

Comment in
    J Nucl Med. 2014 May;55(5):708-9.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a devastating malignancy in which imperfect
imaging plays a primary role in diagnosis. Glypican-3 (GPC3) is an HCC-specific
cell surface proteoglycan overexpressed in most HCCs. This paper presents the use
of (89)Zr-conjugated monoclonal antibody against GPC3 ((89)Zr-aGPC3) for
intrahepatic tumor localization using PET.METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction
confirmed relative GPC3 expression in cell lines. In vitro binding, in vivo
biodistribution, and small-animal PET studies were performed on GPC3-expressing
HepG2 and non-GPC3-expressing HLF and RH7777 cells and orthotopic xenografts.
RESULTS: (89)Zr-aGPC3 demonstrated antibody-dependent, antigen-specific tumor
binding. HepG2 liver tumors exhibited high peak uptake (836.6 ± 86.6 percentage
injected dose [%ID]/g) compared with background liver (27.5 ± 1.6 %ID/g).
Tumor-to-liver contrast ratio was high and peaked at 32.5. The smallest HepG2
tumor (<1 mm) showed lower peak uptake (42.5 ± 6.4 %ID/g) and tumor-to-liver
contrast (1.57) but was still clearly visible on PET. Day 7 tissue activity was
still substantial in HepG2 tumors (466.4 ± 87.6 %ID/g) compared with control
RH7777 tumors (3.9 ± 1.3 %ID/g, P < 0.01), indicating antigen specificity by
(89)Zr-aGPC3. HepG2 tumor treated with unlabeled aGPC3 or heat-denatured
(89)Zr-aGPC3 demonstrated tumor activity (2.1 %ID/g) comparable to that of
control xenografts, confirming antibody dependency.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the feasibility of using (89)Zr-aGPC3 to
image HCC in the liver, as well as the qualitative determination of GPC3
expression via small-animal PET. The ability to clarify the identity of small
liver lesions with an HCC-specific PET probe would provide clinicians with vital 
information that could significantly alter patient management, warranting further
investigation for clinical translation.

PMCID: PMC4116087
PMID: 24627434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2014 Jul 16;58:13-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2014.02.014. Epub 2014 
Mar 12.

Effect of pirfenidone on proliferation, TGF-ß-induced myofibroblast
differentiation and fibrogenic activity of primary human lung fibroblasts.

Conte E(1), Gili E(2), Fagone E(2), Fruciano M(2), Iemmolo M(2), Vancheri C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Biomedicine, University of Catania, 95123
Catania, Italy. Electronic address: econte@unict.it. (2)Department of Molecular
and Clinical Biomedicine, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.

Pirfenidone is an orally active small molecule that has been shown to inhibit the
progression of fibrosis in animal models and in patients with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Although pirfenidone exhibits well documented antifibrotic
and antiinflammatory activities, in vitro and in vivo, its molecular targets and 
mechanisms of action have not been elucidated. In this study, we investigated the
effects of pirfenidone on proliferation, TGF-ß-induced differentiation and
fibrogenic activity of primary human lung fibroblasts (HLFs). Pirfenidone reduced
fibroblast proliferation and attenuated TGF-ß-induced a-smooth muscle actin (SMA)
and pro-collagen (Col)-I mRNA and protein levels. Importantly, pirfenidone
inhibited TGF-ß-induced phosphorylation of Smad3, p38, and Akt, key factors in
the TGF-ß pathway. Together, these results demonstrate that pirfenidone modulates
HLF proliferation and TGF-ß-mediated differentiation into myofibroblasts by
attenuating key TGF-ß-induced signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24613900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer Sci. 2014 May;105(5):512-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12386. Epub 2014 Mar 30.

Inhibition of histone methyltransferase EZH2 depletes leukemia stem cell of mixed
lineage leukemia fusion leukemia through upregulation of p16.

Ueda K(1), Yoshimi A, Kagoya Y, Nishikawa S, Marquez VE, Nakagawa M, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Leukemia stem cells (LSC) are resistant to conventional chemotherapy and
persistent LSC after chemotherapy are supposed to be a major cause of relapse.
However, information on genetic or epigenetic regulation of stem cell properties 
is still limited and LSC-targeted drugs have scarcely been identified. Epigenetic
regulators are associated with many cellular processes including maintenance of
stem cells. Of note are polycomb group proteins, because they potentially control
stemness, and can be pharmacologically targeted by a selective inhibitor (DZNep).
Therefore, we investigated the therapeutic potential of EZH2 inhibition in mixed 
lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion leukemia. Intriguingly, EZH2 inhibition by DZNep or
shRNA not only suppressed MLL fusion leukemia proliferation but also reduced
leukemia initiating cells (LIC) frequency. Expression analysis suggested that p16
upregulation was responsible for LICs reduction. Knockdown of p16 canceled the
survival advantage of mice treated with DZNep. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays demonstrated that EZH2 was highly enriched around the
transcription-start-site of p16, together with H3K27 methylation marks in MLL/ENL
and Hoxa9/Meis1 transduced cells but not in E2A/HLF transduced cells. Although
high expression of Hoxa9 in MLL fusion leukemia is supposed to be responsible for
the recruitment of EZH2, our data also suggest that there may be some other
mechanisms independent of Hoxa9 activation to suppress p16 expression, because
expression levels of Hoxa9 and p16 were not inversely related between MLL/ENL and
Hoxa9/Meis1 transduced cells. In summary, our findings show that EZH2 is a
potential therapeutic target of MLL fusion leukemia stem cells.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317832
PMID: 24612037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(3):e91035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091035. eCollection 
2014.

EndoE from Enterococcus faecalis hydrolyzes the glycans of the biofilm inhibiting
protein lactoferrin and mediates growth.

Garbe J(1), Sjögren J(1), Cosgrave EF(2), Struwe WB(2), Bober M(1), Olin AI(1),
Rudd PM(2), Collin M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Infection Medicine, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (2)Dublin Oxford Glycobiology Group, National Institute
for Bioprocessing Research & Training (NIBRT), Mount Merrion, Blackrock, Co.
Dublin, Ireland.

Glycosidases are widespread among bacteria. The opportunistic human pathogen
Enterococcus faecalis encodes several putative glycosidases but little is known
about their functions. The identified endo-ß-N-acetylglucosaminidase EndoE has
activity on the N-linked glycans of the human immunoglobulin G (IgG). In this
report we identified the human glycoprotein lactoferrin (hLF) as a new substrate 
for EndoE. Hydrolysis of the N-glycans from hLF was investigated using lectin
blot, UHPLC and mass spectrometry, showing that EndoE releases major glycoforms
from this protein. hLF was shown to inhibit biofilm formation of E. faecalis in
vitro. Glycans of hLF influence the binding to E. faecalis, and EndoE-hydrolyzed 
hLF inhibits biofilm formation to lesser extent than intact hLF indicating that
EndoE prevents the inhibition of biofilm. In addition, hLF binds to a
surface-associated enolase of E. faecalis. Culture experiments showed that the
activity of EndoE enables E. faecalis to use the glycans derived from lactoferrin
as a carbon source indicating that they could be used as nutrients in vivo when
no other preferred carbon source is available. This report adds important
information about the enzymatic activity of EndoE from the commensal and
opportunist E. faecalis. The activity on the human glycoprotein hLF, and the
functional consequences with reduced inhibition of biofilm formation highlights
both innate immunity functions of hLF and a bacterial mechanism to evade this
innate immunity function. Taken together, our results underline the importance of
glycans in the interplay between bacteria and the human host, with possible
implications for both commensalism and opportunism.

PMCID: PMC3946673
PMID: 24608122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Mar;18(3):391-5. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12234. Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Lactoferrin gene knockdown leads to similar effects to iron chelation in human
adipocytes.

Moreno-Navarrete JM(1), Ortega F, Moreno M, Serrano M, Ricart W, Fernández-Real
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Institut d'Investigació
Biomèdica de Girona (IdIBGi), CIBEROBN (CB06/03/010) and Instituto de Salud
Carlos III (ISCIII), Girona, Spain.

In human and mice adipose tissue, lactoferrin (LTF) has been found to be
associated with increased adipogenesis and decreased inflammatory markers. Here, 
we aimed to investigate the effects of LTF knockdown (KD) in human adipocyte
differentiation. In addition, the effects of exogenous LTF administration and
iron chelation [using deferoxamine (DFO, 10 µM)] were tested. In both
subcutaneous and visceral pre-adipocytes, LTF KD led to decrease significantly
adipogenic, lipogenic and insulin signalling-related gene expression and a
significant increase in the gene expression of inflammatory mediators. Human
lactoferrin (hLf, 1 µM) administration led to recover adipocyte differentiation
in LTF KD pre-adipocytes. Interestingly, iron chelation triggered similar effects
to LTF KD, decreasing significantly adipogenic gene expressions. Of note, DFO (10
µM) and hLf (1 and 10 µM) co-administration led to a dose-dependent recovery of
adipocyte differentiation. These new data reveal that endogenous LTF biosynthesis
during human adipocyte differentiation is essential to achieve this process,
possibly, modulating adipocyte iron homoeostasis. hLf administration might be a
useful therapeutic target in obesity-associated adipose tissue dysfunction.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3955146
PMID: 24571258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncol Lett. 2014 Mar;7(3):820-826. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Inhibitory effects of human lactoferrin on U14 cervical carcinoma through
upregulation of the immune response.

Shi H(1), Li W(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi 712100, P.R. China.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is a multifunctional glycoprotein that inhibits cancer
growth. However, the inhibitory effect of this glycoprotein in cervical cancer
remains inconclusive. This study investigated the efficacy of hLF on the
inhibition of U14 cervical cancer in vivo. Recombinant adenovirus carrying hLF
(Ad-hLF) were constructed. Mice inoculated with U14 cells were randomly allocated
to four treatments: i) Phosphate-buffered saline (negative control), ii) Ad-green
fluorescent protein (negative control), iii) Ad-hLF (studied) or iv)
cyclophosphamide (CTX; positive control). Tumor growth, as well as levels of
natural killer (NK) cells, CD4(+) and CD8(+) peripheral blood T lymphocyte
subpopulations, serum cytokines and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in 
tumor tissues were detected. Compared with the negative controls, tumor growth
was inhibited by hLF and mice lifespans in the Ad-hLF-treated group were
prolonged to reach the levels of the CTX-treated group. The activity of
tumor-killing NK cells was upregulated by hLF. Moreover, the number of CD4(+) and
CD8(+) peripheral blood T lymphocyte subpopulations increased following treatment
with Ad-hLF. Treatment with Ad-hLF increased the levels of serum interferon-<U+03B3>,
serum interleukin-2 (IL-2) and tumor necrosis factor-a, and decreased the levels 
of serum IL-4 in tumor-bearing mice. The expression of VEGF in tumor tissues was 
downregulated by hLF. In conclusion, hLF inhibits the growth of U14 solid tumors 
by modulating the immune response of tumor-bearing mice.

PMCID: PMC3919929
PMID: 24520300  [PubMed]


95. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2014 Feb 15;949-950:48-57. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2013.12.034. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Single-domain antibody-based ligands for immunoaffinity separation of recombinant
human lactoferrin from the goat lactoferrin of transgenic goat milk.

Tillib SV(1), Privezentseva ME(2), Ivanova TI(2), Vasilev LF(2), Efimov GA(3),
Gursky YG(2), Georgiev GP(2), Goldman IL(2), Sadchikova ER(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
Electronic address: tillib@genebiology.ru. (2)Institute of Gene Biology, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. (3)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular
Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.

Single-domain antibody generation technology was applied to make new
Sepharose-bound ligands for affinity separation of closely related proteins, such
as human and goat lactoferrin. We generated recombinant antibodies that can
selectively bind/recognize only lactoferrins having amino acid sequences
identical to that of human natural lactoferrin (anti-hLF Ab). Selected and
purified histidine-tagged single-domain antibodies were used as ligands, and
different lactoferrins were used as analytes in the kinetics analysis of
lactoferrin binding to captured anti-hLF Abs using the Bio-Rad ProteOn XPR36
protein interaction array system. The data obtained were consistent with a 1:1
binding model with very high affinity, practically equal in the case of hLF and
rec-hLF (calculated KD varied from 0.43nM to 3.7nM). Interaction of captured
fsdAbs with goat LF was significantly weaker and not detectable under the same
analysis conditions. We demonstrated the high efficiency of the recombinant human
lactoferrin purification from goat lactoferrin and other proteins using the
obtained single domain antibody-based affinity ligands. We believe this approach 
can be used for the generation of single-domain antibody-based affinity media for
the efficient separation/purification of a wide spectrum of other highly
homologous proteins.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24463400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Sci Rep. 2014 Jan 24;4:3852. doi: 10.1038/srep03852.

Hsa-miR-520d induces hepatoma cells to form normal liver tissues via a
stemness-mediated process.

Tsuno S(1), Wang X(1), Shomori K(2), Hasegawa J(1), Miura N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacotherapeutics, Department of Pathophysiological &
Therapeutic Science, 86 Nishicho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan. (2)Division of
Organ Pathology, Tottori University, 86 Nishicho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503,
Japan.

The human ncRNA gene RGM249 regulates the extent of differentiation of cancer
cells and the conversion of 293FT cells to hiPSCs. To identify the factors
underlying this process, we investigated the effects of lentivirally inducing
miR-520d expression in 293FT and HLF cells in vitro. Subsequently, we evaluated
tumor formation in a xenograft model. Transformed HLF cells were Oct4 and Nanog
positive within 24 h, showed p53 upregulation and hTERT downregulation, and
mostly lost their migration abilities. After lentiviral infection, the cells were
intraperitoneally injected into mice, resulting in benign teratomas (6%), the
absence of tumors (87%) or differentiation into benign liver tissues (7%) at the 
injection site after 1 month. We are the first to demonstrate the loss of
malignant properties in cancer cells in vivo through the expression of a single
microRNA (miRNA). This miRNA successfully converted 293FT and hepatoma cells to
hiPSC-like cells. The regulation of malignancy by miR-520d appears to be through 
the conversion of cancer cells to normal stem cells, maintaining p53
upregulation.

PMCID: PMC3900933
PMID: 24458129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S505-14. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-3460-1. Epub
2014 Jan 6.

CEACAM1 long cytoplasmic domain isoform is associated with invasion and
recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kiriyama S(1), Yokoyama S, Ueno M, Hayami S, Ieda J, Yamamoto N, Yamaguchi S,
Mitani Y, Nakamura Y, Tani M, Mishra L, Shively JE, Yamaue H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Wakayama Medical University,
Wakayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The two isoforms of carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion
molecule 1 (CEACAM1), 1 with a long cytoplasmic domain (CEACAM1-L) and 1 with a
short (CEACAM1-S), are involved in different signaling pathways. ß2-spectrin
(ß2SP) is an adaptor protein that plays critical roles in the proper control of
Smad access to activate receptors involved in regulation of TGF-ß signaling. In
this study, we examined the association between CEACAM1 isoform balance and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) malignant potential and investigated the
possibility of a molecular interaction between CEACAM1 and ß2SP.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical analysis was carried out with CEACAM1-L or CEACAM1-S
antibodies on 154 HCC tissues to correlate with the factors of malignancy.
Invasion assay was performed for the effect of CEACAM1 expression on HCC cell
lines. Moreover, immunohistochemical analysis and immunoprecipitation analysis
were performed to investigate the association between CEACAM1 isoform balance and
ß2SP.
RESULTS: In immunohistochemical analysis, CEACAM1-L expression dominance was a
risk factor for HCC recurrence (p = 0.04) and was significantly associated with a
shorter survival compared with CEACAM1-S expression dominance. Invasion assay
indicated that CEACAM1-4L-transfected HLF and PLC/PRF/5 cells showed
significantly increased invasion (p < 0.0001) and CEACAM1-4S-transfected HLF
cells showed significantly decreased invasion. Immunohistochemical analysis of
ß2SP suggested that the HCCs with CEACAM1-L-dominant expression were more
strongly stained with ß2SP than the HCCs with CEACAM1-S-dominant expression (p = 
0.013), and coprecipitation assays indicated that CEACAM1-L could bind to ß2SP.
CONCLUSIONS: CEACAM1-L may enhance the HCC invasiveness through an interaction
with ß2SP and subsequent effects on TGF-ß signaling.

PMCID: PMC4216236
PMID: 24390710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Acta Parasitol. 2013 Dec;58(4):615-8. doi: 10.2478/s11686-013-0180-4. Epub 2013
Dec 13.

Effects of Echinostoma caproni miracidia dose on the neutral and polar lipids of 
Biomphalaria glabrata as determined by high-performance thin-layer
chromatography.

Hunsberger A(1), Fried B, Sherma J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Lafayette College, Easton, PA, USA.

The effects of a 5 versus 25 miracidia exposure of Echinostoma caproni on the
lipid composition of Biomphalaria glabrata was studied using high performance
thin layer chromatography (HPTLC)-densitometry. A 50 miracidia dose was not used 
because such a high level of exposure caused severe snail mortality by 3 weeks
post-exposure (PE). Lipids were determined in the digestive-gland gonad complex
(DGG) of the exposed snails and in the uninfected matched controls at 2 and 4
weeks PE. Extraction of lipids from DGGs was carried out by the Folch method with
chloroform-methanol (2:1), and extracts were analyzed on Analtech HPTLC-HLF
pre-adsorbent silica gel plates with measurement of separated bands using a CAMAG
Scanner 3. For neutral lipids the mobile phase was petroleum ether-diethyl
ether-glacial acetic acid (80:20:1) and the detection reagent was 5% ethanolic
phosphoric acid, and for polar lipids chloroform-methanol-deionized water
(65:25:4) mobile phase and 10% cupric sulfate in 8% phosphoric acid detection
reagent were used. No significant differences in the concentrations of free
sterols, free fatty acids, triacylglycerols, phosphatidylcholine, and
phosphatidylethanolamine were seen at 2 weeks PE in any of the groups. At 4 weeks
PE, the free fatty acid concentration increased significantly in the snails
exposed to 25 miracidia compared to that of the 5 miracidia/snail group or the
controls. Elevation of the free fatty acid fraction in the high dose snail group 
suggested that some changes occurred in the lipid metabolism of the snails in
that group as a function of miracidia dose.

PMID: 24338329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Dec 10;14(12):24029-45. doi: 10.3390/ijms141224029.

Hypoxia-induced collagen synthesis of human lung fibroblasts by activating the
angiotensin system.

Liu SS, Wang HY(1), Tang JM(2), Zhou XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing 100050, China. haoyanw@126.com. (2)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100050, China. tangjm416@163.com.

The exact molecular mechanism that mediates hypoxia-induced pulmonary fibrosis
needs to be further clarified. The aim of this study was to explore the effect
and underlying mechanism of angiotensin II (Ang II) on collagen synthesis in
hypoxic human lung fibroblast (HLF) cells. The HLF-1 cell line was used for in
vitro studies. Angiotensinogen (AGT), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE),
angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) and angiotensin II type 2 receptor (AT2R)
expression levels in human lung fibroblasts were analysed using real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) after hypoxic treatment. Additionally, the
collagen type I (Col-I), AT1R and nuclear factor <U+03BA>appaB (NF-<U+03BA>B) protein
expression levels were detected using Western blot analysis, and NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear
translocation was measured using immunofluorescence localization analysis. Ang II
levels in HLF-1 cells were measured with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). We found that hypoxia increased Col-I mRNA and protein expression in
HLF-1 cells, and this effect could be inhibited by an AT1R or AT2R inhibitor. The
levels of NF-<U+03BA>B, RAS components and Ang II production in HLF-1 cells were
significantly increased after the hypoxia exposure. Hypoxia or Ang II increased
NF-<U+03BA>B-p50 protein expression in HLF-1 cells, and the special effect could be
inhibited by telmisartan (TST), an AT1R inhibitor, and partially inhibited by
PD123319, an AT2R inhibitor. Importantly, hypoxia-induced NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear
translocation could be nearly completely inhibited by an AT1R or AT2R inhibitor. 
Furthermore pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC), a NF-<U+03BA>B blocker, abolished the
expression of hypoxia-induced AT1R and Col-I in HLF-1 cells. Our results indicate
that Ang II-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B signalling via ATR is involved in hypoxia-induced
collagen synthesis in human lung fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3876092
PMID: 24336063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Aug 15;1(3):266-80. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.07.004.
eCollection 2013.

Transcriptome analysis identifies regulators of hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells.

Gazit R(1), Garrison BS, Rao TN, Shay T, Costello J, Ericson J, Kim F, Collins
JJ, Regev A, Wagers AJ, Rossi DJ; Immunological Genome Project Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, MA 02115, USA ; Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA ; The Shraga Segal Department of
Microbiology, Immunology, and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) maintain blood homeostasis and are the functional
units of bone marrow transplantation. To improve the molecular understanding of
HSCs and their proximal progenitors, we performed transcriptome analysis within
the context of the ImmGen Consortium data set. Gene sets that define steady-state
and mobilized HSCs, as well as hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs),
were determined. Genes involved in transcriptional regulation, including a group 
of putative transcriptional repressors, were identified in multipotent
progenitors and HSCs. Proximal promoter analyses combined with ImmGen module
analysis identified candidate regulators of HSCs. Enforced expression of one
predicted regulator, Hlf, in diverse HSPC subsets led to extensive self-renewal
activity ex vivo. These analyses reveal unique insights into the mechanisms that 
control the core properties of HSPCs.

PMCID: PMC3849420
PMID: 24319662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2013 Dec;10(4):591-9. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2013.06.005. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Optimizing the antitumor selectivity of PVP-Hypericin re A549 cancer cells and
HLF normal cells through pulsed blue light.

Penjweini R(1), Loew HG, Breit P, Kratky KW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Vienna, Faculty of Physics, Physics of Physiological Processes, 
Boltzmanng. 5, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; Hasselt University, Biomedical Research
Institute, Agoralaan Building C, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium. Electronic address:
rozhin.penjweini@uhasselt.be.

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is based on the preferential accumulation of
photosensitizer in cancer cells with subsequent cytotoxicity mediated by singlet 
oxygen production after light excitation. As photosensitizers accumulate also in 
the surrounding non-cancer cells, the risk of damaging them by photosensitization
is a limitation of PDT. Thus, minimizing the side-effects of PDT on normal cells 
is one of the challenging problems in medical practice. This paper studies the
PDT side-effects of PVP-Hypericin (PVP: polyvinylpyrrolidone) photosensitizer
excited with continuous or pulsed irradiation, on combined cell lines of human
lung carcinoma epithelial cells (A549) and normal primary human lung fibroblast
cells (HLF). In vitro PDTs are performed using pulsed or continuous irradiation
with irradiance intensities I(*)=1.59, 6.34 and 14.27 mW/cm(2). The LED pulse
lengths L are 0.127, 1.29, 13, 54.5 and 131 ms. Then fluorescence and
phototoxicity of PVP-Hypericin in the A549 cancer cells are compared with those
of HLF normal cells. Although, PVP-Hypericin accumulates more in A549 cancer
cells, the results show that HLF cells produce dose-dependent photoreactions in
the presence of photosensitizer. PVP-Hypericin induces the most optimized
anticancer efficacy with moderate side-effects for I(*)=14.27 mW/cm(2) and L=131 
ms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24284116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Nov;33(11):1565-70.

[Differential gene expression profiling for identification of protective
transcription factors in different subtypes of nasopharyngeal carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang C(1), Lin P, Wang J, Huang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Direct MD Class (8-year Program), Grade 2007, First Clinical Medical College, 
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.E-mail: 837949436@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the dysregulated genes among the differentially expressed
genes in 41 nasopharyngeal biopsy samples and identify their protective
transcriptional factors.
METHODS: The differentially expressed gene profiles were obtained by analyzing
both types I and II nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC_I and NPC_II, respectively)
using EXCEL and Bioinformatics tools. The transcriptional factors were further
studied only when (1) the difference in the binding sites of the differentially
expressed genes between NPC_I and NPC_II groups was statistically significant,
(2) the expressions of the transcription factors were correlated with the gene
expressions in the samples, and (3) the transcription factors affected at least
40% of the expression of the related genes.
RESULTS: In NPC_I samples, 80 transcription factors were found to be
up-regulated, in which RUNX3, GATA3, NR3C1, NRF1, RXRA, SMAD7, TBP, and ZBTB6
were positive factors and HLF and MTF1 were negative factors, involved in the
regulation of the genes in T cell receptor signaling pathway. No eligible
transcription factors were found in association with down-regulated genes in
NPC_I compared to NPC_II gene expression profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: The over-expressed genes in NPC_I are mainly related to immune
responses, and we found 8 positive factors and 2 negative factors that regulate
the genes in T cell receptor signaling pathway. The 10 transcription factors may 
serve as potential therapeutic targets for NPC_I. We failed to identify any
transcription factors associated with down-regulated genes in NPC_I relative to
NPC_II possibly as a result of multiple factors that affect the differential gene
expressions in NPC_II including the transcription factors, DNA phosphorylation
and modification, chromosome variation and environmental factors.

PMID: 24273254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Pharmacogenomics. 2013 Nov;14(15):1857-69. doi: 10.2217/pgs.13.166.

Genome-wide association study in NSAID-induced acute urticaria/angioedema in
Spanish and Han Chinese populations.

Cornejo-García JA(1), Liou LB, Blanca-López N, Doña I, Chen CH, Chou YC, Chuang
HP, Wu JY, Chen YT, Plaza-Serón Mdel C, Mayorga C, Guéant-Rodríguez RM, Lin SC,
Torres MJ, Campo P, Rondón C, Laguna JJ, Fernández J, Guéant JL, Canto G, Blanca 
M, Lee MT.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory, UGC Allergy, Málaga General Hospital, Málaga, Spain.

AIM: Acute urticaria/angioedema (AUA) induced by cross-intolerance to NSAIDs is
the most frequent clinical entity in hypersensitivity reactions to drugs. In this
work, we conducted a genome-wide association study in Spanish and Han Chinese
patients suffering from NSAID-induced AUA.
MATERIALS & METHODS: A whole-genome scan was performed on a total of 232 cases
(112 Spanish and 120 Han Chinese) with NSAID-induced AUA and 225 unrelated
controls (124 Spanish and 101 Han Chinese).
RESULTS: Although no polymorphism reached genome-wide significance, we obtained
suggestive associations for three clusters in the Spanish group (RIMS1, BICC1 and
RAD51L 1) and one region in the Han Chinese population (ABI3BP). Five regions
showed suggestive associations after meta-analysis: HLF, RAD51L1, COL24A1,
GalNAc-T13 and FBXL7. A majority of these genes are related to Ca(2+), cAMP
and/or P53 signaling pathways.
CONCLUSION: The associations described were different from those related to the
metabolism of arachidonic acid and could provide new mechanisms underlying
NSAID-induced AUA.

PMID: 24236485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Periodontol. 2014 Jun;85(6):e198-204. doi: 10.1902/jop.2013.130335. Epub 2013
Nov 14.

miR-584 expressed in human gingival epithelial cells is induced by Porphyromonas 
gingivalis stimulation and regulates interleukin-8 production via lactoferrin
receptor.

Ouhara K(1), Savitri IJ, Fujita T, Kittaka M, Kajiya M, Iwata T, Miyagawa T,
Yamakawa M, Shiba H, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontal Medicine, Division of Applied Life Sciences,
Institute of Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, non-coding RNAs that are involved in
post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Differential miRNA expression
in innate and acquired immunity has been shown to regulate immune cell
development and function. miRNA expression has been demonstrated to affect
pathophysiology of inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus.
As such, this study explores the role of miRNA in the context of pathophysiology 
of destructive periodontitis. Specifically, this investigation profiles the
differentially expressed miRNA of Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg)-stimulated human 
gingival epithelial cells (HGECs).
METHODS: The specific miRNAs differentially expressed in Pg-stimulated OBA-9,
immortalized HGECs, were analyzed using microarray. Real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and Western blotting were performed to confirm the level of miRNA 
expression and determine target production of miRNA in OBA-9. The production of
interleukin (IL)-8 was measured to determine the bioactivity of target protein
regulated by miRNA.
RESULTS: miR-584, which targets lactoferrin receptor (LfR), was 3.39-fold
upregulated by Pg stimulation. This upregulation of miR-584 was confirmed by
real-time PCR. Pg stimulation resulted in the suppression of LfR at mRNA and
protein levels. The transfection of the miR inhibitor for miR-584 in OBA-9
recovered Pg-induced suppression of LfR. The addition of human lactoferrin (hLf) 
had a suppressive effect on IL-8 production in Pg-stimulated OBA-9. However, hLf 
also decreased IL-8 production strongly in Pg-stimulated OBA-9 in the presence of
the miR inhibitor for miR-584.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the upregulation of miR-584 by Pg in
OBA-9 inhibits the anti-inflammatory effects of hLf via the suppression of LfR.

PMID: 24228808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 30;8(10):e77798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077798.
eCollection 2013.

Generation of five human lactoferrin transgenic cloned goats using fibroblast
cells and their methylation status of putative differential methylation regions
of IGF2R and H19 imprinted genes.

Meng L(1), Wan Y, Sun Y, Zhang Y, Wang Z, Song Y, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Livestock Embryo Engineering Laboratory, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing, China ; Human and Animal Physiology, Wageningen University, 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is a promising technique to
produce transgenic cloned mammalian, including transgenic goats which may produce
Human Lactoferrin (hLF). However, success percentage of SCNT is low, because of
gestational and neonatal failure of transgenic embryos. According to the studies 
on cattle and mice, DNA methylation of some imprinted genes, which plays a vital 
role in the reprogramming of embryo in NT maybe an underlying mechanism.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Fibroblast cells were derived from the ear of a
two-month-old goat. The vector expressing hLF was constructed and transfected
into fibroblasts. G418 selection, EGFP expression, PCR, and cell cycle
distribution were applied sequentially to select transgenic cells clones. After
NT and embryo transfer, five transgenic cloned goats were obtained from 240
cloned transgenic embryos. These transgenic goats were identified by 8
microsatellites genotyping and southern blot. Of the five transgenic goats, 3
were lived after birth, while 2 were dead during gestation. We compared
differential methylation regions (DMR) pattern of two paternally imprinted genes 
(H19 and IGF2R) of the ear tissues from the lived transgenic goats, dead
transgenic goats, and control goats from natural reproduction. Hyper-methylation 
pattern appeared in cloned aborted goats, while methylation status was relatively
normal in cloned lived goats compared with normal goats.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, we generated five hLF transgenic cloned 
goats by SCNT. This is the first time the DNA methylation of lived and dead
transgenic cloned goats was compared. The results demonstrated that the
methylation status of DMRs of H19 and IGF2R were different in lived and dead
transgenic goats and therefore this may be potentially used to assess the
reprogramming status of transgenic cloned goats. Understanding the pattern of
gene imprinting may be useful to improve cloning techniques in future.

PMCID: PMC3813735
PMID: 24204972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(1):397-404. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00020-13. Epub 
2013 Nov 4.

Protective effects of human lactoferrin during Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans-induced bacteremia in lactoferrin-deficient mice.

Velusamy SK(1), Poojary R, Ardeshna R, Alabdulmohsen W, Fine DH, Velliyagounder
K.

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers School of Dental Medicine, Newark, New Jersey, USA.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, a periodontopathogen, has been associated 
with several systemic diseases. Herein, we report the protective effect of human 
lactoferrin (hLF) during A. actinomycetemcomitans bacteremia in lactoferrin
knockout (LFKO(-/-)) mice. The prophylactic, concurrent, and therapeutic
intravenous (i.v.) administrations of hLF significantly cleared the bacteria from
blood and organs. Nevertheless, all modes of hLF administration significantly
decreased the concentrations of serum proinflammatory cytokines, such as
interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a), interleukin-1ß
(IL-1ß), IL-6, IL-10, and IL-12p70. Additionally, hLF administration
significantly decreased hepatic and splenic proinflammatory cytokine expression
levels compared to those in the non-hLF-treated group. Furthermore,
administration of hLF decreased the serum C-reactive protein level, inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene expression levels in 
liver and spleen. hLF treatment has also resulted in a 6-fold decrease in spleen 
weight with the migration of typical inflammatory cells in infected mice as a
result of decreased inflammatory response. These results reveal that hLF protects
against A. actinomycetemcomitans bacteremia, as indicated by rapid bacterial
clearance and decreased host proinflammatory mediators.

PMCID: PMC3910771
PMID: 24189260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. BMC Cancer. 2013 Oct 10;13:468. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-468.

FOXO/TXNIP pathway is involved in the suppression of hepatocellular carcinoma
growth by glutamate antagonist MK-801.

Yamaguchi F(1), Hirata Y, Akram H, Kamitori K, Dong Y, Sui L, Tokuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University, 1750-1
Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan. bunchan@med.kagawa-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence has suggested the importance of glutamate
signaling in cancer growth, yet the signaling pathway has not been fully
elucidated. N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor activates intracellular
signaling pathways such as the extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and
forkhead box, class O (FOXO). Suppression of lung carcinoma growth by NMDA
receptor antagonists via the ERK pathway has been reported. However, series of
evidences suggested the importance of FOXO pathways for the regulation of normal 
and cancer cell growth. In the liver, FOXO1 play important roles for the cell
proliferation such as hepatic stellate cells as well as liver metabolism. Our aim
was to investigate the involvement of the FOXO pathway and the target genes in
the growth inhibitory effects of NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801 in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.
METHODS: Expression of NMDAR1 in cancer cell lines from different tissues was
examined by Western blot. NMDA receptor subunits in HepG2, HuH-7, and HLF were
examined by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and growth 
inhibition by MK-801 and NBQX was determined using the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. The
effects of MK-801 on the cell cycle were examined by flow cytometry and Western
blot analysis. Expression of thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) and p27 was 
determined by real-time PCR and Western blotting. Activation of the FOXO pathway 
and TXNIP induction were examined by Western blotting, fluorescence microscopy,
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, and reporter gene assay. The effects 
of TXNIP on growth inhibition were examined using the gene silencing technique.
RESULTS: NMDA receptor subunits were expressed in all cell lines examined, and
MK-801, but not NBQX, inhibited cell growth of hepatocellular carcinomas. Cell
cycle analysis showed that MK-801 induced G1 cell cycle arrest by down-regulating
cyclin D1 and up-regulating p27. MK-801 dephosphorylated Thr24 in FOXO1 and
induced its nuclear translocation, thus increasing transcription of TXNIP, a
tumor suppressor gene. Knock-down of TXNIP ameliorated the growth inhibitory
effects of MK-801.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that functional NMDA receptors are expressed in
hepatocellular carcinomas and that the FOXO pathway is involved in the growth
inhibitory effects of MK-801. This mechanism could be common in hepatocellular
carcinomas examined, but other mechanisms such as ERK pathway could exist in
other cancer cells as reported in lung carcinoma cells. Altered expression levels
of FOXO target genes including cyclin D1 and p27 may contribute to the inhibition
of G1/S cell cycle transition. Induction of the tumor suppressor gene TXNIP plays
an important role in the growth inhibition by MK-801. Our report provides new
evidence that FOXO-TXNIP pathway play a role in the inhibition of the
hepatocellular carcinoma growth by MK-801.

PMCID: PMC3852080
PMID: 24112473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. BMC Cancer. 2013 Oct 8;13:465. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-465.

Synergistic growth inhibition by acyclic retinoid and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase inhibitor in human hepatoma cells.

Baba A(1), Shimizu M, Ohno T, Shirakami Y, Kubota M, Kochi T, Terakura D, Tsurumi
H, Moriwaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.
shimim-gif@umin.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: A malfunction of RXRa due to phosphorylation is associated with liver
carcinogenesis, and acyclic retinoid (ACR), which targets RXRa, can prevent the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Activation of PI3K/Akt signaling
plays a critical role in the proliferation and survival of HCC cells. The present
study examined the possible combined effects of ACR and LY294002, a PI3K
inhibitor, on the growth of human HCC cells.
METHODS: This study examined the effects of the combination of ACR plus LY294002 
on the growth of HLF human HCC cells.
RESULTS: ACR and LY294002 preferentially inhibited the growth of HLF cells in
comparison with Hc normal hepatocytes. The combination of 1 µM ACR and 5 µM
LY294002, in which the concentrations used are less than the IC50 values of these
agents, synergistically inhibited the growth of HLF, Hep3B, and Huh7 human HCC
cells. These agents when administered in combination acted cooperatively to
induce apoptosis in HLF cells. The phosphorylation of RXRa, Akt, and ERK proteins
in HLF cells were markedly inhibited by treatment with ACR plus LY294002.
Moreover, this combination also increased RXRE promoter activity and the cellular
levels of RARß and p21(CIP1), while decreasing the levels of cyclin D1.
CONCLUSION: ACR and LY294002 cooperatively increase the expression of RARß, while
inhibiting the phosphorylation of RXRa, and that these effects are associated
with the induction of apoptosis and the inhibition of cell growth in human HCC
cells. This combination might therefore be effective for the chemoprevention and 
chemotherapy of HCC.

PMCID: PMC3852533
PMID: 24103747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biotechnol. 2013 Dec;168(4):666-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.09.011. Epub
2013 Sep 23.

Novel recombinant human lactoferrin: differential activation of oxidative stress 
related gene expression.

Kruzel ML(1), Actor JK, Zimecki M, Wise J, Ploszaj P, Mirza S, Kruzel M, Hwang
SA, Ba X, Boldogh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of
Texas-Houston, United States. Electronic address: marian.l.kruzel@uth.tmc.edu.

Lactoferrin, an iron-binding protein found in high concentrations in mammalian
exocrine secretions, is an important component of the host defense system. It is 
also a major protein of the secondary granules of neutrophils from which is
released upon activation. Due to its potential clinical utility, recombinant
human lactoferrin (rhLF) has been produced in various eukaryotic expression
systems; however, none of these are fully compatible with humans. Most of the
biopharmaceuticals approved by the FDA for use in humans are produced in
mammalian expression systems. The Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) have become
the system of choice for proteins that require post-translational modifications, 
such as glycoproteins. The aim of this study was to scale-up expression and
purification of rhLF in a CHO expression system, verify its glycan primary
structure, and assess its biological properties in cell culture models. A stable 
CHO cell line producing >200mg/L of rhLF was developed and established. rhLF was 
purified by a single-step cation-exchange chromatography procedure. The highly
homogenous rhLF has a molecular weight of approximately 80 kDa. MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometric analysis revealed N-linked, partially sialylated glycans at two
glycosylation sites, typical for human milk LF. This novel rhLF showed a
protective effect against oxidative stress in a similar manner to its natural
counterpart. In addition, rhLF revealed a modulatory effect on cellular redox via
upregulation of key antioxidant enzymes. These data imply that the CHO-derived
rhLF is fully compatible with the native molecule, thus it has promise for human 
therapeutic applications.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3987904
PMID: 24070904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Lipids. 2013;2013:297932. doi: 10.1155/2013/297932. Epub 2013 Aug 22.

Reduction of Cellular Lipid Content by a Knockdown of Drosophila PDP1 <U+03B3> and
Mammalian Hepatic Leukemia Factor.

Dzitoyeva S(1), Manev H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychiatric Institute, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

In exploring the utility of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) injections for silencing 
the PAR-domain protein 1 (Pdp1) gene in adult Drosophila, we noticed a dramatic
loss of fat tissue lipids. To verify that our RNAi approach produced the expected
Pdp1 knockdown, the abdominal fat tissues sections were stained with PDP1
antibodies. PDP1 protein immunostaining was absent in flies injected with dsRNA
targeting a sequence common to all known Pdp1 isoforms. Subsequent experiments
revealed that lipid staining is reduced in flies injected with dsRNA against Pdp1
<U+03B3> (fat body specific) and not against Pdp1 e (predominantly involved in circadian
mechanisms). Drosophila PDP1 <U+03B3> protein shows a high homology to mammalian
thyrotroph embryonic factor (TEF), albumin D site-binding protein (DBP), and
hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) transcription factors. In an in vitro model of
drug- (olanzapine-) induced adiposity in mouse 3T3-L1 cells, the mRNA content of 
HLF but not TEF and DBP was increased by the drug treatment. A knockdown of the
HLF mRNA by transfecting the cultures with HLF dsRNA significantly reduced their 
lipid content. Furthermore, the HLF RNAi prevented olanzapine from increasing the
cell lipid content. These results suggest that the PDP1/HLF system may play a
role in physiological and drug-influenced lipid regulation.

PMCID: PMC3766575
PMID: 24062952  [PubMed]


111. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Aug 15;6(9):1734-46. eCollection 2013.

Array analysis for potential biomarker of gemcitabine identification in non-small
cell lung cancer cell lines.

Zhang HH(1), Zhang ZY, Che CL, Mei YF, Shi YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of rheumatism and immunology, First Clinical Medical College
affiliated to Harbin Medical University Harbin, China.

Gemcitabine is one of the most widely used drugs for the treatment of advanced
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but modest objective response rate of
patients to gemcitabine makes it necessary to identify novel biomarkers for
patients who can benefit from gemcitabine-based therapy and to improve the effect
of clinical therapy. In this work, 3 NSCLC cell lines displaying different
sensitivities to gemcitabine were applied for mRNA and microRNA (miR) expression 
chips to figure out the biomarkers for gemcitabine sensitivity. Genes whose
expression increased dramatically in sensitive cell lines were mainly enriched in
cell adhesion (NRP2, CXCR3, CDK5R1, IL32 and CDH2) and secretory granule
(SLC11A1, GP5, CD36 and IGF1), while genes with significantly upregulated
expression in resistant cell line were mainly clustered in methylation
modification (HIST1H2BF, RAB23 and TP53) and oxidoreductase (TP53I3, CYP27B1 and 
SOD3). The most intriguing is the activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in
gemcitabine resistant NSCLC cell lines. The miR-155, miR-10a, miR-30a, miR-24-2* 
and miR-30c-2* were upregulated in sensitive cell lines, while expression of
miR-200c, miR-203, miR-885-5p, miR-195 and miR-25* was increased in resistant
cell line. Genes with significantly altered expression and putatively mediated by
the expression-changed miRs were mainly enriched in chromatin assembly (MAF, HLF,
BCL2, and IGSF3), anti-apoptosis (BCL2, IGF1 and IKBKB), protein kinase (NRP2,
PAK7 and CDK5R1) (all the above genes were upregulated in sensitive cells) and
small GTPase mediated signal transduction (GNA13, RAP2A, ARHGAP5 and RAB23,
down-regulated in sensitive cells). Our results might provide potential
biomarkers for gemcitabine sensitivity prediction and putative targets to
overcome gemcitabine resistance in NSCLC patients.

PMCID: PMC3759480
PMID: 24040438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mediators Inflamm. 2013;2013:745984. doi: 10.1155/2013/745984. Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Downregulation of NOX4 expression by roflumilast N-oxide reduces markers of
fibrosis in lung fibroblasts.

Vecchio D(1), Acquaviva A, Arezzini B, Tenor H, Martorana PA, Gardi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Wellman Center for
Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, 40 Blossom Street, Boston, MA
02114, USA.

The phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor roflumilast prevents bleomycin- (BLM-) induced 
lung fibrosis in animal models. However, its mechanism of action remains unknown.
We investigated whether roflumilast N-oxide (RNO), the active metabolite of
roflumilast, can modulate in vitro the oxidative effects of BLM on human lung
fibroblasts (HLF). In addition, since BLM increases the production of
F2-isoprostanes that have per se fibrogenic activity, the effect of RNO on
oxidative stress and fibrogenesis induced by the F2-isoprostane 8-epi-PGF2a was
investigated. HLF were preincubated either with the vehicle or with RNO and
exposed to either BLM or 8-epi-PGF2a. Proliferation and collagen synthesis were
assessed as [(3)H]-thymidine and [(3)H]-proline incorporation. Reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and F2-isoprostanes were measured. NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4) protein
and mRNA were also evaluated. BLM increased both cell proliferation and collagen 
synthesis and enhanced ROS and F2-isoprostane production. These effects were
significantly prevented by RNO. Also, RNO significantly reduced the increase in
both NOX4 mRNA and protein, induced by BLM. Finally, 8-epi-PGF2a <U+2009><U+2009>per se
stimulated HLF proliferation, collagen synthesis, and NOX4 expression and ROS
generation, and RNO prevented these effects. Thus, the antifibrotic effect of RNO
observed in vivo may be related to its ability to mitigate ROS generation via
downregulation of NOX4.

PMCID: PMC3763264
PMID: 24027357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Blood. 2013 Oct 17;122(16):2888-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-453662. Epub 2013 
Sep 10.

Essential role of PR-domain protein MDS1-EVI1 in MLL-AF9 leukemia.

Zhang Y(1), Owens K, Hatem L, Glass CH, Karuppaiah K, Camargo F, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY; and.

A subgroup of leukemogenic mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins (MFPs)
including MLL-AF9 activates the Mecom locus and exhibits extremely poor clinical 
prognosis. Mecom encodes EVI1 and MDS1-EVI1 (ME) proteins via alternative
transcription start sites; these differ by the presence of a PRDI-BF1-RIZ1 (PR)
domain with histone methyltransferase activity in the ME isoform. Using an
ME-deficient mouse, we show that ME is required for MLL-AF9-induced
transformation both in vitro and in vivo. And, although Nup98-HOXA9, MEIS1-HOXA9,
and E2A-Hlf could transform ME-deficient cells, both MLL-AF9 and MLL-ENL were
ineffective, indicating that the ME requirement is specific to MLL fusion
leukemia. Further, we show that the PR domain is essential for MFP-induced
transformation. These studies clearly indicate an essential role of PR-domain
protein ME in MFP leukemia, suggesting that ME may be a novel target for
therapeutic intervention for this group of leukemias.

PMCID: PMC3799001
PMID: 24021671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 22;8(8):e72252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072252. eCollection
2013.

Comparative analysis of TGF-ß/Smad signaling dependent cytostasis in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.

Dzieran J(1), Fabian J, Feng T, Coulouarn C, Ilkavets I, Kyselova A, Breuhahn K, 
Dooley S, Meindl-Beinker NM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hepatology - Alcohol Associated Diseases, Department of Medicine II,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(5):e95952.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major public health problem due to increased 
incidence, late diagnosis and limited treatment options. TGF-ß is known to
provide cytostatic signals during early stages of liver damage and regeneration, 
but exerts tumor promoting effects in onset and progression of liver cancer. To
understand the mechanistic background of such a switch, we systematically
correlated loss of cytostatic TGF-ß effects with strength and dynamics of its
downstream signaling in 10 HCC cell lines. We demonstrate that TGF-ß inhibits
proliferation and induces apoptosis in cell lines with low endogenous levels of
TGF-ß and Smad7 and strong transcriptional Smad3 activity (PLC/PRF/5, HepG2,
Hep3B, HuH7), previously characterized to express early TGF-ß signatures
correlated with better outcome in HCC patients. TGF-ß dependent cytostasis is
blunted in another group of cell lines (HLE, HLF, FLC-4) expressing high amounts 
of TGF-ß and Smad7 and showing significantly reduced Smad3 signaling. Of those,
HLE and HLF exhibit late TGF-ß signatures, which is associated with bad prognosis
in HCC patients. RNAi with Smad3 blunted cytostatic effects in PLC/PRF/5, Hep3B
and HuH7. HCC-M and HCC-T represent a third group of cell lines lacking
cytostatic TGF-ß signaling despite strong and prolonged Smad3 phosphorylation and
low Smad7 and TGF-ß expression. Inhibitory linker phosphorylation, as in HCC-T,
may disrupt C-terminally phosphorylated Smad3 function. In summary, we assort 10 
HCC cell lines in at least two clusters with respect to TGF-ß sensitivity. Cell
lines responsive to the TGF-ß cytostatic program, which recapitulate early stage 
of liver carcinogenesis exhibit transcriptional Smad3 activity. Those with
disturbed TGF-ß/Smad3 signaling are insensitive to TGF-ß dependent cytostasis and
might represent late stage of the disease. Regulation of this switch remains
complex and cell line specific. These features may be relevant to discriminate
stage dependent TGF-ß functions for the design of efficient TGF-ß directed
therapy in liver cancer.

PMCID: PMC3750029
PMID: 23991075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2013 Sep;28(6):583-91. doi:
10.1177/1533317513495104.

Efficacy of higher dose 13.3 mg/24 h rivastigmine patch on instrumental
activities of daily living in patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease.

Grossberg G(1), Cummings J, Frölich L, Bellelli G, Molinuevo JL, Krahnke T,
Strohmaier C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, St Louis University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 61304, USA. grossbgt@slu.edu

BACKGROUND: Stabilizing/reducing decline in the ability to perform activities of 
daily living (ADLs) is important in management of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: Post hoc analysis of OPtimizing Transdermal Exelon In Mild-to-moderate
Alzheimer's disease (OPTIMA), a double-blind trial comparing 13.3 and 9.5 mg/24 h
rivastigmine patch in patients with AD demonstrating functional and cognitive
decline with 9.5 mg/24 h patch. Efficacy on Alzheimer's disease Cooperative
Study-instrumental ADL (ADCS-IADL) items, higher level function (HLF), and
autonomy factors was assessed.
RESULTS: The ADCS-IADL, HLF, and autonomy factors favored 13.3 mg/24 h patch at
all time points, reaching significance from weeks 16 to 48, 24 to 48, and 32 to
48, respectively. Higher dose patch demonstrated significantly greater efficacy
on 10 of 17 ADCS-IADL items at 1 or more time points (P < .05 vs 9.5 mg/24 h
patch). More adverse events were observed with higher dose patch; study
discontinuations were similar between the doses.
CONCLUSIONS: Greater efficacy of 13.3 versus 9.5 mg/24 h patch on ADL, including 
autonomy and HLF factors, supports this additional dosing option to prolong
patients' independence.

PMID: 23982674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Oncol Rep. 2013 Nov;30(5):2476-80. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2674. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Expression of angiogenic factors in hepatocarcinogenesis: Identification by
antibody arrays.

Nomura T(1), Morishita A, Jian G, Mimura S, Kato K, Nomura K, Tani J, Miyoshi H, 
Yoneyama H, Sakamoto T, Fujita K, Maeda E, Kobara H, Mori H, Iwama H, Masaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Neurology, Kagawa University School of
Medicine, Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.

Angiogenesis plays a pivotal role in the progression and metastasis of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the expression of a wide range of
angiogenic factors remains obscure in HCC. The purpose of the present study was
to determine the expression of various angiogenic factors related to
hepatocarcinogenesis. We examined the expression of 19 angiogenic factors using
antibody arrays in human tissues of various liver diseases, including HCC. We
also studied the expression of 19 angiogenic factors in the human HCC cell lines 
PLC/PRF/5, Hep 3B, HuH7, HLE, HLF and Li-7 and the normal hepatocyte cell line
ACBRI3716. In human tissues, although the expression of acidic fibroblast growth 
factor (aFGF) was found to increase from normal liver to chronic hepatitis, its
expression remained unchanged in the transition from chronic hepatitis to HCC.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was elevated in liver cirrhosis, but
the amounts remained unchanged in the transition from liver cirrhosis to HCC. In 
contrast, either interleukin-8 (IL-8) or basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)
was upregulated in HCC. In the HCC cell lines PLC/PRF/5, Hep 3B and HuH-7, the
expression of IL-8 was elevated. Although IL-8 was not elevated, bFGF was
upregulated in the other HCC cell lines HLE, HLF and Li-7. Thus, either IL-8 or
bFGF was upregulated in HCC cell lines and in HCC tissue samples. These data
suggest that the upregulation of either IL-8 or bFGF is closely related to the
transition from liver cirrhosis into HCC. Therefore, the analysis of the
expression of these cytokines using protein arrays may identify novel therapies
for individual patients with HCC.

PMID: 23970062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 12;8(8):e71684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071684. eCollection
2013.

Chronic ethanol consumption disrupts the core molecular clock and diurnal rhythms
of metabolic genes in the liver without affecting the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Filiano AN(1), Millender-Swain T, Johnson R Jr, Young ME, Gamble KL, Bailey SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology-Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of
America.

Chronic ethanol consumption disrupts several metabolic pathways including
ß-oxidation and lipid biosynthesis, facilitating the development of alcoholic
fatty liver disease. Many of these same metabolic pathways are directly regulated
by cell autonomous circadian clocks, and recent studies suggest that disruption
of daily rhythms in metabolism contributes to multiple common cardiometabolic
diseases (including non-alcoholic fatty liver disease). However, it is not known 
whether ethanol disrupts the core molecular clock in the liver, nor whether this,
in turn, alters rhythms in lipid metabolism. Herein, we tested the hypothesis
that chronic ethanol consumption disrupts the molecular circadian clock in the
liver and potentially changes the diurnal expression patterns of lipid metabolism
genes. Consistent with previous studies, male C57BL/6J mice fed an
ethanol-containing diet exhibited higher levels of liver triglycerides compared
to control mice, indicating hepatic steatosis. Further, the diurnal oscillations 
of core clock genes (Bmal1, Clock, Cry1, Cry2, Per1, and Per2) and
clock-controlled genes (Dbp, Hlf, Nocturnin, Npas2, Rev-erba, and Tef) were
altered in livers from ethanol-fed mice. In contrast, ethanol had only minor
effects on the expression of core clock genes in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN). These results were confirmed in Per2(Luciferase) knock-in mice, in which
ethanol induced a phase advance in PER2::LUC bioluminescence oscillations in
liver, but not SCN. Further, there was greater variability in the phase of
PER2::LUC oscillations in livers from ethanol-fed mice. Ethanol consumption also 
affected the diurnal oscillations of metabolic genes, including Adh1, Cpt1a,
Cyp2e1, Pck1, Pdk4, Ppargc1a, Ppargc1b and Srebp1c, in the livers of C57BL/6J
mice. In summary, chronic ethanol consumption alters the function of the
circadian clock in liver. Importantly, these results suggest that chronic ethanol
consumption, at levels sufficient to cause steatosis, disrupts the core hepatic
clock as well as the diurnal rhythms of key lipid metabolism genes.

PMCID: PMC3741117
PMID: 23951220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Nov 15;319(19):3000-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.07.014. Epub 
2013 Jul 29.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in fibrosis: collagen type I expression is
highly upregulated after EMT, but does not contribute to collagen deposition.

Hosper NA(1), van den Berg PP, de Rond S, Popa ER, Wilmer MJ, Masereeuw R, Bank
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, Medical Biology Section,
University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 
GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: n.a.hosper@umcg.nl.

The hallmark of fibrosis is an accumulation of fibrillar collagens, especially of
collagen type I. There is considerable debate whether in vivo type II
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in organ fibrosis. Lineage
tracing experiments by various groups show opposing data concerning the relative 
contribution of epithelial cells to the pool of myofibroblasts. We hypothesized
that EMT-derived cells might directly contribute to collagen deposition. To study
this, EMT was induced in human epithelial lung and renal cell lines in vitro by
means of TGF-ß1 stimulation, and we compared the collagen type I (COL1A1)
expression levels of transdifferentiated cells with that of myofibroblasts
obtained by TGF-ß1 stimulation of human dermal and lung fibroblasts. COL1A1
expression levels of transdifferentiated epithelial cells appeared to be at least
one to two orders of magnitude lower than that of myofibroblasts. This was
confirmed at immunohistochemical level: in contrast to myofibroblasts, collagen
type I deposition by EMT-derived cells was not or hardly detectable. We postulate
that, even when type II EMT occurs in vivo, the direct contribution of
EMT-derived cells to collagen accumulation is rather limited.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23906925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Blood. 2013 Sep 12;122(11):1914-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-486977. Epub 2013 
Jul 30.

MLL fusion protein-driven AML is selectively inhibited by targeted disruption of 
the MLL-PAFc interaction.

Muntean AG(1), Chen W, Jones M, Granowicz EM, Maillard I, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Department of Medicine;

MLL rearrangements are common in leukemia and considered an adverse risk factor. 
Through interactions with the polymerase-associated factor complex (PAFc), mixed 
lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins activate genes critical for blocking
differentiation, such as HOXA9. Here we investigate whether the MLL-PAFc
interaction can be exploited therapeutically using both genetic and biochemical
approaches. We tested the genetic requirement of the PAFc in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) using a conditional allele of the PAFc subunit, Cdc73. We show
that the PAFc is indiscriminately necessary for the proliferation of AML cells
through the epigenetic regulation of proleukemogenic target genes, such as MEIS1 
and Bcl2. To investigate the therapeutic potential of targeting the MLL-PAFc
interaction, we engineered a dominant negative fragment of MLL capable of binding
to the PAFc. Disruption of the MLL-PAFc interaction selectively inhibits the
proliferation of MLL leukemic cells without affecting cells transformed by an
unrelated E2A-HLF fusion protein. Using in vivo hematopoietic reconstitution
assays, we demonstrate that disruption of the MLL-PAFc does not alter normal
hematopoietic stem cell function. Together, our data show a selective growth
inhibition of MLL-associated leukemic cells and tolerance of normal hematopoiesis
to disruption of the MLL-PAFc interaction establishing the MLL-PAFc interaction
as an attractive therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3772498
PMID: 23900238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2013 May;44(3):348-51, 392.

[Lentivirus-mediated gene transfer of human sTRAIL induced apoptosis in SGC-7901 
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Cao J, Liu L, Zhu ZA, Wu KJ, Fei SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College,
Xuzhou 221002, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct self-inactivating (SIN) lentiviral vector carrying human 
soluble tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (sTRAIL) gene and
to observe the effects of sTRAIL gene on apoptosis in SGC-7901 cells, so as to
assess the value of sTRAIL in gene therapy for gastric cancer.
METHODS: The bicistronic SIN lentiviral transfer plasmid containing sTRAIL gene
and internal ribosomal entry site-green fluorescent protein gene (IRES-GFP) was
constructed. Recombinant lentivirus containing sTRAIL were packaged using
liposome by lentiviral packing system. Several cell lines including HL-7702,
HLF-1 and SGC-7901 cells were infected with the viral supernatant. Flow cytometry
was used to measure apoptosis of cells and recombinant sTRAIL. protein was
assayed by ELISA at 24 h after infection.
RESULTS: The lentiviral transfer plasmid pXZ208-sTRAIL was constructed, and the
virus titres were above 10(6) IU/mL in the supernatant. SGC-7901 cells were
efficiently infected by recombinant virus. The apoptosis rate of SGC-7901 cells
was increased with the virus multiplicity of infection (MOI) increasing. When the
MOI was > or = 0.5, a dose-dependent apoptosis rate was observed. At MOI of 6.0, 
the highest apoptosis rate (29.12 +/- 2.87)% was observed, while the expression
of sTRAIL in the supernatant was only (34.08 +/- 3.43) ng/mL. However, no
significant apoptosis was observed in HL-7702 cells and HLF-1 cells.
CONCLUSION: Recombinant lentivirus carrying human sTRAIL gene can efficiently
infected SGC-7901 cells, which induced apoptosis in SGC-7901 cells in vitro by
secreting bioactive sTRAIL protein. However, this effect is not seen in normal
cells.

PMID: 23898510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Appl Toxicol. 2013 Oct;33(10):1156-64. doi: 10.1002/jat.2877. Epub 2013 Jun 18.

Role of surface charge and oxidative stress in cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of
graphene oxide towards human lung fibroblast cells.

Wang A(1), Pu K, Dong B, Liu Y, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Duan W, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Suzhou Key Laboratory of Nanobiomedicine, Division of Nanobiomedicine, Suzhou 
Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Suzhou,
Jiangsu, 215123, China.

Recently, attempts have been made to apply graphene oxide (GO) in the field of
biology and medicine, such as DNA sensing and drug delivery with some necessary
modifications. Therefore, the toxicity of GO must be evaluated before it is
applied further in biomedicine. In this paper, the cytotoxicity and genotoxicity 
of GO to human lung fibroblast (HLF) cells have been assessed with methyl
thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT), sub-G1 measurement and comet assays, and the
mechanism of its toxicity has been explored. Various modifications of GO have
been made to help us determine the factors which could affect the toxicity of GO.
The results indicated that cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of GO to HLF cells were 
concentration dependent, and the genotoxicity induced by GO was more severe than 
the cytotoxicity to HLF cells. Oxidative stress mediated by GO might explain the 
reason of its toxic effect. Furthermore, the electronic charge on the surface of 
GO would play a very important role in the toxicity of GO to HLF cells.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23775274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Integr Med. 2013 May;11(3):195-205. doi: 10.3736/jintegrmed2013029.

Constituents of the anti-asthma herbal formula ASHMI(TM) synergistically inhibit 
IL-4 and IL-5 secretion by murine Th2 memory cells, and eotaxin by human lung
fibroblasts in vitro.

Jayaprakasam B(1), Yang N, Wen MC, Wang R, Goldfarb J, Sampson H, Li XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY 10029, USA. xiu-min.li@mssm.edu

OBJECTIVE: Anti-asthma herbal medicine intervention (ASHMI(TM)), a combination of
three traditional Chinese medicinal herbs developed in our laboratory, has
demonstrated efficacy in both mouse models of allergic asthma, and a double-blind
placebo-controlled clinical trial in patients with asthma. This study was
designed to determine if the anti-inflammatory effects of individual herbal
constituents of ASHMI(TM) exhibited synergy.
METHODS: Effects of ASHMI and its components aqueous extracts of Lingzhi
(Ganoderma lucidum), Kushen (Sophora flavescens) and Gancao (Glycyrrhiza
uralensis), on Th2 cytokine secretion by murine memory Th2 cells (D10.G4.1) and
eotaxin-1 secretion by human lung fibroblast (HLF-1) cells were determined by
measuring levels in culture supernatants by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Potential synergistic effects were determined by computing interaction indices
from concentration-effect curve parameters.
RESULTS: Individual Lingzhi, Kushen and Gancao extracts and ASHMI (the
combination of individual extracts) inhibited production of interleukin (IL)-4
and IL-5 by murine memory Th2 cells and eotaxin-1 production by HLF-1 cells. The 
mean 25%-inhibitory-concentration (IC25) values (mg/mL) for ASHMI, Lingzhi,
Kushen and Gancao for IL-4 production were 30.9, 79.4, 123, and 64.6,
respectively; for IL-5 production were 30.2, 263, 123.2 and 100, respectively;
for eotaxin-1 were 13.2, 16.2, 30.2, and 25.1, respectively. The IC50 values
(mg/mL) for ASHMI, Lingzhi, Kushen and Gancao for IL-4 production were 158.5,
239.9, 446.7, and 281.8, respectively; for eotaxin-1 were 38.1, 33.1, 100, and
158.5, respectively. The interaction indices of ASHMI constituents at IC25 were
0.35 for IL-4, 0.21 for IL-5 and 0.59 for eotaxin-1. The interaction indices at
IC50 values were 0.50 for IL-4 and 0.62 for eotaxin-1 inhibition. Inhibition of
IL-5 did not reach IC50 values. All interaction indices were below 1 which
indicated synergy.
CONCLUSION: By comparing the interaction index values, we find that constituents 
in ASHMI(TM) synergistically inhibited eotaxin-1 production as well as Th2
cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC4596404
PMID: 23743163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Clin Exp Immunol. 2013 Sep;173(3):523-35. doi: 10.1111/cei.12139.

S100A9 promotes human lung fibroblast cells activation through receptor for
advanced glycation end-product-mediated extracellular-regulated kinase 1/2,
mitogen-activated protein-kinase and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B-dependent pathways.

Xu X(1), Chen H, Zhu X, Ma Y, Liu Q, Xue Y, Chu H, Wu W, Wang J, Zou H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai, China.

S100A9 belongs to the S100 family of calcium-binding proteins and plays a key
role in many inflammatory conditions. Recent studies have found that S100A9 was
elevated significantly in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis patients, and might be a biomarker for fibrotic interstitial
lung diseases. However, the exact function of S100A9 in pulmonary fibrosis needs 
further studies. We performed this study to investigate the effect of S100A9 on
human embryo lung fibroblast (HLF) proliferation and production of cytokines and 
collagen, providing new insights into the possible mechanism. S100A9 promoted
proliferation of fibroblasts and up-regulated expression of both proinflammatory 
cytokines interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, IL-1ß and collagen type III. S100A9 also
induced HLF cells to produce a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) and receptor for
advanced glycation end-product (RAGE). In addition, S100A9 caused a significant
increase in extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation, while the status of p38 and c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK) phosphorylation remained unchanged. Treatment of cells with S100A9
also enhanced nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation. RAGE blocking antibody
pretreatment inhibited the S100A9-induced cell proliferation, cytokine production
and pathway phosphorylation. S100A9-mediated cell activation was suppressed
significantly by ERK1/2 MAPK inhibitor and NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor. In conclusion, S100A9
promoted HLF cell growth and induced cells to secret proinflammatory cytokines
and collagen through RAGE signalling and activation of ERK1/2 MAPK and NF-<U+03BA>B
pathways.

© 2013 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3949640
PMID: 23682982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61579. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061579. Print 2013.

CADM1 is a key receptor mediating human mast cell adhesion to human lung
fibroblasts and airway smooth muscle cells.

Moiseeva EP(1), Roach KM, Leyland ML, Bradding P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Lung Health, Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Mast cells (MCs) play a central role in the development of many
diseases including asthma and pulmonary fibrosis. Interactions of human lung mast
cells (HLMCs) with human airway smooth muscle cells (HASMCs) are partially
dependent on adhesion mediated by cell adhesion molecule-1 (CADM1), but the
adhesion mechanism through which HLMCs interact with human lung fibroblasts
(HLFs) is not known. CADM1 is expressed as several isoforms (SP4, SP1, SP6) in
HLMCs, with SP4 dominant. These isoforms differentially regulate HLMC homotypic
adhesion and survival.
OBJECTIVE: In this study we have investigated the role of CADM1 isoforms in the
adhesion of HLMCs and HMC-1 cells to primary HASMCs and HLFs.
METHODS: CADM1 overexpression or downregulation was achieved using adenoviral
delivery of CADM1 short hairpin RNAs or isoform-specific cDNAs respectively.
RESULTS: Downregulation of CADM1 attenuated both HLMC and HMC-1 adhesion to both 
primary HASMCs and HLFs. Overexpression of either SP1 or SP4 isoforms did not
alter MC adhesion to HASMCs, whereas overexpression of SP4, but not SP1,
significantly increased both HMC-1 cell and HLMC adhesion to HLFs. The expression
level of CADM1 SP4 strongly predicted the extent of MC adhesion; linear
regression indicated that CADM1 accounts for up to 67% and 32% of adhesion to
HLFs for HMC-1 cells and HLMCs, respectively. HLFs supported HLMC proliferation
and survival through a CADM1-dependent mechanism. With respect to CADM1
counter-receptor expression, HLFs expressed both CADM1 and nectin-3, whereas
HASMCs expressed only nectin-3.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Collectively these data indicate that the
CADM1 SP4 isoform is a key receptor mediating human MC adhesion to HASMCs and
HLFs. The differential expression of CADM1 counter-receptors on HLFs compared to 
HASMCs may allow the specific targeting of either HLMC-HLF or HLMC-HASMC
interactions in the lung parenchyma and airways.

PMCID: PMC3631237
PMID: 23620770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2012 Dec;28(12):1482-91.

[Cloning goat producing human lactoferrin with genetically modified donor cells
selected by single or dual markers].

[Article in Chinese]

An L(1), Yuan Y, Yu B, Yang T, Cheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, Jiangsu,
China.

We compared the efficiency of cloning goat using human lactoferrin (hLF) with
genetically modified donor cells marked by single (Neo(r)) or double (Neo(r)/GFP)
markers. Single marker expression vector (pBLC14) or dual markers expression
vector (pAPLM) was delivered to goat fetal fibroblasts (GFF), and then the
transgenic GFF was used as donor cells to produce transgenic goats. Respectively,
58.8% (20/34) and 86.7% (26/30) resistant cell lines confirmed the transgenic
integration by PCR. Moreover, pAPLM cells lines were subcultured with several
passages, only 20% (6/30) cell lines was observed fluorescence from each cell
during the cell passage. Somatic cell nuclear transfer using the donor cells
harbouring pBLC14 or pAPLM construct, resulting in a total of 806 reconstructed
embryos, a pregnancy rate at 35 d (53.8%, 39.1%) and 60 d (26.9%, 21.7%), and an 
offspring birth rate (1.9%, 1.4%) with 5 and 7 newborn cloned goats,
respectively. Transgene was confirmed by PCR and southern-blot in all cloned
offspring. There were no significant differences at the reconstructed embryo
fusion rates, pregnancy rates and the birth rate (P > 0.05) between single and
double markers groups. The Neo(r)/GFP double markers could improve the
reliability for accurately and efficiently selecting the genetically modified
donor cells. No adverse effect was observed on the efficiency of transgenic goat 
production by SCNT using somatic cells transfected with double (Neo(r)/GFP)
markers vector.

PMID: 23593872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2013 Aug;32(8):1055-62. doi:
10.1007/s10096-013-1850-8. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Enhanced efficacy of synergistic combinations of antimicrobial peptides with
caspofungin versus Candida albicans in insect and murine models of systemic
infection.

MacCallum DM(1), Desbois AP, Coote PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen 
AB25 2ZD, UK.

The objective of this study was to determine whether combinations of
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) with caspofungin display enhanced antifungal
activity versus Candida albicans in vitro and in vivo. Three conventional AMPs
that satisfied criteria favouring their potential development as novel
antifungals were selected for investigation. Colistin sulphate was also included 
as a cyclic peptide antibiotic used in the clinic. Minimum inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) were determined for each antifungal agent and checkerboard 
assays were used to determine fractional inhibitory concentration index (FICI)
values for dual combinations of AMPs or colistin with caspofungin. Viability
assays were performed for the same combinations in order to investigate
fungicidal interactions. Synergistic antifungal combinations were then tested for
efficacy in vivo and compared to monotherapies in wax moth larva and murine
models of systemic C. albicans infection. In combination with caspofungin, each
of the AMPs [hMUC7-12, DsS3(1-16), hLF(1-11)] and colistin were synergistic and
candidacidal in vitro. The treatment of infected wax moth larvae with
combinations of caspofungin with hMUC7-12, DsS3(1-16) or colistin resulted in
significant enhancements in survival compared to treatment with monotherapies.
Notably, the treatment of C. albicans-infected mice with a combination of
caspofungin and DsS3(1-16) resulted in the enhancement of survival compared to
groups treated with just the individual agents. This study demonstrates that
combination therapies containing caspofungin and AMPs or colistin merit further
development as potential novel treatments for C. albicans infections.

PMID: 23572153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jun;182(6):2094-108. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.02.013. Epub
2013 Apr 4.

Mast cells and fibroblasts work in concert to aggravate pulmonary fibrosis: role 
of transmembrane SCF and the PAR-2/PKC-a/Raf-1/p44/42 signaling pathway.

Wygrecka M(1), Dahal BK, Kosanovic D, Petersen F, Taborski B, von Gerlach S,
Didiasova M, Zakrzewicz D, Preissner KT, Schermuly RT, Markart P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Universities
Giessen, Giessen, Germany. malgorzata.wygrecka@innere.med.uni-giessen.de

Mast cell (MC) accumulation has been demonstrated in the lungs of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) patients. Mediators released from MCs may regulate
tissue remodeling processes, thereby contributing to IPF pathogenesis. We
investigated the role of MC-fibroblast interaction in the progression of lung
fibrosis. Increased numbers of activated MCs, in close proximity to fibroblast
foci and alveolar type II cells, were observed in IPF lungs. Correspondingly
elevated tryptase levels were detected in IPF lung tissue samples. Coculture of
human lung MCs with human lung fibroblasts (HLFs) induced MC activation, as
evinced by tryptase release, and stimulated HLF proliferation; IPF HLFs exhibited
a significantly higher growth rate, compared with control. Tryptase stimulated
HLF growth in a PAR-2/PKC-a/Raf-1/p44/42-dependent manner and potentiated
extracellular matrix production, but independent of PKC-a, Raf-1, and p44/42
activities. Proproliferative properties of tryptase were attenuated by knockdown 
or pharmacological inhibition of PAR-2, PKC-a, Raf-1, or p44/42. Expression of
transmembrane SCF, but not soluble SCF, was elevated in IPF lung tissue and in
fibroblasts isolated from IPF lungs. Coculture of IPF HLFs with MCs enhanced MC
survival and proliferation. These effects were cell-contact dependent and could
be inhibited by application of anti-SCF antibody or CD117 inhibitor. Thus,
fibroblasts and MCs appear to work in concert to perpetuate fibrotic processes
and so contribute to lung fibrosis progression.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23562441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Jul;49(1):105-13. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0297OC.

Role of hypoxia-inducible factor 1, a subunit and cAMP-response element binding
protein 1 in synergistic release of interleukin 8 by prostaglandin E2 and nickel 
in lung fibroblasts.

Brant KA(1), Fabisiak JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh 
Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA. kab124@pitt.edu

Numerous epidemiological studies have linked exposure to particulate matter (PM) 
air pollution with acute respiratory infection and chronic respiratory and
cardiovascular diseases. We have previously shown that soluble nickel (Ni), a
common component of PM, alters the release of CXC chemokines from cultured human 
lung fibroblasts (HLF) in response to microbial stimuli via a pathway dependent
on disrupted prostaglandin (PG)E2 signaling. The current study sought to identify
the molecular events underlying Ni-induced alterations in PGE2 signaling and its 
effects on IL-8 production. PGE2 synergistically enhances Ni-induced IL-8 release
from HLF in a concentration-dependent manner. The effects of PGE2 were mimicked
by butaprost and PGE1-alcohol and inhibited with antagonists AH6809 and
L-161,982, indicating PGE2 signals via PGE2 receptors 2 and 4. PGE2 and forskolin
stimulated cAMP, but it was only in the presence of Ni-induced hypoxia-inducible 
factor 1, a subunit (HIF1A) that these agents stimulated IL-8 release. The
Ni-induced HIF1A DNA binding was enhanced by PGE2 and mediated, in part, by
activation of p38 MAPK. Negation of cAMP-response element binding protein 1 or
HIF1A using short interfering RNA blocked the synergistic interactions between Ni
and PGE2. The results of the current study provide novel information on the
ability of atmospheric hypoxia-mimetic metals to disrupt the release of
immune-modulating chemokines by HLF in response to PGE2. Moreover, in the
presence of HIF1A, cAMP-mediated signaling pathways may be altered to exacerbate 
inflammatory-like processes in lung tissue, imparting a susceptibility of
PM-exposed populations to adverse respiratory health effects.

PMCID: PMC3727881
PMID: 23526216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J AOAC Int. 2013 Jan-Feb;96(1):116-20.

Immunochromatography detection of human lactoferrin protein in milk from
transgenic cattle.

Liu C(1), Zhai S, Zhang Q, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Huazhong Agricultural University, Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal
Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, Lab of Molecular
Biology and Animal Breeding, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China.

Transgenic technologies have opened a new era of transgenesis, characterized by
manipulating intraspecies or interspecies genes in microorganisms, plants, or
animals to change them in desired directions. The advent of genetically modified 
animals and related products has raised the need for analytical methods,
nucleotide- or protein-based, to qualitatively and quantitatively determine the
biotechnology ingredients. In this study, we collected milk samples containing
human lactoferrin (hLF) protein, to exploit appropriate detection means for
exogenous hLF protein. We preliminarily developed two types of competitive
immunochromatography strips for quick detection, based on gold-conjugated hLF
protein or gold-conjugated polyclonal antibody. As control methods, sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, dot blot, and Western blot
methods were used to check the accuracy of strips, and highly sensitive ELISA
with chemiluminescent substrates was developed to determine the concentration of 
hLF in milk. Comparing the test results of lateral flow strips with qualitative
assays, we found our strips gave the same results in a few minutes, showing great
advantages with no need of professional technicians or any equipment. Our results
demonstrated that all the applied methods were effective to detect hLF,
suggesting that they could be used to monitor the production of transgenic milk.

PMID: 23513966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Med Virol. 2013 May;85(5):780-8. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23549.

Characterization of the anti-HBV activity of HLP1-23, a human lactoferrin-derived
peptide.

Florian PE(1), Macovei A, Lazar C, Milac AL, Sokolowska I, Darie CC, Evans RW,
Roseanu A, Branza-Nichita N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ligand Receptor Interaction, Institute of Biochemistry of the
Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania.

Lactoferrin (Lf) was shown to exhibit its antiviral activity at an early phase of
viral infection and a mechanism whereby the protein interacts with host cell
surface molecules has been suggested. In this study, human Lf (HLf) and seven
HLf-derived synthetic peptides (HLP) corresponding to the N-terminal domain of
the native protein (1-47 amino acids sequence) were assayed for their capacity to
prevent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection and replication using the HepaRG and
HepG2.2.2.15 cell lines. Of the series tested, four peptides showed 40-75%
inhibition of HBV infection in HepaRG cells, HLP1-23 , containing the GRRRR
cationic cluster, being the most potent. Interestingly, this cluster is one of
the two glycosaminoglycan binding sites of the native HLf involved in its
antiviral activity; however, the mechanism of the HLP1-23 action was different
from that of the full-length protein, the peptide inhibiting HBV infection when
pre-incubated with the virus, while no effect was observed on the target cells.
It is suggested that the cationic cluster is sufficient for the peptide to
interact stably with negatively charged residues on the virion envelope, while
the absence of the second glycosaminoglycan binding site prevents its efficient
attachment to the cells. In conclusion, this peptide may constitute a non-toxic
approach for potential clinical applications in inhibiting HBV entry by
neutralizing the viral particles.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23508903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Scand J Rheumatol. 2013;42(4):276-80. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2013.765031. Epub
2013 Mar 16.

TNF-a modulates expression of the circadian clock gene Per2 in rheumatoid
synovial cells.

Yoshida K(1), Hashiramoto A, Okano T, Yamane T, Shibanuma N, Shiozawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To study the effect of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-a, responsible
for the inflammation and circadian rhythm of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), on the
expression of circadian clock genes in primary cultured human rheumatoid synovial
cells.
METHOD: The expression of circadian clock genes, including circadian locomotor
output cycles kaput (Clock), brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1), period
(Per)1/2, and cryptochrome (Cry)1/2, and the proline and acidic amino acid-rich
basic leucine zipper (PAR bZip) genes, a transcriptional activator of Per2,
including D site of albumin promoter binding protein (Dbp), hepatic leukaemia
factor (Hlf), and thyrotroph embryonic factor (Tef), and a transcriptional
repressor of Per2, E4-binding protein 4 (E4bp4), in TNF-a-stimulated synovial
cells was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The D-box
motifs in the Per2 promoter were mutated by site-directed mutagenesis, and the
promoter activity of the Per2 gene was examined using the luciferase assay.
RESULTS: TNF-a enhanced the mRNA expression of Bmal1 and Cry1 but did not affect 
that of Clock, Per1, or Cry2. However, TNF-a inhibited the mRNA expression of the
Per2 gene, as well as Dbp, Hlf, and Tef, but enhanced the mRNA expression of
E4bp4. Furthermore, TNF-a inhibited the transcriptional activity of the wild-type
Per2 gene in a manner dependent on the D-box 1 and D-box 2 motifs in the Per2
promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: TNF-a modulates the expression of the Per2 gene through the D-box
binding proteins DBP, HLF, TEF, and E4BP4, in rheumatoid synovial cells, and
thereby may contribute to the pathogenesis of RA.

PMID: 23496259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Org Biomol Chem. 2013 May 7;11(17):2772-9. doi: 10.1039/c3ob00043e. Epub 2013 Mar
13.

N-Terminal dual protein functionalization by strain-promoted alkyne-nitrone
cycloaddition.

Temming RP(1), Eggermont L, van Eldijk MB, van Hest JC, van Delft FL.

Author information: 
(1)Synthetic Organic Chemistry, Institute for Molecules and Materials, Radboud
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Strain-promoted alkyne-nitrone cycloadditon (SPANC) was optimized as a versatile 
strategy for dual functionalization of peptides and proteins. The usefulness of
the dual labeling protocol is first exemplified by the simultaneous introduction 
of a chloroquine and a stearyl moiety, two endosomal escape-improving functional 
groups, into the cell-penetrating peptide hLF (human lactoferrin). Additionally, 
we demonstrate that dual labeling of proteins is feasible by combining metal-free
and copper-catalyzed click chemistry. First, SPANC is applied to enhanced green
fluorescent protein to introduce both biotin and a terminal alkyne. The terminal 
acetylene then serves as a convenient anchor point for the CuAAC reaction with
azido-containing fluorescein, thereby demonstrating the potential of combined
SPANC and CuAAC for the straightforward, dual functionalization of proteins.

PMID: 23487244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Jun;28(6):1047-55. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12150.

P21-activated kinase-2 is a critical mediator of transforming growth
factor-ß-induced hepatoma cell migration.

Sato M(1), Matsuda Y, Wakai T, Kubota M, Osawa M, Fujimaki S, Sanpei A, Takamura 
M, Yamagiwa S, Aoyagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) has been shown to play a
central role in the promotion of cell motility, but its functional mechanism has 
remained unclear. With the aim of investigating the diagnostic and treatment
modalities for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the signaling
pathway that may contribute to TGF-ß-mediated cell invasion in hepatoma cells was
evaluated.
METHODS: Three hepatoma cell lines, HepG2, PLC/PRF/5, and HLF, were treated with 
TGF-ß, and the involvement of the non-canonical TGF-ß pathway was analyzed by
cell migration assays. HepG2 cells were treated with a p21-activated kinase-2
(PAK2)-targeting small interfering RNA and analyzed for their cell motility. The 
relationships between the PAK2 status and the clinicopathological characteristics
of 62 HCC patients were also analyzed.
RESULTS: The cell migration assays showed that Akt is a critical regulator of
TGF-ß-mediated cell migration. Western blotting analyses showed that TGF-ß
stimulated Akt and PAK2 in all three hepatoma cell lines, and phosphorylated PAK2
was blocked by Akt inhibitor. Suppression of PAK2 expression by small interfering
RNA resulted in increased focal adhesions with significantly repressed cell
migration in the presence of TGF-ß. Clinicopathological analyses showed that the 
phosphorylation level of PAK2 was closely associated with tumor progression,
metastasis, and early recurrence of HCC.
CONCLUSIONS: PAK2 may be a critical mediator of TGF-ß-mediated hepatoma cell
migration, and may represent a potential target for the treatment of HCC.

© 2013 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23425030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Apr 15;268(2):141-8. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.01.031. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Hepatic leukemia factor promotes resistance to cell death: implications for
therapeutics and chronotherapy.

Waters KM(1), Sontag RL, Weber TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland, WA 99354, USA.

Physiological variation related to circadian rhythms and aberrant gene expression
patterns are believed to modulate therapeutic efficacy, but the precise molecular
determinants remain unclear. Here we examine the regulation of cell death by
hepatic leukemia factor (HLF), which is an output regulator of circadian rhythms 
and is aberrantly expressed in human cancers, using an ectopic expression
strategy in JB6 mouse epidermal cells and human keratinocytes. Ectopic HLF
expression inhibited cell death in both JB6 cells and human keratinocytes, as
induced by serum-starvation, tumor necrosis factor alpha and ionizing radiation. 
Microarray analysis indicates that HLF regulates a complex multi-gene
transcriptional program encompassing upregulation of anti-apoptotic genes,
downregulation of pro-apoptotic genes, and many additional changes that are
consistent with an anti-death program. Collectively, our results demonstrate that
ectopic expression of HLF, an established transcription factor that cycles with
circadian rhythms, can recapitulate many features associated with
circadian-dependent physiological variation.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23415677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. FASEB J. 2013 Jun;27(6):2165-74. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-221432. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Suppression of Lefty expression in induced pluripotent cancer cells.

Saito A(1), Ochiai H, Okada S, Miyata N, Azuma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tokyo Dental College, Chiba, Japan.

Cancer and stem cells share the ability to silence tumor suppressors. We focused 
on Lefty, which encodes one of the most abundant tumor suppressors in embryonic
stem (ES) cells and is not expressed in somatic cancer cells. We found that
transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) induced demethylation of the Lefty B
cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) island and increased Lefty expression (10-200
times) in human pancreatic cancer cells and human liver cancer cells (PLC/PRF/5
and HLF). Expression of Cripto, another important factor in Nodal-Lefty
signaling, was not increased after adding TGF-ß. We generated reprogrammed cancer
cells that revealed high expression of immature marker proteins, high
proliferation, and the potential to express morphological patterns of ectoderm,
mesoderm, and endoderm, suggesting that these cells may have cancer stem
cell-like phenotypes. We investigated Lefty and found that reprogrammed human
liver cancer cells (induced pluripotent cancer cells) displayed a much lower
ability to express Lefty, although less Lefty B CpG methylation was also
observed. We also found that a MEK inhibitor dramatically enhanced Lefty
expression in human pancreatic cancers with mutated ras, whereas Lefty B CpG
methylation was not decreased. These observations indicate that despite the
demethylation of DNA strands in promoter regions of pluripotency-associated
genes, including Lefty gene, Lefty expression was not induced well in
reprogrammed cells. Of note was the fact that Lefty is abundantly expressed in
human ES cells but not in induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. We thus think
that reprogrammed cancer cells share the mechanism for expression of Lefty with
iPS cells. This shared mechanism may contribute to the cancerous transformation
of iPS cells.

PMID: 23407711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Anim Biotechnol. 2013 Jan;24(1):44-52. doi: 10.1080/10495398.2012.739979.

Nutritional composition analysis of meat from human lactoferrin transgenic bulls.

Zhao J(1), Xu J, Wang J, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, PR China.

Transgenic technology has many potential advantages in food production. However, 
the transgenic technology process may influence the composition of food products 
derived from genetically engineered (GE) animals, which may be adverse to human
health. Therefore, it is very important to research the compositions of GE animal
products. Here, we analyzed the compositions of meat from the offspring of human 
lactoferrin (hLF) transgenic cows, which can express human lactoferrin proteins
in their mammary gland. Six hLF transgenic bulls and three wide-type (WT) bulls, 
10 months of age, were slaughtered for meat composition analysis. To determine
the comparative health of hLF bulls for meat analysis, hematological analyses,
organ/body weight analyses and pathology analyses were conducted. Results of the 
meat analysis show that there were no significant differences in the
hematological parameters, organ/body weight ratios of hLF and WT bulls (P>0.05), 
and histopathological examination of the main organs of hLF bulls revealed no
abnormalities. Nutrient parameters of meat compositions of hLF and WT bulls did
not show any significant differences (P>0.05). All of these results suggest that 
the hLF transgene did not have an impact on the meat nutrient compositions of hLF
bulls.

PMID: 23394369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Paediatr Anaesth. 2013 Mar;23(3):209-16. doi: 10.1111/pan.12073.

Ulinastatin as a neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory agent in infant piglets
model undergoing surgery on hypothermic low-flow cardiopulmonary bypass.

Wang X(1), Xue Q, Yan F, Li L, Liu J, Li S, Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, 
Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Infants are potentially more susceptible to brain injury mediated via 
cell death attributed to cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) especially with prolonged
hypothermic low flow (HLF). We hypothesized that a human urinary protease
inhibitor (ulinastatin), by its anti-inflammatory effect, would reduce central
nervous system (CNS) injury during HLF.
METHODS: Fifteen general-type infant piglets were randomized to ulinastatin group
(group U, n = 5), control group (group C, n = 5), and sham operation group (group
S, n = 5). Routine CPB was established after median thoracotomy in group U and C 
under anesthesia. When the temperature of infant piglets dropped down to 25 °C,
low-flow CPB (50 ml·kg(-1) ·min(-1) ) was instituted. After 120 min of aortic
cross-clamping and 20- to 30-min rewarming, the aortic cross-clamp was removed
and finally the piglet was weaned from CPB. Five thousand units per killogram of 
ulinastatin and equivalently normal saline were, respectively, given at the
beginning of and at aortic declamping in group U and group C. group S just
received sham median thoracotomy. Venous blood samples were taken immediately
after anesthesia induction in all three groups, 5- and 120-min post CPB in both
group U and C, respectively; plasma markers of inflammation and CNS injury were
compared. Pathology results of hippocampus were observed by light microscopy.
RESULTS: Statistically significant differences between group C and U were noted
in the expression of inflammatory markers such as IL-10, TNF-a and
neuron-specific enolase at 120-min post CPB. Brain injuries were observed in both
groups (index cases and controls) and were milder in group U.
CONCLUSIONS: In our study, HLF CPB on infant piglets resulted in brain injury,
and ulinastatin might reduce the extent of such injury.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23384299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Apr;12(4):499-508. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0700. Epub
2013 Jan 21.

Antitumor effect of SIRT1 inhibition in human HCC tumor models in vitro and in
vivo.

Portmann S(1), Fahrner R, Lechleiter A, Keogh A, Overney S, Laemmle A, Mikami K, 
Montani M, Tschan MP, Candinas D, Stroka D.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Visceral Surgery and Medicine, Department of Clinical Research,
University of Bern, Murtenstrasse 35, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.

Sirtuins (SIRT1-7) are a highly conserved family of NAD(+)-dependent enzymes that
control the activity of histone and nonhistone regulatory proteins. SIRT1 is
purposed to promote longevity and to suppress the initiation of some cancers.
Nevertheless, SIRT1 is reported to function as a tumor suppressor as well as an
oncogenic protein. Our data show that compared with normal liver or surrounding
tumor tissue, SIRT1 is strongly overexpressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). In addition, human HCC cell lines (Hep3B, HepG2, HuH7, HLE, HLF, HepKK1,
skHep1) were screened for the expression of the sirtuin family members and only
SIRT1 was consistently overexpressed compared with normal hepatocytes. To
determine its effect on HCC growth, SIRT1 activity was inhibited either with
lentiviruses expressing short hairpin RNAs or with the small molecule inhibitor, 
cambinol. Knockdown or inhibition of SIRT1 activity had a cytostatic effect,
characterized by an altered morphology, impaired proliferation, an increased
expression of differentiation markers, and cellular senescence. In an orthotopic 
xenograft model, knockdown of SIRT1 resulted in 50% fewer animals developing
tumors and cambinol treatment resulted in an overall lower tumor burden. Taken
together, our data show that inhibition of SIRT1 in HCC cells impairs their
proliferation in vitro and tumor formation in vivo. These data suggest that SIRT1
expression positively influences the growth of HCC and support further studies
aimed to block its activity alone or in combination as a novel treatment
strategy.

PMID: 23339189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Acta Biomater. 2013 Apr;9(4):6019-31. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2012.12.030. Epub
2013 Jan 4.

Multifunctional triblock co-polymer mP3/4HB-b-PEG-b-lPEI for efficient
intracellular siRNA delivery and gene silencing.

Zhou L(1), Chen Z, Wang F, Yang X, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Guangzhou 510530, People's Republic of China.

A non-viral siRNA carrier composed of mono-methoxy-poly
(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate)-block-polyethylene glycol-block-linear
polyethyleneimine (mP3/4HB-b-PEG-b-lPEI) was synthesized using 1800 Da linear
polyethyleneimine and evaluated for siRNA delivery. Our study demonstrated that
siRNA could be efficiently combined with mP3/4HB-b-PEG-b-lPEI (mAG) co-polymer
and was protected from nuclease degradation. The combined siRNA were released
from the complexes easily under heparin competition. The particle size of the
mAG/siRNA complexes was 158 nm, with a <U+03B6>-potential of around 28 mV. Atomic force 
microscopy images displayed spherical and homogeneously distributed complexes.
The mAG block co-polymer displayed low cytotoxicity and efficient cellular uptake
of Cy3-siRNA in A549 cells by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. In vitro
transfection efficiency of the block co-polymer was assessed using siRNA against 
luciferase in cultured A549-Luc, HeLa-Luc, HLF-Luc, A375-Luc and MCF-7-Luc cells.
A higher transfection efficiency and lower cytotoxicity was obtained by mAG block
co-polymer in five cell lines. Furthermore, a remarkable improvement in
luciferase gene silencing efficiency of the mAG complex (up to 90-95%) over that 
of Lipofectamine 2000 (70-82%) was observed in HLF-Luc and A375-Luc cells.
Additionally, a mAG/p65-siRNA complex also showed a better capability than
Lipofectamine 2000/p65-siRNA complex to drastically reduce the p65 mRNA level
down to 10-16% in HeLa, U251 and HUVEC cells at an N/P ratio of 70.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23295402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052319. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Gene expression profiling combined with bioinformatics analysis identify
biomarkers for Parkinson disease.

Diao H(1), Li X, Hu S, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.

Parkinson disease (PD) progresses relentlessly and affects approximately 4% of
the population aged over 80 years old. It is difficult to diagnose in its early
stages. The purpose of our study is to identify molecular biomarkers for PD
initiation using a computational bioinformatics analysis of gene expression. We
downloaded the gene expression profile of PD from Gene Expression Omnibus and
identified differentially coexpressed genes (DCGs) and dysfunctional pathways in 
PD patients compared to controls. Besides, we built a regulatory network by
mapping the DCGs to known regulatory data between transcription factors (TFs) and
target genes and calculated the regulatory impact factor of each transcription
factor. As the results, a total of 1004 genes associated with PD initiation were 
identified. Pathway enrichment of these genes suggests that biological processes 
of protein turnover were impaired in PD. In the regulatory network, HLF, E2F1 and
STAT4 were found have altered expression levels in PD patients. The expression
levels of other transcription factors, NKX3-1, TAL1, RFX1 and EGR3, were not
found altered. However, they regulated differentially expressed genes. In
conclusion, we suggest that HLF, E2F1 and STAT4 may be used as molecular
biomarkers for PD; however, more work is needed to validate our result.

PMCID: PMC3532340
PMID: 23284986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nat Genet. 2013 Feb;45(2):145-54. doi: 10.1038/ng.2500. Epub 2012 Dec 23.

Genome-wide association analyses identify 18 new loci associated with serum urate
concentrations.

Köttgen A, Albrecht E, Teumer A, Vitart V, Krumsiek J, Hundertmark C, Pistis G,
Ruggiero D, O'Seaghdha CM, Haller T, Yang Q, Tanaka T, Johnson AD, Kutalik Z,
Smith AV, Shi J, Struchalin M, Middelberg RP, Brown MJ, Gaffo AL, Pirastu N, Li
G, Hayward C, Zemunik T, Huffman J, Yengo L, Zhao JH, Demirkan A, Feitosa MF, Liu
X, Malerba G, Lopez LM, van der Harst P, Li X, Kleber ME, Hicks AA, Nolte IM,
Johansson A, Murgia F, Wild SH, Bakker SJ, Peden JF, Dehghan A, Steri M, Tenesa
A, Lagou V, Salo P, Mangino M, Rose LM, Lehtimäki T, Woodward OM, Okada Y, Tin A,
Müller C, Oldmeadow C, Putku M, Czamara D, Kraft P, Frogheri L, Thun GA,
Grotevendt A, Gislason GK, Harris TB, Launer LJ, McArdle P, Shuldiner AR,
Boerwinkle E, Coresh J, Schmidt H, Schallert M, Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Kubo M,
Nakamura Y, Tanaka T, Munroe PB, Samani NJ, Jacobs DR Jr, Liu K, D'Adamo P, Ulivi
S, Rotter JI, Psaty BM, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Campbell S, Devuyst O, Navarro 
P, Kolcic I, Hastie N, Balkau B, Froguel P, Esko T, Salumets A, Khaw KT,
Langenberg C, Wareham NJ, Isaacs A, Kraja A, Zhang Q, Wild PS, Scott RJ, Holliday
EG, Org E, Viigimaa M, Bandinelli S, Metter JE, Lupo A, Trabetti E, Sorice R,
Döring A, Lattka E, Strauch K, Theis F, Waldenberger M, Wichmann HE, Davies G,
Gow AJ, Bruinenberg M; LifeLines Cohort Study, Stolk RP, Kooner JS, Zhang W,
Winkelmann BR, Boehm BO, Lucae S, Penninx BW, Smit JH, Curhan G, Mudgal P, Plenge
RM, Portas L, Persico I, Kirin M, Wilson JF, Mateo Leach I, van Gilst WH, Goel A,
Ongen H, Hofman A, Rivadeneira F, Uitterlinden AG, Imboden M, von Eckardstein A, 
Cucca F, Nagaraja R, Piras MG, Nauck M, Schurmann C, Budde K, Ernst F, Farrington
SM, Theodoratou E, Prokopenko I, Stumvoll M, Jula A, Perola M, Salomaa V, Shin
SY, Spector TD, Sala C, Ridker PM, Kähönen M, Viikari J, Hengstenberg C, Nelson
CP; CARDIoGRAM Consortium; DIAGRAM Consortium; ICBP Consortium; MAGIC Consortium,
Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Singleton AB, Kamatani N, Zeller T, Burnier M,
Attia J, Laan M, Klopp N, Hillege HL, Kloiber S, Choi H, Pirastu M, Tore S,
Probst-Hensch NM, Völzke H, Gudnason V, Parsa A, Schmidt R, Whitfield JB, Fornage
M, Gasparini P, Siscovick DS, Polaek O, Campbell H, Rudan I, Bouatia-Naji N,
Metspalu A, Loos RJ, van Duijn CM, Borecki IB, Ferrucci L, Gambaro G, Deary IJ,
Wolffenbuttel BH, Chambers JC, März W, Pramstaller PP, Snieder H, Gyllensten U,
Wright AF, Navis G, Watkins H, Witteman JC, Sanna S, Schipf S, Dunlop MG, Tönjes 
A, Ripatti S, Soranzo N, Toniolo D, Chasman DI, Raitakari O, Kao WH, Ciullo M,
Fox CS, Caulfield M, Bochud M, Gieger C.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2013 Feb;9(2):64.

Elevated serum urate concentrations can cause gout, a prevalent and painful
inflammatory arthritis. By combining data from >140,000 individuals of European
ancestry within the Global Urate Genetics Consortium (GUGC), we identified and
replicated 28 genome-wide significant loci in association with serum urate
concentrations (18 new regions in or near TRIM46, INHBB, SFMBT1, TMEM171, VEGFA, 
BAZ1B, PRKAG2, STC1, HNF4G, A1CF, ATXN2, UBE2Q2, IGF1R, NFAT5, MAF, HLF,
ACVR1B-ACVRL1 and B3GNT4). Associations for many of the loci were of similar
magnitude in individuals of non-European ancestry. We further characterized these
loci for associations with gout, transcript expression and the fractional
excretion of urate. Network analyses implicate the inhibins-activins signaling
pathways and glucose metabolism in systemic urate control. New candidate genes
for serum urate concentration highlight the importance of metabolic control of
urate production and excretion, which may have implications for the treatment and
prevention of gout.

PMCID: PMC3663712
PMID: 23263486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Feb;31(2):377-85. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1197. Epub 2012 Nov 
29.

Combination of oncolytic adenovirus and endostatin inhibits human retinoblastoma 
in an in vivo mouse model.

Wang H(1), Wei F, Li H, Ji X, Li S, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Center, The First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai 201620, P.R. China.

There is a critical need for new paradigms in retinoblastoma (RB) treatment that 
would more efficiently inhibit tumor growth while sparing the vision of patients.
Oncolytic adenoviruses with the ability to selectively replicate and kill tumor
cells are a promising strategy for cancer gene therapy. Exploration of a novel
targeting strategy for RB utilizing combined oncolytic adenovirus and
anti-angiogenesis therapy was applied over the course of the current study with
positive results. The oncolytic adenoviruses Ad-E2F1 p-E1A and Ad-TERT p-E1 were 
constructed. The E1 region was regulated by the E2F-1 promoter or the human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter, respectively. Effects on both 
replication and promotion of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) expression
were observed in the replication-defective adenovirus Ad-EGFP in diverse cancer
cell lines, HXO-RB44, Y79, Hep3B, NCIH460, MCF-7 and HLF. The cancer cell death
induced by these agents was also explored. The in situ RB model demonstrated that
mice with tumors treated with the oncolytic adenovirus and replication-defective 
adenovirus Ad-endostatin exhibited notable cancer cell death. This anticancer
effect was further examined by stereo microscope, and the survival rate of
experimental mice was determined. Both Ad-E2F1 p-E1A and Ad-TERT p-E1 replicated 
specifically in cancer cells in vitro and promoted EGFP expression in Ad-EGFP,
although Ad-E2F1 p-E1A demonstrated superior EGFP promotion activity than Ad-TERT
p-E1. In Hep3B, NCIH460 and MCF-7 cells, the number of Ad-TERT p-E1 copies was
observed to exceed of the number of Ad-E2F1 p-E1A copies by a minimum of 10-fold.
Furthermore, Ad-TERT p-E1 demonstrated significantly superior oncolytic effects
in the RB mouse model, and Ad-endostatin effectively suppressed tumor growth and 
extended the overall lifespan of subjects; however, the Ad-E2F1 p-E1A was clearly
less effective in attaining these goals. Most notably, the antitumor effect and
survival rate of subjects in the combined Ad-TERT p-E1 + Ad-endostatin group were
higher than those treated with either single Ad-TERT p-E1 (p=0.097, p=0.022,
respectively) or Ad-endostatin (p=0.037, p=0.006, respectively). In conclusion,
application of transcription factor E2F-1 and human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT) promoters to control E1 offer some guarantee that not only 
is RB gene therapy effective, but it is also safe. Combination therapy using the 
oncolytic adenovirus Ad-TERT p-E1 and replication-defective adenovirus
Ad-endostatin demonstrates desirable oncolysis in the in situ RB mouse model.
Additionally, E1B19K is important in the RB tumor suppression effect of oncolytic
adenoviruses.

PMID: 23229955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Chin J Integr Med. 2013 Aug;19(8):582-8. doi: 10.1007/s11655-012-1250-4. Epub
2012 Dec 3.

Hawthorn leaves flavonoids decreases inflammation related to acute myocardial
ischemia/reperfusion in anesthetized dogs.

Fu JH(1), Zheng YQ, Li P, Li XZ, Shang XH, Liu JX.

Author information: 
(1)Xiyuan Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100091,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects and mechanisms of hawthorn leaves
flavonoids (HLF) on acute myocardial ischemia/reperfusion in anesthetized dogs.
METHODS: The acute ischemia models were prepared by ligating left anterior
descending (LAD) artery for 60 min. Qualified 15 male dogs were randomly divided 
into 3 groups with 5 in each group: blank control (treated with normal saline 3
mL/kg) group, HLF low dosage (5 mg/kg) group and high dosage (10 mg/kg) group,
with an once injection through a femoral vein 5 min before reperfusion.
Epicardial electrocardiogram was adopted to measure the scope and degree of
myocardial ischemia. Simultaneously, neutrophil infiltration in infarct (Inf) and
remote site (RS) of myocardial tissue was measured by myeloperoxidase (MPO)
activity assay. The serum interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factora (TNF-a)
content were quantified by radioimmuno-assay. Furthermore, expression of G
protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in Inf and
RS tissue were detected by Western blotting technique.
RESULTS: Ischemia and reperfusion increased the MPO activity and IL-1 and TNF-a
content. HLF (10 and 5 mg/kg) could significantly decrease the degree and scope
of myocardial ischemia; markedly inhibit the increase of MPO activity, and IL-1
and TNF-a content induced by myocardial ischemia/infarction. Furthermore, HLF
increased GRK2 expression and inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B expression in Inf tissue.
CONCLUSION: HLF could improve the situation of acute myocardial ischemia and
inhibit the inflammation in anesthetized dogs, which might be due to its
increasing effect on the GRK2 and NF-<U+03BA>B expressions.

PMID: 23212573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Aug;31(6):496-503. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2926. Epub 2012 Nov 
27.

Thymic stromal lymphopoietin promotes asthmatic airway remodelling in human lung 
fibroblast cells through STAT3 signalling pathway.

Wu J(1), Liu F, Zhao J, Wei Y, Lv J, Dong F, Bi W, Wang X, Wang J, Liu W, Dong L,
Tian H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, China.

This study aimed to identify the role and regulation of thymic stromal
lymphopoietin (TSLP) in asthmatic airway remodelling. To identify the expression 
of TSLP, a smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) and collagen I in bronchial tissues,
bronchial biopsy specimens were collected from patients with asthma and healthy
controls and stained with specific antibodies, respectively. To characterize the 
signalling pathways regulated by TSLP, we silenced or overexpressed TSLP in human
lung fibroblast (HLF-1) cells by shRNA approaches or transfection and detected
the expression of TSLP receptor (TSLPR) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and 
Western blot analysis. In TSLP signalling pathway, the protein expression of
total signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), STAT5, the
phosphorylation of STAT3 (pSTAT3) and STAT5 (pSTAT5), TSLP, a-SMA and collagen I 
were also detected by Western blotting. In addition, the a-SMA, collagen I and
mRNA expression were determined by real-time reverse-transcription. To further
confirm the TSLP-STAT3 signalling pathway in HLF-1 cells, we inhibited STAT3
activity by targeted small molecules and then detected TSLP-induced expression of
a-SMA and collagen I in both mRNA and protein levels by quantitative real-time
reverse-transcription and Western blotting, respectively. First, overexpression
of TSLP, a-SMA and collagen I was detected in epithelium collected from patients 
with asthma. Second, STAT3 activity and the expression of a-SMA and collagen I
were controlled, regulated by TSLP. Specifically, the pSTAT3, a-SMA and collagen 
I were induced by the introduction of TSLP in HLF-1 cells, and the repression of 
a-SMA and collagen I was detected after TSLP silencing. Third, no changes of
pSTAT5 were found in the presence of the STAT3 inhibitor, and TSLP-induced a-SMA 
and collagen I upregulation is in a STAT3 dependent manner. If we inhibit STAT3
activity by STAT3 targeted small molecules, TSLP-induced a-SMA and collagen I
upregulation cannot be detected. The functions of TSLP in asthmatic airway
remodelling were performed through STAT3 signalling pathway.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23192865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cancer Genet. 2012 Dec;205(12):669-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.10.004. Epub
2012 Nov 20.

A novel TCF3-HLF fusion transcript in acute lymphoblastic leukemia with a
t(17;19)(q22;p13).

Panagopoulos I(1), Micci F, Thorsen J, Haugom L, Tierens A, Ulvmoen A, Heim S.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Medical Informatics, The
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
ioannis.panagopoulos@rr-research.no

A 10-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital because of anemia detected after a
two week history of fatigue, dizziness, nausea, headaches, and weight loss. A
bone marrow investigation confirmed a diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
of the B-cell precursor phenotype. Chromosome G-banding analysis yielded the
karyotype 46,XY,t(17;19)(q22;p13), and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
analysis showed rearrangement of the genes TCF3 (on 19p13; accession number
NM_03200 version 3) and HLF (on 17q22; accession number NM_002126 version 4) with
the generation of a TCF3-HLF chimera. Polymerase chain reaction and sequencing
analyses demonstrated the presence of two in-frame chimeric TCF3-HLF transcripts.
In the first one, which corresponds to a type 2 fusion, exon 15 of TCF3 is fused 
to exon 4 of HLF. In the second, described here for the first time and named type
3, exon 14 of TCF3 is fused to exon 4 of HLF. Whether the type 3 chimeric
transcript has the same DNA binding and transcriptional regulatory effect as type
1 and type 2 TCF3-HLF chimeras remains to be seen.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23181981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045412. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

ShRNA-targeted COMMD7 suppresses hepatocellular carcinoma growth.

Zheng L(1), Liang P, Li J, Huang XB, Liu SC, Zhao HZ, Han KQ, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, the Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: COMMD7 is a newly identified gene overexpressed in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) and associated with tumor invasion and poor prognosis. We aim to 
examine the biological function of COMMD7 in HCC by shRNA silencing.
METHODS: COMMD7 expressions were examined in human HCC cell lines HepG2, Huh7,
Hep3B, HLE, HLF, SK-Hep-1 and PLC/PRF/5 cells. Recombinant pGenesil-COMMD7-shRNA 
was transfected into COMMD7-abundant HepG2 cells to silence COMMD7 expression.
The effects of COMMD7 silencing on HepG2 cell proliferation in vitro and
xenograft tumor growth in vivo were evaluated. Flow cytometry profiling was used 
to detect the presence of apoptosis in COMMD7-silenced HepG2 cells and to
differentiate cell cycle distribution. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
luciferase reporter assays to examine the activities of nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling pathways in response to tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a in
COMMD7-silenced HepG2 cells.
RESULTS: COMMD7 expression level was abundance in HepG2 and SK-Hep-1 cells.
COMMD7 was aberrantly overexpressed in HepG2 cells, whilst pGenesil-COMMD7-shRNA 
exhibited a maximal inhibition rate of 75%. COMMD7 silencing significantly
reduced HepG2 cell proliferation and colony formation. The knockdown of COMMD7
resulted in an increased apoptosis and cell cycle arrest at S-phase. COMMD7
knockdown also exhibited an antineoplastic effect in vivo, which manifested as
tumor xenograft growth retardation. COMMD7 silencing also suppressed the
responsiveness of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway to the stimulation with TNF-a in vitro.
Moreover, the similar suppressive effects of COMMD7 silence on SK-Hep-1 cells
were also observed.
CONCLUSIONS: COMMD7 contributes to HCC progression by reducing cell apoptosis and
overcoming cell cycle arrest. The proliferative and antiapoptotic effects of
COMMD7 may be mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3458015
PMID: 23049798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jun;48(6):738-50. doi: 10.1007/s00535-012-0675-z. Epub 2012
Sep 26.

Bortezomib induces tumor-specific cell death and growth inhibition in
hepatocellular carcinoma and improves liver fibrosis.

Saeki I(1), Terai S, Fujisawa K, Takami T, Yamamoto N, Matsumoto T, Hirose Y,
Murata Y, Yamasaki T, Sakaida I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami Kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi, 755-8505, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is highly ubiquitinated. The
ubiquitination is important to the generatation of HCC. The antitumor and
antifibrosis effects of an ubiquitin-proteasome system inhibitor, bortezomib, on 
HCC with liver cirrhosis (LC) were analyzed in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: The effect of bortezomib was analyzed in the rat hepatocarcinogenesis
model using a DEN and CDAA diet (DEN/CDAA model), which shows severe LC and
generation of HCC. The decrease of GST-P-positive foci and HCC were analyzed in
vivo. Cell death was analyzed by cell death detection kit. Liver fibrosis was
checked by sirius-red staining and a-smooth muscle actin staining. The in vitro
study involved 3 HCC cell lines (HepG2, HuH7, and HLF) and primary rat and human 
hepatocytes. The proliferation rate of the HCC cell line was analyzed using the
MTT assay and FACS analysis. The toxicity of bortezomib was checked using the LDH
release assay for primary human and rat hepatocytes.
RESULTS: In the rat hepatocarcinogenesis model, bortezomib prevented the
development of preneoplastic lesions during the early stages of
hepatocarcinogenesis and specifically induced cell death in HCC. Furthermore,
bortezomib inhibited cell proliferation and induced tumor-specific cell death in 
HCC cell lines with decrease of cyclin D1 and phospho-Rb expression. Further,
bortezomib showed no hepatotoxicity of primary rat and human hepatocytes,
suggesting that it might be an HCC-specific drug. Bortezomib also prevented the
activation of hepatic stellate cells and inhibited the liver fibrosis of the
DEN/CDAA model.
CONCLUSIONS: Bortezomib appears to be an ideal target drug for HCC with LC.

PMID: 23011081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2012 Sep;32(9):1250-4.

[Protein kinase C mediates thrombin-induced monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
release from human lung fibroblasts].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan C(1), Xu M, Chen G, Fu Y, Deng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Shantou University Medical College,
Shantou University Medical College, Shantou 515041, China. yuanchao.10086@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of protein kinase C (PKC) in thrombin-induced 
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1(MCP-1) release by human lung fibroblasts
(HLF-1).
METHODS: Cultured human lung fibroblasts HLF-1 were incubated with different
concentrations of PKC inhibitors before by thrombin stimulation. MCP-l protein
levels in the supernatants were assessed using ELISA, and MCP-1 mRNA levels in
the cell lysate were measured by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The broad spectrum PKC inhibitors bisindolylmaleimide I and RO-31-8220
obviously inhibited thrombin-induced MCP-l mRNA and protein expressions in HLF-1 
cells, whereas Ca(2+)-dependent PKC inhibitor Go 6976 had no such effects.
CONCLUSION: Ca(2+)-independent PKC mediates thrombin-induced MCP-1 release in
cultured HLF-1 cells.

PMID: 22985557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Jan;168(2):471-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.02190.x.

Pro-fibrotic processes in human lung fibroblasts are driven by an
autocrine/paracrine endothelinergic system.

Ahmedat AS(1), Warnken M, Seemann WK, Mohr K, Kostenis E, Juergens UR, Racké K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Since endothelin (ET) may act as pro-fibrotic mediator,
expression and release of ET isoforms, their receptors and potential pro-fibrotic
ET effects were studied in human lung fibroblasts.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: MRC-5 and primary human lung fibroblasts (phLFb) were
cultured. Expression of prepro-ET isoforms was determined by qPCR and release of 
ET-1 by elisa. ET receptor function was analysed by real-time measurement of
dynamic mass redistribution (DMR). Incorporation of [(3) H]-thymidine was
determined as measure of proliferation and that of [(3) H]-proline for collagen
synthesis. Phospho-p42/44 MAP kinase was determined by Western blot.
KEY RESULTS: ET-1 is the predominant ET in human lung fibroblasts (hLF), and
TGF-ß caused a further, selective and sustained up-regulation of ET-1 resulting
in increased extracellular ET-1 accumulation. hLFb express mRNA encoding ET-A and
ET-B receptors. Expression of both receptors was confirmed at protein level. ET-1
induced marked DMR signals, an effect that involved ET-A and ET-B receptors.
Stimulatory effects of ET-1 on hLFb proliferation and collagen synthesis were
mediated exclusively via ET-A receptors. ET-1, again via ET-A receptors, induced 
rapid activation of ERK MAPK, shown to be a crucial cellular signal in
ET-1-induced collagen synthesis. ET-1-induced activation of ERK and collagen
synthesis was, in contrast to corresponding effect of a muscarinic agonist,
largely insensitive to pertussis toxin.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: hLFb are endowed with all elements necessary to
build a functional autocrine/paracrine endothelinergic system, which appears to
drive pro-fibrotic airway and lung remodelling processes, effects for which only 
ET-A, but not ET-B receptors appear to be of significance.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3572572
PMID: 22935082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Respir Res. 2012 Aug 8;13:69. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-69.

HSULF-1 inhibits ERK and AKT signaling and decreases cell viability in vitro in
human lung epithelial cells.

Zhang H(1), Newman DR, Sannes PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, Center for Comparative Molecular 
Translational Research, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA.

BACKGROUND: Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) modulate the binding and
activation of signaling pathways of specific growth factors, such as fibroblast
growth factor-2 (FGF-2). Human endosulfatase 1 (HSULF-1) is an enzyme that
selectively removes 6-O sulfate groups from HS side chains and alter their level 
and pattern of sulfation and thus biological activity. It is known that HSULF-1
is expressed at low levels in some cancer cell lines and its enhanced expression 
can inhibit cancer cell growth or induce apoptosis, but the mechanism(s) involved
has not been identified.
METHODS: HSULF-1 mRNA expression was assessed in five normal cells (primary human
lung alveolar type 2 (hAT2) cells, adult lung fibroblasts (16Lu), fetal lung
fibroblasts (HFL), human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE), and primary human lung
fibroblasts (HLF)) and five lung cancer cell lines (A549, H292, H1975, H661, and 
H1703) using quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). H292 and
hAT2 cells over-expressing HSULF-1 were analyzed for cell viability, apoptosis,
and ERK/Akt signaling, by MTT
(3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay, TUNEL
(Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling) assay, and Western
Blot, respectively. Apoptosis pathway activation was confirmed by PCR array in
hAT2, H292, and A549 cells.
RESULTS: HSULF-1 was expressed at a significantly lower level in epithelial
cancer cell lines compared to normal cells. Infection with recombinant adenovirus
for HSULF-1 over-expression resulted in decreased cell viability in H292 cells,
but not in normal hAT2 cells. HSULF-1 over-expression induced apoptosis in H292
cells, but not in hAT2 cells. In addition, apoptosis pathways were activated in
both H292 and A549 cells, but not in hAT2 cells. HSULF-1 over-expression reduced 
ERK and Akt signaling activation in H292 cells, which further demonstrated its
inhibitory effects on signaling related to proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that HSULF-1 is expressed at lower levels in 
H292 lung cancer cells than in normal human alveolar cells and that its
over-expression reduced cell viability in H292 cells by inducing apoptotic
pathways, at least in part by inhibiting ERK/Akt signaling. We hypothesize that
HSULF-1 plays important roles in cancer cells and functions to modify cell
signaling, inhibit cancer proliferation, and promote cancer cell death.

PMCID: PMC3514195
PMID: 22873647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 May;28(5):1871-80. doi:
10.1007/s11274-011-0984-z. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Human lactoferrin increases Helicobacter pylori internalisation into AGS cells.

Coray DS(1), Heinemann JA, Tyrer PC, Keenan JI.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Private Bag 4800,
Christchurch, New Zealand.

Helicobacter pylori has high global infection rates and can cause other
undesirable clinical manifestations such as duodenal ulcer (DU) and gastric
cancer (GC). Frequencies of re-infection after therapeutic clearance and rates of
DU versus GC vary geographically and differ markedly between developed and
developing countries, which suggests additional factors may be involved. The
possibility that, in vivo, lactoferrin (Lf) may play a subtle role in modulating 
micronutrient availability or bacterial internalisation with implications for
disease etiology is considered. Lf is an iron binding protein produced in mammals
that has antimicrobial and immunomodulatory properties. Some bacteria that
regularly colonise mammalian hosts have adapted to living in high Lf environments
and we investigated if this included the gastric pathogen H. pylori. We found
that H. pylori was able to use iron from fully iron-saturated human Lf (hLf)
whereas partially iron-saturated hLf (apo) did not increase H. pylori growth.
Instead, apo-hLf increased adherence to and internalisation of bacteria into
cultured epithelial cells. By increasing internalisation, we speculate that
apo-human lactoferrin may contribute to H. pylori's ability to persistence in the
human stomach, an observation that potentially has implications for the risk of
H. pylori-associated disease.

PMID: 22806010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biotechnol. 2012 Oct 31;161(3):198-205. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2012.06.035.
Epub 2012 Jul 10.

The dominant expression of functional human lactoferrin in transgenic cloned
goats using a hybrid lactoferrin expression construct.

Yu H(1), Chen J, Sun W, Liu S, Zhang A, Xu X, Wang X, He Z, Liu G, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200025, China.

Human Lactoferrin (hLF) is an iron-binding protein with multiple physiological
functions. As the availability of natural hLF is limited, alternative means of
producing this biopharmaceutical protein have been extensively studied. Here we
report on the dominant expression of recombinant human lactoferrin (rhLF) in
transgenic cloned goats using a novel optimised construct made by fusing a 3.3 kb
hLF minigene to the regulatory elements of the ß-casein gene. The transgenic goat
produced more than 30 mg/ml rhLF in its milk, and rhLF expression was stable
during the entire lactation cycle. The rhLF purification efficiency from whole
goat milk is approximately 70%, and its purity is above 98%. Compared with
natural hLF, the rhLF from transgenic goats has similar biological
characteristics including molecular mass, N-terminal sequence, isoelectric point,
immunoreactivity and digestive stability. More importantly, the purified rhLF
showed specific anti-tumour activity in the mouse model of melanoma experimental 
metastasis. Therefore, our study shows that the large-scale production of
functional rhLF in transgenic goat milk could be an economical and promising
source of human therapeutic use in the future.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22789477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Oncol Lett. 2012 May;3(5):1047-1051. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

The expression levels of CD44v6 are correlated with the invasiveness of
hepatocellular carcinoma in vitro, but do not appear to be clinically
significant.

Mima K(1), Okabe H, Ishimoto T, Hayashi H, Nakagawa S, Kuroki H, Miyake K,
Takamori H, Beppu T, Baba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

The finding that the expression of a variant isoform of CD44 induced a metastatic
phenotype in locally growing tumor cells has attracted considerable attention. A 
number of studies have analyzed the expression of CD44v6 in human tumors of
different origins. However, the findings of these studies have been
controversial. Therefore, in the present study, we assessed the association
between CD44v6 expression and the invasive capacity of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cell lines and also investigated the clinical significance of CD44v6 in 150
HCC patients by immunohistochemical analysis. The HCC cell lines with a high
CD44v6 expression, including HLF, HLE and SK HEP-1, showed high invasive
potential, whereas those with a low CD44v6 expression, including PLC/PRF/5 and
HuH1, showed low invasiveness. Despite these observations, we did not find any
significant correlation between CD44v6 expression and clinicopathological factors
in patients. By contrast, there was a weak correlation between a low CD44v6
expression and vascular invasion in HCC patients (P=0.080). Kaplan-Meier curves
revealed that a high CD44v6 expression was not significantly associated with
disease-free survival (P=0.736) or overall survival (P=0.736). Our study suggests
that the expression levels of CD44v6 are correlated with the invasiveness of HCC 
in vitro, but do not appear to be clinically significant. Future experiments
should investigate the role of the various CD44 isoforms, including the CD44
standard isoform, in HCC cell lines and in patients with HCC.

PMCID: PMC3389621
PMID: 22783389  [PubMed]


154. Leukemia. 2012 Dec;26(12):2483-93. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.139. Epub 2012 May 30.

Oncogenic fusion E2A-HLF sensitizes t(17;19)-positive acute lymphoblastic
leukemia to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis by upregulating the expression of death
receptors.

Zhang X(1), Inukai T, Hirose K, Akahane K, Kuroda I, Honna-Oshiro H, Kagami K,
Goi K, Nakamura K, Kobayashi M, Endo M, Yagita H, Kurosawa H, Thomas Look A,
Honda H, Inaba T, Nakazawa S, Sugita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Yamanashi,
Yamanashi, Japan.

t(17;19)-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) shows extremely poor prognosis.
E2A-HLF derived from t(17;19) blocks apoptosis induced by the intrinsic
mitochondrial pathway and has a central role in leukemogenesis and
chemoresistance. Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) 
is expressed on cytotoxic T cells and natural killer cells and binds with death
receptors (DR4/DR5), inducing apoptosis by dual activation of intrinsic and
extrinsic pathways, and TRAIL mediates the graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) effect
after allogeneic stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT). We found that cell lines
and patients' samples of t(17;19)-ALL expressed death receptors for TRAIL, and
recombinant soluble TRAIL immediately induced apoptosis into t(17;19)-ALL cell
lines. E2A-HLF induced gene expression of DR4/DR5, which was dependent on the
DNA-binding and transactivation activities of E2A-HLF through the 5' upstream
region of the start site at least in the DR4 gene. Introduction of E2A-HLF into
non-t(17;19)-ALL cell line upregulated DR4 and DR5 expression, and sensitized to 
proapoptotic activity of recombinant soluble TRAIL. Finally, a newly diagnosed
t(17;19)-ALL patient underwent allo-SCT immediately after induction of first
complete remission, and the patient has survived without relapse for over 3-1/2
years after allo-SCT. These findings suggest that E2A-HLF sensitizes t(17;19)-ALL
to the GVL effect by upregulating death receptors for TRAIL.

PMID: 22743623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;20(3):658-63.

Sustaining expression of B domain-deleted human factor VIII mediated by using
lentiviral vectors in NOD/SCID mouse.

Li YJ(1), Chen C, Zeng LY, Cao J, Xu KL.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Laboratory Diagnosis, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu
Province, China.

Recently, gene therapy has been become a promising approach to cure hemophilia A,
a most common recessive bleeding disease. The aim of this study was to determine 
the perspective of lentiviral vector in hemophilia A gene therapy in vitro and in
NOD/SCID mice. Lentivirus transfer vector pXZ9/BDDFVIII containing human
B-domain-deleted Factor VIII-IRES-eGFP coding sequence and mock control pXZ9 were
constructed. Lentivirus was prepared by co-transfecting 3 plasmids into 293FT
cells. 293FT, HLF, human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells and Chang-liver cells
were transfected with the prepared virus. Coagulant activity of human FVIII,
human FVIII antigen, human FVIII mRNA transcription and genomic integration were 
assayed by ELISA, one-step method, RT-PCR and PCR after infection. Lentiviral
particles were concentrated by ultracentrifugation and NOD/SCID mice were
transfected via portal vein injection. Human FVIII antigen in mouse blood plasma 
was analyzed by ELISA. eGFP expression was observed by fluorescent microscopy and
human FVIII transcription in mouse liver was analyzed by RT-PCR at one month
after transduction. The results showed that the high titer of recombinant virus
was prepared and used to efficiently transduce the target cells in vitro. At 72 h
after transfection, high levels of FVIII activity and FVIII antigen were
detected. Human FVIII gene transcription could be detected in the liver of
NOD/SCID mice received lentiviral particles carrying FVIII gene. Mouse
hepatocytes were transfected with recombinant lentivirus efficiently in vivo.
Human FVIII level in mouse blood plasma reached to (49 ± 6) mU, (54 ± 8) mU and
(23 ± 4) mU at 72 h, one week and one month after transfection respectively. It
is concluded that the lentiviral particles carrying BDDhFVIII gene can high
efficiently transfect the target cells both in vitro and in vivo, and the
transfected target cells can secrete hFVIII efficiently. The sustained expression
of human FVIII in NOD/SCID mice is observed after lentivirus transfection via
portal vein injection.

PMID: 22739177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Aug;79(8):573-85. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22063. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Hybrid expression cassettes consisting of a milk protein promoter and a
cytomegalovirus enhancer significantly increase mammary-specific expression of
human lactoferrin in transgenic mice.

Cheng Y(1), An LY, Yuan YG, Wang Y, Du FL, Yu BL, Zhang ZH, Huang YZ, Yang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Centre for Transgenic Animal Pharmaceutics in Jiangsu
Province, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, No. 12 Wenhui Rd.,
Yangzhou, Jiangsu, PR China. chengyong@yzu.edu.cn

It is very important to develop an effective, specific, and robust expression
cassette that ensures a high level of expression in the mammary glands. In this
study, we designed and constructed a series of mammary gland-specific vectors
containing a complex hybrid promoter/enhancer by utilizing promoter sequences
from milk proteins (i.e., goat ß-casein, bovine as1-casein, or goat
ß-lactoglobulin) and cytomegalovirus enhancer sequences; vectors containing a
single milk protein promoter served as controls. Chicken ß-globin insulator
sequences were also included in some of these vectors. The expression of
constructs was analyzed through the generation of transgenic mice. Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) analysis revealed that the hybrid promoter/enhancer
could drive the expression of recombinant human lactoferrin (rhLF) cDNA at high
levels (1.17-8.10<U+2009>mg/ml) in the milk of transgenic mice, whereas control
promoters achieved a very low rhLF expression (7-40<U+2009>ng/ml). Moreover, the
expression of rhLF was not detected in the serum or saliva of any transgenic
animal. This result shows that all constructs, driven by the hybrid
promoter/enhancer, had high mammary gland-specific expression pattern. Together, 
our results suggest that the use of a hybrid promoter/enhancer is a valuable
alternative approach for increasing mammary-specific expression of recombinant
hLF in a transgenic mouse model.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22730016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Gastroenterology. 2012 Sep;143(3):811-20.e1-15. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2012.05.033. Epub 2012 May 26.

Histone deacetylases activate hepatocyte growth factor signaling by repressing
microRNA-449 in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Buurman R(1), Gürlevik E, Schäffer V, Eilers M, Sandbothe M, Kreipe H, Wilkens L,
Schlegelberger B, Kühnel F, Skawran B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Histone deacetylation regulates chromatin remodeling and
transcriptional down-regulation of specific genomic regions; it is altered in
many types of cancer cells. We searched for microRNAs (miRs) that are affected by
histone deacetylation and investigated the effects in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells.
METHODS: HCC cell lines (HepG2, HLE, HLF, and Huh7) and immortalized liver cell
lines (THLE-2 and THLE-3) were incubated with the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A. Differentially expressed messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and miRs were
identified by expression profiling. Small interfering RNAs were used to reduce
levels of histone deacetylases (HDAC)1-3, and HCC cell lines were transfected
with miR-449. We evaluated growth of xenograft tumors from modified cells in nude
mice. Cells were analyzed by immunoblot and luciferase reporter assays. We
analyzed HCC samples from 23 patients.
RESULTS: HDAC1-3 were up-regulated in HCC samples from patients. In cell lines,
inhibition of HDAC significantly increased levels of hsa-miR-449a. c-MET mRNA,
which encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase for hepatocyte growth factor, is a
target of miR-449. Incubation of HCC cells with trichostatin A or transfection
with miR-449 reduced expression of c-MET and phosphorylation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (downstream effectors of c-MET), increased
apoptosis, and reduced proliferation. Huh-7 cells transfected with miR-449 formed
tumors more slowly in mice than cells expressing control miRs. HCC samples from
patients had lower levels of miR-449 and higher levels of c-MET than human
reference.
CONCLUSIONS: In HCC cells, up-regulation of HDAC1-3 reduces expression of
miR-449. miR-449 binds c-MET mRNA to reduce its levels, promoting apoptosis and
reducing proliferation of liver cells. Expression of miR-449 slows growth of HCC 
xenograft tumors in mice; this miR might function as a tumor suppressor.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22641068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Theriogenology. 2012 Aug;78(3):583-92. doi: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.03.004.
Epub 2012 May 17.

Efficiency of donor cell preparation and recipient oocyte source for production
of transgenic cloned dairy goats harboring human lactoferrin.

Wan YJ(1), Zhang YL, Zhou ZR, Jia RX, Li M, Song H, Wang ZY, Wang LZ, Zhang GM,
You JH, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Embryo Engineering and Technology, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.

The objective was to investigate the effects of the transgenic donor cell
synchronization method, oocyte sources, and other factors, on production of
hLF-gene nucleus transfer dairy goats. Three transfected cell lines from ear
biopsies from three 3-mo-old Saanen dairy goats (designated Number 1, Number 2,
and Number 3, respectively) were selected as karyoplast donors for somatic cell
nuclear transfer (SCNT) after detailed identification (including PCR and
sequencing of PCR products). In donor cell cycle synchronization studies, the
apoptosis rate of hLF transgenic fibroblasts was not different (P > 0.05) after 3
days of serum starvation or 2 days of contact inhibition. Additionally, there was
no effect (P > 0.05) on developmental capacity of reconstructed embryos; however,
the kidding rate of recipients in the serum starvation group was higher than that
in the contact inhibition group (18 vs. 0%, respectively). The production
efficiency of the transgenic cloned goats using donor cells from the Number 1
dairy goat cell line was higher than those using the Number 2 and the Number 3
cell lines (kidding rates were 18, 2, and 0%, respectively, P < 0.05). The oocyte
source did not significantly affect the pregnancy rate of hLF-transgenic cloned
dairy goats, but more fetuses were aborted when using in vitro matured oocytes
compared to in vivo matured oocytes. In summary, utilizing transfected 3-mo-old
dairy goat fibroblasts as donor cells, seven live offspring were produced, and
the hLF gene was successfully integrated. This study provided additional insights
into preparation of donor cells and recipient oocytes for producing transgenic
cloned goats through SCNT.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22607664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cancer Lett. 2012 Oct 28;323(2):215-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.04.015. Epub
2012 May 11.

Synergistic growth inhibition of human hepatocellular carcinoma cells by acyclic 
retinoid and GW4064, a farnesoid X receptor ligand.

Ohno T, Shirakami Y, Shimizu M, Kubota M, Sakai H, Yasuda Y, Kochi T, Tsurumi H, 
Moriwaki H.

Abnormalities in the expression and function of retinoid X receptor (RXR), a
master regulator of the nuclear receptor superfamily, are associated with the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Dysfunction of farnesoid X
receptor (FXR), one of the nuclear receptors that forms a heterodimer with RXR,
also plays a role in liver carcinogenesis. In the present study, we examined the 
effects of acyclic retinoid (ACR), a synthetic retinoid targeting RXRa, plus
GW4064, a ligand for FXR, on the growth of human HCC cells. We found that ACR and
GW4064 preferentially inhibited the growth of HLE, HLF, and Huh7 human HCC cells 
in comparison with Hc normal hepatocytes. The combination of 1µM ACR plus 1µM
GW4064 synergistically inhibited the growth of HLE cells by inducing apoptosis.
The combined treatment with these agents acted cooperatively to induce cell cycle
arrest in the G(0)/G(1) phase and inhibit the phosphorylation of RXRa, which is
regarded as a critical factor for liver carcinogenesis, through inhibition of ERK
and Stat3 phosphorylation. This combination also increased the expression levels 
of p21(CIP1) and SHP mRNA, while decreasing the levels of c-myc and cyclin D1
mRNA in HLE cells. In addition, a reporter assay indicated that the FXRE promoter
activity was significantly increased by treatment with ACR plus GW4064. Our
results suggest that ACR and GW4064 cooperatively inhibit RXRa phosphorylation,
modulate the expression of FXR-regulated genes, thus resulting in the induction
of apoptosis and the inhibition of growth in HCC cells. This combination might
therefore be effective for the chemoprevention and chemotherapy of HCC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22579649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Med Chem. 2012 Jun 14;55(11):5529-35. doi: 10.1021/jm3004587. Epub 2012 May 18.

Protein-protein interactions: inhibition of mammalian carbonic anhydrases I-XV by
the murine inhibitor of carbonic anhydrase and other members of the transferrin
family.

Durdagi S(1), Vullo D, Pan P, Kähkönen N, Määttä JA, Hytönen VP, Scozzafava A,
Parkkila S, Supuran CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute for Biocomplexity and
Informatics, University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive, T2N 1N4, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada.

The murine inhibitor of carbonic anhydrase (mICA), a member of the transferrin
(TF) superfamily of proteins, together with human holo- and apoTF and lactoferrin
(LF) were assessed as inhibitors of all catalytically active mammalian (h =
human, m = murine) CA isoforms, from CA I to CA XV. mICA was a low nanomolar to
subnanomolar inhibitor of hCAs I, II, III, VA, VB, VII and mCAs XV (K(I) of
0.7-44.0 nM) and inhibited the remaining isoforms with K(I) of 185.5-469 nM. hTF,
apoTF, and hLF were inhibitors of most of these CAs but with reduced efficiency
compared to mICA (K(I) of 18.9-453.8 nM). Biacore surface plasmon resonance and
differential scanning calorimetry experiments were also used for obtaining more
insights into the interaction between these proteins, which may be useful for
drug design of protein-based CA inhibitors.

PMID: 22578027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;90(3):279-306. doi: 10.1139/o2012-013. Epub 2012 May 
3.

Lactoferrin: an alternative view of its role in human biological fluids.

Alexander DB(1), Iigo M, Yamauchi K, Suzui M, Tsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nanotoxicology Project, Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabedohri,
Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan. dalexand@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Lactoferrin is a major component of biologically important mucosal fluids and of 
the specific granules of neutrophils. Understanding its biological function is
essential for understanding neutrophil- and mucosal-mediated immunity. In this
review, we reevaluate the in vivo functions of human lactoferrin (hLF)
emphasizing in vivo studies and in vitro studies performed in biologically
relevant fluids. We discuss the evidence in the literature that supports (or does
not support) proposed roles for hLF in mucosal immunity and in neutrophil
function. We argue that the current literature supports a microbiostatic role,
but not a microbicidal role, for hLF in vivo. The literature also supports a role
for hLF in inhibiting colonization and infection of epithelial surfaces by
microorganisms and in protecting tissues from neutrophil-mediated damage. Using
this information, we briefly discuss hLF in the context of the complex biological
fluids in which it is found.

PMID: 22553915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Int J Cancer. 2012 Dec 1;131(11):2537-46. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27575. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

Runt-related transcription factor 3 reverses epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Tanaka S(1), Shiraha H, Nakanishi Y, Nishina S, Matsubara M, Horiguchi S, Takaoka
N, Iwamuro M, Kataoka J, Kuwaki K, Hagihara H, Toshimori J, Ohnishi H, Takaki A, 
Nakamura S, Nouso K, Yagi T, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Okayama, Japan.

Loss or decreased expression of runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3), a
tumor suppressor gene involved in gastric and other cancers, has been frequently 
observed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The objective of this study was to
identify the regulatory mechanism of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
by RUNX3 in HCC. Human HCC cell lines, Hep3B, Huh7, HLF and SK-Hep1, were divided
into low- and high-EMT lines, based on their expression of TWIST1 and SNAI2, and 
were used in this in vitro study. Ectopic RUNX3 expression had an anti-EMT effect
in low-EMT HCC cell lines characterized by increased E-cadherin expression and
decreased N-cadherin and vimentin expression. RUNX3 expression has previously
been reported to reduce jagged-1 (JAG1) expression; therefore, JAG1 ligand
peptide was used to reinduce EMT in RUNX3-expressing low-EMT HCC cells.
Immunohistochemical analyses were performed for RUNX3, E-cadherin, N-cadherin and
TWIST1 in 33 human HCC tissues, also divided into low- and high-EMT HCC, based on
TWIST1 expression. E-cadherin expression was correlated positively and N-cadherin
expression was correlated negatively with RUNX3 expression in low-EMT HCC
tissues. Correlations between EMT markers and RUNX3 mRNA expression were analyzed
using Oncomine datasets. Similarly, mRNA expression of E-cadherin was also
significantly correlated with that of RUNX3 in low-EMT HCC, while mRNA expression
of JAG1 was negatively correlated with that of RUNX3. These results suggest a
novel mechanism by which loss or decreased expression of RUNX3 induces EMT via
induction of JAG1 expression in low-EMT HCC.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22488108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Aug;138(8):1329-38. doi: 10.1007/s00432-012-1206-2.
Epub 2012 Apr 6.

Lentivirus-delivered ZEB-1 small interfering RNA inhibits lung adenocarcinoma
cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

Liu Y(1), Yan X, Liu N, Zhou J, Liu J, Pang H, Cao J, Liu Y, Wang Y, Liu L, Zhang
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 1
Xinsi Road, Xi'an 710038, China.

PURPOSE: To explore the relationship between the expression of ZEB1 gene and the 
proliferation ability of lung adenocarcinoma cells.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry, Western blot and Real-time PCR were used to detect
the expression of ZEB1 gene in lung adenocarcinoma tissue and cell lines compared
with adjacent noncancerous region and the human lung fibroblast cell HLF cells.
The lentivirus RNA interference technique was used to knock down the expression
of ZEB1 in lung adenocarcinoma A549 and H1299 cell lines. Cell cycle and cell
apoptosis were measured by FCM assay. In vivo, four groups of 4-week-old nude
mice were subcutaneously injected with the stably transfected (ZEB-si, scr-si)
cells at a single site to investigate the effect of ZEB1-siRNA in the nude mice
tumor growth. In situ apoptosis was detection by TUNEL assay.
RESULTS: ZEB-1 was highly expressed in lung adenocarcinoma tissue and cell lines 
compared with adjacent noncancerous region and the human lung fibroblast cell HLF
cells. ZEB1-siRNA could decrease lung adenocarcinoma cell proliferation by
delaying S-phase entry and induce cell apoptosis, which led to the inhibition of 
the tumorigenicity of A549 and H1299 cell lines. Further investigation showed
that injecting the ZEB1-siRNA cells into the nude mice could significantly
decrease the tumor growth.
CONCLUSION: Knockdown of ZEB-1 expression by lentivirus-delivered siRNA may
provide a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of lung cancer.

PMID: 22481253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Genes Brain Behav. 2012 Jun;11(4):452-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2012.00790.x. 
Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Confirmation of an epilepsy modifier locus on mouse chromosome 11 and candidate
gene analysis by RNA-Seq.

Hawkins NA(1), Kearney JA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder affecting approximately 1% of the worldwide
population. Mutations in voltage-gated sodium channels have been identified in
several monogenic epilepsy syndromes. Over 800 mutations have been identified in 
the voltage-gated sodium channel genes SCN1A and SCN2A in human epilepsies,
including genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) and Dravet
syndrome. In GEFS+ families, affected members with the same mutation often
display variability in clinical severity of the disease. This suggests that
additional genes modify the effect of the primary mutation, resulting in the
variable clinical presentation. The Scn2a(Q54) transgenic mouse model has an
epilepsy phenotype that varies depending on the genetic strain background.
Scn2a(Q54) mice congenic on the C57BL/6J strain exhibit delayed seizure onset and
improved survival compared to (C57BL/6J × SJL/J)F1.Q54 mice. Two modifier loci of
Scn2a(Q54) seizure susceptibility were mapped and designated Moe1 (modifier of
epilepsy) on chromosome (chr) 11 and Moe2 on chr 19. To confirm Moe1 and refine
its position, we generated interval-specific congenic lines carrying
C57BL/6J-derived chr 11 alleles on the SJL/J strain and refined the map position 
to 89-104 Mb. We then used RNA-Seq for candidate analysis in the modifier region.
C57BL/6J and SJL/J male and female brain RNAs were sequenced, revealing numerous 
significant transcriptome differences and coding single-nucleotide polymorphisms.
Additional consideration of gene function and expression suggested several strong
candidate modifier genes, including two voltage-gated calcium channel subunits,
Cacna1g and Cacnb1, and the proline and acidic amino acid-rich basic leucine
zipper transcription factor, Hlf.

© 2012 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

PMCID: PMC3370141
PMID: 22471526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2012 Jan;41(1):6-12.

[Nutritional components and sub-chronic toxicity of genetically modified rice
expressing human lactoferrin].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu Y(1), Piao J, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Food Safety, China CDC, Beijing 100050, China.
huyichun0319@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To compare the nutritional components of genetically modified rice
expressing human lactoferrin (hLf) with its parental rice, and to observe the
sub-chronic toxicity of hLf rice.
METHODS: The nutritional components of hLf rice and its parental rice were
determined by the National Standard Methods. Eighty weanling Wistar rats were
randomly divided into 4 groups based on their gender and body weight: group A
(hLf rice high-dose group with 71.45% rice), group B (hLf rice medium-dose group 
with 35. 725% rice), group C (parental rice group with 71.01% rice) and group D
(AIN-93G diet group), and the latter two groups were used as the control. Body
weight, dietary intake, blood routine test, blood biochemical examination, organ 
coefficient, bone density and the pathology of organs were investigated at the
end of a 90-day feeding experiment.
RESULTS: Except for human lactoferrin and Fe, there was no difference of main
nutritional components, minerals and vitamins between groups. The differences of 
some indicators of blood routine (WBC, HGB, RBC and MCH), blood biochemistry (AST
and GLU), organ coefficient and bone density between group A and B (hLf rice)
with group C (parental rice) or group D (AIN-93G) were significant, while no
difference of other indicators.
CONCLUSION: Although some differences were observed, all indicators were still in
the normal reference range. Therefore, there was no sign of toxic and adverse
effects for hLf rice on rats.

PMID: 22443050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biol Pharm Bull. 2012;35(3):400-7.

Caffeine increases the antitumor effect of Cisplatin in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells.

Kawano Y(1), Nagata M, Kohno T, Ichimiya A, Iwakiri T, Okumura M, Arimori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Miyazaki Hospital, Kiyotake-cho,
Miyazaki, Japan.

Caffeine is thought to increase the antitumor effect of cisplatin or DNA-damaging
agents because it is known that caffeine inhibits DNA repair. Caffeine-assisted
chemotherapy has been used in the treatment of osteosarcomas. In addition, there 
are several reports about combination chemotherapy with caffeine for certain
malignancies other than osteosarcomas. However, there are no reports that show
the utility of combination chemotherapy with caffeine for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). We examined the combined effects of caffeine and cisplatin in
human HCC cell lines, and screened for a more effective administration method of 
caffeine in vitro. Human HCC cell lines (HepG2, HLF, HuH-7, and Li-7) were
exposed to caffeine (0-0.5 mM) and cisplatin (0-1.2 µg/mL) for 72 h, either alone
or in combination. Cell numbers were measured by WST-8 assay, and cell apoptosis 
was determined by annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)/propidium iodide
(PI) binding assay. As a result, caffeine increased the antitumor effect of
cisplatin on cell proliferation and cell apoptosis in the HCC cell lines.
Moreover, this effect was dependent on the amount of exposure to caffeine. These 
results suggest that caffeine-assisted chemotherapy is useful for HCC treatment.

PMID: 22382328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Pain. 2012 Apr;153(4):742-3. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.01.034. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Pain and the primary somatosensory cortex.

Fields HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, CA, USA.
hlf@gallo.ucsf.edu

Comment on
    Pain. 2012 Apr;153(4):885-92.

PMID: 22365311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;90(3):513-9. doi: 10.1139/o11-088. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Production of human lactoferrin in animal milk.

Goldman IL(1), Georgieva SG, Gurskiy YG, Krasnov AN, Deykin AV, Popov AN,
Ermolkevich TG, Budzevich AI, Chernousov AD, Sadchikova ER.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119334, Vavilova str, 
34/5, Moscow, Russia.

Genetic constructs containing the human lactoferrin (hLf) gene were created
within a joint program of Russian and Belorussian scientists. Using these
constructs, transgenic mice were bred (the maximum hLf concentration in their
milk was 160 g/L), and transgenic goats were also generated (up to 10 g/L hLf in 
their milk). Experimental goatherds that produced hLf in their milk were also
bred, and the recombinant hLf was found to be identical to the natural protein in
its physical and chemical properties. These properties included electrophoretic
mobility, isoelectric point, recognition by polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies,
circular dichroic spectra, interaction with natural ligands (DNA,
lipopolysaccharides, and heparin), the binding of iron ions, the sequence of the 
7 terminal amino acids, and its biological activity. The latter was assessed by
the agglutination of Micrococcus luteus protoplasts, bactericidal activity
against Escherichia coli and Listeria monocytogenes , and fungicidal activity
against Candida albicans . We also demonstrated a significant increase in the
activity of antibiotics when used in combination with Lf.

PMID: 22360490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;90(3):307-19. doi: 10.1139/o11-070. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Delta-lactoferrin, an intracellular lactoferrin isoform that acts as a
transcription factor.

Mariller C(1), Hardivillé S, Hoedt E, Huvent I, Pina-Canseco S, Pierce A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et Fonctionnelle, UMR 8576 CNRS-Université 
des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, IFR 148, 59655 Villeneuve d'Ascq, France. 
christophe.mariller@univ-lille1.fr

Delta-lactoferrin (<U+0394>Lf) is a transcription factor of which the expression is
downregulated in cancer. It is a healthy tissue marker and a high expression
level of its transcripts was correlated with a good prognosis in breast cancer.
<U+0394>Lf results from alternative promoter usage of the hLf gene leading to the
production of 2 isoforms with alternative N-termini: lactoferrin, which is
secreted, and <U+0394>Lf, its nucleocytoplasmic counterpart. <U+0394>Lf possesses
antiproliferative properties and induces cell cycle arrest. It is an efficient
transcription factor interacting in vivo via a <U+0394>Lf response element found in the 
Skp1, Bax, DcpS, and SelH promoters. Since <U+0394>Lf possesses different target genes, 
modifications in its activity or concentration may have crucial effects on cell
homeostasis. Posttranslational modifications modulate <U+0394>Lf transcription factor
activity. Our earlier investigations showed that O-GlcNAcylation negatively
regulates <U+0394>Lf transcriptional activity, whilst inhibiting its ubiquitination and 
increasing its half-life. On the other hand, phosphorylation potentiates <U+0394>Lf
transcriptional activity. Recently, we showed that <U+0394>Lf is also modified by
SUMOylation. Therefore, cooperation and (or) competition among SUMOylation,
ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and O-GlcNAcylation may contribute to the
establishment of a fine regulation of <U+0394>Lf transcriptional activity depending on
the type of target gene and cellular homeostasis.

PMID: 22320386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. BMC Cancer. 2012 Feb 6;12:56. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-56.

Fibroblast growth factor 19 expression correlates with tumor progression and
poorer prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Miura S(1), Mitsuhashi N, Shimizu H, Kimura F, Yoshidome H, Otsuka M, Kato A,
Shida T, Okamura D, Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
1-8-1, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-0856, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) can promote liver
carcinogenesis in mice, its involvement in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
has not been well investigated. FGF19, a member of the FGF family, has unique
specificity for its receptor FGFR4. This study aimed to clarify the involvement
of FGF19 in the development of HCC.
METHODS: We investigated human FGF19 and FGFR4 expression in 40 hepatocellular
carcinoma specimens using quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis and immunohistochemistry. Moreover, we examined 
the expression and the distribution of FGF19 and FGFR4 in 5 hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines (HepG2, HuH7, HLE, HLF, and JHH7) using RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. To test the role of the FGF19/FGFR4 system in tumor
progression, we used recombinant FGF19 protein and small interfering RNA (siRNA) 
of FGF19 and FGFR4 to regulate their concentrations.
RESULTS: We found that FGF19 was significantly overexpressed in HCCs as compared 
with corresponding noncancerous liver tissue (P < 0.05). Univariate and
multivariate analyses revealed that the tumor FGF19 mRNA expression was an
independent prognostic factor for overall and disease-free survival. Moreover, we
found that the FGF19 recombinant protein could increase the proliferation (P <
0.01, n = 12) and invasion (P < 0.01, n = 6) capabilities of human hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines and inhibited their apoptosis (P < 0.01, n = 12). Inversely,
decreasing FGF19 and FGFR4 expression by siRNA significantly inhibited
proliferation and increased apoptosis in JHH7 cells (P < 0.01, n = 12). The
postoperative serum FGF19 levels in HCC patients was significantly lower than the
preoperative levels (P < 0.01, n = 29).
CONCLUSIONS: FGF19 is critically involved in the development of HCCs. Targeting
FGF19 inhibition is an attractive potential therapeutic strategy for HCC.

PMCID: PMC3293719
PMID: 22309595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;53(2):118-28. doi: 10.1007/s12033-012-9495-x.

Influence of human lactoferrin expression on iron homeostasis, flavonoids, and
antioxidants in transgenic tobacco.

Kumar V(1), Gill T, Grover S, Ahuja PS, Yadav SK.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Metabolic Engineering, Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Institute of
Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 
Palampur 176061, Himachal Pradesh, India.

This study was aimed at to check the influence of human lactoferrin (hLF)
expression on iron homeostasis, flavonoids, and antioxidants in transgenic
tobacco. Transgenic tobacco expressing hLF cDNA under the control of a CaMV 35S
promoter was produced. The iron content as well as chlorophyll content of
transgenic tobacco was lower compared to mock and untransformed wild plants.
Interestingly, hLF transgenic tobacco showed higher level of transcript
expression for genes related to iron content regulation like iron transporter and
metal transporter. While expression of genes related to iron storage such as
ferritin 1 and ferritin 2 was downregulated. The transcript expression of genes
encoding antioxidant enzymes such as glutathione reductase,
glutathione-S-transferase, ascorbate peroxidase, and catalase was downregulated
in hLF transgenic tobacco compared to controls. Further, the transcript
expression of two important genes encoding dihydroflavonol reductase (DFR) and
phenylalanine ammonia lyase regulatory enzymes of flavonoid biosynthesis pathway 
was analyzed. The expression of DFR was found to be downregulated, while PAL
expression was upregulated in hLF transgenic tobacco compared to mock and
untransformed wild plant. Total phenolics, flavonoids, and proanthocyanidins
contents were found to be higher in hLF transgenic tobacco than the mock and
untransformed wild plant. Results suggest that hLF expression in transgenic
tobacco leads to iron deficiency, downregulation of antioxidant enzymes, and
increase in total flavonoids.

PMID: 22274938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Apr 15;302(8):G762-72. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00476.2011. Epub 2012 Jan 19.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonism improves metabolic, biochemical, and
histopathological indices of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in mice.

Trevaskis JL(1), Griffin PS, Wittmer C, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Brunt EM, Dolman
CS, Erickson MR, Napora J, Parkes DG, Roth JD.

Author information: 
(1)Amylin Pharmaceuticals, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Apr 15;302(8):G759-61.

These preclinical studies aimed to 1) increase our understanding the dietary
induction of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), and, 2) further explore the
utility and mechanisms of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonism in
NASH. We compared the effects of a high trans-fat (HTF) or high lard fat (HLF)
diet on key facets of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)/NASH in
Lep(ob)/Lep(ob) and C57BL6J (B6) mice. Although HLF-fed mice experienced overall 
greater gains in weight and adiposity, the addition of trans-fat better mirrored 
pathophysiological features of NASH (e.g., hepatomegaly, hepatic lipid, and
fibrosis). Administration of AC3174, an exenatide analog, and GLP-1R agonist to
Lep(ob)/Lep(ob) and B6 ameliorated hepatic endpoints in both dietary models.
Next, we assessed whether AC3174-mediated improvements in diet-induced NASH were 
solely due to weight loss in HTF-fed mice. AC3174-treatment significantly reduced
body weight (8.3%), liver mass (14.2%), liver lipid (12.9%), plasma alanine
aminotransferase, and triglycerides, whereas a calorie-restricted, weight-matched
group demonstrated only modest nonsignificant reductions in liver mass (9%) and
liver lipid (5.1%) relative to controls. Treatment of GLP-1R-deficient (GLP-1RKO)
mice with AC3174 had no effect on body weight, adiposity, liver or plasma indices
pointing to the GLP-1R-dependence of AC3174's effects. Interestingly, the role of
endogenous GLP-1Rs in NASH merits further exploration as the GLP-1RKO model was
protected from the deleterious hepatic effects of HTF. Our pharmacological data
further support the clinical evaluation of the utility of GLP-1R agonists for
treatment of NASH.

PMID: 22268099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Pathobiology. 2012;79(3):115-26. doi: 10.1159/000334100. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Hepatocellular and cholangiolar carcinoma-derived cell lines reveal distinct sets
of chromosomal imbalances.

Wilkens L(1), Hammer C, Glombitza S, Müller DE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
ludwig.wilkens@pathology.unibe.ch

OBJECTIVES: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiolar carcinoma (CC) cell
lines are used to analyze the basic mechanisms of carcinogenesis and target
therapies. However, it is not yet clear which chromosomal aberrations are to be
typically expected in such cell lines. It is also not clear whether there are
prerequisites for in vitro growth on the genomic and/or expression level. We
therefore analyzed HCC and CC cell lines for typical genetic settings.
METHODS: The HCC cell lines HLE, HLF, Huh7, HepG2 and Hep3b and the CC cell lines
EGI1, MzCha1 and TFK-1 were analyzed using high-density arrays for comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH; 244,000 oligonucleotides). Additional fluorescence
in situ hybridization analyses were done to confirm the aCGH results and to add
information regarding the aneuploidy of cell lines.
RESULTS: The gain of 1q, in particular q21-22, was detected in all HCC cell lines
also as a partial loss of 13q. In contrast, a loss of 8p in combination with a
relative gain of 8q was seen in all CC but no HCC cell lines. Interestingly, a
gain of 17q was seen in all cell lines. These aberrations are also well
documented for surgical tumor specimens. Besides these imbalances, the cell lines
revealed imbalances for 11p, 12p, 14q, 16p, 16q, 21q and 22q, respectively, only 
rarely seen in surgical tumor specimens. These aberrations could be of importance
for the in vitro cultivation of tumor cells. Structural aberrations were
accompanied by aneuploidy in 3 of 5 HCC cell lines and 2 of 3 CC cell lines.
Ploidy status was not correlated to any of the imbalances mentioned above.
CONCLUSIONS: HCC and CC cell lines revealed characteristic chromosomal imbalances
similar to those seen in surgical tumor specimens including chromosomes 1, 8, 13 
and 17, respectively. These aberrations are characteristic of the histogenetic
origin of the tumor cells. However, the chromosomal imbalances that occurred
probably led to the ability of tumor cells to grow in vitro.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22261732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int J Oncol. 2012 Apr;40(4):1005-10. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1300. Epub 2011 Dec
15.

Establishment and characterization of two 5-fluorouracil-resistant hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines.

Uchibori K(1), Kasamatsu A, Sunaga M, Yokota S, Sakurada T, Kobayashi E,
Yoshikawa M, Uzawa K, Ueda S, Tanzawa H, Sato N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Education and Research, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) chemotherapy is the first choice treatment for advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and resistance is the major obstacle to
successful treatment. Recent studies have reported that epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is associated with chemoresistance in cancers. We speculated
that EMT and 5-FU metabolism are related to the mechanism of 5-FU resistance.
First, two 5-FU-resistant cell lines, HLF-R4 and HLF-R10, were established from
the HLF undifferentiated human HCC cell line. Whereas cell growth was similar in 
the HLF and HLF-R cell lines, HLF-Rs are about 4- and 10-fold more resistant
compared with the HLF cells; thus, we named these cell lines HLF-R4 and HLF-R10, 
respectively. The terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick
end labeling assay also showed a dramatically decreased number of apoptotic cells
in the HLF-Rs after treatment with 5-FU. We next assessed the characteristics of 
the HLF, HLF-R4 and HLF-R10 cells. Consistent with our hypothesis, the HLF-Rs had
typical morphologic phenotypes of EMT, loss of cell-cell adhesion, spindle-shaped
morphology and increased formation of pseudopodia. Real-time quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction data showed downregulated E-cadherin and 
upregulated Twist-1 and also indicated that EMT changes occurred in the HLF-Rs.
We also found decreased ribonucleotide reductase and increased multidrug
resistance protein 5 genes in the HLF-R cells. Our results suggested that the
metabolism of EMT and 5-FU has important roles in 5-FU chemoresistance in the
HLF-R cells, and that the HLF-R cells would be useful in vitro models for
understanding the 5-FU-resistant mechanisms in HCC.

PMCID: PMC3584526
PMID: 22179686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Sensors (Basel). 2011;11(8):7382-94. doi: 10.3390/s110807382. Epub 2011 Jul 25.

Estimating the biodegradability of treated sewage samples using synchronous
fluorescence spectra.

Lai TM(1), Shin JK, Hur J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environment and Energy, Sejong University, 98 Gunja-dong,
Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-747, Korea. minhtien1383@yahoo.com

Synchronous fluorescence spectra (SFS) and the first derivative spectra of the
influent versus the effluent wastewater samples were compared and the use of
fluorescence indices is suggested as a means to estimate the biodegradability of 
the effluent wastewater. Three distinct peaks were identified from the SFS of the
effluent wastewater samples. Protein-like fluorescence (PLF) was reduced, whereas
fulvic and/or humic-like fluorescence (HLF) were enhanced, suggesting that the
two fluorescence characteristics may represent biodegradable and refractory
components, respectively. Five fluorescence indices were selected for the
biodegradability estimation based on the spectral features changing from the
influent to the effluent. Among the selected indices, the relative distribution
of PLF to the total fluorescence area of SFS (Index II) exhibited the highest
correlation coefficient with total organic carbon (TOC)-based biodegradability,
which was even higher than those obtained with the traditional oxygen
demand-based parameters. A multiple regression analysis using Index II and the
area ratio of PLF to HLF (Index III) demonstrated the enhancement of the
correlations from 0.558 to 0.711 for TOC-based biodegradability. The multiple
regression equation finally obtained was 0.148 × Index II - 4.964 × Index III -
0.001 and 0.046 × Index II - 1.128 × Index III + 0.026. The fluorescence indices 
proposed here are expected to be utilized for successful development of real-time
monitoring using a simple fluorescence sensing device for the biodegradability of
treated sewage.

PMCID: PMC3231730
PMID: 22164023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cancer Sci. 2012 Mar;103(3):542-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02182.x. Epub
2012 Jan 25.

Interaction of endothelial progenitor cells expressing cytosine deaminase in
tumor tissues and 5-fluorocytosine administration suppresses growth of
5-fluorouracil-sensitive liver cancer in mice.

Torimura T(1), Ueno T, Taniguchi E, Masuda H, Iwamoto H, Nakamura T, Inoue K,
Hashimoto O, Abe M, Koga H, Barresi V, Nakashima E, Yano H, Sata M.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Division, Research Center for Innovative Cancer Therapy and
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Kurume University School of
Medicine, Kurume, Japan. tori@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

The drug delivery system to tumors is a critical factor in upregulating the
effect of anticancer drugs and reducing adverse events. Recent studies indicated 
selective migration of bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells (EPC)
into tumor tissues. Cytosine deaminase (CD) transforms nontoxic 5-fluorocytosine 
(5-FC) into the highly toxic 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). We investigated the antitumor
effect of a new CD/5-FC system with CD cDNA transfected EPC for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) in mice. We used human hepatoma cell lines (HuH-7, HLF, HAK1-B,
KYN-2, KIM-1) and a rat EPC cell line (TR-BME-2). Escherichia coli CD cDNA was
transfected into TR-BME-2 (CD-TR-BME). The inhibitory effect of 5-FU on the
proliferation of hepatoma cell lines and the inhibitory effect of 5-FU secreted
by CD-TR-BME and 5-FC on the proliferation of co-cultured hepatoma cells were
evaluated by a tetrazolium-based assay. In mouse subcutaneous xenograft models of
KYN-2 and HuH-7, CD-TR-BME was transplanted intravenously followed by 5-FC
injection intraperitoneally. HuH-7 cells were the most sensitive to 5-FU and
KYN-2 cells were the most resistant. CD-TR-BME secreted 5-FU and inhibited HuH-7 
proliferation in a 5-FC dose-dependent manner. CD-TR-BME were recruited into the 
tumor tissues and some were incorporated into tumor vessels. Tumor growth of
HuH-7 was significantly suppressed during 5-FC administration. No bodyweight
loss, ALT abnormality or bone marrow suppression was observed. These findings
suggest that our new CD/5-FC system with CD cDNA transfected EPC could be an
effective and safe treatment for suppression of 5-FU-sensitive HCC growth.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22151662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biomaterials. 2012 Feb;33(6):1714-21. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.11.030.
Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Controllable synthesis of monodispersed silver nanoparticles as standards for
quantitative assessment of their cytotoxicity.

Li L(1), Sun J, Li X, Zhang Y, Wang Z, Wang C, Dai J, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nanobiomedicine and i-Lab, Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and
Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Suzhou 215123, China.

Silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) are appealing due to their excellent
antibacterial/antivirus properties. At the meantime, the wide applications of Ag 
NPs as antibacterial/antivirus agents arise the concern of Ag NPs' toxicity.
However, quantitative understanding of the cytotoxicity of Ag NPs is minimum
since that the Ag NPs in current studies have wide size distributions, in which
the size effect of Ag NPs on cytotoxicity was unable to be accurately evaluated. 
In this work, unprecedentedly monodispersed Ag NPs with sizes of 25, 35, 45, 60
and 70 nm were obtained, respectively, by using an optimized polyol method with
poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) as surfactant. It was found that the reaction
temperature, reaction time, concentration of the surfactant and reactants are
playing important roles in determining the size and size distribution of Ag NPs. 
With the monodispersed Ag NPs as standard samples, the size- and dose- dependent 
cytotoxicity of Ag NPs against Human lung fibroblast (HLF) cells was accurately
accomplished in terms of cell viability, apoptosis and necrosis, reactive oxygen 
species, etc. We expect that the monodispersed Ag NPs will act as the standard
samples for quantitatively characterizing the toxicity of Ag NPs in vitro and in 
vivo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22137123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Cancer. 2012 Aug 1;131(3):548-57. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26374. Epub 2011 Sep 12.

Inhibition of autophagy potentiates the antitumor effect of the multikinase
inhibitor sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Shimizu S(1), Takehara T, Hikita H, Kodama T, Tsunematsu H, Miyagi T, Hosui A,
Ishida H, Tatsumi T, Kanto T, Hiramatsu N, Fujita N, Yoshimori T, Hayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Multikinase inhibitor sorafenib inhibits proliferation and angiogenesis of tumors
by suppressing the Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathway and VEGF receptor tyrosine
kinase. It significantly prolongs median survival of patients with advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) but the response is disease-stabilizing and
cytostatic rather than one of tumor regression. To examine the mechanisms
underlying the relative resistance in HCC, we investigated the role of autophagy,
an evolutionarily conserved self-digestion pathway, in hepatoma cells in vitro
and in vivo. Sorafenib treatment led to accumulation of autophagosomes as
evidenced by conversion from LC3-I to LC3-II observed by immunoblot in Huh7, HLF 
and PLC/PRF/5 cells. This induction was due to activation of autophagic flux, as 
there was further increase in LC3-II expression upon treatment with lysosomal
inhibitors, clear decline of the autophagy substrate p62, and an mRFP-GFP-LC3
fluorescence change in sorafenib-treated hepatoma cells. Sorafenib inhibited the 
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 and its inhibition led to accumulation of
LC3-II. Pharmacological inhibition of autophagic flux by chloroquine increased
apoptosis and decreased cell viability in hepatoma cells. siRNA-mediated
knockdown of the ATG7 gene also sensitized hepatoma cells to sorafenib. Finally, 
sorafenib induced autophagy in Huh7 xenograft tumors in nude mice and
coadministration with chloroquine significantly suppressed tumor growth compared 
with sorafenib alone. In conclusion, sorafenib administration induced
autophagosome formation and enhanced autophagic activity, which conferred a
survival advantage to hepatoma cells. Concomitant inhibition of autophagy may be 
an attractive strategy for unlocking the antitumor potential of sorafenib in HCC.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21858812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2011 Aug;26(4):477-83. doi: 10.1089/cbr.2010.0937.

Growth suppression effects of recombinant adenovirus expressing human lactoferrin
on cervical cancer in vitro and in vivo.

Li WY(1), Li QW, Han ZS, Jiang ZL, Yang H, Li J, Zhang XB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, No. 22
Xinong Road, Yangling, PR China.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is a multifunctional glycoprotein that can inhibit cancer
growth. The molecular mechanism of hLF-induced tumor growth inhibition is
incompletely understood. Moreover, the adenovirus vector-mediated hLF (Ad-hLF)
gene therapy on cervical cancer has not been yet characterized. In this study,
the replication-deficient Ad-hLF was used to explore tumor growth suppression
effects on cervical cancer in vitro and in vivo. The results showed that the
recombinant adenovirus encoding hLF delivery resulted in a more differential
tumor growth inhibition, and this growth arrest was caused by cell cycle
inhibition at G2/M phase. In addition, Fas, a death-inducing receptor, and Bax, a
member of pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family, were increased in the sample of cervical
cancer tissue treated by Ad-hLF. Further, it was also observed that caspase-3 was
activated and the expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 was decreased. These results
indicated that the growth inhibitory effects of Ad-hLF on cervical cancer were
caused by elevated expression of Fas and decreased the ratio of anti- to
pro-apoptotic molecule Bcl-2/Bax.

PMID: 21834714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011 Dec;53(6):606-14. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0b013e318230a419.

Bovine lactoferrin can be taken up by the human intestinal lactoferrin receptor
and exert bioactivities.

Lönnerdal B(1), Jiang R, Du X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
bllonnerdal@ucdavis.edu

Comment in
    J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011 Dec;53(6):589.

OBJECTIVE: Human lactoferrin (hLF), a major protein in human milk, has been shown
to exert multiple biological activities. To achieve some of the benefits of
breast-fed infants, we investigated the feasibility of adding commercially
available bovine LF (CbLF) to infant formula.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: An intestinal enterocyte model (Caco-2 cells) was used to
compare the ability of bovine LF (bLF) purified by our laboratory and CbLF with
hLF to resist digestion, bind to the receptor, and exert bioactivities, including
cellular proliferation, differentiation, interleukin 18 secretion, and
transforming growth factor-ß1 expression.
RESULTS: bLf and CbLF, which are partially iron (Fe)-saturated, can bind
additional Fe, partially resist digestion either dissolved in phosphate buffered 
saline or in the presence of infant formula at conditions similar to those of the
infant gastrointestinal tract, and bind to Caco-2 cells in a manner similar to
hLF. bLF and CbLF, as well as bound Fe, also are internalized by Caco-2 cells, as
demonstrated by I and Fe labeling, albeit to somewhat less of an extent than hLF.
CbLF promoted cell proliferation and differentiation to an extent similar to that
of bLF and hLF, but these effects were not seen when the LF samples were
saturated with Fe (holo-LF). Native forms of hLF and bLF significantly increased 
expression of transforming growth factor-ß1, and holo-forms of LFs stimulated
interleukin 18 secretion significantly, with the highest results for CbLF.
CONCLUSIONS: CbLF is biologically active and is likely to exert several of the
bioactivities of hLF if added to infant formula.

PMID: 21832946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Peptides. 2011 Sep;32(9):1953-63. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2011.07.017. Epub 2011 
Jul 30.

Discovery and development of a synthetic peptide derived from lactoferrin for
clinical use.

Brouwer CP(1), Rahman M, Welling MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Section of Nuclear Medicine, Leiden University
Medical Center, Room C4-R-77, Leiden, The Netherlands.

There is an urgent need to develop new antimicrobial drugs especially for
combating the rise of infections caused by multi-resistant pathogens such as MRSA
and VRSA. The problem of antibiotic resistant micro-organisms is expected to
increase disproportionally and controlling of infections is becoming difficult
because of the rapid spread of those micro-organisms. Primary therapy with
classical antibiotics is becoming more ineffective. Combinational therapy of
antibiotics with antimicrobial peptides (AMP's) has been suggested as an
alternative approach to improve treatment outcome. Their unique mechanism of
action and safety profile makes AMP's appealing candidates for simultaneous or
sequential use in different cases of infections. In this review, for
antimicrobial treatment the application of synthetic antimicrobial peptide
hLF(1-11), derived from the first 11 amino acids of human lactoferrin is
evaluated in both pre-clinical and clinical settings. Present information
indicates that this derivate from lactoferrin is well tolerated in pre-clinical
tests and clinical trials and thus hLF(1-11) is an interesting candidate for
further exploration in various clinical indications of obscure infections,
including meningitis. Another approach of using AMP's is their use in prevention 
of infections e.g. as coating for dental or bone implants or in biosensing
applications or useful as infection specific radiopharmaceutical.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21827807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Transgenic Res. 2012 Apr;21(2):407-14. doi: 10.1007/s11248-011-9536-4. Epub 2011 
Jul 30.

High-level expression of bioactive recombinant human lysozyme in the milk of
transgenic mice using a modified human lactoferrin BAC.

Liu S(1), Li X, Lu D, Shang S, Wang M, Zheng M, Zhang R, Tang B, Li Q, Dai Y, Li 
N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, 100193, China.

Transgenesis has been used for expressing human lysozyme (hLZ) in the milk of
livestock to improve their disease resistance. Here we describe a human
lactoferrin (hLF) BAC as a candidate vector for high-level expression of hLZ in
the milk of transgenic mice. Using recombineering, hLF genomic DNA in the hLF BAC
was replaced by the hLZ gene (from the ATG start codon to the TAA stop codon),
and flanking regions of the hLF gene (a 90-kb 5' and a 30-kb 3') were used as
transcriptional control elements for hLZ expression. When this construct was used
to generate transgenic mice, rhLZ was highly expressed in the milk of four
transgenic mouse lines (1.20-1.76 g/L), was expressed at a lower level in one
additional line (0.21 g/L). rhLZ from the milk of these transgenic mice exhibited
the same antibacterial activity as native hLZ. Our results suggest a potential
approach for producing large amounts of hLZ in the milk of livestock.

PMID: 21805108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Obes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Jul-Sep;5(3):e169-266. doi: 10.1016/j.orcp.2011.03.003.

A 12-week aerobic exercise program without energy restriction improves
intrahepatic fat, liver function and atherosclerosis-related factors.

Yoshimura E(1), Kumahara H(2), Tobina T(3), Ayabe M(3), Matono S(4), Anzai K(5), 
Higaki Y(3), Kiyonaga A(3), Tanaka H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Faculty of
Nutrition Sciences, Nakamura Gakuen University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Faculty of
Sports and Health Science, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Fukuoka Safety 
Center Co., Ltd., Fukuoka, Japan. (5)Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Saga, 
Japan. (6)Fukuoka University Institute for Physical Activity, Fukuoka, Japan.
Electronic address:htanaka@fukuoka-u.ac.jp.

SUMMARY:
OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of a 12-week continuous aerobic exercise program 
without energy restriction on intrahepatic fat, indices of liver function
(aspartate aminotransferase [AST], alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and <U+03B3>-glutamyl 
transpeptidase [<U+03B3>GTP]), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) and insulin
resistance (HOMA-IR).
METHODS: Subjects were divided into two groups based on the degree of
intrahepatic fat accumulation at baseline (high liver fat [HLF]: n = 13; low
liver fat [LLF]: n = 14). Participants were instructed to exercise for more than 
300 min per week at the lactate threshold. Fat accumulation (intramuscular,
intrahepatic, visceral and subcutaneous fat) was evaluated by computed
tomography. Blood samples were taken to determine the levels of AST, ALT, PAI-1, 
glucose and insulin.
RESULTS: Weight, body mass index, body fat, visceral fat and subcutaneous fat
decreased significantly in both groups between baseline and post-intervention (P 
< 0.05), but were not significantly different between the two groups (P > 0.05). 
Intrahepatic fat, AST, ALT and PAI-1 improved significantly between baseline and 
post-intervention in the HLF group (P < 0.05; AST, P = 0.052), and improvements
were significantly greater than those in the LLF group (P < 0.05). <U+03B3>GTP decreased
significantly in the HLF group between baseline and post-intervention (P < 0.05),
but was not significantly different between the two groups (P > 0.05). HOMA-IR
did not significantly improve between baseline and post-intervention either
within or between the two groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: This study revealed that a 12-week continuous aerobic exercise
program without energy restriction might improve intrahepatic fat, liver function
and atherosclerosis-related factors.

Â© 2011 Asian Oceanian Association for the Study of Obesity . Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24331107  [PubMed]


184. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jun;1807(6):707-18.

AICAR inhibits cancer cell growth and triggers cell-type distinct effects on
OXPHOS biogenesis, oxidative stress and Akt activation.

Jose C(1), Hébert-Chatelain E, Bellance N, Larendra A, Su M, Nouette-Gaulain K,
Rossignol R.

Author information: 
(1)(MRGM) Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme, Université Victor Segalen,
F-33076 Bordeaux, France.

The AMP-activated protein kinase agonist AICAR mimics a low intracellular energy 
state and inhibits the proliferation of cancer cells by different mechanisms,
which may depend on the bioenergetic signature of these cells. AICAR can also
stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis in myoblasts, neurons and HeLa cells. Yet,
whether the reactivation of oxidative phosphorylation biogenesis by AICAR
contributes to the growth arrest of cancer cells remains undetermined. To
investigate this possibility, we looked at the impact of 24- and 48-hour
treatments with 750 µM AICAR on human cancer cell lines (HeLa, DU145, and HEPG2),
non-cancer cells (EM64, FM14, and HLF), embryonic cells (MRC5) and Rho(0) cells. 
We determined the bioenergetic profile of these cells and assessed the effect of 
AICAR on oxidative phosphorylation biogeneis, cell viability and cell
proliferation, ROS generation, mitochondrial membrane potential and apoptosis
induction. We also followed possible changes in metabolic regulators such as Akt 
and Hif1-a stabilization which might participate to the anti-proliferative effect
of AICAR. Our results demonstrated a strong and cancer-specific anti-growth
effect of AICAR that may be explained by three different modes according to cell 
type: the first mode included stimulation of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway 
however with compensatory activation of Akt and upregulation of oxidative
phosphorylation. In the second mode of action of AICAR Akt phosphorylation was
reduced. In the third mode of action, apoptosis was activated by different
pathways. The sensitivity to AICAR was higher in cells with a low steady-state
ATP content and a high proliferation rate.

PMID: 21692240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Biotechnol. 2012 Feb;50(2):137-44. doi: 10.1007/s12033-011-9428-0.

The high-level expression of human tissue plasminogen activator in the milk of
transgenic mice with hybrid gene locus strategy.

Zhou Y(1), Lin Y, Wu X, Xiong F, Lv Y, Zheng T, Huang P, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Engineering Department, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing
100071, China.

Transgene expression for the mammary gland bioreactor aimed at producing
recombinant proteins requires optimized expression vector construction.
Previously we presented a hybrid gene locus strategy, which was originally tested
with human lactoferrin (hLF) as target transgene, and an extremely high-level
expression of rhLF ever been achieved as to 29.8 g/l in mice milk. Here to
demonstrate the broad application of this strategy, another 38.4 kb mWAP-htPA
hybrid gene locus was constructed, in which the 3-kb genomic coding sequence in
the 24-kb mouse whey acidic protein (mWAP) gene locus was substituted by the
17.4-kb genomic coding sequence of human tissue plasminogen activator (htPA),
exactly from the start codon to the end codon. Corresponding five transgenic mice
lines were generated and the highest expression level of rhtPA in the milk
attained as to 3.3 g/l. Our strategy will provide a universal way for the
large-scale production of pharmaceutical proteins in the mammary gland of
transgenic animals.

PMID: 21688038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Open Virol J. 2011;5:27-34. doi: 10.2174/1874357901105010027. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

Modulation of HIV Binding to Epithelial Cells and HIV Transfer from Immature
Dendritic Cells to CD4 T Lymphocytes by Human Lactoferrin and its Major Exposed
LF-33 Peptide.

Carthagena L(1), Becquart P, Hocini H, Kazatchkine MD, Bouhlal H, Belec L.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U743/Team « Immunité et Biothérapie Muqueuse », Paris, France.

Lactoferrin (LF), a multifunctional molecule present in human secretions, has
potent inhibitory activities against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The aim 
of the study was to evaluate whether human LF (hLF) and its exposed domain LF-33 
represented by the peptide (LF-33-GRRRRSVQWCAVSQPEATKCFQWQRNMRKVRGP) involved in 
LF-HIV gag binding and endotoxines neutralization, may inhibit early steps of HIV
mucosal transmission. Human LF and the peptide LF-33 inhibited the attachment of 
primary X4-tropic HIV-1(NDK) and R5-tropic HIV-1(JR-CSF) strains to human
endometrial (HEC-1) and colorectal (HT-29) CD4-negative epithelial cells, the
purified hLF being more potent (up to 80%) than the LF-33 peptide. In addition,
the hLF, but not the LF-33 peptide, inhibited up to 40% the transfer in trans of 
HIV-1(JR-CSF) and HIV-1(NDK,) from immature dendritic cells to CD4 T lymphocytes,
likely in a DC-SIGN-dependent manner. Altogether, these findings demonstrate that
hLF can interfere with HIV-1 mucosal transmission by blocking virus attachment to
epithelial cells and by inhibiting virus transfer from dendritic cells to CD4 T
cells, two crucial steps of HIV dissemination from mucosae to lymphoid tissue.

PMCID: PMC3109640
PMID: 21660187  [PubMed]


187. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2011 Feb;27(2):253-61.

[Construction and identification of mammary expressional vector for cDNA of human
lactoferrin].

[Article in Chinese]

Meng L(1), Zhang Y, Xu X, Wang Z, Yan Y, Pang X, Zhong B, Huang R, Song Y, Wang
J, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Animal Embryo Engineering and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, China.

The aim of this study was to construct a mammary gland-specific expressional
vector pBC1-hLF-Neo for Human Lactoferrin (hLF) gene and then investigate its
expression in the mammary gland epithelium cells. The constructed vector
contained the 6.2 kb long 5' flank regulation region including promoter, other
elements and the 7.1 kb long 3' flank regulation region including transcriptional
ending signal of a goat's beta-casein gene. A cassette of Neo gene was also
inserted into the vector which gave a total length of 26.736 kb identified by
restriction fragment analysis and partial DNA sequencing. The results revealed
that the structure of the final constructed vector accords with the designed
plasmid map. In order to analyze the bioactivity of the vector, we transfected
the lined vector DNA into the dairy goat's mammary gland epithelium cells and
C127 cells of a mouse's mammary epithelium by Lipofectamine. After selection with
G418 for 8-10 days, G418-risistant clones were obtained. PCR analysis
demonstrated that hLF gene cassette had been integrated into the genomic DNA of
G418-risistant clones. After proliferation culture, the two kinds of transgenic
cells were cultured in serum-free DMEM-F12 medium with prolactin, insulin and
hydrocortisone- a medium capable of inducing recombinant hLF expression. RT-PCR, 
Western blotting and anti-bacteria bioactivity experiments demonstrated that the 
constructed mammary gland specific vector pBC1-hLF-Neo possessed the desirable
bioactivity to efficiently express and could secrete hLF in both mammary gland
cells and have the effect of E. coli proliferation inhibition. Paramount to
everything, this study laid a firm foundation for preparing the hLF gene
transgenic goat fetal-derived fibroblast cells.

PMID: 21650051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 15;71(14):4769-79. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3228. Epub 
2011 May 24.

Podoplanin-positive fibroblasts enhance lung adenocarcinoma tumor formation:
podoplanin in fibroblast functions for tumor progression.

Hoshino A(1), Ishii G, Ito T, Aoyagi K, Ohtaki Y, Nagai K, Sasaki H, Ochiai A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate
School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

During the metastatic process, cancer cells interact with vascular adventitial
fibroblasts (VAF), which are the main components of the outermost connective
tissue layer of blood vessels. This activity suggests the presence of a specific 
tumor microenvironment in the perivascular area. The s.c. coinjection of human
lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (A549, PC-14, and CRL-5807) and human VAF (hVAF)
resulted in a high rate of tumor formation, compared with the coinjection of
these cell lines and human lung tissue-derived fibroblasts (hLF). A cDNA
microarray analysis revealed a higher expression level of podoplanin in hVAFs
than in hLFs (4.7-fold). Flow cytometry analysis also showed a higher expression 
level of podoplanin in hVAFs (43% ± 17.5%) than in hLFs (16% ± 10.3%). Sorted
podoplanin-positive hVAFs displayed enhanced tumor formation, lymph node
metastasis, and lung metastasis of A549 compared to sorted podoplanin-negative
hVAFs. Knockdown of podoplanin in hVAFs decreased the augmenting effect of tumor 
formation and in vitro colony formation. The overexpression of podoplanin in
hVAFs hastened the tumor formation of A549, compared with control hVAFs.
Furthermore, the analysis of small-sized human lung adenocarcinoma (n = 112)
revealed that patients with podoplanin-positive cancer-associated fibroblasts had
a significantly higher rate of lymph node metastasis and a high risk of
recurrence. These results indicate a promotive effect of hVAFs mediated by
podoplanin on cancer progression and suggest that the perivascular environment
may constitute a specific niche for tumor progression.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21610106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Drug Metab Dispos. 2011 Aug;39(8):1388-95. doi: 10.1124/dmd.110.037077. Epub 2011
May 3.

Development of a highly sensitive cytotoxicity assay system for CYP3A4-mediated
metabolic activation.

Hosomi H(1), Fukami T, Iwamura A, Nakajima M, Yokoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.

Drug-induced hepatotoxicity, which is a rare but serious adverse reaction to a
large number of pharmaceutical drugs, is sometimes associated with reactive
metabolites produced by drug-metabolizing enzymes. In the present study, we
constructed a cell-based system to evaluate the cytotoxicity of reactive
metabolites produced by CYP3A4 using human hepatoma cells infected with an
adenovirus vector expressing human CYP3A4 (AdCYP3A4). When seven hepatoma cell
lines (HepG2, Hep3B, HLE, HLF, Huh6, Huh7, and Fa2N4 cells) were infected with
AdCYP3A4, HepG2 cells showed the highest CYP3A4 protein expression and
testosterone 6ß-hydroxylase activity (670 pmol · min(-1) · mg(-1)). With the use 
of AdCYP3A4-infected HepG2 cells, the cytotoxicities of 23 drugs were evaluated
by the
2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazoliu
m monosodium salt assay, and the cell viability when treated with 11 drugs
(amiodarone, desipramine, felbamate, isoniazid, labetalol, leflunomide,
nefazodone, nitrofurantoin, tacrine, terbinafine, and tolcapone) was
significantly decreased. Moreover, the transfection of siRNA for nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) to decrease the cellular expression level of 
Nrf2 exacerbated the cytotoxicity of some drugs (troglitazone, flutamide,
acetaminophen, clozapine, terbinafine, and desipramine), suggesting that the
genes regulated by Nrf2 are associated with the detoxification of the
cytotoxicities mediated by CYP3A4. We constructed a highly sensitive cell-based
system to detect the drug-induced cytotoxicity mediated by CYP3A4. This system
would be beneficial in preclinical screening in drug development and increase our
understanding of the drug-induced cytotoxicity associated with CYP3A4.

PMID: 21540358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Exp Ther Med. 2011 May;2(3):399-403. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Use of protein array technology to investigate receptor tyrosine kinases
activated in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Liu S(1), Gong J, Morishita A, Nomura T, Miyoshi H, Tani J, Kato K, Yoneyama H,
Deguchi A, Mori H, Mimura S, Nomura K, Himoto T, Deguchi K, Okano K, Izuishi K,
Suzuki Y, Kushida Y, Haba R, Iwama H, Masaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gastroenterology and Neurology.

Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) play a role in various processes, including cell
growth, differentiation, apoptosis and carcinogenesis. RTKs are activated in
various types of cancers, including breast, stomach, colon, pancreas and liver
cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In the present study, protein array
technology was used to analyze the expression status of various RTKs activated in
HCC. The expression of activated RTKs was examined in the HCC cell lines, Alex,
HuH7, Li-7, Hep3B, HLE and HLF; in the human normal hepatocyte cell line, hNHeps;
and in human HCC and adjacent non-cancerous tissues. Of the 42 different
phospho-RTKs, 15 (ErbB2, ErbB3, ErbB4, FGFR2a, FGFR3, insulin R, Mer, PDGFRß,
c-Ret, ROR2, Tie, TrkA, VEGFR3, EphA1 and EphA4) were activated in some of the
cancer cell lines studied. Among these, only ErbB2 was activated in all the HCC
cell lines examined. Also, in vitro experiments were performed in subcutaneous
HCC-bearing athymic nude mice to determine the therapeutic effects of inhibiting 
ErbB2 activation using the ErbB2-targeting drug trastuzumab. The results revealed
that trastuzumab markedly suppressed the growth of HCC. These data suggest that
ErbB2 is activated in HCC and that trastuzumab may play a role in the treatment
of this disease. In addition, the use of protein array technology is proposed as 
a tool for detecting the expression of activated RTKs and identifying an
effective RTK-based therapy.

PMCID: PMC3440766
PMID: 22977516  [PubMed]


191. Anal Chem. 2011 May 1;83(9):3343-51. doi: 10.1021/ac103002g. Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Effect of carrier fluid viscosity on retention time and resolution in
gravitational field-flow fractionation.

Lee S(1), Kang da Y, Park M, Williams PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Hannam University, Daejeon, South Korea.

Gravitational field-flow fractionation (GrFFF) is a useful technique for fast
separation of micrometer-sized particles. Different sized particles are carried
at different velocities by a flow of fluid along an unobstructed thin channel,
resulting in a size-based separation. They are confined to thin focused layers in
the channel thickness where force due to gravity is exactly opposed by
hydrodynamic lift forces (HLF). It has been reported that the HLF are a function 
of various parameters including the flow rate (or shear rate), the size of the
particles, and the density and viscosity of the liquid. The dependence of HLF on 
these parameters offers a means of altering the equilibrium transverse positions 
of the particles in GrFFF, and hence their elution times. In this study, the
effect of the viscosity of the carrier fluid on the elution behavior (retention, 
zone broadening, and resolution) of micrometer-sized particles in GrFFF was
investigated using polystyrene (PS) latex beads as model particles. In order to
change the carrier liquid viscosity without affecting its density, various
amounts of (hydroxypropyl) methyl cellulose (HPMC) were added to the aqueous
carrier liquid. It was found that particles migrate at faster rates as the
carrier viscosity is increased, which confirms the dependence of HLF on
viscosity. At the same time, particle size selectivity decreased but peak shape
and symmetry for the more strongly retained particles improved. As a result,
separation was improved in terms of both the separation time and resolution with 
increase of carrier viscosity. A theoretical model for plate height in GrFFF is
also presented, and its predictions are compared to experimentally measured
values.

PMID: 21466170  [PubMed]


192. Tsitol Genet. 2011 Jan-Feb;45(1):3-10.

[Developing transgenic barley lines producing human lactoferrin using mutant
alfa-tubulin gene as selective marker gene].

[Article in Russian]

Tanasienko IV, Emets AI, Pirko IaV, Korkhovoi VI, Abumkhadi N, Blium IaB.

Method of biolistic transformation was used for genetic improvement of commercial
barley cultivars (Oksamitoviy, Vodogray and Getman). The plasmid pHLFTuBA was
used for particle bombardment that consists of the hLF gene under the control of 
the barley glutelin B-1 promoter and a selectable marker gene, alpha-tubulin
conferring resistance to trifluralin (dinitroanilinr herbicide). Preliminary
screening of different trifluralin concentration range from 0,1 to 30 microM was 
tested for determination of effective selective agent concentration. Two
transgenic barley line of genotype Oksamitiviy and transgenic callus line of
cultivar Getman were obtained after selection on 10 microM of trifluralin. To
confirm the transgenic nature of regenerated plants, the PCR analysis was carried
out. The 734bp length fragment of hLFgene was amplified from both regenerated
plants.

PMID: 21446153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Health Promot Int. 2012 Mar;27(1):33-44. doi: 10.1093/heapro/dar019. Epub 2011
Mar 18.

Application of the health literacy framework to diet-related cancer prevention
conversations of older immigrant women to Canada.

Thomson MD(1), Hoffman-Goetz L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Behavioral Health, Faculty of Medicine, Virginia
Commonwealth University,1112 E. Clay Street, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.
lhgoetz@uwaterloo.ca

Health literacy, conceptualized as a framework involving basic (functional),
interactive and critical skill sets, is a key determinant of health. Application 
of the health literacy framework (HLF) to immigrant populations has been limited.
Our objective was to apply the HLF to discourses about diet-related colon cancer 
prevention among English-as-a-Second-Language (ESL) immigrant women. We also
explored whether these discussions could inform the development of culturally
appropriate information and potentially increase health literacy. Interviews were
conducted with 64 older Spanish-speaking ESL immigrant women. Directed content
analysis guided by the HLF was used to identify themes. Diet-related
conversations were initiated by 43 (67%) participants. Four themes were
identified: general information requests-low functional health literacy (FHL) (n 
= 23/43), specific nutrition inquiries-high FHL (n = 17/43), actions for healthy 
eating-low interactive health literacy (IHL) (n = 8/43) and community
communication issues-high IHL (n = 3/43). No conversations representing critical 
health literacy were identified. Five women discussed both FHL and IHL themes.
Women's diet-related conversations followed a continuum of increasing information
needs supporting the HLF.

PMID: 21421578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Clin Sci (Lond). 2011 Aug;121(4):159-68. doi: 10.1042/CS20110002.

Hepatic stellate cells stimulate HCC cell migration via laminin-5 production.

Santamato A(1), Fransvea E, Dituri F, Caligiuri A, Quaranta M, Niimi T, Pinzani
M, Antonaci S, Giannelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Section
of Internal Medicine, University of Bari Medical School, Bari, Italy.

Activated HSCs (hepatic stellate cells) are the main source of extracellular
matrix proteins present in cirrhotic liver on which HCC (hepatocellular
carcinoma) commonly develops. HCC cells behave differently according to
differences in the surrounding microenvironment. In the present study, we have
investigated a mechanism whereby HSCs modulate the migratory activity of HCC
cells. We used primary cultures of human HSCs to investigate their effect on
Hep3B, Alexander, HLE and HLF HCC cells. The expression of Ln-5 (laminin-5) was
documented at transcript and protein levels both in vitro and in vivo. HCC cells 
strongly adhere, migrate and spread in the presence of HSC-conditioned medium and
of co-culture. HSCs produce and secrete Ln-5 in the CM (conditioned medium). The 
electrophoretic pattern of secreted Ln-5 is consistent with that of a migratory
substrate, showing the presence of the <U+03B3>2x fragment. Blocking antibodies against 
Ln-5 inhibit HCC migration in the presence of HSC-CM. HCC cells migrate very
poorly in the presence of Ln-5 immunodepleted HSC-CM. HCC migration in the
presence of HSCs is dependent on the MEK [MAPK (mitogen-activated protein
kinase)/ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) kinase]/ERK pathway, but not 
the PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase)/Akt pathway. HSC-CM, as well as Ln-5,
activates the MEK/ERK but not the PI3K/Akt pathway. In human HCC tissues, Ln-5 is
mainly distributed along a-SMA (smooth muscle actin)-positive cells, whereas in
peritumoural tissues, Ln-5 is absent. HSCs stimulate HCC migration via the
production and secretion of Ln-5.

PMID: 21413933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4759-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-327668. Epub 2011
Feb 25.

Requirement for Dot1l in murine postnatal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis by MLL
translocation.

Jo SY(1), Granowicz EM, Maillard I, Thomas D, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Disruptor of telomeric silencing 1-like (Dot1l) is a histone 3 lysine 79
methyltransferase. Studies of constitutive Dot1l knockout mice show that Dot1l is
essential for embryonic development and prenatal hematopoiesis. DOT1L also
interacts with translocation partners of Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene, which
is commonly translocated in human leukemia. However, the requirement of Dot1l in 
postnatal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis of MLL translocation proteins has not 
been conclusively shown. With a conditional Dot1l knockout mouse model, we
examined the consequences of Dot1l loss in postnatal hematopoiesis and MLL
translocation leukemia. Deletion of Dot1l led to pancytopenia and failure of
hematopoietic homeostasis, and Dot1l-deficient cells minimally reconstituted
recipient bone marrow in competitive transplantation experiments. In addition,
MLL-AF9 cells required Dot1l for oncogenic transformation, whereas cells with
other leukemic oncogenes, such as Hoxa9/Meis1 and E2A-HLF, did not. These
findings illustrate a crucial role of Dot1l in normal hematopoiesis and
leukemogenesis of specific oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC3100687
PMID: 21398221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Microbiol. 2011 Feb;49(1):53-7. doi: 10.1007/s12275-011-0195-1. Epub 2011 Mar
3.

Deoxycytidine production by metabolically engineered Corynebacterium
ammoniagenes.

Lee YB(1), Baek H, Kim SK, Hyun HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Hankuk University of Foreign
Studies, Gyunggi, 449-791, Republic of Korea.

Corynebacterium ammoniagenes N424 was metabolically modified to isolate
overproducers of deoxycytidine. Inosine auxotrophy (ino) was initially introduced
to prevent the flow of PRPP (phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate) into the purine
biosynthetic pathway by random mutagenesis using
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. Following that, mutants possessing
hydroxyurea resistance (HU(r)) were isolated to increase the activity of
ribonucleoside diphosphate reductase, which catalyzes the reduction of
ribonucleoside diphosphate to deoxyribonucleoside diphosphate. Then, in order to 
block the flow of dCTP into the TMP biosynthetic pathway via dUTP, thymine
auxotrophy (thy(-)) was introduced into the mutant IH30 with ino(-) and Hlf. The 
resulting mutant IM7, possessing the characteristics of ino(-), HU(r), and
thy(-), was deficient in dCTP deaminase and produced significantly higher amounts
of deoxycytidine (81.3 mg/L) compared to its mother strain IH30 (6.2 mg/L).
Deoxycytidine productivity was further enhanced by isolating the mutant IU19,
which was resistant to 5-fluorouracil, an inhibitor of carbamoyl phosphate
synthase. This enzyme catalyzed the synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate from
glutamine, HCO (3)(-), and ATP. 5-Fluorouracil also inhibited aspartate
trans-carbamoylase, catalyzeing the condensation of carbamoyl phosphate and
aspartate. Finally, 5-fluorocytosine resistance (FC(r)) was introduced into the
mutant strain IU19 to relieve the repression caused by accumulation of pyrimidine
nucleosides. The mutant strain IC14-C6 possessing all the five characteristics
described above produced 226.3 mg/L of deoxycytidine, which was at least 2,000
fold higher compared to the wild type, and accumulated only a negligible amount
of other pyrimidines under shake flask fermentation.

PMID: 21369979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Neuron. 2011 Feb 24;69(4):591-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.02.001.

The doctor's dilemma: opiate analgesics and chronic pain.

Fields HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, 5858 Horton 
Street, Suite 200, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA. hlf@gallo.ucsf.edu

Opiates are utilized routinely and effectively as a short-term analgesic
treatment for a variety of acute pain conditions such as occur following trauma, 
and for patients with painful terminal diseases such as cancer. Because opiate
analgesics are highly addictive substances, their use in the treatment of chronic
nonmalignant pain remains controversial.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3073133
PMID: 21338871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Hepatol. 2011 Oct;55(4):838-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.12.043. Epub 2011 Feb 
18.

Epithelial mesenchymal transition and hedgehog signaling activation are
associated with chemoresistance and invasion of hepatoma subpopulations.

Chen X(1), Lingala S, Khoobyari S, Nolta J, Zern MA, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
University of California, Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Erratum in
    J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):405.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Our previous studies showed that CD133, EpCAM, and aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH) are useful markers to identify cancer stem cells (CSCs) in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues. The present study aims to evaluate
chemosensitivity and invasion capability of HCC based on CSC marker profiles, and
to explore the underlying molecular mechanisms.
METHODS: Hepatoma cell lines were separated into subpopulations according to
CD133, EpCAM, and ALDH expression profiles. Epithelial mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and hedgehog (Hh) signaling were examined to identify their links with
chemoresistance and aggressive invasion.
RESULTS: Well-differentiated cell lines were positive for CD133(+)/ALDH(high) and
CD133(+)/EpCAM(+) at 1.5-15% and 2.3-8.3%; whereas, poorly-differentiated cells
were almost all negative for these markers. FACS-enriched CD133(+)/ALDH(high) and
CD133(+)/EpCAM(+) Hep3B and Huh-7 cells formed more spheroids in vitro.
CD133(-)/ALDH(low) HLE cells were more resistant to cisplatin, doxorubicin or
sorafenib than their positive counterparts. CD133(-)/EpCAM(-) Huh-7 cells or
CD133(-)/ALDH(-) HLE cells exhibited a higher invasion rate than their positive
counterparts. HLE and HLF cells acquired EMT in double negative subpopulations.
Hh activity in Huh-7 CD133(-)/EpCAM(-) cells was higher than in their positive
counterparts, and the inhibition of Hh activity by cyclopamine resulted in
reduced cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Well-differentiated CD133(+)/ALDH(high) or CD133(+)/EpCAM(+) cells
appear to be a CSC/initiating subpopulation; whereas, in poorly-differentiated
hepatoma cells, EMT and enhanced hedgehog signaling activity may be responsible
for their chemoresistance and invasion. These findings underscore the
significance of EMT and enhanced Hh signaling in liver cancer stem or initiating 
cells.

Copyright © 2011 European Association for the Study of the Liver. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3177032
PMID: 21334406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Imaging. 2011 Feb;10(1):69-77.

Glypican-3 targeting of liver cancer cells using multifunctional nanoparticles.

Park JO(1), Stephen Z, Sun C, Veiseh O, Kievit FM, Fang C, Leung M, Mok H, Zhang 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, Materials Science and Engineering, and Radiology,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-2120, USA.

Imaging is essential in accurately detecting, staging, and treating primary liver
cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma [HCC]), one of the most prevalent and lethal
malignancies. We developed a novel multifunctional nanoparticle (NP) specifically
targeting glypican-3 (GPC3), a proteoglycan implicated in promotion of cell
growth that is overexpressed in most HCCs. Quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction was performed to confirm the differential GPC3 expression in two
human HCC cells, Hep G2 (high) and HLF (negligible). These cells were treated
with biotin-conjugated GPC3 monoclonal antibody (aGPC3) and subsequently targeted
using superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs conjugated to streptavidin and Alexa Fluor
647. Flow cytometry demonstrated that only GPC3-expressing Hep G2 cells were
specifically targeted using this aGPC3-NP conjugate (fourfold mean fluorescence
over nontargeted NP), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) experiments showed
similar findings (threefold R2 relaxivity). Confocal fluorescence microscopy
localized the aGPC3 NPs only to the cell surface of GPC3-expressing Hep G2 cells.
Further characterization of this construct demonstrated a negatively charged,
monodisperse, 50 nm NP, ideally suited for tumor targeting. This GPC3-specific NP
system, with dual-modality imaging capability, may enhance pretreatment MRI,
enable refined intraoperative HCC visualization by near-infrared fluorescence,
and be potentially used as a carrier for delivery of tumor-targeted therapies,
improving patient outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3057759
PMID: 21303616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Nutr Biochem. 2011 Dec;22(12):1143-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.09.015. Epub 
2011 Feb 4.

Proadipogenic effects of lactoferrin in human subcutaneous and visceral
preadipocytes.

Moreno-Navarrete JM(1), Ortega F, Sabater M, Ricart W, Fernández-Real JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, CIBEROBN Fisiopatología
de la Obesidad y Nutrición CB06/03/010 and Girona Biomedical Research Institute, 
Girona, Spain.

Lactoferrin has been associated with insulin sensitivity in vivo and in vitro
studies. We aimed to test the effects of lactoferrin on human subcutaneous and
visceral preadipocytes. Human subcutaneous and visceral preadipocytes were
cultured with increasing lactoferrin (hLf, 0.1, 1, 10 µM) under differentiation
conditions. The effects of lactoferrin on adipogenesis were studied through the
expression of different adipogenic and inflammatory markers, AMPK activation and 
Retinoblastoma 1 (RB1) activity. The response to insulin was evaluated through
(Ser473)AKT phosphorylation. In both subcutaneous and visceral preadipocytes,
lactoferrin (1 and 10 µM) increased adipogenic gene expressions and protein
levels (fatty acid synthase, PPAR<U+03B3>, FABP4, ADIPOQ, ACC and STAMP2) and decreased 
inflammatory markers (IL8, IL6 and MCP1) dose-dependently in parallel to
increased insulin-induced (Ser473)AKT phosphorylation. In addition to these
adipogenic effects, lactoferrin decreased significantly AMPK activity (reducing
(pThr172)AMPK and (pSer79)ACC) and RB1 activity (increasing the
(pser807/811)RB1/RB1 ratio). In conclusion, these results suggest that
lactoferrin promotes adipogenesis in human adipocytes by enhancing insulin
signaling and inhibiting RB1 and AMPK activities.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2010 Nov;26(11):1576-83.

[Purification and characterization of recombinant human lactoferrin expressed in 
a cattle mammary bioreactor].

[Article in Chinese]

Bai Q(1), Zhang Y, Wang Y, Luo J, Li Y, Huang Y, Ma R, Su Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing 100029, China.

Novel ion exchange adsorbents were synthesized by immobilizing sulfopropyl
derivative onto homemade highly cross-linked agarose beads. The effects of
different ligand densities (from 0.05 to 0.24 mol/L) on static and dynamic
adsorption of the adsorbents were investigated using lysozyme as a model protein.
Based on these results, rHLF was purified from the transgenic milk by our SP
media. 1 mL high density (0.24 mol/L) adsorbent could handle 50 mL
rHLF-containing milk. The mass recovery of rHLF was 86.5% and the purity was
98.5%. CD spectra demonstrated that the native structure of rHLF was not affected
in the purification process. The biological functions of the purified rHLF,
including iron binding, releasing and antimicrobial activities were then
investigated. The results showed that rHLF had comparable iron binding and
releasing activity to that of native HLF. 5 g/L concentration of rHLF
significantly inhibited the growth of Escherichia coli. These studies lay a solid
foundation for the wide application of our self-prepared ion exchange adsorbents 
in protein purification.

PMID: 21284219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Biotechnol Lett. 2011 Jun;33(6):1113-20. doi: 10.1007/s10529-011-0536-5. Epub
2011 Jan 26.

Surface display of human lactoferrin using a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in
Pichia pastoris.

Jo JH(1), Im EM, Kim SH, Lee HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences,
Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Yongin, Gyeonggi, 449-791, Korea.

A cell surface display system was developed in Pichia pastoris using the gene
TIP1, encoding the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (ScTIP). Human lactoferrin cDNA (hLf) was fused to a
full-length TIP1 DNA (ScTIP ( 630 )) or a short-TIP1 fragment (ScTIP ( 120 ))
encoding the 40 C-terminal amino acids of ScTIP. Both hLf-ScTIP fusion genes were
expressed in P. pastoris SMD 1168. The fused protein was detected by western
blotting after extraction of the lysed recombinant cells with Triton X-100, urea,
and Triton X-100 plus urea, suggesting that the hLf is associated with the
membrane. The localization of surface-displayed hLf was confirmed by
immunofluorescence confocal microscopy and flow cytometric analysis using
FITC-labeled anti-hLf antibody, suggesting that hLf was successfully located at
the surface of P. pastoris. The intact recombinant cells and cell lysates showed 
antibacterial activity against target microorganisms, meaning that the expressed 
hLf was biologically active. The results indicated that the ScTIP anchoring motif
is useful for cell surface display of foreign proteins in P. pastoris.

PMID: 21267758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Pain Manag. 2011 Jan;1(1):23-4. doi: 10.2217/pmt.10.9.

Ask the experts: What has the establishment of multidisciplinary pain centers
done to improve the management of chronic pain conditions?

Fields HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)5858 Horton Street, Suite 200, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA. hlf@phy.ucsf.edu.

Howard Fields received his MD and PhD in Neuroscience at Stanford University (CA,
USA) in 1965-1966. After Internal Medicine training at Bellevue Hospital in New
York, he spent 3 years as a research neurologist at Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research (MD, USA). Following clinical training in neurology at the Boston City
Hospital Service of Harvard Medical School in 1972, he joined the faculty of the 
University of California, San Francisco (USA) where he is currently Professor of 
Neurology, Director of the Wheeler Center for the Neurobiology of Addiction and
Principal Investigator at the Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center. Fields'
major interests are in nervous system mechanisms of pain and substance abuse,
with a focus on how endogenous opioids contribute to these mechanisms. He was a
founder of the UCSF Pain Management Center and has made major contributions to
understanding and treating neuropathic pain. His group was the first to
demonstrate the clinical effectiveness of opioids for neuropathic pain and of
topical lidocaine for postherpetic neuralgia. In laboratory studies he discovered
and elucidated a pain-modulating neural circuit that is required for opioids to
produce analgesia. He also discovered that placebo analgesia is blocked by an
opioid antagonist. Recently, his laboratory has discovered nerve cells in the
striatum that selectively encode the magnitude of a reward. They have also shown 
how the neurotransmitter dopamine contributes to motivation and reward-based
choice. Fields has received numerous research awards and has given many named
lectureships including a Merit Award from the NIH, the Kerr Award of the American
Pain Society, the Cotzias Award of the American Academy of Neurology and the RD
Adams lecture of the American Neurological Association. He also gave the Beecher 
Lecture (in anesthesiology) and the Adams Lecture (in neurology) at Harvard. In
1997, he was elected to membership in the Institute of Medicine and in 2010, he
was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

PMID: 24654581  [PubMed]


204. Curr Biol. 2010 Dec 21;20(24):2199-206. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.11.038. Epub 2010
Dec 2.

Acute induction of Eya3 by late-night light stimulation triggers TSHß expression 
in photoperiodism.

Masumoto KH(1), Ukai-Tadenuma M, Kasukawa T, Nagano M, Uno KD, Tsujino K,
Horikawa K, Shigeyoshi Y, Ueda HR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Systems Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3 
Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2011 Jan 11;21(1):R22-5.

Living organisms detect seasonal changes in day length (photoperiod) [1-3] and
alter their physiological functions accordingly to fit seasonal environmental
changes. TSHß, induced in the pars tuberalis (PT), plays a key role in the
pathway that regulates vertebrate photoperiodism [4, 5]. However, the upstream
inducers of TSHß expression remain unknown. Here we performed genome-wide
expression analysis of the PT under chronic short-day and long-day conditions in 
melatonin-proficient CBA/N mice, in which the photoperiodic TSHß expression
response is preserved [6]. This analysis identified "short-day" and "long-day"
genes, including TSHß, and further predicted the acute induction of long-day
genes by late-night light stimulation. We verified this by advancing and
extending the light period by 8 hr, which induced TSHß expression within one day.
In the following genome-wide expression analysis under this acute long-day
condition, we searched for candidate upstream genes by looking for expression
that preceded TSHß's, and we identified the Eya3 gene. We demonstrated that Eya3 
and its partner Six1 synergistically activate TSHß expression and that this
activation is further enhanced by Tef and Hlf. These results elucidate the
comprehensive transcriptional photoperiodic response in the PT, revealing the
complex regulation of TSHß expression and unexpectedly rapid response to light
changes in the mammalian photoperiodic system.

PMID: 21129973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2011 Jan;37(1):51-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2010.08.020. Epub 2010 Nov 13.

Fungicidal activity of human lactoferrin-derived peptides based on the
antimicrobial aß region.

Kondori N(1), Baltzer L, Dolphin GT, Mattsby-Baltzer I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases/Clinical Bacteriology, University of
Gothenburg, Guldhedsgatan 10, S-413 46 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Owing to the increasing number of infections in hospitalised patients caused by
resistant strains of fungi, there is a need to develop new therapeutic agents for
these infections. Naturally occurring antimicrobial peptides may constitute
models for developing such agents. A modified peptide sequence (CFQWKRAMRKVR;
HLopt2) based on amino acid residues 20-31 of the N-terminal end of human
lactoferrin (hLF) as well as a double-sized human lactoferricin-like peptide
(amino acid residues 16-40; HLBD1) were investigated for their antifungal
activities in vitro and in vivo. By in vitro assay, HLopt2 was fungicidal at
concentrations of 12.5-25 µg/mL against Cryptococcus neoformans, Candida
albicans, Candida krusei, Candida kefyr and Candida parapsilosis, but not against
Candida glabrata. HLopt2 was demonstrated to have = 16-fold greater killing
activity than HLBD1. By inducing some helical formation caused by lactam bridges 
or by extending the assay time (from 2h to 20 h), HLBD1 became almost comparable 
with HLopt2 in its fungicidal activity. Killing of C. albicans yeast cells by
HLopt2 was rapid and was accompanied by cytoplasmic and mitochondrial membrane
permeabilisation as well as formation of deep pits on the yeast cell surface. In 
a murine C. albicans skin infection model, atopic treatment with the peptides
resulted in significantly reduced yields of Candida from the infected skin areas.
The antifungal activities of HLopt2 in vitro and in vivo suggest possible
potential as a therapeutic agent against most Candida spp. and C. neoformans. The
greatly improved antifungal effect of the lactam-modified HLBD1 indicates the
importance of amphipathic helix formation for lethal activity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. and the International Society of Chemotherapy. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21075607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Leukemia. 2011 Feb;25(2):321-30. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.253. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

The E2A-HLF oncogenic fusion protein acts through Lmo2 and Bcl-2 to immortalize
hematopoietic progenitors.

de Boer J(1), Yeung J, Ellu J, Ramanujachar R, Bornhauser B, Solarska O, Hubank
M, Williams O, Brady HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, London, UK.

The oncogenic fusion protein E2A-HLF is a chimeric transcription factor that
arises from the t(17;19) translocation in childhood B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (B-precursor ALL) and is associated with very poor outcome. We show
that retroviral-mediated expression of E2A-HLF alone is sufficient to immortalize
primary lymphoid progenitors. We identify Lmo2 and Bcl-2 as direct target genes
downstream of E2A-HLF. We use real-time PCR analysis to show that LMO2 and BCL-2 
expression is preferentially upregulated both in biopsy material from t(17;19)
B-precursor ALL patients and lymphoid cell lines derived from t(17;19) leukemias.
Co-expression of Lmo2 and Bcl-2 was sufficient to immortalize lymphoid progenitor
cells resulting in a similar phenotype to that induced by E2A-HLF alone. Both
shRNA-mediated knockdown of Lmo2 expression and pharmacological inhibition of
BCL-2 function in E2A-HLF immortalized cells severely compromised their
viability. These data suggest that both Lmo2 and Bcl-2 are required for the
action of E2A-HLF in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 21072044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Sep;123(17):2432-9.

Thrombin promotes human lung fibroblasts to proliferate via NADPH
oxidase/reactive oxygen species/extracellular regulated kinase signaling pathway.

Zhou SY(1), Xiao W, Pan XJ, Zhu MX, Yang ZH, Zheng CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, China.

BACKGROUND: Thrombin is a multifunctional serine protease that plays a crucial
role in hemostasis following tissue injury. In addition to its procoagulation
effect, thrombin is also a potent mesenchymal cell mitogen, therefore it plays
important roles in the local proliferation of mesenchymal cells in the tissue
repair process. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) can induce some human cells to
proliferate at lower rates while at higher concentrations they promote cells to
undergo apoptosis or necrosis. Accumulative evidence suggests that thrombin can
induce some cells to produce ROS. Based on these observations, we provide a
hypothesis that thrombin can stimulate human lung fibroblasts to produce ROS,
which play an important role in human lung fibroblast proliferation.
METHODS: ROS were detected in fibroblasts at 30 minutes and 60 minutes following 
thrombin (20 U/ml) exposure using flow cytometry. The ratio of reduced
glutathione/oxidized glutathione (GSH/GSSG) was assayed in lung fibroblasts using
a commercial kit following treatment with thrombin at different concentrations.
NADPH oxidase and the extracellular regulated kinase1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling
pathway were detected by Western blotting after thrombin stimulation to lung
fibroblasts.
RESULTS: Thrombin, at 20 U/ml, stimulated human lung fibroblasts (HLF) to
generate ROS in a time dependent manner. The ratio of GSH/GSSG in fibroblasts
treated with thrombin showed a significant decrease. NADPH oxidase was activated 
and the ERK1/2 signal pathway was involved in the proliferation process of
fibroblasts treated with thrombin.
CONCLUSION: The activation of NADPH oxidase by thrombin leads to the production
of ROS, which promotes fibroblasts proliferation via activation of the ERK1/2
signaling pathway.

PMID: 21034561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2011 Jan;153(1):134-41. doi: 10.1007/s00701-010-0839-7.
Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Hypertrophy of the lumbar ligamentum flavum is associated with
inflammation-related TGF-ß expression.

Löhr M(1), Hampl JA, Lee JY, Ernestus RI, Deckert M, Stenzel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Neurosurgery, University Hospital of Cologne, Kerpener
Strasse 62, 50924 Cologne, Germany. loehr.m@nch.uni-wuerzburg.de

BACKGROUND: Despite the significance of hypertrophy of the ligamentum flavum
(HLF) in the disease progress of neurogenic claudication, the cellular mechanisms
underlying the gradual fibrotic thickening of the ligamentum flavum remain poorly
understood. The aim of our study was to get insight into the contribution of
inflammatory mechanisms to the development of hypertrophy.
METHODS: Specimens of hypertrophied ligamenta flava were obtained at surgery from
20 patients with acquired lumbar osteoligamentous spinal canal stenosis from the 
central part of the ligament. Paraffin sections were stained with hematoxylin and
eosin and Elastica van Gieson to evaluate extracellular matrix architecture, and 
immunohistochemistry was performed to characterize the inflammatory reaction and 
the sources of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß) expression. Sections of
normal ligamenta flava obtained from corresponding anatomical sites and stained
in parallel served as a control.
RESULTS: HLF was characterized by a considerable distortion of the elastic matrix
and fibrotic transformation by extracellular collagen deposition. All specimens
showed highly inflammatory cellular infiltrates confined to regions exhibiting
marked degeneration of the elastic matrix composed mainly of macrophages,
scattered T lymphocytes, and neovascularization, thus representing a chronic
inflammation. Surprisingly, macrophages as well as vascular endothelial cells but
not fibroblasts showed a strong expression of TGF-ß, a strong inducer of
extracellular collagen deposition.
CONCLUSIONS: Macrophages were identified as a major cellular source of TGF-ß in
advanced HLF and may perpetuate further hypertrophy. This finding suggests that
modulating the immune response locally or systemically could prove to be
effective for impeding the disease progress.

PMID: 20960015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2010;74(10):2127-9. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Involvement of both the N-glycan-relevant and N-glycan-irrelevant structural
elements in the recognition of human milk lactoferrin by the 1CF11 monoclonal
antibody.

Fukaya S(1), Shinoda C, Yabe T, Kanamaru Y.

Author information: 
(1)The United Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Gifu University, Gifu,
Japan.

Monoclonal antibody 1CF11 has been suggested to specifically recognize a certain 
carbohydrate epitope shared by glycoproteins in human external secretions. We
examined the effect of cleaving the polypeptide backbone and removing N-linked
oligosaccharides on the reactivity with 1CF11 of human milk lactoferrin (hLf) to 
elucidate the structural features of the 1CF11 epitope. We reveal by treating hLF
with trypsin and/or N-glycosidase that both the N-glycan-relevant and
N-glycan-irrelevant structural elements were involved in the recognition of hLf
by 1CF11.

PMID: 20944410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2010;74(10):2141-4. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Non-reducing terminal fucose within N-linked glycan plays a significant role in
the recognition of human milk lactoferrin by the 1CF11 monoclonal antibody.

Fukaya S(1), Yabe T, Kanamaru Y.

Author information: 
(1)United Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan.

We have recently demonstrated that the 1CF11 monoclonal antibody bound human milk
lactoferrin (hLf) through the recognition of two distinct portions of the
molecule, namely the N-glycan-relevant and -irrelevant structural elements. In
this present study, we prepared four immunoreactive peptide fractions containing 
N-linked glycan from tryptic digests of reduced and alkylated hLf by using a
concanavalin A lectin column and reverse-phase HPLC. Deglycosylation of these
fractions and a competitive binding assay using fucosylated oligosaccharides
revealed that the non-reducing terminal fucose residue in N-linked glycan(s)
played a significant role in recognizing the N-glycan-relevant element in hLf by 
1CF11.

PMID: 20944405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Glycobiology. 2011 Feb;21(2):206-24. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwq151. Epub 2010 Oct
13.

Comprehensive characterization of the site-specific N-glycosylation of wild-type 
and recombinant human lactoferrin expressed in the milk of transgenic cloned
cattle.

Yu T(1), Guo C, Wang J, Hao P, Sui S, Chen X, Zhang R, Wang P, Yu G, Zhang L, Dai
Y, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

The glycosylation profile of a recombinant protein is important because glycan
moieties can play a significant role in the biological properties of the
glycoprotein. Here we determined the site-specific N-glycosylation profile of
human lactoferrin (hLF) and recombinant human lactoferrin (rhLF) expressed in the
milk of transgenic cloned cattle. We used combined approaches of monosaccharide
composition analysis, lectin blot, glycan permethylation and sequential
exoglycosidase digestion and analyzed samples using high-performance ion
chromatography and mass spectrometry (MS). N-glycans from hLF are comprised
entirely of highly branched, highly sialylated and highly fucosylated
complex-type structures, and many contain Lewis(x) epitopes. Six of these
structures are reported here for the first time. However, N-glycans from rhLF are
of the high mannose-, hybrid- and complex-type structures, with less
N-acetylneuraminic acid and fucose. Some contain a terminal
N-acetylgalactosamine-N-acetylglucosamine (LacdiNAc) disaccharide sequence.
Monosaccharide composition analysis of rhLF revealed small amounts of
N-glycolylneuraminic acid, which were not detected by MS. hLF and rhLF appear to 
be glycosylated at the same two sites: Asn138 and Asn479. The third putative
glycosylation site, at Asn624, is unglycosylated in both hLF and rhLF. The
relative abundance of each N-glycan at each site was also determined. The
different N-glycosylation profile of rhLF when compared with that of hLF is in
consistent with the widely held view that glycosylation is species- and
tissue/cell-specific. These data provide an important foundation for further
studies of glycan structure/function relationships for hLF and rhLF and help to
better understand the glycosylation mechanism in bovine mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 20943674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Stem Cell Res. 2010 Nov;5(3):188-200. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.07.002. Epub 2010
Aug 3.

IL6 and the human limbal stem cell niche: a mediator of epithelial-stromal
interaction.

Notara M(1), Shortt AJ, Galatowicz G, Calder V, Daniels JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocular Biology and Therapeutics, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology,
London, UK. m.notara@ucl.ac.uk

The corneal epithelium is maintained by the limbal epithelial stem cells (LESCs).
In this study, an in vitro model is proposed for the investigation of cell-cell
interactions involving LESC maintenance. Imaging of the limbal niche demonstrated
close spatial arrangement between basal limbal epithelial cells within putative
LESC niche structures and fibroblasts in the stroma. Interactions of the human
limbal epithelial (HLE) cells and mitotically active human limbal fibroblasts
(HLF) were studied for the first time in a serum-free in vitro model that
simulated aspects of the limbal niche microenvironment. HLE cocultured in a ratio
3:1 with HLF exhibited enhanced expression of the putative stem cell markers
ABCG2 and p63a and holoclones were preserved as shown by colony-forming
efficiency assays, clonal analysis, and colony characterisation. Interleukin 6
(IL6) was found to be up-regulated in the 3.1SF system when compared to the HLE
culture with growth-arrested fibroblasts and serum (gold standard system, GS).
IL6 caused a time-dependent phosphorylation of STAT3 in HLE cells. STAT3 and IL6 
inhibition in 3.1SF cultures significantly reduced HLE colony-forming efficiency,
suggesting a previously undetected STAT3-mediated involvement of IL6 in the
maintenance of HLE cells in a progenitor-like state.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20813601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2011 Sep;142(3):388-97. doi: 10.1007/s12011-010-8806-y. Epub
2010 Sep 1.

Chromium (VI) can activate and impair antioxidant defense system.

Asatiani N(1), Kartvelishvili T, Abuladze M, Asanishvili L, Sapojnikova N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics of Biological Systems, Andronikashvili Institute of
Physics, 6, Tamarashvili St, 0177 Tbilisi, Georgia.

The changes in glutathione-dependent cycle enzymes and catalase activities under 
Cr(VI)-induced oxidative stress were investigated in two distinct cell lines:
L-41-human epithelial-like cells and HLF-fetal human diploid lung fibroblasts,
which differ in tissue origin, proliferation, and antioxidant enzymes activities.
The chromium concentrations from 1 to 5 µM cause nontoxic effects and activate
antioxidant enzymes to overcome oxidative stress. In spite of some differences in
the endogenous antioxidant activities, both cell lines reveal the same range of
toxic concentrations (20-30 µM). The irreversible inhibition of
glutathione-dependent antioxidant enzymes develops under toxic concentrations and
serves as a marker of toxicity. The endogenous antioxidant activity influences
time-dependent expression of Cr(VI) toxicity and the dynamics of antioxidant
enzymes activity under nontoxic conditions. The cell antioxidant defense system
is an important marker of the cell adaptive capacity under nontoxic and toxic
conditions.

PMID: 20809274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Exp Ther Med. 2010 Sep;1(5):863-866. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Sorafenib suppresses the cell cycle and induces the apoptosis of hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines in serum-free media.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F, Sugiyama T, Yamamoto S, Sueishi M, Yoshida T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gastroenterology.

To suppress the invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells into surrounding
connective tissues during metastasis, we investigated the usefulness of
sorafenib. In order to search for model cell lines, cell numbers were counted to 
reveal cell lines with the potential to proliferate in serum-free media. Cell
proliferation and cell motility were analyzed with the MTS and wound assay,
respectively. 5-Bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling and mitotic and apoptotic
indices were analyzed to assess the cell cycle and apoptosis. The expression
levels of cyclin D1 and the cleavage of caspase-3 were analyzed by Western
blotting. HLF cells exhibited growth in the serum-free medium, while the other
cell lines examined did not. Sorafenib suppressed the cell proliferation and
motility of the HLF cells in the serum-free media. Both indices of BrdU and
mitotic potential decreased and the apoptotic index was increased in the
serum-free media with sorafenib, suggesting that the cell cycle was suppressed
and apoptosis was induced. The expression levels of cyclin D1 decreased and the
cleavage of caspase-3 was noted in the serum-free media with sorafenib. Sorafenib
may be suitable for molecular therapy to suppress the metastasis of HCC.

PMCID: PMC3445901
PMID: 22993610  [PubMed]


215. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Oct;299(4):R1013-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00241.2010. Epub 2010 Aug 4.

Cardiac hypertrophy, low blood pressure, and low aldosterone levels in mice
devoid of the three circadian PAR bZip transcription factors DBP, HLF, and TEF.

Wang Q(1), Maillard M, Schibler U, Burnier M, Gachon F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The cardiovascular system is under the control of the circadian clock, and
disturbed circadian rhythms can induce cardiovascular pathologies. This cyclic
regulation is probably brought about by the circadian expression of genes
encoding enzymes and regulators involved in cardiovascular functions. We have
previously shown that the rhythmic transcription of output genes is, in part,
regulated by the clock-controlled PAR bZip transcription factors DBP (albumin
D-site binding protein), HLF (hepatic leukemia factor), and TEF (thyrotroph
embryonic factor). The simultaneous deletion of all three PAR bZip transcription 
factors leads to increased morbidity and shortened life span. In the present
study, we demonstrate that Dbp/Tef/Hlf triple knockout mice develop cardiac
hypertrophy and left ventricular dysfunction associated with a low blood
pressure. These dysfunctions are exacerbated by an abnormal response to this low 
blood pressure characterized by low aldosterone levels. The phenotype of PAR bZip
knockout mice highlights the importance of circadian regulators in the modulation
of cardiovascular functions.

PMID: 20686175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Nov;335(2):418-23. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.170837. Epub 
2010 Jul 28.

Influence of a time-restricted feeding schedule on the daily rhythm of abcb1a
gene expression and its function in rat intestine.

Hayashi Y(1), Ushijima K, Ando H, Yanagihara H, Ishikawa E, Tsuruoka S, Sugimoto 
K, Fujimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi 329-0498.

P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is one of the ATP-binding cassette transporters and acts as
an efflux pump for cytotoxic substances. P-gp mRNA expression and transporting
activity show the daily rhythm and contribute to the chrono-pharmacokinetic
profiles of many drugs. It is reported that the daily rhythm of abcb1a mRNA is
regulated by a circadian clock-controlled output pathway. Time-restricted feeding
is well known to shift the peripheral circadian phase of clock gene expression
without changing the central clock function. This study was undertaken to examine
the influence of a time-restricted feeding procedure during the light phase on
the daily rhythms of abcb1a mRNA expression and P-gp activity. The abcb1a mRNA
and P-gp activity showed a daily rhythm with a peak early in the dark phase in
rat intestine under ad libitum feeding. Time-restricted feeding during the light 
phase shifted these rhythms to 12-h advance. The mRNA expression of clock genes
(DBP and HLF, the transcript activators of abcb1a) also showed daily rhythms, and
their phases were shifted by the time-restricted feeding procedure. The peak time
of DBP mRNA expression was similar to that of abcb1a mRNA expression under ad
libitum feeding and time-restricted feeding conditions. These results indicate
that a time-restricted feeding procedure changes DBP mRNA expression, which in
turn influences abcb1a mRNA expression and P-gp activity.

PMID: 20668054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2010 Oct;54(10):4335-42. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01620-09. 
Epub 2010 Jul 12.

Antimicrobial mechanism of action of transferrins: selective inhibition of
H+-ATPase.

Andrés MT(1), Fierro JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oral Microbiology, School of Stomatology, Oviedo, Spain.

Two bacterial species with different metabolic features, namely, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Lactococcus lactis, were used as a comparative experimental model 
to investigate the antimicrobial target and mechanism of transferrins. In
anaerobiosis, P. aeruginosa cells were not susceptible to lactoferrin (hLf) or
transferrin (hTf). In aerobiosis, the cells were susceptible but O(2) consumption
was not modified, indicating that components of the electron transport chain
(ETC) were not targeted. However, the respiratory chain inhibitor piericidin A
significantly reduced the killing activity of both proteins. Moreover,
2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol (DCIP), a reducing agent that accepts electrons from
the ETC coupled to H(+) extrusion, made P. aeruginosa susceptible to hLf and hTf 
in anaerobiosis. These results indicated that active cooperation of the cell was 
indispensable for the antimicrobial effect. For L. lactis cells lacking an ETC,
the absence of a detectable transmembrane electrical potential in hLf-treated
cells suggested a loss of H(+)-ATPase activity. Furthermore, the inhibition of
ATPase activity and H(+) translocation (inverted membrane vesicles) provided
direct evidence of the ability of hLf to inhibit H(+)-ATPase in L. lactis. Based 
on these data, we propose that hLf and hTf also inhibit the H(+)-ATPase of
respiring P. aeruginosa cells. Such inhibition thereby interferes with reentry of
H(+) from the periplasmic space to the cytoplasm, resulting in perturbation of
intracellular pH and the transmembrane proton gradient. Consistent with this
hypothesis, periplasmic H(+) accumulation was prevented by anaerobiosis or by
piericidin A or was induced by DCIP in anaerobiosis. Collectively, these results 
indicate that transferrins target H(+)-ATPase and interfere with H(+)
translocation, yielding a lethal effect in vitro.

PMCID: PMC2944611
PMID: 20625147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Control Release. 2010 Oct 1;147(1):127-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2010.06.022. 
Epub 2010 Aug 1.

Non-ionic surfactant vesicles in pulmonary glucocorticoid delivery:
characterization and interaction with human lung fibroblasts.

Marianecci C(1), Paolino D, Celia C, Fresta M, Carafa M, Alhaique F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Chemistry and Technologies, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

Non-ionic surfactant vesicles (NSVs) were proposed for the pulmonary delivery of 
glucocorticoids such as beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) for the treatment of
inflammatory lung diseases, e.g. asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and various type of pulmonary fibrosis. The thin layer evaporation method
followed by sonication was used to prepare small non-ionic surfactant vesicles
containing beclomethasone dipropionate. Light scattering experiments showed that 
beclomethasone dipropionate-loaded non-ionic surfactant vesicles were larger than
unloaded ones and showed a significant (P<0.001) decrease of the zeta potential. 
The morphological analysis, by freeze-fracture transmission electron microscopy, 
showed the maintenance of a vesicular structure in the presence of the drug. The 
colloidal and storage stability were evaluated by Turbiscan Lab Expert, which
evidenced the good stability of BDP-loaded non-ionic surfactant vesicles, thus
showing no significant variations of mean size and no colloidal phase
segregation. Primary human lung fibroblast (HLF) cells were used for in vitro
investigation of vesicle tolerability, carrier-cell interaction, intracellular
drug uptake and drug-loaded vesicle anti-inflammatory activity. The investigated 
NSVs did not show a significant cytotoxic activity at all incubation times for
concentrations ranging from 0.01 to 1 µM. Confocal laser scanning microscopy
showed vesicular carrier localization at the level of the cytoplasm compartment, 
where the glucocorticoid receptor (target site) is localized. BDP-loaded
non-ionic surfactant vesicles elicited a significant improvement of the HLF
intracellular uptake of the drug with respect to the free drug solution,
drug/surfactant mixtures and empty vesicles used as references. The treatment of 
HLF cells with BDP-loaded non-ionic surfactant vesicles determined a noticeable
increase of the drug anti-inflammatory activity by reducing the secretion of both
constitutive and interleukin-1ß-stimulated nerve growth factor (as inflammatory
index) of 68% and 85%, respectively. Obtained data indicate that the investigated
NSVs represent a promising tool as a pulmonary drug delivery system.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20603167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Sep 1;247(2):146-57. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2010.06.007. Epub 2010 Jun 17.

Multiple protein kinase pathways mediate amplified IL-6 release by human lung
fibroblasts co-exposed to nickel and TLR-2 agonist, MALP-2.

Gao F(1), Brant KA, Ward RM, Cattley RT, Barchowsky A, Fabisiak JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental & Occupational Health, Center for Free Radical and
Antioxidant Health, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health,
Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA.

Microbial stimuli and atmospheric particulate matter (PM) interact to amplify the
release of inflammatory and immune-modulating cytokines. The basis of this
interaction, however, is not known. Cultured human lung fibroblasts (HLF) were
used to determine whether various protein kinase pathways were involved in the
release of IL-6 following combined exposure to the PM-derived metal, Ni, and M.
fermentans-derived macrophage-activating lipopeptide 2 (MALP-2), a toll-like
receptor 2 agonist. Synergistic release of IL-6 by MALP-2 and NiSO4 was obvious
after 8h of co-stimulation and correlated with a late phase accumulation of IL-6 
mRNA. Ni and MALP-2, alone or together, all led to rapid and transient
phosphorylations of ERK(1/2) and JNK/SAPK of similar magnitude. p38
phosphorylation, however, was observed only after prolonged treatment of cells
with both stimuli together. A constitutive level of PI3K-dependent Akt
phosphorylation remained unchanged by Ni and/or MALP-2 exposure. IL-6 induced by 
Ni/MALP-2 co-exposure was partially dependent on activity of HIF-1alpha and COX-2
as shown by targeted knockdown using siRNA. IL-6 release in response to Ni/MALP-2
was partially sensitive to pharmacological inhibition of ERK(1/2), p38, and PI3K 
signaling. The protein kinase inhibitors had minimal or no effects on
Ni/MALP-2-induced accumulation of HIF-1alpha protein, however, COX-2 expression
and, more markedly PGE(2) production, were suppressed by LY294002, SB203580, and 
U0126. Thus, Ni/MALP-2 interactions involve multiple protein kinase pathways
(ERK(1/2), p38, and PI3K) that modulate events downstream from the early
accumulation of HIF-1alpha to promote IL-6 gene expression directly or
secondarily, through COX-2-derived autocrine products like PGE(2).

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919161
PMID: 20600219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2010 Jul 1;878(21):1837-44. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2010.05.023. Epub 2010 May 24.

Simultaneous determination of vitexin-4''-O-glucoside, vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside, 
rutin and vitexin from hawthorn leaves flavonoids in rat plasma by
UPLC-ESI-MS/MS.

Zhang W(1), Xu M, Yu C, Zhang G, Tang X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
110016, PR China.

A sensitive and accurate ultra-performance liquid chromatography electrospray
ionization tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-ESI-MS/MS) method was developed and
validated for the simultaneous determination of vitexin-4''-O-glucoside (VGL),
vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside (VRH), rutin (RUT) and vitexin (VIT) in rat plasma after
intravenous administration of hawthorn leaves flavonoids (HLF). Following protein
precipitation by methanol, the analytes were separated on an ACQUITY UPLC BEH
C(18) column packed with 1.7 microm particles by gradient elution using a mobile 
phase composed of acetonitrile and water (containing 0.1% formic acid) at a flow 
rate of 0.20 mL/min. The analytes and diphenhydramine (internal standard, IS)
were detected in the multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode by means of an
electrospray ionization (ESI) interface (m/z 292.96 for vitexin-4''-O-glucoside, 
m/z 293.10 for vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside, m/z 299.92 for rutin, m/z 310.94 for
vitexin and m/z 166.96 for IS). The calibration curve was linear over the range
10-40,000 ng/mL for vitexin-4''-O-glucoside, 10-50,000 ng/mL for
vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside, 8-1000 ng/mL for rutin and 16-2000 ng/mL for vitexin.
The intra- and inter-run precisions (relative standard deviation, RSD) of these
analytes were all within 15% and the accuracy (the relative error, RE) ranged
from -10% to 10%. The stability experiment indicated that the four analytes in
rat plasma samples and plasma extracts under anticipated conditions were stable. 
The developed method was applied for the first time to pharmacokinetic studies of
the four bioactive compounds of hawthorn leaves flavonoids following a single
intravenous administration of 20 mg/kg in rats.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20570577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Parasitol Res. 2010 Sep;107(4):947-53. doi: 10.1007/s00436-010-1959-y. Epub 2010 
Jun 22.

Effects of Echinostoma caproni infection on the neutral and polar lipids of
intestinal and non-intestinal organs in the BALB/c mouse as determined by
high-performance thin-layer chromatography.

Counihan J(1), Fried B, Sherma J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Lafayette College, Easton, PA 18042, USA.

The goal of this study was to characterize and quantify the various neutral and
polar lipid classes in the BALB/c mouse that are associated with Echinostoma
caproni infection. Ten infected mice and 10 uninfected control mice were used for
this study (five infected and five uninfected were used for each of the neutral
lipid and polar lipid studies). After 3 weeks postinfection, the mice were
necropsied and various organs were removed and prepared for lipid class analysis.
The organs used were liver, kidney, spleen, colon, cecum, anterior portion of the
small intestine (SI), middle portion of the SI, and posterior portion of the SI. 
Lipids were determined by high-performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC) with
Analtech 10 x 20 cm HPTLC-HLF silica gel plates. For neutral lipids, petroleum
ether-diethyl ether-glacial acetic acid (80:20:1) mobile phase and 5% ethanolic
phosphomolybdic acid detection reagent were used to determine the neutral lipids 
in each organ. Chloroform-methanol-deionized water (65:25:4) mobile phase and 10%
cupric sulfate in 8% phosphoric acid detection reagent were used to determine the
polar lipids in each organ. The analyzed polar lipids in all organs were
phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), and sphingomyelin (SM). 
Using HPTLC-densitometry for quantification, PC was found in the greatest amount 
and SM the smallest of all organs analyzed. The PE in the anterior portion of the
SI was determined to be significantly greater (using the Student's t test with P 
< 0.05), with about twice the amount of PE in mice infected with E. caproni
relative to the uninfected mice. No significant differences in any of the neutral
lipid classes were found between infected and uninfected samples.

PMID: 20567983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jun 15;17(6):609-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.04.012.

The PAF complex synergizes with MLL fusion proteins at HOX loci to promote
leukemogenesis.

Muntean AG(1), Tan J, Sitwala K, Huang Y, Bronstein J, Connelly JA, Basrur V,
Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Aug;10(8):529.

MLL is involved in chromosomal rearrangements that generate fusion proteins with 
deregulated transcriptional activity. The mechanisms of MLL fusion
protein-mediated transcriptional activation are poorly understood. Here we show
MLL interacts directly with the polymerase associated factor complex (PAFc)
through sequences flanking the CxxC domain. PAFc interacts with RNA polymerase II
and stimulates posttranslational histone modifications. PAFc augments MLL and
MLL-AF9 mediated transcriptional activation of Hoxa9. Conversely, knockdown of
PAFc disrupts MLL fusion protein-mediated transcriptional activation and MLL
recruitment to target loci. PAFc gene expression is downregulated during
hematopoiesis and likely serves to regulate MLL function. Deletions of MLL that
abolish interactions with PAFc also eliminate MLL-AF9 mediated immortalization
indicating an essential function for this interaction in leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2888888
PMID: 20541477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Blood. 2010 Aug 12;116(6):962-70. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-244673. Epub 2010
Jun 2.

Aberrant induction of LMO2 by the E2A-HLF chimeric transcription factor and its
implication in leukemogenesis of B-precursor ALL with t(17;19).

Hirose K(1), Inukai T, Kikuchi J, Furukawa Y, Ikawa T, Kawamoto H, Oram SH,
Göttgens B, Kiyokawa N, Miyagawa Y, Okita H, Akahane K, Zhang X, Kuroda I, Honna 
H, Kagami K, Goi K, Kurosawa H, Look AT, Matsui H, Inaba T, Sugita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Yamanashi,
Shimokato, Yamanashi, Japan.

LMO2, a critical transcription regulator of hematopoiesis, is involved in human
T-cell leukemia. The binding site of proline and acidic amino acid-rich protein
(PAR) transcription factors in the promoter of the LMO2 gene plays a central role
in hematopoietic-specific expression. E2A-HLF fusion derived from t(17;19) in
B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has the transactivation domain of 
E2A and the basic region/leucine zipper domain of HLF, which is a PAR
transcription factor, raising the possibility that E2A-HLF aberrantly induces
LMO2 expression. We here demonstrate that cell lines and a primary sample of
t(17;19)-ALL expressed LMO2 at significantly higher levels than other B-precursor
ALLs did. Transfection of E2A-HLF into a non-t(17;19) B-precursor ALL cell line
induced LMO2 gene expression that was dependent on the DNA-binding and
transactivation activities of E2A-HLF. The PAR site in the LMO2 gene promoter was
critical for E2A-HLF-induced LMO2 expression. Gene silencing of LMO2 in a
t(17;19)-ALL cell line by short hairpin RNA induced apoptotic cell death. These
observations indicated that E2A-HLF promotes cell survival of t(17;19)-ALL cells 
by aberrantly up-regulating LMO2 expression. LMO2 could be a target for a new
therapeutic modality for extremely chemo-resistant t(17;19)-ALL.

PMID: 20519628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Protein Expr Purif. 2010 Nov;74(1):60-4. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2010.04.015. Epub
2010 Apr 28.

A selectively terminable transgenic rice line expressing human lactoferrin.

Lin C(1), Nie P, Lu W, Zhang Q, Li J, Shen Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology and Institute of Insect Sciences,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is a multifunctional milk protein which could be utilized
for promoting human health. Transgenic rice has been used as a bioreactor for
mass production of recombinant hLF. However, one major concern over such
transgenic rice is the risk of its unintended spreading into environment and into
our food supplies. Here we report the development of selectively terminable
transgenic rice expressing human lactoferrin in seeds. These transgenic rice
plants could be selectively terminated by bentazon, a common herbicide used for
rice weed control. The hLF expression cassette was constructed into a T-DNA
containing the RNA interference cassette suppressing the expression of the rice
gene CYP81A6 which detoxifies herbicide bentazon, and the
5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase (EPSPS) cassette which confers to
glyphosate tolerance. A transgenic line, named as G281, was identified for its
high sensitivity to bentazon, high tolerance to glyphosate, and high expression
of hLF. Southern analysis suggested G281 is a single copy insertion event. Field 
tests demonstrated that G281 plants can be completely killed by a single spray of
bentazon at 1000 mg/L, which is safe to regular rice and represents only half of 
the dose recommended by manufacturer for rice field weed control. Therefore, any 
G281 contaminations in regular rice could be selectively terminated to make sure 
it will not enter food or feed supplies.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20433928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2010 May;31(5):554-9. doi: 10.1038/aps.2010.44. Epub 2010 Apr
26.

Bleomycin induces upregulation of lysyl oxidase in cultured human fetal lung
fibroblasts.

Chen LJ(1), Li WD, Li SF, Su XW, Lin GY, Huang YJ, Yan GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510089, China. chenlij@mail.sysu.edu.cn

AIM: To investigate the mechanism of bleomycin (BLM)-induced pulmonary fibrosis.
METHODS: Cultured human fetal lung fibroblast (HLF) cells were exposed to
bleomycin (BLM) at 0-30 microg/mL for 24 h. Western blot analysis was used to
detect lysyl oxidase (LO) protein expression. Real-time RT-PCR was used to detect
LO mRNA level. LO catalytic activity was measured using diaminopentane as a
substrate and Amplex red as a hydrogen peroxide probe. Copper (Cu) concentration 
was detected by flame atomic absorption spectrophotometry.
RESULTS: Exposure of HLF cells to BLM at 10 microg/mL and 30 microg/mL increased 
LO catalytic activity to 130% and 158% of the control in the conditioned media.
The expression of LO mRNA was increased to 5.5-fold of the control in HLF cells
exposure to BLM at 3 microg/mL. BLM at 3 microg/mL also increased the expression 
of 46 kDa preproLO, 50 kDa proLO and 32 kDa mature LO to 219%, 130%, and 135% of 
the control, respectively. The Cu concentrations in conditioned media of cultured
HLF cells exposed to BLM (10 and 30 microg/mL) were increased significantly to
1.48 and 2.46-fold of the control, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Bleomycin induces upregulation of LO in cultured human fetal lung
fibroblasts, which may be the mechanism of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4002757
PMID: 20418892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Biosci Bioeng. 2010 May;109(5):499-503. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2009.10.020.

Noninvasive discrimination of human normal cells and malignant tumor cells by
phase-shifting laser microscopy.

Tokumitsu A(1), Wakitani S, Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology and Macromolecular Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Hokkaido University, N13W8 Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8628, Japan.

The noninvasive discrimination of cancer cells from normal cells in adherent
culture by the measuring of the phase shift using phase-shifting laser microscopy
(PLM) was investigated with the aim of noninvasive quality control of cell
processing for transplantation. A human prostatic carcinoma epithelial cell line 
(PC-3) and human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (Hep3B, PLC, HLF, and Huh7) 
showed markedly lower phase shifts as measured by PLM than those of human
prostate epithelial cells (PREC) and cryopreserved human hepatocytes,
respectively, although there was no apparent difference in cell morphology
between these sets of cells. Mixed cultures of PC-3 and PREC, in which the
percentages of PC-3 cells were determined to be 43.3%, 14.0%, and 10.6% by
immunofluorescence staining, were prepared, and the percentages were calculated
to be 50.0%, 8.0%, and 2.5% using the distribution of the phase shift data of the
cells, respectively. In conclusion, these adherent cancer cells can be
noninvasively discriminated from normal adherent cells by phase shift measurement
using PLM, and the sensitivity of the method of detecting cancer cell
contamination reached 10%.

(c) 2009 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20347774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. FEBS J. 2010 May;277(9):2051-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07620.x. Epub 2010
Mar 19.

Human lactoferrin activates NF-kappaB through the Toll-like receptor 4 pathway
while it interferes with the lipopolysaccharide-stimulated TLR4 signaling.

Ando K(1), Hasegawa K, Shindo K, Furusawa T, Fujino T, Kikugawa K, Nakano H,
Takeuchi O, Akira S, Akiyama T, Gohda J, Inoue J, Hayakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Japan.

Lactoferrin (LF) has been implicated in innate immunity. Here we reveal the
signal transduction pathway responsible for human LF (hLF)-triggered nuclear
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation. Endotoxin-depleted hLF induces NF-kappaB
activation at physiologically relevant concentrations in the human monocytic
leukemia cell line, THP-1, and in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). In MEFs, in
which both tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) and TRAF5
are deficient, hLF causes NF-kappaB activation at a level comparable to that seen
in wild-type MEFs, whereas TRAF6-deficient MEFs show significantly impaired
NF-kappaB activation in response to hLF. TRAF6 is known to be indispensable in
leading to NF-kappaB activation in myeloid differentiating factor 88
(MyD88)-dependent signaling pathways, while the role of TRAF6 in the
MyD88-independent signaling pathway has not been clarified extensively. When we
examined the hLF-dependent NF-kappaB activation in MyD88-deficient MEFs, delayed,
but remarkable, NF-kappaB activation occurred as a result of the treatment of
cells with hLF, indicating that both MyD88-dependent and MyD88-independent
pathways are involved. Indeed, hLF fails to activate NF-kappaB in MEFs lacking
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), a unique TLR group member that triggers both
MyD88-depependent and MyD88-independent signalings. Importantly, the carbohydrate
chains from hLF are shown to be responsible for TLR4 activation. Furthermore, we 
show that lipopolysaccharide-induced cytokine and chemokine production is
attenuated by intact hLF but not by the carbohydrate chains from hLF. Thus, we
present a novel model concerning the biological function of hLF: hLF induces
moderate activation of TLR4-mediated innate immunity through its carbohydrate
chains; however, hLF suppresses endotoxemia by interfering with
lipopolysaccharide-dependent TLR4 activation, probably through its polypeptide
moiety.

PMID: 20345905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Hepatol Res. 2010 Apr;40(4):424-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2009.00619.x. Epub
2010 Mar 4.

Chemokine CCL3 facilitates the migration of hepatoma cells by changing the
concentration intracellular Ca.

Yuan Y(1), Liu J, Liu Z, He Y, Zhang Z, Jiang C, Qian Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Department of Surgery, Zhongnan Hospital,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

AIM: Recurrence and metastasis are the major factors associated with the poor
prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It was confirmed that multiple
chemokines and their receptors are related to the progression and metastasis of
HCC. The aim of this research was to conduct an investigation into whether
macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha/CCL3, and its receptor CCR1 play a role in
HCC invasion and metastasis.
METHODS: We used reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction,
immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry to detect CCR1 mRNA and protein expression
in the four hepatoma cell lines HepG2, Hep3B, HLE and HLF; and we conducted a
microscope cell migration experiment to observe the pseudopodia formation and
mobility of the hepatoma cells. The concentration of intracellular calcium was
measured by fluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: CCR1 mRNA and protein were positively expressed in the four hepatoma
cell lines HepG2, Hep3B, HLE and HLF. Following CCL3 stimulation, obvious
pseudopodia formation of hepatoma cells was observed using a fluorescence
microscope. The cell migration experiment showed that after incubation with CCL3,
the number of Hep3B cells which passed through the polycarbonate microporous
filter membranes increased to an obvious extent. After CCL3 incubation, the
intracellular Ca(2+) level of the Hep3B cells increased to an obvious extent.
CONCLUSION: Chemokine CCL3 facilitates the migration of hepatoma by changing the 
concentration intracellular Ca(2+). The CCL3-CCR1 axis may play an important role
in HCC invasion and metastasis. It may also be a potential target for HCC therapy
or for prevention of the recurrence and metastasis of HCC.

PMID: 20236357  [PubMed]


229. Br J Dermatol. 2010 Jul;163(1):38-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09748.x. Epub
2010 Mar 6.

Human lactoferrin stimulates skin keratinocyte function and wound
re-epithelialization.

Tang L(1), Wu JJ, Ma Q, Cui T, Andreopoulos FM, Gil J, Valdes J, Davis SC, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human lactoferrin (hLF), a member of the transferrin family, is known
for its antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory effects. Recent studies on various
nonskin cell lines indicate that hLF may have a stimulatory effect on cell
proliferation.
OBJECTIVES: To study the potential role of hLF in wound re-epithelialization.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effects of hLF on cell growth, migration, attachment
and survival were assessed, with a rice-derived recombinant hLF (holo-rhLF),
using proliferation analysis, scratch migration assay, calcein-AM/propidium
iodide staining and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end 
labelling (TUNEL) method, respectively. The mechanisms of hLF on cell
proliferation and migration were explored using specific pathway inhibitors. The 
involvement of lactoferrin receptor low-density lipoprotein receptor-related
protein 1 (LRP1) was examined with RNA interference technique. An in vivo swine
second-degree burn wound model was also used to assess wound
re-epithelialization.
RESULTS: Studies revealed that holo-rhLF significantly stimulated keratinocyte
proliferation which could be blocked by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
kinase 1 inhibitor. Holo-rhLF also showed strong promoting effects on
keratinocyte migration, which could be blocked by either inhibition of the MAPK, 
Src and Rho/ROCK pathways, or downregulation of the LRP1 receptor. With cells
under starving or 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate exposure, the addition of 
holo-rhLF was found greatly to increase cell viability and inhibit cell
apoptosis. Additionally, holo-rhLF significantly increased the rate of wound
re-epithelialization in swine second-degree burn wounds.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies demonstrate the direct effects of holo-rhLF on wound
re-epithelialization including the enhancement of keratinocyte proliferation and 
migration as well as the protection of cells from apoptosis. The data strongly
indicate its potential therapeutic applications in wound healing.

PMID: 20222924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Drug Target. 2010 Nov;18(9):675-87. doi: 10.3109/10611861003649720.

Targeting of the B-lineage leukemia stem cells and their progeny with
norcantharidin encapsulated liposomes modified with a novel CD19 monoclonal
antibody 2E8 in vitro.

Zhang J(1), Tang Y, Li S, Liao C, Guo X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Neonatal
Diseases, Children&#x2019;s Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou 310003, People&#x2019;s Republic of China.

This study was aimed to generate a new agent, norcantharidin (NCTD) encapsulated 
liposomes modified with a novel murine anti-human CD19 monoclonal antibody 2E8
(2E8NCTDliposomes), to specifically target the B-lineage leukemia stem cells
(B-LSCs) and their progeny in vitro. Our results have shown that the positive
percentage of 2E8NCTDliposomes on CD19+ Nalm-6 cells was (95.82 ± 1.09)%,
significantly higher than that on CD19- Molt-3 cells [(2.94 ± 0.07)%, P<0.01],
demonstrated by using multiparameter flow cytometry. The IC50 of
2E8NCTDliposomes on Nalm-6 cells using MTT assay was 14.52 µM, which was
significantly lower than that on Molt-3 cells (45.89 µM, P < 0.01). The confocal 
microscopy and multiparameter flow cytometry analyses revealed that the
internalization of 2E8NCTDliposomes into the cells and subsequently the release
of NCTD into the cytoplasm to induce the apoptosis of B cells were responsible
for specific cytotoxicity to the cells targeted. Real-time RT-PCR showed that the
immunoliposomes were able to induce the apoptosis of B-LSCs via down-regulating
the HLF and up-regulating the NFIL3 (nuclear factor, IL3 regulated) expressions
at the mRNA level. Our conclusion is that 2E8NCTDliposome is a promising agent 
for selectively eradicating the B-LSCs and their progeny in vitro which warrants 
further studies in vivo.

PMID: 20222850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Exp Ther Med. 2010 Mar;1(2):277-283. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Deuterium-depleted water inhibits human lung carcinoma cell growth by apoptosis.

Cong FS(1), Zhang YR, Sheng HC, Ao ZH, Zhang SY, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences and Technology, Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai 200240;

To investigate the in vivo and in vitro inhibitory effects of deuterium-depleted 
water (DDW) on human lung cancer and the possible mechanisms underlying these
effects, we cultured and treated human lung carcinoma cell line A549 and human
embryonic lung fibroblasts HLF-1 with various concentrations of DDW from 2 to 72 
h. Cellular growth inhibition rates were determined using the 3-(4,
5-dimethyldiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium-bromide) (MTT) proliferation
assay. A549 cells were treated with 50±5 ppm DDW, and the morphology and
structure of cells were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). We
observed alterations in the cellular skeleton by transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and changes in cell cycle by flow cytometry. Our data showed that DDW
significantly inhibited the proliferation of A549 cells at a specific time point,
and cells demonstrated the characteristic morphological changes of apoptosis
under SEM and TEM. The length of the S phase increased significantly in cells
treated with 50 ppm DDW, whereas the G0 to G1 phase and G2 to M phase were
decreased. We observed DDW-induced cellular apoptosis using terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) and DNA fragment
analyses. In addition, we established a tumor transplantion model by injecting
H460 tumor cells into subcutaneous tissue of BALB/c mice treated with DDW for 60 
days. We determined the tumor inhibition rate of treated and control groups and
found that the tumor weight was significantly decreased and the tumor inhibition 
rate was approximately 30% in the DDW group. We conclude that DDW is a promising 
new anticancer agent with potential for future clinical application.

PMCID: PMC3445928
PMID: 22993540  [PubMed]


232. Biometals. 2010 Jun;23(3):543-54. doi: 10.1007/s10534-010-9298-0. Epub 2010 Feb
11.

Probiotic Lactobacillus casei expressing human lactoferrin elevates antibacterial
activity in the gastrointestinal tract.

Chen HL(1), Lai YW, Chen CS, Chu TW, Lin W, Yen CC, Lin MF, Tu MY, Chen CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Da-Yeh University, Changhwa 515,
Taiwan.

In this study, Lactobacillus casei was used to deliver and express human
lactoferrin (hLF) to protect the host against bacterial infection. Full-length
hLF cDNA was cloned into a Lactobacillus-specific plasmid to produce the L. casei
transformants (rhLF/L. casei). Antimicrobial activity of recombinant hLF was
examined in inhibition of bacteria growth in vitro. A mouse model was established
to test in vivo antibacterial activity and protective effect of
orally-administered probiotic L. casei transformant in the gastrointestinal
tract. Trials were conducted in which animals were challenged with E. coli
ATCC25922. E. coli colony numbers in duodenal fluid from the group fed with
rhLF/L. casei were significantly lower than those of the group fed with wild-type
L. casei or placebo (P < 0.01). Histopathological analyses of the small
intestine, showed both decreased intestinal injury and increased villi length
were observed in the mice fed with rhLF/L. casei as compared with the control
groups (P < 0.01). Our results demonstrate that L. casei expressing hLF exhibited
antibacterial activity both in in vitro and in vivo. It also provides a
potentially large-scale production of hLF as applications for treatment of
infections caused by clinically relevant pathogens.

PMID: 20148305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Leukemia. 2010 Apr;24(4):865-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.8. Epub 2010 Feb 11.

Specific induction of CD33 expression by E2A-HLF: the first evidence for aberrant
myeloid antigen expression in ALL by a fusion transcription factor.

Akahane K, Inukai T, Inaba T, Kurosawa H, Look AT, Kiyokawa N, Fujimoto J, Goto
H, Endo M, Zhang X, Hirose K, Kuroda I, Honna H, Kagami K, Goi K, Nakazawa S,
Sugita K.

PMID: 20147975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Early Hum Dev. 2010 Jul;86 Suppl 1:59-61. doi: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2010.01.009. 
Epub 2010 Feb 6.

Lactoferrin and prevention of late-onset sepsis in the pre-term neonates.

Manzoni P(1), Decembrino L, Stolfi I, Pugni L, Rinaldi M, Cattani S, Romeo MG,
Messner H, Laforgia N, Vagnarelli F, Memo L, Bordignon L, Saia OS, Maule M, Gallo
E, Mostert M, Magnani C, Quercia M, Bollani L, Pedicino R, Renzullo L, Betta P,
Ferrari F, Magaldi R, Mosca F, Stronati M, Farina D; Italian Task Force for the
Study and Prevention of Neonatal Fungal Infections; Italian Society of
Neonatology.

Collaborators: Di Comite A, Borghesi A, Tzialla C, Agriesti G, Arisio R, Gomirato
G, Giovannozzi C, Cipolla D, Natale F, Corona G, Tumminelli F, Vetrano G,
Tridapalli E, Vitale S, Caliendo E.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Units of S. Anna Hospital, Turin, Italy.
paolomanzoni@hotmail.com

Late-onset sepsis (LOS) affects a large proportion of pre-term neonates in
neonatal intensive care units (NICUs) worldwide, with high morbidity and related 
mortality, and frequent occurrence of severe late neurodevelopmental impairment. 
Due to the frequency, severity and difficulties in early diagnosis and prompt
therapy, prevention is crucial for decreasing the burden of infection-related
complications in NICUs. It is well known that feeding with fresh maternal milk,
hygiene measures and the cautious use of H2-blockers are related with a decreased
risk of developing sepsis. However, evidence from randomised clinical trials
exists only for fluconazole in the prevention of fungal infections in the NICU.
Lactoferrin is the main whey protein in mammalian milk, and is involved in innate
immune host defences. Notably, human lactoferrin can be found at increased
concentrations in colostrum and in milk from mothers of premature neonates. Human
(hLF) and bovine lactoferrin (bLF) share a high (77%) amino-acid homology, and
the same N-terminal peptide responsible for antimicrobial activity, called
lactoferricin. In vitro, bLF shows potent direct antimicrobial activity against
all types of pathogens, which occurs via anti-cell wall actions and leads to
disintegration of the micro-organism's membranes. bLF is also synergistic with
many antimicrobials and antifungals, and promotes growth and differentiation of
the immature gut. Based on this background data, a randomised clinical trial was 
recently conducted in very low birth weight pre-term neonates given bLF alone or 
with the probiotic Lactobacillus GG. The aim of the trial was to assess the
ability of bLF to prevent late-onset sepsis of any origin in the studied infants 
during their stay in the NICU. This article discusses the preliminary data from
this study, along with the proposed mechanisms of action of bLF in pre-term
infants.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20138718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Phytomedicine. 2010 Jul;17(8-9):640-5. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2009.12.010. Epub
2010 Jan 21.

The pharmacokinetics of C-glycosyl flavones of Hawthorn leaf flavonoids in rat
after single dose oral administration.

Ma LY(1), Liu RH, Xu XD, Yu MQ, Zhang Q, Liu HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. mly66@hotmail.com

Hawthorn leaf flavonoids (HLF) are used in the treatment of cardiovascular
diseases. Various potential pharmacodynamic effects have been observed for
vitexin-4''-O-glucoside (VOG) and vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside (VOR) which are the
main constituents of HLF. The aim of this study was to investigate the
pharmacokinetics of VOG and VOR when a single dose of HLF was administrated
orally. The levels of VOG and VOR in plasma, tissues (heart, liver, spleen, lung,
kidney and brain), bile, urine and feces were measured by HPLC-UV. The results
showed that VOG and VOR have the similar pharmacokinetics. Both of them were
absorbed quickly into plasma with maximal plasma concentrations of VOG and VOR
being reached within 0.75 h. The mean elimination half-life (t(1/2)) of VOG and
VOR were 2.53 h and 2.32 h, respectively. High levels of tissue distribution of
VOG and VOR were observed in liver and kidney. No VOG and VOR were detected in
brain tissue. There was no long-term accumulation of VOG and VOR in rat tissues
examined. The total recovery of the dose in 24 hours was 64.91% (0.70% in urine; 
64.21% in feces) for VOG and 89.01% (0.72% in urine; 88.29% in feces) for VOR.
The cumulative VOG and VOR excreted in bile represented 0.58% and 13.38% of the
doses, respectively. VOG and VOR in HLF were not efficiently absorbed in the
rodent gastrointestinal tract.

(c) 2009 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20096549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Wound Repair Regen. 2010 Jan-Feb;18(1):123-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1524-475X.2009.00563.x.

A rice-derived recombinant human lactoferrin stimulates fibroblast proliferation,
migration, and sustains cell survival.

Tang L(1), Cui T, Wu JJ, Liu-Mares W, Huang N, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

Human lactoferrin (hLF), a glycoprotein of the transferrin family, has recently
been shown to stimulate wound repair through its antimicrobial effect and
inflammation modulation. A recent study with several non-skin cell lines
indicated that hLF may also have a stimulatory effect on cell proliferation. To
explore the role of hLF in wound healing, we used recombinant human lactoferrin
(holo-rhLF), derived from transgenic rice, to examine the effects of holo-rhLF on
cell proliferation, migration, attachment, and survival in a human primary skin
fibroblast culture system. This study revealed that holo-rhLF not only
significantly stimulates fibroblast proliferation but also has synergistic
effects with fibroblast growth factor-2 and antagonistic effects with
transforming growth factor-beta1 on cell proliferation. Furthermore, using a
chamber migration assay, our results demonstrate that holo-rhLF promotes
fibroblast migration in a dosage-dependent manner. More importantly, holo-rhLF
significantly increased cell viability and protected cells from death when they
were stressed by either serum depletion or 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
exposure. No significant effect was observed on cell attachment. In conclusion,
these findings reveal the multiple functions of holo-rhLF in human skin
fibroblasts and indicate its potential application in wound therapy by enhancing 
cell proliferation and migration as well as protecting cells from apoptosis.

PMID: 20082685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 Nov;40(6):994-9.

[The effect of matrine on the signal transduction pathway of transforming growth 
factor-beta1 in human lung fibroblast cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Ling W(1), Xie M, Shi JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of matrine on the signal transduction
pathway of transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1).
METHODS: The effect of TGF-beta1, Staurosporine, PD98059 and matrine on the
expression of CTGF, CTGF mRNA, p-Smad2, and p-ERK1/2 were evaluated by Western
blot in cultured HLF-02 cells. Immunohistochemical staining was applied to test
the expression of CTGF and the expression level of CTGF mRNA was assayed by
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Basal levels of CTGF protein were observed in cultured HLF-02. The
expression of CTGF, CTGF mRNA, p-Smad2 and p-ERK1/2, in HLF-02 cells were
stimulated significantly (P < 0.01) by 1 ng/mL TGF-beta1 treatment. The increase 
of CTGF protein was inhibited significantly by pre-incubation with Staurosporine 
(SP) and PD98059 (P < 0.01). And matrine could markedly inhibited the
up-regulation of CTGF, CTGF mRNA, p-Smad2 and p-ERK1/2 (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01) in 
a concentration-dependant manner.
CONCLUSION: CTGF, CTGF mRNA, p-Smad2 and p-ERK1/2 of HLF-02 cells could be
significantly up-regulated after treated with TGF-beta1, and these increases
could be inhibited significantly by matrine. This implied that matrine inhibit
the expression of CTGF and CTGF mRNA induced by TGF-beta1 through the Smad2 and
ERK signal transduction pathways.

PMID: 20067105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 1;29(13):1963-75. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.475. Epub 2010 Jan 11.

Identification of Zfp521/ZNF521 as a cooperative gene for E2A-HLF to develop
acute B-lineage leukemia.

Yamasaki N(1), Miyazaki K, Nagamachi A, Koller R, Oda H, Miyazaki M, Sasaki T,
Honda ZI, Wolff L, Inaba T, Honda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology 
and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

E2A-hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) is a chimeric protein found in B-lineage acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with t(17;19). To analyze the leukemogenic process
and to create model mice for t(17;19)-positive leukemia, we generated inducible
knock-in (iKI) mice for E2A-HLF. Despite the induced expression of E2A-HLF in the
hematopoietic tissues, no disease was developed during the long observation
period, indicating that additional gene alterations are required to develop
leukemia. To elucidate this process, E2A-HLF iKI and control littermates were
subjected to retroviral insertional mutagenesis. Virus infection induced acute
leukemias in E2A-HLF iKI mice with higher morbidity and mortality than in control
mice. Inverse PCR detected three common integration sites specific for E2A-HLF
iKI leukemic mice, which induced overexpression of zinc-finger transcription
factors: growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1), zinc-finger protein subfamily 1A1
isoform a (Zfp1a1, also known as Ikaros) and zinc-finger protein 521 (Zfp521).
Interestingly, tumors with Zfp521 integration exclusively showed B-lineage ALL,
which corresponds to the phenotype of human t(17;19)-positive leukemia. In
addition, ZNF521 (human counterpart of Zfp521) was found to be overexpressed in
human leukemic cell lines harboring t(17;19). Moreover, both iKI for E2A-HLF and 
transgenic for Zfp521 mice frequently developed B-lineage ALL. These results
indicate that a set of transcription factors promote leukemic transformation of
E2A-HLF-expressing hematopoietic progenitors and suggest that aberrant expression
of Zfp521/ZNF521 may be clinically relevant to t(17;19)-positive B-lineage ALL.

PMID: 20062079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Sensors (Basel). 2010;10(4):2460-71. doi: 10.3390/s100402460. Epub 2010 Mar 24.

Estimation of biological oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand for combined
sewer systems using synchronous fluorescence spectra.

Hur J(1), Lee BM, Lee TH, Park DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Sejong University, 98
Gunja-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 143-747, Korea. jinhur@sejong.ac.kr

Real-time monitoring of water quality for sewer system is required for efficient 
sewer network design because it provides information on the precise loading of
pollutant to wastewater treatment facilities and the impact of loading on
receiving water. In this study, synchronous fluorescence spectra and its first
derivatives were investigated using a number of wastewater samples collected in
sewer systems in urban and non-urban areas, and the optimum fluorescence feature 
was explored for the estimation of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and chemical
oxygen demand (COD) concentrations of sewer samples. The temporal variations in
BOD and COD showed a regular pattern for urban areas whereas they were relatively
irregular for non-urban areas. Irrespective of the sewer pipes and the types of
the areas, two distinct peaks were identified from the synchronous fluorescence
spectra, which correspond to protein-like fluorescence (PLF) and humic-like
fluorescence (HLF), respectively. HLF in sewer samples appears to be associated
with fluorescent whitening agents. Five fluorescence characteristics were
selected from the synchronous spectra and the first-derivatives. Among the
selected fluorescence indices, a peak in the PLF region (i.e., Index I) showed
the highest correlation coefficient with both BOD and COD. A multiple regression 
approach based on suspended solid (SS) and Index I used to compensate for the
contribution of SS to BOD and COD revealed an improvement in the estimation
capability, showing good correlation coefficients of 0.92 and 0.94 for BOD and
COD, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3274188
PMID: 22319257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Sensors (Basel). 2010;10(1):254-65. doi: 10.3390/s100100254. Epub 2009 Dec 29.

Spectroscopic and chromatographic characterization of wastewater organic matter
from a biological treatment plant.

Park MH(1), Lee TH, Lee BM, Hur J, Park DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Sejong University, 98
Gunja-dong, Gwangjin-ku, Seoul, 143-747, Korea. p31116@hanmail.net

Spectroscopic and chromatographic changes in dissolved organic matter (DOM)
characteristics of influent and treated sewage were investigated for a wastewater
treatment plant (WWTP) with a biological advanced process. Refractory DOM (R-DOM)
was defined as the dissolved organic carbon concentrations of the samples after
28-day incubation for this study. Specific UV absorbance (SUVA), hydrophobicity, 
synchronous fluorescence spectra and molecular weight (MW) distributions were
selected as DOM characteristics. The percent distribution of R-DOM for the
effluent was much higher than that of the influent, indicating that biodegradable
DOM was selectively removed during the process. Comparison of the influent versus
the effluent sewage revealed that SUVA, fulvic-like fluorescence (FLF),
humic-like fluorescence (HLF), the apparent MW values were enhanced during the
treatment. This suggests that more aromatic and humic-like compounds were
enriched during the biological process. No significant difference in the DOM
characteristics was observed between the original effluent (i.e., prior to the
incubation) and the influent sewage after the incubation. This result suggests
that the major changes in wastewater DOM characteristics occurring during the
biological advanced process were similar to those for simple microbial
incubation.

PMCID: PMC3270839
PMID: 22315538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2010 May;28(3):271-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2009.12.001.
Epub 2009 Dec 16.

Long-term effects of high lipid and high energy diet on serum lipid, brain fatty 
acid composition, and memory and learning ability in mice.

Yu H(1), Bi Y, Ma W, He L, Yuan L, Feng J, Xiao R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health and Family
Medicine, Capital Medical University, No. 10 Xitoutiao, You An Men, Beijing
100069, China. yuhlzjl@ccmu.edu.cn <yuhlzjl@ccmu.edu.cn>

OBJECTIVE: It is well known that high lipid and high energy diet is harmful to
health. But the different effects of high lipid diet composed of either saturated
fatty acids or unsaturated fatty acids have not been distinguished.
METHOD: Eighteen pregnant C57BL/6j (22-25g) mice were randomly divided into three
groups of six each and fed with chow or high lipid diet composed of either
flaxseed oil (chow diet 84%, cholesterol 0.2%, flaxseed oil 15.8%) or lard fat
(chow diet 84%, cholesterol 0.2%, lard fat 15.8%). After weaning, the offspring
were fed the same diet as their mothers were fed during the experiment, and their
spatial memory and learning ability were evaluated by Morris water maze when they
were 8 weeks old. Next, the blood and tissues were sampled when they were 9 weeks
old. Serum lipids were determined using kits, and brain fatty acids were measured
using a gas chromatograph.
RESULTS: Compared to chow diet (control), high flaxseed oil diet (HFO) increased 
high density lipoprotein cholesterol level (HDL-C) in the mothers but not in
offspring; high lard fat diet (HLF) increased serum total cholesterol level (TC) 
and low density lipoprotein cholesterol level (LDL-C) both in mothers and
offspring. Brain fatty acids profile was altered by HLF compared with chow diet. 
Polyunsaturated fatty acids and long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids content
were significantly lower in the HLF group than in the control group, but
saturated fatty acids content were significantly higher in HLF group than those
in control group. The changed fatty acids composition affected the spatial memory
and learning ability of adult offspring.
CONCLUSIONS: A long-term high lard diet increased offspring serum TC and LDL-C
levels and affected the brain's fatty acid composition, and memory and learning
ability. The polyunsaturated fatty acid content of the brain may be correlated
with serum cholesterol levels.

PMID: 20015474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Sep;30(9):615-8.

[Severe hypercalcemia complicated in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with
E2A-HLF fusion gene: report of two cases and literature review].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang J(1), Zhou X, Wang B, Gao C, Zhang RD, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)The Hematology Center of Beijing Children Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100045, China.

OBJECTIVE: To improve the understanding of severe hypercalcemia complicated in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with E2A-HLF fusion gene, and to explore the
mechanism of pathogenesis and the relationship between the special gene
translocation and severe hypercalcemia.
METHODS: Two patients with severe hypercalcemia complicated in ALL were reported.
RESULTS: Two patients with E2A-HLF fusion gene, which is generated by t(17;19)
(q22, p13) translocation, suffered relapse of leukemia three months after
chemotherapy, and developed severe hypercalcemia. After further chemotherapy, the
hypercalcemia symptoms were corrected or alleviated.
CONCLUSION: Severe hypercalcemia is one of rare complications of ALL. In B cell
lymphoblastic leukemia with E2A-HLF fusion gene, the fusion gene showed be
closely monitored for evaluating the disease situation.

PMID: 19954622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Anim Biotechnol. 2009;20(4):247-51. doi: 10.1080/10495390903196455.

The effect of retroviral vector on uptake of human lactoferrin DNA by Yak (Bos
Grunniens) spermatozoa and their fertilizability in vitro.

Zi XD(1), Chen SW, Liang GN, Chen DW, Zhang DW, Yin RH.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Education and 
State Ethnic Affairs Commission, Southwest University for Nationalities, Chengdu,
China. zixd2000@yahoo.com

The objectives of this study were to evaluate the transfection effectiveness of
retroviral vector PLNCX2 in yak sperm-mediated gene transfer (SMGT) and the
effect of SMGT on sperm motility and fertilizability. Human lactoferrin (hLF) DNA
was ligated into PLNCX2 to construct recombinant plasmid PLNCX2-hLF, then, using 
PLNCX2-hLF+FuGene 6 to generate SMGT yak spermatozoa for fertilizing bovine
oocytes. The result showed that DNA-binding rate increased with the extension of 
incubation period and DNA treatment did not decrease sperm motility. Oocytes
inseminated with SMGT-spermatozoa had a lower (P < 0.05) cleavage rate (57.7%)
than the control (73.4%), but development up to blastocyst stage was not
different (26.8 vs. 31.7%). It appears that PLNCX2 is useful for generating
transgenic yaks by SMGT.

PMID: 19937500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Mar;37(3):245-52. doi:
10.1007/s10295-009-0667-z.

Trichoderone, a novel cytotoxic cyclopentenone and cholesta-7, 22-diene-3 beta, 5
alpha, 6 beta-triol, with new activities from the marine-derived fungus
Trichoderma sp.

You J(1), Dai H, Chen Z, Liu G, He Z, Song F, Yang X, Fu H, Zhang L, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
510663 Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

The historical paradigm of the deep ocean as a biological 'desert' has shifted to
one of a 'rainforest' owing to the isolation of many novel microbes and their
associated bioactive compounds. To explore the potential of the bioactive
compounds in our marine microbial natural product library, we screened it for the
selective cytotoxicity of six different cancer cell lines to human normal lung
fibroblast cell line HLF. The crude extract from a marine-derived fungal strain
showed notable selectivity against cancer cell lines. For a bioactivity-guided
fractionation and purification, a novel cyclopentenone, (-)-(4R *, 5S
*)-3-ethyl-4,5-dihydroxycyclopent-2-enone (1, trichoderone), and a known compound
with new activity, cholesta-7,22- diene-3 beta,5 alpha,6 beta-triol (2), were
identified from a marine Trichoderma sp. that was isolated from the deep sea
sediment of the South China Sea. Their structures were determined by NMR and MS
data analyses. Trichoderone (1) displayed potent cytotoxicity against a panel of 
six cancer cell lines, whereas it did not show much cytotoxicity against normal
human lung fibroblast cell line HLF even at a concentration of 7.02 mM. The
selectivity index (SI) value for 1 was greater than 100. To the best of our
knowledge, both compounds were isolated from marine fungi for the first time.
They also exhibited bioactivities against HIV protease and Taq DNA polymerase.
Optimization of the compounds would shed new light on treating cancer and
infectious diseases.

PMID: 19936812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biometals. 2010 Feb;23(1):161-72. doi: 10.1007/s10534-009-9276-6. Epub 2009 Nov
15.

Response of antioxidant defense system to chromium (VI)-induced cytotoxicity in
human diploid cells.

Asatiani N(1), Abuladze M, Kartvelishvili T, Kulikova N, Asanishvili L, Holman
HY, Sapojnikova N.

Author information: 
(1)Andronikashvili Institute of Physics, 0177 Tbilisi, Georgia.

The aim of this study is to establish antioxidant indicators of chromium toxicity
in fetal human lung fibroblasts (HLF). The results obtained corroborate and
develop our earlier observation of low-dose and long-term action of Cr(VI) on
human cells in culture. In the case of a nontoxic chromium dose, temporary
oxidative stress is overcome by increased activity of the antioxidant system with
correlation to cell cycle re-entry. The toxic concentrations misbalance the cell 
antioxidant defense systems and cause irreversible growth arrest and massive cell
death by apoptosis. Sub-toxicity is defined as toxicity stretched in time. The
activity of GPx (glutathione peroxidase) is proposed as a biomarker of oxidative 
stress caused by Cr(VI), and the GR (glutathione reductase) inhibition is
considered as a marker of the toxicity developed under the complex Cr(VI) action.
In HLF cells the glutathione dependent defense system is the first system
destroyed in response to toxic chromium action. Only the balance between SOD
(superoxide dismutase) and H(2)O(2) degrading enzymes (catalase and GPx), should 
play an important role in the fate of a cell, not individual enzymes.

PMID: 19915997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Zhongguo Gu Shang. 2009 Oct;22(10):741-3.

[Selective fenestration lamina of cervical vertebral lamina to excise ligamentum 
flavum for treating hypertrophic ligamentum flavum].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhan BL(1), Ye Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, the Central Hospital of Quzhou, Quzhou 324000,
Zhejiang, China. zbl67899@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore operative method and clinical effect of selective
fenestration of cervical vertebral lamina to excise ligamentum flavum for
treating hypertrophic ligamentum flavum (HLF).
METHODS: From March 1998 to May 2007, 21 patients (14 males and 7 females) with
HLF were reviewed retrospectirely, whose age was from 37 to 76 years with an
average of 52.2 years. The history of HLF was from 5 h to 25 years with an
average of 3 years and 10 months. Reason of onset: 4 cases were no inducement, 10
cases were slow-moving,and 7 cases caused by injury. The operative effect was
assessed according to JOA scores and radiologic results.
RESULTS: All patients were followed up with an average of 2.5 years(ranging from 
3 months to 7.5 years). Radiologic results: sagittal diameter of vertebral canal 
and trans.sec.area increased and spinal cord were well than preoperative status. 
The majority of cases got stronger in the walking, improvement in the fingers
mobility and holding power and using chopsticks, abatement in the limbs numb and 
thoracic waist zonesthesia, amelioration in the urination and defecation
functional disturbance than preoperative symptom. The JOA scoring was 5-16 scores
with an average of 11.48 +/- 2.94 before operation,and 7-17 scores with an
average of 13.81 +/- 2.98 after operation. That results had statistical
significance between before and after operation (t = 3.51, P < 0.05). There were 
13 cases excellent (improvement rate more than 75%), 5 cases good (improvement
rate in 50%-74%), 2 cases fair (improvement rate in 25%-49%), 1 case poor
(improvement rate less than or equal to 24%) with an average improvement rate of 
85.2%.
CONCLUSION: It is simple in the operative procedure and tiny in trauma in
treatment for hypertrophic ligamentum flavum with selective fenestration of
cervical vertebral lamina to excise ligamentum flavum. The method can obtain
effective decompression for vertebral canal but choice of indication must be
reasonable.

PMID: 19902747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Nov 15;15(22):6939-46. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1631. 
Epub 2009 Nov 3.

Gene expression profiling of paraffin-embedded primary melanoma using the DASL
assay identifies increased osteopontin expression as predictive of reduced
relapse-free survival.

Conway C(1), Mitra A, Jewell R, Randerson-Moor J, Lobo S, Nsengimana J, Edward S,
Sanders DS, Cook M, Powell B, Boon A, Elliott F, de Kort F, Knowles MA, Bishop
DT, Newton-Bishop J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Leeds Institute of Molecular
Medicine, St. James's University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Gene expression studies in melanoma have been few because tumors are
small and cryopreservation is rarely possible. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the Illumina DASL Array Human Cancer Panel for gene expression studies
in formalin-fixed melanoma primary tumors and to identify prognostic biomarkers.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Primary tumors from two studies were sampled using a tissue 
microarray needle. Study 1: 254 tumors from a melanoma cohort recruited from 2000
to 2006. Study 2: 218 tumors from a case-control study of patients undergoing
sentinel node biopsy.
RESULTS: RNA was obtained from 76% of blocks; 1.4% of samples failed analysis
(transcripts from <250 of the 502 genes on the DASL chip detected). Increasing
age of the block and increased melanin in the tumor were associated with reduced 
number of genes detected. The gene whose expression was most differentially
expressed in association with relapse-free survival in study 1 was osteopontin
(SPP1; P = 2.11 x 10(-6)) and supportive evidence for this was obtained in study 
2 used as a validation set (P = 0.006; unadjusted data). Osteopontin level in
study 1 remained a significant predictor of relapse-free survival when data were 
adjusted for age, sex, tumor site, and histologic predictors of relapse. Genes
whose expression correlated most strongly with osteopontin were PBX1, BIRC5
(survivin), and HLF.
CONCLUSION: Expression data were obtained from 74% of primary melanomas and
provided confirmatory evidence that osteopontin expression is a prognostic
biomarker. These results suggest that predictive biomarker studies may be
possible using stored blocks from mature clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC2778654
PMID: 19887478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 15;285(3):1850-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.023762. Epub 2009 
Nov 2.

Up-regulation of survivin by the E2A-HLF chimera is indispensable for the
survival of t(17;19)-positive leukemia cells.

Okuya M(1), Kurosawa H, Kikuchi J, Furukawa Y, Matsui H, Aki D, Matsunaga T,
Inukai T, Goto H, Altura RA, Sugita K, Arisaka O, Look AT, Inaba T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine,
Tochigi 321-0293, Japan.

The E2A-HLF fusion transcription factor generated by t(17;19)(q22;p13)
translocation is found in a small subset of pro-B cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (ALLs) and promotes leukemogenesis by substituting for the
antiapoptotic function of cytokines. Here we show that t(17;19)+ ALL cells
express Survivin at high levels and that a dominant negative mutant of E2A-HLF
suppresses Survivin expression. Forced expression of E2A-HLF in t(17;19)(-)
leukemia cells up-regulated Survivin expression, suggesting that Survivin is a
downstream target of E2A-HLF. Analysis using a counterflow centrifugal elutriator
revealed that t(17;19)+ ALL cells express Survivin throughout the cell cycle.
Reporter assays revealed that E2A-HLF induces survivin expression at the
transcriptional level likely through indirect down-regulation of a cell
cycle-dependent cis element in the promoter region. Down-regulation of Survivin
function by a dominant negative mutant of Survivin or reduction of Survivin
expression induced massive apoptosis throughout the cell cycle in t(17;19)+ cells
mainly through caspase-independent pathways involving translocation of
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) from mitochondria to the nucleus. AIF knockdown
conferred resistance to apoptosis caused by down-regulation of Survivin function.
These data indicated that reversal of AIF translocation by Survivin, which is
induced by E2A-HLF throughout the cell cycle, is one of the key mechanisms in the
protection of t(17;19)+ leukemia cells from apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2804343
PMID: 19887369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 22;106(38):16523-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904890106. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Molecular clock is involved in predictive circadian adjustment of renal function.

Zuber AM(1), Centeno G, Pradervand S, Nikolaeva S, Maquelin L, Cardinaux L, Bonny
O, Firsov D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Lausanne, 1005
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Renal excretion of water and major electrolytes exhibits a significant circadian 
rhythm. This functional periodicity is believed to result, at least in part, from
circadian changes in secretion/reabsorption capacities of the distal nephron and 
collecting ducts. Here, we studied the molecular mechanisms underlying circadian 
rhythms in the distal nephron segments, i.e., distal convoluted tubule (DCT) and 
connecting tubule (CNT) and the cortical collecting duct (CCD). Temporal
expression analysis performed on microdissected mouse DCT/CNT or CCD revealed a
marked circadian rhythmicity in the expression of a large number of genes
crucially involved in various homeostatic functions of the kidney. This analysis 
also revealed that both DCT/CNT and CCD possess an intrinsic circadian timing
system characterized by robust oscillations in the expression of circadian core
clock genes (clock, bma11, npas2, per, cry, nr1d1) and clock-controlled Par bZip 
transcriptional factors dbp, hlf, and tef. The clock knockout mice or mice devoid
of dbp/hlf/tef (triple knockout) exhibit significant changes in renal expression 
of several key regulators of water or sodium balance (vasopressin V2 receptor,
aquaporin-2, aquaporin-4, alphaENaC). Functionally, the loss of clock leads to a 
complex phenotype characterized by partial diabetes insipidus, dysregulation of
sodium excretion rhythms, and a significant decrease in blood pressure.
Collectively, this study uncovers a major role of molecular clock in renal
function.

PMCID: PMC2752602
PMID: 19805330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 1;4(10):e7249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007249.

Inferring the transcriptional landscape of bovine skeletal muscle by integrating 
co-expression networks.

Hudson NJ(1), Reverter A, Wang Y, Greenwood PL, Dalrymple BP.

Author information: 
(1)Food Futures Flagship and Livestock Industries, Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organisation, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St. Lucia,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Despite modern technologies and novel computational approaches,
decoding causal transcriptional regulation remains challenging. This is
particularly true for less well studied organisms and when only gene expression
data is available. In muscle a small number of well characterised transcription
factors are proposed to regulate development. Therefore, muscle appears to be a
tractable system for proposing new computational approaches.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we report a simple algorithm that asks
"which transcriptional regulator has the highest average absolute co-expression
correlation to the genes in a co-expression module?" It correctly infers a number
of known causal regulators of fundamental biological processes, including cell
cycle activity (E2F1), glycolysis (HLF), mitochondrial transcription (TFB2M),
adipogenesis (PIAS1), neuronal development (TLX3), immune function (IRF1) and
vasculogenesis (SOX17), within a skeletal muscle context. However, none of the
canonical pro-myogenic transcription factors (MYOD1, MYOG, MYF5, MYF6 and MEF2C) 
were linked to muscle structural gene expression modules. Co-expression values
were computed using developing bovine muscle from 60 days post conception (early 
foetal) to 30 months post natal (adulthood) for two breeds of cattle, in addition
to a nutritional comparison with a third breed. A number of transcriptional
landscapes were constructed and integrated into an always correlated landscape.
One notable feature was a 'metabolic axis' formed from glycolysis genes at one
end, nuclear-encoded mitochondrial protein genes at the other, and centrally
tethered by mitochondrially-encoded mitochondrial protein genes.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The new module-to-regulator algorithm complements our
recently described Regulatory Impact Factor analysis. Together with a simple
examination of a co-expression module's contents, these three gene expression
approaches are starting to illuminate the in vivo transcriptional regulation of
skeletal muscle development.

PMCID: PMC2749936
PMID: 19794913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Leukemia. 2010 Jan;24(1):81-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.202. Epub 2009 Sep 24.

EVI-1 interacts with histone methyltransferases SUV39H1 and G9a for
transcriptional repression and bone marrow immortalization.

Goyama S(1), Nitta E, Yoshino T, Kako S, Watanabe-Okochi N, Shimabe M, Imai Y,
Takahashi K, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI-1) is a nuclear transcription factor 
and has an essential function in the proliferation/maintenance of haematopoietic 
stem cells. Aberrant expression of EVI-1 has been frequently found in myeloid
leukaemia as well as in several solid tumours, and is associated with a poor
patient survival. It was recently shown that EVI-1 associates with two different 
histone methyltransferases (HMTs), SUV39H1 and G9a. However, the functional roles
of these HMTs in EVI-1-mediated leukemogenesis remain unclear. In this study, we 
showed that EVI-1 physically interacts with SUV39H1 and G9a, but not with Set9.
Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that EVI-1 colocalizes with these HMTs in
nuclei. We also found that the catalytically inactive form of SUV39H1 abrogates
the transcriptional repression mediated by EVI-1, suggesting that SUV39H1 is
actively involved in EVI-1-mediated transcriptional repression. Furthermore,
RNAi-based knockdown of SUV39H1 or G9a in Evi-1-expressing progenitors
significantly reduced their colony-forming activity. In contrast, knockdown of
these HMTs did not impair bone marrow immortalization by E2A/HLF. These results
indicate that EVI-1 forms higher-order complexes with HMTs, and this association 
has a role in the transcription repression and bone marrow immortalization.
Targeting these HMTs may be of therapeutic benefit in the treatment for
EVI-1-related haematological malignancies.

PMID: 19776757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Oncogene. 2009 Dec 10;28(49):4364-74. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.288.

Pbx1 is a downstream target of Evi-1 in hematopoietic stem/progenitors and
leukemic cells.

Shimabe M(1), Goyama S, Watanabe-Okochi N, Yoshimi A, Ichikawa M, Imai Y,
Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate school of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Ecotropic viral integration site-1 (Evi-1) is a nuclear transcription factor,
which is essential for the proliferation/maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells 
(HSCs). Aberrant expression of Evi-1 has been frequently found in myeloid
leukemia, and is associated with a poor patient survival. Recently, we reported
candidate target genes of Evi-1 shared in HSCs and leukemic cells using gene
expression profiling analysis. In this study, we identified Pbx1, a
proto-oncogene in hematopoietic malignancy, as a target gene of Evi-1.
Overexpression of Evi-1 increased Pbx1 expression in hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. An analysis of the Pbx1 promoter region revealed that
Evi-1 upregulates Pbx1 transcription. Furthermore, reduction of Pbx1 levels
through RNAi-mediated knockdown significantly inhibited Evi-1-induced
transformation. In contrast, knockdown of Pbx1 did not impair bone marrow
transformation by E2A/HLF or AML1/ETO, suggesting that Pbx1 is specifically
required for the maintenance of bone marrow transformation mediated by Evi-1.
These results indicate that Pbx1 is a target gene of Evi-1 involved in
Evi-1-mediated leukemogenesis.

PMID: 19767769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 Jul;40(4):598-603.

[The effect or rosiglitazone on signal pathways of transforming growth
factor-beta1 in human lung fibroblast].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi JQ(1), Xie M, Wang YJ, Ling W, Wang HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of CTGF, CTGF mRNA, NF-kappaB and AP-1
induced by TGF-beta1 in human lung fibroblast (HLF-02), and study the effect and 
possible mechanism of rosiglitazone on signal pathways of TGF-beta1 in HLF-02.
METHODS: The effects of TGF-beta1, curcumin, PDTC and rosiglitazone on the
expression of CTGF, NF-kappaB and AP-1 were evaluated with Western blot. The
expression of CTGF was also detected with immunohistochemistry assay. The level
of CTGF mRNA was detected with RT-PCR.
RESULTS: (1) The CTGF protein levels of HLF-02 cells were significantly
up-regulated after incubated with 1 ng/mL TGF-beta1 for 15 min (P<0.01 vs
Control). The CTGF mRNA was also up-regulated. The levels of CTGF protein and
CTGF mRNA expression was up-regulated by TGF-beta1 in a time-dependent manner.
(2) The expression of NF-kappaB and AP-1 increased after HLF-02 cells were
incubated with 1 ng/mL TGF-beta1 for 30 min (P<0.01 vs Control). The CTGF protein
levels were inhibited obviously after HLF-02 cells were incubated with PDTC or
curcumin. (3) The expression of CTGF, NF-kappaB and AP-1 decreased after
pre-incubation with different doses of rosiglitazone (P<0.01 vs TGF-beta1 group).
The CTGF mRNA were also markedly inhibited (P<0.01 vs TGF-beta1 group).
CONCLUSION: It is supposed that rosiglitazone inhibits CTGF expression induced by
TGF-beta1 in HLF-02 cells by activating PPARgamma through NF-kappaB and AP-1
signal transduction pathways.

PMID: 19764552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Oncol. 2009 Oct;35(4):861-6.

SiRNA of frizzled-9 suppresses proliferation and motility of hepatoma cells.

Fujimoto T(1), Tomizawa M, Yokosuka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba City, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Frizzled (Fz), a receptor of Wnt ligands, plays key roles in liver
carcinogenesis. Its expression was analyzed as part of a search for a target of
molecular therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and hepatoblastoma (HB). Fz 
genes were analyzed by RT-PCR in HCC cell lines HLE, HLF, PLC/PRF/5, Huh-7 and
Hep3B, HB cell lines Huh-6 and HepG2, HeLa cells, human normal fetal and adult
liver. We transfected PLC/PRF/5, HLE, Huh-6, and HeLa cells with Fz9-small
interfering RNA (Fz9-siRNA). Five days after transfection, cell proliferation was
analyzed by MTS assay and cell motility by wound assay with H&E staining.
Subsequently, the expressions of cyclin D1 and caspase-3 were analyzed by Western
blot analysis. Fz9-siRNA decreased the expression of Fz9 gene in all cell lines. 
MTS assay showed that Fz9-siRNA significantly suppressed cell proliferation and
cell motility in all cell lines. The expression of cyclin D1 was also suppressed 
by Western blotting. Cleaved caspase-3 did not appear and apoptosis was not
observed in any of the cell lines tested. We demonstrated that Fz9 plays an
essential role in carcinogenesis of HB and HCC, concluding that Fz9-siRNA could
represent a useful therapeutic target for HB and HCC.

PMID: 19724923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;41(12):2566-77. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.08.012. Epub 2009 Aug 25.

Bioenergetics of lung tumors: alteration of mitochondrial biogenesis and
respiratory capacity.

Bellance N(1), Benard G, Furt F, Begueret H, Smolková K, Passerieux E, Delage JP,
Baste JM, Moreau P, Rossignol R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U688, Bordeaux, France.

Little is known on the metabolic profile of lung tumors and the reminiscence of
embryonic features. Herein, we determined the bioenergetic profiles of human
fibroblasts taken from lung epidermoid carcinoma (HLF-a) and fetal lung (MRC5).
We also analysed human lung tumors and their surrounding healthy tissue from four
patients with adenocarcinoma. On these different models, we measured functional
parameters (cell growth rates in oxidative and glycolytic media, respiration, ATP
synthesis and PDH activity) as well as compositional features (expression level
of various energy proteins and upstream transcription factors). The results
demonstrate that both the lung fetal and cancer cell lines produced their ATP
predominantly by glycolysis, while oxidative phosphorylation was only capable of 
poor ATP delivery. This was explained by a decreased mitochondrial biogenesis
caused by a lowered expression of PGC1alpha (as shown by RT-PCR and Western blot)
and mtTFA. Consequently, the relative expression of glycolytic versus OXPHOS
markers was high in these cells. Moreover, the re-activation of mitochondrial
biogenesis with resveratrol induced cell death specifically in cancer cells. A
consistent reduction of mitochondrial biogenesis and the subsequent alteration of
respiratory capacity was also observed in lung tumors, associated with a lower
expression level of bcl2. Our data give a better characterization of lung cancer 
cells' metabolic alterations which are essential for growth and survival. They
designate mitochondrial biogenesis as a possible target for anti-cancer therapy.

PMID: 19712747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biochem. 2009 Dec;146(6):839-44. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvp129. Epub 2009 Aug 11.

Cyclic AMP represses the hypoxic induction of hypoxia-inducible factors in PC12
cells.

Torii S(1), Okamura N, Suzuki Y, Ishizawa T, Yasumoto K, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Japan.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a master regulator for hypoxic activation
of genes for angiogenesis, hormone synthesis, glycolysis and cell survival. In
addition to hypoxic stimulus, various effectors and reagents were reported to
affect HIF-1 activity. Here, we show that cyclic AMP (cAMP) down-regulates the
HIF-1 activity in pheochromocytoma PC12 cells but not in Hep3B and HeLa cells.
Hypoxia response element-dependent reporter activity was decreased by the
addition of dibutyryl cAMP. Expression of protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic
alpha-subunits repressed the HIF-1 activity. HIF-1alpha and HLF (HIF-2alpha or
EPAS1) protein levels were decreased by the treatment with dibutyryl cAMP.
Although CREB was served as a negative factor for the HIF-1 activity, it may not 
be a major PKA target in the cAMP-dependent HIF-alpha repression pathway.
Induction of hypoxia responsive genes was suppressed by dibutyryl cAMP. Our
results provide additional insight into a regulatory mechanism of hypoxic
response.

PMID: 19671538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Mar;30(3):166-70.

[Establishment of a high expressing system of human coagulant factor VIII in
vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng H(1), Xu KL, Sun HY, Lu QX, He XP, Pan XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College,
Xuzhou 221002, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct a recombinant lentiviral vector (pXZ208-BDDhFVIII)
mediating B-domain-deleted human coagulation factor VIII (BDDhFVIII) gene and
investigate its expression in HLF, Chang-Liver and MSC cells.
METHODS: BDDhFVIII gene fragment was separated by endonuclease digestion and was 
cloned into the multiple cloning sites of pXZ208 to construct a recombinant
lentiviral vector pXZ208-BDDhFVIII. Viral particles were prepared by means of
three-plasmid cotransfection of 293T package cells by calcium phosphate
precipitation. After infection, the coagulant activity of human FVIII in the
culture medium of 293T, HLF, Chang-Liver and MSC cells was assayed by one-stage
method. The gene transduction efficiency was assayed by flow cytometry (FCM).
Furthermore, PCR was performed to test the integration of BDDhFVIII.
RESULTS: The infection rates of HLF, Chang-Liver and MSC were (74.52 +/- 7.57)%, 
(27.24 +/- 6.53)% and (42.34 +/- 5.84)% respectively. The activities of FVIII in 
supernatants of HLF, Chang-Liver and MSC were (54.1 +/- 5.6)%, (22.5 +/- 2.9)%
and (12.5 +/- 2.7)% respectively. BDDhFVIII gene integration was detected in all 
the infected cells.
CONCLUSION: The recombinant lentiviral vector pXZ208-BDDhFVIII was successfully
constructed and efficiently integrated into target cells to express human FVIII
activity in vitro.

PMID: 19642364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Biol Rhythms. 2009 Aug;24(4):283-94. doi: 10.1177/0748730409336579.

Clock gene modulation by TNF-alpha depends on calcium and p38 MAP kinase
signaling.

Petrzilka S(1), Taraborrelli C, Cavadini G, Fontana A, Birchler T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

A 24-h treatment with the cytokine tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)
suppresses transcription of E-box-driven clock genes (D-site albumin promoter
binding protein, Dbp; Tyrotroph embryonic factor, Tef ; Hepatic leukemia factor, 
Hlf; Period homolog to Drosophila 1/2/3, Per1, Per2, and Per3) by yet unknown
molecular mechanisms. The attenuation of clock genes has been suggested as a
putative cause for the development of sickness behavior syndrome in infectious
and autoimmune diseases. Here, the authors studied the effect of TNF-alpha at
early time points (<3 h) on intracellular signaling events and clock gene
expression in fibroblasts. Interaction of TNF-alpha with TNFR1 (Tnfrsf1a ,
CD120a, p55), but not TNFR2 (Tnfrsf1b, CD120b , p75), leads to fast
downregulation of gene expression of Dbp and upregulation of negative regulators 
of the molecular clock, Per1 and Per2, Cryptochrome-1 (Cry1), and Differentiated 
embryo chondrocytes-1 (Dec1). Since the decrease of Dbp is also observed in cells
deficient for Per1/Per2, Cry1/Cry2 , or Dec1, these genes are unlikely to be
responsible for inhibition of Dbp. The early effect of TNF-alpha on the clock
gene Per1 is dependent on p38, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and/or
calcium signaling, whereas the effect on Dbp is independent of p38 MAPK, but also
involves calcium signaling. Both genes remain unaffected by the NF-kappaB and
AP-1 pathway. Taken collectively these data show p38 MAPK- and calcium-dependent 
TNFR1-mediated transient increase of the negative regulator Per1 and an
independent decrease of Dbp.

PMID: 19625730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jul 18;9:240. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-240.

Twist expression promotes migration and invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Matsuo N(1), Shiraha H, Fujikawa T, Takaoka N, Ueda N, Tanaka S, Nishina S,
Nakanishi Y, Uemura M, Takaki A, Nakamura S, Kobayashi Y, Nouso K, Yagi T,
Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine and Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.
ayakouharujp@yahoo.co.jp

BACKGROUND: Twist, a transcription factor of the basic helix-loop-helix class, is
reported to regulate cancer metastasis. It is known to induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In this study, we evaluated the
expression of twist and its effect on cell migration in hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC).
METHODS: We examined twist expression using immunohistochemistry in 20 tissue
samples of hepatocellular carcinoma, and assessed twist expression in HCC cell
lines by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. Ectopic twist expression was created
by introducing a twist construct in the twist-negative HCC cell lines. Endogenous
twist expression was blocked by twist siRNA in the twist-positive HCC cell lines.
We studied EMT related markers, E-cadherin, Vimentin, and N-cadherin by Western
blot analysis. Cell proliferation was measured by MTT assay, and cell migration
was measured by in vitro wound healing assay. We used immunofluorescent vinculin 
staining to visualize focal adhesion.
RESULTS: We detected strong and intermediate twist expression in 7 of 20 tumor
samples, and no significant twist expression was found in the tumor-free
resection margins. In addition, we detected twist expression in HLE, HLF, and
SK-Hep1 cells, but not in PLC/RPF/5, HepG2, and Huh7 cells. Ectopic
twist-expressing cells demonstrated enhanced cell motility, but twist expression 
did not affect cell proliferation. Twist expression induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition together with related morphologic changes.
Focal adhesion contact was reduced significantly in ectopic twist-expressing
cells. Twist-siRNA-treated HLE, HLF, and SK-Hep1 cells demonstrated a reduction
in cell migration by 50, 40 and 18%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Twist induces migratory effect on hepatocellular carcinoma by causing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

PMCID: PMC2720986
PMID: 19615090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Nov;48(11):1059-69. doi: 10.1002/mc.20558.

Cellular dichotomy between anchorage-independent growth responses to bFGF and TPA
reflects molecular switch in commitment to carcinogenesis.

Waters KM(1), Tan R, Opresko LK, Quesenberry RD, Bandyopadhyay S, Chrisler WB,
Weber TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology and Bioinformatics Groups, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland, Washington 99354, USA.

We have investigated gene expression patterns underlying reversible and
irreversible anchorage-independent growth (AIG) phenotypes to identify more
sensitive markers of cell transformation for studies directed at interrogating
carcinogenesis responses. In JB6 mouse epidermal cells, basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) induces an unusually efficient and reversible AIG response,
relative to 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced AIG which is
irreversible. The reversible and irreversible AIG phenotypes are characterized by
largely nonoverlapping global gene expression profiles. However, a subset of
differentially expressed genes were identified as common to reversible and
irreversible AIG phenotypes, including genes regulated in a reciprocal fashion.
Hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) and D-site albumin promoter-binding protein (DBP)
were increased in both bFGF and TPA soft agar colonies and selected for
functional validation. Ectopic expression of human HLF and DBP in JB6 cells
resulted in a marked increase in TPA- and bFGF-regulated AIG responses. HLF and
DBP expression were increased in soft agar colonies arising from JB6 cells
exposed to gamma radiation and in a human basal cell carcinoma tumor tissue,
relative to paired nontumor tissue. Subsequent biological network analysis
suggests that many of the differentially expressed genes that are common to bFGF-
and TPA-dependent AIG are regulated by c-Myc, SP-1, and HNF-4 transcription
factors. Collectively, we have identified a potential molecular switch that
mediates the transition from reversible to irreversible AIG.

PMID: 19526458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2009 Jun;73(6):1301-7. Epub 2009 Jun 7.

Antibacterial activity of recombinant human lactoferrin from rice: effect of heat
treatment.

Conesa C(1), Rota C, Castillo E, Pérez MD, Calvo M, Sánchez L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Production and Food Science, Food Technology Unit,
Veterinary Faculty, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.

The antibacterial activity of recombinant human lactoferrin from rice (rhLF)
compared with that of human milk lactoferrin (hLF) was evaluated against
Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella Enteritidis and Listeria monocytogenes. The 
hydrolysates of rhLF and hLF were found to be more active than native proteins
against E. coli O157:H7, and their activity was independent of their iron
saturation. The effect of different heat treatments on the antibacterial activity
of apo-rhLF was studied and compared with hLF. We observed that an HTST
pasteurization treatment did not affect the antimicrobial activity of lactoferrin
against the pathogens studied. Furthermore, the activity of apo-rhLF and hLF
against E. coli O157:H7 and L. monocytogenes in UHT milk and whey was assayed,
finding a decrease in the number of bacteria, although lower than that observed
in a broth medium. This study shows the similar antibacterial activity of rhLF
and hLF which is important in order to consider the addition of rhLF as a
supplement in special products.

PMID: 19502737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Assist Inferm Ric. 2009 Jan-Mar;28(1):34-8.

[Quality of life, depression and cognitive functions 6. Cognitive functions].

[Article in Italian]

Rete Infermieri GISSI-HF.

Collaborators: Di Giulio P, Pera C, Scarano M, Ferri B, Lepore V, Miani D,
Tognoni G, Rosson V, Serafini C, Zumino MT, Partemi L, Falleroni ML, Moretti L,
Porta L, Santorsola A, Tenerelli T, Bertoncelli B, Mengoli G, Stagnitto M, Puddu 
GM, Masini E, Pasini A, Boni S, Valsesia E, Cornacini G, Melis D, Mulina A,
Giurlanda A, Fava M, Bellini P, Vallucci S, Cuomo A, Campanale S, Monatti G,
Bianco T, Milli V, Antonelli L, Fanin L, Faiola L, Stefanizzi R, Mariani M, Rossi
A, Regnani ST, Loreni F, Cianfrocca R, Pisani A, Faraolfi V, Ponzalli P, Savli T,
Cresci M, Guardalben S, Belluzzo B, Ruberti R, Zizzi M, Tonda C, Cadrobbi MG,
Gilardi R, Mondì A, Costa A, Milan S, Zottarelli A, Parodi B, Sartorio N, Rossin 
B, Santi A, Cagnan P, Maradei E, Cauteruccio A, Carpino C, Addeo R, Izzo A,
Amendola G, Filardi PP, Prizzitano AM, Piluso GM, Iadevaio AL, Cinà MT,
Cirrincione V, Gumina S, Codato G, Raimondo F, Cappiello MG, Creta F, Barbieri M,
Chiarella L, Abbondio L, Piccin M, Spillone V, Cutrupi G, Ruggeri A, Sicilia G,
Provengano A, Marcari P, Ricci S, Pazzagli E, La Grotteria M, Orsini R, Leandri
L, Vetere NA, Braggion E, Giordanino S, Armando S, Zampieri E, Danese MC,
Valentini A, Ferrante MG, Santacroce C, Crocetti I, Macchi F, Bernacchi M, Pini
D, Varì M, Lucente M, Scaramastra F, Reichardt S, Gabasio S, Zocchi C, Studhika
M, Budzowska E, Cescon M, Lazzari D, Prizzon A, Di Biaggio P, Buda C, Mastrangelo
V, Avigliano M, Dell'Aquila L, Bonanomi E, Mezzani A, Porcini F, Girardi G.

The prevalence of cognitive impairment (CI) is reported to be higher in heart
failure patients than in the general population.AIM: To describe the prevalence
of CI and to assess its prognostic value on the increased risk of
hospitalizations and death over the medium term (3 years).
RESULTS: MMSE was administered to 620/745 heart failure patients >70 years. Up to
35% of the tested population were classified as mild CI and 12% as moderate. The 
severity of baseline clinical conditions, as expressed as NYHA classes, do not
appear to be associated to different degrees of CI. The subgroup of patients with
moderate CI includes higher proportion of people with the lowest educational
level, of feminine gender, of higher age (>80). Even in a population closely
monitored as the one included in the GISSI-HLF trial, it is worth to be
underlined that the presence of moderate CI appears to be strongly prognostic of 
an increased burden of care (hospitalizations), and of death over the whole
observation period of the study (3 years).
CONCLUSION: The presence of even mild or moderate CI is prognostic for increased 
mortality and readmissions for patients of the same NYHA class. In the absence of
effective intervention strategies, research should concentrate on the yield, if
any, of a systematic screening for CI in heart failure patients.

PMID: 19462699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009 Aug;53(8):3308-16. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01688-08.
Epub 2009 May 18.

Inhibitory effects of lactoferrin on growth and biofilm formation of
Porphyromonas gingivalis and Prevotella intermedia.

Wakabayashi H(1), Yamauchi K, Kobayashi T, Yaeshima T, Iwatsuki K, Yoshie H.

Author information: 
(1)Food Science & Technology Institute, Morinaga Milk Industry Co., Ltd., 5-1-83 
Higashihara, Zama, Kanagawa 228-8583, Japan. h_wakaby@morinagamilk.co.jp

Lactoferrin (LF) is an iron-binding antimicrobial protein present in saliva and
gingival crevicular fluids, and it is possibly associated with host defense
against oral pathogens, including periodontopathic bacteria. In the present
study, we evaluated the in vitro effects of LF-related agents on the growth and
biofilm formation of two periodontopathic bacteria, Porphyromonas gingivalis and 
Prevotella intermedia, which reside as biofilms in the subgingival plaque. The
planktonic growth of P. gingivalis and P. intermedia was suppressed for up to 5 h
by incubation with >or=130 microg/ml of human LF (hLF), iron-free and
iron-saturated bovine LF (apo-bLF and holo-bLF, respectively), and >or=6
microg/ml of bLF-derived antimicrobial peptide lactoferricin B (LFcin B); but
those effects were weak after 8 h. The biofilm formation of P. gingivalis and P. 
intermedia over 24 h was effectively inhibited by lower concentrations (>or=8
microg/ml) of various iron-bound forms (the apo, native, and holo forms) of bLF
and hLF but not LFcin B. A preformed biofilm of P. gingivalis and P. intermedia
was also reduced by incubation with various iron-bound bLFs, hLF, and LFcin B for
5 h. In an examination of the effectiveness of native bLF when it was used in
combination with four antibiotics, it was found that treatment with
ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, and minocycline in combination with native bLF for
24 h reduced the amount of a preformed biofilm of P. gingivalis compared with the
level of reduction achieved with each agent alone. These results demonstrate the 
antibiofilm activity of LF with lower iron dependency against P. gingivalis and
P. intermedia and the potential usefulness of LF for the prevention and treatment
of periodontal diseases and as adjunct therapy for periodontal diseases.

PMCID: PMC2715627
PMID: 19451301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Virol J. 2009 May 12;6:53. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-53.

Human lactoferrin but not lysozyme neutralizes HSV-1 and inhibits HSV-1
replication and cell-to-cell spread.

Välimaa H(1), Tenovuo J, Waris M, Hukkanen V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dentistry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
hannamari.valimaa@helsinki.fi

The frequent oral shedding of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) in the absence 
of clinical disease suggests that symptomatic HSV-1 recurrences may be inhibited 
by the mucosal environment. Indeed, saliva has been shown to contain substances
with anti-HSV activity. In the current study, we investigated the anti-HSV-1
activity of human lactoferrin (hLf) and lysozyme (hLz), two highly cationic
polypeptides of the mucosal innate defence system. HLf blocked HSV-1 infection at
multiple steps of the viral replication cycle, whereas lysozyme displayed no
anti-HSV-1 activity. Preincubation of HSV-1 virions and presence of hLf during or
after viral absorption period or for the entire HSV-1 infection cycle inhibited
HSV-1 infection by reducing both the plaque count and plaque size in a dose- and 
virus strain-dependent manner. Cell-to-cell spread of wild-type HSV-1 and the
strain gC-39, deleted of glycoprotein C, was dramatically reduced, but the
cell-to-cell spread of HSV-1 Rid1, harboring a mutated gD and thus unable to
react with the cellular HVEM receptor, remained unchanged. This suggests that the
inhibition of cell-to-cell spread is mediated by effects on gD or its cellular
counterparts. Our results show that the cationic nature is not a major
determinant in the anti-HSV action of mucosal innate cationic polypeptides, since
whereas hLf inhibited HSV-1 infection efficiently, hLz had no HSV-1 inhibiting
activity. Our results show that in addition to inhibiting the adsorption and
post-attachment events of HSV-1 infection, hLf is also able to neutralize HSV-1
and that the inhibition of cell-to-cell spread involves viral gD. These results
suggest that Lf may have a significant role in the modulation of HSV-1 infection 
in the oral cavity as well as in the genital mucosa, the major sites of HSV-1
infection.

PMCID: PMC2685786
PMID: 19435495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Prosthodont Res. 2009 Jul;53(3):136-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jpor.2009.03.002. Epub
2009 May 2.

Development of tissue conditioner capable of binding with anti-microbial protein 
lactoferrin.

Yamamoto D(1), Shinohara Y, Nagadome H, Terada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Fixed Prosthodontics, Division of Oral Rehabilitation, Faculty of
Dental Science, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: This study focused on the anti-microbial protein human lactoferrin (hLF)
commonly found in saliva, and tried to develop biocompatible dental materials
that have higher anti-microbial effects.
METHODS: A lyophilized cation exchange resin was added to tissue conditioner at 4
wt% and 8 wt%. The amount of hLF binding to the tissue conditioner and their
anti-microbial effect against Candida albicans was investigated. Then their
mechanical properties and cytotoxicity were examined.
RESULTS: Tissue conditioner containing cation exchange resin was bound with hLF
and had an anti-microbial effect against C. albicans. In addition, their physical
properties were sufficient and they were harmless to human fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: The clinical application of cation exchange resin for tissue
conditioner can be effective for the prevention and treatment of denture
stomatitis and systemic opportunistic infections since it is thought that these
materials will increase the local concentration of anti-microbial protein in
saliva at the lesion site.

PMID: 19411200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Comput Biol Med. 2009 Jun;39(6):512-8. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2009.03.003.
Epub 2009 Apr 23.

Linear and non-linear parameterization of EEG during monitoring of carotid
endarterectomy.

Accardo A(1), Cusenza M, Monti F.

Author information: 
(1)DEEI, University of Trieste, Via Valerio, 10, I-34100 Trieste, Italy.
accardo@deei.units.it

In this paper, new quantitative linear (HLF ratio: high frequency/low frequency
spectral power ratio) and non-linear parameters (ZC: zero crossing and FD:
fractal dimension) which can assist the physician in real-time decision whether a
shunt is required or not during intra-operative EEG monitoring of carotid
endarterectomy are presented. The results obtained with the new parameters are
compared with those achieved by other indexes proposed in the literature. The HLF
ratio and ZC parameters yielded the best results with a 100% of correct
identification of both shunt and no-shunt situations. The ZC can be also easily
implemented in the real-time monitoring of EEG.

PMID: 19394923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mol Oncol. 2008 Oct;2(3):241-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2008.06.004. Epub 2008 Jun 
20.

Exon 2 deletion splice variant of gamma-glutamyl carboxylase causes
des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin production in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.

Ueda N(1), Shiraha H, Fujikawa T, Takaoka N, Nakanishi Y, Suzuki M, Matsuo N,
Tanaka S, Nishina S, Uemura M, Takaki A, Shiratori Y, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine and Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

Using GGCX gene-specific real-time PCR, exon 2 deletion splice variant of vitamin
K-dependent gamma-glutamyl carboxylase (GGCX) mRNA was identified in HCC cell
lines. Expressions of wild type and exon 2 deletion variant of GGCX were analyzed
with relevance to DCP production in HCC cell lines. Hep3B, HepG2, HuH1, HuH7, and
PLC/PRF/5 produced DCP, while SK-Hep-1, HLE, HLF, and JHH1 produced no detectable
level of DCP. DCP-producing cells expressed exon 2 deletion variant of GGCX mRNA 
and protein, while DCP-negative cells expressed no detectable level of exon 2
deletion variant of GGCX. These results suggest that exon 2 deletion splice
variant of GGCX causes dysfunction of GGCX enzyme activity resulting in DCP
production in HCC cell lines.

PMID: 19383345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cell Cycle. 2009 May 15;8(10):1589-602. Epub 2009 May 25.

AKT1 mediates bypass of the G1/S checkpoint after genotoxic stress in normal
human cells.

Lal MA(1), Bae D, Camilli TC, Patierno SR, Ceryak S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, The George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington DC 20037, USA.

Certain forms of hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] are human carcinogens. Our recent
work has shown that a broad range protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) inhibitor,
sodium orthovanadate (SOV), abrogated both Cr(VI)-induced growth arrest and
clonogenic lethality. Notably, SOV enhanced Cr(VI) mutation frequency, ostensibly
through forced survival of genetically damaged cells. In the present study,
co-treatment with this PTP inhibitor bypassed the Cr(VI)-induced G(1)/S
checkpoint arrest in diploid human lung fibroblasts (HLF). Moreover, the PTP
inhibitor abrogated the Cr(VI)-induced decrease in the expression of key
effectors of the G(1)/S checkpoint [Cyclin D1, phospho Ser 807/811 Rb (pRB),
p27]. Cr(VI)-induced G(1) arrest was associated with the cytoplasmic appearance
of pRb and the nuclear localization of p27, both of which were reversed by the
PTP inhibitor. The PTP inhibitor's reversal of G(1)/S checkpoint effector
localization after Cr exposure was found to be Akt1-dependent, as this was
abrogated by transfection with either akt1 siRNA or an Akt1-kinase dead plasmid. 
Furthermore, Akt1 activation alone was sufficient to induce G(1)/S checkpoint
bypass and to prevent Cr(VI)-induced changes in pRb and p27 localization. In
conclusion, this work establishes Akt1 activation to be both sufficient to bypass
the Cr(VI)-induced G(1)/S checkpoint, as well as necessary for the observed PTP
inhibitor effects on key mediators of the G(1)/S transition. The potential for
Akt to bypass G(1)/S checkpoint arrest in the face of genotoxic damage could
increase genomic instability, which is a hallmark of neoplastic progression.

PMCID: PMC3753188
PMID: 19377290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Med Primatol. 2009 Apr;38(2):114-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0684.2008.00318.x.

Molecular cloning and characterization of Taiwan macaque lactoferrin.

Chang JH(1), Chen CC, Chao MC, Chuang YC, Chang MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Lactoferrin (LF) is an iron-binding glycoprotein that plays an
important role in combating a wide range of pathogens and contributes innate
protective defenses of mammals.
METHODS: We cloned and sequenced the full-length cDNA for LF from Taiwan macaque.
The antimicrobial activity and iron-binding ability of the purified recombinant
macaque LF (rmLF) were determined and compared with those of human LF (hLF).
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The complete mLF cDNA (GenBank: EU523857) encoded a
710-aa precursor with a 19-aa signal peptide. The nucleotide sequence of mLF
showed the highest identity to the rhesus monkey LF (98%), whereas the putative
amino acid sequence of mLF showed the highest identity to the hLF (90%). The rmLF
and natural hLF showed almost equivalent antibacterial activities against
Klebsiella pneumoniae and mLF presented a slightly lower activity against
Listeria monocytogenes than natural hLF. In addition, the patterns of iron
release from mLF and hLF were nearly identical.

PMID: 19335476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004882. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

Regulation of clock-controlled genes in mammals.

Bozek K(1), Relógio A, Kielbasa SM, Heine M, Dame C, Kramer A, Herzel H.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany.

The complexity of tissue- and day time-specific regulation of thousands of
clock-controlled genes (CCGs) suggests that many regulatory mechanisms contribute
to the transcriptional output of the circadian clock. We aim to predict these
mechanisms using a large scale promoter analysis of CCGs.Our study is based on a 
meta-analysis of DNA-array data from rodent tissues. We searched in the promoter 
regions of 2065 CCGs for highly overrepresented transcription factor binding
sites. In order to compensate the relatively high GC-content of CCG promoters, a 
novel background model to avoid a bias towards GC-rich motifs was employed. We
found that many of the transcription factors with overrepresented binding sites
in CCG promoters exhibit themselves circadian rhythms. Among the predicted
factors are known regulators such as CLOCKratioBMAL1, DBP, HLF, E4BP4, CREB,
RORalpha and the recently described regulators HSF1, STAT3, SP1 and HNF-4alpha.
As additional promising candidates of circadian transcriptional regulators PAX-4,
C/EBP, EVI-1, IRF, E2F, AP-1, HIF-1 and NF-Y were identified. Moreover, GC-rich
motifs (SP1, EGR, ZF5, AP-2, WT1, NRF-1) and AT-rich motifs (MEF-2, HMGIY, HNF-1,
OCT-1) are significantly overrepresented in promoter regions of CCGs. Putative
tissue-specific binding sites such as HNF-3 for liver, NKX2.5 for heart or
Myogenin for skeletal muscle were found. The regulation of the erythropoietin
(Epo) gene was analysed, which exhibits many binding sites for circadian
regulators. We provide experimental evidence for its circadian regulated
expression in the adult murine kidney. Basing on a comprehensive literature
search we integrate our predictions into a regulatory network of core clock and
clock-controlled genes. Our large scale analysis of the CCG promoters reveals the
complexity and extensiveness of the circadian regulation in mammals. Results of
this study point to connections of the circadian clock to other functional
systems including metabolism, endocrine regulation and pharmacokinetics.

PMCID: PMC2654074
PMID: 19287494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs. 2009 Mar-Apr;34(2):115-21. doi:
10.1097/01.NMC.0000347306.15950.ae.

Hispanic Labor Friends Initiative: supporting vulnerable women.

Hazard CJ(1), Callister LC, Birkhead A, Nichols L.

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the qualitative aspects of the Hispanic Labor Friends
Initiative.
METHODS: "Hispanic Labor Friends," bilingual Hispanic community women who were
themselves mothers, were recruited by clinic and hospital personnel. Women who
agreed were educated, received translation certification, and were oriented to
the initiative. Pregnant Hispanic immigrant women seen in the health center who
met criteria set by the multidisciplinary health care team were assigned a
Hispanic Labor Friend by 32 weeks' gestation. Hispanic Labor Friends assisted
women with communication with healthcare providers and provided social support.
Qualitative evaluation of the program consisted of interviews with several
groups: (1) Hispanic immigrant women who had a Hispanic Labor Friend, (2)
Hispanic immigrant women who were not in the Hispanic Labor Friends program, (3) 
Hispanic Labor Friends, (4) healthcare providers for Hispanic women. Data
saturation was reached, and data were analyzed by the research team using
descriptive qualitative inquiry.
RESULTS: The Hispanic immigrant women described positive outcomes from being
involved in the Hispanic Labor Friends program, including feeling supported and
comforted. "I felt as though my family were at my side." One woman who had
standard care said, "It is hard for me to communicate. When I gave birth, the
nurses asked me things, and I didn't understand anything. I stayed quiet." One of
the nurses who was interviewed said: "I think they [the HLF patients] get better 
care. Sometimes we think we can communicate with them with their little bit of
English and our little bit of Spanish. But you get an HLF and it's a totally
different story. We can more adequately tell what's going on with them...They end
up getting better care." One Hispanic Labor Friend said, "The women are very
appreciative that I was there to help them through a critical time." Women who
participated in the study identified the need to have a continuing association
with Hispanic Labor Friends in the early postpartum period.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: The provision of culturally appropriate social support is 
critical in the care of Hispanic immigrant childbearing women. Programs such as
the Hispanic Labor Friends Initiative can help improve support and promote
positive outcomes in these vulnerable and disadvantaged women.

PMID: 19262266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2009 May;234(5):566-72. doi: 10.3181/0811-RM-326. Epub
2009 Feb 25.

Involvement of caspase-3 activity and survivin downregulation in
cinobufocini-induced apoptosis in A 549 cells.

Wang J(1), Jin Y, Xu Z, Zheng Z, Wan S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Cancer, Shanghai Academy of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, 725 Southern of Wan Ping Road, 68# Box, 200032 Shanghai, China.
wangjuyong1@126.com

Cinobufocini injection is a preparation containing water-soluble components of
the toad skin. The aim of the present study was to investigate the apoptosis of
human lung adenocarcinoma cell line A 549 induced by cinobufocini. A 549 or
HLF-1(human lung fibroblast) cells were treated with cinobufocini at different
concentrations for 24 and 48 h, respectively. The proliferation of cells was
detected with the 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide
(MTT) assay. Morphology of cells was carried out with scanning electronic
microscopy (SEM) and Hoechst 33258 staining. The apoptosis rate was examined by
flow cytometry. The expression of survivin was examined with RT-PCR and Western
blot assay. The caspase-3 and caspase-7 activities were detected with caspase
colorimetric protease assay. We found that cinobufocini significantly inhibited
tumor growth of A 549 cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner without damaging
non-cancerous cells (HLF-1) and induced granular apoptotic bodies of A 549 cells.
Next, cinobufocini increased the percentage of cells in G1 phase and decreased
the percentage of cells in S phase in A 549 cells. Furthermore, cinobufocini
downregulated the expression of survivin mRNA and protein. Finally, cinobufocini 
upregulated caspase-3 activity. We concluded that cinobufocini induces apoptosis 
of A 549 cells, which is associated with the decreasing expression of survivin
mRNA and protein, increasing caspase-3 activity of A 549 cells.

PMID: 19244543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Transgenic Res. 2009 Aug;18(4):573-82. doi: 10.1007/s11248-009-9248-1. Epub 2009 
Feb 15.

A mWAP-hLF hybrid gene locus gave extremely high level expression of human
lactoferrin in the milk of transgenic mice.

Shi G(1), Chen H, Wu X, Zhou Y, Liu Z, Zheng T, Huang P.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Engineering Department, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, No. 20
Dongdajie Street, 100071, Beijing, China.

The production of pharmaceuticals by current mammary gland bioreactor techniques 
is limited by the low expression level of foreign proteins. We describe here a
novel method that solves this problem. A successive three-step gap-repair
strategy was developed to replace the genomic coding sequence in mouse whey
acidic protein (mWAP) gene locus with that of human lactoferrin (hLF) precisely
from the start code to the end code. A 50-kb mWAP-hLF hybrid gene locus was
constructed, and corresponding transgenic mice were generated. An extremely
high-level expression of rhLF in the milk was demonstrated by sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western blot. The expression level
ranged from 16.7 to 29.8 g/l among five transgenic lines, as indicated by the
ELISA assay. Importantly, the expressed rhLF maintained the same antibacterial
activity as the native hLF. Our strategy can very likely also be used for the
efficient expression of other valuable pharmaceutical proteins.

PMID: 19219636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cell Death Differ. 2009 Jun;16(6):838-46. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.13. Epub 2009 Feb
13.

PAR bZIP-bik is a novel transcriptional pathway that mediates oxidative
stress-induced apoptosis in fibroblasts.

Ritchie A(1), Gutierrez O, Fernandez-Luna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genetica Molecular, Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla,
Servicio Cantabro de Salud, Santander, Spain.

PAR bZIP (cells knockout for PAR bZIP transcription factors) proteins, thyrotroph
embryonic factor (TEF), albumin D-site-binding protein (DBP), and hepatic
leukemia factor (HLF), are a family of transcription factors that have been shown
to contribute to the expression of genes involved in detoxification and drug
metabolism. Recently, we showed that PAR bZIP proteins were able to regulate the 
BH3-only gene bcl-gS in tumor cells. Here, we have extended the role of these
transcription factors in the control of apoptosis executors by analyzing the
expression of BH3-only genes in PAR bZIP triple knockout mouse fibroblasts. We
found that bik was the only BH3-only gene downregulated in knockout cells.
Consistently, transfection of TEF or DBP induces the expression of endogenous
bik, regardless of the presence of active p53. Moreover, both promoter-reporter
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicate that PAR bZIP proteins activate
the bik promoter directly. Treatment with different stress stimuli reveals a
higher survival of knockout fibroblasts compared with that of wild-type cells,
especially after incubation with H(2)O(2), which suggest that PAR bZIP proteins
participate in oxidative stress-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, the apoptotic
cell death promoted by treatment with H(2)O(2) can be impaired by reducing the
expression of Bik in wild-type fibroblasts or enhanced by the overexpression of
Bik in knockout cells. These findings reveal a novel transcriptional pathway
relevant in transducing the apoptotic response to oxidative stress.

PMID: 19219069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Chemosphere. 2009 Apr;75(4):483-90. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.12.056.

Comparison of the heterogeneity within bulk sediment humic substances from a
stream and reservoir via selected operational descriptors.

Hur J(1), Kim G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Sejong University, Seoul
143-747, South Korea. jinhur@sejong.ac.kr

The heterogeneity within a bulk humic substances (HS) of two sediment HS from
different sources (stream and reservoir) was compared using selected operational 
descriptors for ultrafiltration (UF) fractions. The operational descriptors
investigated included the specific UV absorbance (SUVA), the C/N ratio, the ratio
of humic-like/fulvic-like fluorescence (HLF/FLF), the humification index (HIX),
the molecular weight (MW) and the organic carbon normalized pyrene binding
coefficient (K(oc)). The UF fractions exhibited a linear or a log-linear trend
with respect to MW for most operational descriptors. The two sediment HS
exhibited similar patterns in the fluorescence excitation-emission matrix (EEM). 
The trends among some operational descriptors of the UF fractions based on one HS
source were not the same as those obtained from the other HS source. For the C/N 
ratio, HLF/FLF, and the pyrene binding reactivity, the UF fractions of the stream
sediment HS had higher values than those of the reservoir sediment HS UF
fractions. For SUVA and HIX, however, a single relationship was presented with MW
irrespective of HS sources. This indicates that SUVA and HIX may be more related 
to MW of the sediment HS than to the chemical nature and/or the source. A common 
strong correlation between HLF/FLF and pyrene K(oc) was also observed for the UF 
fractions of the two HS, suggesting that HLF/FLF might serve as a good descriptor
to predict the extent of pyrene binding independent of sediment source.

PMID: 19178928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Protein Expr Purif. 2009 May;65(1):100-7. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.01.003. Epub
2009 Jan 11.

Production of recombinant human lactoferrin in the allantoic fluid of embryonated
chicken eggs and its characteristics.

Tutykhina IL(1), Bezborodova OA, Shmarov MM, Logunov DY, Neugodova GL, Nemtsova
ER, Naroditsky BS, Yakubovskaya RI, Gintsburg AL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biotechnology, Gamaleya Research Institute of
Epidemiology and Microbiology, 18, Gamaleya Street, Moscow 123098, Russia.

The human iron-binding protein lactoferrin (hLf) has been implicated in a number 
of important physiological pathways, including those regulating immune function
and tumor growth. In an effort to develop an efficient system for production of
recombinant hLf (rhLf) that is structurally and functionally equivalent to the
natural protein, we generated a recombinant CELO (chicken embryo lethal orphan)
avian adenovirus containing an expression cassette for hLf. Embryonated chicken
eggs were infected with the generated CELO-Lf virus. rhLf expression was measured
in the allantoic fluid of infected eggs by ELISA three days later. The level of
recombinant protein was about 0.8mg per embryo. rhLf was efficiently purified (up
to 85% yield) from the allantoic fluid of infected eggs using affinity
chromatography. rhLf produced in the allantoic fluid was characterized in
comparison with natural hLf (nhLf) purified from human breast milk. SDS-PAGE,
Western blotting and glycosylation analyzes showed that the recombinant protein
had similar physical characteristics to nhLf. In addition, we demonstrated that
the antioxidative and antimicrobial activity of rhLf produced in this system is
equivalent to that of nhLf. Taken together, these results illustrate the utility 
of the described "recombinant CELO adenovirus-chicken embryo" system for
production of functionally active rhLf. Efficient production of rhLf with
accurate structure and function is an important step in furthering investigation 
of Lf as a potential human drug.

PMID: 19174190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2008 Sep;24(9):1538-44.

[A successive three-step 'Gap-repair' method to generate the mWAP-hLF hybrid gene
locus].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi G(1), Wu X, Xiong F, Zhou Y, Liu Z, Deng J, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing
100071, China.

To generate a mWAP-hLF hybrid locus that the transcription of human lactoferrin
(hLF) genomic sequence is directed by the up & down stream regulatory sequence of
murine whey acidic protein (mWAP) gene locus, we describe here a successive
three-step 'Gap-repair' method. First, a gap-repair vector based on pBR322 vector
backbone by inserting six joint homologous arms was constructed. Then using
'Gap-repair 'method mediated by Red recombination system of lambda-prophage in
Escherichia coli, in the first step, the 8 kb 3' flanking region of the mWAP gene
was subcloned from the Bacterial artificial chromosome which harbors the mWAP
gene locus(mWAP BAC) into the gap-repair vector; in the second step, the 29 kb
hLF genomic sequence from the ATG code to the TAA code was subcloned from the hLF
BAC; in the third step, the 12 kb 5' flanking region of the mWAP gene was
subcloned from the mWAP BAC. Finally, all these three DNA fragments were
automatically combined together without any gap in the gap-repair vector, and a
49 kb mWAP-hLF hybrid locus that the hLF genomic sequence was flanked by the 5' &
3' flanking region of mWAP gene locus was constructed. The result was confirmed
by PCR, restriction enzyme digestion and sequencing. Our method provide a new way
for the construction of large mammary-gland expression vector.

PMID: 19160834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Sep;41(3):332-8. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0288OC.
Epub 2009 Jan 16.

Critical role of serum response factor in pulmonary myofibroblast differentiation
induced by TGF-beta.

Sandbo N(1), Kregel S, Taurin S, Bhorade S, Dulin NO.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Chicago, 5841
S. Maryland Ave., MC 6076, Chicago, IL 60618, USA.
nsandbo@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a cytokine implicated in wound
healing and in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis. TGF-beta stimulates
myofibroblast differentiation characterized by expression of contractile smooth
muscle (SM)-specific proteins such as SM-alpha-actin. In the present study, we
examined the role of serum response factor (SRF) in the mechanism of
TGF-beta-induced pulmonary myofibroblast differentiation of human lung
fibroblasts (HLF). TGF-beta stimulated SM-alpha-actin expression in HLF, which
paralleled with a profound induction of SRF expression and activity. Inhibition
of SRF by the pharmacologic SRF inhibitor (CCG-1423), or via adenovirus-mediated 
transduction of SRF short hairpin RNA (shSRF), blocked the expression of both SRF
and SM-alpha-actin in response to TGF-beta without affecting Smad-mediated
signaling of TGF-beta. However, forced expression of SRF on its own did not
promote SM-alpha-actin expression, whereas expression of the constitutively
transactivated SRF fusion protein (SRF-VP16) was sufficient to induce
SM-alpha-actin expression, suggesting that both expression and transactivation of
SRF are important. Activation of protein kinase A (PKA) by forskolin or iloprost 
resulted in a significant inhibition of SM-alpha-actin expression induced by
TGF-beta, and this was associated with inhibition of both SRF expression and
activity, but not of Smad-mediated gene transcription. In summary, this is the
first direct demonstration that TGF-beta-induced pulmonary myofibroblast
differentiation is mediated by SRF, and that inhibition of myofibroblast
differentiation by PKA occurs through down-regulation of SRF expression levels
and SRF activity, independent of Smad signaling.

PMCID: PMC2742753
PMID: 19151320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Int J Cancer. 2009 May 1;124(9):2186-99. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24157.

The effect of cantharidins on leukemic stem cells.

Dorn DC(1), Kou CA, Png KJ, Moore MA.

Author information: 
(1)Moore Laboratory, Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10021, USA. dornd@mskcc.org

To identify an agent with specific activity against leukemic stem cells (LSCs),
we evaluated compounds that targeted hepatic leukemia factor (HLF), a gene
implicated in hematopoietic stem cell (HSCs) regulation, that we found
overexpressed in LSCs. Cantharidin, a natural toxin from blister beetles, used as
medicinal agent since antiquity, has been described to modulate the HLF
competitor NFIL3 and is under clinical evaluation as an antitumor and
antimetastatic agent. The molecule is not a substrate for multidrug resistant
pumps and does not cause myelosuppression, and therefore it represents a
promising compound for selective ablation of LSCs. Cantharidin and
norcantharidin, a derivative with reduced toxicity, decreased HLF protein levels 
and induced apoptosis in the AML cell line MV4-11 by modulating the expression of
several molecules that govern survival pathway, including HLF, SLUG, NFIL3 and
c-myc, thereby inducing p53 and the mitochondrial caspase cascade. In vitro,
cantharidin readily targeted primary AML stem and progenitor cells in contrast to
conventional chemotherapeutic agents, such as Ara-C and daunorubicin, that mainly
targeted more differentiated leukemic cells. In vitro the compound did not
exhibit a therapeutic window, being equally toxic to normal HSCs and LSCs. In
vivo cantharidin did not produce myelosuppression. Because of dose-limiting
toxicity in vivo, neither cantharidin nor norcantharidin proved therapeutical
benefit in AML xenograft models as a single agent. However, its potent in vitro
LSC activity and pathway targeting may still be exploited clinically with a new
generation of cantharidin derivatives or formulations and with appropriate drug
combinations.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19123473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Dec;28(12):2136-8.

[Construction of a recombinant adenovirus vector harboring human transforming
growth factor-beta type II receptor-IgG1Fc fusion gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia L(1), Xue JX, Lu Y.

Author information: 
(1)West China College of Clinical Medicine, Oncology Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China. myjiali@126.comìjl07262005@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To construct a recombinant adenoviral vector harboring human
transforming growth factor-beta type II receptor-IgG1Fc (TbetaRII-IgG1Fc) fusion 
gene.
METHODS: The cDNA fragments of human TbetaRII and IgG1Fc genes were amplified by 
RT-PCR and fused with overlap PCR to obtain the fusion gene TbetaRKK-IgG1Fc. The 
TbetaRII-IgG1Fc gene was cloned into the shuttle plasmid pAdTrack-CMV, which was 
linearized and transfected into E.coli BJ 5183 strain containing the adenoviral
backbone vector. The recombinant adenovirus vector was constructed by homologous 
recombination. The recombinant adenoviral plasmid was linearized and transfected 
into 293 cells, followed by amplification and purification of the virus and
detection of TbetaRII-IgG1Fc mRNA expression by RT-PCR. The functional activity
of the recombinant adenoviral plasmid was assessed using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: The results of restriction endonuclease digestion and DNA sequencing
indicated correct sequence of the target TbetaRII-IgG1Fc fusion gene. The
recombinant adenoviral plasmid expressed hTbetaRII-IgG1Fc and neutralized
TGF-beta1 in vitro after infection of the human lung fibroblasts (HLF), as
confirmed by RT-PCR and ELISA.
CONCLUSIONS: The recombinant adenoviral plasmid capable of neutralizing TGF-beta1
in vitro is constructed successfully.

PMID: 19114339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Int J Cancer. 2009 Mar 1;124(5):1072-80. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24065.

SRPX2 is overexpressed in gastric cancer and promotes cellular migration and
adhesion.

Tanaka K(1), Arao T, Maegawa M, Matsumoto K, Kaneda H, Kudo K, Fujita Y, Yokote
H, Yanagihara K, Yamada Y, Okamoto I, Nakagawa K, Nishio K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University School of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan.

SRPX2 (Sushi repeat containing protein, X-linked 2) was first identified as a
downstream molecule of the E2A-HLF fusion gene in t(17;19)-positive leukemia
cells and the biological function of this gene remains unknown. We found that
SRPX2 is overexpressed in gastric cancer and the expression and clinical features
showed that high mRNA expression levels were observed in patients with
unfavorable outcomes using real-time RT-PCR. The cellular distribution of SRPX2
protein showed the secretion of SRPX2 into extracellular regions and its
localization in the cytoplasm. The introduction of the SRPX2 gene into HEK293
cells did not modulate the cellular proliferative activity but did enhance the
cellular migration activity, as shown using migration and scratch assays. The
conditioned-medium obtained from SRPX2-overexpressing cells increased the
cellular migration activity of a gastric cancer cell line, SNU-16. In addition,
SRPX2 protein remarkably enhanced the cellular adhesion of SNU-16 and HSC-39 and 
increased the phosphorylation levels of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), as shown
using western blotting, suggesting that SRPX2 enhances cellular migration and
adhesion through FAK signaling. In conclusion, the overexpression of SRPX2
enhances cellular migration and adhesion in gastric cancer cells. Here, we report
that the biological functions of SRPX2 include cellular migration and adhesion to
cancer cells.

PMID: 19065654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mutat Res. 2009 Jan 15;660(1-2):40-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.10.006. Epub
2008 Oct 21.

Bypass of hexavalent chromium-induced growth arrest by a protein tyrosine
phosphatase inhibitor: enhanced survival and mutagenesis.

Bae D(1), Camilli TC, Chun G, Lal M, Wright K, O'Brien TJ, Patierno SR, Ceryak S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, The George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

Although the consequences of genotoxic injury include cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, cell survival responses after genotoxic injury can produce intrinsic
death-resistance and contribute to the development of a transformed phenotype.
Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are integral components of key survival
pathways, and are responsible for their inactivation, while PTP inhibition is
often associated with enhanced cell proliferation. Our aim was to elucidate
signaling events that modulate cell survival after genotoxin exposure. Diploid
human lung fibroblasts (HLF) were treated with Cr(VI) (as Na(2)CrO(4)), the
soluble oxyanionic dissolution product of certain particulate chromates, which
are well-documented human respiratory carcinogens. In vitro soluble Cr(VI)
induces a wide spectrum of DNA damage, in both the presence and absence of a
broad-range PTP inhibitor, sodium orthovanadate (SOV). Notably, SOV abrogated
Cr(VI)-induced clonogenic lethality. The enhanced survival of Cr(VI)-exposed
cells after SOV treatment was predominantly due to a bypass of cell cycle arrest,
as there was no effect of the PTP inhibitor on Cr-induced apoptosis. Moreover,
the SOV effect was not due to decreased Cr uptake as evidenced by unchanged
Cr-DNA adduct burden. Additionally, the bypass of Cr-induced growth arrest by SOV
was accompanied by a decrease in Cr(VI)-induced expression of cell cycle
inhibiting genes, and an increase in Cr(VI)-induced expression of cell cycle
promoting genes. Importantly, SOV resulted in an increase in forward mutations at
the HPRT locus, supporting the hypothesis that PTP inhibition in the presence of 
certain types of DNA damage may lead to increased genomic instability, via bypass
of cell cycle checkpoints.

PMCID: PMC2728454
PMID: 19013184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003453. Epub 2008 Oct 20.

Cattle mammary bioreactor generated by a novel procedure of transgenic cloning
for large-scale production of functional human lactoferrin.

Yang P(1), Wang J, Gong G, Sun X, Zhang R, Du Z, Liu Y, Li R, Ding F, Tang B, Dai
Y, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Large-scale production of biopharmaceuticals by current bioreactor techniques is 
limited by low transgenic efficiency and low expression of foreign proteins. In
general, a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) harboring most regulatory
elements is capable of overcoming the limitations, but transferring BAC into
donor cells is difficult. We describe here the use of cattle mammary bioreactor
to produce functional recombinant human lactoferrin (rhLF) by a novel procedure
of transgenic cloning, which employs microinjection to generate transgenic
somatic cells as donor cells. Bovine fibroblast cells were co-microinjected for
the first time with a 150-kb BAC carrying the human lactoferrin gene and a marker
gene. The resulting transfection efficiency of up to 15.79 x 10(-2) percent was
notably higher than that of electroporation and lipofection. Following somatic
cell nuclear transfer, we obtained two transgenic cows that secreted rhLF at high
levels, 2.5 g/l and 3.4 g/l, respectively. The rhLF had a similar pattern of
glycosylation and proteolytic susceptibility as the natural human counterpart.
Biochemical analysis revealed that the iron-binding and releasing properties of
rhLF were identical to that of native hLF. Importantly, an antibacterial
experiment further demonstrated that rhLF was functional. Our results indicate
that co-microinjection with a BAC and a marker gene into donor cells for somatic 
cell cloning indeed improves transgenic efficiency. Moreover, the cattle mammary 
bioreactors generated with this novel procedure produce functional rhLF on an
industrial scale.

PMCID: PMC2565487
PMID: 18941633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Malar J. 2008 Oct 14;7:208. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-208.

Sickness behaviour pushed too far--the basis of the syndrome seen in severe
protozoal, bacterial and viral diseases and post-trauma.

Clark IA(1), Budd AC, Alleva LM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Australian National University, 
Canberra, Australia. ian.clark@anu.edu.au

Certain distinctive components of the severe systemic inflammatory syndrome are
now well-recognized to be common to malaria, sepsis, viral infections, and
post-trauma illness. While their connection with cytokines has been appreciated
for some time, the constellation of changes that comprise the syndrome has simply
been accepted as an empirical observation, with no theory to explain why they
should coexist. New data on the effects of the main pro-inflammatory cytokines on
the genetic control of sickness behaviour can be extended to provide a rationale 
for why this syndrome contains many of its accustomed components, such as
reversible encephalopathy, gene silencing, dyserythropoiesis, seizures,
coagulopathy, hypoalbuminaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia. It is thus proposed
that the pattern of pathology that comprises much of the systemic inflammatory
syndrome occurs when one of the usually advantageous roles of pro-inflammatory
cytokines--generating sickness behaviour by moderately repressing genes (Dbp,
Tef, Hlf, Per1, Per2 and Per3, and the nuclear receptor Rev-erbalpha) that
control circadian rhythm--becomes excessive. Although reversible encephalopathy
and gene silencing are severe events with potentially fatal consequences, they
can be viewed as having survival advantages through lowering energy demand. In
contrast, dyserythropoiesis, seizures, coagulopathy, hypoalbuminaemia and
hypertriglyceridaemia may best be viewed as unfortunate consequences of extreme
repression of these same genetic controls when the pro-inflammatory cytokines
that cause sickness behaviour are produced excessively. As well as casting a new 
light on the previously unrationalized coexistence of these aspects of systemic
inflammatory diseases, this concept is consistent with the case for a primary
role for inflammatory cytokines in their pathogenesis across this range of
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2576339
PMID: 18854046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Toxicol Sci. 2009 Jan;107(1):227-37. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn208. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Nickel and the microbial toxin, MALP-2, stimulate proangiogenic mediators from
human lung fibroblasts via a HIF-1alpha and COX-2-mediated pathway.

Brant KA(1), Fabisiak JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh 
Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219-3130, USA.
kab124@pitt.edu

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1alpha) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) have been
implicated in the regulation of inflammatory-like processes that lead to
angiogenesis and fibrotic disorders. Here we demonstrate that in human lung
fibroblasts (HLFs) treated with mixed exposures to chemical and microbial
stimuli, HIF-1alpha stabilization plays a pivotal role in the induction of COX-2 
mRNA and protein, driving the release of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and proangiogenic and profibrotic chemokines. Upon costimulation with Ni
and the mycoplasma-derived lipopeptide macrophage-activating lipopeptide-2
(MALP-2), there was a synergistic induction of CXCL1 and CXCL5 mRNA and protein
release from HLF, as well as an enhanced response in VEGF compared to either
stimulus alone. Consistent with our previous findings that Ni and MALP-2
stimulates the induction of CXCL8 via a COX-2-mediated pathway, CXCL1, CXCL5, and
VEGF release were also regulated by COX-2. Ni induced the stabilization of
HIF-1alpha protein in HLF, which was further enhanced in the presence of MALP-2. 
Depletion of HIF-1alpha using siRNA blocked COX-2 induction by Ni and MALP-2
along with the release of VEGF, CXCL1, CXCL5, and CXCL8. Our results indicate
that Ni and MALP-2 interact to promote an angiogenic profibrotic phenotype in
HLF. Moreover, these findings reveal a potential role for HIF-1alpha in mediating
chemical-induced alterations in cellular response to microbial stimuli,
modulating pulmonary inflammation and its consequences such as fibrosis and
angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2638645
PMID: 18832182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Oncol Rep. 2008 Oct;20(4):863-72.

The growth inhibition of hepatocellular and cholangiocellular carcinoma cells by 
gemcitabine and the roles of extracellular signal-regulated and checkpoint
kinases.

Matsumoto K(1), Nagahara T, Okano J, Murawaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Tottori University School of Medicine,
Tottori, Japan.

We examined the effects of gemcitabine, a pyrimidine analogue, on hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC) cells. After HCC cells
(HepG2, Hep3B, HLF and PLC/PRF/5) and CCC cells (HuCCT-1) were treated with
gemcitabine, cellular growth, cell cycle, nuclear morphology and activity of
signaling molecules were evaluated by WST-8 assays, flow cytometry analysis,
Hoechst 33258 staining and Western blotting, respectively. We found that
gemcitabine significantly inhibited the growth of HCC and CCC cells in a dose-
and time-dependent manner. Gemcitabine induced cell cycle arrest at the G1 phase,
however, the sub-G1 fraction was not observed and nuclear morphology did not
indicate the induction of apoptosis. Gemcitabine induced differential activation 
of checkpoint kinases, Chk2 and Chk1, in HCC and CCC cells, respectively and
gemcitabine activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 in both cell
types. After the cells were pretreated with a MEK inhibitor U0126, activations of
these checkpoint kinases were abrogated and the cell death was enhanced. These
results demonstrate that gemcitabine inhibited the growth of HCC and CCC cells by
cell cycle arrest without apoptosis and that the ERK/Chk1/2 signaling pathway was
in part responsible for the resistance to gemcitabine. Our findings shed light on
treating patients with HCC and CCC by gemcitabine, especially when combined with 
a MEK inhibitor and Chk1/2 inhibitors.

PMID: 18813828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Chromatogr A. 2008 Oct 31;1209(1-2):206-11. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2008.09.014. 
Epub 2008 Sep 10.

Different elution modes and field programming in gravitational field-flow
fractionation. Effect of channel angle.

Park MR(1), Kang da Y, Chmelik J, Kang N, Kim JS, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Hannam University, Daejeon 305-811, South Korea.

Gravitational field-flow fractionation (GrFFF) has been shown to be useful for
separation and characterization of various types of micrometer-sized particles.
It has been recognized however that GrFFF is less versatile than other members of
FFF because the external field (Earth's gravity) in GrFFF is relatively weak and 
is not tunable (constant), which makes the force acting on the particles
constant. A few approaches have been suggested to control the force acting on
particles in GrFFF. They include (1) changing the angle between the Earth's
gravitational field and the longitudinal axis of the channel, and (2) the use of 
carrier liquid having different densities. In the hyperlayer mode of GrFFF, the
hydrodynamic lift force (HLF) also act on particles. The existence of HLF allows 
other means of changing the force acting on the particles in GrFFF. They include 
(1) the flow rate programming, or (2) the use of channels having non-constant
cross-section. In this study, with polystyrene latex beads used as model
particles, the channel angle was varied to study its effect on elution parameters
(such as selectivity, band broadening and resolution) in the steric or in the
hyperlayer mode of GrFFF. In addition, the effects of the channel thickness and
the flow rate on the elution parameters were also investigated. It was found
that, in the steric mode, the resolution decreases as the flow rate increases due
to increased zone broadening despite of the increase in the selectivity. At a
constant volumetric flow rate, both the zone broadening and the selectivity
increase as the channel thickness increases, resulting in the net increase in the
resolution. It was also found that the retention time decreases as the channel
angle increases in both up- and down-flow positions. The zone broadening tends to
increase almost linearly with the channel angle, while no particular trends were 
found in selectivity. As a result, the resolution decreases as the channel angle 
increases.

PMID: 18805537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochemistry. 2008 Oct 14;47(41):10915-20. doi: 10.1021/bi8012164. Epub 2008 Sep 
12.

The N1 domain of human lactoferrin is required for internalization by caco-2
cells and targeting to the nucleus.

Suzuki YA(1), Wong H, Ashida KY, Schryvers AB, Lönnerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, California 95616,
USA.

Human lactoferrin (hLf) has been shown to interact with cells from the Caco-2
human small intestinal cell line. There currently is little information about the
molecular details of its interaction. As a first step toward detailed
characterization of this interaction, we used a series of Lf chimeras to analyze 
which part of Lf is responsible for the interaction with Caco-2 cells.
Recombinant chimeric proteins consisting of segments of hLf and bovine
transferrin (bTf) were produced in a baculovirus-insect cell system and purified 
by a combination of cation exchange chromatography and immobilized bTf antibody
affinity chromatography. Each chimera was labeled with a green fluorescent dye to
monitor its interaction with Caco-2 cells. Similarly, the intestinal Lf receptor 
(LfR), also known as intelectin, was probed with an anti-LfR antibody that was
detected with a secondary antibody conjugated with a red-color fluorescent dye.
The results demonstrated that chimeric proteins containing the N-lobe or the N1.1
subdomain of Lf bound as well as intact Lf to Caco-2 cells. Confocal microscopy
analysis revealed that these proteins, along with the LfR, were internalized and 
targeted to the nucleus. These results indicate that the N1.1 subdomain of hLf is
sufficient for binding, internalization, and targeting to the nucleus of Caco-2
cells.

PMCID: PMC2668574
PMID: 18785755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Gastroenterology. 2008 Nov;135(5):1636-1644.e3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.07.073. Epub 2008 Aug 3.

Circadian clock-controlled intestinal expression of the multidrug-resistance gene
mdr1a in mice.

Murakami Y(1), Higashi Y, Matsunaga N, Koyanagi S, Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutics, Division of Clinical Pharmacy, Department of
Medico-Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: P-glycoprotein, the product of the multidrug resistance (mdr) 
gene, functions as a xenobiotic transporter contributing to the intestinal
barrier. Although intestinal expression of the mdr1a gene and its efflux pump
function has been shown to exhibit 24-hour variation, the mechanism of the
variations remains poorly understood. Here, we demonstrated that the molecular
components of the circadian clock act as regulators to control 24-hour variation 
in the expression of the mdr1a gene.
METHODS: Luciferase reporter assay and gel mobility shift assay were used to
study the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of the mdr1a gene by clock gene
products. The messenger RNA levels and protein abundances in colon 26 cells and
mouse intestine were measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: Hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) and E4 promoter binding protein-4 (E4BP4) 
regulated transcription of the mdr1a gene by competing with each other for the
same DNA binding site. Molecular and biochemical analyses of HLF- and
E4BP4-down-regulated colon 26 cells and the intestinal tract of Clock mutant mice
suggested that these 2 proteins consisted of a reciprocating mechanism in which
HLF activated the transcription of the mdr1a gene, whereas E4BP4 periodically
suppressed transcription at the time of day when E4BP4 was abundant.
CONCLUSIONS: The intestinal expression of the mdr1a gene is influenced by the
circadian organization of molecular clockwork. Our present findings provide a
link between the circadian timekeeping system and xenobiotic detoxification.

PMID: 18773899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mol Med Rep. 2008 Sep-Oct;1(5):685-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000013.

Picropodophyllin suppresses the proliferation and invasion of hepatocellular
carcinoma under serum starvation.

Tomizawa M(1), Yokosuka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. nihminor-cib@umin.ac.jp.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells invade interstitial connective tissue and
proliferate. Suppression of this invasion and proliferation could serve as a
novel molecular therapy. Since insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR)
interacts with components of interstitial tissue, we focused on the inhibition of
IGF-IR, analyzing HLE and HLF, poorly-differentiated HCC cells, as well as
PLC/PRF/5 and Huh-7, well-differentiated HCC cells. Cell numbers were counted
under serum starvation. Western blot analysis showed that all cell lines clearly 
expressed IGF-IR. Either a neutralizing antibody of IGF-IR or picropodophyllin
(PPP), a specific inhibitor of IGF-IR, were used, with MTS assay, to analyze
changes in cell number or, with wound assay, to analyze invasion. HLF
significantly proliferated without serum while the cell numbers of the other cell
lines did not. IGF-IR antibody did not affect HLF cell number, while PPP
decreased it. Wound assay clearly indicated that PPP inhibited the invasion of
HLF. H&E staining showed that apoptosis caused the inhibition of proliferation
and metastasis. In conclusion, IGF-IR was involved in the proliferation and
invasion of HCC cells in interstitial connective tissue. It was proposed that an 
inhibitor of IGF-IR, PPP, would be a good candidate for molecular therapy for HCC
via the suppression of proliferation/invasion in interstitial connective tissue.

PMID: 21479470  [PubMed]


291. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Nov;52(11):4081-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01597-07.
Epub 2008 Aug 18.

Human lactoferrin induces apoptosis-like cell death in Candida albicans: critical
role of K+-channel-mediated K+ efflux.

Andrés MT(1), Viejo-Díaz M, Fierro JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oral Microbiology, School of Stomatology, University of Oviedo, 
Oviedo, Spain.

Human lactoferrin (hLf) induced an apoptosis-like phenotype in Candida albicans
cells, which includes phosphatidylserine externalization, nuclear chromatin
condensation, DNA degradation, and increased reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production. Intracellular ROS accumulation was seen to correlate with
candidacidal activity in hLf-treated cells. Mitochondrial activity was involved
as indicated by mitochondrial depolarization and increased hLf resistance of
cells preincubated with sordarin or erythromycin, the latter of which inhibits
protein synthesis in mitoribosomes. Interestingly, Cl(-)- and K(+)-channel
blockers prevented the hLf antimicrobial activity, but only when cells were
pretreated with the blocking agent (tetraethylammonium) prior to the hLf-induced 
K(+)-release period. These results indicate for the first time that
K(+)-channel-mediated K(+) efflux is required for the progression of
apoptosis-like process in yeast, suggesting that this essential apoptotic event
of higher eukaryotes has been evolutionary conserved among species ranging from
yeasts to humans.

PMCID: PMC2573133
PMID: 18710913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Aug;31(8):1605-8.

Recombinant human intelectin binds bovine lactoferrin and its peptides.

Shin K(1), Wakabayashi H, Yamauchi K, Yaeshima T, Iwatsuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Food Science & Technology Institute, Morinaga Milk Industry Co., Ltd,
Kanagawa, Japan. k_shin@morniagamilk.co.jp

Intelectin (IntL), a lectin that exists on the brush border membrane of the small
intestine, plays a role in the innate immune response and also acts as a receptor
for lactoferrin (LF), an iron-binding glycoprotein found in milk and other
secretions. Similar to human LF (hLF), bovine LF (bLF) has been shown to induce
proliferation and differentiation of human enterocytes and to modulate their
cytokine productions. To evaluate the interaction between human IntL (hIntL) and 
bLF, recombinant hIntL (rhIntL) conjugated with a tag sequence was examined for
its ligand-binding capacity by using microtiter plates coated with LF or other
proteins. Interestingly, rhIntL showed higher binding for bLF than hLF. It also
bound pepsin hydrolysate of bLF, but to a lower degree than native bLF. A very
low binding of rhIntL was observed for bovine serum albumin or transferrin. These
findings suggest that hIntL acts as a receptor for bLF and its digested
fragments.

PMID: 18670097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Vopr Onkol. 2008;54(3):303-14.

[An immunocytochemical investigation of antigen expression by skin melanoma cells
cultured for vaccine production].

[Article in Russian]

Moiseenko VM, Danilova AB, Danilov AO, Turkevich EA, Baldueva IA, Matsko DE.

There is a great variety of histological patterns of skin melanoma and, in
particular, that of its metastatic patterns. Malignant melanocytes are capable of
influencing tumor-associated antigen expression. As of now, several varieties of 
melanoma-associated antigens (MAA) have been identified: MART1/melan A,
tyrosinase, MITF, gp100, members of MAGE family, S100, CD63 and CD146. Peptides
isolated from such molecules can induce MHC-restricted response of cytotoxic
T-lymphocytes. It has been shown that level and nature of specific antigen
expression caused by melanocytes correlate with tumor stage and a relationship
between survival and MAA expression on tumor cells identified. Morphological
features, growth pattern and proliferation rate varied in melanoma cell cultures 
used in our study. Our experiments involved evaluation of changes in the
properties of antigens HLA (class 1 and 2), tumor tissue samples and cells
isolated from them, which were capable of stable proliferative activity during
passages 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 and 35, and assay for MAA content. Levels of the
antigens were significantly lower following long-term culturing melanoma cell
melanoma cells in vitro. At initial passages (1-5), antigen profile in most
cultures was similar to that in tumor tissue samples. Later on each cell
population showed greater antigen expression heterogeneity matched by increased
number of cells going through mitotic cycle; their nuclei were stained with
antibodies to Ki-67. No HLF A/B/C molecule expression took place during tumor
cell culturing: stained cells--in 68.9% of cultures (passages 1-5) and 36.3%
(passage 35). However, HLA DQ/DP/DR molecule identification showed an inverse
relationship: 44.1% (passage 5) while virtually all the cell lines did synthesize
those molecules after passage 35. Hence, MAA and MHC (class 1 and 2) antigens
expression in tumor cell should be monitored when they are used for preparation
of autologuos and allogenic vaccines. In case of allogenic vaccine production,
cell lines capable of stable production of MAA should be selected.

PMID: 18652234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2008 Nov;27(11):1125-9. doi:
10.1007/s10096-008-0553-z. Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Human antimicrobial peptides' antifungal activity against Aspergillus fumigatus.

Lupetti A(1), van Dissel JT, Brouwer CP, Nibbering PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. alupetti@biomed.unipi.it

In light of the need for new antifungals, we compared the in vitro antifungal
activity of two peptides derived from human lactoferrin (hLF), i.e., hLF(1-11)
and hLF(21-31), two analogs of histatin 5, further referred to as dhvar4 and
dhvar5, and two ubiquicidin (UBI)-derived peptides, i.e., UBI 18-35 and UBI
29-41, with that of amphotericin B against Aspergillus fumigatus hyphae using the
MTT assay. The results revealed a dose-dependent antifungal activity for all
peptides, with dhvar5 being the most potent peptide. In addition, hLF(1-11),
dhvar5, and UBI 18-35 were effective against A. fumigatus conidia. Furthermore,
hLF(1-11) did not lyze human erythrocytes, whereas dhvar5 (>or=16 microM) and UBI
18-35 (>or=20 microM) were hemolytic. Based on these in vitro results and their
effectiveness against infections in mice, we concluded that hLF(1-11) and dhvar5 
are promising candidates for the development of new agents against A. fumigatus
infections.

PMID: 18566844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochimie. 2009 Jan;91(1):155-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2008.04.015. Epub 2008 May
15.

Glycosaminoglycans are not indispensable for the anti-herpes simplex virus type 2
activity of lactoferrin.

Marchetti M(1), Ammendolia MG, Superti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technology and Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale
Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy. magda.marchetti@iss.it

Lactoferrin has been recognized as a potent inhibitor of human herpetic viruses, 
such as herpes simplex type 1 (HSV-1) and 2 (HSV-2). In particular, bovine
lactoferrin (bLf) has been found to prevent viral infection by binding to heparan
sulphate (HS) glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) that in turn can act as cell receptors
for human herpetic viruses. In this study we further investigate the mechanism of
inhibiting activity of both human lactoferrin (hLf) and bLf against HSV-2. The
antiviral effect of these proteins towards HSV-2 strain 333 and its glycoprotein 
C (gC)-truncated derivative HSV-2 gC-neg1 has been tested in monkey kidney cells.
Our results indicate that the antiviral activity of bLf does not involve gC-HS
interaction as there was no difference in its effectiveness towards wild type and
mutant virus. As regards hLf, the mutant virus HSV-2 gC-neg1 was more sensitive
compared to the wild type, suggesting that the human protein might interact with 
some viral structures that in wild-type viruses are masked by gC. When the
modulation of HSV-2 infection by bLf and hLf was investigated under different
experimental conditions, the bovine protein proved more effective than the human 
protein. Moreover, we found that, differently from what observed with HSV-1, bLf 
inhibited HSV-2 plaque-forming activity also in cells devoid of GAG expression.
These results suggest that bLf may block a virus receptor of non-GAG nature and
add new information on the anti-herpes virus activity of this protein, confirming
it as an outstanding candidate for the treatment of herpetic infections.

PMID: 18534197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Biointerphases. 2008 Jun;3(2):FB36. doi: 10.1116/1.2965135.

Interfacial adsorption and denaturization of human milk and recombinant rice
lactoferrin.

Pan F(1), Zhao X, Waigh TA, Lu JR, Miano F.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Physics Group, Schuster Building, The University of Manchester,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom.

Lactoferrin (LF) produced from recombinant technologies can achieve almost
identical amino acid sequences and three-dimensional structures to those
extracted from mammals, but differences often arise in the carbohydrate chains
attached through N-glycosylation, with altered sizes, structures, and chemical
nature. We compare the differences in solvation and interfacial adsorption from
two samples, human milk lactoferrin (hLF) and recombinant rice lactoferrin (rLF).
Lactoferrin is a bilobal protein with a molecular weight of about 80 kD. It has
three N-glycosylation sites. Each of the three attached glycan chains on rLF
contains seven to eight sugar groups. In comparison, each of the three glycan
chains attached to hLF contains 12-13 sugar groups and is twice as long. The rLF 
meting point in 1 mg/ml aqueous solution (pH 7 phosphate buffer, I=20 mM) was 43 
degrees C from dynamic light scattering, compared to 53 degrees C for hLF,
exhibiting the enhanced solvation and stability of hLF due to its longer
carbohydrate side chains. Silicon oxide surfaces provided a model substrate for
assessment of lactoferrin adsorption and comparison with other proteins. The time
dependent interfacial adsorption studied by spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) was
characterized by a fast initial step followed by a slow relaxation process. In
addition, the SE results revealed the persistently higher adsorption of rLF,
again showing the effect of glycan side chains. In spite of the different
adsorbed amounts, neutron reflection revealed similar interfacial structures of
the adsorbed protein layers. At the low lactoferrin concentration around 10 mg/l,
a flat-on molecular monolayer formed with both LF lobes attached to the SiO(2)
surface through electrostatic attraction. As the protein concentration increased,
a secondary molecular layer further adsorbed to the first one and the attachment 
was again driven by electrostatic attraction. The intermixing between the
globular lobes resulted in the dense packing in the middle 60 A with some of the 
lobes projected toward the aqueous bulk solution.

PMID: 20408681  [PubMed]


297. J Virol. 2008 Aug;82(15):7716-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00120-08. Epub 2008 May 21.

Compensatory role of human immunodeficiency virus central polypurine tract
sequence in kinetically disrupted reverse transcription.

Skasko M(1), Kim B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

We tested whether the additional positive-strand DNA synthesis initiation of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) from the central polypurine tract
(cPPT) facilitates efficient completion of kinetically disturbed proviral DNA
synthesis induced by dysfunctional reverse transcriptase (RT) mutants or limited 
cellular deoxynucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) pools. Indeed, the cPPT enabled the 
HIV-1 vectors harboring RT mutants with reduced dNTP binding affinity to
transduce human lung fibroblasts (HLFs), without which these mutant vectors
normally fail to transduce. The cPPT showed little effect on wild-type HIV-1
vector transduction in HLF, whereas it significantly enhanced vector transduction
in HLFs engineered to contain reduced dNTP pools, suggesting a novel compensatory
role for cPPT in viruses harboring kinetically impaired RT.

PMCID: PMC2493349
PMID: 18495776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cancer. 2008 Jul 1;113(1):72-7. doi: 10.1002/cncr.23519.

Phase 2 trial of talactoferrin in previously treated patients with metastatic
renal cell carcinoma.

Jonasch E(1), Stadler WM, Bukowski RM, Hayes TG, Varadhachary A, Malik R, Figlin 
RA, Srinivas S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genitourinary Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. ejonasch@mdanderson.org

BACKGROUND: Talactoferrin (TLF), a recombinant form of human lactoferrin (hLF),
is an immunomodulatory iron-binding glycoprotein first identified in breast milk.
Its immunomodulatory functions include activation of natural killer (NK) and
lymphokine-activated killer cells and enhancement of polymorphonuclear cells and 
macrophage cytotoxicity. Studies in animal models have shown promising anticancer
activity, and clinical antitumor activity has been observed in nonsmall cell lung
cancer and other tumor types. The purpose of the current study was to evaluate
the activity and safety of TLF in patients with refractory metastatic renal cell 
carcinoma (RCC).
METHODS: Forty-four adult patients with progressive advanced or metastatic RCC
who had failed prior systemic therapy received oral talactoferrin at a dose of
1.5 g twice daily on a 12-week-on 2-week-off schedule. Patients were evaluated
for progression-free survival at 14 weeks, overall response rate, and
progression-free and overall survival.
RESULTS: TLF was well tolerated. No significant hematologic, hepatic, or renal
toxicities were reported. The study met its predefined target with a 14-week
progression-free survival rate of 59%. The response rate was 4.5%. The mMedian
progression-free survival was 6.4 months and the median overall survival was 21.1
months.
CONCLUSIONS: TLF is a well-tolerated new agent that has demonstrated preliminary 
signs of clinical activity. Given the lack of toxicity, the lack of rapid disease
progression in this cohort, and the preclinical data on immune activation, a
randomized study assessing its effects on disease progression in patients with
metastatic RCC is rational.

(Copyright) 2008 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 18484647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 May 1;14(9):2806-12. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4708.

Synergistic growth inhibition by 9-cis-retinoic acid plus trastuzumab in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Tatebe H(1), Shimizu M, Shirakami Y, Tsurumi H, Moriwaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu,
Japan.

PURPOSE: A malfunction of retinoid X receptor-alpha (RXRalpha) due to
phosphorylation by the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway is 
associated with the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The humanized 
anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody trastuzumab inhibits the activation of HER2 and its
multiple downstream signaling pathways, including the Ras/mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway. In this study, the effects of phosphorylation of RXRalpha
on the ability of RXRalpha ligand 9-cis-retinoic acid (9cRA) and trastuzumab to
inhibit growth of HCC cells was examined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effects of a combination of 9cRA plus trastuzumab on the
inhibition of cell growth in HLF human HCC cells which express constitutive
activation of HER2 protein were examined.
RESULTS: The combination of 9cRA plus trastuzumab synergistically inhibited the
growth of HLF cells without affecting the growth of Hc normal human hepatocytes. 
Combined treatment with these agents acted synergistically to induce apoptosis in
HLF cells. The treatment of HLF cells with trastuzumab alone inhibited the
phosphorylation of HER2, RXRalpha, ERK, Akt, and Stat3 proteins and these effects
were enhanced when the cells were cotreated with 9cRA. Reporter assays indicated 
that the combination of 9cRA plus trastuzumab markedly increased both the
retinoic acid responsive element and retinoid X responsive element promoter
activities in HLF cells.
CONCLUSION: 9cRA and trastuzumab cooperatively inhibit the activation of HER2 and
its downstream signaling pathways, subsequently inhibiting the phosphorylation of
RXRalpha and the growth of HCC cells. This combination might therefore be
effective for the chemoprevention and chemotherapy of HCC.

PMID: 18451248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell Prolif. 2008 Jun;41(3):393-407. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2008.00538.x. Epub 
2008 Apr 24.

Interleukin-6 receptor superantagonist Sant7 inhibits TGF-beta-induced
proliferation of human lung fibroblasts.

Gallelli L(1), Falcone D, Pelaia G, Renda T, Terracciano R, Malara N, Vatrella A,
Sanduzzi A, D'Agostino B, Rossi F, Vancheri C, Maselli R, Marsico SA, Savino R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University Magna Graecia of 
Catanzaro, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Both interleukin-6 (IL-6) and transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) are crucially involved in fibrotic events that characterize
interstitial lung diseases (ILD). Therefore, the aim of this study was to
investigate in primary cultures of normal and fibrotic human lung fibroblasts
(HLF), exposed to either IL-6 or TGF-beta1, the effects on phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and cell growth of IL-6 signalling
inhibition, performed by the IL-6 receptor superantagonist Sant7.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: MAPK phosphorylation was detected by Western blotting, HLF
viability and proliferation were evaluated using the trypan blue staining and the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay, respectively.
RESULTS: Sant7, at a concentration of 1 microg/mL, was capable of significantly
inhibiting HLF proliferation and MAPK phosphorylation induced by cell exposure to
IL-6 (100 ng/mL) or TGF-beta1 (10 ng/mL), whose actions were more evident in
fibrotic cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that, in HLFs derived from patients with
ILDs, the proliferative mechanisms activated by TGF-beta1 are at least in part
mediated by an increased release of IL-6, leading to phosphorylation-dependent
MAPK activation. Such preliminary findings may thus open new therapeutic
perspectives for fibrogenic ILDs, based on inhibition of signal transduction
pathways stimulated by the IL-6 receptor.

PMID: 18435790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Peptides. 2008 Jul;29(7):1109-17. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2008.03.003. Epub 2008 
Mar 13.

Various routes of administration of (99m)Tc-labeled synthetic lactoferrin
antimicrobial peptide hLF 1-11 enables monitoring and effective killing of
multidrug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections in mice.

Brouwer CP(1), Welling MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Section of Nuclear Medicine, Leiden University
Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands.

The synthetic antimicrobial peptide representative of the first 11 N-terminal
amino acids of human lactoferrin (hLF 1-11) kills multidrug-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). This study displays antimicrobial activity of hLF
1-11, via various routes of administration, against MRSA infections in mice.
Radiolabeling hLF 1-11 with technetium-99m ((99m)Tc-hLF 1-11) enables
scintigraphic monitoring directly after administration. (99m)Tc-hLF 1-11 was
taken up by the gall bladder, intestines, and kidneys. Most of the radioactivity 
was captured in the urinary bladder and about 1% of the injected dose accumulated
into infected thigh muscles. At 2 or 24h after either intravenously,
subcutaneously, intraperitoneally, or orally injected a single dose of 0.04 mg/kg
hLF 1-11 in mice significantly reduced (20-60 times) the number of viable MRSA.
In a dose-response setting in immunocompetent mice maximum bactericidal effects
(10,000 times reduction) of intravenously injected (99m)Tc-hLF 1-11 was seen with
40 mg/kg whereas the same dose of orally administered (99m)Tc-hLF 1-11 induced
about approximately 100 times reduction. In conclusion, intravenously and orally 
administrated (99m)Tc-hLF 1-11 accumulates in infected tissues and is highly
effective against experimental infections with MRSA. Moreover, scintigraphy is an
excellent tool to study the pharmacology of experimental compounds and to
determine the uptake in infected tissues.

PMID: 18423795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. PLoS Biol. 2008 Apr 8;6(4):e84. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060084.

Control of apoptosis by asymmetric cell division.

Hatzold J(1), Conradt B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth Medical School,
Hanover, New Hampshire, United States of America.

Asymmetric cell division and apoptosis (programmed cell death) are two
fundamental processes that are important for the development and function of
multicellular organisms. We have found that the processes of asymmetric cell
division and apoptosis can be functionally linked. Specifically, we show that
asymmetric cell division in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is mediated by a 
pathway involving three genes, dnj-11 MIDA1, ces-2 HLF, and ces-1 Snail, that
directly control the enzymatic machinery responsible for apoptosis.
Interestingly, the MIDA1-like protein GlsA of the alga Volvox carteri, as well as
the Snail-related proteins Snail, Escargot, and Worniu of Drosophila
melanogaster, have previously been implicated in asymmetric cell division.
Therefore, C. elegans dnj-11 MIDA1, ces-2 HLF, and ces-1 Snail may be components 
of a pathway involved in asymmetric cell division that is conserved throughout
the plant and animal kingdoms. Furthermore, based on our results, we propose that
this pathway directly controls the apoptotic fate in C. elegans, and possibly
other animals as well.

PMCID: PMC2288629
PMID: 18399720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Physiol Genomics. 2008 May 13;33(3):361-72. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00139.2007. Epub 2008 Apr 1.

Liver gene expression analysis reveals endoplasmic reticulum stress and metabolic
dysfunction in SCD1-deficient mice fed a very low-fat diet.

Flowers MT(1), Keller MP, Choi Y, Lan H, Kendziorski C, Ntambi JM, Attie AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA. mflowers@biochem.wisc.edu

We previously reported that mice deficient in stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (Scd1)
and maintained on a very low-fat (VLF) diet for 10 days developed severe loss of 
body weight, hypoglycemia, hypercholesterolemia, and many cholestasis-like
phenotypes. To better understand the metabolic changes associated with these
phenotypes, we performed microarray analysis of hepatic gene expression in chow- 
and VLF-fed female Scd1+/+ and Scd1-/- mice. We identified an extraordinary
number of differentially expressed genes (>4,000 probe sets) in the VLF Scd1-/-
relative to both VLF Scd1+/+ and chow Scd1-/- mice. Transcript levels were
reduced for genes involved in detoxification and several facets of fatty acid
metabolism including biosynthesis, elongation, desaturation, oxidation,
transport, and ketogenesis. This pattern is attributable to the decreased mRNA
abundance of several genes encoding key transcription factors, including
LXRalpha, RXRalpha, FXR, PPARalpha, PGC-1beta, SREBP1c, ChREBP, CAR, DBP, TEF,
and HLF. A robust induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is indicated by 
enhanced splicing of XBP1, increased expression of the stress-induced
transcription factors CHOP and ATF3, and elevated expression of several genes
involved in the integrated stress and unfolded protein response pathways. The
gene expression profile is also consistent with induction of an acute
inflammatory response and macrophage recruitment. These results highlight the
importance of monounsaturated fatty acid synthesis for maintaining metabolic
homeostasis in the absence of sufficient dietary unsaturated fat and point to a
novel cellular nutrient-sensing mechanism linking fatty acid availability and/or 
composition to the ER stress response.

PMID: 18381840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Apr;31(4):569-73.

Lactoferrin inhibits platelet production from human megakaryocytes in vitro.

Matsumura-Takeda K(1), Ishida T, Sogo S, Isakari Y, Taki T, Sudo T, Kiwada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics and Biopharmaceutics, Subdivision of
Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima, 1-78-1 Sho-machi, Tokushima 770-8505, Japan.
kuniko_m_t@research.otsuka.co.jp

The mechanism of megakaryopoiesis, proplatelet formation (PPF) and platelet (PLT)
production is not fully elucidated. Lactoferrin (LF) has been reported to have
many biological functions including cell proliferation and differentiation, and
the LF receptor is present on megakaryocytic cells. In the present study, we
examined the effect of human LF (hLF) on PLT production from primary
megakaryocytes (MKs). At first, we developed a PLT production system derived from
human CD34+ cells by thrombopoietin (TPO) stimulation. Because the number of
proplatelets, PLTs and CD41+ MKs was remarkably increased after day 5, we
employed the TPO-induced CD34+ cells on day 5. Then, the effect of hLF on PLT
production from human primary MKs was examined. In the range of 3-30 micrg/ml,
hLF significantly inhibited PLT production up to about 60%. However, it did not
significantly change the intensity of CD41 expression in MKs and the ploidy of
MKs. In addition, it did not inhibit MK progenitors. These results suggest that
LF directly inhibits PLT production from matured MKs, but does not inhibit
megakaryopoiesis, including proliferation/maturation processes.

PMID: 18379042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Vascul Pharmacol. 2008 Apr-Jun;48(4-6):174-83. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2008.02.001.
Epub 2008 Feb 13.

2-Ethoxyestradiol is antimitogenic and attenuates monocrotaline-induced pulmonary
hypertension and vascular remodeling.

Tofovic SP(1), Zhang X, Zhu H, Jackson EK, Rafikova O, Petrusevska G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, USA.

Our previous studies show that 2-methoxyestradiol, a non-estrogenic metabolite of
estradiol (E2), attenuates the development and retards the progression of
pulmonary hypertension (PH) in male rats, and in female rats prevents the
exacerbation of PH and eliminates mortality due to ovariectomy. Recent studies
suggest that 2-ethoxyestradiol (2-EE), a synthetic analog of 2-ME, is an even
more potent antimitogen than 2-ME. The goals of this study were: 1) to compare
the effects of E2, 2-ME and 2-EE on proliferation of human pulmonary artery
endothelial (hPAEC) and smooth muscle cells (hPASMC) and lung fibroblasts (hLF); 
2) to examine the effects of 2-ME, its metabolic precursor 2-hydroxyestradiol
(2-HE) and 2-EE on isoproterenol (ISO)-induced cardiac hypertrophy in male rats; 
and 3) to investigate in male rats the effects of 2-EE (10 mug/kg/h via osmotic
pump) on the development of monocrotaline (MCT; 60 mg/kg i.p.)-induced PH. E2 had
biphasic effects on growth (stimulation at low and inhibition at high
concentrations) in hPAEC and mild growth inhibitory effects in hPASMC and hLF
(1-10 muM). In contrast, in all three pulmonary cell lines, 2-ME and 2-EE
inhibited cell growth with 2-EE being ten times more potent than 2-ME. In
ISO-induced cardiac hypertrophy, 2-ME, 2-HE and 2-EE similarly reduced (~-50%)
left (LV) and right (RV) ventricular hypertrophy and fibrosis (hydroxyproline
content). In animals with MCT-induced PH, treatment with 2-EE for 28 days
significantly decreased the elevated RV peak systolic pressure and reduced
RV/LV+septum weight ratio, strongly inhibited vascular remodeling (media
hypertrophy and adventitia widening), markedly reduced inflammatory responses,
and eliminated MCT-induced (63%) mortality. This study provides the first
evidence that 2-ethoxyestradiol strongly inhibits vascular remodeling in PH and
suggests that anti-proliferative agents, including synthetic analogs of estradiol
metabolites may be protective in PH.

PMID: 18373958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Agric Food Chem. 2008 Apr 23;56(8):2831-7. doi: 10.1021/jf073071r. Epub 2008
Mar 21.

Recombinant human lactoferrin and iron transport across Caco-2 monolayers: effect
of heat treatment on the binding to cells.

Conesa C(1), Pocoví C, Pérez MD, Calvo M, Sánchez L.

Author information: 
(1)Tecnología de los Alimentos, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de Zaragoza,
Miguel Servet 177, 50013 Zaragoza, Spain.

Recombinant human lactoferrin (rhLF) from Aspergillus awamori bound to Caco-2
cell membranes in a saturable manner. The dissociation constant for the apo form 
was (Kd)=2.2 x 10(-7) M; however, the specific binding of the iron-saturated rhLF
and of lactoferrin from human milk (hLF) was too low to calculate the binding
parameters. Recombinant human lactoferrin subjected to heat treatment did not
lose the ability to bind to cell membranes except at high temperature and long
time treatments (85 and 89 degrees C for 40 min) for which there was a slight
decrease in the binding. No significant differences have been found in the
transport of iron bound to rhLF or to hLF across Caco-2 cell monolayers.
Nevertheless, the amount of iron-saturated hLF transported across Caco-2
monolayers was significantly higher than that of rhLF. For both lactoferrins, the
amount of intact protein in the lower chamber was about 4.5% of the total
radioactivity transported, indicating the degradation of lactoferrin in the
passage across Caco-2 cells.

PMID: 18355020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 2008 Feb;34(2):164-70. doi: 10.1080/03639040701484668.

Assessment of intestinal absorption of vitexin-2''-o-rhamnoside in hawthorn
leaves flavonoids in rat using in situ and in vitro absorption models.

Xu YA(1), Fan G, Gao S, Hong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory for Pharmaceutical Metabolite Research, School of
Pharmacy, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, PR China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the absorption mechanism of
vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside, the index component in hawthorn leaves flavonoids (HLF)
in the rat intestine, using two different absorption models, the in situ
single-pass intestinal perfusion and the in vitro everted gut sac model. The
effective permeability coefficients (P(eff)) in the in situ single-pass
intestinal perfusion experiments and the apparent permeability coefficients
(P(app)) in the in vitro everted gut sac experiments were calculated.
Furthermore, the influences of the P-glycoprotein inhibitors, verapamil and
digoxin, on the intestinal absorption of vitexin-2''-O- rhamnoside in HLF were
studied using the above-mentioned two models. Results showed that there were no
significant differences in the absorption of vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside in HLF in
four segments of the rat intestine, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, and colon, and at
different concentrations of HLF ranging from 0.05 mg/ml to 0.5 mg/ml (P > 0.05). 
The P(eff) values for vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside in the rat jejunal perfusion at
the concentration of 0.05, 0.1, 0.25, and 0.5 mg/ml were (2.48 +/- 0.33) x
10(-5); (2.23 +/- 0.67) x 10(-5); (2.18 +/- 0.48) x 10(-5); and (2.25 +/- 0.17) x
10(-5) cm/s, respectively. But there was significant difference between absence
and presence of verapamil or digoxin (P < 0.05). P(eff) and P(app) values of
vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside in HLF were increased in the presence of verapamil or
digoxin. In conclusion, vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside can be classified into high
permeability class drug according to the biopharmaceutical classification system.
Passive diffusion dominates the absorptive transport behavior of
vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside in HLF. The absorption and secretion are mediated by the
efflux transport system, P-gp. The absorption of vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside in HLF 
can be enhanced administered together with P-gp inhibitors.

PMID: 18302035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Jun;32(6):605-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2008.01.003. Epub
2008 Jan 25.

Establishment and characterization of atypical fibroblasts from human adult liver
contributing to hepatocyte cord-like arrangement.

Jodon de Villeroché V(1), Brouty-Boyé D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U602, Villejuif Cedex F-94807, France.

We report the phenotypic and functional characterization of fibroblasts
established in culture from the non-parenchymal epithelial cell populations of
adult human livers. Human liver fibroblasts (hLF) expressed mesenchymal antigens 
vimentin, alpha-smooth muscle actin, collagen, fibronectin, CD73, CD90, CD105,
and CD166 together with non-mesenchymal antigens cytokeratins 8 and 18, glial
fibrillary acidic protein, and nestin. Mixed cell lineage-specific protein
expression was not associated with stem-like cell properties. Coculturing
hepatocytes onto confluent hLF showed that they survived and maintained metabolic
activity such as albumin, glycogen, and urea production. Moreover, hepatocytes
formed cord-like arrangements resembling those established in vivo. Hepatocyte
arrangement depended on cell-to-cell contact and the tissue origin of
fibroblasts. Time-lapse video imaging of cocultured cells showed that hepatocyte 
arrangement was coordinated by the stretching and shortening of underneath hLF.
Our data suggest that hLF may represent resident fibroblasts of the adult human
liver, which could assume guiding functions for hepatic epithelial cells.

PMID: 18296076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Zebrafish. 2005;2(4):231-6. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2005.2.231.

Investigator profile. An interview with A. Thomas Look, M.D. Interview by Vicki
Glaser.

Look AT.

Dr. Look received his M.D. degree and postgraduate training in Pediatrics from
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and completed his fellowship training in
Pediatric Oncology at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis,
Tennessee. He then accepted a faculty position at St. Jude and remained there for
20 years, ultimately becoming the Chair of the Experimental Oncology Department. 
In June 1999, he joined the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston,
Massachusetts, as Vice-Chair for Research in Pediatric Oncology and Professor of 
Pediatrics at Harvard Medical School. Work in Dr. Look's laboratory focuses on
the molecular pathogenesis of leukemia. His group has been credited with the
identification and functional analysis of several chimeric oncogenes activated by
chromosomal translocations, including the E2A-HLF transcription factor, which was
shown to act through an evolutionarily conserved genetic pathway to promote
leukemia cell survival. Their efforts in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia have revealed key multistep mutational pathways that drive the
pathogenesis of this disease and demonstrated that NOTCH1 receptors are
mutationally activated in a majority of these cases. More recently, Dr. Look's
laboratory developed the first transgenic model of leukemia in the zebrafish,
opening the way for chemical and genome-wide genetic modifier screens in a
vertebrate disease model.

PMID: 18248181  [PubMed]


310. Endocrinology. 2008 May;149(5):2241-50. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1238. Epub 2008 Jan 
31.

Thyroid hormone induces hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha gene expression through
thyroid hormone receptor beta/retinoid x receptor alpha-dependent activation of
hepatic leukemia factor.

Otto T(1), Fandrey J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Thyroid hormones are important regulators of differentiation, growth, metabolism,
and physiological function of virtually all tissues. Active thyroid hormone T(3) 
affects expression of genes that encode for angiogenic proteins like
adrenomedullin or vascular endothelial growth factor and erythropoietin, as well 
as for glucose transporters and phospho fructokinase that determine glucose use. 
Interestingly, those target genes are also hypoxia inducible and under the
control of the oxygen-dependent transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1). We and others have reported that T(3) stimulates HIF-1 activation,
which intimately links T(3) and HIF-1 induced gene expression. Here, we studied
intracellular pathways that mediate HIF-1alpha regulation by T(3). We found that 
T(3)-dependent HIF-1 activation is not limited to hepatoma cells but is also
observed in primary human hepatocytes, kidney and lung carcinoma cells. T(3)
increased the HIF-1alpha subunit mRNA and protein within a few hours through
activation of the thyroid hormone receptor beta retinoid X receptor alpha
heterodimer because knockdown of each of the partners abrogated the stimulation
by T(3). However, T(3) had no direct effect on transcription of HIF-1alpha, but
activation of the thyroid hormone receptor beta/retinoid X receptor alpha
heterodimer by T(3) stimulated expression of the hepatic leukemia factor, which
increases HIF-1alpha gene expression.

PMID: 18239067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2008 May;38(5):591-9. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Nickel alterations of TLR2-dependent chemokine profiles in lung fibroblasts are
mediated by COX-2.

Brant KA(1), Fabisiak JP.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Department of
Environmental and Occupational Health, Bridgeside Point, 100 Technology Drive,
Room 327, BRIDG, Pittsburgh, PA 15219-3130, USA. kab124@pitt.edu

Particulate matter air pollution (PM) has been linked with chronic respiratory
diseases. Real-life exposures are likely to involve a mixture of chemical and
microbial stimuli, yet little attention has been paid to the potential
interactions between PM components (e.g., Ni) and microbial agents on the
development of inflammatory-like conditions in the lung. Using the Toll-like
receptor (TLR)-2 agonist MALP-2 as a lipopeptide relevant to microbial
colonization, we hypothesized that nickel sensitizes human lung fibroblasts (HLF)
for microbial-driven chemokine release through modulation of TLR signaling
pathways. NiSO(4) (200 muM) synergistically enhanced CXCL8, yet antagonized
CXCL10 mRNA expression and protein release from HLF in response to MALP-2.
RT(2)-PCR pathway-focused array results indicated that NiSO(4) exposure did not
alter the expression of TLRs or their downstream signaling mediators, yet
significantly increased the expression of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). Moreover,
when NiSO(4) was given in combination with MALP-2, there was an amplified
induction of COX-2 mRNA and protein along with its metabolic product, PGE2, in
HLF. The COX-2 inhibitor, NS-398, attenuated NiSO(4) and MALP-2-induced PGE2 and 
CXCL8 release and partially reversed the NiSO(4)-dependent inhibition of
MALP-2-induced CXCL10 release from HLF. These data indicate that NiSO(4) alters
the pattern of TLR-2-dependent chemokine release from HLF via a COX-2-mediated
pathway. The quantitative and qualitative effects of NiSO(4) on microbial-driven 
chemokine release from HLF shed new light on how PM-derived metals can exacerbate
respiratory diseases.

PMCID: PMC2335339
PMID: 18096868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Toxicology. 2008 Feb 3;244(1):49-55. Epub 2007 Nov 12.

Effects of long-term low-dose cadmium exposure on genomic DNA methylation in
human embryo lung fibroblast cells.

Jiang G(1), Xu L, Song S, Zhu C, Wu Q, Zhang L, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Preventive Medicine, Medical College, Wuhan University of Science
and Technology, Huangjiahu Campus, Wuhan 430065, Hubei Province, People's
Republic of China. jianggaofeng@yahoo.com.cn

Cadmium is a toxic transition metal of continuing occupational and environmental 
concern. As a well-recognized human carcinogen, its carcinogenic mechanisms are
still poorly understood. Cadmium has long been considered a non-genotoxic
carcinogen and thought to act through epigenetic mechanisms. In the present
study, we tested the effects of long-term low-dose cadmium exposure on DNA
methylation in human embryo lung fibroblast (HLF) cells. After 2 months of
exposure to 0-1.5 micromol/L cadmium, both the level of genomic DNA methylation
and the enzyme activity of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) were increased in a
concentration-related manner. Moreover, our results showed that cadmium exposure 
up-regulated the mRNA levels of DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b at higher
concentrations. We further tested the growth dynamics of HLF cells, and observed 
significantly elevated growth rates, decreased cell population of G0/G1-phase and
increased cell population of S-phase at 0.9, 1.2, and 1.5 micromol/L
concentrations. Our study indicated that long-term low-dose cadmium exposure
could disrupt DNA methylation, which may be one of the possible underlying
carcinogenic mechanisms of cadmium.

PMID: 18077075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2008 Jul;62(2):337-46. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Mechanisms of enhanced tumoricidal efficacy of multiple small dosages of
ranpirnase, the novel cytotoxic ribonuclease, on lung cancer.

Lee I(1), Shogen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, B6 Blockley Hall, 423
Guardian Drive, Philadelphia, PA, 19104-6069, USA. intaelee@gmail.com

PURPOSE: The effect of multiple small dosages of the cytotoxic RNase, ranpirnase 
(ONCONASE, ONC), on lung cancer was studied. The possible mechanisms for the
enhanced tumoricidal efficacy of multiple small dosages of ONC were also
investigated.
METHODS: Hematoxylin and eosin staining, TUNEL labeling, and caspase-3-antibody
labeling were used for in vivo analysis of apoptosis. A growth-delay assay was
applied to detect the therapeutic potential of small and multiple dosages of ONC 
in vivo. ONC-induced changes in blood flow in A549 tumors and the kidney were
measured non-invasively by dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging
(DCE-MRI).
RESULTS: In cell culture studies, ONC significantly inhibited tumor growth of
A549 human NSCLC cells without damaging non-cancerous cells (HLF-1 human lung
fibroblast). Multiple small dosages of ONC significantly prolonged tumor growth
delay of A549 tumors, with increased apoptosis in vivo from 0.5 +/- 0.3 to 70.1
+/- 1.1% (by TUNEL labeling, N = 3, P < 0.05). Interestingly, multiple small
doses of ONC were more effective than a single large dose for the inhibition of
tumor growth with reduced side effect. Using non-invasive DCE-MRI methods, we
found that the mean of the K (trans) median values increased to 49.3 +/- 7.5%
from the pre-ONC values by ONC (N = 4 mice, P < 0.05). A subsequent T (1) map of 
the kidney showed that T (1) values were temporarily decreased for up to 2 days
(however, fully recovered approximately 4 days post-treatment).
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple small dosages of ONC significantly inhibited tumor growth
of A549 NSCLC cells in vivo, with markedly increased apoptosis. This
investigation suggests important potential clinical uses of ONC for the treatment
of NSCLC cancer patients.

PMID: 18064463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Protein Expr Purif. 2008 Feb;57(2):127-35. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

Expression of active recombinant human lactoferrin in the milk of transgenic
goats.

Zhang J(1), Li L, Cai Y, Xu X, Chen J, Wu Y, Yu H, Yu G, Liu S, Zhang A, Chen J, 
Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200025, China.

This report details the establishment of a transgenic goat model in order to
produce human lactoferrin (hLf) in the mammary gland for large-scale application 
and research. Two transgenic male goats were generated by microinjecting sequence
encoding hLf cDNA to the pronuclear. In the two lines, derived from the two
founders, eight lactating female goats could secrete recombinant human
lactoferrin (rhLf) at concentrations of up to 0.765 mg/ml. The method of
purifying the rhLf from the milk was achieved using ion-exchange chromatography
and resulted in 97% purity. Biochemical and physicochemical characteristics of
rhLf were similar to native lactoferrin (nhLf); this included N-terminal
sequence, isoelectric point, molecular mass, glycosylation,
iron-binding/releasing ability, thermal stability, and proteolysis. The rhLf
showed broad spectrum antibacterial activity inhibiting the growth of several
pathogenic bacterial strains. Also investigated, although to a lesser degree, was
a practicable pasteurization method for the downstream processing of rhLf and,
further, a method for the oral administration of rhLf. On the basis of these
results, our studies show an optimistic and promising approach for the
large-scale production and therapeutic application of rhLf expressed in
transgenic goats.

PMID: 18054499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;45(9):684-6.

[Classical and molecular cytogenetic abnormalities in 124 pediatric patients with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Chai YH(1), Lü H, Li JQ, Lu J, Xiao PF, He YX, Shao XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Soochow University Children's
Hospital, Suzhou 215003, China.

OBJECTIVE: In childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), cytogenetics plays an
important role in diagnosis, allocation of treatment and prognosis. On the basis 
of the conventional cytogenetic analysis, molecular methods have improved
pediatric hematologists/oncologist's ability to accurately and rapidly perform
risk-stratification on patients with childhood ALL during the last few years. The
aim of the present study was to assess the demography of cytogenetic
abnormalities in childhood ALL.
METHOD: The study subjects consisted of 124 newly diagnosed ALL patients younger 
than 16 years of age, who were diagnosed at the Department of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Soochow University Children's Hospital. The diagnosis and
FAB subtypes of ALL was determined by Wright-Giemsa-stained bone marrow smears
and cytochemical staining. Immunophenotyping of the bone marrow samples was
performed by flow cytometry. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction (Multiplex PCR) 
analysis was performed to detect the 29 most common leukemia translocations for
routine molecular diagnostic hematopathology practice, and complement the
information gained from conventional cytogenetic analysis.
RESULTS: Cytogenetic analysis was successful in 112 of 124 children with ALL.
Sixty-eight (60%) of them had clonal chromosomal abnormalities. Numerical
imbalances consisted of hyperdiploid (> 47 chromosomes, 36 cases), hypodiploid (<
46 chromosomes, 14 cases), pseudodiploidy (18 cases). Chromosomal translocations 
were observed in 13 patients by conventional cytogenetic analysis. Three cases
were found positive for 4; 11 translocation, 3 cases for 9; 22 translocation, 1
case for 1; 19 translocation and 6 cases for other rare translocations.
Multiplex-PCR analysis detected 116 of the 124 ALL patients. Thirteen cases of
TEL-AML1, 10 cases of rearrangement in the MLL gene, 4 cases of E2A-PBX1, 4 cases
of E2A-HLF, 3 cases of BCR-ABL, 2 cases of TLS-ERG, 32 cases of HOX11 were
detected by Multiplex PCR in B-lineage leukemias. SIL-TAL1 had been found in 4 of
7 of T-lineage leukemias.
CONCLUSIONS: Sixty-eight cases of ALL showed chromosomal aberrations. Multiplex
PCR positivity was detected in 59 (50%) of the 116 ALL patients studied.
Multiplex PCR combined with chromosomal analysis uncovered chromosomal
abnormalities in 95 of 124 (77%) of ALL patients and supplemented each other in
detecting chromosomal abnormalities.

PMID: 18021563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2007 Oct;32(5):776-81.

[AP-1 regulates TGF-beta1-induced secretion of Type I collagen in human lung
fibroblasts].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu YB(1), Zeng QF, Feng DY, Li X, Peng JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medicine, Central South University,
Changsha 410013, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of AP-1 in the secretion of Type I collagen in
TGF-beta1-stimulated human lung fibroblasts.
METHODS: Human lung fibroblasts cell line (HLF-02) was cultured, and then
stimulated with 10 microg/L TGF-beta1 at different time points. Curcumin was
added into the culture medium to inhibit the AP-1 activity before incubating with
TGF-beta1. AP-1 DNA binding activity was assayed by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA), and the expression of Type I collagen was detected by Western
blot and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: TGF-beta1 could induce the transcription and secretion of Type I
collagen in HLF-02 cells(P<0.05). TGF-beta1 could upregulate the AP-1 DNA binding
activity ( P<0.05). Curcumin ( 5, 10, 15, and 20 micromol/L) could inhibit the
AP-1 DNA binding activity in TGF-beta1-stimulated cells (the inhibition ratio was
17.1%, 17.6%, 24.2%, and 31.3%; P<0.05). Curcumin (5, 10, 15, and 20 micromol/L) 
could also inhibit the secretion of Type I collagen significantly (the inhibition
ratio was 62.1%, 58.8%, 62.1%, and 59.6%; P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: AP-1 is responsible for the secretion of TGF-beta1-induced Type I
collagen in human lung fibroblasts.

PMID: 18007069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Int J Cancer. 2008 Feb 15;122(4):769-76.

Expression of CCR5 receptors on Reed-Sternberg cells and Hodgkin lymphoma cell
lines: involvement of CCL5/Rantes in tumor cell growth and microenvironmental
interactions.

Aldinucci D(1), Lorenzon D, Cattaruzza L, Pinto A, Gloghini A, Carbone A,
Colombatti A.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology 2, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, I.R.C.C.S., Aviano 
(PN), Italy. daldinucci@cro.it

The expression of CCL5/Rantes by Hodgkin (H) and Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells has
been recently documented. In the present study we demonstrated that the CCL5
receptor (CCR5) is constitutively expressed by Hodgkin Lymphoma (HL)-derived cell
lines (i.e. L-428, KM-H2, L-1236 and L-540) as shown by immunohistochemistry,
flow cytometry and western blotting and also detected by immunohistochemistry on 
primary H-RS cells from lymph node tissues. sCD40L never significantly affected
CCR5 expression, whereas a short exposure to doxorubicin down regulated its
expression. CCR5 receptors on HL cell lines were functionally active, since
neutralizing anti-CCL5 monoclonal antibodies inhibited basal proliferation of
HL-derived cell lines and recombinant CCR5 ligands (CCL3/Mip-1 alpha, CCL4/Mip1
beta and CCL5/Rantes) increased their clonogenic growth. CCL5 secretion by
L-1236, L-428 and KM-H2 cells was stimulated by CD40 engagement and also by
coculturing L-1236 cells on primary stromal fibroblasts from HL-involved lymph
nodes (HLF). Coculture experiments indicated that a direct contact of H-RS cells 
induces HLF cells to produce CCL5. Supernatants from L-1236, L-428 and KM-H2
cells stimulated migration of purified CD4+ T-cells and eosinophils in vitro. The
migratory response to HL-cell lines supernatants was only partially neutralized
(CD4+ cells: 70%; esinophils: 36%) by anti-CCL5 antibodies, reinforcing the
notion that multiple chemokines are involved in the recruitment of nonmalignant
reactive cells in HL tissues. Taken together, our results indicate a possible
involvement of the CCR5/CCR5-ligands signaling in the regulation of H-RS cells
growth and in the formation/maintenance of the typical tissue microenvironment of
HL.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17935139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Infect Dis. 2007 Nov 1;196(9):1416-24. Epub 2007 Oct 2.

Human lactoferrin-derived peptide's antifungal activities against disseminated
Candida albicans infection.

Lupetti A(1), Brouwer CP, Bogaards SJ, Welling MM, de Heer E, Campa M, van Dissel
JT, Friesen RH, Nibbering PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Because the human lactoferrin-derived peptide, hLF(1-11), exerts
potent in vitro candidacidal activity, we investigated whether it displays
antifungal activity against disseminated Candida albicans infections.
METHODS: Neutropenic mice were intravenously infected with C. albicans and, 24 h 
later, were injected with hLF(1-11); 18 h later, the number of viable yeasts in
the kidneys was determined microbiologically, the size and number of infectious
foci were determined histologically, and serum cytokine levels were determined by
immunoassays.
RESULTS: hLF(1-11) was effective (maximum reduction, 1.5 logs) against
disseminated C. albicans infections, and its antifungal activity leveled off at a
concentration of 0.4 ng of hLF(1-11)/kg of body weight. The antifungal activity
of hLF(1-11) was increased in mice injected with interleukin (IL)-10 neutralizing
antibodies, which suggests that IL-10 reduces the antifungal activity of
hLF(1-11). In agreement with this result was the finding that injection of high
doses of hLF(1-11) into infected mice was accompanied by increased levels of
IL-10 in serum. Microscopic analysis revealed that infectious foci in kidneys of 
hLF(1-11)-treated mice contained mainly blastoconidia, whereas filamentous forms 
were abundant in untreated mice. The peptide inhibited the in vitro morphological
transition of C. albicans, in a dose-dependent manner. : hLF(1-11) is effective
against disseminated C. albicans infections; and its effects on C. albicans
viability and virulence and on host cells may explain this antifungal activity.

PMID: 17922408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Oncol Rep. 2007 Nov;18(5):1281-90.

Mechanisms of anti-proliferative effect of JTE-522, a selective cyclooxygenase-2 
inhibitor, on human liver cancer cells.

Nagahara T(1), Okano J, Murawaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Tottori University School of Medicine,
36-1 Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8504, Japan.

Selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors have been demonstrated to inhibit
the proliferation of a variety of cancer cells including hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). We sought to explore the mechanisms by which JTE-522, a selective COX-2
inhibitor, suppressed the growth of human HCC cells. HCC cells (HepG2, HLF, huH1,
Huh7, and PLC/PRF/5 cells) did not express COX-2 at either the mRNA or protein
level. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels in medium were not significantly modulated 
by the JTE-522 treatment. However, MTT assays disclosed that escalating doses
(100 nM to 100 microM) of JTE-522 significantly inhibited the growth of all HCC
cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. JTE-522 induced cell cycle arrest at 
the G1 phase, which was in part mediated by downregulation of cyclin E. Hallmarks
of apoptosis, including the sub-G1 fraction by flow cytometric analysis and
nuclear fragmentation by nuclear staining, were not significantly induced after
the JTE-522 treatment. In addition, JTE-522 enhanced the expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma protein in HepG2 and PLC/PRF/5
cells. Our data demonstrate that JTE-522 inhibited the growth of HCC cells in a
COX-2-independent manner, and that the growth inhibition was in part mediated by 
the cell cycle arrest and the upregulation of PPAR-gamma protein.

PMID: 17914586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cell Biol Int. 2007 Dec;31(12):1495-500. Epub 2007 Jul 15.

BRS-3 activation transforms the effect of human bronchial epithelial cells from
PGE2 mediated inhibition to TGF-beta1 dependent promotion on proliferation and
collagen synthesis of lung fibroblasts.

Wang Y(1), Zhang M, Tan Y, Xiang Y, Liu H, Qu F, Qin L, Qin X.

Author information: 
(1)Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, 
PR China.

Airway re-modelling in asthma usually results in an irreversible weakness of
pulmonary ventilation, however, its initiating or controlling mechanism remains
unclear. In this study, we hypothesize that signal communication between airway
epithelial cells and sub-mucosal fibroblast cells may play an important role in
the maintenance of structure homeostasis in a physiologic condition and in
initiation of airway remodelling in a stressed condition. To test the hypothesis,
a co-cultured system of human bronchial epithelial cells (BEC) and human lung
fibroblasts (HLF) were designed to observe the effects of BEC, in the normal
state or in a BRS-3 activated state, on the proliferation and collagen synthesis 
of HLF. The results showed that the proliferation activities of both BEC and HLF 
inhibited each other under the normal state. BRS-3-activated BEC can transform
the reciprocal inhibition into promoting effects. The secretion of TGF-beta1
increased and the synthesis of PGE2 decreased from BRS-3-activated BEC, which
were correlated with the proliferation and collagen synthesis of HLF. The
proliferation activities of HLF were weakened by co-culture with TGF-beta1
antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) treated BEC. It was concluded that, in the
normal state, BEC inhibits the activities of fibroblasts through release of PGE2 
to maintain the airway homeostasis; however when stressed, for example by BRS-3
activation, BEC promote the activities of fibroblasts mediated by TGF-beta1,
thereby facilitating the airway re-modelling.

PMID: 17714959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. PLoS One. 2007 Aug 22;2(8):e768.

Candidate genes for expansion and transformation of hematopoietic stem cells by
NUP98-HOX fusion genes.

Palmqvist L(1), Pineault N, Wasslavik C, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Hox genes are implicated in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) regulation 
as well as in leukemia development through translocation with the nucleoporin
gene NUP98. Interestingly, an engineered NUP98-HOXA10 (NA10) fusion can induce a 
several hundred-fold expansion of HSCs in vitro and NA10 and the AML-associated
fusion gene NUP98-HOXD13 (ND13) have a virtually indistinguishable ability to
transform myeloid progenitor cells in vitro and to induce leukemia in
collaboration with MEIS1 in vivo.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: These findings provided a potentially powerful
approach to identify key pathways mediating Hox-induced expansion and
transformation of HSCs by identifying gene expression changes commonly induced by
ND13 and NA10 but not by a NUP98-Hox fusion with a non-DNA binding homedomain
mutation (N51S). The gene expression repertoire of purified murine bone marrow
Sca-1+Lin- cells transduced with retroviral vectors encoding for these genes was 
established using the Affymetrix GeneChip MOE430A. Approximately seventy genes
were differentially expressed in ND13 and NA10 cells that were significantly
changed by both compared to the ND13(N51S) mutant. Intriguingly, several of these
potential Hox target genes have been implicated in HSC expansion and
self-renewal, including the tyrosine kinase receptor Flt3, the prion protein,
Prnp, hepatic leukemia factor, Hlf and Jagged-2, Jag2. Consistent with these
results, FLT3, HLF and JAG2 expression correlated with HOX A cluster gene
expression in human leukemia samples.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion this study has identified several novel Hox downstream
target genes and provides important new leads to key regulators of the expansion 
and transformation of hematopoietic stem cells by Hox.

PMCID: PMC1942085
PMID: 17712416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;30(4):273-8.

[Losartan inhibited angiotensin induced human lung fibroblast transformation and 
collagen synthesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Long X(1), Xiong SD, Xiong WN, Xu YJ, Zhang ZX, Cao Y, Chen J, Xu XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the induction of cell transdifferentiation, connective
tissue growth factor (CTGF) expression and collagen production of human lung
fibroblast (HLF) by angiotensin II (Ang II), and to investigate the inhibitory
effect of Ang II receptor antagonist-losartan on this process.
METHODS: HLF cells were cultured and divided into a control group, an Ang II
treated group, an Ang II + losartan co-incubated group and a losartan group. The 
marker of myofibroblast-alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) was detected by
immunofluorescence and Western blot respectively, and the expression of CTGF mRNA
and protein level were measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry respectively. Groups of Ang II and Ang
II + losartan incubated with CTGF phosphothioate antisense, sense and random
oligonucleotides transfected HLFs respectively, and collagen I (Col) I mRNA and
alpha-SMA expression level were compared. The amount of hydroxyproline in the
cell culture was measured by colorimetric assay.
RESULTS: In the Ang II group, CTGF mRNA level (0.82 +/- 0.07) was significantly
higher than the control group (0.29 +/- 0.05), the Ang II + Losartan group (0.51 
+/- 0.04) and the Losartan group (0.26 +/- 0.04). The CTGF protein level in the
Ang II group (0.24 +/- 0.05) was increased as compared to the other groups. In
the Ang II group, Col I mRNA (1.03 +/- 0.12) and amount of hydroxyproline (0.62
+/- 0.01 ng/ml) were significantly different as compared with the other three
groups. The alpha-SMA expression level (1.14 +/- 0.15) and Col I mRNA (0.30 +/-
0.04) of HLF cells transfected with antisense oligonucleotide incubated with Ang 
II decreased significantly as compared to those of sense and random
oligonucleotide transfected cells. Alpha-SMA expression level (0.85 +/- 0.09) and
Col I mRNA (0.20 +/- 0.02) of Losartan + Ang II co-incubated antisense
oligonucleotide transfected HLF cells decreased significantly as compared to Ang 
II treated alone.
CONCLUSION: Ang II promoted HLF cell transdifferentiation into myofibroblasts and
increased collagen production through induction of CTGF expression. Blocking CTGF
expression decreased Ang II induced transdifferentiation. Losartan blocked Ang II
induced HLF cell transdifferentiation and collagen production.

PMID: 17651610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 31;104(31):12843-8. Epub 2007 Jul 23.

TNF-alpha suppresses the expression of clock genes by interfering with
E-box-mediated transcription.

Cavadini G(1), Petrzilka S, Kohler P, Jud C, Tobler I, Birchler T, Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, University Hospital Zurich, Haeldeliweg 4,
CH-8044 Zurich, Switzerland.

Production of TNF-alpha and IL-1 in infectious and autoimmune diseases is
associated with fever, fatigue, and sleep disturbances, which are collectively
referred to as sickness behavior syndrome. In mice TNF-alpha and IL-1 increase
nonrapid eye movement sleep. Because clock genes regulate the circadian rhythm
and thereby locomotor activity and may alter sleep architecture we assessed the
influence of TNF-alpha on the circadian timing system. TNF-alpha is shown here to
suppress the expression of the PAR bZip clock-controlled genes Dbp, Tef, and Hlf 
and of the period genes Per1, Per2, and Per3 in fibroblasts in vitro and in vivo 
in the liver of mice infused with the cytokine. The effect of TNF-alpha on clock 
genes is shared by IL-1beta, but not by IFN-alpha, and IL-6. Furthermore,
TNF-alpha interferes with the expression of Dbp in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
and causes prolonged rest periods in the dark when mice show spontaneous
locomotor activity. Using clock reporter genes TNF-alpha is found here to inhibit
CLOCK-BMAL1-induced activation of E-box regulatory elements-dependent clock gene 
promoters. We suggest that the increase of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta, as seen in
infectious and autoimmune diseases, impairs clock gene functions and causes
fatigue.

PMCID: PMC1937554
PMID: 17646651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Vet Res. 2007 Sep-Oct;38(5):729-39. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Effect of ovotransferrin and lactoferrins on Chlamydophila psittaci adhesion and 
invasion in HD11 chicken macrophages.

Beeckman DS(1), Van Droogenbroeck CM, De Cock BJ, Van Oostveldt P, Vanrompay DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering,
Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, 9000 Gent, Belgium.
Delphine.Beeckman@UGent.be

The effect of ovotransferrin (ovoTF), human lactoferrin (hLF) and bovine
lactoferrin (bLF) on the obligate intracellular pathogen Chlamydophila (Cp.)
psittaci was evaluated using a model of Buffalo Green Monkey kidney (BGM) cells
and HD11 chicken macrophages as artificial hosts. Firstly, the effect of
transferrins on the infectivity of the bacteria was evaluated. Pre-incubation of 
Cp. psittaci with 0.5 to 5 mg/mL ovoTF prior to infecting BGM cells significantly
lowered the infection rate (P < 0.05). For both lactoferrins, the infection rate 
could only be reduced with 5 mg/mL, albeit not significantly as compared to the
infection rate created by the untreated bacteria. Secondly, transferrins were
tested for their ability to influence bacterial adhesion and entry in HD11 cells.
Maximal non-cytotoxic and non-bactericidal concentrations of 0.05 mg/mL ovoTF and
0.5 mg/mL hLF and bLF were used. Overall, ovoTF was more effective than human and
bovine LF in inhibiting bacterial irreversible attachment and cell entry and the 
latter was accompanied by a dose-dependent reduction of actin recruitment at the 
bacterial entry site. However, once bacteria had entered HD11 cells, transferrins
had apparently no effect on intracellular replication. The present findings
suggest a possible role for transferrins and especially ovoTF, in preventing
avian Cp. psittaci infections.

PMID: 17621441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Life Sci. 2007 Jul 4;81(4):336-45. Epub 2007 Jun 16.

Tumor suppressor carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1
potentates the anchorage-independent growth of human hepatoma HepG2 cells.

Hokari M(1), Matsuda Y, Wakai T, Shirai Y, Sato M, Tsuchiya A, Takamura M,
Yamagiwa S, Suzuki K, Ohkoshi S, Ichida T, Kawachi H, Aoyagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Asahimachi-dori 1-757, Niigata 951-8510,
Japan.

Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 (CEACAM1), an adhesion 
molecule of the immunoglobulin superfamily, has been characterized as a putative 
tumor suppressor because it is frequently down-regulated in aggressive types of
cancer cells. Recently, however, several studies have shown that CEACAM1 actively
contributes to malignant progression or migration in some types of tumor cells,
suggesting that the role of CEACAM1 might be diverse among different types of
cancer cells. To investigate the functional consequences of CEACAM1 expression in
hepatocellular carcinoma, we analyzed the status of CEACAM1 in hepatoma cell
lines HLF, PLC/PRF/5, HepG2 and KYN-2. We found that CEACAM1 was only expressed
in HepG2 cells, which show a unique property for enhanced anchorage-independent
growth. When HepG2 cells were treated with small interfering RNA targeted against
CEACAM1, the growth rate in monolayer culture was increased. In contrast, when
HepG2 cells were cultured in suspension, inhibition of CEACAM1 expression
significantly decreased the growth rate, and the speed of cell-cell attachment
was repressed. Hyaluronidase treatment attenuated the growth rate of HepG2 cells 
in suspension culture, indicating that cell-cell attachment is a requisite for
anchorage-independent growth. Our data may reveal the dual role of CEACAM1 on
hepatocarcinogenesis, by showing that CEACAM1 acts as a tumor suppressor in HepG2
cells in anchorage-dependent growth conditions, while in anchorage-independent
growth conditions, it augments cell proliferation by potentiating the cell-cell
attachment.

PMID: 17612570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Transl Med. 2007 Jun 7;5:26.

Rejection of large HPV-16 expressing tumors in aged mice by a single immunization
of VacciMax encapsulated CTL/T helper peptides.

Daftarian PM(1), Mansour M, Pohajdak B, Fuentes-Ortega A, Korets-Smith E,
Macdonald L, Weir G, Brown RG, Kast WM.

Author information: 
(1)ImmunoVaccine Technologies Inc., Halifax, NS, B3J 3R1, Canada.
Pd.ivt@immunovaccine.com

The incidence of cancer increases significantly in later life, yet few
pre-clinical studies of cancer immunotherapy use mice of advanced age. A novel
vaccine delivery platform (VacciMax,VM) is described that encapsulates antigens
and adjuvants in multilamellar liposomes in a water-in-oil emulsion. The
therapeutic potential of VM-based vaccines administered as a single dose was
tested in HLA-A2 transgenic mice of advanced age (48-58 weeks old) bearing large 
palpable TC1/A2 tumors. The VM-based vaccines contained one or more peptides
having human CTL epitopes derived from HPV 16 E6 and E7. VM formulations
contained a single peptide, a mixture of four peptides or the same four peptides 
linked together in a single long peptide. All VM formulations contained PADRE and
CpG as adjuvants and ISA51 as the hydrophobic component of the water-in-oil
emulsion. VM-formulated vaccines containing the four peptides as a mixture or
linked together in one long peptide eradicated 19-day old established tumors
within 21 days of immunization. Peptide-specific cytotoxic cellular responses
were confirmed by ELISPOT and intracellular staining for IFN-gamma producing CD8+
T cells. Mice rendered tumor-free by vaccination were re-challenged in the
opposite flank with 10 million HLF-16 tumor cells, another HLA-A2/E6/E7
expressing tumor cell line. None of these mice developed tumors following the
re-challenge. In summary, this report describes a VM-formulated therapeutic
vaccine with the following unprecedented outcome: a) eradication of large tumors 
(> 700 mm3) b) in mice of advanced age c) in less than three weeks
post-immunization d) following a single vaccination.

PMCID: PMC1904180
PMID: 17555571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2007 Mar;36(2):217-9.

[Construction of CYP1A1-Wt and Asn461, Val462 gene eukaryotic expression vector
and itstransfection in HLF cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiao Y(1), Wei Q, Liu Y, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health, Sun Yatsen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish the cells model with high expression CYP1A1 and analyze
the expression of the variable genotype.
METHODS: Clone the target fragment (CYP1A1-Wt, Asn461, and -Val462) in T-Vectors 
into pBABE-neo, then transfer into the human embryonic lung fibroblast cells
(HLF). The positive cells were selected by G418. The expression of CYP1A1 protein
was measured by Western-Blot. At the same time, cells shape, growth of curve, and
carcinogenicity were observed.
RESULTS: HLF transferred with wild-CYP1A1 and variant-CYP1A1 expressed CYP1A1
protein higher than normal HLF. No differences of biology were found between the 
transfected HLF and normal HLF. These cells are not belong to carcinogenesis
cells.
CONCLUSION: HLF cells with wild-CYP1A1 or variant-CYP1A1 ware established
successfully.

PMID: 17555106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Int J Oncol. 2007 Jul;31(1):81-7.

Activation of a system A amino acid transporter, ATA1/SLC38A1, in human
hepatocellular carcinoma and preneoplastic liver tissues.

Kondoh N(1), Imazeki N, Arai M, Hada A, Hatsuse K, Matsuo H, Matsubara O, Ohkura 
S, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa-shi, 
Saitama 359-8513, Japan. nkondoh@ndmc.ac.jp

The expression of amino acid transporter (AT) mRNAs including A system
(ATA1/SNAT1/SLC38A1, ATA2/SNAT2/SLC38A2 and ATA3/SNAT3/SLC38A4), L system
(LAT1/SLC7A5 and LAT2/SLC7A8), and y+ (CAT2/SLC7A2) genes, were compared among
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and non-cancerous liver cells. Among them the ATA1
mRNA expression was significantly elevated in all HCC cell lines (HepG2, HLF,
HuH7 and JHH4) examined compared with normal liver tissue. We further discovered 
that the expression of ATA1 mRNA was significantly activated in HCC tissues and
also elevated in pre-malignant cirrhotic livers from HCC patients, compared with 
normal livers from non-HCC patients. The ATA1 protein was extensively accumulated
in the cytoplasm of pre-malignant liver and most HCCs, while being weak or
undetectably low in normal liver tissues. SiRNA-mediated suppression of
endogenous ATA1 lowered the viability of HepG2 cells. Thus, the activation of
ATA1 confers growth and survival advantages in pre-malignant and malignant liver 
lesions.

PMID: 17549407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2007 May-Jun;32(3):242-6.

Understanding how opioids contribute to reward and analgesia.

Fields HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94608,
USA. hlf@phy.ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2007 May-Jun;32(3):240-1.

Opioids acting at the mu opioid (MOP) receptor produce powerful analgesia. They
also produce an intensely rewarding effect that can lead to addiction. The
analgesic effect of MOP receptor agonists derives from a direct inhibitory effect
on pain transmission at the spinal-cord level and through activation of a
descending pain-modulatory pathway. The rewarding effect of MOP agonists is the
result of their actions in the mesostriatal dopamine pathway classically
associated with both natural and drug rewards. Both the analgesic and rewarding
effect of MOP agonists are best understood in the context of decision making
under conditions of conflict. Pain is one of many competing motivational states, 
and endogenous opioids suppress responses to noxious stimuli in the presence of
conflicting motivations, such as hunger or a threatening predator. When a food
reward is available, MOP agonists microinjected into the mesostriatal circuit
promote its consumption, while concomitantly suppressing responses to noxious
stimulation. The mesostriatal "reward" circuit, thus, appears to perform a
function critical to decision making and can either amplify or suppress responses
to noxious stimuli.

PMID: 17543821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Hepatogastroenterology. 2007 Mar;54(74):489-92.

Gene expressions associated with chemosensitivity in human hepatoma cells.

Hoshida Y(1), Moriyama M, Otsuka M, Kato N, Taniguchi H, Shiratori Y, Seki N,
Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Only limited patients with hepatoma benefit from chemotherapy
without a clear explanation. We aimed to identify genes associated with
chemosensitivity using transcriptional profiles.
METHODOLOGY: In 8 hepatoma cells (HLE, HLF, Huh7, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5, SK-Hep1,
Huh6, and HepG2) transcriptional profiles were obtained using cDNA microarray
including 2300 genes. Chemosensitivities to 8 anticancer drugs (nimustine,
mitomycin C, cisplatin, carboplatin, doxorubicin, epirubicin, mitoxantrone, and
5-fluorouracil) were measured by obtaining 50% growth inhibitory concentrations
(GI50) using MTT assay. Genes having drug-specific association with
chemosensitivity were selected.
RESULTS: Up-regulation of topoisomerase II beta was associated with
chemo-resistance, the target of doxorubicin. Platinum-specific resistance was
associated with superoxide dismutase 2 expression. Antigen peptide transporter 1 
expression correlated with nimustine and mitoxantrone-specific susceptibility.
These results were verified by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Drug inactivators
reported in non-liver cancers such as multidrug transporters and drug
metabolizers showed less diversity of chemosensitivity in hepatoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: To evaluate these gene expressions may be useful to select
anticancer drugs, and possibly to consider new therapeutic target to modify drug 
action.

PMID: 17523305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Hazard Mater. 2007 Oct 22;149(2):408-17. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

TG-DTA, DRIFT and NMR characterisation of humic-like fractions from olive wastes 
and amended soil.

Francioso O(1), Ferrari E, Saladini M, Montecchio D, Gioacchini P, Ciavatta C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agroenvironmental Sciences and Technologies, University of
Bologna, V le Fanin 40, 40127 Bologna, Italy. ornella.francioso@unibo.it

The purpose of the present study is to investigate, by means of thermogravimetric
analysis (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA), diffuse reflectance
infrared Fourier transform (DRIFT) and 2D nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopies, the structural features of the humic-like fraction (HLF) from
olive pulp (OP), its effluents originated from the fermentation processes for
hydrogen (EH2) and methane production (ECH4) and humic acid (HA) from soil
amended with each of these materials. A considerable structural modification
emerged between the HLF, in particular from the ECH4 effluent, which was
characterised by a high content of polyphenolic and polypeptidic substances. The 
short-term amendment trial with OP and EH2 indicated that no chemical or
structural changes in soil HA appeared. In contrast, the amendment with ECH4
substantially influenced the chemical and structural composition of soil HA. The 
structural interpretation performed by 2D NMR indicated the presence of aliphatic
and aromatic protons while the sugar-like content and O-CH3 groups decreased with
respect to the soil control HA. It emerges from this study that olive wastes
contain stabilised humic-like material that may be recycled as an amendment in
areas where olive trees are cultivated.

PMID: 17499435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Antiviral Res. 2007 Sep;75(3):258-65. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

The anti-papillomavirus activity of human and bovine lactoferricin.

Mistry N(1), Drobni P, Näslund J, Sunkari VG, Jenssen H, Evander M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Umeå University, SE-901-85 Umeå, Sweden.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) cause common warts, laryngeal papilloma and genital
condylomata and is necessary for the development of cervical cancer. We have
previously found that lactoferrin has antiviral activity against HPV-16 and
others have demonstrated that lactoferricin, an N-terminal fragment of
lactoferrin, has inhibitory activities against several viruses. Two cell lines
and two virus types, HPV-5 and HPV-16, were used to study if lactoferrin and
lactoferricin could inhibit HPV pseudovirus (PsV) infection. We demonstrated that
bovine lactoferrin (bLf) and human lactoferrin (hLf) were both potent inhibitors 
of HPV-5 and -16 PsV infections. Among the four lactoferricin derivatives we
analyzed, a 15 amino acid peptide from bovine lactoferricin (bLfcin) 17-31 was
the most potent inhibitor of both HPV-5 and HPV-16 PsV infection. Among the other
derivatives, the human lactoferricin (hLfcin) 1-49 showed some antiviral activity
against HPV PsV infection while bLfcin 17-42 inhibited only HPV-5 PsV infection
in one of the cell lines. When we studied initial attachment of HPV-16, only
bLfcin 17-42 and hLfcin 1-49 had an antiviral effect. This is the first time that
lactoferricin was demonstrated to have an inhibitory effect on HPV infection and 
the antiviral activity differed depending on size, charge and structures of the
lactoferricin.

PMID: 17481742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2007 Jun;70(11):938-46.

Arsenite-induced alterations in Ku70-deficient cells: a model to study genotoxic 
effects.

Liu QZ(1), Jiang GF, He Y, Wang XR, Zhou JW, Zhuang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Toxicology, School of Public Health, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.

As one of three subunits of DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), Ku70 protein
plays an important role in repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DNA DSB). To
further understand the functions of Ku70 protein and the mechanisms underlying
arsenite-induced genotoxic effects, the effects of Ku70 deficiency were examined.
The Ku70-deficient cell line HLFK and null vector cell line HLFC were established
after recombinant plasmid of Ku70 gene antisense RNA and null pEGFP-C1 vector
were transferred into human embryo lung fibroblasts (HLF) cells. Experiments were
undertaken to detect DNA DSB damage by neutral single-cell gel electrophoresis
assay (SCGE), chromosomal alterations by micronucleus test, and cell cycle
progression by flow cytometry in HLFC and HLFK cells treated with control, 1,
2.5, 5, or 10 microM sodium arsenite for 2, 4, or 24 h, respectively. Western
blot analysis results showed that Ku70 protein content in HLFK cells decreased to
38% of those in HLFC cells. The median lethal concentrations (LC50) of sodium
arsenite to HLFC and HLFK cells for 24 h were 27.38 microM and 21.80 microM,
respectively. Results of neutral SCGE assay showed that there were
concentration-dependent increases in tail length of DNA DSB, in percent of cells 
with DNA DSB tails, and in severity of DNA DSB damage in HLFK and HLFC cells. The
increases in these indices in HLFK cells were significantly higher than those
found in HLFC cells exposed to similar amounts of metal. The ability of DNA DSB
to repair in HLFK cells was less than that seen in HLFC cells. Sodium arsenite
produced concentration-dependent elevation in micronuclei and abnormal nuclei
formation. The Ku70-deficiency enhanced the susceptibility to chromosomal
alterations induced by sodium arsenite. Low concentrations of sodium arsenite
induced cell arrest at G1; however, at high concentrations of metal this G1
arrest effect disappeared. These results suggested that Ku70 protein plays an
important role in repair of DNA DSB damage and for maintainance of genome
stability.

PMID: 17479409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 2007 Feb;44(1):44-9.

Conformation of an octapeptide fragment (2-9) of kaliocin-1 in DMSO-d6 by 1H NMR 
and restrained molecular dynamics.

Sunilkumar PN(1), Sadasivan C, Devaky KS, Haridas M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala, India.

Kaliocin-1, a 31-residue synthetic peptide (FFSASCVPGADKGQFPNLCRLCA GTGENKCA),
which has shown the antimicrobial activity forms the 152-182 fragment of human
lactoferrin (HLf). As the octapeptide FSASCVPG forms the 2-9 fragment of
kaliocin-1, in the present study, its conformation in dimethyl sulfoxide-d6
(DMSO-d6) has been determined using two-dimensional (2D) nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy as well as restrained molecular dynamics. Sequence
specific assignments of all the 1H resonances have been carried out using 2D
correlation experiments (2D DQF-COSY, TOCSY and ROESY). In dimethyl sulfoxide-d6 
at 25 degrees C, the octapeptide adopts a predominantly extended backbone
conformation. The calculated structure resembles closely with the reported
structure of the corresponding fragment of HLf. The peptide also has sequence and
structural similarity with the corresponding fragments of lactoferrins from other
organisms.

PMID: 17385340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Exp Hematol. 2007 Apr;35(4 Suppl 1):105-16.

Constitutive activation of Flt3 and STAT5A enhances self-renewal and alters
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells.

Moore MA(1), Dorn DC, Schuringa JJ, Chung KY, Morrone G.

Author information: 
(1)Moore Laboratory, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, 
USA. m-moore@ski.mskcc.org

OBJECTIVE: To model human leukemogenesis by transduction of human hematopoietic
stem cells (HSC) with genes associated with leukemia and expressed in leukemic
stem cells.
METHODS: Constitutive activation of Flt3 (Flt3-ITD) has been reported in 25 to
30% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Retroviral vectors expressing 
constitutively activated Flt3 and STAT5A were used to transduce human cord blood 
CD34(+) cells and HSC cell self-renewal and differentiation were evaluated.
RESULTS: We have demonstrated that retroviral transduction of Flt3 mutations into
CD34(+) cells enhanced HSC self-renewal as measured in vitro in competitive
stromal coculture and limiting-dilution week-2 cobblestone (CAFC) assays.
Enhanced erythropoiesis and decreased myelopoiesis were noted together with
strong activation of STAT5A. Consequently, transduction studies were undertaken
with a constitutively active mutant of STAT5A (STAT5A[1( *)6]) and here also a
marked, selective expansion of transduced CD34(+) cells was noted, with a massive
increase in self-renewing CAFC detectable at both 2 and 5 weeks of stromal
coculture. Differentiation was biased to erythropoiesis, including erythropoietin
independence, with myeloid maturation inhibition. The observed phenotypic changes
correlated with differential gene expression, with a number of genes
differentially regulated by both the Flt3 and STAT5A mutants. These included
upregulation of genes involved in erythropoiesis and downregulation of genes
involved in myelopoiesis. The phenotype of week-2 self-renewing CAFC also
characterized primary Flt3-ITD(+) AML bone marrow samples. Isolation of leukemic 
stem cells (LSC) with a CD34(+), CD38(-), HLA-DR(-) phenotype was undertaken with
Flt3-ITD(+) AML samples resulting in co-purification of early CAFC. Gene
expression of LSC relative to the bulk leukemic population revealed upregulation 
of homeobox genes (HOXA9, HOXA5) implicated in leukemogenesis, and hepatic
leukemia factor (HLF) involved in stem cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: Myeloid leukemogenesis is a multi-stage process that can involve
constitutively activated receptors and downstream pathways involving STAT5, HOX
genes, and HLF.

PMID: 17379095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2007;30:289-316.

Ventral tegmental area neurons in learned appetitive behavior and positive
reinforcement.

Fields HL(1), Hjelmstad GO, Margolis EB, Nicola SM.

Author information: 
(1)Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center and Wheeler Center for the
Neurobiology of Addiction, University of California, San Francisco, Emeryville,
California 94608, USA. hlf@phy.ucsf.edu

Ventral tegmental area (VTA) neuron firing precedes behaviors elicited by
reward-predictive sensory cues and scales with the magnitude and unpredictability
of received rewards. These patterns are consistent with roles in the performance 
of learned appetitive behaviors and in positive reinforcement, respectively. The 
VTA includes subpopulations of neurons with different afferent connections,
neurotransmitter content, and projection targets. Because the VTA and substantia 
nigra pars compacta are the sole sources of striatal and limbic forebrain
dopamine, measurements of dopamine release and manipulations of dopamine function
have provided critical evidence supporting a VTA contribution to these functions.
However, the VTA also sends GABAergic and glutamatergic projections to the
nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex. Furthermore, VTA-mediated but
dopamine-independent positive reinforcement has been demonstrated. Consequently, 
identifying the neurotransmitter content and projection target of VTA neurons
recorded in vivo will be critical for determining their contribution to learned
appetitive behaviors.

PMID: 17376009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2006;26(6):661-3.

Multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction for simultaneous
screening of 29 chromosomal translocation in hematologic malignancies.

Huang M(1), Li C, Liang H, Zhou J, Deng J, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

Multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (M-RT-PCR) has been
proved to possess great clinical potential for simultaneous screening of 29
chromosomal translocations in acute leukemia. To evaluate the clinical value of
M-RT-PCR in hematologic malignancies, bone marrow samples from 90 patients with
various hematologic malignancies, including 25 acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), 
22 acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 27 chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), 4
myeloproliferative diseases (MPD), 3 chronic lymphoblastic leukemia (CLL), 3
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), 3 myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 2 multiple
myeloma (MM) and 1 malignant histiocytosis (MH) were subjected to both M-RT-PCR
and chromosome karyotypic analysis. Some of cases were subjected to follow-up
examination of M-RT-PCR during the period of clinical complete remission (CR) for
detection of minimal residual leukemia. In our hand, 12 of 29 chromosomal
translocation transcripts including TEL/PDGFR, DEK/CAN, MLL/AF6, AML1/ETO,
MLL/AF9, BCR/ABL, MLL/MLL, PML/RARu, TLS/ERG, E2A/HLF, EVI1 and HOXI1 were
detected in 57 cases (63.3 %) of the 90 samples, which were in consistency with
the results of karyotypic analysis. Furthermore, M-RT-PCR had also shown good
clinical relevance when used as an approach to detect minimal residual leukemia. 
We concluded that M-RT-PCR could be used as an efficient and fast diagnostic tool
not only in the initial diagnosis of hematologic malignancies but also in
subsequent monitor of minimal residual leukemia.

PMID: 17357482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2007 May 9;44(1):243-9. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Simultaneous determination of vitexin-4''-O-glucoside and
vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside from Hawthorn leaves flavonoids in rat plasma by HPLC
method and its application to pharmacokinetic studies.

Ma G(1), Jiang XH, Chen Z, Ren J, Li CR, Liu TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, West China School of Pharmacy, Sichuan
University, Key Laboratory of Drug Targeting of Ministry of Education, Chengdu
610041, PR China.

The present study was to investigate the pharmacokinetics of the two similar
flavonoid glycosides, vitexin-4''-O-glucoside (VGL) and vitexin-2''-O-rhamnoside 
(VRH) in rats after intravenous administration of hawthorn leaves flavonoids
(HLF). Blood samples were collected via tail vein at time intervals after drug
administration and the plasma concentrations of the studied ingredients were
analyzed by HPLC after the plasma protein was precipitated directly with
methanol. VGL and VRH were successfully separated using a C(18) column with a UV 
detection at 330 nm and a mobile phase of
methanol-acetonitrile-tetrahydrofuran-0.5% acetic acid (1:1:19.4:78.6, v/v/v/v). 
The assay linearities of VGL and VRH were confirmed over the range 0.23-138.42
and 0.36-218.49 microg/ml, respectively. The accuracy and precision of the two
analytes at high, medium and low concentration were within the range of -3.13% to
3.51% and below 4%, the mean assay recoveries of them (n=5) ranged from 96.87% to
101.75% and 96.88% to 103.51% for intra- and inter-day assays and the mean
extraction recoveries of them (n=5) varied from 92.68% to 95.74% for VGL and
93.45% to 99.26% for VRH, respectively. After intravenous administration of HLF
to rats over the doses range of 10-40 mg/kg, the plasma concentration--time
curves of VGL and VRH were both conformed to the three-compartment open
pharmacokinetic model and linear pharmacokinetic characteristics.

PMID: 17329058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Hepatol Res. 2007 Jan;37(1):77-83.

Interferon alpha receptors are important for antiproliferative effect of
interferon-alpha against human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Damdinsuren B(1), Nagano H, Wada H, Noda T, Natsag J, Marubashi S, Miyamoto A,
Takeda Y, Umeshita K, Doki Y, Dono K, Monden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan.

AIM: Interferon (IFN)-alpha is a promising drug for the prevention and treatment 
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We reported that responders to
IFN-alpha/5-fluorouracil combination therapy expressed higher IFN alpha receptor 
(IFNAR)2 in tumor. Herein we studied involvement of IFNARs in response to
IFN-alpha in HCC cells.
METHODS: IFN-alpha sensitivity and expression of IFNARs were studied in six HCC
cell lines (HuH7, PLC/PRF/5, HLE, HLF, HepG2, Hep3B) using growth-inhibitory and 
RT-PCR, Western blot assays. Short interfering RNAs (SiRNAs) against IFNAR1 and 2
were used to analyze the role of the IFNARs in IFN-alpha's effect and signal
transduction.
RESULTS: The expressions of IFNAR1 and 2c mRNAs were higher in PLC/PRF/5 cells
than those in other cell lines, and PLC/PRF/5 cells expressed abundant IFNAR2c on
their cell membrane. When we examined the sensitivity of the HCC cell lines to
the growth-inhibitory effect of IFN-alpha, PLC/PRF/5 exhibited a significant
response, while the other cells were much more resistant. Knockdown of either
IFNAR1 or 2 using siRNAs suppressed the IFN-alpha's signal transduction
(2.5-fold), and decreased the growth-inhibitory effect (down by 69.9% and 67.3%).
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that the expression of IFNAR1 and IFNAR2c
independently are important for the antiproliferative effect of IFN-alpha in HCC 
cells.

PMID: 17300701  [PubMed]


340. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007 Mar;22(3):436-43.

Cimetidine inhibits epidermal growth factor-induced cell signaling.

Fujikawa T(1), Shiraha H, Nakanishi Y, Takaoka N, Ueda N, Suzuki M, Shiratori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Medical Science, Okayama University Graduate School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Okayama, Japan. tfmty@yahoo.co.jp

BACKGROUND: Cimetidine, a histamine-2 (H2) receptor antagonist, has been
demonstrated to have anticancer effects on colorectal cancer, melanoma and renal 
cell carcinoma. In the current study, we clarified that cimetidine inhibits both 
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced cell proliferation and migration in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines.
METHOD: HCC cell lines (Hep3B, HLF, SK-Hep-1, JHH-2, PLC/PRF/5 and HLE) were used
and cell proliferation was assessed by [3H]-thymidine incorporation assay. Cell
migration was measured by in vitro cell migration assay. Biological effects of
cimetidine were assessed with human EGF receptor (EGFR)-expressing mouse
fibroblast cells (NR6-WT). The autophosphorylation of EGFR and the activation of 
other downstream effectors were analyzed by immunoprecipitation and
immunoblotting. The concentration of intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) was measured
by competitive enzyme immunoassay.
RESULTS: Cimetidine inhibited both EGF-induced cell proliferation and migration
in Hep3B, HLF, SK-Hep-1 and JHH-2, while cimetidine did not affect EGF-induced
cell proliferation and migration in PLC/PRF/5 and HLE. Cimetidine was revealed to
disrupt the EGF-induced autophosphorylation of EGFR and its downstream effectors,
mitogen activated protein kinases and phospholipase C-gamma. To define the
molecular basis of this negative regulation, we identified that cimetidine
significantly decreased intracellular cAMP levels and that decrement of cAMP
inhibited autophosphorylation of EGFR. The cell permeable cAMP analog, CPT-cAMPS 
reversed the cimetidine-induced inhibition of EGF-induced cell proliferation and 
cell migration by restoring autophosphorylation of EGFR.
CONCLUSION: Cimetidine inhibited EGF-induced cell proliferation and migration in 
HCC cell lines by decreasing the concentration of intracellular cAMP levels.
Cimetidine may be a candidate chemopreventive agent for HCC.

PMID: 17295779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2007 Jan;38(1):18-21.

[Study on the protective effect of tomato juice on DNA damage in cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu F(1), Zhang ZZ, Wu M, Shu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, West China School of Public Health,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To test the effect of tomato juice on the growth of human normal cells
(HLF line) and tumor cells (A549 cells line) and its protective effects on DNA
damages for both cells.
METHODS: The effect of tomato juice on the proliferation of cells was measured by
MTT assay. The comet assaywas undertaken to detect the protective effect of
tomato juice on DNA damages of cells induced by potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7).
RESULTS: No effect of tomato juice on the growth of human normal cells and tumor 
cells when the proportion of tomato juice in cell culture fluid under 15%; cell
growth was inhabited when the proportion of tomato juice in cell culture fluid
was up to or higher than 20%. No DNA damages were identified when tomato juice
was set at a concentration between 50 to 500 microL/mL. Protective effects of
tomato juice at 20-100 microL/mL on DNA damages were found, showing decreased.
Percentage of tailed cells and length of tails for both normal and tumor cells. A
negative dose-response relationship between the concentration of tomato juice and
tail length was revealed (r= -0.917, P=0.00369).
CONCLUSION: Tomato juice can't damage the DNA of cells, but reduce the DNA damage
induced by potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) in both human normal and tumor cells.
Furthermore, to test the effect of tomato juice on the growth of cells, we must
consider the volume proportion of tomato juice in cell culture fluid, just as the
result shown in our study, if the proportion of tomato juice exceed 20%, the
conclusion may be unbelievable.

PMID: 17294719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3687-96. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

HOXA10 is a critical regulator for hematopoietic stem cells and
erythroid/megakaryocyte development.

Magnusson M(1), Brun AC, Miyake N, Larsson J, Ehinger M, Bjornsson JM, Wutz A,
Sigvardsson M, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University Hospital, 221 84 Lund, Sweden.

The Homeobox (Hox) transcription factors are important regulators of normal and
malignant hematopoiesis because they control proliferation, differentiation, and 
self-renewal of hematopoietic cells at different levels of the hematopoietic
hierarchy. In transgenic mice we show that the expression of HOXA10 is tightly
regulated by doxycycline. Intermediate concentrations of HOXA10 induced a 15-fold
increase in the repopulating capacity of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) after 13
days of in vitro culture. Notably, the proliferation induction of HSC by HOXA10
was dependent on the HOXA10 concentration, because high levels of HOXA10 had no
effect on HSC proliferation. Furthermore, high levels of HOXA10 blocked erythroid
and megakaryocyte development, demonstrating that tight regulation of HOXA10 is
critical for normal development of the erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. The
HOXA10-mediated effects on hematopoietic cells were associated with altered
expression of genes that govern stem-cell self-renewal and lineage commitment
(eg, hepatic leukemia factor [HlF], Dickkopf-1 [Dkk-1], growth factor
independent-1 [Gfi-1], and Gata-1). Interestingly, binding sites for HOXA10 were 
found in HLF, Dkk-1, and Gata-1, and Dkk-1 and Gfi-1 were transcriptionally
activated by HOXA10. These findings reveal novel molecular pathways that act
downstream of HOXA10 and identify HOXA10 as a master regulator of postnatal
hematopoietic development.

PMID: 17234739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Pediatr Res. 2007 Jan;61(1):89-92.

Effects of iron-unsaturated human lactoferrin on hydrogen peroxide-induced
oxidative damage in intestinal epithelial cells.

Shoji H(1), Oguchi S, Shinohara K, Shimizu T, Yamashiro Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juntendo University School
of Medicine, 113-0033 Tokyo, Japan. hiromichi.shoji@nifty.ne.jp

Human milk (HM) contains various bioactive antioxidants. Lactoferrin (Lf) has
been assumed to be one of the major antioxidants in HM. We examined the
antioxidative properties of iron-unsaturated human Lf (apo-hLf, the major form of
Lf in HM) in two intestinal epithelial cell lines: (1) An intestinal epithelial
cell line (IEC-6) were preincubated for 24 h with either 50 microg/mL of apo-hLf,
iron-saturated human Lf (holo-hLf), iron-unsaturated bovine transferrin
(apo-bTf), or 800 ng/mL of the iron-chelating compound deferoxamine (DFX),
followed by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) challenge to induce oxidative stress.
Survival rates were significantly higher in the cells preincubated with apo-hLf
and DFX than those preincubated with holo-hLf. (2) Caco-2 cells were preincubated
with or without apo-hLf for 24 h, followed by an H2O2 challenge. Intracellular
oxidative stress was assessed by a fluorescent probe,
2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCF-DA). Fluorescent intensity of
cell images and cell homogenates was significantly lower in the cells
preincubated with apo-hLF than those preincubated without apo-hLF. Our study
indicates that apo-hLf alleviates H2O2-induced oxidative damage in intestinal
cells due to the iron-chelating capacity. Therefore, Lf in HM may act as an
antioxidant in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT).

PMID: 17211147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Leukemia. 2007 Feb;21(2):288-96. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Hypercalcemia in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: frequent implication of 
parathyroid hormone-related peptide and E2A-HLF from translocation 17;19.

Inukai T(1), Hirose K, Inaba T, Kurosawa H, Hama A, Inada H, Chin M, Nagatoshi Y,
Ohtsuka Y, Oda M, Goto H, Endo M, Morimoto A, Imaizumi M, Kawamura N, Miyajima Y,
Ohtake M, Miyaji R, Saito M, Tawa A, Yanai F, Goi K, Nakazawa S, Sugita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Yamanashi, School of Medicine,
Yamanashi, Japan. tinukai@yamanashi.ac.jp

Hypercalcemia is relatively rare but clinically important complication in
childhood leukemic patients. To clarify the clinical characteristics, mechanisms 
of hypercalcemia, response to management for hypercalcemia, incidence of t(17;19)
and final outcome of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) accompanied by 
hypercalcemia, clinical data of 22 cases of childhood ALL accompanied by
hypercalcemia (>12 mg/dl) reported in Japan from 1990 to 2005 were
retrospectively analyzed. Eleven patients were 10 years and older. Twenty
patients had low white blood cell count (<20 x 10(9)/l), 15 showed hemoglobin> or
=8 g/dl and 14 showed platelet count > or =100 x 10(9)/l. Parathyroid
hormone-related peptide (PTHrP)-mediated hypercalcemia was confirmed in 11 of the
16 patients in whom elevated-serum level or positive immunohistochemistry of
PTHrP was observed. Hypercalcemia and accompanying renal insufficiency resolved
quickly, particularly in patients treated with bisphosphonate. t(17;19) or
add(19)(p13) was detected in five patients among 17 patients in whom karyotypic
data were available, and the presence of E2A-HLF was confirmed in these five
patients. All five patients with t(17;19)-ALL relapsed very early. Excluding the 
t(17;19)-ALL patients, the final outcome of ALL accompanied by hypercalcemia was 
similar to that of all childhood ALL patients, indicating that the development of
hypercalcemia itself is not a poor prognostic factor.

PMID: 17183364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Ann Saudi Med. 2002 May-Jul;22(3-4):143-8.

Heart rate variability in patients with mitral stenosis: a study of 20 cases from
King Abdulaziz University Hospital.

Al-Hazimi A(1), Al-Ama N, Marouf M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Left atrial enlargement in mitral stenosis predisposes to atrial
fibrillation (AF). Analysis of heart rate variability (HRV) prior to the onset of
an arrhythmia may show alterations in autonomic balance that are known to
predispose to the development of AF. The aim of this study was to determine
whether HRV in patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis (MS) is abnormal in
comparison to normal controls, and to find the relationship between left atrial
size and HRV in patients with MS in sinus rhythm and in AF.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: A series of 24-hour ambulatory Holter electrocardiogram
recordings were obtained for 10 consecutive, newly diagnosed untreated subjects
with pure mitral stenosis in sinus rhythm, 10 with mitral stenosis complicated by
atrial fibrillation and 10 age-matched normal controls. Digitized records were
processed using time domain and power spectral analysis.
RESULTS: In patients with mitral stenosis in sinus rhythm, we observed
significant decrease of the standard deviation of the RR intervals (SDRR), as
well as of the root mean square of successive RR interval differences (RMSSD) and
Edinburgh index (sNN50), while in patients with AF, the RMSSD and sNN50 were much
larger than those in normal. The areas under all spectral bands were markedly
increased in patients with AF compared with normal. Furthermore, the high low
frequency/high frequency (HLF/HF ratio) ratio was very small compared to normal. 
HRV measures were independent of atrial size in both groups.
CONCLUSION: Decreased HRV in mitral stenosis patients with sinus rhythm suggests 
increased sympathetic activity in patients prone to atrial fibrillation, while
marked increased of HRV in patients with AF may indicate that parasympathetic
activity modulates the intrinsic behavior of the atrioventricular node during
atrial fibrillation. The evaluation of HRV may be a useful tool for the
identification of patients predisposed to AF.

PMID: 17159383  [PubMed]


346. Int J Oncol. 2007 Jan;30(1):105-11.

Identification of c-Yes expression in the nuclei of hepatocellular carcinoma
cells: involvement in the early stages of hepatocarcinogenesis.

Nonomura T(1), Masaki T, Morishita A, Jian G, Uchida N, Himoto T, Izuishi K,
Iwama H, Yoshiji H, Watanabe S, Kurokohchi K, Kuriyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Neurology, Kagawa University School of
Medicine, Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.

It is thought that the subcellular distribution of Src-family tyrosine kinases,
including c-Yes binding to the cellular membrane, is membranous and/or
cytoplasmic. c-Yes protein tyrosine kinase is known to be related to malignant
transformation. However, the expression patterns of c-Yes in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) remains unknown. In the present study, we report that c-Yes is
expressed not only in the membrane and cytoplasm, but also in the nuclei of
cancer cells in some human HCC tissues and in a human HCC cell line. We examined 
the expression and localization of c-Yes in human HCC cell lines (HLE, HLF,
PLC/PRF/5 and Hep 3B) by Western blotting and immunohistochemical analyses; we
also examined the expression of c-Yes by immunohistochemistry and Western
blotting in the tissues of various liver diseases, including 39 samples from HCC 
patients. We used an antibody array to detect proteins that bind to nuclear c-Yes
in PLC/PRF/5 cell line. c-Yes was found to be expressed in the membranes and
cytoplasm of HLE, HLF and Hep 3B HCC cells; it was also detected in the nuclei in
addition to the membranes and cytoplasm of PLC/PRF/5 HCC cells. HCC with nuclear 
c-Yes was detected in 5 of 39 cases (13.0%), and nuclear c-Yes expression was not
detected in normal, chronic hepatitis or cirrhotic livers. All HCCs with nuclear 
c-Yes expression were well-differentiated, small tumors at the early stages. In
the PLC/PRF/5 cell line, the nuclear localization of c-Yes with cyclin-dependent 
kinase 1 was confirmed by a protein antibody array. In conclusion, nuclear c-Yes 
expression was found in cancer cells at the early stages of hepatocarcinogenesis,
suggesting that nucleus-located c-Yes may be a useful marker to detect
early-stage HCC.

PMID: 17143518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Neurol Clin Neurophysiol. 2005 Dec 16;2005:4.

Ictal onset slow potential shifts recorded with hippocampal depth electrodes.

Mader EC Jr(1), Fisch BJ, Carey ME, Villemarette-Pittman NR.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana State University Epilepsy Center of Excellence New Orleans, LA
70112, USA. emader@lsuhsc.edu

PURPOSE: Reports of direct current shifts at the onset of scalp-recorded seizures
prompted us to inspect depth-recorded seizures for the presence of similar slow
potential shifts at the onset of the seizure to determine whether slow potential 
(SP) shifts actually occur at the onset of depth-recorded seizures and if these
shifts can facilitate localization of the seizure focus.
METHODS: With the low frequency filter "opened" (LLF=0.1 Hz, HLF=70 Hz, 3
dB/octave), 32 seizures recorded with hippocampal depth and subdural electrodes
were visually inspected to identify an SP shift at the onset of the seizure. A
seizure was considered as having an SP shift when the slow potential waveform was
> 1.5 sec in duration and > 100 microV in amplitude. Seizures were obtained from 
5 subjects; 4 underwent epilepsy surgery (3=Engel I, 1=Engel II) and one received
VNS. SP shift duration, peak voltage and polarity were measured for each seizure.
The ability to identify seizures based on SP shift configuration was also
evaluated.
RESULTS: In 84% of the seizures, ictal onset was associated with a localized SP
shift. Shift duration ranged from 1.5 sec to 11.5 sec (96% > 2 sec, 62% > 5 sec).
The maximum shift ranged from 139 microV to 2305 microV (mean = 1123 microV, SD =
660 microV). In all the seizures, polarity was positive at the point of maximum
shift. By visually examining the SP shift, seizures could be identified as
originating from the same focus or from different foci.
CONCLUSIONS: The onset of depth-recorded seizures appears to be commonly
associated with a localized positive SP shift. An SP shift at the onset of
depth-recorded seizures is likely to be a useful visual aid for localizing
electrographic seizure onset.

PMID: 17139393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Gene. 2007 Jan 15;386(1-2):218-23. Epub 2006 Oct 20.

Xenobiotic- and vitamin D-responsive induction of the steroid/bile
acid-sulfotransferase Sult2A1 in young and old mice: the role of a gene enhancer 
in the liver chromatin.

Seo YK(1), Chung YT, Kim S, Echchgadda I, Song CS, Chatterjee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Texas 78245, USA.

The xenobiotic-activated nuclear receptors PXR (pregnane X receptor) and CAR
(constitutive androstane receptor) and the vitamin D(3)-activated nuclear
receptor VDR regulate steroid and xenobiotic metabolism by inducing the phase I
cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, phase II conjugating transferases, and the phase 
III transporters, which mediate the efflux of water-soluble lipid metabolites
from cells. Metabolic stress due to the deviant expression of steroid- and
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes is known to have severe health consequences
including accelerated aging, and increased expression of these enzymes is
associated with extended longevity [Gachon, F, Olela, FF, Schaad, O, Descombes, P
and Schibler, U, 2006. The circadian PAR-domain basic leucine zipper
transcription factors DBP, TEF, and HLF modulate basal and inducible xenobiotic
detoxification. 4, 25-36.; McElwee, JJ, Schuster, E, Blanc, E, Thomas, JH and
Gems, D, 2004. Shared Transcriptional Signature in Caenorhabditis elegans Dauer
Larvae and Long-lived daf-2 Mutants Implicates Detoxification System in Longevity
Assurance. J. Biol. Chem., 279, 44533-43.]. Information on the similarities and
dissimilarities in drug metabolism between the young and old, as may be uncovered
by studying aging regulation of the genes relevant to steroid and xenobiotic
metabolism, is likely to have clinical significance. In this report, we examined 
the VDR- and PXR-mediated gene induction of the phase II sulfotransferase Sult2A1
in the livers of 4-month- and 20-month-old mice. Sult2A1 converts bile acids,
steroids and a number of drugs to the corresponding sulfated metabolites, which
are readily eliminated from the body due to increased water solubility. In RT-PCR
assay, aging did not change the induction of Sult2A1 mRNAs by the hormonally
active vitamin D(3) and the catatoxic synthetic steroid PCN
(pregnenolone-16alpha-carbonitrile). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) from
liver nuclei showed that aging had no effect on the activity of an IR0 enhancer
in the Sult2A1 chromatin to recruit VDR, RXR-alpha (retinoid X receptor) and PXR 
in mice injected with D(3) or PCN. Thus, mice in late life are as competent as
those in early life in responding to the hormonal and xenobiotic signaling for
Sult2A1 induction. This is the first report describing the role of aging in the
functional response of an enhancer in the liver chromatin to the nuclear
receptor-dependent signaling.

PMCID: PMC1888572
PMID: 17123747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Oncol Rep. 2006 Dec;16(6):1375-80.

The soluble form of human leukocyte antigen class I antigen causes apoptosis on
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.

Shimura T(1), Suehiro T, Suzuki H, Okada K, Araki K, Asao T, Kuwano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgical Science (Surgery I), Gunma University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. tshimura@showa.gunma-u.ac.jp

A soluble form of human leukocyte antigen class I antigen (sHLA-I) has been
reported to cause apoptosis on cytotoxic T cells and inhibit killer activity of
natural killer cells via killer-cell inhibitory receptors. However, its effect on
cancer cells has not yet been elucidated. We examined the direct effect of sHLA-I
on human liver cancer cell lines, HepG2, HLE and HLF. The effects of sHLA-I on
cell growth, DNA synthesis, and apoptosis induction were evaluated. To elucidate 
the mechanisms, cDNA expression arrays were also examined. sHLA-I caused cell
growth inhibition, resulting in apoptosis on human hepatocellular carcinoma,
dose-dependently. In this process, caspase-3 was activated. sHLA-I also inhibited
in vivo growth of hepatocellular carcinoma in severe combined immunodeficient
mice. sHLA-I caused apoptosis on human hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 17089064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Int J Oncol. 2006 Dec;29(6):1501-8.

Apoptosis of liver cancer cells by vitamin K2 and enhancement by MEK inhibition.

Matsumoto K(1), Okano J, Nagahara T, Murawaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Tottori University School of Medicine,
Yonago, Tottori 683-8504, Japan.

Vitamin K2 (VK2) is an anti-proliferative agent toward a variety of cancer
including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Because the growth inhibitory effect of
VK2 to HCC has not been established yet, we investigated it in HCC cells in
vitro. VK2 inhibited growth of Hep3B, but not of HepG2, HLF, and Huh6. VK2
induced the cell cycle arrest at the G1 phase and involvement of apoptosis was
suggested because the sub-G1 fraction appeared in flow cytometric analysis and
nuclear condensation and fragmentation appeared after VK2 treatment. VK2
activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 in a mitogen-activated
ERK-regulating kinase (MEK)-dependent manner in Hep3B and Huh6, but not in HepG2 
and HLF. When ERK1/2 was inhibited by U0126, apoptosis by VK2 in Hep3B, but not
in Huh6, was significantly enhanced. However, Western blot analysis revealed that
neither apoptosis induction by VK2 nor enhancement of apoptosis by U0126 was
mediated by caspase activation. These data demonstrated that VK2 induced
apoptosis and activated the MEK/ERK1/2 signaling pathway in a cell-type specific 
manner, and a MEK inhibitor could augment the cell death in these cells.

PMID: 17088989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2006 Sep;35(5):557-60.

[Effects of the inhalable particle (PM10) on secretion of inflammatory factors in
human lung fibroblasts and mouse alveolar macrophage cell].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia YQ(1), Zhao XH, Guo XB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public
Health, Peking University, Beijing 100083, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of PM10 and the concentrated culture suspension
of RAW264.7 cells treated with PM10 on the secretion of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-6(IL-6) and interleukin-8(IL-8) in the
human lung fibroblasts( HLF).
METHODS: PM10 were collected during heating period in the urban area of Beijing. 
HLF and mouse alveolar macrophage cell (RAW264.7) were used. The two ways of
exposed cells to PM10 were used: (1) HLF were treated with the different
concentration of PM10 for 24h. (2) HLF were stimulated by the added the
suspension of RAW264.7 cell exposed to different concentrations of PM10.
Cytotoxicity of PM10 was measured by MTT assay. The levels of inflammatory
cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IL-8 were determined by the radioimmunity assay.
RESULTS: After treated for 24h, PM10 showed the cytotoxicity in HLF and RAW264.7 
cells, which was characterized by increase of the viability of cells at low
concentration of PM10, and decrease at high doses. PM10 induced the secretion of 
TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IL-8 in HLF in a dose-dependent manner. The concentrated
culture medium of RAW264.7 cells treated with PM10 also stimulated the secretion 
of TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IL-8 in HLF.
CONCLUSION: PM10 is cytotoxic to HLF and RAW264.7 cells. PM10 induced the
secretion of TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IL-8 in HLF. This effect was also observed by
treatment of HLF with the concentrated culture medium of RAW264.7 cell exposed to
PM10.

PMID: 17086702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Virol. 2007 Jan;81(2):954-63. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

Adenoviruses use lactoferrin as a bridge for CAR-independent binding to and
infection of epithelial cells.

Johansson C(1), Jonsson M, Marttila M, Persson D, Fan XL, Skog J, Frängsmyr L,
Wadell G, Arnberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

Most adenoviruses bind to the coxsackie- and adenovirus receptor (CAR).
Surprisingly, CAR is not expressed apically on polarized cells and is thus not
easily available to viruses. Consequently, alternative mechanisms for entry of
coxsackievirus and adenovirus into cells have been suggested. We have found that 
tear fluid promotes adenovirus infection, and we have identified human
lactoferrin (HLf) as the tear fluid component responsible for this effect. HLf
alone was found to promote binding of adenovirus to epithelial cells in a
dose-dependent manner and also infection of epithelial cells by adenovirus. HLf
was also found to promote gene delivery from an adenovirus-based vector. The
mechanism takes place at the binding stage and functions independently of CAR.
Thus, we have identified a novel binding mechanism whereby adenovirus hijacks
HLf, a component of the innate immune system, and uses it as a bridge for
attachment to host cells.

PMCID: PMC1797453
PMID: 17079302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2006 Sep;24(9):523-5.

[Effects of silicon dioxide on expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin in human
lung fibroblasts].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu YB(1), Zeng QF, Peng JW, Chu L, Li X, Wang JS, Jiang HY, Wen JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Centre South University, 
Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of SiO(2) on the expression of alpha-smooth
muscle actin (alpha-SMA) in human lung fibroblasts in vitro and vivo.
METHODS: The experimental group comprised 32 rats while 32 rats were included in 
the control. In vivo, the expression of alpha-SMA in lung tissues of rats exposed
to SiO(2), the supernate of RAW264.7 cells, SiO(2) and the growth factor beta(1) 
(TGF-beta(1)) were investigated, respectively.
RESULTS: (1) alpha-SMA positive myofibroblasts appeared in the lung tissues of
the 28th day groups exposed to SiO(2). (2) The expression of alpha-SMA in HLF-02 
cells was unregulated by TGF-beta(1) and supernate of RAW264.7 cells exposed to
SiO(2). (3) The expression of alpha-SMA in HLF-02 cells was not induced by
SiO(2).
CONCLUSION: Myofibroblasts related to silicosis, and the appearance of
myofibroblasts (in vitro) are independent on direct stimulation by SiO(2), but
related to the mediator (TGF-beta(1)) secreted by SiO(2) stimulated macrophages.

PMID: 17034723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2006 Oct;13(10):1111-8. Epub 2006 Aug 23.

Comparison of human immunodeficiency virus type 1-specific inhibitory activities 
in saliva and other human mucosal fluids.

Kazmi SH(1), Naglik JR, Sweet SP, Evans RW, O'Shea S, Banatvala JE, Challacombe
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Oral AIDS Research Unit, Department of Oral Medicine and Immunology, King's
College London Dental Institute at Guy's, King's College, and St. Thomas'
Hospitals, Floor 28, Guy's Tower, King's College London, London SE1 9RT, United
Kingdom.

Several human mucosal fluids are known to possess an innate ability to inhibit
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection and replication in vitro.
This study compared the HIV-1 inhibitory activities of several mucosal fluids,
whole, submandibular/sublingual (sm/sl), and parotid saliva, breast milk,
colostrum, seminal plasma, and cervicovaginal secretions, from HIV-1-seronegative
donors by using a 3-day microtiter infection assay. A wide range of HIV-1
inhibitory activity was exhibited in all mucosal fluids tested, with some donors 
exhibiting high levels of activity while others showed significantly lower
levels. Colostrum, whole milk, and whole saliva possessed the highest levels of
anti-HIV-1 activity, seminal fluid, cervicovaginal secretions, and sm/sl
exhibited moderate levels, and parotid saliva consistently demonstrated the
lowest levels of HIV-1 inhibition. Fast protein liquid chromatography gel
filtration studies revealed the presence of at least three distinct peaks of
inhibitory activity against HIV-1 in saliva and breast milk. Incubation of
unfractionated and fractionated whole saliva with antibodies raised against human
lactoferrin (hLf), secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI), and, to a
lesser extent, MG2 (high-molecular-weight mucinous glycoprotein) reduced the
HIV-1 inhibitory activity significantly. The results suggest that hLf and SLPI
are two key components responsible for HIV-1 inhibitory activity in different
mucosal secretions. The variation in HIV inhibitory activity between the fluids
and between individuals suggests that there may be major differences in
susceptibility to HIV infection depending both on the individual and on the
mucosal fluid involved.

PMCID: PMC1595323
PMID: 16928883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Anticancer Drugs. 2006 Aug;17(7):771-81.

Pulmonary fibroblasts stimulate the proliferation of cell lines from human lung
adenocarcinomas.

Cekanova M(1), Masi T, Plummer HK 3rd, Majidi M, Fedorocko P, Schuller HM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, Department of Pathobiology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA.

Human lung cancer cell lines are widely used to test anticancer drugs. These
in-vitro tests, however, preclude the detection of responses to paracrine factors
from surrounding stroma. We have cocultured pulmonary fibroblasts CCD-19Lu, from 
a healthy donor, or HLF-A, from a patient with epidermoid carcinoma of the lung, 
with two human pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell lines to test the hypothesis that
the fibroblasts stimulate the growth of the tumor cells. Both fibroblast cell
lines significantly increased the proliferation of the pulmonary adenocarcinoma
cell lines in 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide
assays, with HLF-A fibroblasts yielding the most pronounced responses. The
proliferation of the pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell lines in coculture with
fibroblasts was blocked by antibodies against the transforming growth
factor-alpha and amphiregulin. In addition, reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction showed expression of mRNA for amphiregulin and transforming growth
factor-alpha in all cell lines, whereas mRNA for the epidermal growth factor was 
detected only in pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell lines. Western blot analysis
revealed that medium containing growth factors released by each fibroblast cell
line activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 in the both tested
pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell lines, but activated Akt kinase only in A549 cells.
Assessment of protein levels for cyclin D1 and cyclin E by Western blots
demonstrated pronounced increases of both proteins in each pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cell line, whereas protein levels for cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p21 remained unchanged. Immunocytochemical analysis showed positive
immunoreactivity for P-extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, cyclin D1 and
cyclin E in pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells cocultured with fibroblasts or exposed
to fibroblast-conditioned media. Our data suggest that the growth of pulmonary
adenocarcinoma is stimulated by amphiregulin and transforming growth factor-alpha
released from pulmonary fibroblasts. This may contribute to the disappointing
clinical responses to anticancer drugs, which have shown promise in tests with
lung cancer cell lines.

PMID: 16926627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Pathol. 2006 Oct;210(2):192-204.

Smoking and cancer-related gene expression in bronchial epithelium and
non-small-cell lung cancers.

Woenckhaus M(1), Klein-Hitpass L, Grepmeier U, Merk J, Pfeifer M, Wild P,
Bettstetter M, Wuensch P, Blaszyk H, Hartmann A, Hofstaedter F, Dietmaier W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee
11, D 93053 Regensburg, Germany. matthias.woenckhaus@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

Tobacco smoking is the leading cause of lung cancer worldwide. Gene expression in
surgically resected and microdissected samples of non-small-cell lung cancers (18
squamous cell carcinomas and nine adenocarcinomas), matched normal bronchial
epithelium, and peripheral lung tissue from both smokers (n = 22) and non-smokers
(n = 5) was studied using the Affymetrix U133A array. A subset of 15
differentially regulated genes was validated by real-time PCR or
immunohistochemistry. Hierarchical cluster analysis clearly distinguished between
benign and malignant tissue and between squamous cell carcinomas and
adenocarcinomas. The bronchial epithelium and adenocarcinomas could be divided
into the two subgroups of smokers and non-smokers. By comparison of the gene
expression profiles in the bronchial epithelium of non-smokers, smokers, and
matched cancer tissues, it was possible to identify a signature of 23
differentially expressed genes, which might reflect early cigarette smoke-induced
and cancer-relevant molecular lesions in the central bronchial epithelium of
smokers. Ten of these genes are involved in xenobiotic metabolism and redox
stress (eg AKR1B10, AKR1C1, and MT1K). One gene is a tumour suppressor gene
(HLF); two genes act as oncogenes (FGFR3 and LMO3); two genes are involved in
matrix degradation (MMP12 and PTHLH); three genes are related to cell
differentiation (SPRR1B, RTN1, and MUC7); and five genes have not been well
characterized to date. By comparison of the tobacco-exposed peripheral alveolar
lung tissue of smokers with non-smokers and with adenocarcinomas from smokers, it
was possible to identify a signature of 27 other differentially expressed genes. 
These genes are involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics (eg GPX2 and FMO3) and 
may represent cigarette smoke-induced, cancer-related molecular targets that may 
be utilized to identify smokers with increased risk for lung cancer.

PMID: 16915569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biotechnol J. 2006 Apr;1(4):410-2.

Human and bovine lactoferrins in the milk of recombinant human
lactoferrin-transgenic dairy cows during lactation.

Hyvönen P(1), Suojala L, Haaranen J, von Wright A, Pyörälä S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Biotechnology, University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland.
paula.hyvonen@uku.fi

Seven Friesian human lactoferrin (hLf)-transgenic primiparous dairy cows
expressing recombinant hLf (rhLf) in their milk were included in the study. After
calving, concentrations of rhLf and bovine LF (bLf) in the milk, somatic cell
count and milk yield were determined. The concentration of rhLf was found to be
constant, about 2.9 mg/mL, throughout the early lactation period of 3 months. The
concentration of bLf in colostrum was higher after calving, but decreased rapidly
during the first days of lactation. The mean concentration of bLf was 0.15 mg/mL,
but concentrations varied between cows from 0.07 mg/mL to 0.26 mg/mL. Based on
that, it may be possible to improve the non-specific host defence mechanism in
the mammary gland of dairy cows by enhancing the content of rhLf in the milk.

PMID: 16892268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cell Metab. 2006 Jul;4(1):25-36.

The circadian PAR-domain basic leucine zipper transcription factors DBP, TEF, and
HLF modulate basal and inducible xenobiotic detoxification.

Gachon F(1), Olela FF, Schaad O, Descombes P, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, National Center of Competence in Research
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2006 Jul;4(1):3-4.

The PAR-domain basic leucine zipper (PAR bZip) transcription factors DBP, TEF,
and HLF accumulate in a highly circadian manner in several peripheral tissues,
including liver and kidney. Mice devoid of all three of these proteins are born
at expected Mendelian ratios, but are epilepsy prone, age at an accelerated rate,
and die prematurely. In the hope of identifying PAR bZip target genes whose
altered expression might contribute to the high morbidity and mortality of PAR
bZip triple knockout mice, we compared the liver and kidney transcriptomes of
these animals to those of wild-type or heterozygous mutant mice. These
experiments revealed that PAR bZip proteins control the expression of many
enzymes and regulators involved in detoxification and drug metabolism, such as
cytochrome P450 enzymes, carboxylesterases, and constitutive androstane receptor 
(CAR). Indeed, PAR bZip triple knockout mice are hypersensitive to xenobiotic
compounds, and the deficiency in detoxification may contribute to their early
aging.

PMID: 16814730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Cell Metab. 2006 Jul;4(1):3-4.

Xenobiotic metabolism in the fourth dimension: PARtners in time.

Green CB(1), Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22904, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Metab. 2006 Jul;4(1):25-36.

A significant portion of the transcriptome in mammals, including the PAR bZIP
transcription factors DBP, HLF, and TEF, is under circadian clock control. In
this issue of Cell Metabolism, Gachon and colleagues (Gachon et al., 2006) show
that disruption of these three genes in mice alters gene expression patterns of
many proteins involved in drug metabolism and in liver and kidney responses to
xenobiotic agents. Triple mutant mice have severe physiological deficits,
including increased hypersensitivity to xenobiotic agents and premature aging,
highlighting the profound effect the circadian clock has on this important
response system.

PMCID: PMC3760144
PMID: 16814725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Oct;291(4):L781-93. Epub 2006 Jun 2.

Mycoplasma fermentans and TNF-beta interact to amplify immune-modulating
cytokines in human lung fibroblasts.

Fabisiak JP(1), Gao F, Thomson RG, Strieter RM, Watkins SC, Dauber JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Center for Free Radical
and Antioxidant Health, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public
Health, College of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15219-3130, USA. fabs@pitt.edu

Mycoplasma can establish latent infections and are associated with arthritis,
leukemia, and chronic lung disease. We developed an experimental model in which
lung cells are deliberately infected with Mycoplasma fermentans. Human lung
fibroblasts (HLF) were exposed to live M. fermentans and immune-modulating
cytokine release was assessed with and without known inducers of cytokine
production. M. fermentans increased IL-6, IL-8/CXCL8, MCP-1/CCL2, and
Gro-alpha/CXCL1 production. M. fermentans interacted with TNF-beta to release
more IL-6, CXCL8, and CXCL1 than predicted by the responses to either stimulus
alone. The effects of live infection were recapitulated by exposure to M.
fermentans-derived macrophage-activating lipopeptide-2 (MALP-2), a Toll-like
receptor-2- and receptor-6-specific ligand. The synergistic effect of combined
stimuli was more pronounced with prolonged incubations. Preexposure to TNF-beta
sensitized the cells to subsequent MALP-2 challenge, but preexposure to MALP-2
did not alter the IL-6 response to TNF-beta. Exposure to M. fermentans or MALP-2 
did not enhance nuclear localization, DNA binding, or transcriptional activity of
NF-kappaB and did not modulate early NF-kappaB activation in response to
TNF-beta. Application of specific inhibitors of various MAPKs suggested that p38 
and JNK/stress-activated protein kinase were involved in early IL-6 release after
exposure to TNF-beta and M. fermentans, respectively. The combined response to M.
fermentans and TNF-beta, however, was uniquely sensitive to delayed application
of SP-600125, suggesting that JNK/stress-activated protein kinase contributes to 
the amplification of IL-6 release. Thus M. fermentans interacts with stimuli such
as TNF-beta to amplify lung cell production of immune-modulating cytokines. The
mechanisms accounting for this interaction can now be dissected with the use of
this in vitro model.

PMCID: PMC2897735
PMID: 16751226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 1;176(11):6839-51.

Identification of a candidate regulatory element within the 5' flanking region of
the mouse Igh locus defined by pro-B cell-specific hypersensitivity associated
with binding of PU.1, Pax5, and E2A.

Pawlitzky I(1), Angeles CV, Siegel AM, Stanton ML, Riblet R, Brodeur PH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The Igh locus is controlled by cis-acting elements, including Emu and the 3' IgH 
regulatory region which flank the C region genes within the well-studied 3' part 
of the locus. Although the presence of additional control elements has been
postulated to regulate rearrangements of the VH gene array that extends to the 5'
end of the locus, the 5' border of Igh and its flanking region have not been
characterized. To facilitate the analysis of this unexplored region and to
identify potential novel control elements, we physically mapped the most D-distal
VH segments and scanned 46 kb of the immediate 5' flanking region for DNase I
hypersensitive sites. Our studies revealed a cluster of hypersensitive sites 30
kb upstream of the most 5' VH gene. Detection of one site, HS1, is restricted to 
pro-B cell lines and HS1 is accessible to restriction enzyme digestion
exclusively in normal pro-B cells, the stage defined by actively rearranging
Igh-V loci. Sequence motifs within HS1 for PU.1, Pax5, and E2A bind these
proteins in vitro and these factors are recruited to HS1 sequence only in pro-B
cells. Transient transfection assays indicate that the Pax5 binding site is
required for the repression of transcriptional activity of HS1-containing
constructs. Thus, our characterization of the region 5' of the VH gene cluster
demonstrated the presence of a single cluster of DNase I hypersensitive sites
within the 5' flanking region, and identified a candidate Igh regulatory region
defined by pro-B cell-specific hypersensitivity and interaction with factors
implicated in regulating VDJ recombination.

PMID: 16709844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Tsitologiia. 2005;47(6):494-6.

Effect of lactoferrin on the viability of Arn8 and HaCaT cell lines.

Gal'chenko KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Problems of Cryobiology and Cryomedicine, National Academy of
Sciences of Ukraine, Kharkov. kgalchenko@yahoo.com

The results on the effect of LF from different sources on the viability of two
cell lines (Arn8 and HaCaT) are presented in the work. It is shown that both hLF 
and bLF have an effect on the viability of these two cell lines, and that bLF
decreases the cell viability in much more extend than hLF. Possible action
mechanisms of LF are discussed.

PMID: 16708839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Hepatol Res. 2006 Jul;35(3):152-62. Epub 2006 May 16.

Functional role of DMT1 in transferrin-independent iron uptake by human
hepatocyte and hepatocellular carcinoma cell, HLF.

Shindo M(1), Torimoto Y, Saito H, Motomura W, Ikuta K, Sato K, Fujimoto Y, Kohgo 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, 2-1
Midorigaoka Higashi, Asahikawa, Hokkaido 078-8510, Japan.

Non-transferrin bound iron (NTBI) in serum is cleared rapidly by hepatocytes,
although the mechanisms of NTBI uptake by hepatocytes are poorly understood.
Dietary iron is transported into intestinal enterocytes by divalent metal
transporter 1 (DMT1), which also transports iron from transferrin receptor 1
(TfR1)-mediated recycling endosome to intracytoplasm. We made an antiserum
against human DMT1 protein derived from mRNA with the iron responsive element
(IRE). The DMT1 detected by the antiserum was mainly observed in the membranes of
duodenal enterocytes and enterocyte carcinoma (Caco2) cells, whereas DMT1 in
normal liver and hepatoma (HLF) cells, was preferentially located in cytoplasm
but weakly on cell surface. In addition, iron-depleted HLF increased membrane
expression of DMT1, suggesting that the intracellular iron concentration
regulated the DMT1 expression in hepatocytes via the iron regulatory protein
(IRP)/IRE system. DMT1 overexpressing HLF by DMT1 cDNA transfection expressed
DMT1 in both cytoplasm and cell membrane. Although these cells did not change
TfR-dependent iron uptake, they took up a significant amount of ferrous iron.
These results indicate that the DMT1 plays an important role in transporting NTBI
into cells.

PMID: 16707273  [PubMed]


364. J Chromatogr A. 2006 Jun 23;1118(2):253-60. Epub 2006 May 11.

Different elution modes and field programming in gravitational field-flow
fractionation: field programming using density and viscosity gradients.

Plocková J(1), Chmelík J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Analytical Chemistry, AS CR, 611 42 Brno, Czech Republic.
plockova@iach.cz

In previous papers, several approaches to programming of the resulting force
field in GFFF were described and investigated. The experiments were dealing with 
flow-velocity and channel thickness, i.e. factors influencing hydrodynamic lift
forces (HLF). The potential of density and viscosity of carrier liquid for field 
programming was predicted and demonstrated by preliminary experiments. This work 
is devoted to experimental verification of the influence of carrier liquid
density and viscosity. Several carrier liquid density and simultaneously
viscosity gradients using water-methanol mixtures are in this work implemented in
the separation of a model silica mixture. Working with the water-methanol
gradients, one is not able to separate the influence of density from the
contribution of viscosity. However, we found experimental conditions to show the 
isolated effect of carrier liquid density (two water-methanol mixtures of equal
viscosity differing in their densities). In order to demonstrate the isolated
effect of viscosity, we implemented in this work a new system of
(hydroxypropyl)methyl cellulose (HPMC) carrier liquids. Three different HPMC
compositions enabled to vary the viscosity more than two times at almost constant
density. With increasing carrier liquid viscosity, the focusing and elevating
trend was clearly pronounced for 5 and 10 microm silica particles. By the
isolated effect of increased viscosity, the centre of the 10 microm particle zone
was elevated to the streamline at 16% of the channel height. These experiments
have shown that the influence of carrier liquid viscosity on HLF should be taken 
into account even at higher levels above the channel bottom, i.e. beyond the
near-wall region. Further, it is shown that higher value of carrier liquid
viscosity improves the separation of the model mixture in terms of time and
resolution.

PMID: 16696985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Cancer Res. 2006 May 1;66(9):4826-34.

Luteolin promotes degradation in signal transducer and activator of transcription
3 in human hepatoma cells: an implication for the antitumor potential of
flavonoids.

Selvendiran K(1), Koga H, Ueno T, Yoshida T, Maeyama M, Torimura T, Yano H,
Kojiro M, Sata M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Innovative Cancer Therapy, and Center of the 21st Century 
Center of Excellence Program for Medical Science, Kurume University, Kurume,
Japan.

In this study, we have investigated the underlying molecular mechanism for the
potent proapoptotic effect of luteolin on human hepatoma cells both in vitro and 
in vivo, focusing on the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3)/Fas signaling. A clear apoptosis was found in the luteolin-treated HLF
hepatoma cells in a time- and dosage-dependent manner. In concert with the
caspase-8 activation by luteolin, an enhanced expression in functional Fas/CD95
was identified. Consistent with the increased Fas/CD95 expression, a drastic
decrease in the Tyr(705) phosphorylation of STAT3, a known negative regulator of 
Fas/CD95 transcription, was found within 20 minutes in the luteolin-treated
cells, leading to down-regulation in the target gene products of STAT3, such as
cyclin D1, survivin, Bcl-xL, and vascular endothelial growth factor. Of interest,
the rapid down-regulation in STAT3 was consistent with an accelerated
ubiquitin-dependent degradation in the Tyr(705)-phosphorylated STAT3, but not the
Ser(727)-phosphorylated one, another regulator of STAT3 activity. The expression 
level of Ser(727)-phosphorylated STAT3 was gradually decreased by the luteolin
treatment, followed by a fast and clear down-regulation in the active forms of
CDK5, which can phosphorylate STAT3 at Ser(727). An overexpression in STAT3 led
to resistance to luteolin, suggesting that STAT3 was a critical target of
luteolin. In nude mice with xenografted tumors using HAK-1B hepatoma cells,
luteolin significantly inhibited the growth of the tumors in a dosage-dependent
manner. These data suggested that luteolin targeted STAT3 through dual
pathways-the ubiquitin-dependent degradation in Tyr(705)-phosphorylated STAT3 and
the gradual down-regulation in Ser(727)-phosphorylated STAT3 through inactivation
of CDK5, thereby triggering apoptosis via up-regulation in Fas/CD95.

PMID: 16651438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Anim Biotechnol. 2006;17(1):13-20.

Differential glycosylation of rhLf expressed in the mammary gland of transgenic
mice.

Zhao C(1), Liu Z, Fan B, Dai Y, Wang L, Zheng M, Wang M, Niu H, Xi F, Li N, Zhang
D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratories of Ministry of Agriculture of P.R. China for Animal Breeding 
and Genetics, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, P.R. China.

Differential glycosylation of natural hLf and rhLf from hLf-transgenic mice,
which harbored a 146 Kb BAC insert that includes the intact hLf gene sequence,
was studied in the present report. There were significant differences between the
immunoblotting results of rhLf and natural hLf, which were denatured with
nonreducing SDS sample buffer. The differences disappeared after rhLf and natural
hLf samples were digested with N-glycosidase F, respectively. The results showed 
that there were significant differences (P<0.01) between the glycosylation of
natural hLf and rhLf that were purified, respectively, from milk samples of seven
hLf-transgenic mouse lines.

PMID: 16621756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 Jun 7;251(1-2):56-66. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Lactoferrin (Lf): Retinoid interactions in the mammary glands of transgenic mice 
overexpressing human Lf.

Baumrucker CR(1), Saurer S, Blum JW, Jungi T, Friis RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy & Animal Science, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, 16802, USA. crb@psu.edu

Induction of protein expression in a tissue-specific manner by gene transfer
over-expression techniques has been one means to define the function of a protein
in a biological paradigm. Studies with retinoid reporter constructs transfected
in mammary cell lines suggests that lactoferrin (Lf) affects retinoid signaling
pathways and alters apoptosis. We tested the effects and interactions of
over-expressed mammary-specific human lactoferrin (hLf) and dietary retinol
palmitate on lactation and mammary gland development in mice. Increased retinol
palmitate in the diet increased daily retinol equivalents (RE) to 2.6-fold over
the normal mouse control diet. Transgene (Tg) expression in the dam fed control
diet depressed pup weight gain. Severe depression of pup weight gain was observed
when homozygote TgTg dams were fed the RE diet. Normal weight gain was restored
when pups were placed with a wild type dam fed the RE diet; conversely, normal
growing pups from the wild type dams showed declining weight gains when fostered 
to the TgTg RE-fed dams. Northern analysis of mammary tissue extracts showed a
reduction in WAP and an increase in IGFBP-3 mRNA that was associated with the
presence of the transgene. Histological evaluation of 3 days lactating mammary
tissue showed mammary epithelial cells from TgTg animals contained excessive
secretory products, suggesting a block in cellular secretion mechanisms. In
addition, the mammary cells displayed a cellular apical membrane puckering that
extended into the alveoli lumens. These studies demonstrate an in vivo
interaction of Tg-hLf expression and dietary retinoids in mouse mammary glands.
While normal mammary gland physiology may not be representative by these
experiments because high Lf concentrations during early lactation are abnormal,
the demonstrated biological interaction suggests that typical periods of high Lf 
concentrations may have impact upon developing and involuting mammary glands.

PMID: 16621235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2006 Feb;24(2):77-80.

[p38/ERK signal pathways regulating the expression of type I collagen and
activity of MMP-2 in TGF-beta1-stimulated HLF-02 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu YB(1), Zong YR, Feng DY, Jin ZY, Jiang HY, Peng JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of pathology, Xiangya Medical College, Central South University,
Changsha 410013, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of TGF-beta(1)/MAPK signaling pathways in the 
expression of type I collagen and activity of MMP-2, 9 in human lung fibroblasts.
METHODS: Human lung fibroblasts cell line (HLF-02) was cultured and and then
stimulated with 10 ng/ml TGF-beta(1) for different time; SB203580 or PD98059 was 
added into culture medium to block p38 or ERK kinase pathway before incubated
with TGF-beta(1); the expression of type I collagen was detected by Western
blotting and RT-PCR; zymogram analysis was used to analyze the activity of MMP-2 
and MMP-9.
RESULTS: (1) In the process of stimulation by TGF-beta(1), the type I collagen
mRNA level of 24 h, 48 h and 72 h group was: 1.33 +/- 0.07, 2.46 +/- 0.09 and
2.39 +/- 0.08 respectively; and the type I collagen protein level of 24 h, 48 h
and 72 h group was: 114.89 +/- 8.95, 208.16 +/- 6.75 and 211.46 +/- 8.05
respectively; and the activity of MMP-2 of 24 h, 48 h and 72 h group was: 190.33 
+/- 5.86, 214.33 +/- 8.39 and 212.67 +/- 11.59 respectively. (2) SB203580
significantly inhibited the TGF-beta(1)-induced expression of type I collagen
mRNA, protein and MMP-2 activity (inhibition ratio: 51%, 24% and 20%); (3)
PD98059 also significantly attenuated the TGF-beta(1)-induced expression of type 
I collagen mRNA, protein and MMP-2 activity (inhibition ratio: 42%, 13% and 16%).
CONCLUSION: TGF-beta(1) is capable of inducing the expression of type I collagen 
mRNA and protein and up-regulating MMP-2 activity in HLF-02 cells. p38 and ERK
kinase signaling pathways play important role in regulation and control for this 
process.

PMID: 16600109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Lung. 2006 Jan-Feb;184(1):33-42.

Role of extracellular signal-regulated kinase, p38 kinase, and activator
protein-1 in transforming growth factor-beta1-induced alpha smooth muscle actin
expression in human fetal lung fibroblasts in vitro.

Hu Y(1), Peng J, Feng D, Chu L, Li X, Jin Z, Lin Z, Zeng Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Xiangya Medical School, Central South University,
Tong Zi Po Road 172, Changsha, 410013, China.

Myofibroblasts characterized by alpha smooth muscle actin(alpha-SMA) expression
play a key role in pulmonary fibrosis. Transforming growth factor-beta1
(TGF-beta1) is likely to be involved in the emergence of myofibroblasts, but the 
intracellular signal pathways for this process have not been well determined. The
aim of the present study was to investigate the role of mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK)/activator protein-1 (AP-1) signaling pathways in TGF-beta1-induced 
alpha-SMA expression in human fetal lung fibroblasts (HLF-02). We found that
TGF-beta1 treatment activated p38 kinase and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (Erk) in HLF-02 cells. The induction of alpha-SMA by TGF-beta1 was
suppressed by p38 kinase inhibitor (SB203580) and Erk inhibitor (PD98059). AP-1
inhibitor curcumin also inhibited TGF-beta1-induced alpha-SMA expression. In
addition, dominant negative mutant c-Jun (TAM67) downregulated TGF-beta1-induced 
AP-1 transactivation and alpha-SMA expression. In additional, PD98059 but not
SB203580 inhibited the AP-1 DNA binding activity induced by TGF-beta1. Based on
these findings, we conclude that p38 kinase, Erk, and AP-1 are responsible for
the alpha-SMA expression induced by TGF-beta1 in human fetal lung fibroblasts.
Erk is involved in inducing alpha-SMA expression via AP-1 activation.

PMID: 16598650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Haematologica. 2006 Mar;91(3):422-4.

Characterization of the t(17;19) translocation by gene-specific fluorescent in
situ hybridization-based cytogenetics and detection of the E2A-HLF fusion
transcript and protein in patients' cells.

Yeung J, Kempski H, Neat M, Bailey S, Smith O, Brady HJ.

This is the first report to comprehensively characterize the E2A-HLF fusion
generated from the t(17;19)(q22;p13) translocation in childhood B-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. E2A gene rearrangement and E2A-HLF transcript and protein
expression were determined using conventional cytogenetics, fluorescent in situ
hybridization, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and Western
blotting in leukemic cells from three patients.

PMID: 16531271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2006 Mar;38(3):201-6.

Recombinant functional human lactoferrin expressed in baculovirus system.

Liu T(1), Zhang YZ, Wu XF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Zhejiang Sci-Tec University, Hangzhou 310018,
China.

Human lactoferrin (hLf) is a multifunctional iron-binding glycoprotein. In this
study, we amplified hLf cDNA by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
from normal human mammary gland. The nucleotide sequence of the hLf was identical
to the known hLf. We constructed a recombinant virus, vBm-hLf, harboring the hLf 
gene and exploited the BmN cells as host to produce recombinant human lactoferrin
(rhLf). It was found that a recombinant protein with a molecular mass of
approximately 78 kDa was expressed. Approximately 13.5 microg rhLf was purified
from 1-2x10(5) BmN cells infected by vBm-hLf and the rhLf proved to be
biologically active. This method established in our study will pave the way for
efficient production of rhLf for further application of this protein in the
future.

PMID: 16518545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Blood. 2006 Jul 1;108(1):297-304. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

c-Myb is an essential downstream target for homeobox-mediated transformation of
hematopoietic cells.

Hess JL(1), Bittner CB, Zeisig DT, Bach C, Fuchs U, Borkhardt A, Frampton J,
Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA.

Abdominal-type HoxA genes in combination with Meis1 are well-documented
on-cogenes in various leukemias but it is unclear how they exert their
transforming function. Here we used a system of conditional transformation by an 
inducible mixed lineage leukemia-eleven-nineteen leukemia (MLL-ENL) oncoprotein
to overexpress Hoxa9 and Meis1 in primary hematopoietic cells. Arrays identified 
c-Myb and a c-Myb target (Gstm1) among the genes with the strongest response to
Hoxa9/Meis1. c-Myb overexpression was verified by Northern blot and quantitative 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Also MLL-ENL activated 
c-Myb through up-regulation of Hoxa9 and Meis1. Consequently, short-term
suppression of c-Myb by small inhibitory RNA (siRNA) efficiently inhibited
transformation by MLL-ENL but did not impair transformation by transcription
factor E2A-hepatic leukemia factor (E2A-HLF). The anti c-Myb siRNA effect was
abrogated by coexpression of a c-Myb derivative with a mutated siRNA target site.
The introduction of a dominant-negative c-Myb mutant had a similar but weaker
effect on MLL-ENL-mediated transformation. Hematopoietic precursors from mice
homozygous for a hypo-morphic c-Myb allele were more severely affected and could 
be transformed neither by MLL-ENL nor by E2A-HLF. Ectopic expression of c-Myb
induced a differentiation block but c-Myb alone was not transforming in a
replating assay similar to Hoxa9/Meis1. These results suggest that c-Myb is
essential but not sufficient for Hoxa9/Meis1 mediated transformation.

PMCID: PMC1895838
PMID: 16507773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Chromatogr A. 2006 Feb 17;1106(1-2):196-204. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Low-capacity channel designed for particle separation with controlled electric
fields and evaluation of involved forces.

Masudo T(1), Okada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152-8551, Japan.

Electric field is one of the suitable physical fields applicable to particle
separations. Although long rectangular channel is used for particle separation in
usual electrical field flow fractionation (FFF), a short low-capacity channel can
replace it if the field is precisely controlled. Several separation principles
are proposed with this channel. The elution behavior of particles has revealed
that the gravitational, diffusion, and hydrodynamic lift force (HLF) play
important roles in the determination of the elution behavior of particles. The
elution threshold voltage (V(th)) was defined and experimentally determined for
various system configurations and particles. The electric force no longer
overcomes the other forces, and particles are taken off the wall, when the
applied voltage becomes lower than V(th). V(th) values have allowed us not only
to estimate surface charge density of a particle but also to evaluate the
hydrodynamic lift force against particle.

PMID: 16443462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Mar;1760(3):347-55. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Ovotransferrin is a redox-dependent autoprocessing protein incorporating four
consensus self-cleaving motifs flanking the two kringles.

Ibrahim HR(1), Haraguchi T, Aoki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture,
Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-0065, Japan.
hishamri@chem.agri.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

Embryos of avian eggs and mammals are highly sensitive to oxidative stress and
hence maintaining a steady reducing environment during the embryonic development 
is known to confer protection. Although information is completely lacking,
proteins of avian egg albumin which have been suggested to play various
biological functions, are the major targets for such reducing state during
embryogenesis. In this study, we found that ovotransferrin (OTf), the second
major protein in egg albumin, undergoes autocleavage at distinct sites upon
reduction with thiol-reducing agent or thioredoxin-reducing system. Mass spectral
and microsequencing analysis indicated that OTf is able to cleave itself through 
the unique chemical reactivity of four tripeptides motifs, HTT (residues
209-211), HST (residues 542-544) and two CHT (residues 115-117 and 454-456).
Intriguingly, these self-cleavage sites were uniquely located upstream and
downstream of the two disulfide kringle domains (residues 115-211 and 454-544) of
OTf. These reduction-scissile sequences, His/Cys-X-Thr, are evolutionary
conserved self-cleavage motifs found in several autoprocessing proteins including
hedgehog proteins. Interestingly, reduction of other two members of transferrin
family induced autocleavage patterns, similar to that of OTf, in bovine
lactoferrin (bLf) while human lactoferrin (hLf) showed much less self-cleaving
activity. This finding is the first to describe that transferrins are a new
subset in the class of proteins able to carry out autoprocessing, providing
insight into this unusual biochemical process that appears to be a molecular
switch involved in triggering a yet unidentified function(s) of OTf as well as
bLf.

PMID: 16442235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006 Feb;81(2):625-32; discussion 632-3.

Cardiac output augmentation during hypoxemia improves cerebral metabolism after
hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass.

Schultz JM(1), Karamlou T, Shen I, Ungerleider RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, Doernbecher Children's Hospital, Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hypothermic circulatory arrest (HCA) impairs cerebral oxygen delivery
(CDO2) and cerebral oxygen consumption (CMRO2), which are further reduced by
perioperative hypoxemia. This study investigates if continuous hypothermic
low-flow cardiopulmonary bypass (HLF) or intermittent hypothermic low-flow
cardiopulmonary bypass (IHLF) can prevent reductions in CDO2 and CMRO2 during
hypoxemia.
METHODS: Eighteen neonatal piglets, cooled to 16 degrees to 18 degrees C with
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), were randomly assigned into three groups: HCA, HLF 
(50 cc.kg(-1).min(-1)), or IHLF (1 minute of HLF for every 15 minutes of HCA).
After 60 minutes of hypothermia, normothermic CPB (100 cc.kg(-1).min(-1)) was
established and cerebral perfusion data measured at hyperoxemia (PaO2 150 to 250 
mm Hg), hypoxemia (PaO2 50 to 60 mm Hg), and severe hypoxemia (PaO2 30 to 40 mm
Hg), and with increased CPB flow (200 cc.kg(-1).min(-1)) during severe hypoxemia.
RESULTS: The CMRO2 (in mL O2.100 g(-1).min(-1)) was lower after HCA (2.5 +/-
0.3), compared with HLF (4.1 +/- 0.5, p = 0.02) and IHLF (6.2 +/- 0.8, p =
0.002). Within groups, the change from hyperoxemia to severe hypoxemia resulted
in decreased CMRO2: HCA (1.3 +/- 0.2, p = 0.004), HLF (3.0 +/- 0.5, p = 0.01),
and IHLF (2.9 +/- 0.5, p = 0.01). During severe hypoxemia, increasing CPB flow
(from 100 cc.kg(-1).min(-1) to 200 cc.kg(-1).min(-1)) improved CMRO2: HCA (1.9
+/- 0.5, p = 0.05), HLF (4.2 +/- 0.5, p = 0.05), and IHLF (7.4 +/- 0.5, p =
0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Hypoxemia reduces CDO2 and CMRO2 despite the method of hypothermic
CPB. Increased CPB flow during hypoxemia can restore both CDO2 and CMRO2 to
values found with hyperoxemia and slower CPB flows. Augmenting cardiac output
during periods of perioperative hypoxemia may prevent cerebral injury after
exposure to hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass.

PMID: 16427864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006 Feb;81(2):474-80; discussion 480.

Hypothermic low-flow cardiopulmonary bypass impairs pulmonary and right
ventricular function more than circulatory arrest.

Schultz JM(1), Karamlou T, Swanson J, Shen I, Ungerleider RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, Doernbecher Children's Hospital, Oregon
Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hypothermic circulatory arrest (HCA) is used during surgical
treatment of certain congenital heart defects. The possibility of ischemic
neurologic injury associated with HCA has led some surgeons to use low-flow
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) during the hypothermic interval (hypothermic low
flow [HLF]). This study investigates the inflammatory response to HCA and HLF,
and reports the consequences of this response on pulmonary and right ventricular 
function.
METHODS: Piglets (3.1 to 6.6 kg) were cooled to 16 degrees to 18 degrees C using 
CPB, and randomized: HCA for 60 minutes (n = 7), or HLF (50 cc.kg(-1).min(-1))
for 60 minutes (n = 6). The piglets were rewarmed to 36 degrees C and weaned from
CPB. Serum tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) concentration, percent lung
water, and pulmonary and cardiac function were measured before and after CPB.
RESULTS: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha was higher after HLF (2,990.5 +/- 884.5
pg/mL), compared with HCA (347.6 +/- 89.2 pg/mL; p = 0.03). The percent lung
water was higher after HLF (84.8% +/- 0.3%) than HCA (82.0% +/- 0.4%; p < 0.001).
The alveolar to arterial oxygen gradient was worse after HLF (457 +/- 42 mm Hg)
than HCA (285.8 +/- 45 mm Hg; p = 0.02). Pulmonary vascular resistance was
greater after HLF (36.08 +/- 8.28 mm Hg.mL(-1).m(-2).min(-1)) than HCA (14.55 +/-
3.46 mm Hg. mL(-1).m(-2).min(-1); p = 0.049). The right ventricular pressure
waveform peak derivative, corrected for systolic pulmonary artery pressure, was
lower after HLF (14.1 +/- 1.4 sec(-1)), than HCA (23.8 +/- 2.7 sec(-1); p =
0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Hypothermic low flow extends exposure to CPB, and is associated with
an increased inflammatory response compared with HCA. The greater inflammatory
response after HLF may result in substantial nonneurologic morbidity in the
postoperative period, demonstrated by pulmonary and right ventricular
dysfunction. Interventions that attenuate the inflammatory response to CPB may
prevent pulmonary and right ventricular dysfunction after HLF.

PMID: 16427835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biomed Res. 2005 Dec;26(6):249-55.

Intraperitoneal injection of lactoferrin ameliorates severe albumin extravasation
and neutrophilia in LPS-induced inflammation in neonatal rats.

Yajima M(1), Yajima T, Kuwata T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition Science, Meiji Dairies Corporations, Odawara, Kanagawa 
250-0862, Japan. masako_yajima@meiji-milk.com

Lactoferrin (LF) plays various anti-inflammatory roles in inflammation
experimentally induced by lipopolysaccharides (LPS). But the effects of LF on
albumin extravasation and neutrophilia have not been elucidated. We aimed to
study the effects of LF on albumin extravasation, neutrophilia and/or on other
symptoms in inflammation caused by LPS in rats. Human lactoferrin (hLF) was
injected (10 mg/100 mL in PBS) 18 h, or 15 min prior to, or 60 min after
intraperitoneal injection of LPS in 13 days old Sprague Dawley rats. Prophylactic
injection of hLF significantly ameliorated albumin extravasation in ascitic fluid
at 5 h and neutrophilia in the blood at 24 h after LPS injection, but the
after-injection of hLF did not. Interestingly, an injection of rat anti-TNFalpha 
IgG 15 min prior to LPS injection did not ameliorate albumin extravasation.
Prophylactic injection of hLF significantly ameliorated other symptoms like
mortality, and the decrease of phagocytotic activity of peritoneal
polymorpho-nuclear leukocytes (PMNL), but did not ameliorate the decrease of
platelets in the plasma. These findings suggest that hLF may be available as a
medical treatment prior to surgery for prophylaxis of side effects like albumin
extravasation or neutrophilia.

PMID: 16415506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Oncol Rep. 2006 Feb;15(2):401-8.

TGF-beta1-induced cell growth arrest and partial differentiation is related to
the suppression of Id1 in human hepatoma cells.

Damdinsuren B(1), Nagano H, Kondo M, Natsag J, Hanada H, Nakamura M, Wada H, Kato
H, Marubashi S, Miyamoto A, Takeda Y, Umeshita K, Dono K, Monden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, E2, 2-2 
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-beta1) is a proposed regulator of Ids
(inhibitors of DNA binding/differentiation) gene expression in epithelial cells. 
We previously reported that Id proteins are variously expressed in human
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC). However, the mechanism of regulation of Ids in
HCC remains obscure. Here, we examined the relationship between Id1 and TGF-beta1
in four HCC cell lines, and studied the changes in cell proliferation, cell cycle
and differentiation. The four HCC cell lines expressed Id1, TGF-beta1 and their
receptors at various levels. TGF-beta1 strongly inhibited the growth of HuH7
cells, while the growth inhibition was moderate in PLC/PRF/5, and was not
observed in HLE and HLF cell lines. TGF-beta1-induced growth inhibition in HuH7
cells was associated with cell accumulation in the G1 phase and partial induction
of differentiation (with reduction of AFP and AFP-L3). Induction by TGF-beta1
dose-dependently suppressed Id1 expression in HuH7 cells; 1 ng/ml TGF-beta1
inhibited Id1 by 84.0 and 78.6% that of the untreated control at transcriptional 
and protein levels, respectively. HLE and HLF cells, which did not exhibit a
TGF-beta1 growth inhibitory effect, lacked TGF-beta receptors and Id1 expression 
was not altered. In PLC/PRF/5 cells, Id1 augmentation was not observed in
response to TGF-beta1, indicating that TGF-beta1-induced growth inhibition was
not related to Id1 in this cell line. Our results suggest that, in some HCC
cells, the pathway of suppression of Id1 by TGF-beta1 may be important in
TGF-beta1-induced growth inhibition and partial differentiation.

PMID: 16391861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. FEBS Lett. 2006 Jan 9;580(1):184-90. Epub 2005 Dec 9.

Transformation-associated gene regulation by ATF6alpha during
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Arai M(1), Kondoh N, Imazeki N, Hada A, Hatsuse K, Kimura F, Matsubara O, Mori K,
Wakatsuki T, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry II, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa-shi, Saitama 359-8513, Japan.

We have previously reported that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-regulated 
transmembrane transcription factor 6 alpha (ATF6alpha) is implicated in the
pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). In order to further identify
genes that are regulated by ATF6alpha, the global gene expression profiles of the
ATF6alpha-transfected and untransfected HCC cell line, HLF, were analyzed. These 
results were then compared with the differential gene expression patterns of
poorly differentiated HCC and control non-tumorous liver tissue. Our findings
demonstrate that at least 18 genes are specifically upregulated by ATF6alpha,
while another UPR mediator, XBP1 or ER-stress inducer, thapsigargin could
partially stimulate or even repress some of them in HCC cells. Moreover, six of
these identified genes contain potential ER stress-responsive elements and/or
unfolded protein response elements in their 5' regulatory regions.

PMID: 16364319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Feb;5(2):180-8. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Adenovirus E1A reverses the resistance of normal primary human lung fibroblast
cells to TRAIL through DR5 upregulation and caspase 8-dependent pathway.

Zhu H(1), Ling W, Hu B, Su Y, Qiu S, Xiao W, Qi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei Province, P. R. China.

Expression of the adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5) E1A enhances tumor cells to
apoptosis by TNF-alpha, Fas-ligand and TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL). In this study, we found that E1A expression reversed the resistance of
normal primary human lung fibroblast cells (P-HLF) to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
Furthermore, TRAIL dramatically induced apoptosis of P-HLF cells that expressed
E1A following either infection with Ad-E1A or transfection with pcDNA3-E1A.
Further results demonstrated that E1A specifically upregulated DR5 levels but had
nearly no effect on the levels of DR4. E1A dramatically upregulated the exogenous
TRAIL, and then increased a substantial amount of TRAIL on the surface of P-HLF
cells treated with the expression vectors, both Ad-TRAIL and pIRES-EGFP-TRAIL.
The dominant negative FADD mutation (FADD-DN) results revealed that the apoptosis
in Ad-E1A and Ad-TRAIL coinfected P-HLF cells was completely blocked following
inhibition of the death receptors-associated apoptosis-inducing molecules FADD.
Moreover, the caspase 8 inhibitor (Z-IETD-FMK) could efficiently block caspase 8 
activation and resulted in inhibition of caspase 3 activation and cleavage.
However, The caspase 9 specific inhibitor (Z-LEHD-FMK) could not counteract the
synergistic effect of TRAIL-induced apoptosis in combination with E1A, and
caspase 3 activation and cleavage were not inhibited by Z-LEHD-FMK. Thus, our
results suggest that adenovirus E1A sensitizes P-HLF cells to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis involving DR5 upregulation and the caspase 8-dependent pathway. These
findings provide the first direct evidence for molecular mechanisms of adenovirus
E1A gene products to sensitize normal cells to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis.

PMID: 16357524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Sep;13(9):1495-505. Epub 2005 Dec 9.

Notch1 confers thymocytes a resistance to GC-induced apoptosis through Deltex1 by
blocking the recruitment of p300 to the SRG3 promoter.

Jang J(1), Choi YI, Choi J, Lee KY, Chung H, Jeon SH, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology of Genetics,
and Center for Functional Cellulomics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, 
Korea.

One notable phenotypic change during the differentiation of immature thymocytes
into either mature CD4 or CD8 single-positive lineages is the acquisition of a
resistance to glucocorticoid (GC)-induced apoptosis. We have previously reported 
that SRG3 is critical in determining the sensitivity for the GC-induced apoptosis
in developing thymocytes. We report here that Notch signaling downregulates the
transcriptional activation of SRG3 through N-box and/or E-box elements on its
promoter. RBP-J represses SRG3 transcription through the N-box motif. On the
other hand, Deltex1 competitively inhibits the binding of p300 to E2A/HEB protein
bound to the E-box elements and represses the SRG3 promoter activity. Moreover,
enforced expression of Deltex1 restored double-positive (DP) thymocyte survival
from the GC-induced apoptosis. Our results suggest that Notch signaling confers
differentiating DP thymocytes resistance to GCs by regulating the SRG3 expression
through Deltex1, and that Deltex1 and SRG3 may play a significant role during DP 
thymocyte maturation.

PMID: 16341126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2005 Sep;34(5):529-32.

[Study on the adaptive reaction of low dose hydroquinone inducement in human
embryo lung fibroblasts cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang HW(1), Liang HR, Zhuang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang
524023, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the adaptive reaction and its possible mechanisms in
eukaryotic cells, the oxidize of adaptive mode was established by studying the
dose-effect relation of inducing the adaptive reaction.
METHODS: Human embryo lung fibroblasts (HLF) were attacked 1 hour by 80.0
micromol/L concentration respectively after using a different concentration HQ to
pretreat the 12 hours. The adaptive reaction of a low concentration HQ inducement
was observed by combining the micronucleus test, the comet test and the cell
cycle change.
RESULTS: The results showed that, in cellular viability, HLF induced by
pretreated with HQ at 0.001 micromol/L and 0.0 micromol/L appeared to be
tolerated when retreated by the following 80.0 micromol/L concentration of HQ.
Compared with control respectively, the micronucleus rate and abnormal nuclei
rate increased obviously by pretreatment with HQ concentration from 0.5
micromol/L to 80 micromol/L in HLF. Phenomena of cells with tails appeared, tail 
length and percentage of cells with tails increased significantly in HLF (P <
0.01). From 0.1 micromol/L pretreatment dose on, proportion of DNA lesion cells
belonged to three and four grade increase gradually by the dose increasing. G2
phase arrest and cell numbers decreasing in G1. When compared with only high dose
attack respectively, micronucleus rate, abnormal nuclei rate, tail length,
percentage of cells with tails decreased significantly. proportion of severely
damaged cells descended markedly by pretreatment with HQ from 0 micromol/L from
0.1 micromol/L in HLF (P < 0.05). It showed that there was a dose-related
increase in the rate of micronucleus or abnormal nuclei, tail length and in
percentage of cells with tails after pretreatment with HQ from 0 micromol/L to 80
micromol/L in HLF (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: HLF induced by pretreated with HQ at low concentration appeared to
adaptive reaction when retreated by high concentration of HQ.

PMID: 16329588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Tumour Biol. 2005 Nov-Dec;26(6):300-5. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Effect of promoter methylation of the p16 gene on phosphorylation of
retinoblastoma gene product and growth of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Maeta Y(1), Shiota G, Okano J, Murawaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicine and Clinical Science, Department of Multidisciplinary
Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan.

The biological significance of hypermethylation of p16 gene promoter in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells remains to resolved. In order to clarify the
significance of methylation of p16 gene promoter, we examined the methylation
status of p16 gene in association with phosphorylation of retinoblastoma gene
product (pRb) and cell growth in human HCC cell lines. The presence of
methylation was examined by methylation-specific PCR. Expression and
phosphorylation of p16 and pRb were examined by Western blot analysis. Genetic
changes were analyzed by multiplex PCR and DNA sequencing. The effect of
demethylation of p16 was assessed by cell growth. p16 gene promoter was
methylated in HuH7 and HLF cells. The demethylating agent, 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine 
(5-Aza-CdR), upregulated p16 mRNA in HuH6 and HuH7 cells. 5-Aza-CdR increased p16
protein expression in HuH6, HuH7, and HLF cells, and it clearly decreased the
phosphorylation level of pRb in HuH6, HuH7 and PLC/PRF/5 cells. Treatment with
5-Aza-CdR inhibited the growth of HuH7 cells. Homozygous deletion and significant
mutations were absent. Methylation in the p16 promoter region is biologically
significant, being associated with phosphorylation of pRb and cell growth in
human HCC cells.

Copyright 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16254459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Genes Dev. 2005 Nov 1;19(21):2583-92. Epub 2005 Oct 17.

Symplekin and multiple other polyadenylation factors participate in 3'-end
maturation of histone mRNAs.

Kolev NG(1), Steitz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biophysics and
Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06536, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2005 Nov 1;19(21):2517-21.

Most metazoan messenger RNAs encoding histones are cleaved, but not
polyadenylated at their 3' ends. Processing in mammalian cell extracts requires
the U7 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (U7 snRNP) and an unidentified heat-labile
factor (HLF). We describe the identification of a heat-sensitive protein complex 
whose integrity is required for histone pre-mRNA cleavage. It includes all five
subunits of the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF), two
subunits of the cleavage stimulation factor (CstF), and symplekin. Reconstitution
experiments reveal that symplekin, previously shown to be necessary for
cytoplasmic poly(A) tail elongation and translational activation of mRNAs during 
Xenopus oocyte maturation, is the essential heat-labile component. Thus, a common
molecular machinery contributes to the nuclear maturation of mRNAs both lacking
and possessing poly(A), as well as to cytoplasmic poly(A) tail elongation.

PMCID: PMC1276732
PMID: 16230528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Oct;22(5):551-3.

[Detection of fusion genes resulting from chromosome abnormalities in childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

He J(1), Chen ZX, Xue YQ, Li JQ, He HL, Huang YP, He YX, Chai YH, Zhu LL.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, the First Hospital, Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu, PR China. junhe1964@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression of the fusion genes resulting from chromosome
abnormalities in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia(ALL) and its conformity
to WHO classification.
METHODS: Sixty-two children with ALL were investigated. The expression of fusion 
genes was determined by multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), karyotyping (R band) and immunophenotyping (by flow cytometry) were
also performed.
RESULTS: Of the 62 patients, 23(37.1%) were found to carry 13 different fusion
genes. The patients with immunophenotype of Pre-B-ALL were found to carry:
TEL/AML1(3 cases); E2A/PBX1, E2A/HLF, TLS/ERG, MLL/AF4, MLL/AF9, MLL/AF10,
MLL/AFX-MLL/AF6-MLL/ELL, MLL/AF6-MLL/ELL, dupMLL (one case for each); and HOX11
(6 cases). The patients with immunophenotype of Pre-T-ALL were found to carry:
TAL1D (4 cases, one is also found to have HOX11 expression); and HOX11 (2 cases).
The multiplex RT-PCR in combination with chromosome analysis revealed genetic
abnormalities in 69.4%(43/62) of childhood ALL.
CONCLUSION: Multiplex RT-PCR combined with chromosome analysis and
immunophenotyping can provide reliable and helpful information for the diagnosis,
therapy evaluation and prognosis prediction in childhood ALL, which may also
serve as a basis on which to implement the criteria of WHO classification.

PMID: 16215946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2006 Nov;47(6):757-64.

ABCB1 over-expression and drug-efflux in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines 
with t(17;19) and E2A-HLF expression.

Baudis M(1), Prima V, Tung YH, Hunger SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida College of Medicine and the
University of Florida Shands Cancer Center, Gainesville, FL 32610-0296, USA.

BACKGROUND: The t(17;19)(q21;p13), which occurs in a small subset of acute
lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs) and is associated with a dismal prognosis, creates
a chimeric E2A-HLF transcription factor with transforming properties.
PROCEDURE: We used representational difference analysis to identify candidate
E2A-HLF target genes. Transient transfection assays and an inducible expression
model system were then used to evaluate the ability of E2A-HLF to modulate target
gene expression.
RESULTS: We identified ABCB1 (MDR1, P-glycoprotein) as a gene differentially
expressed in ALL cell lines with and without E2A-HLF expression and demonstrated 
that t(17;19)+ ALL cell lines expressed high levels of ABCB1 protein and had a
drug efflux-positive phenotype. Although ABCB1 transcription is regulated by
C/EBPbeta via interaction with a DNA response element that shares significant
homology with the optimal E2A-HLF binding site, E2A-HLF did not directly activate
transcription of reporter genes under control of ABCB1 promoter elements in
transient transfection assays. However, ABCB1 expression was induced in a
DNA-binding independent manner by E2A-HLF, E2A-PBX1, and truncated E2A
polypeptides consisting of those portions of E2A present in leukemic fusion
proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: E2A-HLF-mediated over-expression of ABCB1 may play a critical role
in defining the clinical phenotype of ALLs with a t(17;19), suggesting
pharmacologic modulation of ABCB1 activity as a rational therapeutic strategy for
this chemotherapy resistant subtype of ALL.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16206189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Transgenic Res. 2005 Aug;14(4):397-405.

The protein structure of recombinant human lactoferrin produced in the milk of
transgenic cows closely matches the structure of human milk-derived lactoferrin.

Thomassen EA(1), van Veen HA, van Berkel PH, Nuijens JH, Abrahams JP.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysical Structural Chemistry, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden
University, Einsteinweg 55, 2333 CC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is an iron-binding glycoprotein involved in the host
defence against infection and excessive inflammation. As the availability of
(human milk-derived) natural hLF is limited, alternative means of production of
this biopharmaceutical are extensively researched. Here we report the crystal
structure of recombinant hLF (rhLF) expressed in the milk of transgenic cows at a
resolution of 2.4 A. To our knowledge, the first reported structure of a
recombinant protein produced in milk of transgenic livestock. Even though rhLF
contains oligomannose- and hybrid-type N-linked glycans next to complex-type
glycans, which are the only glycans found on natural hLF, the structures are
identical within the experimental error (r.m.s. deviation of only 0.28 A for the 
main-chain atoms). Of the differences in polymorphic amino acids between the
natural and rhLF variant used, only the side-chain of Asp561 could be modeled
into the rhLF electron density map. Taken together, the results confirm the
structural integrity of the rhLF variant used in this study. It also confirms the
validity of the transgenic cow mammary gland as a vehicle to produce recombinant 
human proteins.

PMID: 16201406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Med Microbiol. 2005 Nov;54(Pt 11):1049-54.

Potential antimicrobial effects of human lactoferrin against oral infection with 
Listeria monocytogenes in mice.

Lee HY(1), Park JH, Seok SH, Baek MW, Kim DJ, Lee BH, Kang PD, Kim YS, Park JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine and
School of Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Kwanak-Gu,
Seoul, Korea.

Listeria monocytogenes is a food-borne pathogen that causes serious listeriosis
in humans. Antimicrobial effects of human lactoferrin (hLF) against L.
monocytogenes have been clearly demonstrated in in vitro studies. However, in
vivo studies have not been reported yet. This study investigated whether the oral
administration of hLF could inhibit oral infection of listeria in BALB/c mice.
The MICs for several strains of L. monocytogenes were determined, and the most
sensitive strain was used for the animal work. hLF was administered to BALB/c
mice for 7 days, commencing 4 days before oral infection. The effect of hLF was
determined by bacterial enumeration and histopathological analysis of the liver
and spleen, which are well-known as the major targets of oral listeria infection 
in mice. In bacterial enumeration, hLF decreased the number of L. monocytogenes
cells in the liver. Histopathologically, the size and frequency of necrotic foci 
in the liver samples decreased with hLF administration. However, these changes
were not observed in the spleen samples. The mRNA levels of inflammatory
cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-1beta, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and
interferon (IFN)-gamma, decreased in the liver of mice receiving hLF. This study 
has shown that hLF decreases the hepatic colonization of L. monocytogenes,
hepatic necrosis and expression of inflammatory cytokines. It revealed that
perorally given hLF could mediate antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory activities 
remote from the gut (i.e. in the liver) of mice challenged with L. monocytogenes.

PMID: 16192436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Nov 11;337(1):330-6.

Human lactoferrin exerts bi-directional actions on PC12 cell survival via ERK1/2 
pathway.

Lin TY(1), Chiou SH, Chen M, Kuo CD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biophysics, Department of Medical Research and Education, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is a member of the transferrin family and is found in
most body fluids of human. Recent study showed that hLF played some roles in the 
regulation of cell growth. However, the biological function of hLF in the central
nervous system and neuronal cells is still unclear. The MTT was used to assay
cell viability, ELISA tests were used to assay caspase activities, and TUNEL
staining was used to test the cytotoxicity of hLF to the cells. Our result showed
that 700 microg/ml hLF significantly reduced the cell viability and increased the
caspase 3 and 8 activities in PC12 neuronal cells. TUNEL staining further showed 
that 700 microg/ml hLF was cytotoxic to the PC12 through apoptosis-mediated
pathway. In addition, 700 microg/ml hLF significantly decreased the protein
expressions of phosphorylated extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) 
and Bcl-2 in PC12 cells, whereas 50 microg/ml hLF significantly increased the
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 which could be specifically inhibited by PD98059.
Furthermore, 50 microg/ml hLF could not only up-regulate the Bcl-2 expression but
also protect PC12 cells from FasL-induced apoptosis. In conclusion, hLF plays a
crucial role in the regulation of apoptosis and anti-apoptosis in PC12 neuronal
cells via ERK1/2 phosphorylation pathway.

PMID: 16188236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2005 Aug;23(4):274-7.

[Low concentration of hydroquinone-induced adaptive response in hPARP-1 protein
normal and deficient cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang HW(1), Liang HR, Zhuang ZX, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, Guang
dong, Province 524023, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether or not adaptive response of hPARP-1 protein
normal and deficient cells is induced by low dose of hydroquinone (HQ), and to
analyze the relationship between the adaptive response and micronuclei formation,
and cell cycle alteration in human embryo lung fibroblasts (HLF), so as to
elucidate the mechanism of adaptive response.
METHODS: HLF, HLFC and HLFP cells pretreated with low concentration were
retreated by high concentration of HQ. Cellular viability, the rate of
micronuclei and abnormal nuclei, cell cycle and DNA strand break were determined.
RESULTS: The tolerance to 80.0 micromol/L concentration of HQ was enhanced when
HLF, HLFC and HLFP cells were pretreated with HQ from 0.001 - 0.050 micromol/L.
There were varying degrees of micronuclei and abnormal nuclei in three cells
pretreated with low concentration of HQ and then retreated with high
concentration of HQ; the cell numbers of G1, G2, S phase in cell cycle were
obviously different. When compared with only high attack dose, the micronuclei
rate and abnormal nuclei rate of HLF, HLFC and HLFP decreased by pretreatment
with HQ at high concentration (P < 0.05), meanwhile increased by pretreatment
with HQ at low concentration (P < 0.05). HLF, HLFC and HLFP showed blockage in G2
phase when pretreated with HQ at 0 approximately 0.05 micromol/L, but HLFP showed
blockage in G1 phase, and in S phase at 1.0 and 2.0 micromol/L.
CONCLUSION: The level of adaptive response of hPARP-1 protein deficient cells was
lower than normal cell, suggesting that hPARP-1 protein may play an important
role in the adaptive response of cells, which may be related with the regulation 
of cell cycle.

PMID: 16188097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Transplant Proc. 2005 Jul-Aug;37(6):2557-9.

One hundred sixteen cases of acute liver failure treated with MARS.

Novelli G(1), Rossi M, Pretagostini M, Pugliese F, Ruberto F, Novelli L, Nudo F, 
Bussotti A, Corradini S, Martelli S, Berloco PB.

Author information: 
(1)Policlinico Umberto I, University of Rome La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
novelligilnardo@virgilio.it

The various definitions of acute liver failure do not accurately reflect the
differences in clinical signs and prognosis. Liver support devices to improve the
clinical condition before liver transplantation (LT) were used in 13 patients
with primary nonfunction, 24 with fulminant hepatitis, 17 were affected by
delayed nonfunction, and 56 of acute on chronic hepatic failure. The average age 
of these patients was 41.8 years. The average number of applications of molecular
absorbing recirculating system (MARS) was about 6 (range: 1-24). The mean length 
of application was about 9 hours (range: 8-20). MARS treatment was carried out in
HLF patients with continuous acute-on-chronic hepatic failure dialisate flow
similar to continuous veno venus hemofiltration (CVVH), albumin flow < 20% of
hematic flow, heparin 5/10 UI/kg. In acute on chronic hepatic failure (AoCHF)
patients, 6- to 11-hour (average 8.5) treatments were performed for a minimum of 
three treatments. The majority of patients were treated in the intensive care
unit (ICU). Laboratory results were also monitored and showed progressive
modification: bilirubin (before treatment 22.37 +/- 11.6 mg/dL, after treatment
11.36 +/- 7.5 mg/dL) and ammonium (before treatment 238.2 +/- 19 microg/dL, after
treatment 115.4 +/- 12 microg/dL) showed significant change (P < .01). Lactates
(before treatment 3.48 +/- 1.3 mmol/L, after treatment 1.76 +/- 1.1 mmol/L) and
creatinine (before treatment 2.36 +/- 0.18 mg/dL, after treatment 1.26 +/- 0.67
mg/dL) also showed significant changes (P < .02 and P < .04). Glasgow Coma Score 
(GCS) went from 8.6 +/- 1.4 to 11.9 +/- 3.9 (P < .05). The mean middle cerebral
artery flow (V media) went from 46 cm/s/26-59) to 73 cm/s (52-106) representing
decreased cerebral edema, a difference that was not significant. INR scores
(before treatment 2.4 after treatment 1.8) also showed no significant change. The
MARS can be applied with tolerability for long periods for patients with PDF and 
FH as a bridge to transplant. In patients with PDF, it is used for a waiting
recovery of the transplanted organ. Therefore MARS can also limit the necessity
to perform further transplants.

PMID: 16182742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 2005 Jun;18(3):157-60.

Regulative effects of hawthorn leave flavonoids on cytotoxicity, NO and Ca2+ in
hypoxia-treated human umbilical vein endothelial cells.

Lan WJ(1), Ge YK, Zheng XX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou Zhejiang.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the potential effect of HLF (Hawthorn leave flavonoids,
w/w, 80% flavonoids) against thrombus formation, effect of HLF on hypoxia-treated
human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVECs) was studied.
METHOD: The levels of cytotoxicity and NO upon HUVECs were studied by flow
cytometry. Moreover, the level of calcium ion in HUVECs was examined through
laser scanning confocal microscopy.
RESULT: Data from this study showed that HLF at concentrations of 5 micrograms/ml
and 10 micrograms/ml decreased the cytotoxicity of hypoxia to HUVECs (P<0.05,
P<0.01). The intracellular levels of NO and calcium ion were downregulated by HLF
at concentrations of 5 micrograms/ml (P<0.01; P<0.01) and 10 micrograms/ml (vs
control, P<0.01; P<0.01) too.
CONCLUSION: Results observed suggest that HLF protect HUVECs from hypoxia partly 
through its regulative effect on NO and calcium ion levels.

PMID: 16161268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 Jan;34(1):65-72. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Lipoxin A4 inhibits proliferation of human lung fibroblasts induced by connective
tissue growth factor.

Wu SH(1), Wu XH, Lu C, Dong L, Chen ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, People's Republic of
China. kad-yc@163.com

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) plays an important role in pathways
leading to lung fibrosis via the mitogenic action of CTGF on fibroblasts. Studies
have shown that lipoxin A4 (LXA4) inhibits proliferation of renal mesangial cells
induced by leukotriene D4 or platelet-derived growth factor. This study
investigates the regulatory role of LXA4 on proliferation of human lung
fibroblasts (HLF) induced by CTGF and mechanisms of LXA4 action. CTGF induced HLF
proliferation; enhanced the expression of cyclin D1; phosphorylated extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-K), protein
kinase B (PKB), and DNA-binding activity of signal transducers and activators of 
transcription-3 (STAT3); and inhibited expression of p27(kip1). LXA4
downregulated the CTGF-stimulated HLF proliferation and expression of cyclin D1; 
and phosphorylated ERK1/2, PI3-K, PKB, and DNA-binding activity of STAT3.
CTGF-induced decrement in expression of p27(kip1) was ameliorated by LXA4. PI3-K 
or STAT blockade but not ERK1/2 blockade partially inhibited the CTGF-activated
proliferation of HLF. Transfection of the human LXA4 receptor gene into HLF
intensified the inhibition of LXA4 on CTGF-induced cell proliferation. These
results demonstrate that CTGF induces proliferation of HLF via upregulation of
PI3-K/PKB, STAT3, and cyclin D1, and downregulation of p27(kip1). LXA4 inhibits
these effects of CTGF on HLF.

PMID: 16141446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2004 Jan;20(1):21-4.

[Expression of goat beta-casein gene targeting vector in mammary gland cell].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu HQ(1), Li ZG, Liu HR, Wu GX, Cheng GX.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Transgenic Research Center, Shanghai 201203, China.

The study of mammary gland bioreactor is in the ascendant. In order to generate
transgenic goats of well-controlled expression of exogenic genes, we constructed 
a human lactoferrin (hLF) gene targeting vector containing promoter, exon 1,
intron1 and some of exon 2 (about 6.1 kb fragment) and exon 6 approximately 9
(about 3.3 kb fragment) of the goat beta-casein gene as well as hLF minigene, neo
gene inserted into them and tk gene ligated to the 3' end of the construct. The
9.4 kb goat genomic sequences as homologous arms were initially amplified by PCR 
with local goat tissue DNA. The expression vector was named pBC-tk-neo-hlf. Then 
the recombinant plasmid pBC-tk-neo-hlf containing hLF minigene was transfected
into mice mammary tumor cell line C127 by liposome, cell clones were selected
with G418. After proliferating, the transfected cells were induced with insulin, 
luteotropic hormone and hydrocortisone. The result of Western-blotting analysis
showed that the transfected cells can secrete hLF protein, and the recombinant
protein expressed in cultured cell supernatant has the similar molecular weight
as the native protein. The expression level detected by ELISA was 0.21 microg/mL.
This result indicated that the targeting vector could efficiently direct the
expression of hLF in mammary cells,and it confirmed the validity of the
constructed vector. At the same time, C127 cell line proved to be useful for
evaluating the regulation of a foreign gene expression in mammary gland specific 
expression vector.

PMID: 16108483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2005 Apr;23(2):109-12.

[Transforming growth factor-beta1 induced phenotypic differentiation of human
lung fibroblasts through mitogen activated protein kinase-dependent pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu YB(1), Feng DY, Peng JW, Chu L, Lin Z, Zeng QF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Xiang-Ya Medical School, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410013, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of MAPK signal transduction in TGF-beta1
induced phenotypic differentiation of human lung fibroblasts.
METHOD: Human lung fibroblasts cell line (HLF-02) were cultured and then
stimulated with 10 ng/ml TGF-beta1 for different time; SB203580 or PD98059 was
added into culture medium to prevent p38 or Erk kinase pathway before incubating 
with TGF-beta1; the expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) was
detected by Western blotting and RT-PCR; Western blotting was used to assay
phosphorylation of p38, Erk, and JNK kinase.
RESULTS: (1) In the process of stimulation by TGF-beta1, the alpha-SMA mRNA
expression levels of 24, 48 and 72 h groups were 1.87 +/- 0.11, 2.49 +/- 0.10,
3.02 +/- 0.15 respectively; and the alpha-SMA protein expression levels of 24, 48
and 72 h groups were 3.20 +/- 0.14, 3.96 +/- 0.21, 4.57 +/- 0.13 respectively.
(2) TGF-beta1 induced p38, Erk kinase phosphorylation but not JNK kinase. (3) The
inhibitors SB203580 and PD98059 suppressed TGF-beta1-induced p38 kinase and Erk
phosphorylation respectively. (4) SB203580 significantly attenuated
TGF-beta1-induced alpha-SMA mRNA and protein expression (inhibition rate: 30% and
40%); PD98059 also significantly inhibited TGF-beta1-induced alpha-SMA mRNA and
protein expression (inhibition rate: 10% and 20%).
CONCLUSION: TGF-beta1 is capable of inducing the phenotypic differentiation of
HLF-02, which is regulated by p38 and Erk kinase signal pathway.

PMID: 16105451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Biotechnol. 2005 Aug 22;118(3):246-56.

High level expression of functionally active human lactoferrin in silkworm
larvae.

Liu T(1), Zhang YZ, Wu XF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou 310029, China.

In this paper, recombinant human lactoferrin (rhLf) was expressed very well using
Bombyx mori nuclear polyhedrosis baculovirus expression system. Infection of
silkworm larvae with recombinant virus, vBm-hLf, the rhLf was efficiently
secreted into larvae hemolymph and the concentration of product purified was
about 65 microg/ml. The isolated rhLf molecular mass was approximately 78 kDa,
lower than that of the human lactoferrin (hLf) standards, which may be due to
incomplete glycosylation or protein degradation. Furthermore, the rhLf was
characterized and its biological activities were evaluated by in vivo bioassay
using dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis mouse model that mimics some
characteristics of colitis disease in human. We conclude that silkworm expression
system can be used successfully to express functional human lactoferrin.

PMID: 15993972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2005 Jun 18;37(3):306-9.

[Selective heterologous communication among human lung epithelial cells,
fibroblasts, and lung cancer PG cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang ZQ(1), Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing
Cancer Hospital, Beijing 100034, China. zqzhang@public3.bta.net.cn

OBJECTIVE: To further understand the roles of gap junctional intercellular
communication in carcinogenesis and progression of human lung cancer.
METHODS: The heterologous communication was characterized among human lung
epithelial cells HLEC, human lung fibroblasts HLF, human lung giant carcinoma PG 
cells and its Cx43 transfectants PG/C4 by using a preloading assay. Cx43
immunofluorescent staining and Northern blot were performed to examine Cx43 gene 
expression.
RESULTS: Although both human lung fibroblasts HLF and epithelial cells HLEC
expressed Cx43 and had very strong homologous communication, HLEC cells were
unable to communicate with HLF cells. The human lung carcinoma cell line PG was
defective of both homologous communication, and heterologous communication with
its epithelial origin HLEC. Transfection of Cx43 into PG cells, which rescued PG 
cells' homologous communication and enhanced heterologous communication with HLF 
cells, could restore heterologous coupling with HLEC cells.
CONCLUSION: Selective heterologous communication exists among different kinds of 
human lung cells, when human lung carcinoma cells lost coupling with its
epithelial origin, Cx43 gene expression is not enough to establish heterologous
communication between them.

PMID: 15968326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Jun;124(6):1249-58.

Salivary lactoferrin is recognized by the human herpesvirus-8.

Grange PA(1), Marcelin AG, Calvez V, Chauvel C, Escande JP, Dupin N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie Cutanée, Pavillon Tarnier, Groupe Hospitalier
Cochin-Port Royal, Université Paris V, Paris, France.
philippe.grange@cch.ap-hop-paris.fr

Human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) is commonly detected in all epidemiologic forms of
Kaposi's sarcoma. Despite the broad cellular tropism of HHV-8, studies on mucosal
shedding of HHV-8 have shown that infectious particles are restricted to saliva
isolated from the oropharynx. We used biotinylated purified HHV-8 particles in a 
direct binding assay to whole clarified human salivary samples isolated from
HHV-8-infected and uninfected individuals. We found that the major binding
activity was carried out by a protein of 78-kDa size, which was further
characterized as human lactoferrin (hLf) using 2-D electrophoresis and MALDI-ToF 
analysis. Preliminary comparison of HHV-8 binding activity of 76 salivary samples
from HHV-8-infected and uninfected individuals showed that 7.8% of the uninfected
population exhibited a form of Lf not recognized by HHV-8. Deglycosylation of hLf
by PNGase F did not reduce HHV-8 binding activity, whereas endoproteinase
cleavage of native hLf generated a non-glycosylated 8-kDa peptide recognized by
HHV-8 particles and was located at the position Ala606-Tyr679 in the native hLf
amino acid sequence, corresponding to the C-terminal region of the glycoprotein. 
This work identify the lactoferrin in saliva as a ligand for HHV-8 and suggests
that this glycoprotein could be used as a carrier for the viral particles.

PMID: 15955101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Apr;43(4):288-92.

[Transfection of Lipoxin A4 receptor-like protein gene enhanced the inhibitory
effect of Lipoxin A4 on human lung fibroblasts proliferation induced by
connective tissue growth factor].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu C(1), Chen JQ, Wu SH, Wu YJ, Zhao F, Pan XQ, Fei L, Guo M, Huang SM, Guo XR,
Chen RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: Lipoxin A(4) is formed by the metabolism of arachidonic acid.
Anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative effect of lipoxin A(4) has been shown in
many human diseases. Recently, as a novel high affinity receptor for ligand
lipoxin A(4), Lipoxin A(4) receptor-like protein (LRLP) has been identified.
Currently close attention is paid to the important contribution of connective
tissue growth factor (CTGF) in lung fibrosis. The purpose of the study was to
transfect LRLP gene into human lung fibroblasts and investigate the mechanism of 
its enhancing antagonistic effect of Lipoxin A(4) on human lung fibroblasts
proliferation induced by connective tissue growth factor.
METHODS: Eukaryocytic expression vector pEGFP/LRLP which contained LRLP and green
fluorescence protein fusion gene (GFP) was constructed and transfected into human
lung fibroblasts (HLF). After selecting with G418, HLF/LRLP cell clone which
stably expressed LRLP/GFP fusion protein was isolated and characterized by the
laser scanning confocal microscope. Cultured HLF and HLF/LRLP were stimulated for
24 h with CTGF (1 microg/ml) in the presence and absence of pretreatment of
Lipoxin A(4) (10.0 nmol/L) for 30 min. Inhibition of cell proliferation was
determined by MTT assay. Cell cycle analysis was performed by flow cytometry.
Western blot was used to detect the expression of cyclin D(1) protein.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was employed to detect the DNA
binding activity of STAT(3).
RESULTS: (1) HLF/LRLP cell clone which stably expressed LRLP and GFP fusion
protein was successfully obtained. (2) Proliferation of HLF and HLF/LRLP was
induced by 1 microg/ml CTGF. Pretreatment with 10 nm Lipoxin A(4) inhibited the
proliferation of HLF and HLF/LRLP. And the inhibitory rate of HLF/LRLP was
significantly higher than that of HLF [(54.1 +/- 4.2)%, (21.2 +/- 3.7)%, P <
0.05]. (3) The flow cytometry analysis showed that compared with HLF, more
HLF/LRLP were arrested at G(0)/G(1) phase in the presence of pretreatment of
Lipoxin A(4). [(76.3 +/- 3.5)%, (60.8 +/- 2.0)%, P < 0.05]. (4) Ten nmol/L
Lipoxin A(4) antagonized CTGF induced increase of cyclin D(1) protein expression 
in HLF and HLF/LRLP. And its antagonistic effect on HLR/LRLP was stronger than
that on HLF (P < 0.05). (5) Ten nmol/L Lipoxin A(4) antagonized CTGF induced
increase of STAT(3) DNA binding activity, and its antagonistic effect on HLF/LRLP
was more powerful than that on HLF (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Transfection of Lipoxin A(4) receptor-like protein gene enhanced the
inhibitory effect of Lipoxin A(4) on human lung fibroblasts proliferation induced
by CTGF. Its mechanism might be related to regulation of cyclin D(1) protein
expression and STAT(3) DNA binding activity.

PMID: 15924723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Yi Chuan. 2002 Jan;24(1):9-14.

[Studies of the clone and cell expression of human lactoferritin gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao Y(1), Gao HY, Yu L, Yuan XD, Li QW, Tang MQ, An LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116012 
China. chpfkcy@163.net

In this paper,we directly cloned 2.366 Kb cDNA sequence of human lactoferrin gene
and 800 bp 5'flank regulatory sequence of beta/lactoglobulin gene from goat by
PCR,then connected them with the expression vector pLNCX. The recombinant plasmid
pLNCXHLF containing human lactoferrin gene cDNA was transfected into mice mammary
tumor cell line MA/782 after liposome transinfection. Positive single clone cells
were selected with G418 and by PCR. After proliferating,the transfected cells
immobilized and cultured in sodium alginate were induced by hormone. The result
of Western blotting analysis on cultured cell supernatant shows that transfected 
cells can express the exogenic gene and secrete hLF protein, whose MW is 34 KD.
The highest amount detected by ELISA reached 65 mg/l medium/10(5) cells. The
result of antibacterial experiment indicates that the recombinant hLF protein has
the effect of inhibiting E.coli proliferation;moreover,its activity is superior
to the commercial available hLF's.

PMID: 15901554  [PubMed]


401. Dev Cell. 2005 May;8(5):651-63.

Hierarchical and ontogenic positions serve to define the molecular basis of human
hematopoietic stem cell behavior.

Shojaei F(1), Trowbridge J, Gallacher L, Yuefei L, Goodale D, Karanu F, Levac K, 
Bhatia M.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Robarts Research Institute,
London, Ontario, Canada.

The molecular basis governing functional behavior of human hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) is largely unknown. Here, using in vitro and in vivo assays, we
isolate and define progenitors versus repopulating HSCs from multiple stages of
human development for global gene expression profiling. Accounting for both the
hierarchical relationship between repopulating cells and their progenitors, and
the enhanced HSC function unique to early stages of ontogeny, the human homologs 
of Hairy Enhancer of Split-1 (HES-1) and Hepatocyte Leukemia Factor (HLF) were
identified as candidate regulators of HSCs. Transgenic human hematopoietic cells 
expressing HES-1 or HLF demonstrated enhanced in vivo reconstitution ability that
correlated to increased cycling frequency and inhibition of apoptosis,
respectively. Our report identifies regulatory factors involved in HSC function
that elicit their effect through independent systems, suggesting that a unique
orchestration of pathways fundamental to all human cells is capable of
controlling stem cell behavior.

PMID: 15866157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Biochem Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;83(2):239-49.

Constitutive expression of human lactoferrin and its N-lobe in rice plants to
confer disease resistance.

Takase K(1), Hagiwara K, Onodera H, Nishizawa Y, Ugaki M, Omura T, Numata S,
Akutsu K, Kumura H, Shimazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
ktakase@nias.affrc.go.jp

The milk protein, lactoferrin, is known to have antibacterial, antiviral, and
antifungal activities. To explore the possibility of conferring disease
resistance in plants by expressing this protein, the gene for the full-length
human lactoferrin (HLF), as well as the N-lobe, the N-terminal half molecule
(HLFN), was introduced into rice plants and expressed constitutively under the
control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promotor. Western blot analysis of
leaves from HLF-transgenic rice plants showed an 80 kDa-band, which was about 1-2
kDa less than human milk lactoferrin. HLFN was expressed as a 45-kDa protein and 
retained its heparin-binding property. Deglycosylation experiments suggested that
both proteins produced by the plants had plant-type oligosaccharide chains. The
transgenic rice plants were assessed for resistance against disease-causing
bacteria, virus, and fungi. Of the pathogens tested, significant resistance
against Burkholderia (Pseudomonas) plantarii, the causative agent of bacterial
seedling blight disease, was observed in the transgenic plants expressing HLF or 
HLFN.

PMID: 15864332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Feb;41(2):119-22.

[Protective effects of transplantation of hCNTF-transfected cell line on
axotomy-induced degeneration of retinal ganglion cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Li HM(1), Lu SD, Xia X, Xu P, Wang F, Huang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Central Experimental Laboratory, The First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective effects of transplantation of cell line 
stably expressing and secreting human ciliary neurotrophic factor (hCNTF) on the 
degeneration of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) after optic nerve transection.
METHODS: Plasmid encoding hCNTF was transfected into human lung fibroblast (HLF) 
cell line, then the stably transfected clones were selected with methopterin. In 
adult SD rats, RGCs were labeled with retrograde axonal tracer fluorogold (FG)
injected to their targets including dorsal lateral geniculate nuclei (dLGN) and
superior colliculi (SC). Seven days later, the optic nerve was transected alone
or in combination with transplantation of HLF cells. Five, 14, 17, 21 and 28 days
after axotomy, the retinas were mounted and examined under fluorescence
microscope to observe the RGCs.
RESULTS: Compared to the controls, the density of RGC in axotomy group decreased 
by 67.44% and 82.73% on the 14th and 28th day, respectively. In the eyes with
hCNTF-transfected HLF cells transplantation, RGC density was higher than that of 
the axotomy group on the 5th, 17th, 21st day after axotomy (P < 0.05). On the 5th
day, the morphology of RGC in the hCNTF group remained the same as the controls, 
whereas the morphology of RGC in the axotomy alone group began to change.
CONCLUSIONS: hCNTF administered at the time of optic nerve transection can
protect RGC from degeneration, increasing the numbers of surviving RGCs and
delaying the death of RGCs.

PMID: 15840336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2005:3-11.

Reducing risk in infant cardiopulmonary bypass: the use of a miniaturized circuit
and a crystalloid prime improves cardiopulmonary function and increases cerebral 
blood flow.

Karamlou T(1), Hickey E, Silliman CC, Shen I, Ungerleider RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Advances in perfusion strategies have played an important role in improving
outcomes following repair of complex congenital heart defects. The influence of
cooling strategy, temperature, duration of circulatory arrest, and specific
method of cerebral perfusion on neurologic morbidity have been extensively
characterized. Similarly, the ability of pharmacologic agents to modulate the
post-cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) inflammatory response has been previously
elucidated in both the laboratory and clinical arena. However, modification of
the circuit and priming components have received comparably less attention. We
recently showed that employment of a miniaturized circuit and a bloodless prime
reduce inflammation and have salutary effects on cardiopulmonary function
following hypothermic low-flow perfusion (HLF), and that this circuit may also
improve cerebral protection following both deep hypothermic circulatory arrest
and HLF. The current report, therefore, reviews current strategies utilized to
minimize post-CPB inflammation and highlights the empirical evidence from our
laboratory demonstrating the beneficial role of a miniaturized extracorporeal
circuit in this context.

PMID: 15818352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2003 Dec;28(6):587-90.

[Establishment and characteristics of the human diploid cell strain HLF-02].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang BY(1), Li M, Wu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Cell Culture, Central South University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish the HLF-02 and provide a new material to the study of
geronics, oncology, virology, pharmacology, and biogenetics.
METHODS: The lung tissue was digested with 0.15% trypsin. More than 90% of the
dissociated cell exhibited initial viability (trypan blue dye exclusion and the
ability of adhesion). The surviving cells were analyzed by morphology, growth
curves, karyotype analysis, electron microscopic observation and
heterotransplantation.
RESULTS: A newly established cell strain, which was designated HLF-02 had been
maintained in continuous culture for over 50 generations for 10 months.
Morphological observation, electron microscopic observation, karyotype analysis
and heterotransplantation showed that it was corresponding to diploid cells. The 
doubling time of the cells was 75.5 hours. Chromosome analyses showed the human
cell strain to be typical diploid appearance, and the tumorigenecity assays of
nude mice were negative.
CONCLUSION: The HLF-02 is a human dipolid cell strain and can serve the further
studies of cell gerontics, oncology, virology, pharmacology, and biogenetics.

PMID: 15804067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Pharm Dev Technol. 2005;10(1):47-58.

A thermodynamic model for organic and aqueous tablet film coating.

am Ende MT(1), Berchielli A.

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer Global Research and Development, Groton, CT 06340, USA.
Mary_T_am_Ende@groton.pfizer.com

A tablet film-coating model for aqueous- and/or organic-based systems is shown to
predict exhaust stream conditions thereby facilitating process optimization and
scale-up. This coating model uses the First Law of Thermodynamics and
conservation of mass principles to complete a material-energy balance on the
coating unit operation for a closed, non-isolated system. Heat loss from the
coating pan is incorporated into the model through a parameter called a heat loss
factor (HLF) that is directly related to the heat transfer coefficient and pan
surface area. For a mixed organic-aqueous coating formulation, the outlet air
temperature and humidity are most notably affected by the coating composition and
the inlet drying air temperature, which controls the evaporative cooling rate.
The coating solution temperature and inlet air relative humidity do not
significantly influence the exhaust air temperature, Tair,out. The HLF was
determined to be 24 to 62 cal/min degrees C for the LDCS-20 to HCT-30, 360
cal/min degrees C for the HCT-60, 0 cal/min degrees C for the HC-130L and 945 to 
1322 cal/min degrees C for the Accela-Cota-48 to Compulab-36 coating pans. This
model successfully predicts Tair,out within 3 degrees C for a given coating pan, 
and within 6 degrees C scaling up from one to 220 kg pans for both organic- and
aqueous-based coatings. The model is also useful for probing process and
formulation variable sensitivity critical to establishing process robustness.

PMID: 15776813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;11(3):1277-86.

Combination of IFN-alpha and 5-fluorouracil induces apoptosis through
IFN-alpha/beta receptor in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Kondo M(1), Nagano H, Wada H, Damdinsuren B, Yamamoto H, Hiraoka N, Eguchi H,
Miyamoto A, Yamamoto T, Ota H, Nakamura M, Marubashi S, Dono K, Umeshita K,
Nakamori S, Sakon M, Monden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka University, 2-2 Yamada-oka E2, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

PURPOSE: Several studies showed the effectiveness of combination therapy with
IFN-alpha and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.
However, only little is known about the underlying mechanism of combination
therapy. In the present study, we examined whether apoptosis through
IFN-alpha/beta receptor (IFN-alpha/betaR) was associated with the effects of
combination therapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: HuH7, PLC/PRF/5, HLE, and HLF were treated with IFN- (500
units/mL), 5-FU (0.5 microg/mL), or their combination for 10 days. In addition,
IFN-alpha/betaR gene transfer with combination therapy was done.
RESULTS: Ten-day treatment by combination therapy resulted in >80% cell growth
inhibition. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling
analysis showed synergistic effects for combination therapy on PLC/PRF/5, HLE,
and HLF. Concordant results were obtained with DNA fragmentation. Moreover, there
was an evidence showing that changes in the expression of Bcl-2 family lead to
apoptosis. On the other hand, the expression of IFN-alpha/betaR and up-regulation
of alpha-phospho-signal transducer and activator of transcription 1, IFN
regulatory factor-1 by combination therapy were observed in all cell lines.
Furthermore, IFN-alpha/type 2 IFN receptor long form-transfected HuH7 cells
treated with combination therapy showed strong DNA fragmentation compared with
nontransfected or transfected with IFN-alpha- and 5-FU-treated HuH7.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that combination of IFN-alpha plus 5-FU strongly 
induced cell growth inhibition of human hepatocellular carcinoma cells and
indicated that one of the direct mechanisms of combination therapy may in part be
attributable to alterations in induction of apoptosis through IFN-alpha/betaR.

PMID: 15709199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Int J Oncol. 2005 Mar;26(3):661-71.

Comparison study of the expressions of myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase
substrate in hepatocellular carcinoma, liver cirrhosis, chronic hepatitis, and
normal liver.

Masaki T(1), Tokuda M, Yoshida S, Nakai S, Morishita A, Uchida N, Funaki T, Kita 
Y, Funakoshi F, Nonomura T, Himoto T, Deguchi A, Kimura Y, Izuishi K, Wakabayashi
H, Usuki H, Yoshiji H, Watanabe S, Kurokohchi K, Kuriyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Kagawa Medical University, Miki-cho,
Kita-gun, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.

The myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase substrate (MARCKS) is a prominent
substrate for protein kinase C (PKC) in a variety of cells. The aim of this study
was not only to evaluate the expression and localization of MARCKS in various
pathological liver tissues, including HCC, but also to analyze the difference in 
MARCKS expression between hepatitis virus-induced HCC and cirrhosis. The level of
MARCKS and its phosphorylated proteins, as well as its localization, were
determined using Western blot and/or immunohistochemistry in HCC and other
pathological liver tissues. We also analyzed the change of MARCKS localization on
the influence of MARCKS phosphorylation in the HLF cancer cell line by
phosphorylation study. In addition, the relationship between MARCKS expression
and proliferative activity was studied in HCC. In the immunohistochemical study, 
a very small amount of MARCKS protein was found along the contour of the
hepatocellular membrane in normal liver and in cases of chronic hepatitis. MARCKS
was up-regulated in liver cirrhosis tissue and was localized in the cytoplasm of 
hepatocytes. The expression of MARCKS was down-regulated in HCC tissues, as
compared with non-tumorous liver cirrhosis tissues from the same patients.
Furthermore, MARCKS was serine-phosphorylated in liver cirrhosis and HCC, and
phosphorylated MARCKS was detected in a cytosolic fraction of these tissues. In a
phosphorylation study using the HLF HCC cell line, MARCKS was displaced from the 
plasma membrane to the cytosol following the activation of protein kinase C (PKC)
by phorbol 12-myristrate 13-acetate (PMA). Furthermore, the activity of cyclin D1
and cyclin E kinases was found to be higher in HCCs with low MARCKS expression
than in HCCs with high MARCKS expression. These results suggest that
up-regulation of MARCKS might be essential in the generation of cirrhotic nodules
through chronic hepatitis from normal liver, and that the phosphorylation and/or 
down-regulation of MARCKS might play an important role in the development and
progression of HCC from liver cirrhosis.

PMID: 15703821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005 Jun;288(6):L1110-6. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

Chloride channel activity in human lung fibroblasts and myofibroblasts.

Yin Z(1), Watsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology, Univ. of Tennessee Health Science Center, 894 Union Ave.,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

It is well established that transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta stimulates
human lung fibroblasts (HLF) to differentiate into myofibroblasts. We
characterized lysophosphatidic acid (LPA)-activated Cl- channel current
(I(Cl-LPA)) in cultured human lung fibroblasts and myofibroblasts and
investigated the influence of I(Cl-LPA) on fibroblast-to-myofibroblast
differentiation. We recorded I(Cl-LPA) using the amphotericin perforated-patch
technique. We activated I(Cl-LPA) using LPA or sphingosine-1-phosphate. We
determined phenotype by Western blotting and immunohistochemistry using an
anti-alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA) antibody. RT-PCR was performed to determine 
which phospholipid growth factor receptors are present in HLF. We found that HLF 
cultured in TGF-beta (myofibroblasts) had significantly elevated alpha-SMA levels
and I(Cl-LPA) current density compared with control fibroblasts. I(Cl-LPA)
activation was blocked by DIDS, 5-nitro-2-(3-phenylpropylamino)benzoic acid
(NPPB), and the LPA receptor-specific antagonist dioctyl-glycerol pyrophosphate
(1 microM). DIDS and NPPB, in a dose-dependent manner, significantly reduced
alpha-SMA levels in HLF stimulated with TGF-beta. These results demonstrate the
receptor-mediated activation of I(Cl-LPA) by LPA and sphingosine-1-phosphate in
cultured human lung myofibroblasts, with only minimal I(Cl-LPA) activity in
fibroblasts. This Cl- channel activity appears to play a critical role in the
differentiation of human lung fibroblasts to myofibroblasts.

PMID: 15681397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Blood. 2005 Jun 1;105(11):4437-44. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

TEF, an antiapoptotic bZIP transcription factor related to the oncogenic E2A-HLF 
chimera, inhibits cell growth by down-regulating expression of the common beta
chain of cytokine receptors.

Inukai T(1), Inaba T, Dang J, Kuribara R, Ozawa K, Miyajima A, Wu W, Look AT,
Arinobu Y, Iwasaki H, Akashi K, Kagami K, Goi K, Sugita K, Nakazawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Yamanashi, 1110
Shimokato, Tamaho-cho, Nakakoma-gun, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.
tinukai@yamanashi.ac.jp

Gain and/or loss of function mediated by chimeric transcription factors generated
by nonrandom translocations in leukemia is a key to understanding oncogenesis.
E2A-hepatic leukemia factor (HLF), a chimeric basic region/leucine zipper (bZIP) 
transcription factor expressed in t(17;19)-positive leukemia cells, contributes
to leukemogenesis through its potential to inhibit apoptosis. To identify
physiologic counterparts of this chimera, we investigated the function of other
bZIP factors that bind to the same DNA sequence recognized by E2A-HLF. Here, we
show that thyrotroph embryonic factor (TEF), which shares a high level of
sequence identity with HLF and recognizes the same DNA sequence, is expressed in 
a small fraction of each subset of hematolymphoid progenitors. When TEF was
introduced into FL5.12 interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent cells, TEF protected the
cells from apoptosis due to IL-3 deprivation. Unexpectedly, TEF also almost
completely down-regulated expression of the common beta (betac) chain of cytokine
receptors. Consequently, TEF-expressing cells accumulated in G(0)/G(1) phase
without undergoing apoptosis. These findings suggest that TEF is one of the
apoptotic regulators in hematopoietic progenitors and controls hematopoietic-cell
proliferation by regulating the expression of the betac chain. In contrast,
E2A-HLF promoted cell survival more efficiently than TEF but did not
down-regulate betac chain expression, suggesting that E2A-HLF retains ideal
properties for driving leukemic transformation.

PMID: 15665112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Yi Chuan. 2004 Sep;26(5):567-73.

[Mammary gland dual-expression construct containing prolactin and foreign DNAs
can promote the expression of foreign proteins in mammary cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu FT(1), Yan JB, Ren ZR, Huang SZ, Zeng YT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200 040,
China. 6ft@sohu.com

To investigate the feasibility in the promotion of the expression of foreign
proteins, such as human lactinferrin (hLF) and thrombopoietin (TPO), in the
transgenic animals-mammary gland bioreactor by bovine prolactin (bPRL), two types
of mammary gland dual-expression vectors containing bPRL and foreign DNAs were
constructed. In one type of vector, both foreign and bPRL DNAs were linked by
internal ribosome entry site (IRES) which shared one goat 6.7 kb of beta-casein
promoter; while in the other type of vector, the transcriptions of the foreign
gene as well as bPRL were respectively directed by 6.7 kb goat beta-casein
promoter and 2.0 kb of goat beta-casein promoter. After transfection of the
vectors with lipofectin method, the expression of foreign proteins were measured 
by RT-PCR as well as ELISA assay. The results showed that bPRL could obviously
promote the expression of foreign proteins (hLF and TPO) in cultured cells. The
hLF expression level was increased from 12.6 microg/L to 18.4 microg/L and 37.2
microg/L in the COS-7 cells (African green monkey kidney cell) (P<0.05), and from
13.7 microg/L to 20.7 microg/L and 19.9 microg/L in the HC-11 cells (epithelial
cell of mouse mammary gland) (P<0.05) by two vectors, respectively. TPO
expression level was increased from 572 ng/L to 1340 ng/L in the COS-7 cell
(P<0.05), and from 783 ng/L to 1040 ng/L in the HC-11 cell (P<0.05) by the vector
which have two promoters. This work indicate that bovine prolactin can
effectively increase the expression of foreign genes in mammal cells.

PMID: 15640063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Lab Clin Med. 2004 Dec;144(6):302-6.

Tumor-specific expression detected with the use of an expression vector driven by
human telomerase reverse transcriptase gene promoter.

Yin J(1), Fu P, Wang X, Jin G, Xiu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Dalian Railway Hospital and Fourth Affiliated
Hospital of Dalian Medical University, China.

To construct the tumor-specific expression vector driven by human telomerase
reserve transcriptase gene promoter, we amplified a fragment of the enhanced
green fluorescent protein (EGFP) gene from the pEGFP-N1 plasmid and cloned it
into the multiple cloning site of the pLNCX vector, then named the recombinant as
pLNCX-EGFP. The fragment of human telomerase reverse transcriptase gene promoter 
(hTERT) was amplified from the human genome with the use of human telomerase
reserve transcriptase gene-specific primers and cloned into the pLNCX-EGFP
vector, from which the cytomegalovirus promoter had previously been removed
through the use of restriction enzymes, in sense orientation relative to the
green fluorescent protein coding sequence. Then the expression vector
pLNT-EGFP--under the control of the human telomerase reserve transcriptase gene
promoter, which contains green fluorescent protein reporter gene-was successfully
constructed. To detect the transcriptional activity of the human telomerase
reserve transcriptase gene promoter, we conducted transient transfection of this 
specific expression vector into human lung fibroblast (HLF) cell lines with high 
telomerase activity and normal human fetal lung fibroblast (WI38) cell lines
without telomerase activity. The results of transient transfection showed that
the pLNT-EGFP vector strongly expressed the green fluorescent protein reporter
gene in telomerase-positive cells but not in telomerase-negative cells.

PMID: 15614252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 1;10(23):7884-95.

Partial contribution of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL)/TRAIL receptor pathway to antitumor effects of
interferon-alpha/5-fluorouracil against Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Yamamoto T(1), Nagano H, Sakon M, Wada H, Eguchi H, Kondo M, Damdinsuren B, Ota
H, Nakamura M, Wada H, Marubashi S, Miyamoto A, Dono K, Umeshita K, Nakamori S,
Yagita H, Monden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita City, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

PURPOSE: Our purpose was to explore the contribution of tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)/TRAIL receptor pathway to
antitumor effects of IFNalpha and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) combination therapy for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Susceptibility of HCC cell lines to TRAIL and/or 5-FU was
examined by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay.
The effects of 5-FU, IFNalpha, or both on the expression of TRAIL receptors (R1, 
R2, R3, and R4) on HCC cells or TRAIL in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) were examined by flow cytometry. IFNalpha-induced cytotoxic effects of
PBMC on HCC cell lines were examined by (51)Cr release assay. TRAIL expression in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and liver tissue from patients was examined by
real-time reverse transcription-PCR or immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: HLE and HepG2 were sensitive to TRAIL, but HuH7, PLC/PRF/5, and HLF were
resistant. 5-FU had synergistic effect on TRAIL in HLF and additive effect in
four other HCC cell lines. TRAIL receptors on HCC cells were up-regulated by
5-FU, and IFNalpha induced TRAIL on CD4(+) T cells, CD14(+) monocytes, and
CD56(+) NK cells. Treatment of effector cells by IFNalpha and target HCC cells by
5-FU enhanced the cytotoxicity of CD14(+) monocytes and CD56(+) NK cells against 
HCC cells via a TRAIL-mediated pathway. TRAIL mRNA overexpression was noted in
PBMC of HCC patients who clinically responded to IFNalpha/5-FU combination
therapy, and TRAIL(+) mononuclear cells were found in cancer tissue of a
responder.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that modulation of TRAIL/TRAIL receptor-mediated 
cytotoxic pathway might partially contribute to the anti-HCC effect of IFNalpha
and 5-FU combination therapy.

PMID: 15585621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004 Dec;48(12):4919-21.

The synthetic N-terminal peptide of human lactoferrin, hLF(1-11), is highly
effective against experimental infection caused by multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii.

Dijkshoorn L(1), Brouwer CP, Bogaards SJ, Nemec A, van den Broek PJ, Nibbering
PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. l.dijkshoorn@lumc.nl

The lactoferrin-derived peptide hLF(1-11), but not its control peptide, was
highly effective against five multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii strains
in vitro (3 to 4 log reduction) and against four of these strains in an
experimental infection in mice (2 to 3 log reduction). Therefore, this peptide is
a promising candidate as a novel agent against infections with
multidrug-resistant A. baumannii.

PMCID: PMC529198
PMID: 15561882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 24;325(4):1153-62.

Enhanced TRAIL sensitivity by E1A expression in human cancer and normal cell
lines: inhibition by adenovirus E1B19K and E3 proteins.

Hu B(1), Zhu H, Qiu S, Su Y, Ling W, Xiao W, Qi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Virology, Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences,
Wuhan University, 430072, Wuhan, Hubei Province, PR China.

TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a member of the TNF superfamily 
of cytokines that induces apoptosis in a variety of cancer cells, but not in
normal cells. However, more and more tumor cells remain resistant to TRAIL, which
limited its application for cancer therapy. Expression of the adenovirus serotype
5 (Ad5) E1A sensitizes tumor cells to apoptosis by TNF-alpha, Fas-ligand, and
TRAIL. Here we asked whether E1A overcomes this resistance and enhances
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in the tumor cells. Our results revealed that the tumor
cell lines, HeLa and HepG2, with infection by Ad-E1A, were highly sensitive to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Importantly, we found that in normal primary human lung 
fibroblast cells (HLF) TRAIL is capable of inducing apoptosis in combination with
E1A as efficiently as in some tumor cell lines. The adenovirus type 5 encoding
proteins, E1B19K and E3 gene products, have been shown to inhibit E1A and
TRAIL-induced apoptosis of HLF cells by using the recombinant adenovirus
AdDeltaE1B55K, with mutation of E1B55K, containing E1B19K and complete E3 region.
Further results demonstrated that the expression of DR5 and TRAIL was
down-regulated in the AdDeltaE1B55K co-infected HLF cells. These findings suggest
that TRAIL may play an important role in limiting virus infections and the
ability of adenovirus to inhibit killing may prolong acute and persistent
infections. The results from this study have also suggested the possibility that 
the combination of E1A with TRAIL could be used in the treatment of human
malignancy, or in the selection of the optimal adenovirus mutant as effective
delivering vector for cancer therapy.

PMID: 15555548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1279-87.

Genes associated with human hepatocellular carcinoma cell chemosensitivity to
5-fluorouracil plus interferon-alpha combination chemotherapy.

Moriyama M(1), Hoshida Y, Kato N, Otsuka M, Yoshida H, Kawabe T, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Recently, combined chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and interferon
(IFN)-alpha has been reported to show marked effects in patients with advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma. We investigated the genes associated with
susceptibility to this combination therapy. The gene expression profiles of eight
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HepG2, Hep3B, Huh7, Huh6, PLC/PRF/5, HLE,
HLF, and SK-Hep1) were evaluated using an oligonucleotide microarray that
consisted of 3,800 genes. The 50% growth inhibitory concentration (GI50) values
for 5-FU, IFN-alpha, and the combination of 5-FU plus IFN-alpha were determined
by the MTT assay. We selected genes that were expressed differentially between
the cells with increased susceptibility to the combination therapy and the
remaining cells. Relevance networks of the gene expression patterns and GI50
values of the susceptible cells were constructed to find genes associated with
susceptibility to the combination therapy. Of the eight cells tested, five showed
increased susceptibility to 5-FU plus IFN-alpha compared with 5-FU treatment
alone. Among the 3,800 genes, 25 were expressed differentially between
susceptible cells and resistant cells. The relevance networks revealed that
sensitivity to 5-FU plus IFN-alpha involved the expression of 27 independent
genes, which included 10 genes that are commonly associated with sensitivity to
5-FU alone. We selected a set of genes to predict susceptibility to 5-FU plus
IFN-alpha combination therapy. We also selected genes that play key roles in the 
synergistic effect of this combination therapy. These gene sets should prove
useful in evaluations of the efficacy and underlying molecular mechanisms of this
combination therapy.

PMID: 15492816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Biomaterials. 2005 Apr;26(11):1261-70.

Nanofiber alignment and direction of mechanical strain affect the ECM production 
of human ACL fibroblast.

Lee CH(1), Shin HJ, Cho IH, Kang YM, Kim IA, Park KD, Shin JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Inje University, 607 Eu-Bang Dong
Gimhae, Gyeongnam 621-749, Republic of Korea.

The effects of fiber alignment and direction of mechanical stimuli on the ECM
generation of human ligament fibroblast (HLF) were assessed. The nanofiber matrix
was fabricated using electrospinning technique. To align the nanofibers, a
rotating target was used. The HLFs on the aligned nanofibers were spindle-shaped 
and oriented in the direction of the nanofibers. The degree of ECM production was
evaluated by comparing the amount of collagen on aligned and randomly oriented
structures. Significantly more collagen was synthesized on aligned nanofiber
sheets, although the proliferation did not differ significantly. This suggests
that the spindle-shape observable in intact ligaments is preferable in producing 
ECM. To evaluate the effect of strain direction on the ECM production, HLFs were 
seeded on parallel aligned, vertically aligned to the strain direction, and
randomly oriented nanofiber sheets attached to Flexcell plates. After a 48-h
culture, 5% uniaxial strain was applied for 24h at a frequency of 12 cycles/min. 
The amounts of collagen produced were measured 2 days after halting the strain
application. The HLFs were more sensitive to strain in the longitudinal
direction. In conclusion, the aligned nanofiber scaffold used in this study
constitutes a promising base material for tissue-engineered ligament in that it
provides more preferable biomimetic structure, along with proper mechanical
environment.

PMID: 15475056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Antiviral Res. 2004 Oct;64(1):63-8.

Lactoferrin inhibits human papillomavirus binding and uptake in vitro.

Drobni P(1), Näslund J, Evander M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Umeå University, SE-901 85 Umeå, Sweden.
Peter.drobni@climi.umu.se

Lactoferrin (LF), a member of the transferrin family, is a bi-globular protein
secreted in milk, saliva, tears, seminal fluid, endocervix and vaginal
secretions. LF is an important player in the defence against pathogenic
microorganisms and has also been shown to have activity against several viruses
including herpesvirus, adenovirus, rotavirus and poliovirus. The antiviral
activity of LF is directed against the early steps of viral infection and the LF 
antiviral effect against herpesvirus is mediated through LF binding to the
herpesvirus receptor heparan sulfate. Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes genital
warts and is a prerequisite for cervical cancer. HPV can also use heparan sulfate
on the cell surface as a receptor. We studied the inhibition by LF on HPV entry
by incubating HaCaT cells and HPV-16 virus-like particles (VLPs) with either
human (HLF) or bovine lactoferrin (BLF). LF inhibited internalization of HPV-16
particles using CFDA-SE-labelled VLPs that only fluoresce after internalisation. 
By using a western blot assay we also found dose-dependent LF inhibition of
HPV-16 VLP binding to the HaCaT cell surface. BLF was a more potent inhibitor of 
HPV entry than human LF. It was also clear that LF acted early in the HPV uptake 
process.

PMID: 15451180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Clin Nutr. 2004 Oct;23(5):975-82.

Clinical practice of nutrition in acute liver failure--a European survey.

Schütz T(1), Bechstein WO, Neuhaus P, Lochs H, Plauth M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik für Gastroenterologie, Hepatologie und Endokrinologie,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Campus Charité-Mitte, Berlin 10098, Germany.

Comment in
    Clin Nutr. 2004 Oct;23(5):953-4.

BACKGROUND: Evidence-based guidelines for artificial nutrition in hyperacute
(HLF), acute (ALF) and subacute liver failure (SLF) cannot be given at present
due to scarcity of clinical studies.
METHODS: Current nutritional practice was surveyed using a questionnaire which
was answered by 33 hepatology units (2-170 cases/year) in 11 European countries.
RESULTS: All units used specific nutrition support regimes in liver failure
patients. Eight units (385 patients/year) preferentially used tube-feeding with
standard diets, 25 units (377 patients/year) used parenteral nutrition (PN). For 
PN glucose was infused at 4.0 g/kg d (median; range 0.6-10.0). Intravenous fat
was given only by some units: (18/33) in HLF at 0.9 g/kg d (0.3-2.0), (21/33) in 
ALF at 1.0 g/kg d (0.3-2.0), and (23/33) in SLF at 1.0 g/kg d (0.3-3.0). Amino
acid solutions, predominantly enriched in branched-chain amino acids, were used
in HLF (19/33 units) and in ALF (23/33) at 0.9 g/kg d (0.5-1.5) and in SLF
(24/33) at 1.0 g/kg d (0.7-1.5).
CONCLUSION: Hepatology units use a considerable variety of specific nutrition
support strategies in liver failure. About 50% of patients receive enteral
nutrition. Dosage and monitoring of PN is similar to other critical illness with 
a wide variety of infusion rates and accepted ranges of substrate plasma
concentrations.

PMID: 15380885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Hepatology. 2004 Sep;40(3):609-17.

Proteomic signature corresponding to alpha fetoprotein expression in liver cancer
cells.

Yokoo H(1), Kondo T, Fujii K, Yamada T, Todo S, Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Proteomics Project, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) has been implicated in the development of hepatocellular 
carcinoma and is considered to be a diagnostic and prognostic tumor marker.
Because elevated expression of AFP is associated with many characteristics of
hepatocellular carcinoma tissues, we hypothesized that multiple proteins may
function in a coordinated manner with AFP. To identify such proteins, we
performed global protein expression analysis, namely a proteomic study. The
protein expression profiles of 9 AFP-producing liver cancer cell lines (JHH-5,
HuH-1, PLC/PRL/5, Hep3B, HT-17, JHH-7, HuH-7, HepG2, Li-7) and 7 nonproducing
liver cancer cell lines (HLE, JHH-6, Sk-Hep-1, JHH-4, HLF, RBE, SSP-25) were
generated by fluorescence 2-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis. In
fluorescence 2-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis, proteins are labeled
with fluorescent dyes before electrophoresis for more accurate quantitative
expression analysis. We identified 11 protein spots that distinguished
AFP-producing cell lines from nonproducing cell lines by multivariate studies.
The spots showed consistent alterations in amount in AFP-producing cell lines (6 
up-regulated and 5 down-regulated). An additional 5 liver cancer cell lines
(KIM-1, KYN-2, KYN-3, PH5-CH, PH5-T) also were correctly grouped with respect to 
their AFP production on the basis of the intensity of the 11 protein spots. The
proteins corresponding to the 11 selected spots were identified by mass
spectrometry and were categorized into 4 groups based on their known role in
apoptosis, glucose metabolism, cytoskeletal organization, or translation. In
conclusion, we found a novel association of AFP with other proteins. Their
interaction should provide insight into the biology of AFP-producing
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Copyright 2004 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases

PMID: 15349899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 24;322(3):1052-8.

Chemokine CCL20 enhances the growth of HuH7 cells via phosphorylation of p44/42
MAPK in vitro.

Fujii H(1), Itoh Y, Yamaguchi K, Yamauchi N, Harano Y, Nakajima T, Minami M,
Okanoue T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

CCR6 is the receptor of chemokine CCL20. In the present study, we demonstrated
that the surface expression of CCR6 was enhanced on the human HCC cell lines
(HuH7, PLC/PRF/5, and HepG2) especially on HuH7 cells, but not on HLE or HLF
cells. These HCC cell lines (HuH7, PLC/PRF/5, and HepG2) especially the HuH7
cells secreted a significant amount of CCL20 spontaneously, whereas HLE or HLF
did not. Stimulation by CCL20 up-regulated the mRNA expression of CCR6 in HuH7
cells and significantly enhanced the growth of HuH7 cells. CCL20-stimulated
growth of HuH7 cells was abrogated by the inhibition of downstream signal
transduction pathway mediated by p44/42 MAPK, but not by p38 MAPK or SAPK/JNK.
CCR6 expression in human HCC tissues was confirmed by RT-PCR. These results
indicate that the growth of a proportion of human HCC cells may be mediated by
CCL20-CCR6 axis, like HuH7 cells, in an autocrine or paracrine manner.

PMID: 15336571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 Sep 1;238(1):221-6.

Variation in antimicrobial activity of lactoferricin-derived peptides explained
by structure modelling.

Farnaud S(1), Patel A, Odell EW, Evans RW.

Author information: 
(1)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, New 
Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, St. Thomas Street, London SE1 1UL, UK.
sebastien.farnaud@kcl.ac.uk

Antimicrobial peptides bovine lactoferricin (LfcinB) and human lactoferricin
(LfcinH) are produced from the respective lactoferrin, but are more active than
their precursors. Despite sequence homology, the bovine peptide and its
derivatives are more active than their human homologs. Such differences between
not only the peptides and their precursor but also between the bovine and the
human peptides could relate to structural differences. Upon sequence alignment of
both peptides with their parental proteins, the structural differences observed
between the bovine lactoferrin (BLf) and LfcinB were also found between the human
lactoferrin (HLf) and the LfcinH. The helical structures in HLf are replaced by
beta-strands separated by a strong turn in LfcinH suggesting an antiparallel
beta-sheet structure similar to LfcinB. MIC assays with HLP-2 and BLP-2,
11-residue peptides derived from the active core of both Lfcins, against
Escherichia coli, showed that the bovine derivative, BLP-2, is more active than
its human homolog HLP-2. Both 3D models for HLP-2 and BLP-2 showed that the
beta-strand is centred between the aromatic residues giving both side chains the 
same orientations. The displacement towards the N-terminus observed for the
beta-strand in HLP-2, compared with its central location in BLP-2, could be less 
favourable to membrane interaction and therefore responsible for the decrease in 
activity. Such a model suggests for LfcinH a mechanism similar to the one
observed for LfcinB, where the absence of long-range interaction, present in
lactoferrin, destabilises the first alpha helix, as observed in solution and,
upon interaction with the membrane, could result in the formation of a
beta-strand, as observed in the presence of LPS. The location of the beta-strand 
in relation to the positive charges, seems to define the efficiency of the
activity of the peptide and may explain the difference in activity obtained
between HLP-2 and BLP-2.

PMID: 15336425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2004 Sep;54(3):603-8. Epub 2004 Jul 28.

Release of calcium from intracellular stores and subsequent uptake by
mitochondria are essential for the candidacidal activity of an N-terminal peptide
of human lactoferrin.

Lupetti A(1), Brouwer CP, Dogterom-Ballering HE, Senesi S, Campa M, Van Dissel
JT, Nibbering PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, C5-P, Leiden University Medical Center
(LUMC), P.O. Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Earlier studies showed that mitochondrial damage is a hallmark of the
candidacidal activity of an N-terminal peptide of human lactoferrin, further
referred to as hLF(1-11). Since uptake of Ca(2+) by mitochondria may be essential
for their activation, the aim of this study was to define the role of Ca(2+) in
killing of Candida albicans by the hLF(1-11) peptide.
METHODS: The effect of compounds interfering with Ca(2+) homeostasis on the
hLF(1-11)-induced candidacidal activity, changes in mitochondrial membrane
potential, and reactive oxygen species production were evaluated using a killing 
assay, rhodamine 123 staining, and 2',7'-dichlorofluorescein diacetate,
respectively. The increase in cellular Ca(2+) content was measured using
(45)Ca(2+).
RESULTS: Our results revealed that Ruthenium Red, which inhibits the
mitochondrial Ca(2+)-uniporter and the voltage-sensitive Ca(2+) release from
internal stores, blocked (P<0.05) the hLF(1-11)-induced candidacidal activity as 
well as changes in the membrane potential of mitochondria, and reactive oxygen
species production. Oxalate, which precipitates Ca(2+) in intracellular
organelles, decreased (P<0.05) the peptide-induced changes in the membrane
potential of mitochondria, reactive oxygen species production, and candidacidal
activity. Furthermore, the Ca(2+) ionophore ionomycin combined with high CaCl(2) 
concentrations enhanced the hLF(1-11)-induced candidacidal activity. Moreover,
hLF(1-11) caused an influx of Ca(2+) from the extracellular medium into C.
albicans reaching a three-fold increase at 2 h, whereas no increase was found in 
unexposed cells. In agreement, the Ca(2+)-chelator EGTA blocked the
peptide-induced candidacidal activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Ca(2+) release from intracellular stores, probably through
subsequent mitochondrial Ca(2+) uptake, is essential for the hLF(1-11)-induced
candidacidal activity.

PMID: 15282237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. ScientificWorldJournal. 2004 Jun 29;4:490-9.

Antioxidant capacity of cultured mammalian cells estimated by ESR method.

Kartvelishvili T(1), Abuladze M, Asatiani N, Akhvlediani J, Asanishvili L, Holman
HY, Sapojnikova N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Georgian Academy of Sciences,
14,Gotua Str., 0160 Tbilisi, Georgia. tkartvelishvili@hotmail.com,

In the present study, the antioxidant capacity against hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), 
one of the stress-inducing agents, was investigated in two distinct cell lines:
L-41 (human epithelial-like cells) and HLF (human diploid lung fibroblasts),
which differ in tissue origin, life span in culture, proliferate activity, and
special enzyme system activity. The cell antioxidant capacity against H2O2 was
estimated by the electron spin resonance (ESR) spin-trapping technique in the
Fenton reaction system via Fe+2 ion action with H2O2 resulting in hydroxyl
radical generation. The effects of catalase inhibitors, such as sodium azide and 
3-amino-1,2,4-triazole, on the antioxidant capacity of cells were tested. Based
on our observation, it can be concluded that the defensive capacity of cells
against H2O2 depends on the ratio between catalase/GPx/SOD and H2O2, especially
at high-stress situations, and the intracellular balance of these enzymes are
more important than the influence of the single component.

PMID: 15258675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Toxicol Sci. 2004 Oct;81(2):467-79. Epub 2004 Jun 30.

Microbial stimulation by Mycoplasma fermentans synergistically amplifies IL-6
release by human lung fibroblasts in response to residual oil fly ash (ROFA) and 
nickel.

Gao F(1), Barchowsky A, Nemec AA, Fabisiak JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA.

Mycoplasma (MP), such as the species M. fermentans, possess remarkable
immunoregulatory properties and can potentially establish chronic latent
infections with little signs of disease. Atmospheric particulate matter (PM) is a
complex and diverse component of air pollution associated with adverse health
effects. We hypothesized that MP modulate the cellular responses induced by
chemical stresses such as residual oil fly ash (ROFA), a type of PM rich in
transition metals. We assessed the release of interleukin-6 (IL-6), a prototypic 
immune-modulating cytokine, in response to PM from different sources in human
lung fibroblasts (HLF) deliberately infected with M. fermentans. We found that M.
fermentans and ROFA together synergistically stimulated production of IL-6
compared to either stimuli alone. Compared to several other PM, ROFA appeared
most able to potentiate IL-6 release. The potentiating effect of live MP
infection could be mimicked by M. fermentans-derived macrophage-activating
lipopeptide-2 (MALP-2), a known Toll-like receptor-2 agonist. The aqueous
fraction of ROFA also contained potent IL-6 inducing activity in concert with
MALP-2, and exposure to several defined metal salts indicated that Ni and, to a
lesser extent V, (but not Cu) could synergistically act with MALP-2 to induce
IL-6. These data indicate that microorganisms like MP can interact with
environmental stimuli such as PM-derived metals to synergistically activate
signaling pathways that control lung cell cytokine production and, thus, can
potentially modulate adverse health effects of PM exposure.

PMCID: PMC4290844
PMID: 15229366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biometals. 2004 Jun;17(3):337-42.

Recombinant human lactoferrin treatment for global health issues: iron deficiency
and acute diarrhea.

Bethell DR(1), Huang J.

Author information: 
(1)Ventria Bioscience, 4110 N. Freeway Boulevard, Sacramento, California 95834,
USA. dbethell@ventriab21.com

Iron deficiency and diarrhea are two of the most significant issues for global
health. Iron deficiency anemia is the most common nutritional deficiency in the
world, affecting nearly 25% of the world population (UNICEF/WHO 1999). The
prevalence of iron deficiency in developing countries is illustrated by
comparison with other deficiencies: iron deficiency affects 3.5 billion people,
while vitamin A and iodine deficiency affect 0.3 billion people and 0.8 billion
people, respectively. The prevalence is highest among young children and women of
childbearing age (particularly pregnant women). It is estimated that national
productivity levels could be raised as much as 20% by correcting iron deficiency 
in developing countries. Recombinant human lactoferrin (rhLF), expressed and
extracted from rice seed, is being evaluated by Ventria Bioscience for use as a
dietary supplement to treat iron deficiency and/or iron deficiency anemia.
Diarrhea is also a major world health issue. Sixty percent of children who die
under age five die of pneumonia, diarrhea or measles. World Health Organization
oral rehydration solution (WHO-ORS) is one of the major medical advances in the
past 50 years, saving the lives of 1 to 2 million children annually. Many studies
have demonstrated similar efficacy of rice-based ORS. There are studies
documenting the reduced frequency of diarrhea in breast-fed children and this
health improvement is attributed to the antimicrobial action of the human milk
proteins lactoferrin and lysozyme. In vitro data document the growth inhibition
of the diarrheal associated organisms: rotavirus, ETEC, cholera, salmonella, and 
shigella by human lactoferrin (hLF) and human lysozyme. Using Ventria's
ExpressTec system, we have expressed human lactoferrin and human lysozyme in
rice. In a rice-based ORS formulation, these proteins have the potential to
provide not only the benefits of reduced stool volume and improved weight gain,
but also shorten the course of diarrheal episodes via antimicrobial activity
against the causative agent.

PMID: 15222487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Biometals. 2004 Jun;17(3):235-43.

Lactoferrin receptors in gram-negative bacteria: insights into the iron
acquisition process.

Ekins A(1), Khan AG, Shouldice SR, Schryvers AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

One component of the anti-microbial function of lactoferrin (Lf) is its ability
to sequester iron from potential pathogens. To overcome this iron limitation, a
number of gram-negative bacterial pathogens have developed a mechanism for
acquiring iron directly from this host glycoprotein. This mechanism involves
surface receptors capable of specifically binding Lf from the host, removing iron
and transporting it across the outer membrane. The iron is then bound by a
periplasmic iron-binding protein, FbpA, and transported into the cell via an
inner membrane complex comprised of FbpB and FbpC. The receptor has been shown to
consist of two proteins, LbpA and LbpB. LbpB is bilobed lipoprotein anchored to
the outer membrane via fatty acyl groups attached to the N-terminal cysteine.
LbpA is a homologue of siderophore receptors, which consist of an N-terminal plug
and a C-terminal beta-barrel region. We propose that the receptor proteins, LbpA 
and LbpB, induce conformational changes in human Lf (hLf) that lower its affinity
for iron that binding by FbpA can drive the transport across the outer membrane, 
a mechanism shared with transferrin (Tf) receptors. The interaction between the
receptor proteins and Lf is quite extensive and has been previously studied by
using chimeric proteins comprised of Lf & Tf. In an attempt to evaluate the role 
of FbpA in the transport process, a series of site-directed mutants of FbpA were 
prepared and used to replace the wild-type protein in the iron acquisition
pathway. The mutations were made in the iron-binding and anion-binding ligands of
FbpA and were designed to result in altered binding properties. Protein
crystallography of the iron-bound form of the Q58L mutant protein revealed that
it was in the open conformation with iron coordinated by Y195 and Y196 from the
C-terminal domain but not by the other iron-liganding amino acids from the
N-terminal domain, H9 and E57. Replacement of the native FbpA in Neisseria
meningitidis with wild-type or mutant Haemophilus influenzae FbpAs resulted in a 
defect in growth on Tf or Lf, suggesting that there may be a barrier to
functional expression of H. influenzae FbpAs in Neisseria meningitidis. Thus
mutants of the N. meningitidis FbpA are being prepared to replace wild-type
protein in order to test their ability to mediate transport from hLf.

PMID: 15222471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2004 May;33(3):327-30.

[Establishment of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis technical platform for
proteome research].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu J(1), Fang S, Li X, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen 518020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish and optimize two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
technique for proteomics.
METHODS: Immobiline pH gradients isoelectric focusing was used as 1D, vertical
SDS-PAGE as 2D, some factors such as method and volume of loading sample, choice 
of gels, concentration of SDS gels, preset of electric program and parameters,
protocol for staining the gels were improved.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Using the proper method described above, satisfactory 2DE
maps of human embryonic lung fibroblast(HLF) and silkworm egg were obtained. 2DE 
technical platform for proteome research was set up.

PMID: 15211805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004 Jul;5(7):565-75.

State-dependent opioid control of pain.

Fields H(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, California
94143, USA. hlf@itsa.ucsf.edu

PMID: 15208698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Vasc Res. 2004 Jul-Aug;41(4):293-304. Epub 2004 Jun 10.

Human apo-lactoferrin enhances angiogenesis mediated by vascular endothelial
growth factor A in vivo.

Norrby K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Sahlgrenska
Academy, Göteborg University, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Lactoferrin, LF, a multifunctional iron- and heparin-binding protein,
present in exocrine body secretions and leukocytes, is remarkably resistant to
proteolysis. Ingested bovine iron-unsaturated LF, apo-bLF, suppresses
VEGF-A-mediated angiogenesis in a previously described rat mesentery angiogenesis
assay, possibly explaining, at least in part, its established anticancer effect
in rats and mice.
METHODS: Using the same experimental system, we have now studied the effect of
(i) ingested human apo-LF, apo-hLF, on angiogenesis mediated by VEGF-A and bFGF, 
(ii) ingested human iron-saturated LF, holo-hLF, on VEGF-A-mediated angiogenesis 
and (iii) subcutaneous continuously infused apo-hLF on VEGF-A-mediated
angiogenesis.
RESULTS: Ingested holo-hLF did not affect VEGF-A-mediated angiogenesis. Ingested 
apo-hLF (from one and the same batch) significantly enhanced VEGF-A-mediated
angiogenesis but did not affect bFGF-mediated angiogenesis. Moreover,
subcutaneously infused apo-hLF also significantly stimulated VEGF-A-mediated
angiogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the data suggest that apo-hLF exerts a specific
proangiogenic effect in VEGF-A-mediated angiogenesis. Clearly, human and bovine
apo-LF exert opposite effects on VEGF-A-induced angiogenesis. Differences in
molecular features between human and bovine LFs of possible significance for the 
outcome are discussed. In hypoxia, compensatory collateral circulation is
mediated primarily by VEGF-A. We hypothesize that systemically administered
apo-hLF may promote collateral blood vessel formation at hypoxic sites in normal 
tissue, thus counteracting ischemia and infarction.

PMID: 15192265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jun 9;32(10):3169-79. Print 2004.

Altered DNA binding specificity of Arnt by selection of partner bHLH-PAS
proteins.

Kinoshita K(1), Kikuchi Y, Sasakura Y, Suzuki M, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Sendai, 980-8578, Japan.

The Ah receptor (AhR) and HLF are transcription factors involved in xenobiotic
metabolism and hypoxic response, respectively. AhR and HLF heterodimerize with
Arnt as the common partner, and bind to asymmetric E-boxes termed XRE and HRE,
respectively. In order to investigate nucleotide preference of the heterodimers, 
reporter plasmids with oligonucleotides for XREs or HREs with systematic
mutations were constructed and their activity was determined. Comparison of the
activity revealed that DNA length and nucleotide preference recognized by Arnt
subunit in the two heterodimers were largely different between XRE and HRE. We
expressed AhR-Arnt and HLF-Arnt in Escherichia coli and used them for DNA
binding. The dissociation constant of HLF-Arnt-HRE was 10.4 +/- 1.6 nM.
Competition activity of mutated XREs or HREs with wild type was consistent with
their transcription activity. Bending of XRE and HRE induced by binding of the
relevant heterodimers was observed with stronger bending of XRE than of HRE. By
deletional and mutational analyses, an alanine and three arginine (Ala 8, Arg 9, 
Arg 11 and Arg 12) residues in the basic sequence of HLF were found to be
indispensable for the transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC434443
PMID: 15190133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Genes Dev. 2004 Jun 15;18(12):1397-412. Epub 2004 Jun 2.

The loss of circadian PAR bZip transcription factors results in epilepsy.

Gachon F(1), Fonjallaz P, Damiola F, Gos P, Kodama T, Zakany J, Duboule D, Petit 
B, Tafti M, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, National Center of Competence Research
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

DBP (albumin D-site-binding protein), HLF (hepatic leukemia factor), and TEF
(thyrotroph embryonic factor) are the three members of the PAR bZip (proline and 
acidic amino acid-rich basic leucine zipper) transcription factor family. All
three of these transcriptional regulatory proteins accumulate with robust
circadian rhythms in tissues with high amplitudes of clock gene expression, such 
as the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and the liver. However, they are expressed
at nearly invariable levels in most brain regions, in which clock gene expression
only cycles with low amplitude. Here we show that mice deficient for all three
PAR bZip proteins are highly susceptible to generalized spontaneous and
audiogenic epilepsies that frequently are lethal. Transcriptome profiling
revealed pyridoxal kinase (Pdxk) as a target gene of PAR bZip proteins in both
liver and brain. Pyridoxal kinase converts vitamin B6 derivatives into pyridoxal 
phosphate (PLP), the coenzyme of many enzymes involved in amino acid and
neurotransmitter metabolism. PAR bZip-deficient mice show decreased brain levels 
of PLP, serotonin, and dopamine, and such changes have previously been reported
to cause epilepsies in other systems. Hence, the expression of some
clock-controlled genes, such as Pdxk, may have to remain within narrow limits in 
the brain. This could explain why the circadian oscillator has evolved to
generate only low-amplitude cycles in most brain regions.

PMCID: PMC423191
PMID: 15175240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Br J Haematol. 2004 Jun;125(5):560-7.

E4BP4 expression is regulated by the t(17;19)-associated oncoprotein E2A-HLF in
pro-B cells.

Yeung J(1), O'Sullivan E, Hubank M, Brady HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, London, UK.

The E4BP4 basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor is regulated by
interleukin-3 (IL-3) in pro-B cells and has been reported to promote survival of 
the murine IL-3-dependent pro-B cell lines, FL5.12 and Baf-3. The E2A-HLF
oncoprotein arises from a t(17;19) translocation in childhood pro-B cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia and acts as an anti-apoptotic factor in FL5.12 and Baf-3 
cells. To assess the functions of E2A-HLF and E4BP4 in cell survival, a
tetracycline-inducible system was established in Baf-3 cells to express E4BP4 or 
E2A-HLF. Upon IL-3 withdrawal, expression of E2A-HLF conferred resistance to
apoptosis whereas overexpression of E4BP4 did not. E4BP4 and E2A-HLF both
recognized the same DNA sequence in reporter gene assays, but had opposite
effects on transcription. E2A-HLF acts as a transcriptional activator and E4BP4
as a transcriptional repressor. Furthermore, E4BP4 is a downstream
transcriptional target of E2A-HLF. Our data suggests that the overexpression of
E4BP4 is unable to block apoptosis induced by IL-3 withdrawal and that the
expression of E2A-HLF does not replace the function of E4BP4 in mediating
survival.

PMID: 15147370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Yonsei Med J. 2004 Apr 30;45(2):229-32.

Head injuries from falls in preschool children.

Park SH(1), Cho BM, Oh SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University 
College of Medicine, 445 Gil-dong, Kangdong-gu, Seoul 134-701, Korea.
sehyuck@hallym.or.kr

Falls are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality among children. We performed
a retrospective analysis of pediatric patients under 7 years of age admitted to
our department after a fall from January 1994 through December 1999 to describe
the characteristics of fall-related head injury and to determine the clinical
parameters influencing outcome. The patients were divided into two groups
according to age: group I (babies and toddlers, 0-3 years) and group II
(preschool children, 4-6 years). Falls were classified as low and high level.
Sixty-eight cases were identified and falls accounted for 35.2% of head injuries.
There were more boys than girls, and more low-level falls(LLF) than high-level
falls (HLF), particularly in group I. Although more common in HLF, significant
intracranial injuries were also sustained from LLF. Calvarial fractures were the 
most frequent type of head injury and were more common in LLF than HLF. Admission
Glasgow Coma Scale score, types of head injury and hypoxia on admission were
significantly correlated with Glasgow Outcome Scale score, but age, sex,
extracranial injury and height of fall did not influence clinical outcome. From
this study, we concluded that the height of fall should not limit the evaluation 
of patients and that aggressive management is mandatory to improve outcome even
in patients with poor prognostic factors.

PMID: 15118993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Hum Pathol. 2004 Apr;35(4):424-9.

Overexpression of metastatic tumor antigen 1 in hepatocellular carcinoma:
Relationship to vascular invasion and estrogen receptor-alpha.

Moon WS(1), Chang K, Tarnawski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Administration Medical Center, Long Beach,
California, USA.

The morbidity and mortality experienced by cancer patients is mainly due to the
invasion and metastasis of the primary tumor. Recently, a potential
metastasis-associated gene and its product, the metastatic tumor antigen 1
(MTA1), were identified; this gene has been found to be overexpressed in a
variety of cancers. MTA1 is also known as a potent co-repressor of estrogen
receptor element transcription in breast cancer cells. The expression of MTA1 in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its potential relationship to metastasis and
to estrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha) expression has not been examined, forming
the basis for this study. Paraffin sections of 45 HCC specimens, 4 different HCC 
cell lines, and normal hepatocyte cell line (h NHeps) were immunostained with
MTA1 and ER-alpha antibodies. In addition, we examined, by Western blotting, the 
MTA1 and ER-alpha expression levels in 4 human HCC lines (HepG2 [wild p53], HLE, 
HLF, and HuH-7 [mutant p53]). MTA1 was overexpressed in HCC cells versus
nonmalignant hepatocytes in 31 of 45 HCC specimens (69%). Its expression was
predominantly localized to the nucleus or cytoplasm of HCC cells. Nineteen of 20 
HCC (95%) specimens with vascular invasion displayed strong MTA1 expression.
Overexpression of MTA1 also significantly correlated with large tumor size. The
cytoplasmic and nuclear immunoreactivity for ER-alpha was present in HCC
specimens in 46% and 12%, respectively. Expression of MTA1 inversely correlated
with the nuclear localization of ER-alpha. There was no marked difference in MTA1
and ER-alpha expression levels between HCC cell line expressing wild-type p53 and
cell line with mutated p53 HCC. In conclusion, these findings indicate that
overexpression of MTA1 is associated with HCC growth and vascular invasion.
Nuclear translocation of ER-alpha inversely correlated with MTA1 expression,
suggesting negative regulatory mechanisms.

PMID: 15116322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Blood. 2004 Apr 15;103(8):3185-91. Epub 2003 Dec 11.

Regulation of annexin II by cytokine-initiated signaling pathways and E2A-HLF
oncoprotein.

Matsunaga T(1), Inaba T, Matsui H, Okuya M, Miyajima A, Inukai T, Funabiki T,
Endo M, Look AT, Kurosawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Dokkyo University School of 
Medicine, Mibu, Tochigi, Japan.

In pro-B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), expression of the E2A-HLF
fusion gene as a result of t(17;19)(q22;p13) is associated with poor prognosis,
hypercalcemia, and hemorrhagic complications. We previously reported that the
E2A-HLF fusion protein protects interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent lymphoid cells
from apoptosis caused by cytokine starvation. Here, we report that annexin II, a 
surface phospholipid-binding protein and one of the proposed causes of the
hemorrhagic complications of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), is also
implicated in t(17;19)+ ALL. Annexin II was expressed at high levels in APL cells
and in each of 4 t(17;19)+ leukemia cell lines, and annexin II expression was
induced by enforced expression of E2A-HLF in leukemia cells. In IL-3-dependent
cells, we found that annexin II expression was regulated by IL-3 mainly by Ras
pathways, including Ras/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways. Moreover, E2A-HLF
increased annexin II expression in IL-3-dependent cells in the absence of the
cytokine. These findings indicate that E2A-HLF induces annexin II by substituting
for cytokines that activate downstream pathways of Ras.

PMID: 15070701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Novartis Found Symp. 2004;256:189-200; discussion 200-4, 259-69.

Macrophage infiltration and angiogenesis in human malignancy.

Knowles H(1), Leek R, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Molecular Oncology Laboratories, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

It is well recognized that human tumours are hypoxic compared to normal adjacent 
tissues and that hypoxia is related to a poor outcome regardless of modality of
treatment, including surgery alone, radiotherapy or chemotherapy. Hypoxia
regulates a complex programme of gene transcription via hypoxia-inducible factors
1 and 2 (HIF-1, -2). We have shown that in breast cancer and many other tumour
types, tumour-associated macrophages express high levels of HIF-2alpha compared
to normal tissue macrophages and compared to the tumour. This high macrophage
HIF-2alpha is an independent prognostic factor for poor outcome. The mechanisms
up-regulating HLF-2alpha in macrophages may include inflammatory cytokines as
well as hypoxia. Differentiation of monocytes into macrophages increases the
basal level of HIF-2alpha protein and changes the programme of hypoxia. Many of
these inducible genes are involved in inflammation and angiogenesis. Thus, the
conversion of a peripheral monocyte into a macrophage generates a complex new
programme of hypoxia-responsive genes that may contribute to angiogenesis and the
complex microenvironment within the tumour, and as such provides important
targets for therapy.

PMID: 15027491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Int J Oncol. 2004 Apr;24(4):837-45.

Down-regulation of matrix-invasive potential of human liver cancer cells by type 
I interferon and a histone deacetylase inhibitor sodium butyrate.

Kaneko F(1), Saito H, Saito Y, Wakabayashi K, Nakamoto N, Tada S, Suzuki H,
Tsunematsu S, Kumagai N, Ishii H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo
160-8582, Japan.

We have demonstrated anti-proliferation and anti-metastasis effects of both
interferon-alpha and a histone deacetylase inhibitor, sodium butyrate, on human
liver cancer cell lines. In this study, invasive ability of human liver cancer
cell lines through the matrix-coated membrane was examined and inhibitory effect 
of interferon-alpha and sodium butyrate was investigated. Among six human liver
cancer cell lines, HLE and HLF showed high invasive ability using the Matrigel
invasion assay. This invasion ability was significantly inhibited by pretreatment
of the cells with 1000 IU/ml of interferon-alpha or 2 mM of sodium butyrate.
Gelatin zymography and the matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 activity assay
showed that these two cell lines produce active- and pro-matrix
metalloproteinase-2 and -9, and their activity was significantly reduced by
pretreatment with both agents. Real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction showed decrease in matrix
metalloproteinase-1 mRNA levels by pretreatment with both agents, but mRNA levels
of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 and -2 were differently
modulated by interferon-alpha and sodium butyrate. These results suggest that
interferon-alpha and sodium butyrate reduce a chance of invasion and metastasis
of human liver cancer cells by inhibiting matrix metalloproteinase activity,
although its inhibitor is differently regulated.

PMID: 15010820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Nucl Med. 2004 Feb;45(2):321-6.

99mTc-Labeled UBI 29-41 peptide for monitoring the efficacy of antibacterial
agents in mice infected with Staphylococcus aureus.

Nibbering PH(1), Welling MM, Paulusma-Annema A, Brouwer CP, Lupetti A, Pauwels
EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center C5-P, PO
Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. p.h.nibbering@lumc.nl

Based on our earlier observation that (99m)Tc-UBI 29-41, a radiolabeled peptide
derived from ubiquicidin (UBI), discriminates between infections and sterile
inflammatory processes, we considered the possibility that this tracer could be
used for monitoring the efficacy of antibacterial agents in animals infected with
Staphylococcus aureus.METHODS: We injected (99m)Tc-UBI 29-41 into S.
aureus-infected mice after treatment with various doses of cloxacillin or
erythromycin. At intervals thereafter, accumulation of the radiolabeled peptide
at the site of infection was assessed by scintigraphy. When S. aureus was
antibiotic resistant, we evaluated the efficacy of hLF 1-11, an antimicrobial
peptide derived from human lactoferrin (hLF), in rats using (99m)Tc-UBI 29-41 and
scintigraphy.
RESULTS: Decreasing amounts of radiolabeled peptide at the site of the S. aureus 
infection in animals correlated (r(2) > 0.81; P < 0.001) with increasing doses of
cloxacillin in animals. An effective dose of erythromycin resulted in reduced (P 
= 0.023) accumulation of the radiolabeled peptide at the site of S. aureus
infection in mice. In addition, we noted decreasing amounts of (99m)Tc-UBI 29-41 
at the site of infection after administration of increasing doses of hLF 1-11
peptide in rats infected with antibiotic-resistant S. aureus. Furthermore, the
number of viable bacteria decreased with increasing doses of cloxacillin or hLF
1-11 peptide, and a good correlation (r(2) > 0.80; P < 0.001) between the
accumulation of (99m)Tc-UBI 29-41 and the number of viable (antibiotic-resistant)
S. aureus at the site of infection was seen. In an attempt to explain these
results, we found that these antibacterial agents do not affect the in vitro
binding of (99m)Tc-UBI 29-41 to bacteria. Furthermore, this radiolabeled peptide 
bound to free bacteria and to cell-adherent but not phagocytized S. aureus,
suggesting that at sites of infection mainly extracellular bacteria are targeted 
by (99m)Tc-UBI 29-41.
CONCLUSION: (99m)Tc-UBI 29-41 allows the monitoring of the efficacy of
antibacterial agents in mice and rats with S. aureus infections.

PMID: 14960656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Feb;271(4):678-84.

The role of N-linked glycosylation in the protection of human and bovine
lactoferrin against tryptic proteolysis.

van Veen HA(1), Geerts ME, van Berkel PH, Nuijens JH.

Author information: 
(1)Pharming, Archimedesweg, Leiden, The Netherlands. h.veen@pharming.com

Lactoferrin (LF) is an iron-binding glycoprotein of the innate host defence
system. To elucidate the role of N-linked glycosylation in protection of LF
against proteolysis, we compared the tryptic susceptibility of human LF (hLF)
variants from human milk, expressed in human 293(S) cells or in the milk of
transgenic mice and cows. The analysis revealed that recombinant hLF (rhLF) with 
mutations Ile130-->Thr and Gly404-->Cys was about twofold more susceptible than
glycosylated and unglycosylated variants with the naturally occurring Ile130 and 
Gly404. Hence, N-linked glycosylation is not involved in protection of hLF
against tryptic proteolysis. Apparently, the previously reported protection by
N-linked glycosylation of hLF [van Berkel, P.H.C., Geerts, M.E.J., van Veen,
H.A., Kooiman, P.M., Pieper, F., de Boer, H.A. & Nuijens, J.H. (1995) Biochem. J.
312, 107-114] is restricted to rhLF containing the Thr130 and Cys404. Comparison 
of the tryptic proteolysis of hLF and bovine LF (bLF) revealed that hLF is about 
100-fold more resistant than bLF. Glycosylation variants A and B of bLF differed 
by about 10-fold in susceptibility to trypsin. This difference is due to
glycosylation at Asn281 in bLF-A. Hence, glycosylation at Asn281 protects bLF
against cleavage by trypsin at Lys282.

PMID: 14764083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2003 Feb;21(1):57-60.

[Construction of eukaryotic expression vector of hMTH1 gene antisense RNA].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang GF(1), Zhuang ZX, Liu QZ, He Y, Du LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Toxicology, School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct pEGFP-C1-T vector, an eukaryotic expression plasmid of
hMTH1 gene antisense RNA.
METHODS: The conservative region of hMTH1 gene was amplified by RT-PCR after
total RNA being extracted from human embryo lung fibroblast (HLF) and then cloned
into pGEM-T vector. After the recombinant plasmid was certified by DNA
sequencing, the conservative region of hMTH1 gene was inserted into pEGFP-C1
vector reversedly and pEGFP-C1-T vector was constructed. The efficiency of
antisense inhibition was verified by Western blotting after cell transfection.
RESULTS: 423 bp fragment including conservative region of hMTH1 gene was obtained
by RT-PCR. After cloned by pGEM-T vector and certified by DNA sequencing,
pEGFP-C1-T vector was successfully constructed by means of recombinant DNA
technology. Additionally pEGFP-C1-T vector could efficiently decrease hMTH1
protein level by 46%.
CONCLUSION: The efficient expression vector of hMTH1 gene antisense RNA,
pEGFP-C1-T has been constructed successfully.

PMID: 14761578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2003 Apr;21(2):105-7.

[Construction of double-strand break repair protein hKu70 deficient cell strain
and its biologic characters].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu QZ(1), Zhuang ZX, Jiang GF, He Y, Du LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Toxicology, Public Health School, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510089, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair protein hKu70
deficient cell strain and to observe its biological characters for studying the
functions of hKu70 gene and the effects of occupational harmfulness factors on
DSB repair.
METHODS: Human lung fibroblasts (HLF) were transfected with the eukaryotic
expression plasmids of hKu70 gene antisense RNA (pEGFP-C1-K) to construct hKu70
protein deficient cells (named as "HLFK"). The protein expression levels of hKu70
gene in HLFC and HLFK were detected by the Western blotting to estimate the
effects of antisense inhibition. Morphology, growth character and growth status
in soft agar of transfected HLFK were observed.
RESULTS: pEGFP-C1-K vector was successfully expressed in HLF. The protein
expression level of hKu70 gene in HLFK was decreased by 42% as compared with that
in HLFC. No obvious changes of the biologic characters were observed in HLFK.
CONCLUSION: The hKu70 protein deficient cell strain was successfully constructed.
The hKu70 protein deficiency alone didn't induce obvious changes of the
biological characters in HLFK.

PMID: 14761525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2003 Jul-Aug;39(7):321-8.

Expression of fibroblast growth factor receptor genes in human hepatoma-derived
cell lines.

Asada N(1), Tanaka Y, Hayashido Y, Toratani S, Kan M, Kitamoto M, Nakanishi T,
Kajiyama G, Chayama K, Okamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Division of Frontier Medical
Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 
734-8553, Japan.

The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) function has been considered to contribute to 
various human tumors and malignant growth of neoplasm. Hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) is a typical hypervascular tumor, and it is suggested that FGF may be
involved in hepatocarcinogenesis. Therefore, the relationship between the
progression of HCC and expression of FGFs and FGF receptors (FGFRs) was evaluated
in this study. We investigated the expression of messenger ribonucleic acids
(mRNAs) of FGFs and FGFRs by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) analysis in eight human hepatoma-derived cell lines (Hep3B, HLE, HLF,
HUH6, HUH7, KIM1, Li7, and PLC/PRF/5), one hepatoblastoma-derived cell line
(HepG2), and human primary hepatocytes. In addition, effects of FGF-1, FGF-2, and
FGF-7 on the growth of hepatoma-derived cell lines were studied in serum-free
defined culture conditions. An RT-PCR analysis revealed that all cell lines
except PLC/PRF/5 expressed all FGFR mRNAs: FGF-R1 (IIIc), -R2 (IIIb), -R2 (IIIc),
-R3 (IIIb), -R3 (IIIc), and -R4 mRNAs. In contrast, human primary hepatocytes
expressed FGF-R1 (IIIc), -R3 (IIIc), and -R4 mRNAs but not mRNAs of FGF-R2
(IIIb), -R2 (IIIc), and -R3 (IIIb). All cell lines except HUH6 and HUH7 expressed
FGF-1 and FGF-2 mRNAs. Addition of exogenous FGF-1 or FGF-2 (or both) to culture 
stimulated cell proliferation in several cell lines, but FGF-7 exhibited no
growth stimulation in all cells. Hepatoma cells may possess a proliferation
mechanism regulated by an autocrine mechanism, a paracrine mechanism, or both,
which are mediated by FGF-1/FGFR or FGF-2/FGFR (or both). In addition, a gain of 
FGF-R2 (IIIb), -R2 (IIIc), and -R3 (IIIb) may be associated with malignant
transformation of liver tumor and may eventually serve as useful diagnostic and
prognostic indicators.

PMID: 14753849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Planta Med. 2003 Nov;69(11):1005-8.

Transgenic ginseng cell lines that produce high levels of a human lactoferrin.

Kwon SY(1), Jo SH, Lee OS, Choi SM, Kwak SS, Lee HS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Cell Biotechnology, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience
and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea.

In order to produce a human lactoferrin (hLf) protein in cultured plant cells, we
developed Korean ginseng (Panax ginseng) cell line using an oxidative
stress-inducible peroxidase (SWPA2) promoter and characterized the production of 
human lactoferrin in cultured cells. A construct containing a targeting signal
peptide from tobacco endoplasmic reticulum fused to human lactoferrin cDNA under 
the control of SWPA2 promoter was engineered. Transgenic Korean ginseng cell
lines that produced a recombinant hLf protein were successfully generated and
confirmed by PCR and Southern blot analyses. Western blot and ELISA analyses
showed that hLf protein was synthesized in the transgenic cells. The production
of hLf showed a maximal level (up to 3.0% of total soluble protein) in the
stationary phase of callus cultures. These results suggest that the transgenic
cell lines in this study will be biotechnologically useful for the commercial
production of hLf protein in cell cultures, with no need for purification.

PMID: 14735437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Apr;25(4):473-82. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Effective asymmetry in gap junctional intercellular communication between
populations of human normal lung fibroblasts and lung carcinoma cells.

Zhang ZQ(1), Hu Y, Wang BJ, Lin ZX, Naus CC, Nicholson BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing
University School of Oncology, Da-Hong-Luo-Chang Street, Western District,
Beijing 100034, People's Republic of China. zqzhang@public3.bta.net.cn

The dysfunction of homologous and/or heterologous gap junctional intercellular
communication (GJIC) has been implicated in tumorigenesis of many kinds of cells.
Here we have characterized GJIC and the expression of connexins in six human lung
carcinoma cell lines and normal lung fibroblasts (HLF). Compared with HLF, all
the carcinoma cells showed reduced or little homologous GJIC. They expressed
remarkably reduced connexin(Cx)43 mRNA and variable levels of Cx45 mRNA, but
neither Cx43 nor Cx45 protein could be detected. However, using a preloading
assay, transfer of calcein was observed between donor HLF cells and first order
neighboring recipient tumor cells (recipient cells in 1000-fold excess). Transfer
from tumor to HLF cells under the same conditions was not seen, although
increasing the ratio of donor tumor cells to recipient HLF cells and plating the 
cells at low density did reveal weak transfer from tumor cells to HLF.
Transfection of Cx43 into giant cell carcinoma PG cells increased homologous
communication and eliminated the rectifying behavior of heterologous
communication. This indicates that the apparent rectification of dye transfer
between normal and tumor cells was a product of low rates of heterologous
transfer linked to (i) rapid dilution of the dye to below detectable limits
through a very well coupled cell population (tumor to HLF) and (ii) concentration
of dye in immediate neighbors in a poorly coupled cell population (HLF to tumor
cells). These results suggest that the coupling levels may need to exceed a
certain threshold to allow propagation of signals over a sufficient distance to
affect behavior of a cell population. We propose that the relative rates of
heterologous and homologous coupling of cell populations and the 'pool size' of
shared metabolites in tumor cells and the surrounding normal tissue are likely to
be very important in the regulation of their growth.

PMID: 14656943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Int J Cancer. 2004 Jan 1;108(1):41-6.

Growth arrest by troglitazone is mediated by p27Kip1 accumulation, which results 
from dual inhibition of proteasome activity and Skp2 expression in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Motomura W(1), Takahashi N, Nagamine M, Sawamukai M, Tanno S, Kohgo Y, Okumura T.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa,
Japan.

In our study, we examined whether human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) expresses 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and the effects of
PPAR gamma activation by its selective ligands on cell growth and cell invasion
in HCC cells. RT-PCR and Western blot analysis revealed that HCC-derived cell
lines, HepG2 and HLF, express PPARgamma mRNA and protein. Luciferase assay in HLF
cells showed that troglitazone, a selective ligand for PPAR gamma, transactivated
the transcription of a peroxisome proliferator response element-driven promoter
in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting that the expressed PPARgamma functions as 
a transcriptional factor. Not only troglitazone but pioglitazone dose-dependently
inhibited cell growth in HepG2 and HLF cells. Invasion assay using a transwell
chamber demonstrated that troglitazone also inhibited cell invasion in HCC cells.
To examine the mechanism of the troglitazone-induced growth inhibition, we
determined p27(Kip1), a cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor, expression by Western 
blot analysis in troglitazone-treated HLF cells. Troglitazone increased p27(Kip1)
in time- and dose-dependent manners, suggesting that p27(Kip1) may be involved in
the growth inhibition by troglitazone in HLF cells. To further examine the
mechanism of the troglitazone-induced p27(Kip1) protein accumulation, 2 major
systems for regulation of p27(Kip1) protein, proteasome activity and Skp2, an
F-box protein that targets p27(Kip1) for degradation, were evaluated.
Troglitazone potently inhibited proteasome activity and decreased Skp2 protein
levels. All these results suggest that human HCC cells express functional PPAR
gamma and PPARgamma activation resulted in growth inhibition. The growth
inhibition was mediated by p27(Kip1) accumulation, which is induced by both
inhibition of ubiquitylation of p27(Kip1) and reduction of degradation activity
of p27Kip1 by proteasome.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14618613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Br J Haematol. 2003 Nov;123(4):577-85.

Apoptosis and leukaemia.

Brady HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, London, UK. H.Brady@ich.ucl.ac.uk

PMID: 14616959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Int J Oncol. 2003 Dec;23(6):1575-83.

Activation of Galectin-1 gene in human hepatocellular carcinoma involves
methylation-sensitive complex formations at the transcriptional upstream and
downstream elements.

Kondoh N(1), Hada A, Ryo A, Shuda M, Arai M, Matsubara O, Kimura F, Wakatsuki T, 
Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry II, National Defense Medical College, Saitama
359-8513, Japan.

The expression of Galectin-1 (Gal-1) mRNA was activated in primary hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCCs) compared to matched non-tumorous liver tissues. To elucidate
the mechanism of Gal-1 activation in HCC cells, DNA methylation encompassing the 
transcriptional start site (-165/+151) was examined. Among 12 CpG dinucleotides
on both DNA strands, those at positions -116, -109, -52, -41, -36, +35 and +43
were preferentially methylated in non-tumorous liver tissue, while hypomethylated
in the matched HCC tissue. Transient transfection of a series of deleted GAL-1
promoters revealed that both an upstream (-57/-31) and a downstream (+10/+57)
elements accounted for efficient promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay of the upstream element (-63/-30) using nuclear extracts from three
HCC cell lines (HLF, HuH7 and HepG2) and normal liver cells revealed at least two
complexes (alpha and (beta) interacted with the upstream element in all of the
nuclear extracts. Competition experiments revealed that the complex beta
preferentially attached to the upstream element harboring unmethylated CpGs. On
the other hand, at least three complexes (I, II and III) interacted with the
downstream element in all of the nuclear extracts. Competition experiments
revealed that complex I specifically attached to the downstream element harboring
unmethylated CpG at +35. Furthermore, a DNase I protection assay revealed that a 
methylation-associated conformational alteration occurred near the CpG site at
+35 in HLF cells. Thus, the specific interaction of methylation-sensitive factors
to the upstream and downstream elements may be essential for the activation of
the Gal-1 gene in HCC cells.

PMID: 14612929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 1;63(19):6282-9.

Relationship between elevated FX expression and increased production of
GDP-L-fucose, a common donor substrate for fucosylation in human hepatocellular
carcinoma and hepatoma cell lines.

Noda K(1), Miyoshi E, Gu J, Gao CX, Nakahara S, Kitada T, Honke K, Suzuki K,
Yoshihara H, Yoshikawa K, Kawano K, Tonetti M, Kasahara A, Hori M, Hayashi N,
Taniguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Division of Molecular Therapy Science, Osaka
University, Graduate School of Medicine, 1-7 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan.

The levels of fucosylated glycoproteins in various cancers and inflammatory
processes have been a subject of intense study. The level of fucosyltransferases 
and intracellular GDP-L-fucose, a sugar nucleotide and a common donor substrate
for all fucosyltransferases, may regulate the level of fucosylated glycoproteins.
This study reports on the determination of GDP-L-fucose levels in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and surrounding tissues, using a recently
established high-throughput assay system. Levels of GDP-L-fucose in HCC tissues
were significantly increased compared with adjacent nontumor tissues or normal
livers. The mean +/- SD for GDP-L-fucose level was 3.6 +/- 0.2 micro mol/mg in
control liver, 4.6 +/- 0.9 micro mol/mg in adjacent noninvolved liver tissues
(chronic hepatitis, 4.4 +/- 0.7 micro mol/mg; liver cirrhosis, 4.8 +/- 0.9 micro 
mol/mg), and 7.1 +/- 2.5 micro mol/mg in HCC tissues. The level of GDP-L-fucose
in HCC decreased in proportion with tumor size (r = -0.675, P = 0.0002). When
expression of the series of genes responsible for GDP-L-fucose synthesis was
investigated, the gene expression of FX was found to be increased in 70% (7 of
10) of the HCC tissues examined compared with that in their surrounding tissues. 
The levels of GDP-L-fucose were positively correlated with the expression of FX
mRNA (r = 0.599, P = 0.0074). The levels of FX gene expression in some human
hepatoma and hepatocyte cell lines were determined. FX mRNA production was
strongly increased in HepG2 and Chang liver, moderately increased in Hep3B and
HLF, and, in HLE, was similar to that of a normal human liver tissue. To
investigate the effect of GDP-L-fucose on core fucosylation, FX cDNA was
transfected into Hep3B cells, which express a relatively low level of
GDP-L-fucose:N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminide alpha1-6 fucosyltransferase (alpha1-6 
FucT) and FX mRNA. Transfection of this gene caused an increase in GDP-L-fucose
levels as well as the extent of fucosylation on glycoproteins, including
alpha-fetoprotein, as judged by reactivity to lectins. Collectively, the results 
herein suggest that the high level of fucosylation in HCC is dependent on a high 
expression of FX followed by increases in GDP-L-fucose, as well as an enhancement
in alpha1-6 FucT expression. Thus, an elevation in GDP-L-fucose levels and the
up-regulation of FX expression represent potential markers for HCC.

PMID: 14559815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2003 Oct;59(Pt 10):1773-81. Epub 2003 Sep
19.

Structure of diferric hen serum transferrin at 2.8 A resolution.

Guha Thakurta P(1), Choudhury D, Dasgupta R, Dattagupta JK.

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography and Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700 064, India.

Hen serum transferrin in its diferric form (hST) has been isolated, purified and 
the three-dimensional structure determined by X-ray crystallography at 2.8 A
resolution. The final refined structure of hST, comprising 5232 protein atoms,
two Fe(3+) cations, two CO(3)(2-) anions, 54 water molecules and one fucose
moiety, has an R factor of 21.5% and an R(free) of 26.9% for all data. The
structure has been compared with the three-dimensional structure of hen
ovotransferrin (hOT) and also with structures of some other transferrins, viz.
rabbit serum transferrin (rST) and human lactoferrin (hLF). The overall
conformation of the hST molecule is essentially the same as that of other
transferrins. However, the relative orientation of the two lobes, which is
related to the species-specific receptor-recognition property of transferrins,
has been found to be different in hST from that in hOT, rST and hLF. On the basis
of superposition of the N lobes, rotations of 5.8, 16.9 and 11.3 degrees are
required to bring the C lobes of hOT, rST and hLF, respectively, into coincidence
with that of hST. A number of additional hydrogen bonds between the two domains
in the N and C lobes have been identified in the structure of hST compared with
that of hOT, which indicate a greater compactness of the lobes of hST than those 
of hOT. Being products of the same gene, hST and hOT have 100% sequence identity 
and differ only in the attached carbohydrate moiety. On the other hand, despite
having similar functions, hST and rST have only 51% sequence similarity. However,
the nature of the interdomain interactions of hST are closer to rST than to hOT. 
A putative carbohydrate-binding site has been identified in the N lobe of hST at 
Asn52 and a fucose molecule could be modelled at the site. The variations in
interdomain and interlobe interactions in hST, together with altered lobe
orientation with respect to hOT, rST and hLF, which are the representatives of
the other subfamily of transferrins, are discussed.

PMID: 14501117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Jul 25;83(14):1274-7.

[Construction and identification of a tumor-specific expression vector driven by 
human telomerase reserve transcriptase gene promotor].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin JJ(1), Hu X, Fu PF, Yuan XD, Zhang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The 4th Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct the tumor-specific expression vector driven by human
telomerase reserve transcriptase gene promotor.
METHODS: The fragment of the enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) gene was
PCR amplified from the pEGFP-N1 plasmid and cloned into the multiple cloning site
of pLNCX vector, and the recombinant was named as pLNCX-EGFP. The fragment of
human telomerase reserve transcriptase gene promoter was amplified from the human
genome by using the human telomerase reserve transcriptase gene specific primers,
and cloned into the pLNCX-EGFP vector, where the cytomegalovirus promoter was
previously removed using restriction enzymes, in sense orientation relative to
the green fluorescent protein coding sequence. Then the expression vector
pLNT-EGFP under the control of the human telomerase reserve transcriptase gene
promoter, containing green fluorescent protein reporter gene, was successfully
constructed. To detect the transcriptional activity of the human telomerase
reserve transcriptase gene promoter, transient transfection of this specific
expression vector into HLF cell lines with high telomerase activity and WI38 cell
lines without telomerase activity was performed.
RESULTS: The expression vector proven by restriction enzymes digestion and
sequencing was in correspondence with the design. The results of transient
transfection showed that the pLNT-EGFP vector could highly expressed green
fluorescent protein reporter gene in telomerase-positive cells, but not in
telomerase-negative cells.
CONCLUSION: A tumor-specific expression vector driven by human telomerase reserve
transcriptase gene promotor has been successfully constructed.

PMID: 12930647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2003 May;37(3):183-5.

[Effects of hydroquinone on DNA and nucleus damage in human embryo lung
fibroblasts].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang GF(1), Zhuang ZX, Liu QZ, He Y, Du LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Toxicology, Center for Disease Control and Prevention of 
Shenzhen City, Shenzhen 518020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study DNA and nucleus damage in human embryo lung fibroblast (HLF) 
exposed to hydroquinone (HQ) and its genotoxicity.
METHODS: HLF were treated with HQ (0, 10, 20, 40, 80 micro mol/L, respectively)
for 3 h and DNA damage was detected by comet assay. HLF was also treated with the
same concentrations of HQ for 1 h and micronucleus test was performed after they 
were cultured for 24 h.
RESULTS: Comet assay showed that percentage of cells with tails in each groups
treated with varied doses of HQ was 12%, 19%, 42%, 79% and 95%, respectively,
with mean tail length of 7.87, 9.35, 11.03, 19.28 and 23.32 micro m,
respectively, in an obvious dose-dependent manner (P < 0.05). Very significant
increase in percentage of cells with tails and length of their comet tail were
observed in those groups treated with HQ of 20, 40 and 80 micro mol/L (P < 0.01).
And, proportion of high and severe DNA damage increased with dose of HQ. HQ could
also induce formation of micronucleus and abnormal nucleus in all groups treated 
by varied doses of HQ, with rates of micronucleus and abnormal nucleus of 2%, 3%,
10%, 9% and 15%, and 6%, 7%, 16%, 27% and 28%, respectively, in a significant
dose-dependent manner. There was significant increase in rates of micronuclei and
abnormal nuclei in cells treated with HQ at doses of 20, 40 and 80 micro mol/L (P
< 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to HQ could cause DNA and nucleus damage inducing genotoxic
effects on HLF.

PMID: 12880565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Microbiology. 2003 Jul;149(Pt 7):1729-37.

Bacterial lactoferrin-binding protein A binds to both domains of the human
lactoferrin C-lobe.

Wong H(1), Schryvers AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Calgary, Rm 274, Heritage Medical Research Building, 3330 Hospital 
Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Pathogenic bacteria in the family Neisseriaceae express surface receptors to
acquire iron from the mammalian iron-binding proteins. Transferrins and
lactoferrins constitute a family of iron-binding proteins highly related in both 
sequence and structure, yet the bacterial receptors are able to distinguish
between these proteins and uphold a strict binding specificity. In order to
understand the molecular basis for this specificity, the interaction between
human lactoferrin (hLf) and the lactoferrin-binding protein A (LbpA) from
Moraxella catarrhalis was studied. A periplasmic expression system was designed
for the heterologous expression of LbpA, which enabled the investigation of its
binding activity in the absence of lactoferrin-binding protein B (LbpB). To
facilitate delineation of the LbpA-binding regions of hLf, chimeric proteins
composed of hLf and bovine transferrin were made. Binding studies performed with 
the chimeric proteins and recombinant LbpA identified two binding regions within 
the C-terminus of hLf. Furthermore, native LbpA from Moraxella and Neisseria spp.
bound the identical spectrum of hybrid proteins as the recombinant receptor,
demonstrating a conserved binding interaction with the C-lobe of hLf.

PMID: 12855724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Blood. 2003 Sep 1;102(5):1634-40. Epub 2003 May 15.

The HIF family member EPAS1/HIF-2alpha is required for normal hematopoiesis in
mice.

Scortegagna M(1), Morris MA, Oktay Y, Bennett M, Garcia JA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Internal
Medicine, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Hypoxic stress plays a role in pathophysiologic states such as myocardial
infarction and cerebral vascular events as well as in normal physiologic
conditions including development and hematopoiesis. Members of the hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF) family function as transcriptional regulators of genes
involved in the hypoxic response. After generating adult mice that globally lack 
endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1, also known as HIF-2alpha/HRF/HLF/MOP3), 
the second member of the HIF family, characterization of the hematopoietic cell
population indicated that the loss of EPAS1/HIF-2alpha resulted in pancytopenia. 
Using bone marrow reconstitution experiments of lethally irradiated hosts, we
have defined the extent and site of hematopoietic impairment in the
EPAS1/HIF-2alpha null mice. These data suggest a critical role for
EPAS1/HIF-2alpha in maintaining a functional microenvironment in the bone marrow 
for effective hematopoiesis.

PMID: 12750163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Front Biosci. 2003 May 1;8:s206-22.

E2A basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors in human leukemia.

LeBrun DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
lebrun@cliff.path.queensu.ca

The gene E2A on chromosome 19 is involved in recurrent chromosomal rearrangements
associated with pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The resulting fusion of
5' E2A sequences with 3' portions of other genes leads to the expression of two
well-characterized fusion proteins: E2A-PBX1 and E2A-HLF. Since the E2A, PBX1 and
HLF proteins all appear to function as transcription factors, it appears likely
that the oncogenic fusion proteins contribute to leukemia development by causing 
abnormal transcriptional regulation of key target genes. Furthermore, since the
E2A portion of the fusion proteins contains transcriptional activation domains,
and the PBX1 and HLF portions contain DNA binding domains, leukemogenesis may be 
due, at least in part, to excessive transcriptional induction of target genes
defined by PBX1 or HLF. However, recent findings suggest that this model is
simplistic and possibly incorrect. In this article, I review the evidence
pertaining to leukemogenesis by the well-characterized E2A-fusion proteins and
consider its mechanistic implications.

PMID: 12700034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2003;8(1):41-8.

Characterization of the human lactoferrin (HLF) cell line HLFK1, generated in CBA
mice.

Kocieba M(1), Zimecki M, Chodaczek G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapy, Institute of Immunology and Experimental
Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, Weigla 12, 53-114 Wroclaw, Poland.

A human lactoferrin-specific cell line was generated in CBA mice, sensitized with
200 microg HLF in Freund's complete adjuvant. HLFK1 cells derived from the lymph 
nodes of these mice were maintained using HLF as the antigen. HLF was added at
the beginning of each 14-day restimulation cycle, at a concentration of 100
microg/ml. The presentation of the antigen to HLFK1 was demonstrated using
glass-adherent lymphocytes from spleens (GAL) as the antigen-presenting cells
(APC). The presentation of HLF by GAL was highly efficient; a very low
concentration of the antigen (1 microg/ml) was enough to stimulate proliferation 
of the HLFK1 cell line. HLFK1 did not proliferate in the presence of ovalbumin or
bovine lactoferrin (BLF), which is structurally related to HLF. However, we found
that BLF caused a reduction in the proliferation of the HLFK1 cell line when BLF 
was added to the cultures together with the antigen - (HLF). On the other hand,
proliferation of the HLFK1 cell line was not inhibited by pretreatment of the
antigen-presenting cells or T cells with BLF. Therefore, we suggest that bovine
lactoferrin may interfere with the binding or uptake of the antigen (HLF).
Alternatively, BLF may nonspecifically inhibit the activation of the HLFK1 cell
line.

PMID: 12655355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):4757-64. Epub 2003 Feb 27.

A PAR domain transcription factor is involved in the expression from a
hematopoietic-specific promoter for the human LMO2 gene.

Crable SC(1), Anderson KP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH, USA.

The transcription factor LMO2 is believed to exert its effect through the
formation of protein-protein interactions with other DNA-binding factors such as 
GATA-1 and TAL1. Although LMO2 has been shown to be critical for the formation of
the erythroid cell lineage, the gene is also expressed in a number of
nonerythroid tissues. In this report, we demonstrate that the more distal of the 
2 promoters for the LMO2 gene is highly restricted in its pattern of expression, 
directing the hematopoietic-specific expression of this gene. Deletion and
mutation analyses have identified a critical cis element in the first
untranslated exon of the gene. This element is a consensus-binding site for a
small family of basic leucine zipper proteins containing a proline and acidic
amino acid-rich (PAR) domain. Although all 3 members of this family are produced 
in erythroid cells, only 2 of these proteins, thyrotroph embryonic factor and
hepatic leukemia factor, can activate transcription from this LMO2 promoter
element. These findings represent a novel mechanism in erythroid gene regulation 
because PAR proteins have not previously been implicated in this process.

PMID: 12609830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. EMBO J. 2003 Mar 3;22(5):1134-46.

HLF/HIF-2alpha is a key factor in retinopathy of prematurity in association with 
erythropoietin.

Morita M(1), Ohneda O, Yamashita T, Takahashi S, Suzuki N, Nakajima O, Kawauchi
S, Ema M, Shibahara S, Udono T, Tomita K, Tamai M, Sogawa K, Yamamoto M,
Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Aoba, 
Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8578, Japan.

An HLF (HIF-1alpha-like factor)/HIF-2alpha-knockout mouse is embryonic lethal,
preventing investigation of HLF function in adult mice. To investigate the role
of HLF in adult pathological angiogenesis, we generated HLF-knockdown
(HLF(kd/kd)) mice by inserting a neomycin gene sandwiched between two loxP
sequences into exon 1 of the HLF gene. HLF(kd/kd) mice expressing 80-20%
reduction, depending on the tissue, in wild-type HLF mRNA were fertile and
apparently normal. Hyperoxia-normoxia treatment, used as a murine model of
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), induced neovascularization in wild-type mice,
but not in HLF(kd/kd) mice, whereas prolonged normoxia following hyperoxic
treatment caused degeneration of retinal neural layers in HLF(kd/kd) mice due to 
poor vascularization. Cre-mediated removal of the inserted gene recovered normal 
HLF expression and retinal neovascularization in HLF(kd/kd) mice. Expression
levels of various angiogenic factors revealed that only erythropoietin (Epo) gene
expression was significantly affected, in parallel with HLF expression. Together 
with the results from intraperitoneal injection of Epo into HLF(kd/kd) mouse,
this suggests that Epo is one of the target genes of HLF responsible for
experimental ROP.

PMCID: PMC150350
PMID: 12606578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003 Feb;2(2):199-205.

Relevance network between chemosensitivity and transcriptome in human hepatoma
cells.

Moriyama M(1), Hoshida Y, Otsuka M, Nishimura S, Kato N, Goto T, Taniguchi H,
Shiratori Y, Seki N, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. moriyamamint@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Generally, hepatoma is not a chemosensitive tumor, and the mechanism of
resistance to anticancer drugs is not fully elucidated. We aimed to
comprehensively evaluate the relationship between chemosensitivity and gene
expression profile in human hepatoma cells, by using microarray analysis, and
analyze the data by constructing relevance networks. In eight hepatoma cell lines
(HLE, HLF, Huh7, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5, SK-Hep1, Huh6, and HepG2), the baseline
expression levels of 2300 genes were measured by cDNA microarray. The
concentrations of eight anticancer drugs (nimustine, mitomycin C, cisplatin,
carboplatin, doxorubicin, epirubicin, mitoxantrone, and 5-fluorouracil) needed
for 50% growth inhibition were examined and used as a measure of
chemosensitivity. These data were combined and comprehensive pair-wise
correlations between gene expression levels and the 50% growth inhibition values 
were calculated. Significant correlations with significance were used to
construct networks of similarity. Fifty-two relations, including 42 genes, were
selected. Among them, nearly 20% were various types of transporters, and most of 
them negatively correlated with chemosensitivity. Transporter associated with
antigen processing 1 was associated with resistance to mitoxantrone, consistent
with previous reports. Other transporters were not reported previously to
associate with chemosensitivity. Resistance to doxorubicin and its analogue,
epirubicin, were positively correlated with topoisomerase II beta expression,
whereas it negatively correlated with expression of carboxypeptidases A3 and Z.
Response to nimustine was associated with expression of superoxide dismutase 2.
Relevance networks identified several negative correlations between gene
expression and resistance, which were missed by hierarchical clustering. Our
results suggested the necessity of systematically evaluating the transporting
systems that may play a major role in resistance in hepatoma. This may provide
useful information to modify anticancer drug action in hepatoma.

PMID: 12589037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003 Jun;284(6):L955-63. Epub 2003 Jan 24.

Cigarette smoke extract induces oxidative stress and apoptosis in human lung
fibroblasts.

Carnevali S(1), Petruzzelli S, Longoni B, Vanacore R, Barale R, Cipollini M,
Scatena F, Paggiaro P, Celi A, Giuntini C.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Unit, Cardiothoracic Department, Pharmacology Unit, University of
Pisa, 56124 Pisa, Italy. carnevali.stefano@unimo.it

Cigarette smoke is a mixture of chemicals having direct and/or indirect toxic
effects on different lung cells. We investigated the effect of cigarette smoke on
human lung fibroblasts (HFL-1) oxidation and apoptosis. Cells were exposed to
various concentrations (1, 5, and 10%) of cigarette smoke extract (CSE) for 3 h, 
and oxidative stress and apoptosis were assessed by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting and confocal laser fluorescence microscopy. Both oxidative stress and
apoptosis exhibited a dose-response relationship with CSE concentrations. Lung
fibroblasts also showed marked DNA fragmentation at the Comet assay after
exposure to 10% CSE. Coincubation of HLF-1 cells with N-acetylcysteine (1 mM)
during CSE exposure significantly reduced oxidative stress, apoptosis, and DNA
fragmentation, whereas preincubation (3 h) with the glutathione-depleting agent
buthionine sulfoximine (125 microM) produced a significant increase of oxidative 
stress. Cigarette smoke is a potent source of oxidative stress, DNA damage, and
apoptosis for HFL-1 cells, and we speculate that this could contribute to the
development of pulmonary emphysema in the lungs of smokers.

PMID: 12547733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Scand J Immunol. 2003 Jan;57(1):2-10.

Anti-inflammatory activities of human lactoferrin in acute dextran
sulphate-induced colitis in mice.

Håversen LA(1), Baltzer L, Dolphin G, Hanson LA, Mattsby-Baltzer I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Bacteriology, University of Göteborg, Sweden.
liliana.ceafalau@mirobio.gu.se

In this study, we investigated the anti-inflammatory effects of orally
administered human lactoferrin (hLF) and two peptides, based on the bactericidal 
region of hLF (HLD1 and HLD2), on the course of experimental colitis. Acute
colitis was induced in C57Bl/6 mice by giving 5% dextran sulphate (DX) in the
drinking water. The mice were killed after 2 or 7 days of DX exposure. The
animals were given hLF or the peptides orally twice a day (2 mg/dose/mouse)
during the DX exposure. In the control animals, the hLF or the peptides were
replaced by bovine serum albumin or water. The appearance of occult blood in the 
faeces and macroscopic rectal bleeding were significantly delayed and partly
reduced in the hLF-treated animals compared with the control animals. The
shortening of the colon, a pathological effect of DX exposure, was significantly 
less pronounced in the hLF-treated group compared with the control group. Also,
the interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) levels in the blood were significantly
diminished in this group after 2 days of DX exposure. A significantly lower crypt
score was observed in the distal part of the colon in the hLF-treated group
compared with the control group. Also, significantly reduced numbers of CD4
cells, F4/80-positive macrophages and tumour necrosis factor-alpha-producing
cells were detected by immunohistochemistry in the distal colon of the
hLF-treated animals compared with the control animals after 7 days of DX
exposure. A reduction was also observed concerning the IL-10-producing cells in
the middle colonic submucosa. The HLD1 and HLD2 treatment, which was carried out 
for 2 days, only gave results almost identical to those of hLF, concerning
clinical parameters after the 2 days of DX exposure. An even stronger effect was 
observed for HLD2, regarding decreased occult blood in the faeces and colon
length. Our results show that perorally given hLF mediates anti-inflammatory
effects on the DX-induced acute colitis, and further suggest that the
bactericidal region of the hLF molecule may be involved in these activities.

PMID: 12542792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2000 Jul;29(4):237-9.

[Protection of beta-carotene and vitamin C on the transformation of human lung
fibroblasts cell induced by nickel sesquioxide].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang J(1), Liu Y, Zhang J, Zhu S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Tongji University, Shanghai 200070, China.

In order to study the protection of beta-carotene and vitamin C against the
transformation of human lung fibroblasts (HLF) cell induced by nickel
sesquioxide, HLF cells were treated repeatedly by different concentrations of
Ni2O3 in vitro. beta-carotene (5.4 mg/L) and vitamin C(1.8 mg/L) were added into 
the media containing Ni2O3(1.0 mg/L) respectively. The identification of
malignancy of the transformation of HLF cell was carried out by the tests of ConA
and the growth on semisolid agar culture. The results showed that Ni2O3 could
induce the malignant transformation of HLF cell. The transformed cell
proliferated rapidly. The transformed colonies exhibited in extensively random
orientation and the cells were crossingover. The frequency of transformation
showed a dose-response relation at the experimental concentrations. The
transformed cell could be agglutinated by lower concentration of ConA and could
grow in semisolid agar. The frequencies of transformation of HLF cell exposed to 
beta-carotene and vitamin C were decreased significantly. The cells could not be 
agglutinated by ConA and not grow in semisolid agar. It was concluded that Ni2O3 
could induce strongly the malignant transformation of HLF cell and might be
carcinogenic to human. The protection of beta-carotene and vitamin C on the
transformation of HLF cell induced by Ni2O3 was observed. The increase of foods
riched in beta-carotene and vitamin C was suggested for workers exposed to
nickel.

PMID: 12520930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2003 Jan;47(1):262-7.

Synergistic activity of the N-terminal peptide of human lactoferrin and
fluconazole against Candida species.

Lupetti A(1), Paulusma-Annema A, Welling MM, Dogterom-Ballering H, Brouwer CP,
Senesi S, Van Dissel JT, Nibbering PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.

In light of the need for new antifungal regimens, we report that at
noncandidacidal concentrations, the lactoferrin-derived peptide hLF(1-11), which 
is highly active against fluconazole-resistant Candida albicans, acts
synergistically with fluconazole against this yeast and a fluconazole-sensitive
C. albicans strain as well as C. glabrata, C. krusei, C. parapsilosis, and C.
tropicalis. When these yeasts were exposed to hLF(1-11) for 5 min and then
incubated with fluconazole, they were killed effectively, while no candidacidal
activity was observed when they were incubated first with fluconazole and then
exposed to the peptide, indicating that the candidacidal activity is initiated by
the peptide while fluconazole is only required during the effector phase.
Investigations of the effect of azide, which inhibits mitochondrial respiration, 
on the activity of combinations of hLF(1-11) and fluconazole against
fluconazole-resistant C. albicans revealed that it inhibits this activity, even
when added during the effector phase only. As expected, azide inhibited the
accumulation of rhodamine 123 in mitochondria and the production and release of
ATP by C. albicans that occurred upon exposure to the combination of hLF(1-11)
and fluconazole. Accordingly, oxidized ATP (oATP), an antagonist of ATP
receptors, completely blocked the candidacidal activity of the
hLF(1-11)-fluconazole combination, whereas oATP did not block the activity when
its presence was restricted to the effector phase. The candidacidal activity of
combinations of hLF(1-11) and fluconazole, which is initiated by the peptide
through the involvement of energized mitochondria, renders fluconazole-resistant 
C. albicans sensitive to this azole.

PMCID: PMC149030
PMID: 12499200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Biochem J. 2003 Mar 15;370(Pt 3):771-84.

Genomic organization and transcriptional analysis of the human l-glutaminase
gene.

Pérez-Gómez C(1), Matés JM, Gómez-Fabre PM, del Castillo-Olivares A, Alonso FJ,
Márquez J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica, Laboratorio de Química de
Proteínas, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain.

In mammals, glutaminase (GA) is expressed in most tissues, but the regulation of 
organ-specific expression is largely unknown. Therefore, as an essential step
towards studying the regulation of GA expression, the human liver-type GA (hLGA) 
gene has been characterized. LGA genomic sequences were isolated using the genome
walking technique. Analysis and comparison of these sequences with two LGA cDNA
clones and the Human Genome Project database, allowed the determination of the
genomic organization of the LGA gene. The gene has 18 exons and is approx. 18 kb 
long. All exon/intron junction sequences conform to the GT/AG rule. Progressive
deletion analysis of LGA promoter-luciferase constructs indicated that the core
promoter is located between nt -141 and +410, with several potential regulatory
elements: CAAT, GC, TATA-like, Ras-responsive element binding protein and
specificity protein 1 (Sp1) sites. The minimal promoter was mapped within +107
and +410, where only an Sp1 binding site is present. Mutation experiments
suggested that two CAAT recognition elements near the transcription-initiation
site (-138 and -87), play a crucial role for optimal promoter activity.
Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays confirmed the importance of CAAT- and
TATA-like boxes to enhance basal transcription, and demonstrated that HNF-1 motif
is a significant distal element for transcriptional regulation of the hLGA gene.

PMCID: PMC1223212
PMID: 12444921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Cancer Cell. 2002 Oct;2(4):279-88.

Slug, a highly conserved zinc finger transcriptional repressor, protects
hematopoietic progenitor cells from radiation-induced apoptosis in vivo.

Inoue A(1), Seidel MG, Wu W, Kamizono S, Ferrando AA, Bronson RT, Iwasaki H,
Akashi K, Morimoto A, Hitzler JK, Pestina TI, Jackson CW, Tanaka R, Chong MJ,
McKinnon PJ, Inukai T, Grosveld GC, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2002 Oct;2(4):249-51.

We show here that a zinc finger transcriptional repressor, Slug, which is
aberrantly upregulated by the E2A-HLF oncoprotein in pro-B cell acute leukemia,
functions as an antiapoptotic factor in normal hematopoietic progenitor cells.
Slug(-/-) mice were much more radiosensitive than wild-type mice, dying earlier
and showing accentuated decreases in peripheral blood cell counts, as well as
abundant microhemorrhages and widely disseminated bacterial microabscesses
throughout the body. Slug expression was detected in diverse subsets of
hematopoietic progenitors, but not in more differentiated B and T lymphoid cells,
and there was a significant increase in apoptotic (TUNEL-positive) bone marrow
progenitor cells in irradiated Slug(-/-) mice compared to wild-type controls.
These results implicate Slug in a novel survival pathway that protects
hematopoietic progenitors from apoptosis after DNA damage.

PMID: 12398892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Cancer Cell. 2002 Oct;2(4):249-51.

SLUGging away at cell death.

Becker MW(1), Clarke MF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2002 Oct;2(4):279-88.

Programmed cell death (PCD) plays an important role in normal and malignant
hematopoieis. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Inoue et al. (2002) demonstrate that 
the CED-1 homolog, Slug, is a key regulator of apoptosis in the response of early
hematopoietic progenitors to gamma radiation.

PMID: 12398886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Hepatogastroenterology. 2002 Nov-Dec;49(48):1639-44.

Antisense oligonucleotides of hepatoma-derived growth factor (HDGF) suppress the 
proliferation of hepatoma cells.

Kishima Y(1), Yoshida K, Enomoto H, Yamamoto M, Kuroda T, Okuda Y, Uyama H,
Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yamada-oka 2-2, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Human hepatoma-derived growth factor, purified from the
conditioned medium of hepatoma-derived cell line, HuH-7, stimulates the growth of
Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts and HuH-7 cells. To evaluate the role of hepatoma-derived
growth factor on the growth of hepatoma cells, we investigated the effects of
recombinant hepatoma-derived growth factor protein and hepatoma-derived growth
factor antisense oligonucleotides on the proliferation of several hepatoma cell
lines.
METHODOLOGY: We examined the effects of hepatoma-derived growth factor antisense 
oligonucleotides on the growth of hepatoma cells by cell growth assay.
RESULTS: Hepatoma-derived growth factor stimulated the proliferation of some
hepatoma cells (HuH-7, HLF, HepG2, AH66tc cells) about 15-70% over than the
control. Hepatoma-derived growth factor antisense oligonucleotides,
phosphorothioate-linked or encapsulated in liposome, can inhibit the growth of
hepatoma cells. The ID50 of hepatoma-derived growth factor antisense
phosphorothioate oligonucleotides for HuH-7 cells, in which hepatoma-derived
growth factor expression was abundant, was 3 microM by the assay of cell
proliferation and [3H]-thymidine incorporation. Their ID50 for AH66tc cells, on
which the effects of exogenous hepatoma-derived growth factor were weak, was
higher than 10 microM. To omit the toxic effects due to phosphorothioate
modification of oligonucleotides and keep the cellular uptake more without their 
destruction in the culture medium, we used oligonucleotides encapsulated in
cationic liposome. Hepatoma-derived growth factor antisense oligonucleotides
encapsulated in liposome suppressed the growth of hepatoma cells effectively
(ID50:2.0 microM).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that hepatoma-derived growth factor is one of
important autocrine, and/or intracrine factors for hepatoma cells, and that
hepatoma-derived growth factor anti-sense oligonucleotides may be useful for
human hepatocellular carcinoma as an anti-cancer agent.

PMID: 12397753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biotechniques. 2002 Oct;Suppl:92-4, 96-7.

Isolation of acetylcholinesterase from apoptotic human lung fibroblast cells by
antibody affinity chromatography.

Jin QH(1), Shi YF, He HY, Ng KK, Jiang H, Yang L, Jiang ZQ, Zhang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai.

Acetylcholinesterase (AChE; EC3.1.1.7) is well known for its role in the
hydrolysis of acetylcholine at cholinergic synapses to terminate
neurotransmission. In addition to its synaptic presence, AChE has been found to
be in non-cholinergic cells such as hematopoietic and osteogenic cells. We have
recently reported that AChE is expressed in various cells undergoing apoptosis.
To characterize AChE in apoptotic cells and to investigate the role of AChE
expression in apoptosis, we devised a method to purify AChE expressed in
apoptotic human lung fibroblast cell line HLF. The isolation of this enzyme is
mainly based on inhibitor ligand affinity chromatography using immobilized
tacrine. However, this method is only effective in isolating active AChE. Here we
employed antibody-based chromatography and found that both active and inactive
AChE were present in apoptotic HLF cells. Active AChE was predominantly observed 
in the nuclei of apoptotic cells, while inactive AChE was mainly present in the
cytoplasm. Therefore, our method provides an opportunity to investigate further
the role of AChE, especially inactive AChE, in apoptosis.

PMID: 12395932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Hepatology. 2002 Nov;36(5):1115-24.

Synergistic induction of apoptosis by acyclic retinoid and interferon-beta in
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Obora A(1), Shiratori Y, Okuno M, Adachi S, Takano Y, Matsushima-Nishiwaki R,
Yasuda I, Yamada Y, Akita K, Sano T, Shimada J, Kojima S, Okano Y, Friedman SL,
Moriwaki H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Pathobiochemistry,
Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan.

Acyclic retinoid, a synthetic retinoid analog, as well as interferon alfa
(IFN-alpha) and IFN-beta induce apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells
and are used clinically in the prevention of HCC. Here, we show that acyclic
retinoid acts synergistically with IFNs in suppressing the growth and inducing
apoptosis (as characterized by DNA fragmentation and chromatin condensation) in 5
human HCC cell lines (JHH7, HuH7, PLC/PRF/5, HLE, and HLF). This synergism was
only observed when cells were pretreated with the acyclic retinoid, whereas
natural retinoic acids (all-trans and 9-cis retinoic acid) were ineffective. This
promotion may be due to up-regulation of type 1 IFN receptor (IFNR) expression by
the retinoid. Accordingly, incubation with antitype 1 IFNR antibody abolished the
synergy. Enhanced IFNR expression was accompanied by increased expression and
DNA-binding activity of STAT1, an intracellular signal transducing molecule of
IFNR, and increased induction of 2', 5'-oligoadenyl-5'-triphosphate synthetase,
which is a target gene of STAT1. Acyclic retinoid did not have any effects on the
growth of normal human hepatocytes (Hc) probably because of a lack of IFNR and
STAT1 up-regulation. In conclusion, these results provide a rationale for
combined biochemoprevention of HCC using acyclic retinoid and IFN-beta.

PMID: 12395321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Hepatol Res. 2002 Nov;24(3):228.

Lactoferrin inhibits hepatitis B virus infection in cultured human hepatocytes.

Hara K(1), Ikeda M, Saito S, Matsumoto S, Numata K, Kato N, Tanaka K, Sekihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, 236-0004,
Yokohama, Japan

We recently reported that lactoferrin (LF), a milk protein belonging to the iron 
transporter family, inhibits hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in cultured human 
hepatocytes (PH5CH8) and that the interaction of LF with HCV is responsible for
this inhibitory effect. As PH5CH8 cells were found to be a human hepatocyte line 
susceptible to hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, we therefore examined if LF
could effectively prevent HBV infection in PH5CH8 cells. Preincubation of the
cell with bovine LF (bLF) or human LF (hLF) was required to prevent HBV infection
of cells, and preincubation of HBV with bLF or hLF had no inhibitory effect on
HBV infection. We further found that bovine transferrin, casein, and lactoalbumin
had no anti-HBV activity. Our findings suggest that the interaction of LF with
cells was important for its inhibitory effect, and that LF may well be among the 
candidates for an anti-HBV reagent that could prove effective in the treatment of
patients with chronic hepatitis.

PMID: 12393024  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


471. Anal Biochem. 2002 Oct 1;309(1):60-6.

Analytical cation-exchange chromatography to assess the identity, purity, and
N-terminal integrity of human lactoferrin.

van Veen HA(1), Geerts ME, van Berkel PH, Nuijens JH.

Author information: 
(1)Pharming, Archimedesweg 4, 2333 CN Leiden, The Netherlands.
h.veen@pharming.com

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is an iron-binding glycoprotein involved in the innate
host defense. The positively charged N-terminal domain of hLF mediates several of
its activities by interacting with ligands such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), specific receptors, and other proteins. This cationic domain is highly
susceptible to limited proteolysis, which impacts on the affinity of hLF for the 
ligand. An analytical method, employing cation-exchange chromatography on Mono S,
was developed to assess the N-terminal integrity of hLF preparations. The method,
which separates N-terminally intact hLF from hLF species lacking two
(Gly(1)-Arg(2)) or three (Gly(1)-Arg(2)-Arg(3)) residues, showed that 5-58% of
total hLF in commercially obtained preparations was N-terminally degraded. The
elution profile of hLF on Mono S unequivocally differed from lactoferrins from
other species as well as homologous and other whey proteins. Analysis of fresh
human whey samples revealed two variants of N-terminally intact hLF, but not
limitedly proteolyzed hLF. Mono S chromatography of 2 out of 26 individual human 
whey samples showed a rare polymorphic hLF variant with three N-terminal
arginines (Gly(1)-Arg(2)-Arg(3)-Arg(4)-Ser(5)-) instead of the usual variant with
four N-terminal arginines (Gly(1)-Arg(2)-Arg(3)-Arg(4)-Arg(5)-Ser(6)-). In
conclusion, Mono S cation-exchange chromatography appeared a robust method to
assess the identity, purity, N-terminal integrity, and the presence of
polymorphic and intact hLF variants.

PMID: 12381362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(21):7678-87.

Transformation of bone marrow B-cell progenitors by E2a-Hlf requires coexpression
of Bcl-2.

Smith KS(1), Rhee JW, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

The chimeric transcription factor E2a-Hlf is an oncoprotein associated with a
subset of acute lymphoblastic leukemias of early B-lineage derivation. We
employed a retroviral transduction-transplantation approach to evaluate the
oncogenic effects of E2a-Hlf on murine B-cell progenitors harvested from adult
bone marrow. Expression of E2a-Hlf induced short-lived clusters of primary
hematopoietic cells but no long-term growth on preformed bone marrow stromal cell
layers comprised of the AC6.21 cell line. Coexpression with Bcl-2, however,
resulted in the sustained self-renewal of early preB-I cells that required
stromal and interleukin-7 (IL-7) support for growth in vitro. Immortalized cells 
were unable to induce leukemias after transplantation into nonirradiated
syngeneic hosts, unlike the leukemic properties and cytokine independence of
preB-I cells transformed by p190(Bcr-Abl) under identical in vitro conditions.
However, bone marrow cells expressing E2a-Hlf in combination with Bcl-2, but not 
E2a-Hlf alone, induced leukemias in irradiated recipients with long latencies,
demonstrating both a requirement for suppression of apoptosis and the need for
further secondary mutations in leukemia pathogenesis. Coexpression of IL-7
substituted for Bcl-2 to induce the in vitro growth of pre-B cells expressing
E2a-Hlf, but leukemic conversion required additional abrogation of undefined
stromal requirements and was associated with alterations in the Arf/Mdm2/p53
pathway. Thus, E2a-Hlf enhances the self-renewal of bone marrow B-cell
progenitors without inciting a p53 tumor surveillance response or abrogating
stromal and cytokine requirements for growth, which are nevertheless abrogated
during progression to a leukemogenic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC135651
PMID: 12370314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Immunol Methods. 2002 Sep 15;267(2):139-50.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies against human lactoferrin.

van Berkel PH(1), van Veen HA, Geerts ME, Nuijens JH.

Author information: 
(1)Pharming, Archimedesweg 4, 2333 CN, PO Box 451, 2300 AL Leiden, The
Netherlands.

The iron-binding glycoprotein human lactoferrin (hLF) is involved in the host
defense against infection and is a modulator of inflammatory reactions. We
generated monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to hLF as tools to assist both
structure-function studies and the development of recombinant human lactoferrin
for applications in human health care. Binding experiments with ten distinct
anti-hLF mAbs to tryptic and recombinant hLF fragments in ELISA and/or on
immunoblots revealed that five mAbs bound to conformational epitopes residing in 
the N-lobe (residues 1 to 334), whereas the other five bound to C-lobe
conformational epitopes (residues 335 to 692). None of the mAbs bound to hLF
denatured upon reduction. Monoclonal antibody E11 appeared to bind to the
arginine-rich N-terminus of hLF, which is the binding site for heparin, bacterial
lipopolysaccharide, human lysozyme, DNA and receptors. The dissociation constant 
of the distinct mAbs for hLF ranged from 0.5 to 18 nM, without differences in
affinity for unsaturated or iron-saturated hLF, indicating that the
conformational changes subject to incorporation of iron do not seem to affect the
exposure and/or conformation of the antibody epitopes. The mAbs did not bind to
human transferrin, a protein closely related to hLF in size, primary amino acid
sequence and structure. Two C-lobe specific mAbs, E2 and E8, cross-reacted with
bovine and/or porcine lactoferrin, indicating that human, bovine and porcine
lactoferrin share antigenic determinants. This panel of mAbs will be used to
develop quantitative and qualitative immunoassays for hLF and to delineate which 
regions of hLF are relevant to its anti-infective and anti-inflammatory
properties.

PMID: 12165435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Hepatogastroenterology. 2002 Jul-Aug;49(46):928-31.

Suppressive effects of tea polyphenol and conformational changes with receptor
for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) expression in human hepatoma cells.

Takada M(1), Ku Y, Toyama H, Suzuki Y, Kuroda Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Kobe University School of Medicine, 7-5-2,
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan. moriatsu@med.kobe-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: It is reported that polyphenol is associated with low risk of
hepatoma and that RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation end products) is
important for cancer invasion.
METHODOLOGY: Effects of teapolyphenol, EGCG (epigallocatechin-3-gallate) were
studied. Proliferation of on human hepatoma cells, HLF, was measured with the use
of WST-1 colorimetric assay. Cell invasion was analyzed by the Matrigel invasion 
assay. Morphology and immunohistological staining of expression of RAGE were also
performed.
RESULTS: Proliferation was inhibited with the addition of EGCG in a
dose-dependent manner. EGCG (200 mumol/L) produced a profound growth suppression 
of HLF cells (24.5%). Cell invasion was also inhibited with preincubation of 100 
mumol/L of EGCG (10.2%). In addition to the antitumor effects, neurite-like
conformational changes of HLF cells were observed. Addition of EGCG (100 mumol/L)
showed the expression of RAGE on cell surface in accordance to the morphological 
changes.
CONCLUSIONS: The pathway associated to cell movement might be activated with RAGE
expression. Although EGCG inhibits the growth and invasion, the cells which
expressed RAGE seem to survive. Thus, the enrollment of RAGE should be analyzed
to clarify the mechanisms of cancer resistance.

PMID: 12143244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Hematol J. 2002;3(3):153-6.

E2A/HLF fusion gene in an acute lymphoblastic leukemia patient with disseminated 
intravascular coagulation and a normal karyotype.

Dahéron L(1), Brizard F, Millot F, Cividin M, Lacotte L, Guilhot F, Brizard A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Hématologie (CNRS FRE 2224), Poitiers University Hospital,
France.

INTRODUCTION: Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a rare event in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). However, it has been described in a few cases
of pre-B ALL with translocation t(17;19)(q22;p13) which results in the fusion of 
E2A gene with sequences of HLF gene. Here, we report a case of pre-B ALL with DIC
and an apparently normal karyotype by R banding.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies were
performed on bone marrow cells from the patient at presentation and after three
months of therapy. RT-PCR was used to detect the E2A-HLF transcript. The type of 
rearrangement was characterized by sequencing.
RESULTS: The t(17;19)(q22;p13) was detected by FISH analysis. The fusion E2A-HLF 
was amplified by RT-PCR and sequenced, giving a type I rearrangement with a long 
insertion (146 nucleotides) between E2A exon 13 and HLF exon 4.
CONCLUSION: While translocation t(17;19) is undetectable by R-banding technique, 
it can be detected with FISH and amplified with RT-PCR. Therefore, systematic
molecular investigations should be conducted for all patients with pre-B ALL
associated with DIC, in order to appreciate the incidence and the prognostic
value of this rare abnormality.

PMID: 12111652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Toxicol Lett. 2002 Jul 7;133(1):47-57.

Plasmid DNA damage caused by methylated arsenicals, ascorbic acid and human liver
ferritin.

Ahmad S(1), Kitchin KT, Cullen WR.

Author information: 
(1)Mercer University School of Medicine, Division of Basic Medical Sciences, 1550
College Street,, Macon, GA 31207, USA.

Both dimethylarsinic acid (DMA(V)) and dimethylarsinous acid (DMA(III)) release
iron from human liver ferritin (HLF) with or without the presence of ascorbic
acid. With ascorbic acid the rate of iron release from HLF by DMA(V) was
intermediate (3.37 nM/min, P<0.05) and by DMA(III) was much higher (16.3 nM/min, 
P<0.001). No pBR322 plasmid DNA damage was observed from in vitro exposure to
arsenate (iAs(V)), arsenite (iAs(III)), monomethylarsonic acid (MMA(V)),
monomethylarsonous acid (MMA(III)) or DMA(V) alone. DNA damage was observed
following DMA(III) exposure; coexposure to DMA(III) and HLF caused more DNA
damage; considerably higher amounts of DNA damage was caused by coexposure of
DMA(III), HLF and ascorbic acid. Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (an iron
chelator), significantly inhibited DNA damage. Addition of catalase (which can
increase Fe(2+) concentrations) further increased the plasmid DNA damage.
Iron-dependent DNA damage could be a mechanism of action of human arsenic
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 12076509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Int J Oncol. 2002 Jul;21(1):81-4.

Ribozyme mediated suppression of vascular endothelial growth factor gene
expression enhances matrix metalloproteinase 1 expression in a human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line.

Kamochi J(1), Tokunaga T, Morino F, Nagata J, Tomii Y, Abe Y, Hatanaka H, Kijima 
H, Yamazaki H, Watanabe N, Matsuzaki S, Ueyama Y, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Bohseidai,
Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan.

The levels of expression of various genes were altered in cellular transformants 
with manipulation of expression of single genes. Vascular endothelial growth
factor A (VEGF-A) is a key molecule for tumor progression, although it is unclear
how VEGF-A expression regulates various genes. Multiple gene expression levels
were evaluated using cDNA arrays in a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line
(HLF) with suppression of the VEGF-A gene by anti-VEGF-A ribozyme (alphaVRz). The
ribozyme-mediated suppression of VEGF-A gene solely up-regulated matrix
metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) gene level in HLF/alphaVRz. Levels of expression of
other members of MMP family or tissue inhibitors of MMPs did not show any
alteration. These results suggested that intracellular suppression of VEGF-A gene
was specifically linked to up-regulation of MMP1 in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells.

PMID: 12063553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Chromatogr A. 2002 Apr 26;955(1):95-103.

Different elution modes and field programming in gravitational field-flow
fractionation. IV. Field programming achieved with channels of non-constant
cross-sections.

Plocková J(1), Matulík F, Chmelík J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Analytical Chemistry, Brno, Czech Republic. plockova@iach.cz

Force field programming provided increased speed of separation with an improved
resolution and detection capability in many field-flow fractionation (FFF)
techniques. Gravitational field-flow fractionation (GFFF) uses the Earth's
gravitational field to cause the settlement of particles towards the channel
accumulation wall. Although this field is constant and relatively weak, there are
different ways to implement force field programming in GFFF. Because hydrodynamic
lift forces (HLF) participate in the separation process in focusing (hyperlayer) 
elution mode, they can control the resulting force field acting on particles via 
changes in flow-velocity. These changes can be accomplished by a programmable
pump or with channels of non-constant cross-sections. This work is focused on
flow-velocity programming accomplished with channels of non-constant
cross-sections. Three trapezoidal channels of decreasing breadth and two channels
of decreasing height (along the longitudinal axis) are tested as tools for
optimization of the separation of a model silica gel particle mixture. The
trapezoidal channels yielded reduced separation times. However, taking into
account both speed of separation and resolution, the optimization effect was
lower compared with the flow-rate gradients generated by a programmable pump. The
channels of non-constant height did not yield advantageous separations.

PMID: 12061568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 26;293(1):150-4.

Expression of the Musashi1 gene encoding the RNA-binding protein in human
hepatoma cell lines.

Shu HJ(1), Saito T, Watanabe H, Ito JI, Takeda H, Okano H, Kawata S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Yamagata University School of
Medicine, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.

Musashi1, a neural RNA-binding protein, plays an important role in regulating
cell differentiation in precursor cells. Recently, expression of Musashi1 has
been detected in human tumor tissues such as gliomas and melanomas, suggesting
its involvement in oncogenic development. To determine any association between
Musashi1 and the development of liver cancer, we investigated its gene expression
in seven human hepatoma cell lines: HuH6, HuH7, Hep3B, SK-Hep1, HepG2, HLE, and
HLF. Musashi1 mRNA expression was analyzed using the reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and the PCR products were sequenced using a
subcloning procedure. Musashi1 protein expression was analyzed in HuH7 and HepG2 
cells by Western blot and immunofluorescence staining. Musashi1 mRNA was detected
in the HuH6, HuH7, and Hep3B hepatoma cell lines, but not in the others.
Sequencing of the PCR-amplified Musashi1 cDNA in these three cell lines showed
the expected sequence of the human Musashi1 gene. Musashi1 protein expression was
confirmed in HuH7 cells, which were positive for Musashi1 mRNA expression, but
not in HepG2 cells. These results suggest that Musashi1 expression may be an
important factor in the development of several types of carcinoma such as human
hepatoma, and may be a useful molecular marker for tumor detection.

PMID: 12054577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2002 Jun;46(6):1634-9.

Internal thiols and reactive oxygen species in candidacidal activity exerted by
an N-terminal peptide of human lactoferrin.

Lupetti A(1), Paulusma-Annema A, Senesi S, Campa M, Van Dissel JT, Nibbering PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.

We previously showed that the energized mitochondrion and extracellular ATP are
essential for the candidacidal activity of the N-terminal peptide of human
lactoferrin, subsequently referred to as hLF(1-11). The present study focuses on 
the involvement of internal thiols and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the
candidacidal activity exerted by hLF(1-11). Our results reveal that hLF(1-11)
reduced the internal thiol level of Candida albicans by 20%. In agreement,
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), which is a precursor of glutathione and an ROS
scavenger, inhibited the candidacidal activity of hLF(1-11). In addition,
azodicarboxylic acid bis(N,N-dimethylamide) (diamide), which oxidizes internal
thiols, was candidacidal. Furthermore, hLF(1-11) increased the level of ROS
production by C. albicans in a dose-dependent manner, and a correlation between
ROS production and candidacidal activity was found.
6-Hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid (trolox), which is an ROS 
scavenger, partially inhibited the hLF(1-11)-induced, but not the
diamide-triggered, candidacidal activity. It is of interest that hLF(1-11) and
diamide acted synergistically in killing C. albicans and in ROS production. In
agreement, oxidized ATP, an irreversible inhibitor of extracellular ATP
receptors, partially blocked the hLF(1-11)-induced, but not the
diamide-triggered, candidacidal activity. Finally, the hLF(1-11)-induced
activation of mitochondria was inhibited by NAC, indicating that internal thiols 
and ROS affect mitochondrial activity. Therefore, the candidacidal activity of
hLF(1-11) involves both generation of ROS and reduction of internal thiols.

PMCID: PMC127236
PMID: 12019068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Toxicol In Vitro. 2002 Jun;16(3):235-43.

In vitro toxicity of 7H-dibenzo[c,g]carbazole in human liver cell lines.

O'Brien T(1), Schneider J, Warshawsky D, Mitchell K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
ML0056 Cincinnati OH 45267-0056, USA.

7H-Dibenzo[c,g]carbazole (DBC) is a model N-heterocyclic aromatic compound (NHA) 
which is both a hepatotoxin and hepatocarcinogen in rodents. The focus of this
investigation was to determine whether human liver cell lines display
differential sensitivities to DBC-induced toxicity. Treatment of cell lines with 
increasing DBC concentrations produced apoptosis only in HepG2 cells. Although
DBC inhibited the clonogenic growth of all cell lines at high concentrations,
only the survival of HepG2 cells was reduced at lower concentrations. DBC
inhibited DNA synthesis in two (HepG2, HLF) of the three cell lines at lower
concentrations and was effective only at a high concentration in Mahlavu cells.
Differences in DBC uptake were not observed in any of the cell lines, suggesting 
that bioavailability was not a limiting factor. DBC-DNA adducts were not detected
in HLF or Mahlavu cells at either low or high concentrations of DBC. Consistent
with the DNA adduct data, RP-HPLC analysis indicated that DBC was metabolized to 
a lesser degree in the HLF and Mahlavu cells. These results suggest that human
liver cell lines differ markedly in the ability to metabolize DBC to toxic
species and that DBC-induced apoptosis is only observed in cells that produce
detectable metabolites and DBC-DNA adducts.

PMID: 12020596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Jun;9(6):597-600.

Decreased expression of the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha gene involved in
hepatocyte proliferation in human hepatocellular carcinomas.

Tomizawa M(1), Wang YQ, Ebara M, Saisho H, Watanabe K, Nakagawara A, Tagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba City 260-8670, Japan.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha), expressed at a high level in
liver, plays an important role in proliferation and differentiation of
hepatocytes. Previous studies showed that an expression level of the C/EBPalpha
gene in hepatocytes was downregulated in response to proliferation signals and
that forced expression of the C/EBPalpha gene in a number of cells caused cell
cycle arrest. We compared the expression level of the C/EBPalpha gene in surgical
specimens between hepatocellular carcinoma and non-tumorous regions of the same
patients. In 9 out of 13 cases, the expression level in the tumors was decreased 
compared with that in corresponding non-tumorous regions. Transfection of the
C/EBPalpha gene into C/EBPalpha-negative human hepatocellular carcinoma HLF
cells, however, did not influence the rate of cell proliferation or cell cycle.
Our present data suggest that the expression of the C/EBPalpha gene was
downregulated in the majority of human hepatocellular carcinoma but the
expression may not be directly associated with impaired proliferative activity of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

PMID: 12011976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Immunobiology. 2002 Mar;205(1):120-31.

Immunoregulatory activities of lactoferrin in the delayed type hypersensitivity
in mice are mediated by a receptor with affinity to mannose.

Zimecki M(1), Kocieba M, Kruzel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Wroclaw.

The mannose receptor (MR) mediates clearance of pathogenic microorganisms and
potentially harmful glycoproteins by recognition of the carbohydrate structures. 
This manuscript describes the significance of the MR in mediation of the
lactoferrin (LF) effects in delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) in mice. Here we 
demonstrate that the inhibitory effect of LF on the effector phase of DTH to
sheep red blood cells (SRBC) was abolished by intraperitoneal (i.p.) pretreatment
of mice with 50 mg of methyl-alpha-D-mannopyranoside (MMan). Also, we report that
the inhibition of the effector DTH response to ovalbumin (OVA) was reversed by
MMan but not by D-galactose (Gal). MMan was found to reduce the adjuvant activity
of LF given together with OVA, however, did not interfere with the upstimulatory 
effect of the complete Freund's adjuvant. Comparative studies between bovine and 
human lactoferrins (BLF and HLF), revealed that the adjuvant effect of BLF was
stronger than that of HLF, nevertheless, both effects were inhibited by MMan.
Thus, we postulate, that MR is a primary receptor for lactoferrin in mediation of
its some immunotropic activities.

PMID: 11999341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23508-14. Epub 2002 Apr 30.

The transcriptional activation function of the HIF-like factor requires
phosphorylation at a conserved threonine.

Gradin K(1), Takasaki C, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Life Science, Tohoku
University, Sendai, 980-8578, Japan.

The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha and the HIF-like factor (HLF)
transcription factors are regulated at multiple levels including protein
stabilization, nuclear import, and activation of transactivation, resulting in
recruitment of coactivators such as the cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB)-binding protein (CBP)/p300 and SRC-1. During low oxygen tension these
proteins modulate a network of genes that are necessary for angiogenesis,
erythropopoiesis, and glycolysis. We report here that the C-terminal
transactivation domain of HLF is phosphorylated on multiple sites and that
phosphorylation on threonine 844 of HLF is necessary for the transcriptional
activation function of the protein independently of the hypoxia condition.
Importantly, using the mammalian two-hybrid system we demonstrate that a
substitution of threonine 844 to an alanine decreased the enhanced
transcriptional activation function mediated by CBP/p300.

PMID: 11983697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Nat Biotechnol. 2002 May;20(5):484-7.

Large scale production of recombinant human lactoferrin in the milk of transgenic
cows.

van Berkel PH(1), Welling MM, Geerts M, van Veen HA, Ravensbergen B, Salaheddine 
M, Pauwels EK, Pieper F, Nuijens JH, Nibbering PH.

Author information: 
(1)Pharming, Leiden, The Netherlands. p.berkel@pharming.com

The limited capacity of current bioreactors has led the biopharmaceutical
industry to investigate alternative protein expression systems. The milk of
transgenic cattle may provide an attractive vehicle for large-scale production of
biopharmaceuticals, but there have been no reports on the characteristics of such
recombinant proteins. Here we describe the production of recombinant human
lactoferrin (rhLF), an iron-binding glycoprotein involved in innate host defense,
at gram per liter concentrations in bovine milk. Natural hLF from human milk and 
rhLF had identical iron-binding and -release properties. Although natural hLF and
rhLF underwent differential N-linked glycosylation, they were equally effective
in three different in vivo infection models employing immunocompetent and
leukocytopenic mice, and showed similar localization at sites of infection. Taken
together, the results illustrate the potential of transgenic cattle in the
large-scale production of biopharmaceuticals.

PMID: 11981562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2002 May;29(5):674-9. Epub 2002 Mar 6.

Technetium-99m labelled fluconazole and antimicrobial peptides for imaging of
Candida albicans and Aspergillus fumigatus infections.

Lupetti A(1), Welling MM, Mazzi U, Nibbering PH, Pauwels EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, The
Netherlands.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether technetium-99m labelled
fluconazole can distinguish fungal from bacterial infections. Fluconazole was
labelled with (99m)Tc and radiochemical analysis showed less than 5% impurities. 
The labelling solution was injected into animals with experimental infections.
For comparison, we used two peptides for infection detection, i.e. UBI 29-41 and 
hLF 1-11, and human IgG, all labelled with (99m)Tc. Mice were infected with
Candida albicans or injected with heat-killed C. albicans or lipopolysaccharides 
to induce sterile inflammation. Also, mice were infected with Staphylococcus
aureus or Klebsiella pneumoniae. Next, accumulation of (99m)Tc-fluconazole and
(99m)Tc-labelled peptides/IgG at affected sites was determined scintigraphically.
(99m)Tc-fluconazole detected C. albicans infections (T/NT ratio=3.6+/-0.47)
without visualising bacterial infections (T/NT ratio=1.3+/-0.04) or sterile
inflammatory processes (heat-killed C. albicans: T/NT ratio=1.3+/-0.2;
lipopolysaccharide: T/NT ratio=1.4+/-0.1). C. albicans infections were already
seen within the first hour after injection of (99m)Tc-fluconazole (T/NT
ratio=3.1+/-0.2). A good correlation (R(2)=0.864; P<0.05) between T/NT ratios for
this tracer and the number of viable C. albicans was found. Although (99m)Tc-UBI 
29-41 and (99m)Tc-hLF 1-11 were able to distinguish C. albicans infections from
sterile inflammatory processes in mice, these (99m)Tc-labelled peptides did not
distinguish these fungal infections from bacterial infections. It is concluded
that (99m)Tc-fluconazole distinguishes infections with C. albicans from bacterial
infections and sterile inflammations.

PMID: 11976807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Viral Immunol. 2002;15(1):147-54.

Human fibroblasts transfected with cytomegalovirus immediate-early genes show
increased MHC class I expression and are targets for natural killer cell-mediated
cytotoxicity.

Nyquist AC(1), Zhang L, Weinberg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, USA. nyquist.ann-christine@tchden.org

Natural killer (NK) cells are an important line of defense against viral
infections, such as those caused by cytomegalovirus (CMV), but in the context of 
solid organ transplantation NK responses to CMV-infected graft cells might be
deleterious to the graft survival. To gain a better understanding of NK responses
to CMV-infected human lung fibroblasts (HLF), we transfected HLF with a plasmid
expressing CMV immediate-early (IE) genes under the control of the CMV major IE
promoter and compared major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I expression
and NK-mediated lysis of transfected cells, CMV-infected cells, and appropriate
controls. HLF transfected with CMV IE genes showed increased MHC Class I
expression and triggered NK-mediated cytotoxicity at the same level as
CMV-infected HLF and at significantly higher levels than mock-infected or
mock-transfected controls. Transfection of CMV genes provides an experimental
model for molecular studies of CMV- and allograft-specific cell-mediated immunity
and modulation.

PMID: 11952136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Biochem Cell Biol. 2002;80(1):75-80.

Characterization of mammalian receptors for lactoferrin.

Suzuki YA(1), Lönnerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis 95616, USA.

Lactoferrin (Lf) has been suggested to have several physiological functions.
Specific binding of Lf, indicating the presence of Lf receptors (LfRs), has been 
observed in various types of mammalian cells such as lymphocytes, hepatocytes,
and enterocytes. These LfRs are considered to function as a mediator for some of 
the functions of Lf. We here review current knowledge of mammalian LfRs
characterized in different tissues. We also briefly present evidence for the
existence of an LfR provided by our cloning of a human intestinal LfR (HLfR). The
entire coding region of the HLfR was cloned by polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
and a recombinant HLfR (rHLfR) was expressed in a baculovirus system. The rHLfR
was purified by immobilized human Lf (HLf) affinity chromatography, indicating
that the rHLfR retained the capacity to bind HLf. The gene was expressed at high 
levels in fetal small intestine and in adult heart but at lower levels in Caco-2 
cells. In summary, we demonstrate the presence of a unique receptor-mediated
mechanism for Lf, functioning in the small intestine of the newborn infant and
possibly in other tissues of human adults.

PMID: 11908646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 8;291(4):861-7.

Arsenic trioxide-induced apoptosis and its enhancement by buthionine sulfoximine 
in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.

Kito M(1), Akao Y, Ohishi N, Yagi K, Nozawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Biochemistry, Yagi Memorial Park, Mitake, Gifu 505-0116, 
Japan.

We treated four hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines, HLE, HLF, HuH7, and HepG2
with ATO and demonstrated that arsenic trioxide (ATO) at low doses (1--3 muM)
induced a concentration-dependent suppression of cell growth in HLE, HLF, and
HuH7. HLE cells underwent apoptosis at 2 microM ATO, which was executed by the
activation of caspase-3 through the mitochondrial pathway mediated by caspase-8
activation and Bid truncation. When these cell lines were exposed to ATO in
combination with l-S,R-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) which inhibits GSH synthesis,
a synergistic growth suppression was induced, even in HepG2 showing a lower
sensitivity to ATO than other cell lines tested. The intracellular GSH levels
after the treatment with ATO plus BSO were considerably decreased in HLE cells
compared with those after the treatment with ATO or BSO alone. The production of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) which was examined by 2' ,7'
-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate, increased significantly after the
treatment with ATO plus BSO in HLE cells. These findings indicate that ATO at low
concentrations induces growth inhibition and apoptosis, and furthermore that the 
ATO-BSO combination treatment enhances apoptosis through increased production of 
ROS in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

PMID: 11866444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Br J Cancer. 2002 Jan 7;86(1):98-101.

Inverse correlation between E-cadherin and Snail expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines in vitro and in vivo.

Jiao W(1), Miyazaki K, Kitajima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Saga Medical School, 5-1-1 Nabeshima, Saga 849-8501,
Japan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma is a well-known malignancy in the world. However, the
molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis and tumour progression remains unclear.
Recently, reduced E-cadherin expression due to transcriptional suppressor Snail
was proven in a panel of epithelial and dedifferentiated cells derived from
carcinomas of various etiologies. In the present study, we examined Snail and
E-cadherin mRNA/protein expression in five hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines
with variable phenotypes (HuL-1, Hep-G(2), Changliver, HLE, and HLF). The results
demonstrated that the presence of Snail mRNA in HuL-1, Changliver, HLE and HLF
cells detected by RT-PCR, which was further proven by in situ hybridization in
tumours induced by HuL-1, Changliver, and HLF cells where Snail mRNA signals
expressed in each of the sections. By contrast, E-cadherin mRNA and protein
expression were only detected in Hep-G(2) cells by RT-PCR and Western blot,
respectively. These results were also consistent with the data obtained from in
vivo immunohistochemical staining where membranous expression of endogenous
E-cadherin protein was revealed only in tumour sections induced by Hep-G(2)
cells. Here we are the first to report that there is an inverse correlation
between Snail and E-cadherin expression in HCC cells as well.

PMCID: PMC2746537
PMID: 11857019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Feb;34(2):223-31.

Alterations of the circadian clock in the heart by streptozotocin-induced
diabetes.

Young ME(1), Wilson CR, Razeghi P, Guthrie PH, Taegtmeyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of
Texas-Houston Medical School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The heart, like other organs, possesses an internal circadian clock. These clocks
provide the selective advantage of anticipation, enabling the organ to prepare
for a given stimulus, thereby optimizing the appropriate response. The heart in
diabetes is associated with alterations in morphology, gene expression,
metabolism and contractile performance. The present study investigated whether
diabetes also alters the circadian clock in the heart. Insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus was induced in rats by treatment with streptozotocin (STZ; 65 mg/kg).
STZ increased humoral (glucose and non-esterified fatty acids) and heart gene
expression (myosin heavy chain beta, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 and
uncoupling protein 3) markers of diabetes. The circadian patterns of gene
expression of seven components of the mammalian clock (bmal1, clock, cry1, cry2, 
per1, per2 and per3), as well as three clock output genes (dbp, hlf and tef),
were compared in hearts isolated from control and STZ-induced diabetic rats. All 
components of the clock investigated possessed circadian rhythms of gene
expression. In the hearts isolated from STZ-induced diabetic rats, the phases of 
these circadian rhythms were altered (approximately 3 h early) compared to those 
observed for control hearts. The clock in the heart has therefore lost normal
synchronization with its environment during diabetes. Whether this loss of
synchronization plays a role in the development of contractile dysfunction of the
heart in diabetes remains to be determined.

Copyright 2002 Academic Press.

PMID: 11851361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Pharm Res. 2002 Jan;19(1):54-62.

The antiviral protein human lactoferrin is distributed in the body to
cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection-prone cells and tissues.

Beljaars L(1), Bakker HI, van der Strate BW, Smit C, Duijvestijn AM, Meijer DK,
Molema G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics and Drug Delivery, University Center for
Pharmacy, Groningen University Institute for Drug Exploration, The Netherlands.
L.Belijaars@farm.rug.nl

PURPOSE: Lactoferrin has anti-Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and -HIV properties in vitro.
However, the pharmacokinetic behavior of the 80-kD protein has not been well
defined. We, therefore, assessed the plasma decay and body distribution of
lactoferrin after intravenous administration to freely moving rats. Furthermore, 
the systemic availability of lactoferrin after intraperitoneal dosing was
determined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: After intravenous injection, human lactoferrin (hLF) was
rapidly cleared from the plasma, but higher doses resulted in prolonged plasma
levels. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a pronounced distribution of hLF to
endothelial cells in the liver whereas diffuse staining in hepatocytes indicated 
the presence of considerable amounts in this large cell population. This
endothelial association, which also was found in other organ/tissues, including
blood vessels. was confirmed by in vitro cell-binding studies. In addition,
leukocytes in plasma that were infiltrated in various organs showed binding of
hLF. A small fraction of hLF was transported into the lymphatic system. Western
blot analysis revealed that hLF, present in the various organs. mainly consisted 
of an 80-kD protein. After intraperitoneal administration, small amounts of 80-kD
hLF distributed to the general circulation. The bioavailability was 0.6% but
increased to 3.6% after multiple administrations.
CONCLUSIONS: The affinity of hLF for endothelial cells and leukocytes, and its
penetration into the lymphatic system, indicates that this protein reaches target
cells and body compartments that are crucial for CMV and HIV replication. The
ability to reach the blood compartment after intraperitoneal dosing offers
opportunities for parenteral administration of the protein in future studies on
its antiviral effects in vivo.

PMID: 11841043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2001;501:107-13.

Human lactoferrin in the milk of transgenic mice increases intestinal growth in
ten-day-old suckling neonates.

Zhang P(1), Sawicki V, Lewis A, Hanson L, Nuijens JH, Neville MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Denver 80220, USA.

Regulatory roles and a signaling receptor have been proposed for the milk protein
lactoferrin (Lf), but none has been definitively characterized. Nichols and
colleagues (1987) observed that human lactoferrin (hLf) stimulated thymidine
incorporation into the DNA of rat intestinal crypt cells. We tested the
hypothesis that chronic Lf administration stimulates intestinal growth by
studying neonatal mice suckling transgenic dams secreting about 12 mg/mL hLf in
their milk. Specifically, nontransgenic litters were adjusted to eight pups each 
and cross-fostered to transgenic dams. Controls were pups suckling nontransgenic 
dams of the same strain. On day 10 postpartum pups were weighed, sacrificed, and 
the small intestines were weighed, measured, and stored for later determination
of enzyme activities. The results indicate that intestinal growth was increased
in neonates suckling transgenic dams. The weight of the small intestine was
increased about 27% when the pups received milk containing hLf. Intestinal length
only increased about 6.5% suggesting that Lf in milk enhanced mucosal growth. The
ratio of maltase to lactase in the duodenal segment of the small intestine, an
indicator of maturation, was also significantly increased in the pups suckling
transgenic milks. Our results imply that chronic oral consumption of human Lf
promotes the growth and maturation of the intestinal mucosa, and suggest a
possible therapeutic role for the agent in premature infants as well as in
patients with bowel damage.

PMID: 11787671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Dec 19;1568(3):197-204.

The binding of lactoferrin to glycosaminoglycans on enterocyte-like HT29-18-C1
cells is mediated through basic residues located in the N-terminus.

El Yazidi-Belkoura I(1), Legrand D, Nuijens J, Slomianny MC, van Berkel P, Spik
G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Biologique, Université des Sciences et Technologies de
Lille, Unité Mixte de Recherche du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Villeneuve d' Ascq, France.

Although lactoferrins (Lfs) isolated from milk of various mammals exhibit a close
structural relationship, they show species-specific binding to cells. To define
the specificity of recognition of human (hLf), bovine (bLf) and murine (mLf)
lactoferrin by human intestinal cells, we analysed the binding of the three
proteins to a subclone derived from human carcinoma cell line HT29. We observed
that hLf and bLf interact with two types of binding sites (K(d): 63+/-22 nM;
0.7+/-0.2 microM) while mLf was recognized only by the lowest affinity binding
sites with a lower number of binding sites. Using N-terminal deleted human Lf
variants, we found that the sequence G(1)RRRR(5) is mainly responsible for the
interactions with HT29 cells. Lactoferrin-binding sites on the surface of HT29
cells were further identified as heparan sulphate and chondroitin sulphate
glycosaminoglycans. We conclude that the presence of the sequence A(1)PRK(4) in
bLf and K(1)ATT(4) in mLf provides an insight into why the interaction of bLf
with cell membrane-associated glycosaminoglycans is similar to that of hLf and
why binding of these lactoferrin species differs from that of murine Lf.

PMID: 11786226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2000 Sep;22(5):411-3.

[Preliminary clinical comparison of HLF and ELF regimen in the treatment of
advanced gastric carcinoma in middle-aged and elderly patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong X(1), Zhu Z, Wen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medicine, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen Medical University, Guangzhou 510120, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the therapeutic effects and toxicity of HLF
(hydroxycamptothecin HCPT/leucovorin LV/fluorouracil 5-Fu) regimen and ELF
(etoposide VP-16/LV/5-Fu) regimen in middle-aged and elderly patients with
advanced gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: A group of twenty-five cases were treated with HLF regimen, and the
other group of 23 cases were treated with ELF regimen.
RESULTS: Of the 25 cases treated with HLF regimen, there was no complete
remission (CR), but there were 12 partial response (PR), 11 no response (NC), and
2 had progressive disease (PD). The response rate (RR) was 48.0%. Of the 23
patients treated with ELF regimen, there was no CR, there were 9 PR, 11 NC, and 3
PD. The RR was 39.1% (P > 0.05). The main toxicity was myelosuppression and
stomatocace. Grade III-IV stomatocace in HLF regimen group (68.0%) was more
commonly seen than that in ELF regimen group (39.1%, P < 0.05). There was no
cardiac or renal toxicity observed.
CONCLUSION: HLF regimen is promising for treatment of advanced gastric carcinoma 
in middle-aged and elderly patients with the merits of low toxicity affecting
heart, kidney and bladder except stomatocace, which is worthy of further clinical
trial.

PMID: 11778280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Biochemistry. 2001 Dec 25;40(51):15771-9.

Molecular cloning and functional expression of a human intestinal lactoferrin
receptor.

Suzuki YA(1), Shin K, Lönnerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, 
Davis, California 95616, USA.

Lactoferrin (Lf), a major iron-binding protein in human milk, has been suggested 
to have multiple biological roles such as facilitating iron absorption,
modulating the immune system, embryonic development, and cell proliferation. Our 
previous binding studies suggested the presence of a specific receptor for Lf
(LfR) in the small intestine of newborn infants, which may facilitate iron
absorption. We here report the cloning and the functional expression of the human
intestinal LfR and the evidence of its involvement in iron metabolism. The entire
coding region of the LfR cDNA was cloned by PCR based on amino acid sequences of 
the purified native LfR (nLfR). The recombinant LfR (rLfR) was then expressed in 
a baculovirus-insect cell system and purified by immobilized human Lf (hLf)
affinity chromatography where binding of hLf to the rLfR was partially Ca(2+)
dependent. The apparent molecular mass was 136 kDa under nonreducing conditions
and 34 kDa under reducing conditions. 125I-hLf bound to the rLfR with an apparent
K(d) of approximately 360 nM. These biochemical properties of the rLfR are
similar to those of the nLfR. RT-PCR revealed that the gene was expressed at high
levels in fetal small intestine and in adult heart and at lower levels in Caco-2 
cells. PI-PLC treatment of Caco-2 cells indicated that the LfR is GPI anchored.
In Caco-2 cells transfected with the LfR gene, 125I-hLf binding and 59Fe-hLf
uptake were increased by 1.7 and 3.4 times, respectively, compared to those in
mock-transfected cells. Our findings demonstrate the presence of a unique
receptor-mediated mechanism for nutrient uptake by the newborn.

PMID: 11747454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2001 Dec;34(Pt 3):151-9.

Identification of an import signal for, and the nuclear localization of, human
lactoferrin.

Penco S(1), Scarfi S, Giovine M, Damonte G, Millo E, Villaggio B, Passalacqua M, 
Pozzolini M, Garrè C, Benatti U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Biology and Genetics, University of Genoa, Viale
Benedetto XV, 6 Genoa, Italy.

Many different unique functions have been attributed to lactoferrin (Lf),
including DNA and RNA binding, and transport into the nucleus, where Lf binds to 
specific sequences and activates transcription. A pentapeptide,
Gly-Arg-Arg-Arg-Arg, corresponding to a region of the N-terminal portion of human
Lf rich in basic amino acids, was synthesized and its intracellular localization 
was investigated. Peptide internalization was assayed using the rhodaminated form
of the same molecule. This N-terminal peptide sequence is able to be internalized
within less than 10 min at concentration as low as 1 microM, and its
intracellular localization is nuclear, mainly nucleolar. Similar behaviour was
observed using peptides composed of either all l or d amino acids, the last one
being a retro-inverse peptide. The internalization process does not involve an
endocytotic pathway, since no inhibition of the uptake was observed at 4 degrees 
C. The kinetics of peptide internalization was also evaluated. The
internalization properties of such a short Lf pentapeptide have been assayed for 
its ability to transport peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) inside cells in order to
improve their efficacy. The abundant transmembrane transport and nuclear
localization of the proposed peptide, deriving from hLf and, for the first time, 
identified as a nuclear localization signal, could be used as an alternative
strategy to tackle the unsolved problem of intracellular accumulation of
antisense and antigene drugs and for the development of new pharmacological
tools.

PMID: 11730482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Anticancer Res. 2001 Jul-Aug;21(4A):2429-33.

Enhanced expression of S8, L12, L23a, L27 and L30 ribosomal protein mRNAs in
human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kondoh N(1), Shuda M, Tanaka K, Wakatsuki T, Hada A, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Biochemistry, National Defense Medical College, Saitama, 
Japan.

Differential display (DD) analysis using surgically resected human hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) and adjacent non-tumorous liver tissues was performed. We
identified 5 cDNAs up-regulated in human hepatocellular carcinoma, encoding S8,
L12, L23a, L27 and L30 ribosomal protein mRNAs. Northern blot analysis, using
total RNAs from thirteen pairs of HCC and abjacent non-tumorous liver tissues
demonstrated that these mRNA levels were up-regulated along with the histological
grading of tumors. The expression of these mRNAs was also high in three human HCC
cell lines (HuH-7, HepG2 and HLF), irrespective of the growth state. These
results suggest that activation of these genes is an important manifestation of
HCC phenotypes.

PMID: 11724303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2001 Jul;17(4):385-7.

[cDNA cloning and sequence analysis of human lactoferrin].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng H(1), Chen XZ, Huan LD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) cDNA was amplified by RT-PCR from normal human mammary
tissue obtained from Daxing County of Beijing City of China, and then subcloned
into pGEM-T vector. hLF cDNA sequence was determined, which consists of 2136 bp. 
Comparison with five other hLF cDNA sequences registered in GenBank shows 99%
homology in DNA sequence. However, there are two base substitutions (nucleotide
1740 G-->C, nucleotide 1756 T-->C), one of which subsequently leads to an amino
acid change (residue 580 Glu-->Asp).

PMID: 11702692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biochemistry. 2001 Nov 6;40(44):13281-7.

Interactions of bismuth with human lactoferrin and recognition of the
Bi(III)-lactoferrin complex by intestinal cells.

Zhang L(1), Szeto KY, Wong WB, Loh TT, Sadler PJ, Sun H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong,
PRC.

Several bismuth compounds are currently used as antiulcer drugs, but the
mechanism of action still remains unclear. The antimicrobial activity of Bi(III) 
complexes toward Gram-negative bacteria is reported to be dependent on the iron
uptake system [Domenico, P., et al. (1996) J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 38,
1031-1040]. Electronic absorption and 13C NMR spectroscopic data show that
Bi(III) binds to human lactoferrin at the specific Fe(III) sites along with
either carbonate or oxalate as the synergistic anion. The uptake of Bi(III) by
apo-hLF was rapid [minutes in 10 mM Hepes buffer and 5 mM bicarbonate (pH 7.4)], 
and almost equal in both lobes. The presence of ATP facilitates the release of
Bi(III) from the Bi2-hLF complex when the pH is lowered. The Bi2-hLF complex
blocked the uptake of the radiolabeled 59Fe-hLF complex into rat IEC-6 cells.
Surprisingly, apo-hLF (but not apotransferrin) was almost as effective in
blocking 59Fe uptake as bismuth-loaded lactoferrin. These results suggest that
Bi(III)-loaded hLF might be recognized by the lactoferrin receptor and be taken
up into cells.

PMID: 11683638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 10;20(40):5718-25.

E2A-HLF usurps control of evolutionarily conserved survival pathways.

Seidel MG(1), Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Department, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street,
M-630, Boston, Massachusetts, MA 02115, USA.

E2A-HLF, the chimeric fusion protein resulting from the leukemogenic
translocation t(17;19), appears to employ evolutionarily conserved signaling
cascades for its transforming and antiapoptotic functions. These arise from both 
impairment of normal E2A function and activation of a survival pathway triggered 
through the HLF bZip DNA binding and dimerization domain. Recent reports identify
wild-type E2A as a tumor suppressor in T lymphocytes. Moreover, E2A-HLF has been 
shown to activate SLUG, a mammalian homologue of the cell death specification
protein CES-1 in Caenorhabditis elegans, which appears to regulate an
evolutionarily conserved cell survival program. Recently, several key mouse
models have been generated, enabling further elucidation of these pathways on a
molecular genetic level in vivo. In this review, we discuss the characteristics
of both components of the fusion protein with regard to their contribution to the
regulation of cell fate and the oncogenic potential of E2A-HLF.

PMID: 11607821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Acta Otolaryngol. 2001 Jul;121(5):637-42.

Remarkable attachment of lactoferrin to Streptococcus pyogenes during acute
pharyngotonsillitis.

Stenfors LE(1), Bye HM, Vorland LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Tromsø, Norway.
larseric@fagmed.uit.no

The purpose of this study was to establish whether lactoferrin (hLf) attached to 
Streptococcus pyogenes, one causative agent of acute pharyngotonsillitis (AT),
during the course of the disease. Bacterial samples were obtained from the
tonsillar surfaces of 7 patients (6 females, 1 male; median age 26 years; range
16-50 years) suffering from AT who were culture-positive for S. pyogenes and from
5 healthy adult controls who were culture-negative for this pathogen. Using
gold-labelled antiserum against S. pyogenes and hLf, this pathogen and other
bacteria on the tonsillar surfaces coated with hLf could be identified by tracing
the gold particles in a transmission electron microscope. In healthy adults, 8%
(median value; range 6-12%) of the surface tonsillar bacteria were coated with
hLf. In AT patients, 59% (median value; range 42 67%) of S. pyogenes were coated 
with hLf, in contrast to 9% (median value; range 0-26%) of all other bacteria (p 
< 0.01). This study hints that hLf might participate in recovery from AT in
several ways, e.g. by binding to the S. pyogenes pathogens, in addition to its
well-known virtue of iron-binding capacity.

PMID: 11583400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2001 Aug;33(2):155-9.

Randomized, multicenter trial of two different formulas for very early enteral
feeding advancement in extremely-low-birth-weight infants.

Mihatsch WA(1), von Schoenaich P, Fahnenstich H, Dehne N, Ebbecke H, Plath C, von
Stockhausen HB, Gaus W, Pohlandt F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology and Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2002 Nov;35(5):739.

BACKGROUND: In extremely-low-birth-weight (ELBW) infants, formula feeding is
required if human milk is not available. The tolerance of a new 'high' lactose
(55 g/L), low protein, low phosphate, hydrolyzed protein formula (HLF) for early 
enteral feeding advancement of ELBW infants was compared with that of a low
lactose (1 g/L) hydrolyzed protein formula (LLF).
METHODS: In a randomized multicenter trial, 99 ELBW infants were fed according to
a standardized protocol beginning at 48 hours of age with 12 ml/kg daily
increments. Primary outcome was the cumulative milk feeding volume (CFV) from
days 3 to 14. The authors hypothesized that feeding HLF as a supplement to human 
milk would increase the CFV at least by 20% in at least 60% of matched pairs
compared with LLF. A secondary issue was to investigate whether human milk would 
increase the CFV compared with formula.
RESULTS: The CFV was 720 mL/kg (range, 0-962 mL/kg) with HLF and 613 mL/kg
(range, 3-1,283 mL/kg) with LLF feeding. There was no 20% difference. On day 14, 
the median feeding volume was 103 mL/kg. The CFV was 533 mL/kg (range, 0-962
mL/kg) in infants who received less than 10% of human milk and 832 mL/kg (range, 
74-1,283 mL/kg) in infants who received more than 10%. Necrotizing enterocolitis 
(Bell stage > or =2) occurred only with LLF feeding (n = 5; P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The study failed to find the hypothesized 20% advantage of the new
HLF. The observed advantage of human milk supports the hypothesis that it should 
be the first diet in ELBW infants; however, this hypothesis still must be
confirmed in a controlled, randomized trial.

PMID: 11568516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):5935-45.

The E2A-HLF oncoprotein activates Groucho-related genes and suppresses Runx1.

Dang J(1), Inukai T, Kurosawa H, Goi K, Inaba T, Lenny NT, Downing JR, Stifani S,
Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The E2A-HLF fusion gene, formed by the t(17;19)(q22;p13) chromosomal
translocation in leukemic pro-B cells, encodes a chimeric transcription factor
consisting of the transactivation domain of E2A linked to the bZIP DNA-binding
and protein dimerization domain of hepatic leukemia factor (HLF). This
oncoprotein blocks apoptosis induced by growth factor deprivation or irradiation,
but the mechanism for this effect remains unclear. We therefore performed
representational difference analysis (RDA) to identify downstream genetic targets
of E2A-HLF, using a murine FL5.12 pro-B cell line that had been stably
transfected with E2A-HLF cDNA under the control of a zinc-regulated
metallothionein promoter. Two RDA clones, designated RDA1 and RDA3, were
differentially upregulated in E2A-HLF-positive cells after zinc induction. The
corresponding cDNAs encoded two WD40 repeat-containing proteins, Grg2 and Grg6.
Both are related to the Drosophila protein Groucho, a transcriptional corepressor
that lacks DNA-binding activity on its own but can act in concert with other
proteins to regulate embryologic development of the fly. Expression of both Grg2 
and Grg6 was upregulated 10- to 50-fold by E2A-HLF. Immunoblot analysis detected 
increased amounts of two additional Groucho-related proteins, Grg1 and Grg4, in
cells expressing E2A-HLF. A mutant E2A-HLF protein with a disabled DNA-binding
region also mediated pro-B cell survival and activated Groucho-related genes.
Among the transcription factors known to interact with Groucho-related protein,
only RUNX1 was appreciably downregulated by E2A-HLF. Our results identify a
highly conserved family of transcriptional corepressors that are activated by
E2A-HLF, and they suggest that downregulation of RUNX1 may contribute to
E2A-HLF-mediated leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC87312
PMID: 11486032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Chemistry. 2001 Jun 1;7(11):2449-58.

Multipeptide-metalloporphyrin assembly on a dendrimer template and photoinduced
electron transfer based on the dendrimer structure.

Sakamoto M(1), Ueno A, Mihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Nagatsuta, Yokohama, Japan.

To construct an artificial photosynthetic system, peptide dendrimers
[n-(X-HLY)PAMAMs: X = R, E; Y= L, F; n=4, 8, 16, 32 and 64 segments], in which
amphiphilic alpha-helix peptides (X-HLY: R-HLL, E-HLL and R-HLF) were introduced 
at the end groups of polyamidoamine dendrimers (PAMAMs), were designed and
synthesized. The peptide dendrimers 64-(X-HLY)PAMAMs are novel synthetic
biopolymers with an enormous molecular weight, about 160 kDa, and with a
regulated amino acid sequence and three-dimensional conformation. The peptide
dendrimers bound Fe(III)- or Zn(II)-mesoporphyrin IX per two alpha-helices; this 
afforded a multimetalloporphyrin assembly similar to the natural light-harvesting
antennae in photosynthetic bacteria. Circular dichroism studies and peroxidase
activity measurements revealed that metalloporphyrins were coordinated to the
peptide dendrimers in a regulated manner and packed more densely with the growth 
of the dendrimer generation. Fluorescence quenching and photoreduction studies
with methylviologen demonstrated that the photoinduced electron-transfer function
with the peptide dendrimer-multi-Zn-MP was accomplished more effectively as the
dendrimer generation increased. Thus, the three-dimensional assembly of
metalloporphyrins and peptides in the dendrimer was an effective module for
light-harvesting antennae in an artificial photosynthetic system.

PMID: 11446647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Leukemia. 2001 Jun;15(6):995-7.

Expression of two types of E2A-HLF fusion proteins in YCUB-2, a novel cell line
established from B-lineage leukemia with t(17;19).

Takahashi H, Goto H, Eunabiki T, Fujii H, Yamazaki S, Fujioka K, Ikuta K, Kai S.

PMID: 11417493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;21(14):4636-46.

CREB is one component of the binding complex of the Ces-2/E2A-HLF binding element
and is an integral part of the interleukin-3 survival signal.

Chen W(1), Yu YL, Lee SF, Chiang YJ, Chao JR, Huang JH, Chiong JH, Huang CJ, Lai 
MZ, Yang-Yen HF, Yen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

The Ces-2/E2A-HLF binding element (CBE) is recognized by Caenorhabditis elegans
death specification gene product Ces-2 and human acute lymphocytic leukemia
oncoprotein E2A-HLF. In an attempt to identify a cellular CBE-binding protein(s) 
that may be involved in apoptosis regulation in mammals, multiple nuclear binding
complexes of CBE were identified in various mammalian cell lines and tissues by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Cyclic AMP (cAMP)-responsive element
(CRE)-binding protein (CREB) was present in one major CBE complex of Ba/F3 and
TF-1 cells, and both in vitro-translated and Escherichia coli-synthesized CREB
bound to CBE. Activation of CREB by cAMP-elevating chemicals or the catalytic
subunit of protein kinase A (PKAc) resulted in induction of the CBE-driven
reporter gene. Stimulation of Ba/F3 cells with interleukin-3 (IL-3) promptly
induced phosphorylation of CREB at serine(133) partially via a PKA-dependent
pathway. Consistently, Ba/F3 cell survival in the absence of IL-3 was prolonged
by activation of PKA. Conversely, treatment of cells with a PKA inhibitor or
expression of the dominant negative forms of the regulatory subunit type I of PKA
and CREB overrode the survival activity of IL-3. Last, the bcl-2 gene was
demonstrated to be one candidate cellular target of the CREB-containing CBE
complex, as mutations in the CRE and CBE sites significantly reduced the IL-3
inducibility of the bcl-2 promoter. Together, our results suggest that CREB is
one cellular counterpart of Ces-2/E2A-HLF and is part of IL-3 dependent apoptosis
regulation in hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC87131
PMID: 11416141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001 Jun;107(6):1001-8.

IL-4 and IL-13 induce myofibroblastic phenotype of human lung fibroblasts through
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase-dependent pathway.

Hashimoto S(1), Gon Y, Takeshita I, Maruoka S, Horie T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine Nihon University School of Medicine,
30-1 Oyaguchikamimachi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Myofibroblasts play a role in the airway remodeling response of
bronchial asthma. IL-4 and IL-13 are possibly involved in the airway remodeling
response by inducing extracellular matrix production by fibroblasts. However, the
roles of these cytokines in inducing the phenotypic modulation of human lung
fibroblasts (HLFs) to myofibroblasts and the intracellular signal have not been
determined.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the effect of IL-4 and IL-13 on inducing the phenotypic
modulation of HLFs to myofibroblasts characterized by alpha-smooth muscle actin
and examined the role of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase superfamily
in inducing the myofibroblastic phenotype of the HLF to clarify these issues.
METHODS: Phosphorylation and activities of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK), p38
MAP kinase, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) were examined by
using Western blotting and in vitro kinase assay. Expression of alpha-smooth
muscle actin in IL-4- and IL-13-stimulated HLFs was analyzed by means of Western 
blotting.
RESULTS: The results showed that (1) IL-4 and IL-13 increased alpha-smooth muscle
actin expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner; (2) IL-4 and IL-13 induced
increases in JNK and Erk phosphorylation and activity but not p38 MAP kinase
activity; (3) CEP-1347 and PD 98059 attenuated IL-4- and IL13-induced JNK and Erk
activity, respectively; and (4) CEP-1347, but not PD 98059, attenuated IL-4- and 
IL-13-induced alpha-smooth muscle actin expression.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that IL-4 and IL-13 are capable of inducing
the phenotypic modulation of HLFs to myofibroblasts, and JNK, but not p38 MAP
kinase and Erk, regulates IL-4- and IL-13-induced phenotypic modulation of HLFs
to myofibroblasts.

PMID: 11398077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Circ Res. 2001 Jun 8;88(11):1142-50.

Clock genes in the heart: characterization and attenuation with hypertrophy.

Young ME(1), Razeghi P, Taegtmeyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of
Texas-Houston Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2001 Dec 7;89(12):1084-6.

We investigated whether the heart, like other mammalian organs, possesses
internal clocks, and, if so, whether pressure overload-induced hypertrophy alters
the clock mechanism. Clock genes are intrinsically maintained, as shown by
rhythmic changes even in single cells. Clocks are believed to confer a selective 
advantage by priming the cell for the expected environmental stimulus. In this
way, clocks allow anticipation, thereby synchronizing responsiveness of the cell 
with the timing of the stimulus. We have found that in rat heart all mammalian
homologues of known Drosophila clock genes (bmal1, clock, cry1, cry2, per1, per2,
per3, dbp, hlf, and tef) show circadian patterns of expression and that the
induction of clock output genes (the PAR [rich in proline and acidic amino acid
residues] transcription factors dbp, hlf, and tef) is attenuated in the
pressure-overloaded hypertrophied heart. The results expose a new dynamic
regulatory system in the heart, which is partially lost with hypertrophy.
Although the target genes of these PAR transcription factors are not known in the
heart, the results provide evidence for a diminished ability of the hypertrophied
heart to anticipate and subsequently adapt to physiological alterations during
the day.

PMID: 11397780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2001 Jun;226(6):559-64.

Liposomes as possible carriers for lactoferrin in the local treatment of
inflammatory diseases.

Trif M(1), Guillen C, Vaughan DM, Telfer JM, Brewer JM, Roseanu A, Brock JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Spl Independentei 296, 77700 Bucharest, Romania.
mtrif@biochim.ro

Liposomes prepared from naturally occurring biodegradable and nontoxic lipids are
good candidates for local delivery of therapeutic agents. Treatment of arthritis 
by intra-articular administration of anti-inflammatory drugs encapsulated in
liposomes prolongs the residence time of the drug in the joint. We have
previously shown that intra-articular injection of human lactoferrin (hLf), a
glycoprotein that possesses anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial activities, into 
mice with collagen-induced arthritis reduces inflammation. We have now
investigated the possibility of using liposome-entrapped hLf as a delivery system
to prolong hLf retention at sites of local inflammation such as the rheumatoid
joint. Entrapment of hLf in negatively charged liposomes enhanced its
accumulation in cultured human synovial fibroblasts from rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) patients, compared with positively charged formulations or free protein.
However, in the presence of synovial fluid, positively charged liposomes with
entrapped hLf were more stable than the negatively charged formulations. In vivo 
experiments in mice with collagen-induced arthritis showed that the positive
liposomes were more efficient in prolonging the residence time of hLf in the
inflamed joint as compared with other liposomes. Thus, the amount of hLf retained
in the joint after 2 hr was 60% of the injected dose in the case of positive
liposomes and only 16% for negative pH-sensitive liposomes. The results suggest
that entrapment of hLf in positively charged liposomes may modify its
pharmacodynamic profile and be of therapeutic benefit in the treatment of RA and 
other local inflammatory conditions.

PMID: 11395926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Hypertens. 2001 May;19(5):931-40.

Exercise training causes skeletal muscle venular growth and alters hemodynamic
responses in spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Amaral SL(1), Silveira NP, Zorn TM, Michelini LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, ICB, University of São Paulo, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether training changes skeletal muscle venular
profile and hemodynamic responses to exercise we studied spontanesouly
hypertensive rats (SHR) and Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats submitted to training
programme (T = 50-60% of VO2max).
DESIGN: Training (T) was performed on a treadmill over a period of 13 weeks.
Age-matched control groups were kept sedentary (S). T and S rats were chronically
instrumented for hindlimb flow (HLF) and arterial pressure (AP) measurements at
rest, during dynamic exercise and recovery in two different situations: control
and after extensive intravenous blockade (hexamethonium + losartan +
Nomega-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester + hydralazine). For morphometric analysis,
skeletal muscle samples (gracilis) were obtained after transcardiac perfusion
with fixative.
RESULTS: T caused a significant reduction of resting mean arterial pressure (MAP)
(-11%) only in the SHR group without changing basal HLF. In the sedentary SHR
(SHRs), basal relative hindlimb resistance was increased by 45%, but was
significantly reduced after T (P < 0.05). During dynamic exercise, MAP increased 
similarly (10-20 mmHg) in all groups. HLF increases were similar for the four
groups up to 0.8 km/h; at higher workloads, HLF was higher in trained SHR (SHRT) 
versus trained WKY (WKYT) (3.9- versus 2.9-fold increase over basal HLF,
respectively). After blockade (and pressure correction with IV phenylephrine
infusion), steady-state exercise was performed with similar hindlimb vasodilation
in all groups and was accompanied by MAP reduction (-17 +/- 8 mmHg) only in SHRT 
group. Skeletal muscle venular profile (density, diameter and lumen
cross-sectional area) was similar in WKY(T), WKY(S) and SHR(S), but significantly
increased in SHR(T). In this group the two-fold increase in venule density was
correlated with both the reduction in baseline MAP and the increase in HLF during
dynamic exercise.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that increased venule density is a specific
adaptation of SHR skeletal muscle to training. Venular growth may contribute to
both the pressure-lowering effect and the large HLF at high exercise intensities 
observed in the trained SHR.

PMID: 11393677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hepatology. 2001 May;33(5):1087-97.

Involvement of p21(WAF1/Cip1), p27(Kip1), and p18(INK4c) in troglitazone-induced 
cell-cycle arrest in human hepatoma cell lines.

Koga H(1), Sakisaka S, Harada M, Takagi T, Hanada S, Taniguchi E, Kawaguchi T,
Sasatomi K, Kimura R, Hashimoto O, Ueno T, Yano H, Kojiro M, Sata M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume,
Japan. hirokoga@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) regulates cell
growth and differentiation. Recent evidence has suggested that PPARgamma ligands 
had anti-tumor effects through inhibiting cell growth and inducing cell
differentiation in several types of malignant neoplasm. In the present study, we 
investigated: 1) the expression of PPARgamma in both human hepatoma cell lines
and 5 resected human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues; 2) the
growth-inhibitory effect of troglitazone, a PPARgamma ligand, on those hepatoma
cells; and 3) the molecular mechanisms of troglitazone-induced cell-cycle arrest.
Five hepatoma cell lines, HLF, HuH-7, HAK-1A, HAK-1B, and HAK-5, were used. The
mRNA expression levels of PPARgamma, p21(WAF1/Cip1), and p27(Kip1) were
determined by real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction. The expression of cell cycle-regulating proteins, such as p21, p27,
p18(INK4c), cyclin E, and pRb, was examined using Western blotting. PPARgamma was
constitutively expressed in all the cell lines and the HCC tissues used in this
study. A cytostatic effect of troglitazone was found in those cell lines, and
this inhibition of cell growth was dosage-dependent. G0/G1 arrest was apparently 
demonstrated in flow cytometric analysis in HLF, HAK-1A, HAK-1B, and HAK-5, all
of which showed an increased expression of p21 protein. However, HuH-7, lacking
p21 protein expression, did not demonstrate clear arrest in the cell-cycle
analysis. HLF, which was deficient in the protein product of the retinoblastoma
tumor-suppressor gene (pRb), responded most profoundly to troglitazone, showing
an increased expression in not only p21, but also in p27 and in p18. These
findings suggested that p21, p27, and p18 might be involved in
troglitazone-induced cell-cycle arrest in human hepatoma cells.

PMID: 11343236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Nucl Med. 2001 May;42(5):788-94.

99mTc-labeled antimicrobial peptides for detection of bacterial and Candida
albicans infections.

Welling MM(1), Lupetti A, Balter HS, Lanzzeri S, Souto B, Rey AM, Savio EO,
Paulusma-Annema A, Pauwels EK, Nibbering PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Nucl Med. 2002 Aug;43(8):1125; author reply 1126-7.

This study compared the possibilities and limitations of 99mTc-labeled synthetic 
peptides derived from two human antimicrobial peptides, namely, ubiquicidin (UBI)
and lactoferrin (hLF), for the scintigraphic detection of bacterial and fungal
infections in mice and rabbits. The rationale of our approach was that selected
peptides accumulate in infected areas but not in sterile inflammatory lesions,
because they bind preferentially to microorganisms. 99mTc-labeled human
neutrophil peptides (defensins), ciprofloxacin, and human polyclonal IgG were
included as control agents.METHODS: 99mTc-labeled peptides and control agents
were injected intravenously into animals that had been injected intramuscularly
18 h earlier with multidrug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, or fluconazole-resistant Candida albicans. Sterile inflammatory sites
were induced by the injection of heat-killed microorganisms or lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) into the thigh muscle. Up to 4 h after injection, the accumulation of
99mTc-labeled compounds in the infected/inflamed thigh muscles was determined
using scintigraphic techniques and radioactivity counts in dissected tissues.
RESULTS: Scintigraphy revealed that 99mTc-labeled peptides UBI 29-41, UBI 18-35, 
UBI 31-38, hLF 1-11, and defensins, which showed preferential in vitro binding to
microorganisms in a former study, accumulated at a significantly higher rate (P <
0.01) in bacterial and C. albicans infections in mice and rabbits than in
inflamed tissues induced by heat-killed microorganisms or by LPS. No significant 
difference in the accumulation of 99mTc-labeled ciprofloxacin was observed
between infected and sterile inflamed thigh muscles in mice.
CONCLUSION: 99mTc-labeled antimicrobial peptides UBI 29-41, UBI 18-35, UBI 31-38,
hLF 1-11, and defensins accumulate significantly in tissues infected with
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and C. albicans. Significantly lower (P 
< 0.01) accumulation of these peptides occurs in sterile inflamed tissues. These 
data indicate that the peptides preferentially tag microorganisms at the site of 
infection, which is in agreement with their preferential binding to the
microorganisms in vitro and in vivo. 99mTc-labeled ciprofloxacin does not
distinguish between infections and sterile inflammatory lesions, which implies
that its specificity for the detection of bacterial infections is not warranted.

PMID: 11337578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Apr 30;1536(1):1-12.

Enhanced expression of mRNAs of antisecretory factor-1, gp96, DAD1 and CDC34 in
human hepatocellular carcinomas.

Tanaka K(1), Kondoh N, Shuda M, Matsubara O, Imazeki N, Ryo A, Wakatsuki T, Hada 
A, Goseki N, Igari T, Hatsuse K, Aihara T, Horiuchi S, Yamamoto N, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Virology, School of Medicine, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Japan.

To identify differentially expressed genes in hepatocarcinogenesis, we performed 
differential display analysis using surgically resected hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) and adjacent non-tumorous liver tissues. We identified four cDNA fragments 
upregulated in HCC samples, encoding antisecretory factor-1 (AF), gp96, DAD1 and 
CDC34. Northern blot analysis demonstrated that these mRNAs were expressed
preferentially in HCCs compared with adjacent non-tumorous liver tissues or
normal liver tissues from non-HCC patients. The expression of these mRNAs was
increased along with the histological grading of HCC tissues. These mRNA levels
were also high in three human HCC cell lines (HuH-7, HepG2 and HLF), irrespective
of the growth state. We also demonstrate that sodium butyrate, an inducer of
differentiation, downregulated the expression of AF and gp96 mRNAs, supporting in
part our pathological observation. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that
gp96 and CDC34 proteins were preferentially accumulated in cytoplasm and nuclei
of HCC cells, respectively. Overexpression of these genes could be an important
manifestation of HCC phenotypes and should provide clues to understand the
molecular basis of hepatocellular carcinogenesis.

PMID: 11335099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Genes Dev. 2001 Apr 15;15(8):995-1006.

Antagonistic role of E4BP4 and PAR proteins in the circadian oscillatory
mechanism.

Mitsui S(1), Yamaguchi S, Matsuo T, Ishida Y, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Brain Science, Kobe University School of Medicine,
Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

E4BP4, a basic leucine zipper transcription factor, contains a DNA-binding domain
closely related to DBP, HLF, and TEF, which are PAR proteins. Here, we show that 
the phase of e4bp4 mRNA rhythm is opposite to that of the dbp, hlf, and tef
rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the mammalian circadian center, and
the liver. The protein levels of E4BP4 and DBP also fluctuate in almost the
opposite phase. Moreover, all PAR proteins activate, whereas E4BP4 suppresses,
the transcriptional activity of the reporter gene containing a common binding
sequence in transcriptional assays in vitro. An electrophoretic mobility shift
assay demonstrated that E4BP4 is not able to dimerize with the PAR proteins, but 
is able to compete for the same binding sites with them. Furthermore, we showed
sustained low e4bp4 and high dbp mRNA levels in mCry-deficient mice. These
results indicate that the E4BP4 and PAR proteins are paired components of a
reciprocating mechanism wherein E4BP4 suppresses the transcription of target
genes during the time of day when E4BP4 is abundant, and the PAR proteins
activate them at another time of day. E4BP4 and the PAR proteins may switch back 
and forth between the on-off conditions of the target genes.

PMCID: PMC312673
PMID: 11316793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Apr;7(4):824-30.

Elevated and altered expression of the multifunctional DNA base excision repair
and redox enzyme Ape1/ref-1 in prostate cancer.

Kelley MR(1), Cheng L, Foster R, Tritt R, Jiang J, Broshears J, Koch M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, 702 Barnhill Drive, Indianapolis, Indiana 
46202, USA. mkelley@iupui.edu

The DNA base excision repair pathway is responsible for the repair of cellular
alkylation and oxidative DNA damage. A crucial step in the BER pathway involves
the cleavage of baseless sites in DNA by an apurinic/apyrimidinic or baseless
(AP) endonuclease (Ape1/ref-1), which is a multifunctional enzyme that acts not
only as an AP endonuclease but also as a redox-modifying factor for a variety of 
transcription factors including Fos, Jun, paired box containing genes (PAX),
nuclear factor-kappaB, hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIF-1alpha), HIF-like
factor (HLF), p53, and others. The expression of Ape1/ref-1 in prostate has not
been characterized previously. Ape1/ref-1 nuclear immunohistochemistry levels,
scored for intensity as 1+, 2+, or 3+, were 91, 3, and 6% in benign hypertrophy
(BPH), 0, 42, and 58% in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and 3, 30, and
67% in prostate cancer, respectively, clearly showing an increase in Ape1/ref-1
nuclear staining in the PIN and cancer compared with BPH. Furthermore, the level 
of cytoplasmic staining of Ape1/ref-1 in cancer and PIN were elevated (42 and
36%, respectively) compared with BPH (5%). There was no correlation with
prostate-specific antigen values or doubling times to Ape1/ref-1 levels. In
conclusion, we have demonstrated that Ape1/ref-1 is dramatically elevated in
prostate cancer, the level of staining of Ape1/ref-1 increases from low in BPH to
intense in PIN and cancer, and there is an increase in the amount of Ape1/ref-1
in the cytoplasm of PIN and cancer compared with BPH. Given these results, we
conclude that Ape1/ref-1 may be a diagnostic marker for early prostate cancer and
play a role, through its repair, redox, or both functions, in the physiology of
the early development of prostate cancer.

PMID: 11309329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Hepatol Res. 2001 May 1;20(1):84-96.

Simple quantitative assay of alpha-fetoprotein mRNA in liver tissue using the
real-time detection polymerase chain reaction assay - its application for
clinical use.

Matsumura M(1), Ijichi M, Shiratori Y, Togo G, Hikiba Y, Inoued K, Kohara M,
Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute for Adult Diseases, Asahi Life Foundation, 1-9-14
Nishi-Shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku, 160-0023, Tokyo, Japan

Alpha-feto protein (AFP) mRNA levels increase in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
cells as compared with non-neoplastic tissue. Therefore, detection of AFP mRNA in
blood nuclear cells is useful for the evaluation of treatment efficacy and
prognosis of HCC. In this study, simple and reproducible methods were developed
to quantify AFP mRNA using the real-time RT-PCR assay (Taq Man assay). By using
in vitro synthesized AFP and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
RNA, the sensitivity and dynamic range of the RT-PCR assay were established. AFP 
mRNA in both HCC and non-neoplastic tissue, as well as in cell lines, were
measured using this assay system. The expression of the AFP mRNA level was
normalized using the GAPDH house keeping gene product as an endogenous reference.
AFP and GAPDH mRNA can be quantified in the range of 10-10(8) copies when using
this quantitative assay. Among HCC cell lines, Huh 7 and HepG2 cells,
respectively, represented 1.5x10(6) and 6.0x10(5) AFP mRNA/10(6) GAPDH mRNA, in
contrast to 6, 23 and 230 AFP mRNA/10(6) GAPDH mRNA for HLE, HLF and PLC/PRF/5
cells, respectively. Other cell lines derived from stomach, pancreas, and colon
cancers have 10 AFP mRNA copies/10(6) GAPDH mRNA. In liver tissue from patients
with chronic hepatitis, and the non-neoplastic portion of the liver from HCC
patients, AFP mRNA distributes from 2.5x10(3) to 5.8x10(4)/10(6) GAPDH
transcripts. In contrast, AFP mRNA in tumor cells were more than 100-fold higher 
than that found in corresponding non-neoplastic portions in two patients who had 
a high level of AFP in serum. The establishment of the TaqMan quantifying system 
for AFP mRNA may have important clinical implications.

PMID: 11282488  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 1;61(5):2220-5.

Altered expression of Ape1/ref-1 in germ cell tumors and overexpression in NT2
cells confers resistance to bleomycin and radiation.

Robertson KA(1), Bullock HA, Xu Y, Tritt R, Zimmerman E, Ulbright TM, Foster RS, 
Einhorn LH, Kelley MR.

Author information: 
(1)Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics, James
Whircomb Riley Hospital for Children, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis 46202, USA.

The human AP endonuclease (Ape1 or ref-1) DNA base excision repair (BER) enzyme
is a multifunctional protein that has an impact on a wide variety of important
cellular functions including oxidative signaling, transcription factor
regulation, and cell cycle control. It acts on mutagenic AP (baseless) sites in
DNA as a critical member of the DNA BER repair pathway. Moreover, Ape1/ref-1
stimulates the DNA-binding activity of transcription factors (Fos-Jun, nuclear
factor-kappaB, Myb, ATF/cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein family,
HIF-1alpha, HLF, PAX, and p53) through a redox mechanism and thus represents a
novel component of signal transduction processes that regulate eukaryotic gene
expression. Ape1/ref-1 has also been shown to be closely linked to apoptosis
associated with thioredoxin, and altered levels of Ape1/ref-1 have been found in 
some cancers. In a pilot study, we have examined Ape1/ref-1 expression by
immunohistochemistry in sections of germ cell tumors (GCTs) from 10 patients with
testicular cancer of various histologies including seminomas, yolk sac tumors,
and malignant teratomas. Ape1/ref-1 was expressed at relatively high levels in
the tumor cells of nearly all sections. We hypothesized that elevated expression 
of Ape1/ref-1 is responsible in part for the resistance to therapeutic agents. To
answer this hypothesis, we overexpressed the Ape1/ref-1 cDNA in the GCT cell line
NT2/D1 using retroviral gene transduction with the vector LAPESN. Using an
oligonucleotide cleavage assay and immunohistochemistry to assess Ape1/ref-1
repair activity and expression, respectively, we found that the repair activity
and relative Ape1/ref-1 expression in GCT cell lines are directly related. NT2/D1
cells transduced with Ape1/ref-1 exhibited 2-fold higher AP endonuclease activity
in the oligonucleotide cleavage assay, and this was reflected in a 2-3-fold
increase in protection against bleomycin. Lesser protection was observed with
gamma-irradiation. We conclude that: (a) Ape1/ref-1 is expressed at relatively
high levels in some GCTs; (b) elevated expression of Ape1/ref-1 in testicular
cancer cell lines results in resistance to certain therapeutic agents; and (c)
Ape1/ref-1 expression in GCT cell lines determined by immunohistochemistry and
repair activity assays parallels the level of protection from bleomycin. We
further hypothesize that elevated Ape1/ref-1 levels observed in human testicular 
cancer may be related to their relative resistance to therapy and may serve as a 
diagnostic marker for refractory disease. To our knowledge, this is the first
example of overexpressing Ape1/ref-1 in a mammalian system resulting in enhanced 
protection to DNA-damaging agents.

PMID: 11280790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Leukemia. 2001 Jan;15(1):95-102.

Detection of E2A translocations in leukemias via fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Boomer T(1), Varella-Garcia M, McGavran L, Meltesen L, Olsen AS, Hunger SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver,
CO, USA.

Three rearrangements in ALL disrupt E2A and create E2A fusion proteins: the
t(1;19)(q23;p13) and E2A-PBX1, t(17;19)(q22;p13) and E2A-HLF and a cryptic
inv(19)(p13;q13) and E2A-FB1. While E2A is fused to PBX1 in most ALLs with a
t(1;19), 5-10% of cases have translocations that appear identical, but do not
affect E2A or PBX1. Because more intensive therapy improves the outcome of
patients with E2A-PBX1positive (1;19) translocations, it is critical to identify 
this subset of patients so that appropriate therapy can be administered. In
addition, there are balanced and unbalanced variants of the t(1;19) and
controversy exists regarding the clinical significance of this distinction. We
have developed a two-color fluorescence in situ hybridization assay that
accurately detects E2A translocations in metaphase and interphase cells,
distinguishes between balanced and unbalanced variants and identifies patients
with a t(1;19) who lack E2A-PBX1 fusion. We found that clonal microheterogeneity 
is common in patients with E2A translocations and most patients have mixtures of 
cells with balanced and unbalanced translocations, suggesting that this
distinction represents two ends of a continuum rather than distinct biological
entities. These reagents should have widespread clinical utility and be useful
for translational and basic research studies involving E2A translocations and
this region of chromosome 19p13.

PMID: 11243406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Gene. 2001 Jan 24;263(1-2):239-45.

The DBP transcriptional activation domain is highly homologous to that of HLF and
TEF and is not responsible for the tissue type-specific transcriptional activity 
of DBP.

Li S(1), Hunger SP.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of Colorado Cancer Center
and School of Medicine, 4200 East Ninth Ave., Denver, CO 80262, USA.

DBP, HLF and TEF comprise a distinct subfamily of mammalian bZIP proteins that
plays an important role in regulation of tissue-specific gene expression,
particularly in the liver. In this report we demonstrate that DBP contains a 38
amino acid TAD which is highly homologous to the HLF and TEF TADs that we have
delineated previously. Deletion of this domain completely abrogates
transcriptional activity of native DBP and GAL4-DBP fusion proteins. This domain 
functions as a modular TAD that is a potent transcriptional activator when fused 
to the GAL4 DBD. While DBP itself is a liver-specific transactivator, the DBP TAD
is active in a variety of cell types, indicating that liver-specific activity is 
not an intrinsic property of the TAD and must be conferred by other regions of
the protein. Using GAL4-HLF fusion proteins, we further refine the core TAD of
PAR proteins to a region of 13 amino acids. Recently described PAR-bZIP proteins 
from Drosophila and zebrafish also contain domains that share strong homology
with the TAD of mammalian PAR proteins, making this one of the most highly
evolutionarily conserved TADs identified to date.

PMID: 11223263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001 Jan;163(1):152-7.

Transforming growth Factor-beta1 induces phenotypic modulation of human lung
fibroblasts to myofibroblast through a c-Jun-NH2-terminal kinase-dependent
pathway.

Hashimoto S(1), Gon Y, Takeshita I, Matsumoto K, Maruoka S, Horie T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nihon University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Myofibroblasts play an important role in the fibrogenic process of pulmonary
fibrosis. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta is well known to induce the
phenotypic modulation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts; however, the
intracellular signal regulating induction of the myofibroblastic phenotype of
human lung fibroblasts (HLF) has not been determined. In the present study, we
examined the role of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) superfamily in
inducing the phenotypic modulation of HLF to myofibroblasts characterized by
alpha-smooth-muscle actin expression, in order to clarify this issue. The results
showed that: (1) TGF-beta1 caused the phenotypic modulation of HLF to
myofibroblasts in a dose- and a time-dependent manner; (2) TGF-beta1 induced
increases in c-Jun-NH2- terminal kinase (JNK), p38 MAPK, and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (Erk) phosphorylation and activity; (3) the inhibitors
CEP-1347, SB 203580, and PD 98059 attenuated TGF-beta1-induced JNK, p38 MAPK, and
Erk activity, respectively; and (4) CEP-1347, but not SB 203580 or PD 98059,
attenuated the TGF-beta1-induced phenotypic modulation of HLF to myofibroblasts
in a dose-dependent manner. These results indicate that TGF-beta1 is capable of
inducing the myofibroblastic phenotype of HLF, and that JNK regulates the
phenotypic modulation of TGF-beta1-stimulated HLF to myofibroblasts.

PMID: 11208641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Infect Immun. 2001 Mar;69(3):1469-76.

Human lactoferrin and peptides derived from its N terminus are highly effective
against infections with antibiotic-resistant bacteria.

Nibbering PH(1), Ravensbergen E, Welling MM, van Berkel LA, van Berkel PH,
Pauwels EK, Nuijens JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. p.h.nibbering@lumc.nl

Since human lactoferrin (hLF) binds to bacterial products through its highly
positively charged N terminus, we investigated which of the two cationic domains 
is involved in its bactericidal activity. The results revealed that hLF lacking
the first three residues (hLF(-3N)) was less efficient than hLF in killing of
antibiotic-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Listeria monocytogenes, and
Klebsiella pneumoniae. Both hLF preparations failed to kill Escherichia coli O54.
In addition, hLF(-3N) was less effective than hLF in reducing the number of
viable bacteria in mice infected with antibiotic-resistant S. aureus and K.
pneumoniae. Studies with synthetic peptides corresponding to the first 11
N-terminal amino acids, designated hLF(1-11), and fragments thereof demonstrated 
that peptides lacking the first three N-terminal residues are less effective than
hLF(1-11) in killing of bacteria. Furthermore, a peptide corresponding to
residues 21 to 31, which comprises the second cationic domain, was less effective
than hLF(1-11) in killing of bacteria in vitro and in mice having an infection
with antibiotic-resistant S. aureus or K. pneumoniae. Using fluorescent probes,
we found that bactericidal hLF peptides, but not nonbactericidal peptides, caused
an increase of the membrane permeability. In addition, hLF killed the various
bacteria, most probably by inducing intracellular changes in these bacteria
without affecting the membrane permeability. Together, hLF and peptides derived
from its N terminus are highly effective against infections with
antibiotic-resistant S. aureus and K. pneumoniae, and the first two arginines
play an essential role in this activity.

PMCID: PMC98043
PMID: 11179314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Clin Exp Immunol. 2000 Dec;122(3):429-36.

Expression of myelin basic protein (MBP) epitopes in human non-neural cells
revealed by two anti-MBP IgM monoclonal antibodies.

Chignola R(1), Cestari T, Guerriero C, Riviera AP, Ferrari S, Brendolan A, Gobbo 
M, Amato S, Sartoris S, Fracasso G, Liuzzi MG, Riccio P, Tridente G, Andrighetto 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Neurology Section, University of Verona, , Italy. 
chignola@borgoroma.univr.it

Two monoclonal antibodies (1H6.2 and 45.30) were raised against MBP purified from
human brain under experimental conditions that allowed MBP to retain binding to
surrounding myelin lipids (human lipid-bound MBP (hLB-MBP)). 1H6.2 and 45.30
MoAbs were selected on the basis of their different binding properties to:
hLB-MBP, human lipid-free-MBP (hLF-MBP) and bovine lipid-free-MBP (bLF-MBP).
Although the isotype of both MoAbs was IgM, their specificity, as tested in ELISA
assays against chemical haptens and unrelated protein antigens, was restricted to
MBP. 1H6.2 and 45.30 MoAbs stained MBP from human brain white matter tissue
extracts, as well as bLF-MBP, in Western blot assays. Both MoAbs stained
oligodendrocytes and myelin in immunohistochemical analysis of white matter from 
human brain. Tissue sections from human peripheral nerves were labelled by 1H6.2 
only, however, demonstrating that the MoAbs recognize two different epitopes.
Epitopes recognized by 1H6.2 and 45.30 MoAbs were also expressed by a wide array 
of human non-neural cells of either normal or pathological origin, as evidenced
by cytofluorimetric assays. In particular, MBP epitopes (MEs) were expressed by
lymphoid cells as well as by cells which play a pivotal role in immune
homeostasis and in the immune response, such as thymic epithelial cells and
professional antigen-presenting cells. Both MoAbs were efficiently internalized
by cells from a human B cell line, suggesting trafficking of MEs along the
endocytic pathways. These findings support hypotheses regarding the role of MEs
expressed by non-neural cells in establishing self-tolerance and/or in triggering
the immune response against MBP antigen.

PMCID: PMC1905799
PMID: 11122251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Oncol. 2001 Jan;18(1):49-55.

Relation of type II transforming growth factor-beta receptor to hepatic fibrosis 
and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Ueno T(1), Hashimoto O, Kimura R, Torimura T, Kawaguchi T, Nakamura T, Sakata R, 
Koga H, Sata M.

Author information: 
(1)Kurume University Research Center for Innovative Cancer Therapy, Second
Department of Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
takato@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

Hepatocarcinogenesis is closely related to hepatic fibrosis. In this study, we
investigated the relationship of type II transforming growth factor-beta receptor
(T beta RII) to hepatic fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In vivo:
liver tissues were obtained from 30 patients (10 chronic hepatitis, 7 cirrhosis, 
13 HCC). Protein expression and immunolocalization of T beta RII were examined by
Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry. In vitro: T beta RII protein
expression in hepatoma cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B, HLE, HLF and Huh7) was examined 
by Western blot analysis. Next, we transfected T beta RII cDNA to Huh7, and
compared the change of cell number and observed the induction of apoptosis after 
TGF-beta1 treatment using a FACScan flow cytometer. In vivo: T beta RII
immunolocalization in liver tissues was significantly decreased in patients with 
HCC compared with that of patients with chronic hepatitis or liver cirrhosis. In 
Western blot analysis, T beta RII expression in tissues attenuated in comparison 
with that in non-tumor tissues in some patients with HCC. In vitro: T beta RII
protein expression in HLE, HLF and Huh7 cells was weaker than that in HepG2 and
Hep3B cells. In Huh7 cells transfected T beta RII cDNA, cell arrest and apoptosis
were obviously induced. These results indicated that human HCC has a reduced
expression of T beta RII for TGF-beta1. This may provide a selective growth
advantage to HCC to escape the inhibitory growth signals of TGF-beta1, and may be
linked with critical steps in the growth of hepatoma cells.

PMID: 11115538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Infect Immun. 2000 Dec;68(12):6519-25.

Human lactoferrin interacts with soluble CD14 and inhibits expression of
endothelial adhesion molecules, E-selectin and ICAM-1, induced by the
CD14-lipopolysaccharide complex.

Baveye S(1), Elass E, Fernig DG, Blanquart C, Mazurier J, Legrand D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Biologique et Unité Mixte de Recherche no. 8576 du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université des Sciences et
Technologies de Lille, 59655 Villeneuve d'Ascq Cedex, France.

Lipopolysaccharides (LPS), either in the free form or complexed to CD14, a LPS
receptor, are elicitors of the immune system. Lactoferrin (Lf), a LPS-chelating
glycoprotein, protects animals against septic shock. Since optimal protection
requires administration of Lf prior to lethal doses of LPS, we hypothesized that 
interactions between Lf and soluble CD14 (sCD14) exist. In a first step, human
sCD14 and human Lf (hLf) were used to determine the kinetic binding parameters of
hLf to free sCD14 in an optical biosensor. The results demonstrated that hLf
bound specifically and with a high affinity (K(d) = 16+/-7 nM) to sCD14. Affinity
chromatography studies showed that hLf interacted not only with free sCD14 but
also, though with different binding properties, with sCD14 complexed to LPS or
lipid A-2-keto-3-deoxyoctonic acid-heptose. In a second step, we have
investigated whether the capacity of hLf to interact with sCD14 could modulate
the expression of endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecule 1 (E-selectin) or
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) induced by the sCD14-LPS complex on
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Our experiments show that hLf
significantly inhibited both E-selectin and ICAM-1 expressions at the surface of 
HUVEC. In conclusion, these observations suggest that the anti-inflammatory
effects of hLf are due not only to the ability of the molecule to chelate LPS but
also to its ability to interact with sCD14 and with the sCD14 complexed to LPS,
thus modifying the activation of endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC97745
PMID: 11083760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000 Dec;44(12):3257-63.

Candidacidal activities of human lactoferrin peptides derived from the N
terminus.

Lupetti A(1), Paulusma-Annema A, Welling MM, Senesi S, van Dissel JT, Nibbering
PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Division of Nuclear Medicine, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

In light of the need for new antifungal agents, the candidacidal activities of
human lactoferrin (hLF) and synthetic peptides representing the first, hLF(1-11),
and second, hLF(21-31), cationic domains of its N terminus were compared. The
results revealed that hLF(1-11) was more effective in killing
fluconazole-resistant Candida albicans than hLF(21-31) and much more effective
than lactoferrin, as determined microbiologically and by propidium iodide (PI)
staining. By using hLF(1-11) and various derivatives, it was found that the
second and third residues of the N terminus of hLF(1-11) were critical for its
candidacidal activity. Detailed investigation to elucidate the mechanism of
action of hLF(1-11) revealed a dose-dependent release of ATP by Candida upon
exposure to hLF(1-11). Our observations that sodium azide reduced the PI uptake
and candidacidal activity of hLF(1-11) and that, upon exposure to hLF(1-11), the 
fluorescent dye rhodamine 123 first accumulated inside the mitochondria and later
was released into the cytoplasm indicate that the peptide triggers the energized 
mitochondrion. Furthermore, oxidized ATP, which interferes with the interaction
of ATP with its extracellular receptors, blocked the candidacidal action of
hLF(1-11), as measured microbiologically and by PI staining. Addition of ATP (or 
analogues) was not a sufficient stimulus to kill C. albicans or to act
synergistically with suboptimal concentrations of the peptide. The main
conclusions are that the first two arginines at the N terminus of hLF are
critical in the candidacidal activity of hLF(1-11) and that extracellular ATP is 
essential but not sufficient for the peptide to exert its candidacidal activity.

PMCID: PMC90189
PMID: 11083624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biol Pharm Bull. 2000 Oct;23(10):1167-72.

Characterization of bovine and human lactoferrins as glycyrrhizin-binding
proteins and their phosphorylation in vitro by casein kinase II.

Hatomi M(1), Tanigawa K, Fujihara M, Ito J, Yanahira S, Ohtsuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetical Biochemistry, Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Japan.

The binding ability of bovine and human lactoferrins (bLF and hLF; LFs) to a
glycyrrhizin (GL)-affinity column and their phosphorylation by casein kinase II
(CK-II) in vitro were biochemically investigated. It was found that (i) both bLF 
and hLF are GL-binding proteins; (ii) purified both proteins function as
phosphate acceptors of CK-II; and (iii) this phosphorylation is completely
inhibited by two polyphenol-containing anti-oxidant compounds (quercetin and
epigallocatechin gallate) at I microm, whereas a glycyrrhetinic acid derivative
(oGA) inhibits it at one tenth the concentration of GL. The DNA-binding affinity 
of hLF was reduced by GL in a dose dependent manner. However, no significant
effect of the CK-II-mediated hLF phosphorylation on its DNA-binding affinity was 
detected. These results suggest that the GL-induced inhibition of the DNA-binding
affinity and the CK-II-mediated phosphorylation of hLF may be closely correlated 
with the anti-inflammatory effect of GL in the human body.

PMID: 11041245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mutat Res. 2000 Oct 16;461(2):83-108.

Going APE over ref-1.

Evans AR(1), Limp-Foster M, Kelley MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The DNA base excision repair (BER) pathway is responsible for the repair of
cellular alkylation and oxidative DNA damage. A crucial and the second step in
the BER pathway involves the cleavage of baseless sites in DNA by an AP
endonuclease. The major AP endonuclease in mammalian cells is Ape1/ref-1.
Ape1/ref-1 is a multifunctional protein that is not only responsible for repair
of AP sites, but also functions as a reduction-oxidation (redox) factor
maintaining transcription factors in an active reduced state. Ape1/ref-1 has been
shown to stimulate the DNA binding activity of numerous transcription factors
that are involved in cancer promotion and progression such as Fos, Jun, NF(B,
PAX, HIF-1(, HLF and p53. Ape1/ref-1 has also been implicated in the activation
of bioreductive drugs which require reduction in order to be active and has been 
shown to interact with a subunit of the Ku antigen to act as a negative regulator
of the parathyroid hormone promoter, as well as part of the HREBP transcription
factor complex. Ape1/ref-1 levels have been found to be elevated in a number of
cancers such as ovarian, cervical, prostate, rhabdomyosarcomas and germ cell
tumors and correlated with the radiosensitivity of cervical cancers. In this
review, we have attempted to try and assimilated as much data concerning
Ape1/ref-1 and incorporate the rapidly growing information on Ape1/ref-1 in a
wide variety of functions and systems.

PMID: 11018583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Infect Immun. 2000 Oct;68(10):5816-23.

Human lactoferrin and peptides derived from a surface-exposed helical region
reduce experimental Escherichia coli urinary tract infection in mice.

Håversen LA(1), Engberg I, Baltzer L, Dolphin G, Hanson LA, Mattsby-Baltzer I.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Clinical Immunology, Göteborg, Sweden.

Lactoferrin (LF) is a multifunctional immunoregulatory protein that has been
associated with host defense at mucosal surfaces through its antibacterial
properties. The antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties of LF were further
explored with an animal model of experimental urinary tract infection. Bovine LF 
(bLF), human LF (hLF), and synthetic peptide sequences based on the antibacterial
region of hLF (amino acid residues 16 to 40 [HLD1] and 18 to 40 [HLD2]) were
given orally to female mice 30 min after the instillation of 10(8) Escherichia
coli bacteria into the urinary bladder. The control groups received
phosphate-buffered saline or water. C3H/Tif mice were treated with hLF or bLF,
and C3H/HeN mice were treated with bLF only. The numbers of bacteria in the
kidneys and bladder of C3H/Tif and C3H/HeN mice were significantly reduced 24 h
later by the LF treatments compared to the findings for the control group. The
hLF-treated group showed the strongest reduction compared with the
vehicle-treated-group (P values were 0.009 and 0.0001 for the kidneys and
bladder, respectively). The urinary leukocyte response was diminished in the
hLF-treated group. The hLF treatment also significantly reduced the urinary
interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels at 2 h and the systemic IL-6 levels at 24 h after
infection (P values were 0.04 and < 0.002, respectively). In the bLF-treated
animals, no such strong anti-inflammatory effects were obtained. In another
series of experiments, C3H/Tif mice perorally treated with HLD1 or HLD2 also
showed reduced numbers of bacteria in the kidneys compared with the
vehicle-treated mice, although the results were significantly different only for 
HLD2 (P < 0.01). Analysis of urine from hLF-fed C3H/Tif mice showed that hLF was 
excreted into the urinary tract at 2 h after feeding. Testing of the in vitro
bactericidal activity of LF (1 mg/ml) or the peptides (0.1 mg/ml) in mouse urine 
against the E. coli bacteria revealed moderate killing only by HLD2. In
conclusion, these results demonstrate for the first time that oral administration
of hLF or peptides thereof is effective in reducing infection and inflammation at
a remote site, the urinary tract, possibly through transfer of hLF or its
peptides to the site of infection via renal secretion. The antibacterial
mechanism is suggested to involve bactericidal capacities of LF, fragments
thereof, or its peptides.

PMCID: PMC101542
PMID: 10992490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Oncol. 2000 Sep;17(3):495-9.

Hammerhead ribozyme specifically inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor gene
expression in a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line.

Morino F(1), Tokunaga T, Tsuchida T, Handa A, Nagata J, Tomii Y, Kijima H,
Yamazaki H, Watanabe N, Matsuzaki S, Ueyama Y, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Bohseidai,
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.

Hammerhead-type ribozymes are often utilized to suppress the expression of target
genes. We evaluated the efficacy of an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) hammerhead-type ribozyme against GUC at exon 1 of the VEGF gene in a
cell-free system (in vitro) as well as in the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line 
HLF (in vivo). The anti-VEGF ribozyme (alphaVRz) specifically cleaved synthetic
VEGF RNA substrate, but not other triplet sequences of VEGF RNA substrate in
vitro. When the alphaVRz was introduced into HLF cells, the ribozyme suppressed
not only VEGF mRNA level but also that of VEGF protein. These results suggest
that this ribozyme selectively inhibits VEGF gene expression in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

PMID: 10938389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2000 Aug;46(2):235-40.

Intravenous infusion of erythromycin inhibits CXC chemokine production, but
augments neutrophil degranulation in whole blood stimulated with Streptococcus
pneumoniae.

Schultz MJ(1), Speelman P, Hack CE, Buurman WA, van Deventer SJ, van Der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, Department of Intensive Care,
Tropical Medicine and AIDS, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.j.schultz@uva.amc.nl

Macrolides may influence the inflammatory response to an infection by mechanisms 
that are unrelated to their antimicrobial effect. Indeed, erythromycin and other 
macrolides inhibit cytokine production and induce degranulation of neutrophils in
vitro. CXC chemokines are small chemotactic cytokines that specifically influence
neutrophil functions. To determine the effect of a clinically relevant dose of
erythromycin on the production of CXC chemokines and neutrophil degranulation,
six healthy humans received a 30 min iv infusion of erythromycin (1000 mg). Whole
blood obtained before and at various times after the infusion was stimulated ex
vivo with heat-killed Streptococcus pneumoniae. Ex vivo production of the CXC
chemokines interleukin 8 (IL-8) and epithelial cell-derived neutrophil attractant
78 (ENA-78), in whole blood obtained after erythromycin infusion, was lower than 
that in blood drawn before erythromycin infusion (maximum inhibition
post-infusion: 32.9 +/- 6.5% and 35.2 +/- 12.6% decrease in production,
respectively, expressed as percentage change relative to production before
infusion of erythromycin, both P < 0.05). In contrast, infusion of erythromycin
was associated with an enhanced capacity of whole blood to release the neutrophil
degranulation products bactericidal/permeability increasing protein (BPI), human 
neutrophil elastase (HNE) and human lactoferrin (HLF) upon stimulation with S.
pneumoniae. Effects of erythromycin were greatest 4 h after infusion was stopped,
when BPI, HNE and HLF concentrations were increased by +107.6 +/- 33.5%, +134.7
+/- 34.8% and +205.9 +/- 55.9 %, respectively (expressed as percentage change
relative to production before infusion of erythromycin) (all P < 0. 05). These
results indicate the ability of erythromycin to reduce CXC chemokine production
and to enhance neutrophil degranulation in human blood.

PMID: 10933646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Carcinog. 2000 Jun;28(2):111-8.

Chromium(VI) induces p53-dependent apoptosis in diploid human lung and mouse
dermal fibroblasts.

Carlisle DL(1), Pritchard DE, Singh J, Patierno SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The George Washington University Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Some forms of hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] are known to cause damage to
respiratory-tract tissue and DNA and are thought to be human lung carcinogens. In
general, Cr(VI) is mutagenic and carcinogenic at doses that also evoke some cell 
death, and we previously showed that the predominant mode of death is apoptosis. 
Because p53 has been shown to initiate apoptosis after genotoxic insults, the
objective of these experiments was to determine whether p53 is activated in and
necessary for apoptosis of normal diploid human lung fibroblasts (HLF cells)
after chromium exposure. By using annexin(V) staining and fluorescent microscopy,
we found that Cr(VI) caused up to 14% of HLF cells to undergo apoptosis within 24
h after exposure. In addition, by using western blotting, we found that p53
protein levels increased fourfold to sixfold after exposure to sodium chromate.
Because the major function of p53 is as a transcription factor, it must be
translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after chromate exposure to be
active. Immunofluorescence studies using an antibody against p53 showed that,
after chromate exposure, p53 was located in the nucleus of the treated HLF cells.
The necessity of p53 for chromium-induced apoptosis was examined in two ways. One
approach used dermal fibroblasts from p53 wild-type, heterozygous, and null mice,
and the other approach used HLF cells that were transiently transfected with the 
human papilloma virus E6 gene, which targets p53 for degradation and creates a
functional p53-null cell. These studies showed that chromium-induced apoptosis
was p53 dependent. Mol. Carcinog. 28:111-118, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10900468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Transgenic Res. 2000 Feb;9(1):71-8.

Expression of full-length bioactive antimicrobial human lactoferrin in potato
plants.

Chong DK(1), Langridge WH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Loma Linda University, CA
92350, USA.

A cDNA fragment encoding human lactoferrin (hLF) linked to a plant microsomal
retention signal peptide (SEK-DEL) was stably integrated into the Solanum
tuberosum genome by Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated leaf disk transformation
methods. The lactoferrin gene was expressed under control of both the
auxin-inducible manopine synthase (mas) P2 promoter and the cauliflower mosaic
virus (CaMV) 35S tandem promoter. The presence of the hLF cDNA in the genome of
regenerated transformed potato plants was detected by polymerase chain reaction
amplification methods. Full-length hLF protein was identified by immunoblot
analysis in tuber tissue extracts from the transformed plants by immunoblot
analysis. The hLF produced in transgenic plant tissues migrated during
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as a single band with an approximate molecular
mass equal to hLF. Auxin activation of the mas P2 promoter increased lactoferrin 
expression levels in transformed tuber and leaf tissues to approximately 0.1% of 
total soluble plant protein. Antimicrobial activity against four different human 
pathogenic bacterial strains was detected in extracts of lactoferrin-containing
potato tuber tissues. This is the first report of synthesis of full length,
biologically active hLF in edible plants.

PMID: 10853271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Pediatr Res. 2000 May;47(5):606-13.

Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and Flk-1 in developing and
glucocorticoid-treated mouse lung.

Bhatt AJ(1), Amin SB, Chess PR, Watkins RH, Maniscalco WM.

Author information: 
(1)Strong Children's Research Center (Division of Neonatology), Children's
Hospital at Strong, University of Rochester School of Medicine, New York, USA.

Although the endothelial cell is the most abundant cell type in the
differentiated lung, little is known about regulation of lung developmental
vasculogenesis. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an endothelial cell 
mitogen and angiogenic factor that has putative roles in vascular development.
Mitogenic actions of VEGF are mediated by the tyrosine kinase receptor KDR/murine
homologue fetal liver kinase Flk-1. HLF (hypoxia-inducible factor-like factor) is
a transcription factor that increases VEGF gene transcription. Dexamethasone
augments lung maturation in fetal and postnatal animals. However, in vitro
studies suggest that dexamethasone blocks induction of VEGF. The objectives for
the current study were to measure VEGF mRNA and Flk-1 mRNA in developing mouse
lung and to measure the effects of dexamethasone treatment in vivo on VEGF and
Flk-1 in newborn mouse lung. Our results show that VEGF and Flk-1 messages
increase in parallel during normal lung development (d 13 embryonic to adult) and
that the distal epithelium expresses VEGF mRNA at all ages examined.
Dexamethasone (0.1-5.0 mg x kg(-1) x d(-1)) treatment of 6-d-old mice resulted in
significantly increased VEGF, HLF, and Flk-1 mRNA. Dexamethasone did not affect
cell-specific expression of VEGF, VEGF protein, or proportions of VEGF mRNA
splice variants. These data suggest that the developing alveolar epithelium has
an important role in regulating alveolar capillary development. In addition,
unlike effects on cultured cells, dexamethasone, even in relatively high doses,
did not adversely affect VEGF expression in vivo. The relatively high levels of
VEGF and Flk-1 mRNA in adult lung imply a role for pulmonary VEGF in endothelial 
cell maintenance or capillary permeability.

PMID: 10813585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cell Biol Toxicol. 1999;15(5):333-40.

Effect of toluene diisocyanate and its corresponding amines on viability and
growth of human lung fibroblasts in culture.

Pons F(1), Fischer A, Frossard N, Lugnier A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U425, Neuroimmunopharmacologie Pulmonaire, Faculté de Pharmacie,
Illkirch, France. pons@pharma.u-strasbg.fr

Toluene diisocyanate (TDI) is a highly volatile chemical known to cause
occupational asthma in exposed workers. TDI-induced asthma is associated with
airway epithelium injury and repair, and subepithelial fibrosis. We investigated 
the effect of TDI and its hydrolysis products, the 2,4- and 2,6-toluenediamines
(TDA), on viability and growth of human lung fibroblasts (HLFs) in culture, using
a tetrazolium-based cell viability assay. The effects of increasing
concentrations of each of these chemicals were evaluated on quiescent cells
seeded at two densities (2500 and 5000 cells/well) and treated for 24 or 48 h.
TDI (10(-4)-10(-5) mol/L, as a mixture of 80% 2,4-TDI and 20% 2,6-TDI) exhibited 
a partial but significant cytotoxic effect (10-24%, p<0.05) on HLFs. This effect 
was observed at both cell densities, and was time- and concentration-dependent.
2,4-TDA, at lower concentrations (10(-8)-10(-6) mol/L) applied for 48 h, also
partially reduced HLF viability (10-15%, p<0.05), whereas it tended to trigger
cell growth at concentrations higher than 10(-5) mol/L. 2,6-TDA exhibited both a 
cytotoxic and a proliferative effect on HLFs that depended on concentration, time
of exposure and cell culture density. Significant cytotoxicity was only observed 
after 24 h of treatment with 10(-7)-10(-6) mol/L 2,6-TDA, and reached greater
intensity in cells cultured at the highest density. In contrast, 2,6-TDA
stimulated HLF growth only after 48 h of incubation at 10(-4) mol/L on cells
cultured at the lowest density. Taken together, our results showed that TDI and
2,4-TDA somewhat decreased HLF viability, whereas 2,6-TDA appeared to exhibit
both a cytotoxic and a growth stimulatory effect on these cells. TDI and 2,4-TDA 
are thus suggested to contribute to airway epithelium damage associated with
TDI-induced asthma, whereas 2,6-TDA might either trigger epithelial damage or
induce cell proliferation that could contribute to epithelium repair or
subepithelial fibrosis.

PMID: 10813366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Toxicol Sci. 2000 May;55(1):60-8.

Apoptosis and P53 induction in human lung fibroblasts exposed to chromium (VI):
effect of ascorbate and tocopherol.

Carlisle DL(1), Pritchard DE, Singh J, Owens BM, Blankenship LJ, Orenstein JM,
Patierno SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Molecular and Cellular Oncology and Genetics, The 
George Washington University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Some forms of hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] are known to cause damage to
respiratory tract tissue, and are thought to be human lung carcinogens. Because
Cr(VI) is mutagenic and carcinogenic at doses that evoke cell toxicity, the
objective of these experiments was to examine the effect of Cr(VI) on the growth,
survival, and mode of cell death in normal human lung fibroblasts (HLF cells).
DNA adduct formation was monitored as a marker for bioavailability of genotoxic
chromium. We also examined the modulation of these endpoints by vitamins C and E.
Long-term Cr(VI) exposures were employed, which decreased clonogenic cell
survival by 25% to 95% in a dose-dependent manner. The predominant cellular
response to Cr(VI) was growth arrest. We found that Cr(VI) caused up to 20% of
HLF cells to undergo apoptosis, and documented apoptotic morphology and the
phagocytosis of apoptotic bodies by neighboring cells. P53 levels increased 4- to
6-fold in chromium-treated cells. In contrast with previous studies using CHO
cells, the present study using HLFs found that pretreatment with either vitamin C
or E did not exhibit a significant effect on Cr-induced apoptosis or clonogenic
survival. In addition, pretreatment with vitamin C did not affect the p53
induction observed after chromium treatment. Neither vitamin had any effect on
Cr-DNA adduct formation. These data indicate that although pretreatment with
vitamin C or E alters the spectrum of cellular and/or genetic lesions induced by 
chromium(VI), neither vitamin altered the initiation or progression of apoptosis 
in diploid human lung cells.

PMID: 10788560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biol Pharm Bull. 2000 Apr;23(4):438-42.

Biochemical characterization of bovine lactoferrin as a glycyrrhizin-binding
protein in vitro.

Tanigawa K(1), Fujihara M, Furuya T, Shimoyama Y, Morishima N, Ohtsuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, School of Allied Health Sciences, Kitasato
University, Sagamihara, Japan.

Lactoferrin (LF) from bovine colostrum was biochemically characterized as a
glycyrrhizin (GL)-binding protein (gbP) in vitro. It was found that (i) bovine LF
(bLF) and a synthetic bovine lactoferricin (bLFcin, the N'-terminal region of bLF
at the positions 17--41) had a high affinity to a GL-affinity column; (ii)
approximately 1.8 moles of GL were bound to a molecule of bLF with a binding
constant of approx. 1.20x10(4) M(-1) at pH 6.8; and (iii) GL, but not
glycyrrhetinic acid (GA), induced a conformational change of bLF. In addition,
the glucuronic acid moiety of the GL molecule was found to be responsible for
binding to bLF, because (i) no binding of GA and two glucoses-GA (Glc-Glc-GA) to 
bLF was detected; and (ii) a synthetic fluorinated GL (GlcA-GlcF-GA) and
mono-glucuronyl-GA (mono-GlcA-GA) were bound significantly to bLF. A similar
binding of GL to human LF (hLF) was also observed under the same experimental
conditions. Data provided here suggest that (i) bLF contains plural GL-binding
sites; and (ii) the specific binding of GL to bLF may modulate the physiological 
activity of bLF in vivo.

PMID: 10784423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Nucl Med. 2000 Mar;27(3):292-301.

Technetium-99m labelled antimicrobial peptides discriminate between bacterial
infections and sterile inflammations.

Welling MM(1), Paulusma-Annema A, Balter HS, Pauwels EK, Nibbering PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur J Nucl Med. 2000 Dec;27(12):1865-8.
    Eur J Nucl Med. 2001 Jun;28(6):779-81.

The aim of this study was to select technetium-99m labelled peptides that can
discriminate between bacterial infections and sterile inflammations. For this
purpose, we first assessed the binding of various 99mTc-labelled natural or
synthetic peptides, which are based on the sequence of the human antimicrobial
peptide ubiquicidin (UBI) or human lactoferrin (hLF), to bacteria and to
leucocytes in vitro. In order to select peptides that preferentially bind to
bacteria over host cells, radiolabelled peptides were injected into mice
intraperitoneally infected with Klebsiella pneumoniae (K. pneumoniae) and the
amount of radioactivity associated with the bacteria and with the leucocytes was 
quantitated. The next phase focussed on discrimination between bacterial
infections and sterile inflammatory processes using 99mTc-labelled peptides in
mice intramuscularly infected with various bacteria (e.g. multi-drug-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus) and in animals that had been injected with
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) of bacterial origin to create a sterile inflammatory
process. Also, we studied the distribution of 99mTc-labelled UBI 29-41 and UBI
18-35 in rabbits having an experimental thigh muscle infection with K. pneumoniae
and in rabbits injected with LPS. Based on the results of our in vitro and in
vivo binding assays, two peptides, i.e. UBI 29-41 and UBI 18-35, were selected as
possible candidates for infection imaging. The radiolabelled peptides can detect 
infections with both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria in mice as early as
5-30 min after injection, with a target-to-non-target (T/NT) ratio between 2 and 
3; maximum T/NT ratios were seen within 1 h after injection. In rabbits, high
T/NT ratios (>5) for 99mTc-labelled UBI 29-41 were observed from 1 h after
injection. No accumulation of the selected 99mTc-labelled UBI-derived peptides
was observed in thighs of mice and rabbits previously injected with LPS.
Scintigraphic investigation into the biodistribution of 99mTc-labelled UBI
peptides revealed that these peptides were rapidly removed from the circulation
by renal excretion. Similar data were observed for 99mTc-labelled defensin 1-3.
Our data for 99mTc-labelled hLF and related peptides indicate that these
compounds are less favourable for infection detection. Taken together,
99mTc-labelled UBI 18-35 and UBI 29-41 enable discrimination between bacterial
infections and sterile inflammatory processes in both mice and rabbits. Based on 
their characteristics, we consider these peptides the candidates of preference
for detection of bacterial infections in man.

PMID: 10774881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Apr 17;1496(2-3):221-31.

Overexpression of hemochromatosis protein, HFE, alters transferrin recycling
process in human hepatoma cells.

Ikuta K(1), Fujimoto Y, Suzuki Y, Tanaka K, Saito H, Ohhira M, Sasaki K, Kohgo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, Nishikagura 
4-5, Asahikawa, Japan.

HFE is a MHC class 1-like protein that is mutated in hereditary hemochromatosis. 
In order to elucidate the role of HFE protein on cellular iron metabolism,
functional studies were carried out in human hepatoma cells (HLF) overexpressing 
a fusion gene of HFE and green fluorescent protein (GFP). The expression of
HFE-GFP was found to be localized on cell membrane and perinuclear compartment by
fluorescent microscopy. By co-immunoprecipitation and Western blotting, HFE-GFP
protein formed a complex with endogenous transferrin receptor and
beta(2)-microglobulin, suggesting that this fusion protein has the function of
HFE reported previously. We then examined the (59)Fe uptake and release, and
internalization and recycling of (125)I-labeled transferrin in order to elucidate
the functional roles of HFE in the cell system. In the transfectants, HFE protein
decreased the rate of transferrin receptor-dependent iron ((59)Fe) uptake by the 
cells, but did not change the rate of iron release, indicating that HFE protein
decreased the rate of iron influx. Scatchard analysis of transferrin binding to
HFE-transfected cells showed an elevation of the dissociation constant from 1.9
to 4. 3 nM transferrin, indicating that HFE protein decreased the affinity of
transferrin receptor for transferrin, while the number of transferrin receptors
decreased from 1.5x10(5)/cell to 1. 2x10(5)/cell. In addition, the rate of
transferrin recycling, especially return from endosome to surface, was decreased 
in the HFE-transfected cells by pulse-chase study with (125)I-labeled
transferrin. Our results strongly suggest an additional role of HFE on
transferrin receptor recycling in addition to the decrease of receptor affinity, 
resulting in the reduced cellular iron.

PMID: 10771090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2000 Mar;30(3):233-7.

Activity of hydrolysed lactoferrin against foodborne pathogenic bacteria in
growth media: the effect of EDTA.

Branen J(1), Davidson PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Toxicology, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID,
USA.

Lactoferrin was hydrolysed with pepsin and the antimicrobial activity of the
resulting hydrolysate (HLF) was studied in 1% peptone, 0.05% yeast extract, 1%
glucose (PYG) medium and tryptic soy broth (TSB). HLF was effective against
Listeria monocytogenes, enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli and Salmonella
enteritidis in PYG, however, the highest studied concentration (1.6 mg ml-1) did 
not inhibit growth of any of these organisms in TSB. The addition of EDTA
enhanced the activity of HLF in TSB, indicating that the decreased activity of
HLF may have been due, in part, to excess cations in the medium.

PMID: 10747257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Prog Brain Res. 2000;122:245-53.

Pain modulation: expectation, opioid analgesia and virtual pain.

Fields HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA.
hlf@itsa.ucsf.edu

To summarize, although there are multiple potential target nuclei for modulating 
pain transmission and several candidate efferent pathways that exert modulatory
control, the most completely described pain modulating circuit includes the
amygdala, PAG, DLPT and RVM in the brainstem. Through descending projections,
this circuit controls both spinal and trigeminal dorsal horn pain transmission
neurons and mediates both opioid and stimulation produced analgesia. Several
different neurotransmitters are involved in the modulatory actions of this
circuit, which exerts bi-directional control of pain through On cells that
facilitate and Off cells that inhibit dorsal horn nociceptive neurons. There is
evidence that this circuit contributes to analgesia in humans and may be
activated by acute stress or the expectation of relief. Conversely, through the
facilitating effect of On cells, this circuit is theoretically capable of
generating or enhancing perceived pain intensity. Such an effect could provide a 
physiological mechanism for the pain enhancing actions of mood, attention and
expectation.

PMID: 10737063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. FEBS Lett. 2000 Mar 3;469(1):5-8.

Lactoferrin inhibits the binding of lipopolysaccharides to L-selectin and
subsequent production of reactive oxygen species by neutrophils.

Baveye S(1), Elass E, Mazurier J, Legrand D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Biologique, Unité Mixte de Recherche du CNRS no. 8576,
Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, 59655, Villeneuve d'Ascq,
France.

The activation of leukocytes by lipopolysaccharides (LPS), resulting in the
oxidative burst, contributes to the pathogenesis of septic shock. The binding of 
LPS to L-selectin, which was reported as a serum-independent LPS receptor on
neutrophils, induces the production of oxygen free radicals. Human lactoferrin
(hLf), an anti-inflammatory glycoprotein released from neutrophil granules during
infection, binds to LPS. In this study, we investigated the capacity of hLf to
inhibit the L-selectin-mediated activation of neutrophils. Our experiments
revealed that hLf prevents the binding of LPS to L-selectin in a
concentration-dependent manner. Inhibition was maximum (87.7+/-0.5%) at a
concentration of 50 microg/ml of hLf. Furthermore, hLf inhibited up to
55.4+/-0.5% of the intracellular hydrogen peroxide production induced by LPS in
neutrophils. These findings suggest that the anti-inflammatory properties of hLf 
are due, at least in part, to their ability to prevent the binding of LPS to
neutrophil L-selectin.

PMID: 10708745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 18;275(7):4618-27.

A redox mechanism controls differential DNA binding activities of
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 1alpha and the HIF-like factor.

Lando D(1), Pongratz I, Poellinger L, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, South
Australia.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and the HIF-like factor (HLF) are
two highly related basic Helix-Loop-Helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) homology
transcription factors that undergo dramatically increased function at low oxygen 
levels. Despite strong similarities in their activation mechanisms (e.g. they
both undergo rapid hypoxia-induced protein stabilization, bind identical target
DNA sequences, and induce synthetic reporter genes to similar degrees), they are 
both essential for embryo survival via distinct functions during vascularization 
(HIF-1alpha) or catecholamine production (HLF). It is currently unknown how such 
specificity of action is achieved. We report here that DNA binding by HLF, but
not by HIF-1alpha, is dependent upon reducing redox conditions. In vitro DNA
binding and mammalian two-hybrid assays showed that a unique cysteine in the
DNA-binding basic region of HLF is a target for the reducing activity of redox
factor Ref-1. Although the N-terminal DNA-binding domain of HIF-1alpha can
function in the absence of Ref-1, we found that the C-terminal region containing 
the transactivation domain requires Ref-1 for full activity. Our data reveal that
the hypoxia-inducible factors are subject to complex redox control mechanisms
that can target discrete regions of the proteins and are the first to establish a
discriminating control mechanism for differential regulation of HIF-1alpha and
HLF activity.

PMID: 10671489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Biometeorol. 1999 Nov;43(3):113-8.

Environmental impacts on offspring survival during the lambing period in central 
Patagonia.

Coronato F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional Patagónico (CONICET), Puerto Madryn, Argentina.
coronato@cenpat.edu.ar

Weather conditions are the main factors affecting the survival rate of newborn
lambs. In the windy climate of Patagonia, the influence of weather conditions is 
exacerbated as the wind speed increases noticeably in spring. If the wind
increases faster than the temperature rises, wind chill conditions worsen
temporarily. This departure from the predictable improvement in bioclimatic
conditions as the season moves towards summer may coincide with lambing, if this 
is not adequately regulated. This paper explores bioclimatic conditions during
the 2-month period in which lambing may take place (i.e. mid-September to
mid-November), and identifies the unfavourable period that occurs in the second
fortnight of October. Starting from the Mount and Brown (Agric Meteorol
27:241-255, 1982) model to assess thermal stress in sheep by means of common
meteorological records, a simpler model was developed employing in long-term
records. For 2-week averages of temperature (Tf), wind speed (Vf) and total
precipitation (Pf), the average heat loss in sheep (HLf) was 40.40 - 2.07Tf +
5.64Vf + 0.04Pf. (r2 = 0.95). A 24-year series of Tf, Vf and Pf data was employed
in the calculation of HLf, and results showed this parameter was significantly
higher in the second fortnight in October. HLf values were classified into four
groups (from "very good" to "very bad" conditions); once again, significant
differences appeared in the second fortnight in October. Finally, HLf during the 
lambing period was correlated to the percentage of lambs surviving 2 months
later. Significant differences between the survival of lambs born under "very
bad" and "very good" conditions were found, but intermediate HLf conditions did
not show a clear pattern. The survival rate was best correlated to HLf in the
fortnight preceding lambing (P < 0.05). This suggests that bioclimatic conditions
during late pregnancy are at least as important as conditions during lambing in
determining the survival lambs.

PMID: 10639902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Virol. 2000 Feb;74(3):1241-51.

Identification of multiple transcription factors, HLF, FTF, and E4BP4,
controlling hepatitis B virus enhancer II.

Ishida H(1), Ueda K, Ohkawa K, Kanazawa Y, Hosui A, Nakanishi F, Mita E, Kasahara
A, Sasaki Y, Hori M, Hayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) enhancer II (EnII) is a hepatotropic cis element which is
responsible for the hepatocyte-specific gene expression of HBV. Multiple
transcription factors have been demonstrated to interact with this region. In
this study, the region from HBV nucleotides (nt) 1640 to 1663 in EnII was
demonstrated to be essential for enhancer activity and to be another target
sequence of putative transcription factors. To elucidate the factors which bind
to this region, we used a yeast one-hybrid screening system and cloned three
transcription factors, HLF, FTF, and E4BP4, from a human adult liver cDNA
library. All of these factors had binding affinity to the sequence from nt 1640
to 1663. Investigation of the effects of these factors on transcriptional
regulation revealed that HLF and FTF had stimulatory activity on nt 1640 to 1663,
whereas E4BP4 had a suppressing effect. FTF coordinately activated both 3. 5-kb
RNA and 2.4/2.1-kb RNA transcription in a transient transfection assay with an
HBV expression vector. HLF, however, activated only 3.5-kb RNA transcription, and
in primer extension analysis, HLF strongly stimulated the synthesis of pregenome 
RNA compared to precore RNA. Thus, FTF stimulated the activity of the second
enhancer, while HLF stimulated the activity of the core upstream regulatory
sequence, which affects only the core promoter, and had a dominant effect on the 
pregenome RNA synthesis.

PMCID: PMC111458
PMID: 10627534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2000 Jan;22(1):75-84.

Bradykinin stimulates lung fibroblasts to release neutrophil and monocyte
chemotactic activity.

Koyama S(1), Sato E, Numanami H, Kubo K, Nagai S, Izumi T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
and National Chushin-Matsumoto Hospital, Matsumoto, Japan.

Activation of the kallikrein-kinin system in lung injury has long been
recognized. However, the effects of bradykinin (BK) on human lung fibroblasts
(HLF) remain to be elucidated. We determined whether BK stimulates HLF to release
chemotactic activity for neutrophils and monocytes (NCA and MCA, respectively).
We evaluated HLF supernatant fluids for chemotactic activity through a blind-well
chamber technique. HLF released NCA and MCA in a dose- and time-dependent manner 
in response to BK. The release of chemotactic activity was inhibited by
lipoxygenase inhibitors and cycloheximide. Molecular sieve column chromatography 
revealed that both NCA and MCA had multiple chemotactic peaks. NCA was inhibited 
by a leukotriene (LT) B(4) receptor antagonist and by antibodies to interleukin
(IL)-8 and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). MCA was attenuated by
the LTB(4) receptor antagonist and by antibodies to monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta. Both the LTB(4) receptor antagonist and
these antibodies inhibited chemotactic activity of the molecular weights
corresponding to MCP-1, GM-CSF, and TGF-beta, separated by column chromatography.
The concentrations of IL-8, G-CSF, MCP-1, GM-CSF, and TGF-beta in supernatant
fluids increased significantly in a time-dependent manner in response to BK. The 
receptors responsible for the release of NCA, MCA, and individual chemokines
included both BKB(1) and BKB(2) receptors. These data suggest that BK may
stimulate lung fibroblasts to release inflammatory cytokines, which may modulate 
lung inflammation.

PMID: 10615068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Novartis Found Symp. 1999;224:102-18; discussion 118-23.

Photoactivation of rhodopsin: interplay between protein and chromophore.

DeGrip WJ(1), DeLange F, Klaassen CH, Verdegem PJ, Wallace-Williams S, Creemers
AF, Bergo V, Bovee PH, Raap J, Rothschild KJ, DeGroot HJ, Lugtenburg J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Nijmegen, Department of Biochemistry, The Netherlands.

Data in the literature suggest a finely tuned interaction between ligand
(11-cis-retinal) and protein (opsin) in order to allow very efficient
photoactivation of the ligand and highly vectorial rhodopsin activation with a
huge increase in receptor activity. We have further investigated this interaction
using ligand homologues, 13C-ligand labelling or 15N-protein labelling, in
combination with Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) and solid-state magic angle
spinning (ss-MAS)-NMR spectroscopy. Using 1D rotational resonance (RR) or
double-quantum heteronuclear local field (2Q-HLF) ss-MAS-NMR we report the first 
structure refinement of the rhodopsin chromophore in situ. These measurements
yield a specification of the torsional strain in the for isomerization essential 
C10-C13 segment of the chromophore. This strain is thought to contribute to the
high rate and stereospecificity of the photoisomerization reaction. In agreement 
with previous data, the C10-C13 segment region reaches a relaxed all-trans
configuration at the lumirhodopsin photointermediate. MAS-NMR analysis of
[15N]lysine-labelled rhodopsin reveals the presence of a 'soft' counterion,
requiring intermediate water molecules for stabilization. FT-IR studies on
[2H]tyrosine-labelled rhodopsin demonstrate participation of several tyrosin(at)e
residues in receptor activation. One of these, probably Tyr268, is already active
at the bathorhodopsin stage. Finally, the effect of ligands with single
additional methyl substituents in the C10-C12 region has been investigated. They 
do not affect the general activation pathway, but perturb the activation kinetics
of rhodopsin, suggesting steric interference with protein residues. Possible
implications of these results for a structural role of water residues will be
discussed, as well.

PMID: 10614048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Leukoc Biol. 1999 Nov;66(5):809-16.

alpha9beta1 integrin is expressed on human neutrophils and contributes to
neutrophil migration through human lung and synovial fibroblast barriers.

Shang T(1), Yednock T, Issekutz AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Accumulation of leukocytes in inflamed tissue involves their migration through
vascular endothelium and then in the connective tissue. Recently we utilized a
barrier of human synovial, dermal, and lung fibroblasts (HSF, HDF, and HLF) grown
on polycarbonate filters as a model of human polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN)
migration through connective tissue. The beta2 integrins (CD 11/ CD18) and
alpha4, alpha5, and alpha6beta1 (VLA-4, -5, and -6) integrins each contributed to
this PMN migration. Here we report that on human blood leukocytes, alpha9beta1
(VLA-9) is expressed only on PMNs and that it is up-regulated after PMN
activation. Based on monoclonal antibody (mAb) blocking studies, alpha9beta1
integrin contributed to C5a-induced PMN migration through fibroblast (HLF and
HSF) barriers. This role was apparent only when alternate mechanisms such as
CD18, alpha4, alpha5, and alpha6beta1 integrins were blocked and then mAb to
alpha9beta1 integrin inhibited the residual PMN migration (by 40-50%) through the
HLF or HSF barrier, resulting in > or = 75% inhibition overall. In contrast, PMN 
migration across interleukin-1-activated endothelium (HUVEC) in response to a C5a
gradient, which is partly (30-40%) via CD11/CD18-independent mechanisms, was not 
inhibited by adhesion blocking by mAbs to alpha4, alpha5, alpha6, and alpha9beta1
even in combination. These results indicate that alpha9beta1 integrin on PMN may 
have a special role, in conjunction with other beta1 integrins, in mediating PMN 
migration in the extravascular space, and may contribute to differential
neutrophil function within tissues.

PMID: 10577513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Gen Virol. 1999 Dec;80 ( Pt 12):3257-65.

Induction of apoptosis after switch-on of the hepatitis B virus X gene mediated
by the Cre/loxP recombination system.

Shintani Y(1), Yotsuyanagi H, Moriya K, Fujie H, Tsutsumi T, Kanegae Y, Kimura S,
Saito I, Koike K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The HBx protein of hepatitis B virus is a multifunctional protein that is
implicated in the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma by regulating gene
transcription, causing cell proliferation and, as shown recently, inducing cell
death. However, analysis of the effects of HBx in stable cultured cell clones has
been hampered because only cell lines that adapted to the effects of HBx were
selected during the establishment of cell clones. Here, we describe a system in
which transcription of the X gene of hepatitis B virus is switched on by the use 
of the site-specific Cre recombinase. Two human liver cell lines, HLF and HepG2, 
were used, the former with a mutant p53 allele and the latter with wild-type p53.
The stable cell clones isolated, which carried the X gene in a transcriptionally 
silent state, were infected with recombinant adenovirus carrying Cre recombinase.
Ninety-six hours after adenovirus infection, cell clones that expressed HBx had
undergone TUNEL-positive cell death with characteristics of apoptosis. Apoptosis 
was induced despite concomitant inactivation of the p53 protein as a result of
its cytoplasmic translocation by HBx. In contrast, neither the X gene-carrying
cells infected with wild-type adenovirus nor various control cells infected with 
Cre-expressing adenovirus exhibited apoptosis. These results indicate that the
expression of HBx protein leads to liver cell apoptosis independently of the p53 
pathway. The significance of HBx-induced apoptosis in natural infection is
unclear, but it may contribute to the development of hepatitis and serve to
spread progeny virus to neighbouring cells while evading the host immune
responses.

PMID: 10567659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 19;274(47):33709-13.

EPAS1 trans-activation during hypoxia requires p42/p44 MAPK.

Conrad PW(1), Freeman TL, Beitner-Johnson D, Millhorn DE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Department of Molecular and
Cellular Physiology, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0576, USA.

Hypoxia is a common environmental stress that regulates gene expression and cell 
function. A number of hypoxia-regulated transcription factors have been
identified and have been shown to play critical roles in mediating cellular
responses to hypoxia. One of these is the endothelial PAS-domain protein 1
(EPAS1/HIF2-alpha/HLF/HRF). This protein is 48% homologous to hypoxia-inducible
factor 1-alpha (HIF1-alpha). To date, virtually nothing is known about the
signaling pathways that lead to either EPAS1 or HIF1-alpha activation. Here we
show that EPAS1 is phosphorylated when PC12 cells are exposed to hypoxia and that
p42/p44 MAPK is a critical mediator of EPAS1 activation. Pretreatment of PC12
cells with the MEK inhibitor, PD98059, completely blocked hypoxia-induced
trans-activation of a hypoxia response element (HRE) reporter gene by transfected
EPAS1. Likewise, expression of a constitutively active MEK1 mimicked the effects 
of hypoxia on HRE reporter gene expression. However, pretreatment with PD98059
had no effect on EPAS1 phosphorylation during hypoxia, suggesting that MAPK
targets other proteins that are critical for the trans-activation of EPAS1. We
further show that hypoxia-induced trans-activation of EPAS1 is independent of
Ras. Finally, pretreatment with calmodulin antagonists nearly completely blocked 
both the hypoxia-induced phosphorylation of MAPK and the EPAS1 trans-activation
of HRE-Luc. These results demonstrate that the MAPK pathway is a critical
mediator of EPAS1 activation and that activation of MAPK and EPAS1 occurs through
a calmodulin-sensitive pathway and not through the GTPase, Ras. These results are
the first to identify a specific signaling pathway involved in EPAS1 activation.

PMID: 10559262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cell. 1999 Sep;4(3):343-52.

SLUG, a ces-1-related zinc finger transcription factor gene with antiapoptotic
activity, is a downstream target of the E2A-HLF oncoprotein.

Inukai T(1), Inoue A, Kurosawa H, Goi K, Shinjyo T, Ozawa K, Mao M, Inaba T, Look
AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The E2A-HLF fusion gene transforms human pro-B lymphocytes by interfering with an
early step in apoptotic signaling. In a search for E2A-HLF-responsive genes, we
identified a zinc finger transcription factor, SLUG, whose product belongs to the
Snail family of developmental regulatory proteins. Importantly, SLUG bears close 
homology to the CES-1 protein of C. elegans, which acts downstream of CES-2 in a 
neuron-specific cell death pathway. Consistent with the postulated role of CES-1 
as an antiapoptotic transcription factor, SLUG was nearly as active as Bcl-2 or
Bcl-xL in promoting the survival of IL-3-dependent murine pro-B cells deprived of
the cytokine. We conclude that SLUG is an evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional repressor whose activation by E2A-HLF promotes the aberrant
survival and eventual malignant transformation of mammalian pro-B cells otherwise
slated for apoptotic death.

PMID: 10518215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Br J Cancer. 1999 Oct;81(3):393-403.

Proline-rich antimicrobial peptide, PR-39 gene transduction altered invasive
activity and actin structure in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Ohtake T(1), Fujimoto Y, Ikuta K, Saito H, Ohhira M, Ono M, Kohgo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, Japan.

PR-39 is an endogenous proline-rich antimicrobial peptide which induces the
synthesis of syndecan-1, a transmembrane heparan sulphate proteoglycan involved
in cell-to-matrix interactions and wound healing. Previously, we revealed that
the expression of syndecan-1 was reduced in human hepatocellular carcinomas with 
high metastatic potential and speculated that syndecan-1 played an important role
in inhibition of invasion and metastasis. It is assumed that a modification of
this process with PR-39 and syndecan-1 may result in a new strategy by which it
can inhibit the invasion and metastasis. Therefore, we transduced a gene of PR-39
into human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HLF, which shows a low expression
of syndecan-1 and a high in vitro invasive activity, and examined whether this
procedure could reduce the invasive activity of tumour cells. In two
transfectants with PR-39 gene, the syndecan-1 expression was induced and the
invasive activity in type I collagen-coated chamber was inhibited. Moreover,
these transfectants showed the suppression of motile activity assayed by
phagokinetic tracks in addition to the disorganization of actin filaments
observed by a confocal imaging system. In contrast, five transfectants with
syndecan-1 gene in the HLF cells revealed suppression of invasive activity but
did not alter the motile activity and actin structures of the cell. These results
suggest that PR-39 has functions involved in the suppression of motile activity
and alteration of actin structure on human hepatocellular carcinoma cells in
addition to the suppression of invasive activity which might result from the
induction of syndecan-1 expression.

PMCID: PMC2362919
PMID: 10507762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1999 Aug;51(8):935-40.

Characteristics of L-carnitine transport in cultured human hepatoma HLF cells.

Yokogawa K(1), Miya K, Tamai I, Higashi Y, Nomura M, Miyamoto K, Tsuji A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Natural
Science and Technology, Kanazawa University, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Pharm Pharmacol 1999 Dec;51(12):following 1466.

The recently cloned organic cation transporter, OCTN2, isolated as a homologue of
OCTN1, has been shown to be of physiological importance in the renal tubular
reabsorption of filtered L-carnitine as a high-affinity Na+ carnitine transporter
in man. Although the mutation of the OCTN2 gene has been proved to be directly
related to primary carnitine deficiency, there is little information about the
L-carnitine transport system in the liver. In this study, the characteristics of 
L-carnitine transport into hepatocytes were studied by use of cultured human
hepatoma HLF cells, which expressed OCTN2 mRNA to a greater extent than OCTN1
mRNA. The uptake of L-carnitine into HLF cells was saturable and the
Eadie-Hofstee plot showed two distinct components. The apparent Michaelis
constant and the maximum transport rate were 6.59+/-1.85 microM (mean+/-s.d.) and
78.5+/-21.4 pmol/5 min/10(6) cells, respectively, for high-affinity uptake, and
590+/-134 microM and 1507+/-142 pmol/5 min/10(6) cells, respectively, for
low-affinity uptake. The high affinity L-carnitine transporter was significantly 
inhibited by metabolic inhibitors (sodium azide, dinitrophenol, iodoacetic acid) 
and at low temperature (4 degrees C). Uptake of [3H]L-carnitine also required the
presence of Na+ ions in the external medium. The uptake activity was highest at
pH 7.4, and was significantly lower at acidic or basic pH. L-Carnitine analogues 
(D-carnitine, L-acetylcarnitine and gamma-butyrobetaine) strongly inhibited
uptake of [3H] L-carnitine, whereas beta-alanine, glycine, choline, acetylcholine
and an organic anion and cation had little or no inhibitory effect. In
conclusion, L-carnitine is absorbed by hepatocytes from man by an active
carrier-mediated transport system which is Na+-, energy- and pH-dependent and has
properties very similar to those of the carnitine transporter OCTN2.

PMID: 10504033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 1;274(40):28690-6.

Characterization of the mUBC9-binding sites required for E2A protein degradation.

Huggins GS(1), Chin MT, Sibinga NE, Lee SL, Haber E, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Mammalian Ubc9 (mUbc9) is required for rapid degradation of the E2A proteins E12 
and E47 by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. We have shown elsewhere that mUbc9
interacts with amino acids 477-530 of E12/E47. Here we test the hypothesis that
this region, rich in proline, glutamic acid, serine, and threonine (PEST)
residues, serves as the E2A protein degradation domain (DD). An E2A protein
lacking this region, E47Delta(478-531), was significantly more stable than
wild-type E47(half-life of more than 6 h versus 55 min). Deletion of the E2A DD
had no effect on the E-box-binding and transcriptional activity of E47. We mapped
two discreet mUbc9-interacting regions within the E2A DD: amino acids 476-494 and
505-513. E2A(505-513) interacted with mUbc9 but not with human Ubc5, MyoD, Id3,
or the polymyositis-scleroderma autoantigen. Substitution of the E2A(505-513)
central hydrophobic residues with basic residues abolished interaction with
mUbc9. Also, full-length E47 lacking the second mUbc9-interacting region was
significantly more stable than wild-type E47. Reintroduction of the E2A DD into
the long-lived, naturally occurring chimeric oncoprotein E2A-HLF (hepatic
leukemic factor) destabilized it, suggesting that this domain can transfer a
degradation signal to a heterologous protein. E2A-HLF-DD chimeric protein was
stabilized by the proteasome inhibitor LLNL, indicating the role of the
ubiquitin-proteasome system mediating degradation through the E2A degradation
domain. Our experiments indicate that the E2A DD mediates E2A protein
interactions with the ubiquitin-proteasome system and that the E2A DD is required
for metabolism of these widely expressed proteins.

PMID: 10497239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mech Dev. 1999 Sep;87(1-2):193-7.

mRNA cloning and expression studies of the quail homologue of HIF-2alpha.

Elvert G(1), Lanz S, Kappel A, Flamme I.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin der Universität zu Köln,
Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 9, D-50931, Köln, Germany.

Hypoxia inducible factors (HIF) are candidate transcriptional regulators of
vascular development. Unlike HIF-1alpha - the founding member of the HIF family -
which is expressed more or less ubiquitously, HIF-2alpha (also called HRF, HLF
and EPAS1) is highly expressed by vascular endothelial cells and was shown to
activate the transcription of endothelial cell-specific receptor tyrosine kinases
(tie-2 and flk-1/VEGF receptor 2) and of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). Therefore HIF-2alpha is a candidate dual regulator of vascular
development. Here we describe the quail homologue of HIF-2alpha. Sequence
analysis reveals that HIF-2alpha is highly conserved between birds and mammals.
Like the murine HIF-2alpha, the quail molecule is highly expressed by endothelial
cells but also detectable in certain epithelial cells such as in the endoderm.

PMID: 10495286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Radiat Res. 1999 Jun;40(2):125-33.

Chromosome breakage and cell lethality in human hepatoma cells irradiated with X 
rays and carbon-ion beams.

Ofuchi T(1), Suzuki M, Kase Y, Ando K, Isono K, Ochiai T.

Author information: 
(1)Space and Particle Radiation Science Research Group, National Institute of
Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan.

Prediction of radiosensitivity would be valuable for heavy-ion radiotherapy.
Premature chromosome condensation (PCC) technique has been a potential predictive
assay in photon radiotherapy, but has not been investigated for hepatomas
receiving heavy ions. Two human hepatoma cell lines, i.e., HLE and HLF, were
irradiated with either 290 MeV/u carbon ions or 200 kVp X rays. Cell lethality
was assayed by colony formation and compared with the unrejoined fraction of
chromatin breaks as measured by PCC technique. Carbon ions at linear energy
transfer (LET) of 76 keV/micron produced cell death more effectively than those
of 13 keV/micron and X rays. For the cell killing, the relative biological
effectiveness (RBE) of 13 and 76 keV/micron carbon ions compared with X rays was 
1.10-1.24 and 2.57-2.59, respectively. Mean number of chromosomes in HLE and HLF 
cells was similar to each other, i.e., 60.48 and 60.28. RBEs for chromatin breaks
of 13 and 76 keV/micron carbon ions were 1.30-1.31 and 2.64-2.79, respectively. A
strong correlation between unrejoined chromatin breaks and cell killing for human
hepatoma cells was observed irrespective of radiation quality. We conclude that
PCC provides a potential predictor for the radiosensitivity of individual
hepatoma that are treated with photon as well as heavy ion irradiation.

PMID: 10494144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Pain. 1999 Aug;Suppl 6:S61-9.

Pain: an unpleasant topic.

Fields HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Keck Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University 
of California, San Francisco 94143, USA. hlf@itsa.ucsf.edu

This essay is an attempt to clarify the construct of unpleasantness in the
context of the psychophysics of pain. The first critical point is that one aspect
of unpleasantness is tightly coupled to stimulus intensity and is therefore a
sensory discrimination. Pain has this quality, but so do other somatic sensations
such as itch and dysesthesias that are not recognized as painful by most people. 
A corollary of this is that pain must have a quality other than unpleasantness
that allows it to be unequivocally identified. I use the term algosity for that
quality. In addition to stimulus bound (primary) unpleasantness, there is an
unpleasant experience that reflects a higher level process which has a highly
variable relationship to stimulus intensity and is largely determined by memories
and contextual features. I have termed this experience secondary unpleasantness. 
I suggest that the sensory-discriminative/affective-motivational dichotomy has
outlived its usefulness and is currently more of an impediment than a guide to
neurobiological explanations of pain. In order to increase our understanding of
pain we need psychophysical tools designed specifically to differentiate primary 
unpleasantness from both algosity and secondary unpleasantness. These tools can
then be used to determine the neural mechanisms of pain.

PMID: 10491974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 1999;47(4):257-64.

Regulatory effects of lactoferrin and lipopolysaccharide on LFA-1 expression on
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Zimecki M(1), Miedzybrodzki R, Mazurier J, Spik G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Wroclaw.

The aim of this study was to investigate effects of human lactoferrin (hLF) with 
regard to LFA-1 expression on unstimulated and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). The investigations were carried 
out on 30 healthy volunteers, males and females, 24-58 years old. We found that
hLF, at an optimal dose of 5 microg/ml/10(6) cells in 24-hour culture, exerted
regulatory effects on LFA-1 expression, depending on distribution of this
molecule on cells in control cultures and on the effects of LPS. First, we
revealed several patterns of LFA-1 distribution and density of this marker among 
studied individuals. The effects of LPS and hLF on LFA-1 expression patterns were
differential. LFA-1 expression was stimulated by individual actions of LPS or
hLF, additive or synergistic effects of both factors, it could be also inhibited 
by hLF alone or in combination with LPS. In about one third of cases no
significant effects of LPS or hLF on LFA-1 expression were seen. Removal of
monocytes from the PBMC population diminished LFA-1 expression in control
cultures and abolished LPS- or hLF-elicited changes. The regulatory effects of
hLF were also blocked by treatment of PBMC cultures with anti-tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-alpha) antibodies. Taken together, the data showed that hLF and
LPS had immunoregulatory properties with respect to LFA-1 expression on human
PBMC and that these actions were mediated by monocytes and TNF-alpha.

PMID: 10483875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Br J Pharmacol. 1999 Jul;127(5):1119-28.

Inhibition of gelatinase activity in human airway epithelial cells and
fibroblasts by dexamethasone and beclomethasone.

Carver JE(1), Galloway WA, Robinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Clinical Pharmacology, St George's Hospital
Medical School, London.

The effects of dexamethasone and beclomethasone on gelatinase activity released
from lung epithelial cells (A549, NCI-H292 and Calu-3 cell lines and NHBE primary
cultures) and human lung fibroblasts (HLF) were investigated. All cells
spontaneously released gelatin-degrading activity but the amounts were unaffected
by treatment with glucocorticoids. Phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) increased the 
amount of gelatinase activity in conditioned media prepared from all cell types
examined. In epithelial cells, PMA induced the expression of gelatinase B,
whereas in HLF the increased gelatinase activity resulted from increased
activation of gelatinase A. Dexamethasone and beclomethasone produced
concentration-dependent inhibition of PMA-induced gelatinase activity in HLF and 
epithelial cell lines. In the epithelial cell lines, the inhibition of activity
was associated with an attenuation of enzyme induction by PMA. In contrast,
primary cultures of human bronchial epithelial cells were unresponsive to
dexamethasone at concentrations that were maximally effective at inhibiting
gelatinase activity induced in other cells.

PMCID: PMC1566123
PMID: 10455257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biochem. 1999 Aug;126(2):320-5.

High-level expression of human lactoferrin in milk of transgenic mice using
genomic lactoferrin sequence.

Kim SJ(1), Sohn BH, Jeong S, Pak KW, Park JS, Park IY, Lee TH, Choi YH, Lee CS,
Han YM, Yu DY, Lee KK.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Molecular Physiology Research Unit Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Taejon, 305-333, Korea.

In our previous study, transgenic mice were generated that expressed human
lactoferrin (hLF) in milk using cDNA under control of the 2 kb bovine beta-casein
promoter. The expression level of the protein in milk of 7 mice ranged from 1 to 
200 microg/ml; 1 to 34 microg/ml in 6 mice and 200 microg/ml in 1 mouse. With the
aim of inducing higher expression of the protein, we constructed an expression
cassette comprised of 10 kb of the bovine beta-casein gene promoter and the hLF
genomic sequence in place of the cDNA. The hLF genomic sequence of about 27 kb,
spanning 23 kb of the entire coding region and 4 kb of the 3'-flanking sequence, 
was placed downstream the bovine beta-casein promoter. In total, 8 transgenic
mice were generated from 31 mice (transgenic rate of 25.8%) born from the embryos
microinjected with the 40-kb hLF expression cassette. Mammary-specific expression
of the transgene was addressed by performing Northern hybridization of the total 
RNAs from various tissues of transgenic mice. Immunoblot analysis showed that the
recombinant protein expressed in milk has the same molecular weight as the native
protein. The amount of the protein in milk of 5 mice ranged from 60 to 6,600
microg/ml when judged by ELISA analysis. Three mice expressed the protein at the 
level higher than 500 microg/ml. These data suggest that the genomic lactoferrin 
sequence represents a valuable element for the efficient expression of the
protein in milk of transgenic animals.

PMID: 10423524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Curr Eye Res. 1999 Aug;19(2):154-61.

Differential expression and regulation of TGF-beta1, TGF-beta2, TGF-beta3,
TGF-betaRI, TGF-betaRII and TGF-betaRIII in cultured human corneal, limbal, and
conjunctival fibroblasts.

Li DQ(1), Lee SB, Tseng SC.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Surface and Tear Center Department of Ophthalmology Bascom Palmer Eye
Institute USA Florida, Miami, FL 33101, USA.

PURPOSE: We have reported that three patterns of cytokine expression are
potentially involved between epithelia and fibroblasts of the human ocular
surface. The TGF-beta family is a prototypical fibrogenic cytokine responsible
for fibroblast activation in wound healing. We investigated how the TGF-beta
family is differentially expressed and regulated in cultured human corneal,
limbal and conjunctival fibroblasts.
METHODS: Human corneal (HCF), limbal (HLF) and conjunctival fibroblast (HJF) were
cultured in DMEM-10% FBS until confluence and switched to serum-free DMEM-ITS for
48 h before adding 10 ng/ml of each of eight cytokines for 4 h in three separate 
experiments. Total RNA was isolated and subjected to Northern hybridization with 
GAPDH as a control. ELISA was used to determine TGF-beta1 and TGF-beta2 proteins 
in the media.
RESULTS: All three isoforms of TGF-beta and three types of TGF-betaR were
expressed by HCF, HLF and HJF. Expression of TGF-beta1 mRNA was strongest and
upregulated by the three TGF-betas in all three types of fibroblast. PDGF-BB and 
TGF-alpha slightly increased TGF-beta1 mRNA. TGF-betas also upregulated TGF-beta3
mRNA in HJF. TGF-betaRI mRNA was the only receptor upregulated by TGF-betas.
TGF-betaRII and TGF-betaRIII mRNA were not regulated by all cytokines tested.
CONCLUSIONS: TGF-betas auto-induction is the major mechanism upregulating
TGF-beta1 expression. Promotion of TGF-beta3 by the TGF-betas may have a special 
role in HJF. Differential expression and regulation of TGF-betas and TGF-betaRs
suggest that each TGF-beta isoform may have specific functions in different
ocular surface fibroblasts. No cytokine tested can downregulate TGF-beta1 and the
TGF-betaRs.

PMID: 10420185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Endocrinology. 1999 Jul;140(7):3125-32.

Interruption of activin A autocrine regulation by antisense oligodeoxynucleotides
accelerates liver tumor cell proliferation.

Takabe K(1), Lebrun JJ, Nagashima Y, Ichikawa Y, Mitsuhashi M, Momiyama N,
Ishikawa T, Shimada H, Vale WW.

Author information: 
(1)The Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, The Salk Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Administration of activin A, a member of the transforming growth factor-beta
superfamily inhibits hepatocyte proliferation in vitro and reduces liver mass in 
vivo. However, a role of endogenous activin A in local growth modulation has not 
been established in any system. The aim of this study was to examine the
production of activin A in the human hepatoma cell line HLF and to explore a
possible autocrine role of activin as a cell growth inhibitor by blocking
production of endogenous activin using antisense oligodeoxynucleotides.
Administration of exogenous activin A suppressed HLF cell growth, and
immunoreactive activin A was shown to be produced in the cells at confluency by
Western blotting analysis. Cells were exposed to phosphorothioate-modified
oligodeoxynucleotides, synthesized with antisense or randomly shuffled base
sequences of activin betaA subunit messenger RNA, under serum-free conditions.
Uptake of the oligodeoxynucleotides into the cells was confirmed by use of
fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled oligodeoxynucleotides. Administration of
antisense oligodeoxynucleotides reduced activin A production as confirmed by both
competitive PCR and Western blotting. Activin betaA antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides significantly increased cell proliferation compared with
controls. These findings are consistent with the existence of an autocrine role
of activin A as an inhibitor of hepatocyte proliferation.

PMID: 10385405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):17643-8.

D-site binding protein transactivation requires the proline- and acid-rich domain
and involves the coactivator p300.

Lamprecht C(1), Mueller CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Cancer Research Laboratories, Queen's
University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada.

The D-site binding protein (DBP) is a member of the proline- and acid-rich (PAR) 
domain subfamily of basic/leucine zipper proteins and is involved in
transcriptional regulation in the liver. Deletion analysis of the DBP protein was
carried out in an effort to define the function of the conserved PAR domain.
Internal deletions of the protein, i.e. removing portions of the PAR domain,
resulted in a substantial loss in transactivation of a high affinity DBP reporter
construct when assayed in Hep G2 cells. These same sequences conferred
significant transactivation to GAL4 DNA binding domain fusion proteins,
indicating that this region acts as part of an independent activation domain
comprised of sequences in both the amino terminus and in the PAR domain of DBP.
The coexpression of full-length expression constructs for both DBP and hepatic
leukemia factor resulted in a dramatic increase in activation mediated by the
GAL4-DBP fusion proteins, suggesting the involvement of a regulated coactivator
in this process. DBP transactivation appears to be a p300-dependent process, as a
12 S E1A expression construct disrupted DBP-mediated transactivation, and a p300 
expression vector, but not a CREB binding protein vector, was able to restore DBP
transactivation. These results suggest that the PAR domain is required for DBP
activation, which occurs through a regulated, p300-dependent process.

PMID: 10364202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4443-51.

Disrupted differentiation and oncogenic transformation of lymphoid progenitors in
E2A-HLF transgenic mice.

Smith KS(1), Rhee JW, Naumovski L, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

The hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) gene codes for a basic region-leucine zipper
(bZIP) protein that is disrupted by chromosomal translocations in a subset of
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemias. HLF undergoes fusions with the E2A gene,
resulting in chimeric E2a-Hlf proteins containing the E2a transactivation domains
and the Hlf bZIP DNA binding and dimerization motifs. To investigate the in vivo 
role of this chimeric bZIP protein in oncogenic transformation, its expression
was directed to the lymphoid compartments of transgenic mice. Within the thymus, 
E2a-Hlf induced profound hypoplasia, premature involution, and progressive
accumulation of a T-lineage precursor population arrested at an early stage of
maturation. In the spleen, mature T cells were present but in reduced numbers,
and they lacked expression of the transgene, suggesting further that E2a-Hlf
expression was incompatible with T-cell differentiation. In contrast, mature
splenic B cells expressed E2a-Hlf but at lower levels and without apparent
adverse or beneficial effects on their survival. Approximately 60% of E2A-HLF
mice developed lymphoid malignancies with a mean latency of 10 months. Tumors
were monoclonal, consistent with a requirement for secondary genetic events, and 
displayed phenotypes of either mid-thymocytes or, rarely, B-cell progenitors. We 
conclude that E2a-Hlf disrupts the differentiation of T-lymphoid progenitors in
vivo, leading to profound postnatal thymic depletion and rendering B- and T-cell 
progenitors susceptible to malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC104403
PMID: 10330184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Blood. 1999 May 1;93(9):2780-90.

Expression of E2A-HLF chimeric protein induced T-cell apoptosis, B-cell
maturation arrest, and development of acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Honda H(1), Inaba T, Suzuki T, Oda H, Ebihara Y, Tsuiji K, Nakahata T, Ishikawa
T, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan. hhirai-tky@umin.ac.jp

The E2A-HLF fusion gene, generated by t(17;19)(q22;p13) in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), encodes a chimeric transcription factor in which the
trans-activating domains of E2A are fused to the DNA-binding and dimerization
domains of hepatic leukemic factor (HLF). To investigate its biological role, we 
generated transgenic mice expressing E2A-HLF using Ig enhancer and promoter,
which direct transgene expression in cells committed to the lymphoid lineage. The
transgenic mice exhibited abnormal development in the thymus and spleen and were 
susceptible to infection. The thymus contained small numbers of thymocytes, and
TUNEL staining showed that higher population of thymocytes were undergoing
apoptosis. The spleen exhibited a marked reduction in splenic lymphocytes and the
flow cytometric analyses and the in vitro colony formation assays showed that the
B-cell maturation was blocked at a very early developmental stage. These findings
indicated that the expression of E2A-HLF induced T-cell apoptosis and B-cell
maturation arrest in vivo and that the susceptibility of the transgenic mice to
infection was due to immunodeficiency. Moreover, several transgenic mice
developed acute leukemia, classified as T-ALL based on the surface marker
analysis and DNA rearrangements, suggesting that an additional event is required 
for malignant transformation of lymphoid cells expressing E2A-HLF. Our findings
provide insight into the biological function of E2A-HLF in lymphoid development
and also its role in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10216071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. EMBO J. 1999 Apr 1;18(7):1905-14.

Molecular mechanisms of transcription activation by HLF and HIF1alpha in response
to hypoxia: their stabilization and redox signal-induced interaction with
CBP/p300.

Ema M(1), Hirota K, Mimura J, Abe H, Yodoi J, Sogawa K, Poellinger L,
Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-77, Japan.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1alpha) and its related factor, HLF,
activate expression of a group of genes such as erythropoietin in response to low
oxygen. Transfection analysis using fusion genes of GAL4DBD with various
fragments of the two factors delineated two transcription activation domains
which are inducible in response to hypoxia and are localized in the C-terminal
half. Their sequences are conserved between HLF and HIF1alpha. One is designated 
NAD (N-terminal activation domain), while the other is CAD (C-terminal activation
domain). Immunoblot analysis revealed that NADs, which were rarely detectable at 
normoxia, became stabilized and accumulated at hypoxia, whereas CADs were
constitutively expressed. In the mammalian two-hybrid system, CAD and NAD baits
enhanced the luciferase expression from a reporter gene by co-transfection with
CREB-binding protein (CBP) prey, whereas CAD, but not NAD, enhanced
beta-galactosidase expression in yeast by CBP co-expression, suggesting that NAD 
and CAD interact with CBP/p300 by a different mechanism. Co-transfection
experiments revealed that expression of Ref-1 and thioredoxin further enhanced
the luciferase activity expressed by CAD, but not by NAD. Amino acid replacement 
in the sequences of CADs revealed a specific cysteine to be essential for their
hypoxia-inducible interaction with CBP. Nuclear translocation of thioredoxin from
cytoplasm was observed upon reducing O2 concentrations.

PMCID: PMC1171276
PMID: 10202154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Med Mycol. 1999 Feb;37(1):35-41.

In vitro susceptibility of Candida species to lactoferrin.

Xu YY(1), Samaranayake YH, Samaranayake LP, Nikawa H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Stomatology, Beijing Medical University, China.

Lactoferrin is an antimicrobial protein present in human mucosal secretions as
well as saliva. As there is no information on the relative fungicidal activity of
human and bovine lactoferrin, an oral isolate of Candida albicans was studied for
its susceptibility to these two proteins. Exposure to a concentration of 20
micrograms ml-1 of either HLF or BLF at 37 degrees C inactivated the yeast to the
same degree irrespective of the incubation time of 45, 90 or 150 min. A similar
study, using 20 micrograms ml-1 BLF and an incubation time of 150 min, elicited
varying anticandidal activity against 35 isolates belonging to six different
Candida species. Thus, BLF was fungicidal for the six Candida species in the
following decreasing order, C. tropicalis > C. krusei > C. albicans > C.
guilliermondii > C. parapsilosis > C. glabrata; the latter being the most
resistant. These Candida species also demonstrated significant intra-species
variation in susceptibility to the protein (P < 0.05). When the yeast cells
exposed to BLF were examined by cryo-scanning electron microscopy, profound cell 
wall changes such as cell surface blebs, swelling and cell collapse were noted.
These findings suggest that lactoferrin, a constituent of saliva, may
differentially modulate the carriage of Candida species in the oral cavity.

PMID: 10200932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cancer Res. 1999 Apr 1;59(7 Suppl):1701s-1706s.

Genetic control of programmed cell death in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.

Horvitz HR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139, USA.

Studies of the development of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans established
that programmed cell death involves specific genes and proteins and that those
genes and proteins act within the cells that die. This finding revealed that cell
death is a fundamental and active biological process, much like cell division and
cell differentiation. The characterization of genes responsible for programmed
cell death in C. elegans has defined a molecular genetic pathway. This pathway is
conserved evolutionarily and provides a basis for understanding programmed cell
death in more complex organisms, including humans. Knowledge of the mechanisms of
programmed cell death should help lead to new methods for the diagnosis and
treatment of human diseases characterized by too many or too few cell deaths,
including cancer.

PMID: 10197583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 1999 Feb;55(Pt 2):403-7.

Structure of recombinant human lactoferrin expressed in Aspergillus awamori.

Sun XL(1), Baker HM, Shewry SC, Jameson GB, Baker EN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Chemistry, Massey University, Palmerston
North, New Zealand.

Human lactoferrin (hLf) has considerable potential as a therapeutic agent.
Overexpression of hLf in the fungus Aspergillus awamori has resulted in the
availability of very large quantities of this protein. Here, the
three-dimensional structure of the recombinant hLf has been determined by X-ray
crystallography at a resolution of 2.2 A. The final model, comprising 5339
protein atoms (residues 1-691, 294 solvent molecules, two Fe3+and two CO32-
ions), gives an R factor of 0.181 (free R = 0.274) after refinement against 32231
reflections in the resolution range 10-2.2 A. Superposition of the recombinant
hLf structure onto the native milk hLf structure shows a very high level of
correspondence; the main-chain atoms for the entire polypeptide can be
superimposed with an r.m.s. deviation of only 0.3 A and there are no significant 
differences in side-chain conformations or in the iron-binding sites. Dynamic
properties, as measured by B-value distributions or iron-release kinetics, also
agree closely. This shows that the structure of the protein is not affected by
the mode of expression, the use of strain-improvement procedures or the changes
in glycosylation due to the fungal system.

PMID: 10089347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Leukemia. 1999 Mar;13(3):369-75.

Identification of a novel molecular partner of the E2A gene in childhood
leukemia.

Brambillasca F(1), Mosna G, Colombo M, Rivolta A, Caslini C, Minuzzo M, Giudici
G, Mizzi L, Biondi A, Privitera E.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Università di
Milano, Italy.

The 'promiscuous' E2A gene, at 19p13.3, is fused with two different molecular
partners, PBX1 and HLF, following two chromosome translocations recurrent in
childhood pre-B ALL. We have identified a novel gene, FB1, by virtue of its
fusion with E2A and by a combination of molecular techniques. FB1 was localized
on 19q13.4, suggesting that the novel chimera originated by a cryptic
rearrangement of chromosome 19. Two FB1 transcripts, of 1.2 kb and 1.1 kb, are
differentially expressed at low level in a variety of human tissues, including
hemopoietic cell lines from different lineages. Accordingly, FB1 cDNA displays
high homology with a number of cDNA clones from different human tissues. High
homology was found also with cDNA clones from mouse and rat, suggesting that the 
sequence might be conserved at least among mammals. The function of the putative 
FB1 protein, however, is currently unknown as database sequence comparisons have 
failed to reveal strong homology with known proteins. The E2A/FB1 fusion appears 
to be a recurrent feature of pre-B ALLs, suggesting that it might have a role in 
the development and/or progression of leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10086727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Infect Immun. 1999 Apr;67(4):1683-7.

Identification of pneumococcal surface protein A as a lactoferrin-binding protein
of Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Hammerschmidt S(1), Bethe G, Remane PH, Chhatwal GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, GBF-National Research Centre for
Biotechnology, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

Lactoferrin (Lf), an iron-sequestering glycoprotein, predominates in mucosal
secretions, where the level of free extracellular iron (10(-18) M) is not
sufficient for bacterial growth. This represents a mechanism of resistance to
bacterial infections by prevention of colonization of the host by pathogens. In
this study we were able to show that Streptococcus pneumoniae specifically
recognizes and binds the iron carrier protein human Lf (hLf). Pretreatment of
pneumococci with proteases reduced hLf binding significantly, indicating that the
hLf receptor is proteinaceous. Binding assays performed with 63 clinical isolates
belonging to different serotypes showed that 88% of the tested isolates
interacted with hLf. Scatchard analysis showed the existence of two hLf-binding
proteins with dissociation constants of 5.7 x 10(-8) and 2.74 x 10(-7) M. The
receptors were purified by affinity chromatography, and internal sequence
analysis revealed that one of the S. pneumoniae proteins was homologous to
pneumococcal surface protein A (PspA). The function of PspA as an hLf-binding
protein was confirmed by the ability of purified PspA to bind hLf and to
competitively inhibit hLf binding to pneumococci. S. pneumoniae may use the
hLf-PspA interaction to overcome the iron limitation at mucosal surfaces, and
this might represent a potential virulence mechanism.

PMCID: PMC96514
PMID: 10085004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Mar 24;256(3):626-30.

alpha-thrombin inhibits interleukin-6-induced Stat3 signaling and gp130 gene
expression in primary cultures of human lung fibroblasts.

Bhat GJ(1), Raghu G, Gunaje JJ, Idell S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Specialty Care Services, University of Texas Health Center at
Tyler, 11937 US Hwy 271, Tyler, Texas, 75701, USA.

Exposure of primary human lung fibroblasts (HLF) to interleukin-6 (IL-6) rapidly 
induced Stat3 (signal transducers and activators of transcription 3) tyrosine
phosphorylation. In these cells, alpha-thrombin did not induce tyrosine
phosphorylation of Stat3; however, it potently induced its serine
phosphorylation. Interestingly, a short pretreatment of cells with alpha-thrombin
significantly inhibited IL-6-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat3. The
inhibition by alpha-thrombin was attenuated if cells were pretreated with U0126, 
a specific inhibitor of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase kinase 1
(MAPKK1). Exposure of HLF cells to IL-6 induced a twofold increase in gp130 mRNA 
levels; however, alpha-thrombin inhibited this IL-6-induced response almost to
control levels. These results demonstrate, for the first time, that in HLF cells 
alpha-thrombin inhibits IL-6-induced Stat3 signaling via activation of MAPKK1 and
that this cross-talk regulates IL-6-induced gp130 gene expression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10080949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;18(2):165-73.

Enhanced binding of HLF/DBP heterodimers represents one mechanism of PAR protein 
transactivation of the factor VIII and factor IX genes.

Begbie M(1), Mueller C, Lillicrap D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

The regulatory regions of the genes for coagulation Factors VIII and IX contain
binding sites for both liver-enriched and ubiquitous transcriptional regulators. 
We investigated the role of the liver-enriched protein, hepatic leukemia factor
(HLF), in mediating transcriptional regulation of the Factor VIII and IX genes.
Using transient transfection assays in HepG2 hepatoma cells, we demonstrated the 
ability of HLF alone and in synergistic combination with the D-box binding
protein (DBP), another proline and acidic-rich (PAR) protein family member, to
transactivate these promoters. HLF is capable of binding to multiple sites in
both the Factor VIII and Factor IX promoters. At least some of the synergistic
activation of the Factor VIII promoter seen with HLF and DBP cotransfection can
be attributed to increased binding of HLF-DBP heterodimers to two Factor VIII
promoter sites. We have also demonstrated that an E2A-HLF chimera, derived from a
t(17;19) translocation in pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells, is
capable of mediating expression from the Factor VIII and Factor IX promoters in
both hepatoma cells and pre-B ALL cells. These observations indicate that the PAR
family of transcription factors plays an important and complex role in regulating
expression of the Factor VIII and Factor IX genes, involving the binding of both 
homodimeric and heterodimeric complexes of HLF and DBP to several sites in the
promoters. Finally, these studies reaffirm the potential role of dimeric
transcription factor complexes in mediating interactions with specific promoter
elements, which, in the case of the Factor VIII promoter, results in dramatically
enhanced binding of HLF-DBP heterodimers to two cis-acting sequences. These
observations further our understanding of the role played by members of the PAR
family of transcription factors in regulating expression of the Factor VIII and
Factor IX genes.

PMID: 10073576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Brain Res. 1999 Feb 27;820(1-2):1-11.

Expression patterns of the hepatic leukemia factor gene in the nervous system of 
developing and adult mice.

Hitzler JK(1), Soares HD, Drolet DW, Inaba T, O'Connel S, MG Rosenfeld, Morgan
JI, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
332 N. Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) is a bZIP transcription factor related to the CES-2
protein, which controls apoptosis of the NSM serotoninergic neurons in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Ectopic expression of HLF as an E2A-HLF fusion protein in
t(17;19)-positive human pro-B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias is believed to
promote malignancy by interfering with apoptosis. While HLF has been linked to
malignancies of the lymphoid system, it is not normally expressed in these cells.
Rather, HLF transcripts are detected in the liver, kidney, lung and adult nervous
system by Northern blotting. Despite the links to cell death, little is known of 
the distribution or function of HLF in the adult and developing mammalian nervous
system. Therefore, we cloned mouse Hlf and studied its expression by in situ
hybridization. During embryonic brain development, Hlf expression was restricted 
to the anterior pituitary and meninges. By early postnatal life, Hlf was highly
expressed in somatosensory cortex, thalamic nuclei, and structures arising from
ectodermal placodes. Subsequently, Hlf expression increased in the central
nervous system and was found throughout the brain by adulthood. In the developing
pituitary gland, Hlf was highly expressed in the rostral tip of the anterior
lobe. This pattern is similar to that of Tef, an Hlf-related bZIP protein.
However, while Tef is expressed in the anterior pituitary of the adult mouse, Hlf
was detected in both the anterior and posterior pituitary. Hlf expression was not
associated with cells undergoing programmed cell death in the nervous system. Hlf
expression increased markedly with synaptogenesis and was coincident with barrel 
formation revealed by cytochrome oxidase staining. Together, these data suggest
that Hlf plays a role in the function of differentiated neurons in the adult
nervous system rather than programmed cell death.

Copyright 1999 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10023025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cells. 1998 Dec 31;8(6):663-8.

Structure of the human lactoferrin gene and its chromosomal localization.

Kim SJ(1), Yu DY, Pak KW, Jeong S, Kim SW, Lee KK.

Author information: 
(1)Plant and Animal Cell Technology Research Division, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Taejon.

The complete gene encoding the human lactoferrin (hLf) was isolated from a cosmid
library and its structure was characterized. A detailed restriction map and the
complete exon-intron structure of the gene are presented. The transcript is
assembled from 17 exons like the bovine (bLf) and murine lactoferrin (mLf) genes,
which are separated by introns ranging in size from about 300 bp to 3.3 kb. The
total length of the gene is about 24.5 kb, estimated by adding up the sizes of
the exons and introns. A comparison of the structure of the hLf gene with that of
other species revealed that the hLf gene is more closely related to bLf than to
mLf. The positions of the introns were well matched with those of the bLf gene
except only for exons 14 and 15, wherein exon 14 of the hLf gene is one nt
shorter while exon 15 is one nt longer than the bLf gene. All the exon-intron
boundaries of the gene conformed to the GT/AG rule. In situ fluorescence
hybridization indicated that the hLf gene was mapped in the region 3p21.3.

PMID: 9895117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Vis. 1998 Dec 31;4:31.

Familial subepithelial corneal amyloidosis (gelatinous drop-like corneal
dystrophy): exclusion of linkage to lactoferrin gene.

Klintworth GK(1), Sommer JR, Obrian G, Han L, Ahmed MN, Qumsiyeh MB, Lin PY,
Basti S, Reddy MK, Kanai A, Hotta Y, Sugar J, Kumaramanickavel G, Munier F,
Schorderet DF, El Matri L, Iwata F, Kaiser-Kupfer M, Nagata M, Nakayasu K,
Hejtmancik JF, Teng CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
KLINT001@mc.duke.edu

PURPOSE: Because corneal tissue with familial subepithelial corneal amyloidosis
(FSCA; gelatinous drop-like dystrophy of the cornea) contains lactoferrin the
possibility that the FSCA gene was the human lactoferrin (hLF) gene was
investigated. Due to contradictory published information we also mapped the hLF
gene.
METHODS: We mapped the hLF gene using a genomic clone of the entire hLF gene as a
probe by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Utilizing PCR primers that
are specific to the hLF gene, we also mapped the hLF via radiation somatic cell
hybrid analysis. Linkage of the FSCA gene to the hLF gene was evaluated by
genetic linkage analysis using polymorphic markers within and in the vicinity of 
the hLF gene.
RESULTS: The hLF gene mapped to the short arm of chromosome 3 at 3p21. Linkage
analysis using polymorphic markers for hLF and haplotype analysis of the 3p21
loci indicates that the FSCA gene is not linked to the 3p21 locus.
CONCLUSIONS: The gene for FSCA is not the hLF gene in these families.

PMID: 9873069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Blood. 1999 Jan 1;93(1):321-32.

Two candidate downstream target genes for E2A-HLF.

Kurosawa H(1), Goi K, Inukai T, Inaba T, Chang KS, Shinjyo T, Rakestraw KM, Naeve
CW, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and the Center for Biotechnology, St Jude 
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105-2794, USA.

The E2A-HLF fusion gene, formed by the t(17;19)(q22;p13) chromosomal
translocation, is thought to drive the leukemic transformation of early B-cell
precursors by repressing an evolutionarily conserved apoptotic pathway. To test
this hypothesis, we sought to identify downstream targets of E2A-HLF in t(17;19)+
pro-B leukemia cells (UOC-B1) that had been transfected with a zinc-inducible
vector encoding a dominant-negative suppressor (E2A-HLF[dn]) of the oncoprotein. 
Representational difference analysis of mRNAs from E2A-HLF(dn)+ UOC-B1 cells
grown with (E2A-HLF inactive) or without (E2A-HLF active) the addition of zinc
yielded several differentially expressed cDNA fragments that were individually
subcloned. Two of the clones, designated F-5 and G-4, hybridized with mRNAs that 
were upregulated by E2A-HLF. Levels of both transcripts declined sharply within 8
to 12 hours after suppression of E2A-HLF DNA-binding activity, becoming
undetectable after 96 hours. The F-5 cDNA was identified as a portion of ANNEXIN 
VIII, whose product was expressed in promyelocytic leukemia cells and UOC-B1
cells, but not in other leukemic cell lines. A novel full-length cDNA cloned with
the G-4 fragment encoded a protein that we have named SRPUL (sushi-repeat protein
upregulated in leukemia). It is normally expressed in heart, ovary, and placenta,
but could not be detected in leukemic cell lines other than UOC-B1. Neither
protein prevented apoptosis in interleukin-3-dependent murine pro-B cells,
suggesting that they have paraneoplastic roles in leukemias that express E2A-HLF,
perhaps in the disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and hypercalcemia that
characterize these cases.

PMID: 9864177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;82(3-4):189-91.

Molecular cytogenetic mapping of 24 CEPH YACs and 24 gene-specific large insert
probes to chromosome 17.

Bärlund M(1), Nupponen NN, Karhu R, Tanner MM, Paavola P, Kallioniemi OP,
Kallioniemi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, University of 
Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere (Finland).

Defining boundaries of chromosomal rearrangements at the molecular level would
benefit from landmarks that link the cytogenetic map to physical, genetic, and
transcript maps, as well as from large-insert FISH probes for such loci to detect
numerical and structural rearrangements in metaphase or interphase cells. Here,
we determined the locations of 24 genetically mapped CEPH-Mega YACs along the
FLpter scale (fractional length from p-telomere) by quantitative fluorescence in 
situ hybridization analysis. This generated a set of cytogenetically mapped
probes for chromosome 17 with an average spacing of about 5 cM. We then developed
large-insert YAC, BAC, PAC, or P1 clones to the following 24 known genes, and
determined refined map locations along the same FLpter scale:
pter-TP53-TOP3-cen-TNFAIP1-ERBB2-TOP2A- BRCA1-TCF11-NME1-HLF-ZNF147/CL
N80-BCL5/MPO/SFRS1-TBX2-PECAM1-DDX5/ PRKCA-ICAM2-GH1/PRKAR1A-GRB2-CDK3
/FKHL13-qter. Taken together, these 48 cytogenetically mapped large-insert probes
provide tools for the molecular analysis of chromosome 17 rearrangements, such as
mapping amplification, deletion, and translocation breakpoints in this
chromosome, in cancer and other diseases.

PMID: 9858813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cells. 1998 Oct 31;8(5):530-6.

Matrix attachment region sequences enhanced the expression frequency of a whey
acidic protein/human lactoferrin fusion gene in the mammary gland of transgenic
mice.

Lee TH(1), Kim SJ, Han YM, Yu DY, Lee CS, Choi YJ, Moon HB, Baik MG, Lee KK.

Author information: 
(1)Plant and Animal Cell Technology Research Division, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience & Biotechnology, Taejon.

To elevate the expression frequency of transgenes in transgenic mice, the chicken
lysozyme matrix attachment region (MAR) sequence was used by combining it with a 
transgene. The whey acidic protein (WAP) promoter/human lactoferrin (hLF) cDNA
fusion transgene (pWL) was connected to the chicken lysozyme MAR sequence at its 
5'-end (pMWL). While only two of three mice became transgenic from the pWL vector
expressed hLF, all seven mice from the pMWL vector expressed the transgene in
their lactating mammary glands. To evaluate the effect of lactogenic hormones on 
transgene expression, experiments with the primary culture of transgenic mammary 
explants were performed. It was revealed that the expression of transgenes was
slightly increased by insulin plus dexamethasone or insulin plus prolactin
treatment. However it was not increased by insulin, dexamethasone or prolactin
(IDP) treatment alone. In contrast, the endogenous WAP gene was expressed only in
the IDP treated group. These results demonstrate that MAR sequences are effective
in improving the expression frequency of transgenes in transgenic mice although
the developmental and hormonal regulations are not the same as those of the
endogenous WAP gene.

PMID: 9856339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1998;443:285-91.

Bovine lactoferrin and Lactoferricin inhibit tumor metastasis in mice.

Yoo YC(1), Watanabe S, Watanabe R, Hata K, Shimazaki K, Azuma I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunological Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

The effect of a bovine milk protein, lactoferrin (bLf), and a pepsin-generated
peptide of bLf, lactoferricin (Lfcin-B), on inhibition of tumor metastasis
produced by highly metastatic murine tumor cells, B16-BL6 melanoma and
L5178Y-ML25 lymphoma cells, was examined in experimental and spontaneous
metastasis models using syngeneic mice. The subcutaneous (s.c.) administration of
bovine apo-lactoferrin (apo-bLf) and Lfcin-B 1 day after tumor inoculation
significantly inhibited liver and spleen metastasis of L5178Y-ML25 cells and lung
metastasis of B16-BL6 cells, whereas human apo-lactoferrin (apo-hLf) and bovine
holo-lactoferrin (holo-Lf) at the dose of 1 mg/mouse did not. Furthermore, both
apo-bLf and Lfcin-B, but not apo-hLf and holo-bLf, inhibited the number of
tumor-induced blood vessels and suppressed tumor growth on day 8 after tumor
inoculations in an in vivo model. However, in a long-term analysis of tumor
growth for up to 21 days after tumor inoculation, single administration of
apo-bLf significantly suppressed the growth of B16-BL6 cells throughout the
examination period, but Lfcin-B showed inhibitory activity only during the early 
period (8 days). In spontaneous metastasis model, multiple administration of both
apo-bLf and Lfcin-B significantly inhibited lung metastasis of B16-BL6 cells,
however it was only apo-bLf that exhibited the inhibitory effect of tumor growth 
at the time of primary tumor amputation (on day 21) after tumor inoculation. The 
results suggest that apo-bLf and Lfcin-B inhibit tumor metastasis through
different mechanisms, and that the inhibitory activity of bLf on tumor metastasis
may be related to the property of iron (Fe3+)-saturation.

PMID: 9781371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1998;443:49-55.

Role of the first N-terminal basic cluster of human lactoferrin (R2R3R4R5) in the
interactions with the Jurkat human lymphoblastic T-cells.

Legrand D(1), van Berkel PH, Salmon V, van Veen HA, Slomianny MC, Nuijens JH,
Spik G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Biologique, Université des Sciences et Technologies de
Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

We previously characterized a receptor of Mr 105,000 for human lactoferrin (hLf) 
on Jurkat human lymphoblastic T-cells. To delineate the role of R2R3R4R5 of hLf
in the interaction with cells, we studied the binding of hLf variants obtained
either by tryptic proteolysis (hLf-2N, hLF-3N and hLf-4N) or by mutagenesis
(rhLf-5N). Consecutive removal of N-terminal arginine residues from hLf
progressively increased the binding affinity but decreased the number of binding 
sites on the cells. The binding parameters of bovine Lf and native hLf did not
differ, whereas the binding parameters of murine Lf resembled those of rhLf-5N.
Culture of Jurkat cells in the presence of chlorate, which inhibits sulfation,
reduced the number of binding sites for both native hLf and hLf-3N but not for
rhLf-5N indicating that the hLf binding sites include sulfated molecules. The
results suggest that the interaction of hLf with about 80,000 binding sites per
Jurkat cell, mainly sulfated molecules, is dependent on R2R3R4, but not on R5.
Interaction with about 20,000 binding sites per cell, presumably the hLf
receptor, does not require the first N-terminal basic cluster of hLf. We conclude
that the deletion of R2-R5 from hLf may serve to modulate the nature of its
binding to cells and thereby its effects on cellular physiology.

PMID: 9781342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):6035-43.

The AD1 and AD2 transactivation domains of E2A are essential for the
antiapoptotic activity of the chimeric oncoprotein E2A-HLF.

Inukai T(1), Inaba T, Ikushima S, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The chimeric oncoprotein E2A-HLF, generated by the t(17;19) chromosomal
translocation in pro-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, incorporates the
transactivation domains of E2A and the basic leucine zipper (bZIP) DNA-binding
and protein dimerization domain of HLF (hepatic leukemic factor). The ability of 
E2A-HLF to prolong the survival of interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent murine pro-B
cells after IL-3 withdrawal suggests that it disrupts signaling pathways normally
responsible for cell suicide, allowing the cells to accumulate as transformed
lymphoblasts. To determine the structural motifs that contribute to this
antiapoptotic effect, we constructed a panel of E2A-HLF mutants and programmed
their expression in IL-3-dependent murine pro-B cells (FL5.12 line), using a
zinc-inducible vector. Neither the E12 nor the E47 product of the E2A gene nor
the wild-type HLF protein was able to protect the cells from apoptosis induced by
IL-3 deprivation. Surprisingly, different combinations of disabling mutations
within the HLF bZIP domain had little effect on the antiapoptotic property of the
chimeric protein, so long as the amino-terminal portion of E2A remained intact.
In the context of a bZIP domain defective in DNA binding, mutants retaining
either of the two transactivation domains of E2A were able to extend cell
survival after growth factor deprivation. Thus, the block of apoptosis imposed by
E2A-HLF in pro-B lymphocytes depends critically on the transactivating regions of
E2A. Since neither DNA binding nor protein dimerization through the bZIP domain
of HLF is required for this effect, we propose mechanisms whereby protein-protein
interactions with the amino-terminal region of E2A allow the chimera to act as a 
transcriptional cofactor to alter the expression of genes regulating the
apoptotic machinery in pro-B cells.

PMCID: PMC109189
PMID: 9742120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Leukemia. 1998 Sep;12(9):1417-21.

Different patterns of homozygous p16INK4A and p15INK4B deletions in childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemias containing distinct E2A translocations.

Maloney KW(1), McGavran L, Odom LF, Hunger SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, The
Children's Hospital, Denver, USA.

The p16INK4A (p16) and p15INK4B (p15) tumor suppressor genes are inactivated by
homozygous gene deletion and p15 promoter hypermethylation in a significant
proportion of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs). However, little is 
known about the potential association between p16/p15 gene alterations and
specific genetic abnormalities implicated in leukemogenesis. The t(1;19)(q23;p13)
and t(17;19)(q21-22;p13) are non-random translocations observed in childhood ALL 
that create distinct E2A fusion proteins: E2A-PBX1 and E2A-HLF, respectively.
Previously, a negative association was found between the t(1;19) and homozygous
p16/p15 deletions. In this study we determined p16 and p15 gene status in
additional t(1;19)+ ALLs and compared this incidence to that observed in
t(17;19)+ ALLs. No homozygous p16 or p15 deletions were observed among 13
t(1;19)+ ALLs analyzed. In contrast, homozygous deletions of both p16 and p15
were present in two of four t(17;19)+ ALLs. None of 10 t(1;19)+ ALLs contained
p15 promoter hypermethylation. In contrast, one of the two t(17;19)+ ALLs that
lacked p15/p16 homozygous deletions showed probable hemizygous p15
hypermethylation. We conclude that homozygous p16 and/or p15 deletions and p15
hypermethylation rarely accompany E2A-PBX1 fusion, but occur in concert with
E2A-HLF fusion in a subset of t(17;19)+ ALLs. These findings suggest that there
may be different modes of cooperative leukemogenesis in ALLs associated with
different E2A fusion proteins.

PMID: 9737691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1998 Aug;25(10):1557-63.

[Antitumor effect of human lactoferrin against newly established human pancreatic
cancer cell line SPA].

[Article in Japanese]

Sakamoto N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Dept. of Surgery, Showa University School of Medicine.

This paper describes the antitumor effect of human lactoferrin against the human 
pancreatic cancer cell line SPA, which was newly established in our laboratory
from a metastatic liver tumor of pancreatic origin. In tissue culture, the cancer
cells proliferated rapidly at 16 hours of doubling time, and produced tumor
markers into the culture medium at a high concentration. Subcutaneous and
intraperitoneal transplantation of these neoplastic cells into nude mice resulted
in tumor formation and carcinomatous peritonitis. The inhibitory effect of human 
lactoferrin on the cell growth of SPA was found both in vivo and in vitro. There 
was significant inhibition of cell growth in vivo at the concentration of 1
microgram/ml of hLf in the culture medium. And in the in vivo assay, hLf delayed 
the growth of subcutaneously transplanted tumors into BALB/c nude mice, and the
effect was retained for two weeks. These results indicate the possibility that
hLf will become one of the new drugs for adjuvant therapy against pancreatic
cancer.

PMID: 9725049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 30;248(3):789-94.

Transcriptionally active heterodimer formation of an Arnt-like PAS protein,
Arnt3, with HIF-1a, HLF, and clock.

Takahata S(1), Sogawa K, Kobayashi A, Ema M, Mimura J, Ozaki N, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan.

We isolated a cDNA clone encoding a polypeptide of 626 amino acids containing
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and PAS domains from a mouse cDNA library of P19
cells. This protein, termed Arnt3, showed the highest similarity to Arnt and
Arnt2 in the bHLH and PAS regions. Arnt3 mRNA was expressed in brain, skeletal
muscle, 13.5-day embryos, and P19 cells treated with retinoic acid. The partner
PAS proteins of Arnt3 were searched for by the two-hybrid system in yeast, and
HIF-1 alpha, HLF, and Clock among various bHLH/PAS proteins were found. Gel
mobility shift analysis using nuclear extracts from 293T cells cotransfected with
Arnt3 and HIF-1 alpha (or HLF) expression plasmids revealed that these complexes 
specifically bound the hypoxia-response element (HRE). Coexpression of Arnt3 and 
HIF-1 alpha (or HLF) in Arnt-deficient c4 cells enhanced transcription of a
reporter gene driven by the HRE sequences. We also showed that Arnt3 contained an
activation domain at the C-terminal region and a repression domain between the
PAS-A and PAS-B regions.

PMID: 9704006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Physiol. 1998 Aug;275(2 Pt 1):L223-30.

Human lung fibroblasts release chemokinetic activity for monocytes
constitutively.

Koyama S(1), Sato E, Masubuchi T, Takamizawa A, Nomura H, Kubo K, Nagai S, Izumi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Shinshu University School of Medicine, First Department of Internal Medicine, 
Matsumoto 390, Japan.

We determined whether human lung fibroblasts (HLFs) might release mediators that 
are responsible for monocyte chemokinetic activity (MCA) constitutively. HLF
supernatant fluids showed MCA in a time-dependent manner (P < 0.001).
Checkerboard analysis of 24- and 72-h supernatant fluids showed that the activity
was chemokinetic. Partial characterization of 24- and 72-h supernatant fluids
revealed that the mediators released after 24 h were predominantly composed of
lipid-soluble activity, and MCA was blocked by lipoxygenase inhibitors. The
mediators released after 72 h were predominantly trypsin sensitive and blocked by
cycloheximide. Molecular-sieve column chromatography identified four peaks of
MCA. A polyclonal antibody to monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)
inhibited MCA by 20% after 24 h and by 40% after 72 h. Granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)
antibodies attenuated MCA released after 72 h by 30 and 10%, respectively. These 
antibodies inhibited corresponding molecular-weight peaks separated by
molecular-sieve column. The concentrations of MCP-1, GM-CSF, and TGF-beta were
4,698 +/- 242, 26.8 +/- 3.8, and 550 +/- 15 pg/ml, respectively. A leukotriene B4
(LTB4)-receptor antagonist attenuated the total MCA and the lowest molecular
weight peak of MCA. The concentrations of LTB4 were 153.4 +/- 12.4 (24 h) and 212
+/- 16.6 (72 h) pg/ml. These findings suggest that HLFs may modulate the
recruitment of monocytes into the lung by releasing MCP-1, GM-CSF, TGF-beta, and 
LTB4 constitutively.

PMID: 9700081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Blood. 1998 Aug 15;92(4):1397-405.

The chimeric E2A-HLF transcription factor abrogates p53-induced apoptosis in
myeloid leukemia cells.

Altura RA(1), Inukai T, Ashmun RA, Zambetti GP, Roussel MF, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105-2794, USA.

Leukemic lymphoblasts expressing the E2A-HLF oncoprotein possess wild-type p53
genes, but do not undergo apoptosis in response to DNA damage. Experimentally,
E2A-HLF prevents apoptosis due to growth factor deprivation or gamma-irradiation 
in interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent murine pro-B cells. To directly test the
chimeric protein's ability to abrogate p53-mediated cell death, we used mouse
myeloid leukemia cells (M1p53tsval) that constitutively express a
temperature-sensitive (ts) mutant p53 gene and undergo apoptosis when p53 assumes
an active wild-type configuration. This effect is blocked by treatment with IL-6,
which allows the cells to survive in culture despite wild-type p53 activation. We
introduced E2A-HLF into M1p53tsval cells and found that they were resistant to
p53-mediated apoptosis and that E2A-HLF effectively substituted for the survival 
functions of IL-6. The expression of p53-responsive genes such as p21 and Bax was
upregulated normally, suggesting that E2A-HLF acts downstream of p53 to block
execution of the p53-induced apoptotic program. NFIL3, a growth factor-regulated 
bZIP protein that binds to the same DNA-consensus site as E2A-HLF, delays
apoptosis in IL-3-dependent pro-B cells deprived of growth factor. By contrast,
in the present study, enforced expression of NFIL3 failed to protect M1p53tsval
cells from p53-dependent apoptosis and actively antagonized the ability of IL-6
to rescue cells from that fate, consistent with its role as either a
transcriptional repressor or activator, depending on the cell type in which it is
expressed. We conclude that the E2A-HLF chimera abrogates p53-induced apoptosis
in leukemic cells, possibly through the transcriptional modulation of cell death 
pathways that are activated by p53 in response to DNA damage.

Copyright 1998 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 9694729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Leuk Res. 1998 Jul;22(7):567-79.

Establishment and characterization of human B cell precursor-leukemia cell lines.

Matsuo Y(1), Drexler HG.

Author information: 
(1)Fujisaki Cell Center, Hayashibara Biochemical Laboratories, Okayama, Japan.

A large number of continuous human leukemia cell lines have been established over
the last three decades. Clearly, leukemia cell lines have become important
research tools. Here, we have summarized the immunological, molecular and
standard cytogenetic features of a panel of well characterized B cell precursor
(BCP)-leukemia cell lines which were derived from patients with acute
lymphoblastic/undifferentiated leukemia (ALL/AUL) or chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) in blast crisis. Following the recently proposed immunological EGIL
classification, we assigned our panel of 27 BCP-cell lines to one of the
following categories: B-I pro-B cell line; B-II common-B cell line; and B-III
pre-B cell line. All cell lines express general B-lineage associated surface
markers (HLA-DR, CD22, CD79a) being negative for surface immunoglobulin (Ig); the
differences between the subgroups reside in expression of CD10 and cytoplasmic
Ig. Several BCP-cell lines show the myelomonocytic cell-associated markers CD13
and/or CD33. These immunologically 'biphenotypic' BCP-cell lines are generally
TdT+ CD10+ CD13+ CD19+ CD22+ CD34+ and carry the Philadelphia (Ph) translocation.
The BCP-cell lines display surface receptors for interferon-gamma (CD119),
interleukin-7 (CD127) and FLT-3 ligand (CD135). All BCP-cell lines examined have 
complex numerical and structural chromosomal alterations including translocations
commonly seen in BCP-ALL such as t(4;11), t(9;22), t(11;19), t(12;21), and
t(17;19) involving the fusion genes MLL-AF4, BCR-ABL, ENL-MLL, TEL/ETV6-AML1 and 
E2A-HLF, respectively. Besides the expected rearrangement of the Ig heavy chain
receptor gene, several cell lines also have rearrangements of the T cell receptor
genes beta, gamma or delta. While some BCP-cell lines express (aberrantly)
myeloperoxidase at the mRNA level, most lines are negative in the immunological
or cytochemical staining. Several large series documented the difficulty in
establishing such BCP cell lines with success rates in the range of 10-20% (on
average 15%). Still, since the establishment of the first bonafide BCP-cell line 
in 1974 (cell line REH), some 150 cell lines have been established of which,
however, only a small percentage have been sufficiently well characterized and
described. A higher success rate for immortalizing any given leukemia cell might 
depend on a closer emulation of the physiological in vivo microenvironment. The
possibility to grow in vitro leukemia cells at will would represent ideal
experimental systems permitting basic research and patient-specific
investigations. In summary, the use of well-characterized BCP-cell lines provide 
unprecedented opportunities for studying a multitude of biological aspects
related to normal and neoplastic B-lymphocytes.

PMID: 9680106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Gastroenterol. 1998 Jun;33(3):368-75.

Reduced expression and rare genomic alteration of nm23-H1 in human hepatocellular
carcinoma and hepatoma cell lines.

Fujimoto Y(1), Ohtake T, Nishimori H, Ikuta K, Ohhira M, Ono M, Kohgo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, Japan.

We investigated the expression and genomic alteration of nm23-H1 (which encodes a
nucleoside diphosphate, kinase A) in 12 human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs)
and four hepatoma cell lines. The expression of nm23-H1 protein was significantly
reduced in HCCs with intrahepatic metastasis (72%) compared with expression in
HCCs without intrahepatic metastasis (38%). However, in two of three HCCs
examined that had marked reduction of nm23-H1 protein, the nm23-H1 mRNA level was
not reduced. A hepatoma cell line, HLF (phenotype, poorly differentiated
carcinoma) revealed marked reduction of nm23-H1 protein compared with two other
hepatoma cell lines, HuH-1 and HuH-2, although the mRNA level was similar in the 
three cell lines. No allelic deletion of the nm23-H1 gene was detected in the 12 
HCCs examined. No point mutation in the coding region of the nm23-H1 gene was
observed in any of the 12 HCCs or the four hepatoma cell lines. These findings
suggest that: (i) the expression of nm23-H1 protein is inversely associated with 
high metastatic potential of HCC, (ii) regulation of nm23-H1 expression may
occasionally occur at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels in
HCC; and (iii) genomic alteration of nm23-H1 is a rare event in HCC.

PMID: 9658316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 1997 Oct;32(10):616-9.

[Glycosylated high density lipoprotein in diabetes related to pregnancy induced
hypertension].

[Article in Chinese]

Lipu(1), Song Y, Tian Y.

Author information: 
(1)Qiannan Medical College of National Minorities, Duyun.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the glycosylation of high density lipoprotein (glc-HDL)
and its specific binding to human lung fibroblasts (HLF) receptors in gestational
diabetes woman and to study its relationship with pregnancy induced hypertension 
(PIH).
METHODS: The glc-HDL was measured by fluorimetry and the specific binding of HDL 
to HLF receptors was measured with enzyme linked immunoreceptor assay in 32
gestational diabetic woman group 1, 34 group II, 36 normal pregnant (NP) and 32
normal non-pregnant (NNP) women.
RESULTS: The levels of glc-HDL and the intracellular total cholesterol in
diabetic pregnant woman group I and II were significantly higher than those in
the NP and the NNP (P < 0.01). The cell binding, internalization and degradation 
of glc-HDL were higher than that in the NP and the NNP.
CONCLUSION: The change of HDL level and lipid deposition during the process may
be one of the causes for arteriole spasm in PIH.

PMID: 9642380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Protein Expr Purif. 1998 Jun;13(1):127-35.

Production of human lactoferrin in transgenic tobacco plants.

Salmon V(1), Legrand D, Slomianny MC, el Yazidi I, Spik G, Gruber V, Bournat P,
Olagnier B, Mison D, Theisen M, Mérot B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Biologique, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
No. 111, Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq,
France.

Production and characterization of human lactoferrin (hLf) in transgenic tobacco 
is reported. We have engineered two constructs containing either the native
signal peptide from human lactoferrin or the signal peptide from sweet potato
sporamin fused to human lactoferrin encoding cDNA. N-terminal sequences of rhLf
purified from tobacco were identical to Lf from human milk for both constructs.
The tobacco rhLf presents a molecular mass closely identical to native protein.
Overall sugar composition shows the presence of plant specific xylose while
sialic acid is absent. Binding parameters of the recombinant molecule to both
Jurkat lymphoblastic T-cells or HT29-18-C1 enterocytes are similar to those of
human lactoferrin isolated from milk.

PMID: 9631525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem J. 1997 Nov 1;327 ( Pt 3):841-6.

The N-terminal Arg2, Arg3 and Arg4 of human lactoferrin interact with sulphated
molecules but not with the receptor present on Jurkat human lymphoblastic
T-cells.

Legrand D(1), van Berkel PH, Salmon V, van Veen HA, Slomianny MC, Nuijens JH,
Spik G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Biologique et Unité Mixte de Recherche no. 111 du Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université des Sciences et Technologies de
Lille, 59655 Villeneuve d'Ascq cedex, France.

We previously characterized a 105 kDa receptor for human lactoferrin (hLf) on
Jurkat human lymphoblastic T-cells. To delineate the role of the basic cluster
Arg2-Arg3-Arg4-Arg5 of hLf in the interaction with Jurkat cells, we isolated
N-terminally deleted hLf species of molecular mass 80 kDa lacking two, three or
four N-terminal residues (hLf-2N, hLf-3N and hLf-4N) from native hLf that had
been treated with trypsin. Native hLf bound to 102000 sites on Jurkat cells with 
a dissociation constant (Kd) of 70 nM. Consecutive removal of N-terminal arginine
residues from hLf progressively increased the binding affinity but decreased the 
number of binding sites on the cells. A recombinant hLF mutant lacking the first 
five N-terminal residues (rhLf-5N) bound to 17000 sites with a Kd of 12 nM. The
binding parameters of bovine lactoferrin (Lf) and native hLf did not
significantly differ, whereas the binding parameters of murine Lf (8000 sites; Kd
30 nM) resembled those of rhLf-5N. Culture of Jurkat cells in the presence of
chlorate, which inhibits sulphation, decreased the number of binding sites for
both native hLf and hLf-3N but not for rhLf-5N, indicating that the hLf-binding
sites include sulphated molecules. We propose that the interaction of hLf with a 
large number of binding sites (approx. 80000 per cell) on Jurkat cells is
dependent on Arg2-Arg3-Arg4, but not on Arg5. Interaction with approx. 20000
binding sites per cell, presumably the hLf receptor, does not require the first
N-terminal basic cluster of hLf. Moreover, the affinity of hLf for the latter
binding site is enhanced approx. 6-fold after removal of the first basic cluster.
Thus N-terminal proteolysis of hLf in vivo might serve to modulate the nature of 
its binding to cells and thereby its effects on cellular physiology.

PMCID: PMC1218865
PMID: 9581564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Apr 17;245(2):633-9.

Regulation of the DBP promoter by PAR proteins and in leukemic cells bearing an
E2A/HLF translocation.

Newcombe K(1), Glassco T, Mueller C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratories, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

The D-site binding protein (DBP) is a member of the PAR domain subfamily of b/ZIP
proteins, whose expression in the liver is highly sensitive to the growth state
of that organ. This paper examines the regulation of the DBP promoter by C/EBP
alpha and examines the role of autoregulation in its expression. Of four
previously characterized proximal promoter sites, sites I and III are shown to
bind C/EBP alpha, but cotransfection in Hep G2 cells of a C/EBP alpha expression 
vector is unable to transactivate the promoter. In contrast, the expression of
DBP, particularly in conjunction with the related protein HLF, is able to
dramatically upregulate expression directed by the proximal promoter. Deletion
analysis and the use of single site reporter constructs demonstrate that sites II
and IV are highly responsive to transactivation by DBP and HLF. The DBP promoter 
is active in the UOC-B1 cell line, which bears a 17:19 translocation resulting in
the creation of an E2A:HLF fusion protein. The proteins binding to site IV are
elevated in this line, suggesting that upregulation of DBP expression in response
to inappropriate HLF activity may be mediated through this site.

PMID: 9571207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Int J Oncol. 1998 Mar;12(3):655-9.

Hepatocyte growth factor enhances the invasion activity of human hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines.

Kamiyama T(1), Une Y, Uchino J, Hamada J.

Author information: 
(1)Kushiro Rosai Hospital, 13-23 Nakazono-cho, Kushiro, 085, Japan.

We investigated whether hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) enhances the invasion
activity of three human HCC cell lines, HLF, HLE, and HC-4, in vitro. The
analysis of the invasiveness consisted of the production of u-PA and the
chemotaxis for fibronectin. Invasion activity of all cell lines was enhanced by
the addition of recombinant human hepatocyte growth factor (rhHGF) to the medium.
HGF stimulated the production of u-PA in HLF cells. HGF accelerated the
chemotaxis of HC-4 and HLE. These data suggest that HGF increase the invasion
activity of human HCC cell lines by affecting the production of u-PA or the
chemotaxis for fibronectin.

PMID: 9472107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Immunology. 1997 Dec;92(4):527-35.

Beta 2 (CD18) and beta 1 (CD29) integrin mechanisms in migration of human
polymorphonuclear leucocytes and monocytes through lung fibroblast barriers:
shared and distinct mechanisms.

Shang XZ(1), Issekutz AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Accumulation of leucocytes in inflamed lung tissue and alveolar space involves
their migration through vascular endothelium and then lung connective tissue. As 
a model of this process, we investigated human polymorphonuclear leucocyte (PMNL)
and monocyte migration through a biological barrier of human lung fibroblasts
(HLF) grown on polycarbonate filters. Very few PMNL (1-2%) or monocytes (3-8%)
migrated through the HLF barriers spontaneously. Migration increased to 48-53% of
added PMNL and 17-24% of added monocytes, when a C5a chemotactic gradient was
present. The monocyte migration induced by C5a was not inhibited by monoclonal
antibodies (mAb) to CD18 (beta 2 integrins). This CD18-independent migration was 
partially inhibited (35%) by mAb to gamma 5 of VLA-5 and completely inhibited by 
the combination of mAb to gamma 4 of VLA-4 with mAb to VLA-5, in the presence of 
mAb to CD18. In contrast, PMNL migration across HLF induced by C5a was partially 
inhibited by mAb to CD18 alone, but even with the addition of mAb to VLA-4, VLA-5
beta 1 and VLA-6, the greatest degree of inhibition was only 60%. Blocking the
function of CD18 was not required to observe the inhibition by mAb to VLA-4,
although the inhibitory effect of mAb to VLA-5 and VLA-6 alone or in combination 
was only observed when CD18 mechanisms were also blocked with anti-CD18 mAb.
These results demonstrate that (a) both monocytes and PMNL can use either
CD11/CD18 (beta 2 integrin) or beta 1 (CD49/CD29) integrins to migrate through
HLF barriers; (b) in the case of monocytes, the VLA-4 and VLA-5 integrins account
for essentially all the CD11/CD18-independent migration mechanisms; and (c) in
contrast to monocytes, PMNL CD18-independent migration is mediated not only by
VLA-4 and VLA-5, but also by VLA-6, and up to 40% of the migration appears to be 
via yet to be defined PMNL surface molecules.

PMCID: PMC1364159
PMID: 9497495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Mol Biol. 1997 Nov 28;274(2):222-36.

Three-dimensional structure of diferric bovine lactoferrin at 2.8 A resolution.

Moore SA(1), Anderson BF, Groom CR, Haridas M, Baker EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.

The three-dimensional structure of diferric bovine lactoferrin (bLf) has been
determined by X-ray crystallography in order to investigate the factors that
influence iron binding and release by transferrins. The structure was solved by
molecular replacement, using the coordinates of diferric human lactoferrin (hLf) 
as a search model, and was refined with data to 2.8 A resolution by simulated
annealing (X-PLOR) and restrained least squares (TNT). The final model comprises 
5310 protein atoms (residues 5 to 689), 124 carbohydrate atoms (from ten
monosaccharide units, in three glycan chains), 2 Fe3+, 2 CO32- and 50 water
molecules. This model gives an R-factor of 0.232 for 21440 reflections in the
resolution range 30.0 to 2.8 A. The folding of the bLf molecule is essentially
the same as that of hLf, but bLf differs in the extent of closure of the two
domains of each lobe, and in the relative orientations of the two lobes.
Differences in domain closure are attributed to amino acid changes in the
interface, and differences in lobe orientations to slightly altered packing of
two hydrophobic patches between the lobes. Changed interdomain interactions may
explain the lesser iron affinity of bLf, compared with hLf, and two lysine
residues behind the N-lobe iron site of bLf offer new insights into the "dilysine
trigger" mechanism proposed for iron release by transferrins. The bLf structure
is also notable for several well-defined oligosaccharide units which demonstrate 
the structural factors that stabilise carbohydrate structure. One glycan chain,
attached to Asn545, appears to contribute to interdomain interactions and may
modulate iron release from the C-lobe.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press Limited.

PMID: 9398529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Infect Immun. 1998 Feb;66(2):486-91.

Lactoferrin inhibits the endotoxin interaction with CD14 by competition with the 
lipopolysaccharide-binding protein.

Elass-Rochard E(1), Legrand D, Salmon V, Roseanu A, Trif M, Tobias PS, Mazurier
J, Spik G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche de CNRS no. 111, Université des Sciences et
Technologies de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

Human lactoferrin (hLf), a glycoprotein released from neutrophil granules during 
inflammation, and the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-binding protein (LBP), an
acute-phase serum protein, are known to bind to the lipid A of LPS. The
LPS-binding sites are located in the N-terminal regions of both proteins, at
amino acid residues 28 to 34 of hLf and 91 to 108 of LBP. Both of these proteins 
modulate endotoxin activities, but they possess biologically antagonistic
properties. In this study, we have investigated the competition between hLf and
recombinant human LBP (rhLBP) for the binding of Escherichia coli 055:B5 LPS to
the differentiated monocytic THP-1 cell line. Our studies revealed that hLf
prevented the rhLBP-mediated binding of LPS to the CD14 receptor on cells.
Maximal inhibition of LPS-cell interactions by hLf was raised when both hLf and
rhLBP were simultaneously added to LPS or when hLf and LPS were mixed with cells 
30 min prior to the incubation with rhLBP. However, when hLf was added 30 min
after the interaction of rhLBP with LPS, the binding of the rhLPS-LBP complex to 
CD14 could not be reversed. These observations indicate that hLf competes with
rhLBP for the LPS binding and therefore interferes with the interaction of LPS
with CD14. Furthermore, experiments involving competitive binding of the
rhLBP-LPS complex to cells with two recombinant mutated hLfs show that in
addition to residues 28 to 34, another basic cluster which contains residues 1 to
5 of hLf competes for the binding to LPS. Basic sequences homologous to residues 
28 to 34 of hLf were evidenced on LPS-binding proteins such as LBP,
bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein, and Limulus anti-LPS factor.

PMCID: PMC107932
PMID: 9453600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biochem J. 1997 Nov 15;328 ( Pt 1):145-51.

N-terminal stretch Arg2, Arg3, Arg4 and Arg5 of human lactoferrin is essential
for binding to heparin, bacterial lipopolysaccharide, human lysozyme and DNA.

van Berkel PH(1), Geerts ME, van Veen HA, Mericskay M, de Boer HA, Nuijens JH.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Medical Biotechnology Department, Gorlaeus
Laboratories, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

Human lactoferrin (hLF), a protein involved in host defence against infection and
excessive inflammation, interacts with heparin, the lipid A moiety of bacterial
lipopolysaccharide, human lysozyme (hLZ) and DNA. To determine which region of
the molecule is important in these interactions, solid-phase ligand binding
assays were performed with hLF from human milk (natural hLF) and N-terminally
deleted hLF variants. Iron-saturated and natural hLF bound equally well to
heparin, lipid A, hLZ and DNA. Natural hLF lacking the first two N-terminal amino
acids (Gly1-Arg2) showed reactivities of one-half, two-thirds, one-third and
one-third towards heparin, lipid A, hLZ and DNA respectively compared with
N-terminally intact hLF. A lack of the first three residues (Gly1-Arg2-Arg3)
decreased binding to the same ligands to one-eighth, one-quarter, one-twentieth
and one-seventeenth respectively. No binding occurred with a mutant lacking the
first five residues (Gly1-Arg2-Arg3-Arg4-Arg5). An anti-hLF monoclonal antibody
(E11) that reacts to an N-lobe epitope including Arg5 completely blocked
hLF-ligand interaction. These results show that the N-terminal stretch of four
consecutive arginine residues, Arg2-Arg3-Arg4-Arg5, has a decisive role in the
interaction of hLF with heparin, lipid A, hLZ and DNA. The role of limited
N-terminal proteolysis of hLF in its anti-infective and anti-inflammatory
properties is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1218898
PMID: 9359845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 1997 Nov;124(22):4685-96.

PDP1, a novel Drosophila PAR domain bZIP transcription factor expressed in
developing mesoderm, endoderm and ectoderm, is a transcriptional regulator of
somatic muscle genes.

Lin SC(1), Lin MH, Horváth P, Reddy KL, Storti RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology M/C536, University of
Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago 60612, USA.

In vertebrates, transcriptional control of skeletal muscle genes during
differentiation is regulated by enhancers that direct the combinatorial binding
and/or interaction of MEF2 and the bHLH MyoD family of myogenic factors. We have 
shown that Drosophila MEF2 plays a role similar to its vertebrate counterpart in 
the regulation of the Tropomyosin I gene in the development of Drosophila somatic
muscles, however, unlike vertebrates, Drosophila MEF2 interacts with a muscle
activator region that does not have binding sites for myogenic bHLH-like factors 
or any other known Drosophila transcription factors. We describe here the
isolation and characterization of a component of the muscle activator region that
we have named PDP1 (PAR domain protein 1). PDP1 is a novel transcription factor
that is highly homologous to the PAR subfamily of mammalian bZIP transcription
factors HLF, DBP and VBP/TEF. This is the first member of the PAR subfamily of
bZIP transcription factors to be identified in Drosophila. We show that PDP1 is
involved in regulating expression of the Tropomyosin I gene in somatic body-wall 
and pharyngeal muscles by binding to DNA sequences within the muscle activator
that are required for activator function. Mutations that eliminate PDP1 binding
eliminate muscle activator function and severely reduce expression of a muscle
activator plus MEF2 mini-enhancer. These and previous results suggest that PDP1
may function as part of a larger protein/DNA complex that interacts with MEF2 to 
regulate transcription of Drosophila muscle genes. Furthermore, in addition to
being expressed in the mesoderm that gives rise to the somatic muscles, PDP1 is
also expressed in the mesodermal fat body, the developing midgut endoderm, the
hindgut and Malpighian tubules, and the epidermis and central nervous system,
suggesting that PDP1 is also involved in the terminal differentiation of these
tissues.

PMID: 9409684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biochem. 1997 Oct;122(4):703-10.

CBP/p300 functions as a possible transcriptional coactivator of Ah receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt).

Kobayashi A(1), Numayama-Tsuruta K, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai.

A heterodimer of AhR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor) and Arnt (AhR nuclear
translocator) conveys a transactivation signal of aromatic hydrocarbons such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and 3-methylcholanthrene to the genes for a
group of drug-metabolizing enzymes. This inducible expression of the genes is
inhibited by adenovirus E1A, suggesting that CBP/p300 is somehow involved in the 
transactivation of the genes by the AhR and Arnt heterodimer. Yeast and mammalian
two hybrid systems revealed that CBP/p300 interacted with the transactivation
domain of Arnt, but not with that of AhR, via the CREB-binding domain. The pull
down assay using GST-Arnt hybrid protein confirmed the interaction between Arnt
and CBP/p300. Considering these results and that Arnt or Arnt2 functions as a
common partner in the formation of transcriptional regulators with other bHLH/PAS
proteins such as AhR, HLF, and HIF-1alpha, the possibility arises that CBP/p300
is extensively involved as a coactivator in the transactivation process by
bHLH/PAS (a conserved sequence motif among Per, Arnt, and Sim) heterodimer
transcription factors through interaction with Arnt or Arnt2.

PMID: 9399571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Nov 26;240(3):552-6.

Cardiac expressions of HIF-1 alpha and HLF/EPAS, two basic loop helix/PAS domain 
transcription factors involved in adaptative responses to hypoxic stresses.

Ladoux A(1), Frelin C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UPR 411, Valbonne,
France.

Expression of many mammalian genes is regulated by oxygen tension. HIF-1 alpha
and HLF/EPAS are two basic helix-loop-helix/PAS domain transcription factors that
bind to hypoxia sensitive elements in the promoters /enhancers of hypoxia
sensitive genes such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). This paper
describes the structure of rat HIF-1 alpha and analyses expressions HIF-1 alpha
and of HLF/EPAS mRNAs in lung and cardiac tissues from the rat. HLF/EPAS mRNAs
appear at birth in the two tissues and are maintained at high levels throughout
adult life. HIF-1 alpha mRNAs are expressed at a constant level during lung
development. Their abundance increase transiently at birth in cardiac tissues.
Cultured cardiomyocytes from new born rats only express HIF-1 alpha mRNAs. HIF-1 
alpha mRNA expression is increased by phorbol myristate acetate but not by anoxia
or cobalt. The results indicate (i) that HIF-1 alpha and HLF/EPAS are expressed
in a cell specific manner and (ii) that the hypoxic induction of VEGF mRNA
expression by isolated cardiomyocytes is independent of HLF/EPAS. Finally, they
suggest that protein kinase C may prime hypoxia induced gene regulation by
inducing expression of HIF-1 alpha mRNAs.

PMID: 9398602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncogene. 1997 Oct 23;15(17):2059-67.

The chimeric oncoproteins E2A-PBX1 and E2A-HLF are concentrated within spherical 
nuclear domains.

LeBrun DP(1), Matthews BP, Feldman BJ, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

Oncogenic mutation of nuclear transcription factors often is associated with
altered patterns of subcellular localization that may be of functional
importance. The leukemogenic transcription factor gene E2A-PBX1 is created
through fusion of the genes E2A and PBX1 as a result of t(1;19) in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. We evaluated subcellular localization patterns of
E2A-PBX1 protein in transfected cells using immunofluorescence. Full-length
E2A-PBX1 was exclusively nuclear and was concentrated in spherical domains
denoted chimeric-E2A oncoprotein domains (CODs). In contrast, nuclear
fluorescence for wild-type E2A or PBX1 proteins was diffuse. Enhanced
concentrations of RNA polymerase II within many CODs and the requirement for an
E2A-encoded activation domain suggested transcriptional relevance. However, in
situ co-detection of nascent transcripts labeled with bromouridine failed to
confirm altered transcriptional activity in relation to CODs. CODs also failed to
co-localize with other proteins known to occupy functional nuclear compartments, 
including the transcription factor PML, the spliceosome-associated protein SC-35 
and the adenovirus replication factor DBP, or with foci of DNA replication.
Co-transfection of Hoxb7, a homeodomain protein capable of enhancing DNA binding 
by PBX1, impaired COD formation, suggesting that CODs contain E2A-PBX1 protein
not associated with DNA. We conclude that, as a 'gain of function' phenomenon
requiring protein elements from both E2A and PBX1, COD formation may be relevant 
to the biology of E2A-PBX1 in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 9366523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Cancer. 1997 Oct 21;74(5):482-91.

Reduced expression of syndecan-1 in human hepatocellular carcinoma with high
metastatic potential.

Matsumoto A(1), Ono M, Fujimoto Y, Gallo RL, Bernfield M, Kohgo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, Hokkaido,
Japan.

Syndecans comprise a gene family of transmembrane proteoglycans that regulate
cellular behavior through interactions with various effectors, including
heparin-binding growth factors and insoluble matrix components. Syndecan-1, the
most extensively studied, localizes in epithelial cells and has been shown to
present in normal hepatocytes. However, little is known about the change of
syndecan-1 expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We investigated
syndecan-1-protein expression by immunohistochemistry in 57 HCC tissue samples.
Syndecan-1 gene expression was also determined. Syndecan-1 protein was expressed 
in cytoplasm and cell membrane of the hepatocytes and in the bile duct epithelial
cells of liver with underlying hepatitis and cirrhosis. Conversely, among 57 HCC 
tissues, 39 HCC (68.4%) showed negative staining; 50% of well-differentiated HCC 
showed positive staining, whereas 82.4% of poorly differentiated HCC were
negative. Loss of syndecan-1-protein expression was more prevalent in HCC with
intra-hepatic metastasis (85.2%) than those without metastasis (48.0%).
Similarly, syndecan-1 expression was significantly reduced in HCC with
extra-hepatic metastasis (91.7%) as compared with the HCC without extra-hepatic
metastasis (62.2%). The gene expression of syndecan-1 was significantly lower in 
HCC tissue than that in non-tumoral liver tissue. In 2 human HCC cell lines with 
poorly differentiated phenotype, HLE and HLF, syndecan-1 expression was markedly 
decreased both at the mRNA and the protein levels. These results suggest that the
loss of syndecan-1 expression is a characteristic feature of HCC with high
metastatic potential.

PMID: 9355969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1997 Aug;51(8):520-6.

Effects of preterm infant formula supplementation with alpha-linolenic acid with 
a linoleate/alpha-linolenate ratio of 6: a multicentric study.

Billeaud C(1), Bouglé D, Sarda P, Combe N, Mazette S, Babin F, Entressangles B,
Descomps B, Nouvelot A, Mendy F.

Author information: 
(1)Departementes de Neonatologie: Université Bordeaux II, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of a milk formula supplemented with a
alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) (18:2 n-6/18:3 n-3 ratio near 6/1) on plasma and red
blood cell (RBC) fatty acids (FAs) in premature infants and compare with a non
supplemented formula (18:2 n-6/18:3 n-3 = 22/1).
DESIGN AND SUBJECTS: Infants of mothers who elected not to breast-feed were
randomly assigned to either a high alpha linolenic formula (HLF: n = 31) group or
a low alpha-linolenic formula (LLF: n = 32) control group. Infants fed human milk
(HM: n = 25) were enrolled concurrently as a reference group. Anthropometric and 
biological measurements were made after two days (D2) and 15 d (D15) of enteral
feeding and at the 37th week (W37) of postconceptual age. In HLF, the 18:3 n-3
content was 1.95% of total FAs (0.77% of total energy) and the 18:2 n-6/18:3 n-3 
ratio was near 6/1. In LLF, the 18:3 n-3 content was 0.55% of total FAs (0.22% of
total energy) and the 18:2 n-6/18:3 n-3 ratio was 22/1.
RESULTS: ALA supplementation had minimal effect on the n-6 series, did not alter 
the anthropometric data and confirmed the conversion of ALA into docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA). Throughout the study, it maintained, the RBC membrane DHA values
within the confidence interval of those obtained in the HM group. Such was not
the case with LLF CONCLUSION: alpha-linolenic acid supplementation (from Rapeseed
oil and in a 18:2 n-6/18:3 n-3 ratio = 6) in premature infant formula can
contribute efficiently to the maintenance of the n-3 status in the premature
newborns.

PMID: 11248877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Gastroenterol. 1997 Jun;32(3):330-7.

Wild-type p53 gene-induced morphological changes and growth suppression in
hepatoma cells.

Terai S(1), Noma T, Kimura T, Nakazawa A, Kurokawa F, Okita K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Yamaguchi University School of
Medicine, Japan.

The human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell line, HLF, expresses only
mutant-type p53 (mt-p53), which has an amino acid substitution at the 244th
residue from glycine to alanine. HLF cells were transfected with wild-type p53
(wt-p53) cDNA construct pC53-SN3, mt-p53 cDNA construct pC53-SCX [which differs
by a single nucleotide, resulting in alanine instead of valine at the 143rd
residue in p53 (p53-143)], or pCMV-Neo-Bam, as a control, by a liposome method.
After G418 selection, three wt-p53 stable transformants (WT), four mt-p53
transformants (MT), and three control vector transformants (VT) were obtained. We
analyzed the cell growth and morphological changes of these transformants under
different culture conditions [fetal calf serum (FCS), 10%, 1%, and 0%]. Whereas
no difference from control in the growth rate and morphology was observed under
the 10% FCS conditions, serum starvation induced remarkable phenotypical changes 
in all three WTs, but not in the other transformant. Corresponding to these
phenotypical changes, the transcriptional activity of wt-p53 was increased more
than nine fold. These results indicated that serum starvation would induce wt-p53
biological function, which is tightly linked to morphological changes and growth 
suppression. To induce these changes, the introduction of the wt-p53 gene itself 
was not sufficient, and additional triggering, i.e., serum starvation, was
indispensable.

PMID: 9213246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cytotechnology. 1997 May;24(1):39-45. doi: 10.1023/A:1007927906986.

Comparison of different hepatocyte cell lines for use in a hybrid artificial
liver model.

Takagi M(1), Fukuda N, Yoshida T.

Author information: 
(1)International Center for Biotechnology, Osaka University, 2-1, Yamada-oka,
Suita, Osaka, 565, Japan.

Selection of a cell line suitable for a hybrid artificial liver model employing
cellulose porous beads (CPBs) was investigated. Hep G2 cells grown in a culture
dish exhibited appreciably higher ureogenesis and gluconeogenesis activities than
those grown in CPBs. SEM observation of CPBs revealed marked difference in the
distribution of attached cells from one bead to another, and showed that almost
all the cell-bearing micropores were completely packed with cells.With the aim of
selecting a cell line not prone to excessive aggregation and which grows
moderately so as not to fill up the micropores, cells of 6 cell lines, HLE, HLF, 
Hep 3B, PLC/PRF/5, Huh 7 and Hep G2, were cultivated in dishes. Hep G2, HLE, and 
HLF increased to 5 × 10(5) cells/cm(2), whereas PLC/PRF/5 grew only to 5 × 10(4),
and Hep 3B and Huh 7 up to 2 × 10(4) cells/cm(2). The specific activities of
ureogenesis and gluconeogenesis of Huh 7 were the highest among the lines tested 
- 42- and 7-fold those of Hep G2, respectively. When the 6 cell lines were grown 
in a submerged culture with 0.6 g/l of CPBs, Huh 7 had the lowest cell
concentration of 0.54 × 10(6) cells/ml, and the highest activities of ammonia
consumption and urea and glucose production (1.38 µ mol NH(3), 99 nmol urea, and 
14.5 nmol glucose/10(6)cells/h). Consequently, Huh 7 is considered to be a
suitable cell line for use in the development of an artificial liver model
employing porous beads.

PMCID: PMC3449613
PMID: 22358595  [PubMed]


107. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 29;94(9):4273-8.

A novel bHLH-PAS factor with close sequence similarity to hypoxia-inducible
factor 1alpha regulates the VEGF expression and is potentially involved in lung
and vascular development.

Ema M(1), Taya S, Yokotani N, Sogawa K, Matsuda Y, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-77, Japan.

We have isolated and characterized a cDNA for a novel Per-Arnt/AhR-Sim basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH-PAS) factor that interacts with the Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt), and its predicted amino acid sequence exhibits significant
similarity to the hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha) and Drosophila
trachealess (dTrh) gene product. The HIF1alpha-like factor (HLF) encoded by the
isolated cDNA bound the hypoxia-response element (HRE) found in enhancers of
genes for erythropoietin, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and various 
glycolytic enzymes, and activated transcription of a reporter gene harboring the 
HRE. Although transcription-activating properties of HLF were very similar to
those reported for HIF1alpha, their expression patterns were quite different
between the two factors; HLF mRNA was most abundantly expressed in lung, followed
by heart, liver, and other various organs under normoxic conditions, whereas
HIF1alpha mRNA was ubiquitously expressed at much lower levels. In lung
development around parturition, HLF mRNA expression was markedly enhanced,
whereas that of HIF1alpha mRNA remained apparently unchanged at a much lower
level. Moreover, HLF mRNA expression was closely correlated with that of VEGF
mRNA. Whole mount in situ hybridization experiments demonstrated that HLF mRNA
was expressed in vascular endothelial cells at the middle stages (9.5 and 10.5
days postcoitus) of mouse embryo development, where HIF1alpha mRNA was almost
undetectable. The high expression level of HLF mRNA in the O2 delivery system of 
developing embryos and adult organs suggests that in a normoxic state, HLF
regulates gene expression of VEGF, various glycolytic enzymes, and others driven 
by the HRE sequence, and may be involved in development of blood vessels and the 
tubular system of lung.

PMCID: PMC20712
PMID: 9113979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8802-7.

Characterization of recombinant human lactoferrin secreted in milk of transgenic 
mice.

Nuijens JH(1), van Berkel PH, Geerts ME, Hartevelt PP, de Boer HA, van Veen HA,
Pieper FR.

Author information: 
(1)Pharming BV, Niels Bohrweg 11-13, The Netherlands. jnuijens@pharming.nl

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is an iron-binding protein involved in host defense
against infection and severe inflammation. Transgenic mice were produced
harboring either hLF cDNA or genomic hLF sequences fused to regulatory elements
of the bovine alphaS1 casein gene. Recombinant hLF expressed in the milk of
transgenic mice (transgenic hLF) was compared with natural (human milk-derived)
hLF. Immunological identity of the two forms was shown by double antibody
immunoassays and the absence of an anti-hLF antibody response in transgenic mice 
on hyperimmunization with natural hLF. Mono S cation-exchange chromatography and 
N-terminal protein sequencing of transgenic and natural hLF revealed identical
cationicity and N-terminal sequences. SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and 
absorbance measurements of purified transgenic hLF showed this protein was 90%
saturated with iron, whereas natural hLF is only 3% saturated. The pH-mediated
release of iron from transgenic hLF was not different from that of iron-saturated
natural hLF. Unsaturated transgenic hLF could be completely resaturated upon
addition of iron. Slight differences in mobility between transgenic and natural
hLF on SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis were abolished by enzymatic
deglycosylation. Binding of transgenic and natural hLF to a range of ligands,
including bacterial lipopolysaccharide, heparin, single-stranded DNA, Cibacron
blue FG 3A, and lectins, was not different. Based on these observations, we
anticipate that (unsaturated) rhLF and natural hLF will exert similar, if not
identical, antibacterial and anti-inflammatory activity in vivo.

PMID: 9079716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Mar 18;94(6):2609-14.

Pivotal role for the NFIL3/E4BP4 transcription factor in interleukin 3-mediated
survival of pro-B lymphocytes.

Ikushima S(1), Inukai T, Inaba T, Nimer SD, Cleveland JL, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The E2A-HLF (hepatic leukemia factor) oncoprotein, generated in pro-B lymphocytes
by fusion of the trans-activation domain of E2A to the basic region/leucine
zipper (bZIP) domain of HLF, functions as an anti-apoptotic transcription factor 
in leukemic cell transformation. When introduced into interleukin 3
(IL-3)-dependent mouse pro-B lymphocytes, E2A-HLF prevents apoptosis induced by
growth factor deprivation, suggesting that IL-3 mediates cell survival through
activation of a transcription factor whose activity can be constitutively
replaced by the chimeric oncoprotein. We considered four bZIP transcription
factors as candidates for this putative IL-3-regulated factor, each of which
binds avidly to the DNA consensus sequence recognized by E2A-HLF and is related
to the Caenorhabditis elegans CES-2 (cell death specification protein)
neuron-specific mediator of cell death. The expression and binding activity of
the Nfil3 protein (also called E4bp4), but not of Hlf, Dbp, or Tef, was found to 
be regulated by IL-3 in mouse pro-B cell lines (Baf-3 and FL5.12). Northern blot 
analysis showed that Nfil3/E4bp4 is regulated as a "delayed-early"
IL-3-responsive gene, requiring de novo protein synthesis. In the absence of
IL-3, enforced expression of the human NFIL3/E4BP4 cDNA promoted the survival but
not the growth of IL-3-dependent pro-B cells. Our results implicate NFIL3/E4BP4
(nuclear factor regulated by IL-3/adenovirus E4 promoter binding protein) in a
distinct growth factor-regulated signaling pathway that is responsible for the
survival of early B-cell progenitors, and whose alteration by E2A-HLF leads to
childhood B lineage leukemia.

PMCID: PMC20136
PMID: 9122243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1417-24.

Cell transformation mediated by homodimeric E2A-HLF transcription factors.

Inukai T(1), Inaba T, Yoshihara T, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The E2A-HLF fusion gene, created by the t(17;19)(q22;p13) chromosomal
translocation in pro-B lymphocytes, encodes an oncogenic protein in which the E2A
trans-activation domain is linked to the DNA-binding and protein dimerization
domain of hepatic leukemia factor (HLF), a member of the proline- and acidic
amino acid-rich (PAR) subfamily of bZIP transcription factors. This fusion
product binds to its DNA recognition site not only as a homodimer but also as a
heterodimer with HLF and two other members of the PAR bZIP subfamily, thyrotroph 
embryonic factor (TEF) and albumin promoter D-box binding protein (DBP). Thus,
E2A-HLF could transform cells by direct regulation of downstream target genes,
acting through homodimeric or heterodimeric complexes, or by sequestering normal 
PAR proteins into nonfunctional heterocomplexes (dominant-negative interference).
To distinguish among these models, we constructed mutant E2A-HLF proteins in
which the leucine zipper domain of HLF was extended by one helical turn or
altered in critical charged amino acids, enabling the chimera to bind to DNA as a
homodimer but not as a heterodimer with HLF or other PAR proteins. When
introduced into NIH 3T3 cells in a zinc-inducible vector, each of these mutants
induced anchorage-independent growth as efficiently as unaltered E2A-HLF,
indicating that the chimeric oncoprotein can transform cells in its homodimeric
form. Transformation also depended on an intact E2A activator region, providing
further support for a gain-of-function contribution to oncogenesis rather than
one based on a dominant-interfering or dominant-negative mechanism. Thus, the
tumorigenic effects of E2A-HLF and its mutant forms in NIH 3T3 cells favor a
straightforward model in which E2A-HLF homodimers bind directly to
promoter/enhancer elements of downstream target genes and alter their patterns of
expression in early B-cell progenitors.

PMCID: PMC231866
PMID: 9032268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Infect Immun. 1997 Feb;65(2):514-8.

Identification, characterization, and immunogenicity of the lactoferrin-binding
protein from Helicobacter pylori.

Dhaenens L(1), Szczebara F, Husson MO.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Bactériologie-Hygiène, Faculté de Médecine Henri Warembourg,
Lille, France.

Iron acquisition plays an important role in bacterial virulence. Different
studies have been initiated to define the mechanism by which Helicobacter pylori 
acquires iron. We had previously demonstrated that human lactoferrin (HLf)
supported full growth of the bacteria in media lacking other iron sources. The
ability of H. pylori to use HLf as an iron source had been found to be dependent 
on cell-to-protein contact. Since lactoferrin has been found in significant
amounts in human stomach resection specimens from patients with superficial or
atrophic gastritis, the iron uptake of H. pylori via a specific HLf receptor may 
play a major role in the virulence of H. pylori infection. In this study, by
using affinity chromatography with biotinylated HLf and streptavidin-agarose, we 
identified a 70-kDa lactoferrin-binding protein (Lbp) from outer membrane
proteins of H. pylori. This Lbp was only present when H. pylori was grown in an
iron-starved medium, suggesting that it serves in iron uptake. Direct binding
assays with increasing concentrations of biotinylated HLf demonstrated that the
lactoferrin interaction with the outer membrane of H. pylori grown in
iron-restricted medium was saturable. Competitive binding experiments with bovine
and human lactoferrin and with transferrin of horse, bovine, and human origin
indicated that this Lbp appeared highly specific for HLf. A number of other
studies have focused on the importance of transferrin and lactoferrin receptors
in pathogenic bacteria and their specificity with the host species. This
observation might explain the very strict human specificity of H. pylori.

PMCID: PMC176089
PMID: 9009306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1997 Jan;77(1):50-3.

[Blocking action of tetrandrine on the cell proliferation induced by PDGF in
human lung fibroblasts and liver Ito cell of rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Tian Z(1), Liu S, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao Medical
College.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism of hepatic fiberosis, the effects of
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) on cell proliferation activity and collagen
synthesis in human lung fibroblasts (HLF) and Ito cells of rat liver as well as
the blocking action of tetrandrine on the cell proliferation induced by PDGF.
METHODS: The Ito cells were separated from liver of rats by using the perfusion
of collagenase and density pradient centrifugation. The cell proliferation was
observed with the incorporation method of H-TdR and 3H-L-proline.
RESULTS: Under condition of cell culture with 1% serum, PDGF could significantly 
enhance DNA synthesis, cell proliferation and collagen synthesis, which increased
in degree with a rising of concentration of PDGF. This occurred in culture
without serum, but under the same condition, if PDGF was applied together with
insulin-like growth factor (IGF), it enhanced cell proliferation. The result also
showed that the dose of tetrandrine below the level of inhibiting cell DNA
synthesis could antagonize the stimulation action of PDGF on cell proliferation
and collagen synthesis.
CONCLUSION: Tetrandrine plays the blocking action in the promoting cell
proliferation induced by PDGF.

PMID: 9596979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Gene Expr. 1997;6(5):287-99.

Molecular characterization of the murine Hif-1 alpha locus.

Luo G(1), Gu YZ, Jain S, Chan WK, Carr KM, Hogenesch JB, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Madison, WI, USA.

Hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) is a basic helix-loop-helix-PAS
(bHLH-PAS) transcription factor that mediates certain cellular responses to low
oxygen tension, iron chelators, Co2+, Ni2+, Mg2+, and low intracellular glucose
concentration. Upon exposure to the above conditions, HIF-1 alpha is upregulated 
and heterodimerizes with the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT, also known
as HIF-1 beta), the heterodimeric complex binds TACGTG-containing genomic
enhancer elements, and activates transcription of target genes. As a first step
in developing genetic models to study the biology related to cellular hypoxia, we
have cloned the murine HIF-1 alpha cDNA, determined the tissue-specific
expression of its mRNA, functionally analyzed its protein product, and
characterized its promoter and its genomic structure. A comparison between the
murine and human HIF-1 alpha protein sequence reveals 95%, 99%, and 83% identity 
in the bHLH, PAS, and variable domains, respectively. RNAse protection assays
demonstrate that in adult mice, the mHIF-1 alpha mRNA is expressed at high levels
in kidney, heart, brain, thymus, and placenta, with moderate expression in liver,
spleen, testis, and lung and much lower expression in skeletal muscle testis.
Northern blot analysis indicates that the mRNA of the murine HIF-1 alpha is
transcribed in two forms, a major 4-kb species and a minor 5-kb species; both are
present in all tissues examined. The Hif-1 alpha promoter is GC rich, does not
have a TATA element near its transcriptional start site, and does not respond to 
hypoxia or Co2+. The mHIF-1 alpha structural gene is composed of 15 exons. The
splice junction sites within the bHLH and the PAS domains of HIF-1 alpha gene are
highly conserved with respect to a number of previously characterized members of 
the bHLH-PAS superfamily. However, unlike other bHLH-PAS genes, where the
variable domain is encoded by 2 exons, the variable region of the mHIF-1 alpha
gene is encoded by 7 exons. Furthermore, most of these splice junction sites in
the variable region are conserved with that of HIF-2 alpha, a recently cloned
hypoxia-responsive bHLH-PAS protein (also known as MOP2, EPAS1, and HLF). These
data suggest that HIF-1 alpha, along with HIF-2 alpha, represents a new subclass 
of the bHLH-PAS superfamily.

PMID: 9368100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1997;220:45-53.

E2A-HLF chimeric transcription factors in pro-B cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Look AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

PMID: 9103674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Med Microbiol. 1996 Dec;45(6):433-9.

Binding of human plasminogen and lactoferrin by Helicobacter pylori coccoid
forms.

Khin MM(1), Ringnér M, Aleljung P, Wadström T, Ho B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National University of Singapore.

The interactions between Helicobacter pylori spiral and coccoid forms,
extracellular matrix (ECM) and plasma proteins were studied in an 125I-labelled
protein assay. The range of binding of collagen V, plasminogen, human lactoferrin
(HLf) and vitronectin to coccoid forms of H. pylori NCTC 11637 was 26-48%. In
contrast, binding of radiolabelled fibronectin and collagen types I and III was
low (3-8%). The coccoid forms of 14 strains of H. pylori showed significant HLf
binding (median 26%). With plasminogen, no significant difference was found
between binding to the coccoid (median = 13%) and spiral (median = 12%) forms, of
13 of the 14 strains of H. pylori tested; the exception was strain NCTC 11637.
125I-plasminogen showed a dose-dependent binding to both the coccoid and spiral
forms. Plasminogen binding to both forms was specific; the binding was inhibited 
by non-labelled plasminogen, plasmin, lysine, EACA (epsilon-aminocaproic acid)
but not by fetuin or various carbohydrates. Similarly, HLf binding was found to
be specific and was inhibited by non-labelled HLf and BLf. The coccoid forms
showed either similar or enhanced ECM binding capabilities compared with the
spiral forms. As the binding of ECM proteins may be an important mechanism of
tissue adhesion for various pathogenic bacteria, the coccoid differentiated form 
of H. pylori can be considered as an infective form in the pathogenesis of
helicobacter infection and type B gastritis.

PMID: 8958246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Transgenic Res. 1996 Nov;5(6):421-31.

Mammary gland-specific hypomethylation of Hpa II sites flanking the bovine alpha 
S1-casein gene.

Platenburg GJ(1), Vollebregt EJ, Karatzas CN, Kootwijk EP, De Boer HA, Strijker
R.

Author information: 
(1)Pharming BV, Leiden, Netherlands.

In the lactating cow, mammary gland-specific hypomethylation occurs at two Hpa II
sites in the 5'-flanking region of the alpha S1-casein gene, and one in the
3'-region. These sites, A, B and C, are at nucleotide position -1388, -774 and
+18034, respectively, relative to the major transcription start site. Site B was 
hypomethylated when the alpha S1-casein gene was expressed, and methylated when
not expressed. In transgenic mice containing the bovine alpha S1-casein 5' and 3'
regulatory elements fused to the human lactoferrin (hLF) cDNA, in some cases
similar methylation patterns of sites A and B, as compared to the situation in
the cow, were observed. In five mouse lines (out of the seven analysed)
expressing the transgene in the milk, site B was hypomethylated in the mammary
gland, while it was methylated in liver. In the two other mouse lines, no
correlation was found between transgene expression and mammary gland-specific
hypomethylation of site B. One of the five mouse lines with transgene expression 
and showing mammary-gland-specific hypomethylation of site B was studied in
detail. In this mouse line, induction of transgene expression preceded
hypomethylation of site B.

PMID: 8840525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1996 Oct;35(10):682-5.

[A study on glycosylated high density lipoprotein and its binding to receptors in
human lung fibroblasts in diabetic patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Lei T(1), Gu J, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Ganquan Hospital, Shanghai Railway University.

In order to know the glycosylation of high density lipoprotein (HDL) and its
specific binding to human lung fibroblasts (HLF) receptors in diabetic patients, 
the glycosyflation of HDL in diabetic group I (HbAlc < 7.6%) and II (HNbAlc >
9.6%) and a control group were measured with fluorimetry. The hydrazides in
carbonyl radical of HDL in the three groups were conjugated with horadish
peroxidase (HRP). The specific binding of HDL-HRP to HLF receptors was measured
with enzyme linked immunoreceptor assay. The results showed that the glycosylated
amount of HDl in group I, II and the control group was 39.26 +/- 8.10, 72.96 +/- 
6.40 and 20.40 +/- 1.10 glycogroups/HDL respectively. The surface specific
binding of HDL-HRP to HLF receptors in medium with high cholesterol was
significantly greater than that in medium without cholesterol (P < 0.01). The
surface specific binding of HDL-HRP to HLF receptors in group I and II was
significantly lower than that in the control group (P < 0.01) and that in group
II was significantly lower than in group I (P < 0.01). The results indicate
glycosylated HDL in diabetic patients is increased but its specific binding to
HLF receptors is decreased as compared with that in control subjects.

PMID: 9592329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Biochem J. 1996 Oct 1;319 ( Pt 1):117-22.

Heterogeneity in utilization of N-glycosylation sites Asn624 and Asn138 in human 
lactoferrin: a study with glycosylation-site mutants.

van Berkel PH(1), van Veen HA, Geerts ME, de Boer HA, Nuijens JH.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Medical Biotechnology Department, Gorlaeus
Laboratories, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is a glycoprotein involved in the host defence against
infection and excessive inflammation. Our objective was to determine to what
extent each of the three sequons for N-linked glycosylation in hLF is actually
used. Human kidney-derived 293(S) cell lines expressing recombinant hLF (rhLF) or
glycosylation-site mutants were produced. The mutations involved replacement of
asparagine residues with glutamine at one or more sequons for N-glycosylation
(Asn138, Asn479 and Asn624). Comparative SDS/PAGE analyses of rhLF, mutated rhLF 
and human-milk-derived (natural) hLF led us to propose that glycosylation of hLF 
occurs at two sites (at Asn138 and Asn479) in approx. 85% of all hLF molecules.
Glycosylation at a single site (Asn479) or at all three sites occurs in approx,
5% and 9% of hLF respectively. The extent of glycosylation at Asn624 was
increased to approx. 29% and 40% of Asn479 and Asn138/479 mutant molecules
respectively, which indicates that glycosylation at Asn624 in natural hLF might
be limited by glycosylation at Asn479. The presence in supernatant of
unglycosylated hLF (approx. 60% of the total) after mutations of Asn138 and
Asn479 suggests that glycosylation of hLF is not an absolute requirement for its 
secretion. The pronounced degradation of unglycosylated hLF in supernatant after 
mutation at all three glycosylation sites (Asn138/479/624 mutant) but not after
mutation at both Asn138 and Asn479 suggests that an altered conformation rather
than the lack of glycosylation has rendered the Asn138/479/624 mutant susceptible
to intra- and/or extra-cellular degradation.

PMCID: PMC1217743
PMID: 8870657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Int J Cancer. 1996 Sep 17;67(6):892-7.

Inhibition of hepatitis-B-virus core promoter by p53: implications for
carcinogenesis in hepatocytes.

Uchida T(1), Takahashi K, Tatsuno K, Dhingra U, Eliason JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Nippon Roche Research Center, Kamakura, Japan.

The incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is particularly high in regions
of Asia and sub-Saharan Africa where rates of infection with human hepatitis-B
virus (HBV) and aflatoxin-B1 contamination of food are high. In HCC tumors
occurring in inhabitants of these regions, a G-to-T mutation frequently occurs at
position 249 of the tumor-suppressor gene p53. This suggests that HBV and p53
mutation may collaborate in the carcinogenic process in liver. We have examined
the effect of the HBV protein HBX in HCC lines with exogenous wild-type p53 or
mutated p53 on transactivation of 2 different reporter genes. Transfection of HCC
lines with wild-type p53 and a reporter with the promoter from the p53-responsive
gene WAF1/p21 resulted in a high level of expression, as expected. When cells
were co-transfected with a reporter gene driven by the HBV core promoter and with
the HBX gene, expression was enhanced in the Hep 3B, HLE, PLC/PRF/5 and HuH 7
lines, but not in the HuH 1 line. Co-transfection of the reporter with a plasmid 
containing wild-type p53 resulted in significant inhibition of the HBV core
promoter in all of the lines, whereas the mutated p53 gene had no effect. Our
results indicate that wild-type p53 can inhibit transcription from the HBV core
promoter. In similar experiments, both HBX and p53 were co-transfected into HCC
lines with the WAF1/p2l reporter gene. HBX inhibited p53-induced expression in 4 
of the 6 lines (Hep 3B, HuH 1, HuH 7 and HLE), there was no effect in one line
(HLF), and enhancement was evident in PLC/PRF/5. Our results indicate that
inhibition of p53 transcriptional activity by HBX does occur in HCC, but is
highly cell-context-dependent. Inhibition of transcription from the HBV core
promoter by wild-type p53 appears to be more universal, and may represent a
mechanism by which wild-type p53 can protect against the carcinogenic process in 
liver.

PMID: 8824564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nature. 1996 Aug 8;382(6591):545-7.

Transcriptional regulator of programmed cell death encoded by Caenorhabditis
elegans gene ces-2.

Metzstein MM(1), Hengartner MO, Tsung N, Ellis RE, Horvitz HR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139, USA.

The ces (for cell-death specification) genes of the nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans control the cell-death fate of individual cell types and are candidates
for being the regulators of an evolutionarily conserved general pathway of
programmed cell death. Here we present what we believe is the first molecular
characterization of a ces gene. We cloned the gene ces-2, which is required to
activate programmed cell death in the sister cells of the serotoninergic
neurosecretory motor (NSM) neurons, and found that ces-2 encodes a basic region
leucine-zipper (bZIP) transcription factor. The CES-2 protein is most similar to 
members of the PAR (proline- and acid-rich) subfamily of bZIP proteins and has
DNA-binding specificity like that of PAR-family proteins. An oncogenic form of
the mammalian PAR-family protein, hepatic leukaemia factor (HLF), is reported to 
effect programmed cell death in mammalian cells. On the basis of these
observations, we suggest that some CES-2/PAR family transcription factors are
evolutionary conserved regulators of programmed cell death.

PMID: 8700229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nature. 1996 Aug 8;382(6591):541-4.

Reversal of apoptosis by the leukaemia-associated E2A-HLF chimaeric transcription
factor.

Inaba T(1), Inukai T, Yoshihara T, Seyschab H, Ashmun RA, Canman CE, Laken SJ,
Kastan MB, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The E2A-HLF (for hepatic leukaemia factor) fusion gene, formed by action of the
t(17;19) (q22;p13) chromosomal translocation, drives the leukaemic transformation
of early B-cell precursors, but the mechanism of this activity remains unknown.
Here we report that human leukaemia cells carrying the translocation t(17;19)
rapidly died by apoptosis when programmed to express a dominant-negative
suppressor of the fusion protein E2A-HLF, indicating that the chimaeric
oncoprotein probably affects cell survival rather than cell growth. Moreover,
when introduced into murine pro-B lymphocytes, the oncogenic E2A-HLF fusion
protein reversed both interleukin-3-dependent and p53-mediated apoptosis. The
close homology of the basic region/leucine zipper (bZIP) DNA-binding and
dimerization domain of HLF to that of the CES-2 cell-death specification protein 
of Caenorhabditis elegans suggests a model of leukaemogenesis in which E2A-HLF
blocks an early step within an evolutionarily conserved cell-death pathway.

PMID: 8700228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1996 Aug;80(2):171-8.

Induction of HIV-1 expression in chronically infected promonocytic cells
cocultured with human lung fibroblasts.

Ho WZ(1), Li YH, Zhu XH, Song L, Douglas SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania Medical School 19104, USA.

The interaction between a chronically human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1)-infected promonocytic line (U1) and a normal human embryonic lung
fibroblast line (MRC-5) on HIV-1 expression was investigated. Coculture of U1
cells with MRC-5 cells induced HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) activities 40- to
50-fold higher than those of parallel control cultures of U1 cells. Culture of U1
cells in the presence of media conditioned by MRC-5 cell culture supernatants
resulted in a 30- to 40-fold greater HIV-1 RT activity over a 6-day period. HIV-1
RT activity, however, was not increased in the chronically infected T lymphocyte 
cell line (ACH-2) by either coculture with MRC-5 cells or when cultured in the
MRC-5 cell culture supernatant-conditioned media. A polyclonal antibody against
interleukin-6 (IL-6) blocked HIV-1 induction in the U1 cells by MRC-5 culture
supernatants, indicating that IL-6 plays an important role in the HIV-1
induction. The magnitude of HIV-1 induction by the MRC-5 cell culture
supernatant-conditioned media was proportional to the concentration of IL-6. In
addition, the supernatants from three other normal human lung fibroblast (HLF)
cell lines induced HIV-1 RT expression in U1 cells. Thus, normal unstimulated
HLFs stimulate HIV-1 expression in chronically infected promonocytic cells by
secreting IL-6, suggesting that the interaction of HLFs and macrophages may play 
an important role in the development of HIV-1 infection in the lungs.

PMID: 8764562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 1996 Jul;1(3):285-95.

Structure and biological actions of lactoferrin.

Nuijens JH(1), van Berkel PH, Schanbacher FL.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Medical Biotechnology Department, Gorlaeus
Laboratories, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

Lactoferrin is an iron-binding glycoprotein of the transferrin family, first
isolated from milk but also found in most exocrine secretions as well as in the
secondary granules of neutrophils. The many reports on its antimicrobial and
antiinflammatory activity in vitro identify lactoferrin as important in host
defense against infection and excessive inflammation. Most if not all lactoferrin
actions are mediated through iron sequestration and/or interaction with a large
variety of ligands including microbial cell wall components and cellular
receptors, through its highly positively charged N-terminus. Lactoferrin exerts
its effects on glandular epithelia, secretions, mucosal surfaces as well as in
the interstitium and vascular compartments where it has been postulated to
participate in iron metabolism, disease defense, and modulation of inflammatory
and immune responses. A need to understand the diverse biological actions of
lactoferrin and the prospect of a wide variety of potential applications in human
health care have stimulated studies of the relation between lactoferrin structure
and function, the regulation of lactoferrin secretion and development of large
scale production of recombinant human lactoferrin (hLf). This review provides a
synthesis of our current understanding of lactoferrin. Space limitations have led
us to refer to review articles whenever possible; the reader is advised to use
these articles for access to the primary experimental literature.

PMID: 10887502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Hepatology. 1996 Jun;23(6):1384-92.

Quantitation of alpha-fetoprotein and albumin messenger RNA in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Niwa Y(1), Matsumura M, Shiratori Y, Imamura M, Kato N, Shiina S, Okudaira T,
Ikeda Y, Inoue T, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (II), Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

To analyze gene expression of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and albumin in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), messenger RNAs (mRNAs) of these proteins in six
human hepatoma cell lines and in 30 cases of HCC were quantitatively analyzed by 
competitive reverse transcription (RT) followed by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). The transcriptional levels of both AFP and albumin genes in HepG2 and Huh 
7 cell lines were 10(10) copies/microgram RNA, in contrast to approximately 10(5)
copies/microgram RNA in HLE and HLF cell lines. AFP and albumin mRNA levels in
three normal livers were 10(5) and 10(10) transcripts/microgram RNA,
respectively. In 30 cases with HCC AFP mRNA level in neoplasm was 10 to
10(5)-fold enhanced as compared with that of nonneoplastic portion, and
correlated with serum AFP level and tumor size (P < .01). In contrast, albumin
mRNA level was not reduced in the neoplasms presenting enhanced AFP mRNA levels, 
indicating that AFP and albumin gene expression in situ is not necessarily
mutually exclusive. Prospective analysis revealed that an increased serum AFP was
shown at the time of recurrence among patients with enhanced AFP mRNA levels in
neoplasm only, indicating that AFP mRNA levels in neoplasm could be a clinically 
predictable tool.

PMID: 8675155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Hepatology. 1996 Jun;23(6):1359-68.

Gene therapy for alpha-fetoprotein-producing human hepatoma cells by
adenovirus-mediated transfer of the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene.

Kanai F(1), Shiratori Y, Yoshida Y, Wakimoto H, Hamada H, Kanegae Y, Saito I,
Nakabayashi H, Tamaoki T, Tanaka T, Lan KH, Kato N, Shiina S, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

We have developed a recombinant replication-defective adenovirus containing human
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) promoter/enhancer to direct cell type-specific expression
of the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSVtk) gene to AFP-producing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. After an in vitro infection by a
recombinant adenovirus carrying the lacZ gene under the control of human AFP
promoter/enhancer (AdAFPlacZ), an expression of the lacZ gene was demonstrated
efficiently in AFP-producing HuH-7 and HepG2 cell lines, but not in
AFP-nonproducing HLE and HLF cell lines, although lacZ gene expression was
demonstrated in all these cell lines when infected with adenovirus vector
carrying lacZ gene driven by the beta-actin-based promoter. Expression of the
HSVtk gene by adenovirus, from AFP promoter/enhancer (AdAFPtk) induced the cells 
sensitive to ganciclovir (GCV) in the AFP-producing cell line efficiently, but
not in AFP-nonproducing HLF hepatoma cells. An in vitro bystander effect was
observed when only 10% of the cells were infected with AdAFPtk. These findings
suggest that the AFP promoter/enhancer sequence can provide the tumor-specific
activity for the therapeutic gene expression, and that the AdAFPtk vector induces
the selective growth inhibition by GCV in the adenovirus-infected human hepatoma 
cells in vitro. Recombinant adenovirus transfer of the HSVtk gene under the
control of tumor-specific promoter followed by GCV may have promise as a targeted
in situ treatment for solid neoplasms.

PMID: 8675152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4607-17.

The proto-oncogene HLF and the related basic leucine zipper protein TEF display
highly similar DNA-binding and transcriptional regulatory properties.

Hunger SP(1), Li S, Fall MZ, Naumovski L, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University
of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO, USA.

Genes encoding transcription factors are frequently altered by chromosomal
translocations in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), suggesting that aberrant
transcriptional regulation plays a prominent role in leukemogenesis. E2A-hepatic 
leukemia factor (HLF), a chimeric transcription factor created by the t(17;19),
consists of the amino terminal portion of E2A proteins, including two
experimentally defined transcriptional activation domains (TADs), fused to the
HLF DNA binding and protein dimerization basic leucine zipper (bZIP) domain. To
understand the mechanisms by which E2A-HLF induces leukemia and the crucial
functions contributed by each constituent of the chimera, it is essential to
define the normal transcriptional regulatory properties of HLF and related bZIP
proteins. To address these questions, we cloned the human homologue of TEF/VBP, a
bZIP protein closely related to HLF. Using a binding site selection assay, we
found that TEF bound preferentially to the consensus sequence 5'-GTTACGTAAT-3',
which is identical to the previously determined HLF recognition site. TEF and HLF
activated transcription of consensus site-containing reporter genes in several
different cell types with similar potencies. Using GAL4 chimeric proteins, a TAD 
was mapped to a discrete approximate 40 amino acid region of TEF and HLF within
which they share 72% amino acid identity and 85% similarity. The TEF/HLF
activation domain (THAD) has a predicted helical secondary structure, but shares 
no sequence homology with previously reported TADs. The THAD contained most, if
not all, of the transcriptional activation properties present in both TEF and HLF
and its deletion completely abrogated transcriptional activity of TEF and HLF in 
both mammalian cells and yeast. Thus, TEF and HLF share indistinguishable
DNA-binding and transcriptional regulatory properties, whose alteration in
leukemia may be pathogenetically important.

PMID: 8639829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):1929-35.

Binding of the Ets factor GA-binding protein to an upstream site in the factor IX
promoter is a critical event in transactivation.

Boccia LM(1), Lillicrap D, Newcombe K, Mueller CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

Factor IX is an essential vitamin K-dependent serine protease that participates
in the intrinsic pathway of coagulation. The protein is expressed exclusively in 
the liver. The rare Leyden form of hemophilia B (inherited factor IX deficiency) 
results from point mutations in three proximal promoter elements that decrease
factor IX expression. Recovery of expression occurs following puberty, with
factor IX protein levels rising into the normal range. We have previously
implicated the PAR domain D-site-binding protein (DBP) as well as an upstream
element, site 5, as playing important roles in the phenotypic recovery of
hemophilia B Leyden. Here we demonstrate that site 5 binds both the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPalpha) and the ubiquitous Ets factor
GA-binding protein (GABPalpha/beta). Transactivation of the factor IX promoter by
the PAR proteins DBP and hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) is dependent on the
binding of GABPalpha/beta to site 5, and coexpression of these two factors is
required for optimal activation of this promoter. The binding of C/EBPalpha to
site 5 also augments the activity of GABPalpha/beta. Analysis of the
developmental regulation of site 5-binding proteins in rat liver has shown that
C/EBPalpha and the GABPbeta subunit increase markedly in the 2 weeks after birth.
These observations establish a functional association between the Ets factor
GABPalpha/beta and C/EBPalpha and indicate that the two PAR proteins, DBP and
HLF, may play complementary roles in factor IX activation. Given the
developmental changes exhibited by these proteins, it is likely that they play a 
role in regulation of the normal factor IX promoter as well as promoters carrying
hemophilia B Leyden mutations.

PMCID: PMC231180
PMID: 8628259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Antiviral Res. 1996 Mar;29(2-3):221-31.

Lactoferrin inhibits herpes simplex virus type 1 adsorption to Vero cells.

Marchetti M(1), Longhi C, Conte MP, Pisani S, Valenti P, Seganti L.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Institute, University of Rome, La Sapienza, Italy.

This paper describes the ability of human and bovine lactoferrins (HLf; BLf),
iron-binding proteins belonging to the non-immune defense system, to interfere
with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection. Since lactoferrins are known 
to bind to heparan sulphate proteoglycans and to low density lipoprotein
receptor, which in turn act as binding sites for the initial interaction of HSV-1
with host cells, we tested the effect of these proteins on HSV-1 multiplication
in Vero cells. Both HLf and BLf are found to be potent inhibitors of HSV-1
infection, the concentrations required to inhibit the vital cytopathic effect in 
Vero cells by 50% being 1.41 microM and 0.12 microM, respectively. HLf and BLf
exerted their activity through the inhibition of adsorption of virions to the
cells independently of their iron withholding property showing similar activity
in the apo- and iron-saturated form. The binding of [35S]methionine-labelled
HSV-1 particles to Vero cells was strongly inhibited when BLf was added during
the attachment step. BLf interacts with both Vero cell surfaces and HSV-1
particles, suggesting that the hindrance of cellular receptors and/or of viral
attachment proteins may be involved in its antiviral mechanism.

PMID: 8739601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Blood. 1996 Feb 15;87(4):1211-24.

Chromosomal translocations involving the E2A gene in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia: clinical features and molecular pathogenesis.

Hunger SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver,
USA.

PMID: 8608207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 1996;44(1):51-6.

Lactoferrin inhibits proliferative response and cytokine production of TH1 but
not TH2 cell lines.

Zimecki M(1), Mazurier J, Spik G, Kapp JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Czerska, Wroclaw, Poland.

Bovine (BLF) and human (HLF) lactoferrin inhibit proliferation and cytokine
production by an antigen specific TH1 cell line stimulated with antigen
presenting cells (APC) and antigen. Beside the inhibitory effects on TH1 cells we
observed a decrease of interleukin 2 receptor (IL-2R) expression on these cells
contacted with LF. Lactoferrin (LF) did not inhibit proliferation of indicator
HT-2 cells to IL-2 suggesting lack of interference with IL-2/IL-2R interaction by
LF. No inhibitory effect was observed on proliferation and cytokine production by
TH2 cell lines and no changes in interleukin 4 receptor (IL-4R) levels were found
with regard to TH2 cell line. We conclude that LF has differential activity with 
regard to effector functions of antigen-specific T cells by inhibiting TH1 but
not TH2-mediated immune responses.

PMID: 8874770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao. 1996 Jan;17(1):63-5.

Effects of egtazic acid and calcimycin on synthesis of DNA and collagen in
cultured human lung fibroblasts.

Liu HL(1), Lu HM, Li DG, Qi F, Jiang ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Xin-Hua Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical
University, China.

AIM: To study the effects of egtazic acid (EA) and calcimycin (Cal) on the
synthesis of DNA and collagen in cultured human lung fibroblasts (HLF).
METHODS: The synthesis of DNA and collagen was determined by measuring the
incorporation of [3H]TdR and [3H]proline of HLF respectively.
RESULTS: The collagen synthesis increased markedly 24 h after exposure to both EA
(0.05-4 mmol.L-1) and Cal (0.25-20 mumol.L-1), and that there was no obvious
change in DNA synthesis. After 36-48-h exposure, both DNA and collagen syntheses 
decreased in the groups of EA (1, 2, and 4 mmol.L-1); the DNA synthesis was also 
suppressed in Cal groups in a concentration-dependent manner, whereas collagen
synthesis decreased only in Cal (10 and 20 mumol.L-1).
CONCLUSION: Extracellular Ca2+ influx into fibroblasts increased collagen
production, However, the DNA synthesis was suppressed when the cytosolic Ca2+ was
too high or too low.

PMID: 8737458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Basic Res Cardiol. 1996 Jan-Feb;91(1):64-78.

Substrate effects on sarcolemmal permeability in the normoxic and hypoxic
perfused rat heart.

Lochner A(1), Pentz A, Williams K, Tromp E, Harper IS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Biology Programme, South African Medical Research
Council,Tygerberg, Republic of South Africa.

OBJECTIVES: Based on the hypothesis that provision of glucose is good and fatty
acids are bad for the ischaemic myocardium, the aims of this study were to
determine i) the effects of different substrates on sarcolemmal permeability
during normoxia, low-flow hypoxia (HLF) and reperfusion, ii) whether increased
membrane permeability is associated with ultrastructural damage and increased
influx of Ca2+ into cells and iii) whether changes in membrane permeability
correlate with myocardial function and high energy phosphate metabolism.
METHODS: The isolated rat heart subjected to HLF was used as model of global
ischaemia, and sarcolemmal permeability assessed by release of LDH from and
influx of lanthanum and Ca2+ into myocardial tissue. Myocyte structural injury
was also evaluated quantitatively, and mechanical activity was monitored
throughout the experimental protocol.
RESULTS: Regardless of the substrate used, HLF caused a 80-90% and 20-40%
reduction in myocardial oxygen uptake and coronary flow rate, respectively.
Palmitate (0.5 mM conjugated to 0.1 mM albumin) or substrate-free perfusion
caused ultrastructural damage and loss of normal sarcolemmal integrity during
both normoxia and HLF. Although reperfusion reversed injury in some cells, in
general, myocytes exhibited myofibrillar contracture, while membrane integrity
recovered to some extent, as indicated by reduced lanthanum influx. Intracellular
Ca2+ increased significantly upon reperfusion. Mechanical function as well as
tissue high energy phosphates were significantly depressed during both HLF and
reperfusion. Glucose, on the other hand, protected against ischaemia-induced
structural damage and loss of sarcolemmal integrity. Reperfusion in these
experiments resulted in almost complete recovery of normal morphology,
ultrastructure and sarcolemmal integrity, while intracellular Ca2+ remained
unchanged. Mechanical function and tissue high energy phosphates were
significantly higher in glucose-perfused hearts than in palmitate-perfused or
substrate-free hearts. Glucose was also able to attenuate the harmful effects of 
palmitate on myocardial ultrastructure, membrane integrity, mechanical function, 
energy metabolism and prevented Ca2+ overloading during reperfusion.
CONCLUSION: The results provide new evidence for the protective role of glucose
during myocardial ischaemia and reperfusion. Although the exact mechanism of the 
beneficial actions of glucose remains to be established, the results suggest that
glycolytic flux and thus glycolytically derived ATP protect against ischaemic
damage via preservation of membrane integrity.

PMID: 8660263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biochem J. 1995 Dec 15;312 ( Pt 3):839-45.

Lactoferrin-lipopolysaccharide interaction: involvement of the 28-34 loop region 
of human lactoferrin in the high-affinity binding to Escherichia coli 055B5
lipopolysaccharide.

Elass-Rochard E(1), Roseanu A, Legrand D, Trif M, Salmon V, Motas C, Montreuil J,
Spik G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Biologique, Unité Mixte de Recherche du CNRS no. 111,
Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

The ability of lactoferrin (Lf), an iron-binding glycoprotein that is also called
lactotransferrin, to bind lipopolysaccharide (LPS) may be relevant to some of its
biological properties. A knowledge of the LPS-binding site on Lf may help to
explain the mechanism of its involvement in host defence. Our report reveals the 
presence of two Escherichia coli 055B5 LPS-binding sites on human Lf (hLf): a
high-affinity binding site (Kd 3.6 +/- 1 nM) and a low-affinity binding site (Kd 
390 +/- 20 nM). Bovine Lf (bLf), which shares about 70% amino acid sequence
identity with hLf, exhibits the same behaviour towards LPS. Like hLf, bLf also
contains a low- and a high-affinity LPS-binding site. The Kd value (4.5 +/- 2 nM)
corresponding to the high-affinity binding site is similar to that obtained for
hLf. Different LPS-binding sites for human serum transferrin have been suggested,
as this protein, which is known to bind bacterial endotoxin, produced only 12%
inhibition of hLf-LPS interaction. Binding and competitive binding experiments
performed with the N-tryptic fragment (residues 4-283), the C-tryptic fragment
(residues 284-692) and the N2-glycopeptide (residues 91-255) isolated from hLf
have demonstrated that the high-affinity binding site is located in the
N-terminal domain I of hLf, and the low-affinity binding site is present in the
C-terminal lobe. The inhibition of hLf-LPS interaction by a synthetic
octadecapeptide corresponding to residues 20-37 of hLf and lactoferricin B
(residues 17-41), a proteolytic fragment from bLf, revealed the importance of the
28-34 loop region of hLf and the homologous region of bLf for LPS binding. Direct
evidence that this amino acid sequence is involved in the high-affinity binding
to LPS was demonstrated by assays carried out with EGS-loop hLf, a recombinant
hLf mutated at residues 28-34.

PMCID: PMC1136191
PMID: 8554529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Photochem Photobiol. 1995 Dec;62(6):1005-8.

The photochemistry of human retinal lipofuscin as studied by EPR.

Reszka K(1), Eldred GE, Wang RH, Chignell C, Dillon J.

Author information: 
(1)Lab Molecular Biophysics, NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Fluorescent material generated in the human retina accumulates within lipofuscin 
(HLF) granules of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) during aging. We have been
investigating the possible light-induced contribution of these fluorophores to
various diseases including age-related macular degeneration. Our studies have
shown that some of the fluorescent components of HLF are products of the reaction
of retinaldehyde with ethanolamine and that synthetic mixtures of this reaction
can serve as a useful model for photophysical studies. Previous research by us
has demonstrated that irradiation of either natural or synthetic lipofuscin
resulted in the formation of a triplet state and possibly a free radical. Here
EPR studies were performed to verify the formation of that radical. The UV
irradiation of either synthetic or natural human retinal lipofuscin extracts in
oxygen-free methanol led to the formation of a 5,5-dimethylpyrroline-N-oxide
(DMPO) spin-trapped carbon-centered radical resulting from either hydrogen atom
or electron abstraction from solvent molecules. In the presence of oxygen
superoxide was formed, which was observed as a DMPO adduct. It is concluded that 
certain components of the chloroform-soluble fluorophores of human RPE lipofuscin
granules and the fluorescent reaction products of retinaldehyde and ethanolamine 
are photophysically similar but not the same. Electron or hydrogen abstraction
from a substrate by these fluorophores in vivo and the resulting radical products
may contribute to the age-related decline of RPE function and blue light damage
in the retina.

PMID: 8570736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochem J. 1995 Nov 15;312 ( Pt 1):107-14.

Glycosylated and unglycosylated human lactoferrins both bind iron and show
identical affinities towards human lysozyme and bacterial lipopolysaccharide, but
differ in their susceptibilities towards tryptic proteolysis.

van Berkel PH(1), Geerts ME, van Veen HA, Kooiman PM, Pieper FR, de Boer HA,
Nuijens JH.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Medical Biotechnology Department, Gorlaeus
Laboratories, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

We studied the role of N-glycosylation of human lactoferrin (hLF) with respect to
properties that are relevant to its antibacterial and anti-inflammatory
activities. A human kidney-derived 293(S) cell line that constitutively expresses
recombinant hLF (rhLF) was produced. The reactivity towards various antibodies of
rhLF that had been expressed in the absence or presence of tunicamycin (which
blocks N-linked glycosylation) did not differ from that of natural (human
milk-derived) hLF. Cation-exchange chromatography and N-terminal protein
sequencing showed identical cationic properties and an intact N-terminal sequence
for rhLF and natural hLF. SDS/PAGE of rhLF expressed in the presence of
tunicamycin revealed a protein with the same M(r) as that of enzymically
deglycosylated natural hLF. Both glycosylated and unglycosylated rhLF appeared to
be completely saturated with iron. The affinity of natural hLF, glycosylated and 
non-glycosylated rhLF for both human lysozyme (Kd 4.5 x 10(-8) M) and bacterial
lipopolysaccharide did not differ. SDS/PAGE of hLF species subjected to trypsin
indicated that unglycosylated rhLF was much more susceptible to degradation.
Furthermore, this analysis suggests that N-glycosylation heterogeneity in natural
hLF and rhLF resides in the C-lobe. Thus our results provide no argument for
differential antibacterial and/or anti-inflammatory activity of natural and
(glycosylated) rhLF and suggest that a major function of glycosylation in hLF is 
to protect it against proteolysis.

PMCID: PMC1136233
PMID: 7492299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cas Lek Cesk. 1995 Oct 4;134(19):625-9.

Human genome--chromosome no. 19.

Sokol L(1), Prchal JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.

Chromosome 19 is short but has higher relative density of genes than other
chromosomes. Increasing number of the genes coding for proteins implicated in the
pathogenesis of various human diseases have been mapped on chromosome 19.
Mutations of low density lipoprotein receptor (LDL-R) result in one of the most
frequent mendelian inherited disorder-familial hypercholesterolemia. Mutations of
insulin receptor (INSR) are causative for rare syndromes of insulin resistance
and some of non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). Erythropoietin
receptor (EPOR) mutations are causative for rare primary familial and congenital 
polycythemias (PFCP). Defects of one of the largest gene in the human genome RYR 
1 (ryanodine receptor gene) (> 240 kb in size) accounts for majority of malignant
hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD). All these disorders represent
group of receptor diseases. The amplification of GCT trinucleotide repeats in
myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) gene is causative for myotonic dystrophy
(DM) and represents a new class of human gene mutations: trinucleotide repeat
mutations. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) locus plays a role in pathogenesis of the late
onset familial Alzheimer's disease. Translocation of EA2 gene which encodes two
helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription proteins and its fusion with PBXI or hepatic
leukemia factor (HLF) leads to the leukemogenesis in subgroup of ALL.
Interestingly adeno-associated virus (AAV), currently widely used as vector for
gene therapy has unique capability of specific integration into human chromosome 
19q.

PMID: 7585875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao. 1995 Sep;16(5):412-4.

Effects of tetrandrine and chlorpromazine on synthesis of collagen and hyaluronic
acid in cultured human lung fibroblasts.

Liu HL(1), Lu HM, Li DG, Jiang ZM, Qi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Shanghai Second Medical University, China.

AIM: To study the effects of tetrandrine (Tet) and chlorpromazine (Chl) on
synthesis of collagen and hyaluronic acid (HA) in cultured human lung fibroblasts
(HLF).
METHODS: The synthesis of collagen and HA was assessed by measuring the
incorporation of [3H]proline and radioimmunoassay.
RESULTS: Both Tet (5-80 mumol L-1) and Chl (10-40 mumol L-1) diminished the
collagen synthesis in a concentration-dependent manner. The suppression was
aggravated at 36-48 h. The HA content in the supernatant of culture also
decreased gradually with the increasing dosage of Tet or Chl after 24-h exposure.
There was no obvious toxic effect of Tet on HLF cells at 5-20 mumol L-1.
CONCLUSION: Tet 5-20 mumol L-1 decreased the production of collagen and HA
without obvious toxity on HLF, suggesting that Tet could be a hopeful
anti-fibrosis drug.

PMID: 8701756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. EMBO J. 1995 Sep 1;14(17):4307-17.

The rat hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) gene encodes two transcriptional activators
with distinct circadian rhythms, tissue distributions and target preferences.

Falvey E(1), Fleury-Olela F, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

Hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) is a member of the PAR family of transcription
regulatory proteins. We have characterized the rat HLF gene and studied its
expression and activity. The rat HLF gene is transcribed from two alternative
promoters, alpha and beta, with different circadian amplitudes and tissue
specificities. The alpha RNA isoforms produce a 43 kDa protein, HLF43, abundant
in brain, liver and kidney, like the previously described human HLF RNA. The beta
RNA HLF isoforms use a CUG codon to initiate translation of a novel 36 kDa
protein, HLF36, which is shorter at its N-terminus relative to the 43 kDa form.
HLF36 is expressed uniquely in the liver, where it is the most abundant HLF
protein. Surprisingly, the two proteins accumulate in the liver with different
circadian amplitudes and have distinct liver-specific promoter preferences in
transfection experiments. Thus, HLF43 stimulates transcription from the
cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase promoter much more efficiently than from the
albumin promoter, while the converse is true for HLF36.

PMCID: PMC394515
PMID: 7556072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Biochem J. 1995 Aug 15;310 ( Pt 1):73-81.

Effect of transforming growth factor-beta 1 and basic fibroblast growth factor on
the expression of cell surface proteoglycans in human lung fibroblasts. Enhanced 
glycanation and fibronectin-binding of CD44 proteoglycan, and down-regulation of 
glypican.

Romarís M(1), Bassols A, David G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

We have tested the effects of transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta 1),
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and TGF-beta 1 + bFGF on the expression of 
the cell surface proteoglycans (CD44, syndecans and glypican) in cultures of
human lung fibroblasts (HLF). Cell surface proteoglycan expression was monitored 
by quantitative immunoprecipitation from metabolically labelled cells. Western
and Northern blotting and evaluation of the glycanation of the proteoglycans.
Stimulation of the cells with TGF-beta 1 increased the length of the chondroitin 
sulphate (CS) chains on CD44 (approximately 1.6-fold). bFGF, administered solely,
also increased the length of the CS chains on CD44 (approximately 1.4-fold),
whereas the combination of TGF-beta 1 + bFGF nearly doubled both the length and
the number of the CS chains on CD44. None of these treatments lead to changes in 
CD44 message or core-protein expression. This enhanced glycanation of CD44 after 
the TGF-beta 1, bFGF and combined treatments correlated with a 2-fold increase in
the affinity of the proteoglycan for fibronectin but had no influence on the
binding to type I collagen. TGF-beta 1, alone or in combination with bFGF, also
stimulated the CS content of syndecan-1, but none of the other syndecans was
significantly affected by any of the factors or combinations tested. The
expression of glypican however was significantly decreased (nearly halved) by the
combination of TGF-beta 1 + bFGF, less so by TGF-beta 1 and not at all by bFGF.
This decrease occurred both at the level of the message and of the core protein. 
These data demonstrate specific and differential effects of TGF-beta 1 and bFGF
on the structure, expression and interactions of the cell surface proteoglycans
of HLF.

PMCID: PMC1135856
PMID: 7544118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jun;15(6):3247-55.

E2A-HLF-mediated cell transformation requires both the trans-activation domains
of E2A and the leucine zipper dimerization domain of HLF.

Yoshihara T(1), Inaba T, Shapiro LH, Kato JY, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The E2A-HLF fusion gene, formed by the t(17;19)(q22;p13) translocation in
childhood acute pro-B-cell leukemia, encodes a hybrid protein that contains the
paired trans-activation domains of E2A (E12/E47) linked to the basic
region/leucine zipper DNA-binding and dimerization domain of hepatic leukemia
factor (HLF). To assess the transforming potential of this novel gene, we
introduced it into NIH 3T3 murine fibroblasts by using an expression vector that 
also contained the neomycin resistance gene. Cells selected for resistance to the
neomycin analog G418 formed aberrant colonies in monolayer cultures, marked by
increased cell density and altered morphology. Transfected cells also grew
readily in soft agar, producing colonies whose sizes correlated with E2A-HLF
expression levels. Subclones expanded from colonies with high levels of the
protein reproducibly formed tumors in nude mice and grew to higher plateau-phase 
cell densities in reduced-serum conditions than did parental NIH 3T3 cells. By
contrast, NIH 3T3 cells expressing mutant E2A-HLF proteins that lacked either of 
the bipartite E2A trans-activation domains or the HLF leucine zipper domain
failed to show oncogenic properties, including anchorage-independent cell growth.
Thus, both of the E2A trans-activation motifs and the HLF leucine zipper
dimerization domain are essential for the transforming potential of the chimeric 
E2A-HLF protein, suggesting a model in which aberrant regulation of the
expression pattern of downstream target genes contributes to leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC230557
PMID: 7760820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;15(4):1923-32.

DNA-binding specificity of the PAR basic leucine zipper protein VBP partially
overlaps those of the C/EBP and CREB/ATF families and is influenced by domains
that flank the core basic region.

Haas NB(1), Cantwell CA, Johnson PF, Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111.

The PAR subfamily of basic leucine zipper (bZIP) factors comprises three proteins
(VBP/TEF, DBP, and HLF) that have conserved basic regions flanked by proline- and
acidic-amino-acid-rich (PAR) domains and functionally compatible leucine zipper
dimerization domains. We show that VBP preferentially binds to sequences that
consist of abutted GTAAY half-sites (which we refer to as PAR sites) as well as
to sequences that contain either a C/EBP half-site (GCAAT) or a CREB/ATF
half-site (GTCAT) in place of one of the PAR half-sites. Since the sequences that
we describe as PAR sites and PAR-CREB/ATF chimeric sites, respectively, were both
previously described as high-affinity binding sites for the E4BP4 transcriptional
repressor, we infer that these sequences may be targets for positive and negative
regulation. Similarly, since the sequences that we describe as PAR-C/EBP and
PAR-CREB/ATF chimeric sites are known to be high-affinity binding sites for C/EBP
and CREB/ATF factors, respectively, we infer that these sites may each be targets
for multiple subfamilies of bZIP factors. To gain insights regarding the
molecular basis for the binding-site specificity of PAR factors, we also carried 
out an extensive mutational analysis of VBP. By substituting five amino acid
residues that differ between the Drosophila giant bZIP factor and the vertebrate 
PAR bZIP factors, we show that the fork region, which bridges the basic and
leucine zipper domains, contributes to half-site sequence specificity. In
addition, we report that at least two domains amino terminal to the core basic
region are required for VBP to bind to the full spectrum of PAR target sites.
Thus, whereas direct base contacts may be restricted to basic-region residues (as
indicated by GCN4-DNA crystal structures), several other domains also influence
the DNA-binding specificity of PAR bZIP proteins.

PMCID: PMC230418
PMID: 7891686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Biol Neonate. 1995;67(5):330-9.

Iron saturation alters the effect of lactoferrin on the proliferation and
differentiation of human enterocytes (Caco-2 cells).

Oguchi S(1), Walker WA, Sanderson IR.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Gastroenterology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston 02129-2060, USA.

Recent studies have indicated that lactoferrin may act as a cell mitogen. The
effect of human and bovine lactoferrins on the proliferation and differentiation 
of a human intestinal epithelial cell line (Caco-2) was investigated and compared
with that of human transferrin. Caco-2 cells were cultured in serum-free media
supplemented with both iron-unsaturated and -saturated forms of the iron-binding 
proteins. Cell proliferation and differentiation were evaluated by examining
growth curves and measuring sucrase and alkaline phosphatase activities of brush 
border membrane fractions, respectively. The iron-binding status of lactoferrins 
and transferrin affected the proliferation of Caco-2 cells. The iron-saturated
forms of human (S-hLf), bovine (S-bLf) lactoferrins and human transferrin (S-hTf)
enhanced cell proliferation, while iron-unsaturated forms (U-hLf, U-bLf, and
U-hTf) suppressed it. Iron-binding status also determined the effect of
lactoferrin and transferrin on cellular differentiation, but this effect differed
for different brush border enzymes. S-hTf enhanced sucrase activity more than
S-hLF or S-bLf. Both U-hLf and U-bLf markedly suppressed sucrase activity. U-hTf 
suppressed alkaline phosphatase activity appreciably, while the other
iron-binding proteins showed no significant effect on it. Lactoferrin and
transferrin may modulate the proliferation and differentiation of intestinal
epithelial cells, but their efficacy depends on their saturation with iron.

PMID: 7662812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol. 1994 Oct;86(1):25-35.

Induction of metallothionein synthesis by bismuth in cultured vascular
endothelial cells.

Kaji T(1), Suzuki M, Yamamoto C, Imaki Y, Mishima A, Fujiwara Y, Sakamoto M,
Kozuka H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokuriku University, Kanazawa, Japan.

Metallothionein synthesis induced by bismuth nitrate was characterized using a
cell culture system. It was found that bismuth (1-10 microM) significantly
increased the intracellular accumulation of metallothionein in bovine aortic
endothelial cells without an exhibition of cytotoxicity and a change of either
general protein synthesis or proliferative DNA synthesis after a 24-h incubation.
A low increase in the metallothionein accumulation was observed in bovine aortic 
smooth muscle cells; however, porcine kidney epithelial LLC-PK1 cells, human
Chang liver cells and two human hepatoma cell lines (HLF cells and Hep-G2 cells) 
did not respond to bismuth. Other cations including cobalt, lead and zinc at 10
microM failed to induce metallothionein in endothelial cells, although cadmium at
1 microM was a strong inducer. Bismuth accumulated highly in endothelial cells
but very slightly in LLC-PK1 cells and Chang liver cells. The present data
suggest that bismuth is a selective inducer of metallothionein of vascular
endothelial cells and this cell type particularly responds to the cation.

PMID: 7850253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Genomics. 1994 Sep 15;23(2):344-51.

Chromosomal localization and cDNA cloning of the human DBP and TEF genes.

Khatib ZA(1), Inaba T, Valentine M, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105.

We have isolated cDNA and genomic clones and determined the human chromosome
positions of two genes encoding transcription factors expressed in the liver and 
the pituitary gland: albumin D-site-binding protein (DBP) and thyrotroph
embryonic factor (TEF). Both proteins have been identified as members of the PAR 
(proline and acidic amino acid-rich) subfamily of bZIP transcription factors in
the rat, but human homologues have not been characterized. Using a fluorescence
in situ hybridization technique, the DBP locus was assigned to chromosome 19q13, 
and TEF to chromosome 22q13. Each assignment was confirmed by means of human
chromosome segregation in somatic cell hybrids. Coding sequences of DBP and TEF, 
extending beyond the bZIP domain to the PAR region, were highly conserved in both
human-human and interspecies comparisons. Conservation of the exon-intron
boundaries of each bZIP domain encoding exon suggested derivation from a common
ancestral gene. DBP and TEF mRNAs were expressed in all tissues and cell lines
examined, including brain, lung, liver, spleen, and kidney. Knowledge of the
human chromosome locations of these PAR proteins will facilitate studies to
assess their involvement in carcinogenesis and other fundamental biological
processes.

PMID: 7835883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Sep;14(9):5986-96.

DNA-binding and transcriptional regulatory properties of hepatic leukemia factor 
(HLF) and the t(17;19) acute lymphoblastic leukemia chimera E2A-HLF.

Hunger SP(1), Brown R, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, California
94305.

The t(17;19) translocation in acute lymphoblastic leukemias results in creation
of E2A-hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) chimeric proteins that contain the
DNA-binding and protein dimerization domains of the basic leucine zipper (bZIP)
protein HLF fused to a portion of E2A proteins with transcriptional activation
properties. An in vitro binding site selection procedure was used to determine
DNA sequences preferentially bound by wild-type HLF and chimeric E2A-HLF proteins
isolated from various t(17;19)-bearing leukemias. All were found to selectively
bind the consensus sequence 5'-GTTACGTAAT-3' with high affinity. Wild-type and
chimeric HLF proteins also bound closely related sites identified previously for 
bZIP proteins of both the proline- and acidic amino acid-rich (PAR) and C/EBP
subfamilies; however, E2A-HLF proteins were significantly less tolerant of
certain deviations from the HLF consensus binding site. These differences were
directly attributable to loss of an HLF ancillary DNA-binding domain in all
E2A-HLF chimeras and were further exacerbated by a zipper mutation in one
isolate. Both wild-type and chimeric HLF proteins displayed transcriptional
activator properties in lymphoid and nonlymphoid cells on reporter genes
containing HLF or C/EBP consensus binding sites. But on reporter genes with
nonoptimal binding sites, their transcriptional properties diverged and E2A-HLF
competitively inhibited activation by wild-type PAR proteins. These findings
establish a spectrum of binding site-specific transcriptional properties for
E2A-HLF which may preferentially activate expression of select subordinate genes 
as a homodimer and potentially antagonize expression of others through
heteromeric interactions.

PMCID: PMC359124
PMID: 8065331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Physiol. 1994 Aug;267(2 Pt 1):G308-15.

Apical-to-basolateral transepithelial transport of human lactoferrin in the
intestinal cell line HT-29cl.19A.

Mikogami T(1), Heyman M, Spik G, Desjeux JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Biologique, Université des Sciences et Technologies de
Lille, France.

The role of human lactoferrin (hLf) in alimentary iron absorption across
intestinal cells was explored using a human differentiated colon carcinoma cell
line, HT-29cl.19A. The apical surface of HT-29cl.19A cell monolayers exhibited
1.5 x 10(6) specific binding sites for hLf per cell, with a dissociation constant
of 8.3 x 10(-7) M. The apical-to-basolateral transport of 125I-labeled hLf
(125I-hLf) or 125I-59Fe-labeled hLf (125I-[59Fe]hLf) was investigated using
filter-grown HT-29cl.19A cell monolayers mounted in Ussing chambers. Transport of
total (intact plus degraded) hLf, measured by the 125I flux, was not saturable up
to an apical hLf concentration of 12.5 microM, whereas immunoreactive hLf
transport measured by enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay was saturable at 3.75
microM. Lowering the temperature to 4 degrees C reduced the total and
immunoreactive hLf fluxes by 77% and 90%, and colchicine (500 microM) reduced
these fluxes by 30% and > 97%, respectively. These results indicate that both
types of transport are transcellular. Electrophoretic analysis revealed that
125I-hLf transported to the basal compartment consisted of largely degraded
fragments (< 2 and 10-20 kDa) and a small portion of intact hLf. At an apical
concentration of 3.75 microM diferric 125I-[59Fe]hLf, the immunoreactive hLf flux
(64.6 +/- 14.3 ng.h-1.cm-2) constituted approximately 12% of the total hLf flux
(552.0 +/- 61.6 ng.h-1.cm-2) and was similar to the [59Fe]hLf-equivalent flux
(77.0 +/- 12.3 ng.h-1.cm-2).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8074229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Leukemia. 1994 Jul;8(7):1131-8.

E2A/HLF fusion cDNAs and the use of RT-PCR for the detection of minimal residual 
disease in t(17;19)(q22;p13) acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Devaraj PE(1), Foroni L, Sekhar M, Butler T, Wright F, Mehta A, Samson D,
Prentice HG, Hoffbrand AV, Secker-Walker LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine, London, UK.

Three cases of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with the rare t(17;19)(q22;p13)
translocation were investigated for E2A/HLF fusion genes using reverse
transcription coupled with polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The patients had
C-ALL, F/17 years (case 1) or pre-B ALL, M/11 years (case 2) and M/13 years (case
3). Case 1 had an event-free survival (EFS) of 42 months. Case 2 was ultimately
refractory to treatment. Case 3 presented following EFS of 16 months in
morphological remission (1% blasts), but with immunological and cytogenetic
evidence of active disease, then relapsed, remitted and relapsed. Type II E2A/HLF
fusion cDNA was found at diagnosis (cases 1, 2), at presentation (case 3) and in 
all samples tested, whether with active disease or in complete remission (CR).
Case 3 showed, in addition, type I fusion E2A/HLF cDNA at presentation, through
induction therapy when there was evidence of active disease, but not in CR. Cases
1 and 3 had bone marrow transplantation while in CR but with residual disease
detectable by RT-PCR. All patients have died of ALL. Two cases (2 and 3) had
hypercalcemia with bone lesions. No case had any evidence of disseminated
intravascular coagulation. This is the first demonstration of the value of RT-PCR
for the detection of minimal residual disease in t(17;19) ALL.

PMID: 7518549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Clin Diagn Virol. 1994 Jun;2(3):165-79.

Antigen detection in human respiratory Coronavirus infections by monoclonal
time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay.

Hierholzer JC(1), Halonen PE, Bingham PG, Coombs RA, Stone YO.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Enteric Viruses Branch, Division of Viral and Rickettsial
Diseases, Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control, 1600(o)
Clifton Rd. N.E. Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of respiratory infections by detecting viral antigens
has received considerable attention using immunofluorescent assays (IFA) and
enzyme immunoassays (EIA). Time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay (TR-FIA) has been
developed for several viruses.
OBJECTIVES: To prepare monoclonal antibodies to coronavirus strains, to
incorporate them into a TR-FIA, and test the assay on clinical specimens.
STUDY DESIGN: Monoclonal antibodies were prepared to the N nucleoprotein of the
two human respiratory coronaviruses, HCV strains 229E and OC43. Monoclonals to
both viruses were completely type-specific; they did not cross-react between
themselves or with multiple strains of other respiratory viruses. These
antibodies were configured into optimized EIA and TR-FIA tests. The
all-monoclonal tests were then compared to polyclonal EIA tests in terms of their
ability to detect virus in clinical specimens.
RESULTS: The all-monoclonal TR-FIA was uniformly the most sensitive, detecting
virus in all 13 229E-positive specimens compared to 69% for the monoclonal EIA
and 54% for the polyclonal EIA test. Similar results were obtained for 10
OC43-positive specimens: 100% in TR-FIA, 90% in monoclonal EIA, and 80% in
polyclonal EIA. For 229E in TR-FIA, mean positive/negative (P/N) ratios were 143 
for 229E-positive human embryonic lung fibroblast (HLF) cell culture fluids and
10 for positive nasopharyngeal aspirate specimens; for OC43 in TR-FIA, mean P/N
values were 964 for OC43-positive rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cell culture fluids and
174 for positive NPA specimens. The sensitivities of the TR-FIA were determined
with purified virions to be 0.308 ng virus per well for HCV-229E and 0.098 ng
virus per well for HCV-OC43.
CONCLUSIONS: This rapid and sensitive test appears to be much more sensitive than
traditional antigen detection assays but will require more extensive field
testing on clinical specimens.

PMID: 15566763  [PubMed]


149. Blood. 1994 May 15;83(10):2970-7.

Two types of genomic rearrangements create alternative E2A-HLF fusion proteins in
t(17;19)-ALL.

Hunger SP(1), Devaraj PE, Foroni L, Secker-Walker LM, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 94305.

The t(17;19)(q21-q22;p13.3) in acute lymphoblastic leukemia results in creation
of an E2A-HLF fusion protein with structural and functional properties of a
chimeric transcription factor. Two types of genomic rearrangements underlie
fusion of E2A with HLF. In type I rearrangements, an insertion that codes for a
portion of the chimera not found in either wild type protein occurs between E2A
exon 13- and HLF exon 4-encoded sequences. This insertion is derived from a
cryptic exon created at the junction between chromosomes 17 and 19, and includes 
intronic portions of both E2A and HLF with intervening nontemplated N
nucleotides. Type II rearrangements arise from more 5' breakpoints in E2A and
result in fusion cDNAs with E2A exon 12 spliced directly to HLF exon 4. Analysis 
of the genomic structure of HLF shows that these different modes of protein
fusion result from selective constraints to maintain the proper HLF reading
frame, because a direct E2A exon 13 to HLF exon 4 splice would lead to
translation of a truncated E2A protein lacking any contribution from HLF. These
features underscore the requirement for DNA binding and/or dimerization conferred
by the bZIP portion of the E2A-HLF chimera in t(17;19)-ALL.

PMID: 8180393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 May;14(5):3403-13.

DNA-binding specificity and trans-activating potential of the leukemia-associated
E2A-hepatic leukemia factor fusion protein.

Inaba T(1), Shapiro LH, Funabiki T, Sinclair AE, Jones BG, Ashmun RA, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105.

Hybrid transcription factors, resulting from gene fusions in the wake of
chromosomal translocations, have been implicated in leukemogenesis, but their
precise contributions to oncogenic conversion remain unclear. The E2A-HLF fusion 
gene, formed by a t(17;19)(q22;p13) in childhood pro-B-cell acute lymphoid
leukemia, encodes a hybrid protein that contains the trans-activation domain of
E2A (E12/E47) linked to the bZIP DNA-binding and dimerization domain of hepatic
leukemia factor (HLF). Here we report that both HLF and E2A-HLF bind to a 10-bp
consensus sequence, 5'-GTTACGTAAT-3', with a core dyad-symmetric motif
characteristic of the bZIP scissors-grip model of DNA binding. A probe containing
this sequence bound chimeric E2A-HLF proteins in nuclear extracts of a leukemic
cell line (UOC-B1) containing the t(17;19), as demonstrated by complexes
supershifted with antibodies specific for amino-terminal epitopes of E2A or
carboxyl-terminal eptiopes of HLF. E2A-HLF functioned as a potent trans activator
of reporter gene expression from a plasmid that contained the consensus
DNA-binding sequence. Interestingly, wild-type HLF was restricted in its capacity
to act as a trans activator, functioning in human fetal kidney cells but not
HepG2 hepatocarcinoma cells or NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblasts. The ability of the
E2A-HLF hybrid protein to bind DNA in a sequence-specific manner and trans
activate the expression of artificial reporter genes suggests that it could
subvert transcriptional programs that normally control the growth,
differentiation, and survival of lymphoid progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC358705
PMID: 8164688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Chest. 1994 May;105(5):1474-80.

Two-color analysis of lymphocyte subsets of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and
peripheral blood in Japanese patients with sarcoidosis.

Mukae H(1), Kohno S, Morikawa T, Kusano S, Kadota J, Hara K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Japan.

Analysis of T-cell surface markers was carried out in peripheral blood and
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid of Japanese patients with sarcoidosis to
examine the influence of differing racial background. The subjects were 26
untreated patients in whom a diagnosis of active sarcoidosis had recently been
established and 9 healthy volunteers, and two-color immunofluorescence analysis
was performed. CD3+HLA-DR+ cells, CD4+HLA-DR+ cells, and CD4+CD29+ cells in
peripheral blood and BAL fluid were significantly increased in the patients
compared with the healthy volunteers, and the mean percentages increased in
parallel with the extent of the radiologic stage. The percentage of CD3+HLF-DR+
cells in peripheral blood and lavage fluid also significantly correlated with
serum activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme (r = 0.69, p < 0.001; r = 0.61, p
< 0.001, respectively). Thus, the evaluation of these antigens' expression is an 
important clinical approach for the staging of the disease. However, no
significant differences were found in CD3+CD25+, CD4+CD45RA+, or CD8+CD11+ cells 
in either peripheral blood or BAL fluid between the patients and volunteers. Our 
results indicated that in Japanese patients with sarcoidosis, circulating T cells
are activated but CD25+ cells are not increased in peripheral blood and BAL
fluid, but there is not a significant association with racial background.

PMID: 7514117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Jpn J Med Sci Biol. 1994 Apr;47(2):73-85.

Inhibition with lactoferrin of in vitro infection with human herpes virus.

Hasegawa K(1), Motsuchi W, Tanaka S, Dosako S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Life Science, School of Medicine, Tokai University,
Kanagawa.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) as well as bovine lactoferrin (bLF) inhibited infection
of tissue culture cells with human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and human herpes
simplex virus-1 (HSV-1). The addition of lactoferrin (LF) inhibited both in vitro
infection and replication of HCMV and HSV-1 in human embryo lung host cells. The 
maximum inhibition by more than six exponentials of TCID50 for HCMV and four
exponentials for HSV-1 was obtained at a concentration in a range from 0.5 to 1
mg of LF per ml of medium. The antiviral activity of LF was associated with its
protein moiety, but not with its iron molecule or sialic acid. None of other
transferrin gene family members bound to ferrous ions or sialic acid possessed
significant antiviral activity. Additionally, we found that LF prevented virus
adsorption and/or penetration into host cells, indicating an effect on the early 
events of virus infection. Preincubation of host cells with LF for 5 to 10 min
was sufficient to prevent HCMV infection, even when LF was removed after addition
of virus. These results suggest that LF possesses a potent antiviral activity and
may be useful in preventing HCMV and HSV-1 infection in humans.

PMID: 7853749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Mar 16;1205(1):59-67.

Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and differential scanning calorimetry of 
transferrins: human serum transferrin, rabbit serum transferrin and human
lactoferrin.

Hadden JM(1), Bloemendal M, Haris PI, Srai SK, Chapman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protein and Molecular Biology, Royal Free Hospital School of
Medicine, London, UK.

Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) have been used to investigate the solution structure and
thermal stability of human serum transferrin (HST), human lactoferrin (HLF) and
rabbit serum transferrin (RST) in their diferric and apo forms. Our study shows
that: (A) The secondary structure of all the proteins studied (estimated in H2O) 
was in the range 43-53% alpha-helix and 23-28% beta-sheet. These values differ
markedly from previously reported circular dichroism (CD) data. This is
attributed to the fact that FTIR and CD measure different aspects of secondary
structure (hydrogen bonding and dihedral angles, respectively). (B) The secondary
structural content of the proteins is not altered by iron binding or release.
However, the iron-free proteins undergo a greater extent of 1H-2H exchange than
the diferric proteins indicating that significant structural changes do occur
upon iron binding/release. (C) The removal of iron leads to thermal
destabilization of HST, HLF and RST. Structural variation in the apo transferrins
is indicated by the observation of a single irreversible DSC transition for apo
human lactoferrin, a double DSC transition for apo human serum transferrin (one
reversible) and a broad irreversible asymmetric DSC transition for apo rabbit
serum transferrin. FTIR spectroscopy shows that a distinct loss of protein
secondary structure occurs at the transition temperatures shown by DSC.

PMID: 8142485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Transgenic Res. 1994 Mar;3(2):99-108.

Expression of human lactoferrin in milk of transgenic mice.

Platenburg GJ(1), Kootwijk EP, Kooiman PM, Woloshuk SL, Nuijens JH, Krimpenfort
PJ, Pieper FR, de Boer HA, Strijker R.

Author information: 
(1)GenePharming Europe B.V. Niels Bohrweg, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The expression of human lactoferrin (hLF) in the milk of transgenic mice is
described. Regulatory sequences derived from the bovine alpha S1-casein gene were
fused to the coding sequence of the hLF cDNA and several lines of transgenic mice
were generated. Human LF RNA was detected exclusively in the mammary gland of
lactating females and only after the onset of lactation. No aberrant RNA products
could be detected using northern blotting and primer extension analysis. The hLF 
concentrations in the milk ranged from less than 0.1 to 36 micrograms ml-1. Human
LF thus expressed did not differ from human milk derived LF, with respect to
molecular mass and immunoreactivity with monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies.

PMID: 8193642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1994;357:279-85.

Lactoferrin promotes nerve growth factor synthesis/secretion in mouse fibroblast 
L-M cells.

Shinoda I(1), Takase M, Fukuwatari Y, Shimamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Nutritional Science Laboratory, Morinaga Milk Industry Co., LTD,
Kanagawa-Pref.

Fibroblast cells are known to have an ability to synthesize and secrete nerve
growth factor (NGF). To investigate the mechanism of action of the iron-binding
protein, lactoferrin (Lf), on cultured animal cells, the effect of bovine Lf
(bLf) on NGF synthesis/secretion in mouse fibroblast cells was examined. Both
apo- and holo-bLf induced an increase in NGF content in the cell-conditioned
medium(CM) of mouse L-M cells, a line derived from L929 fibroblast cells, with
similar effectiveness. The increase in NGF content in the CM of L-M cells
cultured with bLf was not dependent on the induction of increase in cell numbers,
but was due to induction of de novo synthesis of NGF in individual cells by bLf. 
Human Lf(hLf) also increased NGF content. However, apo- and holo-bovine
transferrin (bTf) failed to stimulate the NGF synthesis. The time-dependent
induction of NGF in L-M cells by bLf was different from that induced by basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and bLf showed an additive effect with bFGF.
These results suggest that the induction of NGF synthesis depends on a mechanism 
different from iron transport or bFGF.

PMID: 7762443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Semin Cancer Biol. 1993 Dec;4(6):387-99.

Chimaeric oncoproteins resulting from chromosomal translocations in acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Hunger SP(1), Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, CA 94305.

A major mode of proto-oncogene activation by chromosomal translocations concerns 
the creation of fusion genes which encode chimaeric proteins. The largest class
of oncogenes identified to date is the transcription factors, which are involved 
in control of cellular proliferation and differentiation via regulation of target
gene transcription. Protein chimaeras that result from translocations in
childhood ALL include two which involve the 19p13.3 gene E2A and a large
heterogeneous group involving HRX located at chromosome band 11q23. Functional
studies demonstrate that E2A fusion proteins function as chimaeric transcription 
factors, and structural features suggest that HRX fusion proteins may have
analogous properties.

PMID: 8142624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Biochemistry. 1993 Sep 14;32(36):9362-9.

Ferroxidase kinetics of human liver apoferritin, recombinant H-chain apoferritin,
and site-directed mutants.

Sun S(1), Arosio P, Levi S, Chasteen ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of New Hampshire, Durham 03824.

A detailed study of the kinetics of iron(II) oxidation by molecular oxygen in
natural and recombinant human apoferritins has been carried out using electrode
oximetry to better understand the ferroxidase activity of the protein shell. A
comparative study of recombinant L-chain ferritin (rLF), recombinant H-chain
ferritin (rHF), and variants has shown that (1) rLF lacks a ferroxidase activity,
confirming the results of previous studies; (2) the ferroxidase site of rHF
involves Glu-62 and His-65, presumably as Fe2+ ligands, since mutation of these
residues abolishes most of the oxidase activity, in agreement with previous
studies; and (3) mutation of both the putative ferroxidase and nucleation site
ligands in rHF renders the protein totally incapable of catalyzing the oxidation 
of Fe2+ whereas mutation of nucleation site ligands alone (Glu-61, Glu-64, and
Glu-67) decreases the activity only slightly. Analysis of the kinetics of rHF and
natural human liver ferritin (HLF) (4% H-chain, 96% L-chain) gave the following
apparent parameters at pH 7: Km,O2 = 6 +/- 2 microM, Km,Fe = 80 +/- 10 microM,
and kcat = 201 +/- 14 min-1 for rHF and Km,O2 = 60 +/- 12 microM, Km,Fe = 50 +/- 
10 microM, and kcat = 31.2 +/- 0.6 min-1 for HLF. Furthermore, Zn2+ was shown to 
be a noncompetitive inhibitor of Fe2+ oxidation in rHF but a mixed inhibitor in
HLF. These different forms of Zn2+ inhibition in the two proteins and the higher 
activity of HLF than expected, based on its H-chain composition as well as
differences in their enzyme kinetic parameters, suggest that H- and L-chains
cooperate in modulating the ferroxidase activity of the apoferritin even though
the L-subunit lacks a ferroxidase site itself.

PMID: 8369307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Clin Infect Dis. 1993 Aug;17 Suppl 1:S69-78.

Properties of adhering and nonadhering populations of Mycoplasma genitalium.

Mernaugh GR(1), Dallo SF, Holt SC, Baseman JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio 78284-7758.

The interaction between Mycoplasma genitalium and human lung fibroblasts (HLFs)
was studied with the use of wild-type and hemadsorption-negative (HA-)
mycoplasmas. [35S]-methionine-labeled M. genitalium adhered to HLFs by
first-order kinetics, with maximal interaction occurring at approximately 2
hours. Electron microscopy of chemically fixed cells revealed an almost immediate
association of mycoplasmas with the HLF plasma membrane that was mediated by the 
mycoplasma tip and a nap-like layer, which appeared to extend from the tip around
much of the mycoplasmal unit membrane. Following cytadherence, M. genitalium
appeared capable of invading the intracellular spaces of targeted HLF cells,
possibly by receptor-mediated endocytosis. Spontaneously arising HA- variants of 
M. genitalium strain G37 failed to adhere to HLF cells and were distinguished on 
the basis of their protein profiles. SDS-PAGE analysis of the class I (lacking
the 140-kd protein but containing a polypeptide doublet at approximately 140-kd) 
and class II (lacking the 140-kd protein and doublet) variants of M. genitalium
revealed that class I variants contain a doublet protein in the 140-kd region,
which reacted with a monoclonal antibody generated to the adhesin-implicated
140-kd protein (P140) of wild-type M. genitalium. Class II variants completely
lacked the 140-kd protein or immunologically related peptides.

PMID: 8399942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Carcinogenesis. 1993 May;14(5):987-92.

p53 gene mutation and integrated hepatitis B viral DNA sequences in human liver
cancer cell lines.

Hsu IC(1), Tokiwa T, Bennett W, Metcalf RA, Welsh JA, Sun T, Harris CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore 
21201.

A G:C-->T:A mutational hotspot at codon 249 of the p53 tumor suppressor gene has 
previously been identified in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) of patients from
Qidong, China and southern Africa in which aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) and hepatitis B
virus (HBV) are known synergistic risk factors. We have examined p53 mutation
patterns of HCC from geographic areas in which the risk factors vary. Nine HCC
lines and four hepatoblastoma lines (HB) were examined for p53 gene mutations and
the relationship with HBV infection. Five of the nine HCC lines had homozygous
mutation or deletion randomly distributed in exons 6-8, whereas none of the four 
HB cell lines had p53 mutations. One of the four HB lines (HepG2) had an N-ras
mutation at codon 61 position 2. The p53 point mutations in the three HCC cell
lines from Japan resulted in the amino acid changes of cysteine for tyrosine in
cell line HuH 7 at codon 220 (A:T-->G:C), alanine for glycine in cell line HLF at
codon 244 (G:C-->C:G), and serine for arginine in cell line HLE at codon 249
(G:C-->C:G). In addition, the deletion of 18 base pairs from codon 264 position 3
to codon 270 position 1 has resulted in the deletion of Leu-Gly-Arg-Asn-Ser-Phe
from the amino acids sequences 256-270 in the Japanese cell line HuH 4. The cell 
line PLC/PRF/5 that showed p53 mutation at codon 249 (G:C-->T:A) with
substitution of serine for arginine was derived from a South African patient. Our
results indicate that whereas the p53 gene is not mutated in the HB cell lines,
the HCC cell lines frequently contain an abnormal p53 gene. In addition, p53
point mutations were not detected in the four Japanese HCC cell lines that were
positive for genomic integration of HBV X-gene and surface antigen gene. The
three Japanese HCC cell lines with p53 mutations did not contain HBV sequences,
indicating that hepatocarcinogenesis associated with p53 mutation does not
require the genomic integration of HBV sequences.

PMID: 8389256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Gene. 1992 Dec 1;122(1):219-23.

An inducible expression system for the production of human lactoferrin in
Aspergillus nidulans.

Ward PP(1), May GS, Headon DR, Conneely OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

The production and secretion of human lactoferrin (hLF) in Aspergillus nidulans
is described. The hLF cDNA was expressed under the control of the strong
ethanol-inducible alcohol dehydrogenase (alcA) promoter. Recombinant hLF (re-hLF)
is produced at levels up to 5 micrograms/ml. Approximately 30% of the re-hLF
produced in this system is secreted into the growth medium. The re-hLF is
indistinguishable from native hLF with respect to size and immunoreactivity.
Furthermore, re-hLF is functional by the criterion of iron-binding capacity. The 
A. nidulans expression system offers an inexpensive, convenient method for the
controlled production of mg amounts of biologically active mammalian
glycoproteins.

PMID: 1452033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Med Virol. 1992 Dec;38(4):235-9.

Expression of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in human hepatocellular
carcinoma and hepatoblastoma cell lines.

Farshid M(1), Tabor E.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Erratum in
    J Med Virol 1993 Feb;39(2):177-8.

The expression of nine oncogenes (c-myc, N-myc, N-ras, H-ras, k-ras, abl, fos,
src, and raf) and two tumor suppressor genes (p53 and RB) were studied by
northern blot hybridization in six human hepatocellular carcinoma or
hepatoblastoma cell lines (PLC/PRF/5, Hep3B, Hep G2, 2.2.15, HLE, and HLF) and in
a human embryonic lung fibroblast cell line (WI-38) to look for differences that 
might be associated with the presence (PLC/PRF/5, Hep3B, and 2.2.15) or absence
(Hep G2, HLE, and HLF) of integrated hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA. The levels of
expression of the oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes were unrelated to the
presence or absence of integrated HBV-DNA. Furthermore, the intensity of
expression of these oncogenes was no greater in the 2.2.15 cell line (consisting 
of Hep G2 cells transfected with hepatitis B virus) than in untransfected Hep G2 
cells.

PMID: 1335479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Pharmacobiodyn. 1992 Dec;15(12):673-9.

A tiaramide derivative,
5-chloro-3-(4-hydroxypiperadinocarbonylmethyl)benzothiazoline-2-one (HPR-611), a 
potent inhibitor of anaphylactic chemical mediator release--a distinctive feature
from disodium cromoglycate.

Nabe T(1), Hashii H, Matsubara S, Yasui K, Yamamura H, Horiba M, Watanabe-Kohno
S, Ohata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, Japan.

Effects of a tiaramide derivative,
5-chloro-3-(4-hydroxypiperadinocarbonylmethyl)benzothiazoline++ +-2-one
(HPR-611), on anaphylactic chemical mediator release from rat peritoneal exudate 
cells (RPEC), guinea pig lung fragments (GPLF) and human lung fragments (HLF)
were investigated in comparison with those of tiaramide and disodium cromoglycate
(DSCG). HPR-611 at 10(-6) - 10(-4) g/ml showed a concentration-dependent
inhibition of the histamine release from RPEC regardless of its pretreatment
time. Tiaramide also inhibited the release with slightly less potency than
HPR-611. The treatment of DSCG 1 min before antigen challenge markedly prevented 
the release but the inhibitory potency was clearly deteriorated by prolongation
of the pretreatment time. Tiaramide tended to influence the anaphylactic release 
of histamine from GPLF with only 20% inhibition of the release at either 10(-5)
or 10(-4) g/ml, whereas HPR-611 at 10(-5) and 10(-4) g/ml significantly
suppressed the release in a concentration-dependent fashion. DSCG was not
effective on that even at higher concentrations. Anaphylactic release of not only
histamine but also immunoreactive leukotriene B4 (i-LTB4) and i-LTC4 from HLF was
markedly inhibited by 10(-8) - 10(-4) g/ml of HPR-611. Tiaramide inhibited the
release to a somewhat less extent than HPR-611, while nominal or no inhibitions
by DSCG were found. From these results, it is clearly apparent that anti-allergic
actions of HPR-611 are quite different from those of DSCG.

PMID: 1284281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Am J Physiol. 1992 Oct;263(4 Pt 1):L487-94.

Mechanisms of fibrin formation and lysis by human lung fibroblasts: influence of 
TGF-beta and TNF-alpha.

Idell S(1), Zwieb C, Boggaram J, Holiday D, Johnson AR, Raghu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Sciences Center, Tyler
75710.

Fibrin gels form within the alveolar and interstitial compartments of the injured
lung, and fibroblasts invade and facilitate organization of these transitional
gels. We studied the effects of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) on fibrinolytic and procoagulant
activities of human lung fibroblasts (HLF) to determine their capacity to
regulate pulmonary fibrin deposition. Fibrinolytic activity of cell lysates and
media (n = 6 HLF cultures) were uniformly depressed by TGF-beta or TNF-alpha. In 
dose and time-course studies, HLF plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) was
increased by TGF-beta, whereas TNF-alpha induced release of PAI-1 into the media.
HLF and media urokinase concentrations were depressed by TGF-beta, whereas
urokinase was unchanged or increased by TNF-alpha. Tissue plasminogen activator
was mainly cell associated and unchanged by TGF-beta or TNF-alpha. HLF
antiplasmin activity was not detected. Plasma recalcification times of HLF media 
were decreased by TNF-alpha but unchanged by TGF-beta. These studies suggest that
TGF-beta and TNF-alpha impair the ability of HLF to degrade fibrin by disturbing 
the balance of HLF plasminogen activators and PAI and that these cytokines
concurrently leave unchanged or increase the capacity of HLF to initiate fibrin
formation. Cytokines likely to occur in the injured lung induce abnormalities of 
fibrinolysis in HLF from adults; such abnormalities favor extravascular fibrin
deposition, a characteristic feature of alveolitis.

PMID: 1415727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Genes Dev. 1992 Sep;6(9):1608-20.

Hlf, a novel hepatic bZIP protein, shows altered DNA-binding properties following
fusion to E2A in t(17;19) acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Hunger SP(1), Ohyashiki K, Toyama K, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, California
94305.

Oncogenic conversion of transcription factors by chromosomal translocations is
implicated in leukemogenesis. We report that the t(17;19) in acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia produces a chimeric transcription factor consisting of the
amino-terminal portion of HLH proteins E12/E47 (products of the E2A gene) fused
to the basic DNA-binding and leucine zipper dimerization motifs of a novel
hepatic protein called hepatic leukemia factor (Hlf). Hlf, which is not normally 
transcribed in lymphoid cells, belongs to the recently described PAR subfamily of
basic leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins, which also includes Dbp and Tef/Vbp.
Wild-type Hlf is able to bind DNA specifically as a homodimer or as a heterodimer
with other PAR factors. Structural alterations of the E2a-Hlf fusion protein
markedly impair its ability to bind DNA as a homodimer compared with wild-type
Hlf. However, E2a-Hlf can bind DNA as a heterodimer with other PAR proteins,
suggesting a novel mechanism for leukemogenic conversion of a bZIP transcription 
factor.

PMID: 1516826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Science. 1992 Jul 24;257(5069):531-4.

Fusion of the leucine zipper gene HLF to the E2A gene in human acute B-lineage
leukemia.

Inaba T(1), Roberts WM, Shapiro LH, Jolly KW, Raimondi SC, Smith SD, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105.

A t(17;19) chromosomal translocation in early B-lineage acute leukemia was shown 
to result in chimeric transcripts that contain sequences from the E2A basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor gene on chromosome 19, fused to sequences
from a previously unidentified gene (HLF) on chromosome 17 that encodes a hepatic
leukemia factor. The chimeric protein consisted of the amino-terminal
transactivation domain of E2A linked to the carboxyl-terminal basic
region-leucine zipper domain of HLF. HLF was normally expressed in liver and
kidney, but not in lymphoid cells, and was found to be closely related to the
leucine zipper-containing transcription factors DBP (albumin D-box binding
protein) and TEF (thyrotroph embryonic factor), which regulate developmental
stage-specific gene expression.

PMID: 1386162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biotechnology (N Y). 1992 Jul;10(7):784-9.

Production of biologically active recombinant human lactoferrin in Aspergillus
oryzae.

Ward PP(1), Lo JY, Duke M, May GS, Headon DR, Conneely OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

We report the production of recombinant human lactoferrin in Aspergillus oryzae. 
Expression of human lactoferrin (hLF), a 78 kD glycoprotein, was achieved by
placing the cDNA under the control of the A. oryzae alpha-amylase promoter and
the 3' flanking region of the A. niger glucoamylase gene. Using this system, hLF 
is expressed and secreted into the growth medium at levels up to 25 mg/l. The
recombinant lactoferrin is indistinguishable from human milk lactoferrin with
respect to its size, immunoreactivity, and iron-binding capacity. The recombinant
protein appears to be appropriately N-linked glycosylated and correctly processed
at the N-terminus by the A. oryzae secretory apparatus. Lactoferrin is the
largest heterologous protein and the first mammalian glycoprotein expressed in
the Aspergillus system to date. Hence, this expression system appears suitable
for the large-scale production and secretion of biologically active mammalian
glycoproteins.

PMID: 1368268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Infect Immun. 1992 Jul;60(7):2619-26.

Lactoferrin-binding proteins in Shigella flexneri.

Tigyi Z(1), Kishore AR, Maeland JA, Forsgren A, Naidu AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Malmö General Hospital, Sweden.

The ability of Shigella flexneri to interact with lactoferrin (Lf) was examined
with a 125I-labeled protein-binding assay. The percent binding of human
lactoferrin (HLf) and bovine lactoferrin (BLf) to 45 S. flexneri strains was 19
+/- 3 and 21 +/- 3 (mean +/- standard error of the mean), respectively.
125I-labeled HLf and BLf binding to strain M90T reached an equilibrium within 2
h. Unlabeled HLf and BLf displaced the 125I-HLf-bacteria interaction in a
dose-dependent manner. The Lf-bacterium complex was uncoupled by KSCN or urea,
but not by NaCl. The interaction was specific, and approximately 4,800 HLf
binding sites (affinity constant [Ka], 690 nM) or approximately 5,700 BLf binding
sites (Ka, 104 nM) per cell were estimated in strain M90T by a Scatchard plot
analysis. The native cell envelope (CE) and outer membrane (OM) did not reveal
Lf-binding components in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. However, after being boiled, the CE and OM preparations showed
three distinct horseradish peroxidase-Lf reactive bands of about 39, 22, and 16
kDa. The 39-kDa component was also reactive to a monoclonal antibody specific for
porin (PoI) proteins of members of the family Enterobacteriaceae. The Lf-binding 
protein pattern was similar with BLf or HLf, for Crb+ and Crb- strains. The
protein-Lf complex was dissociable by KSCN or urea and was stable after treatment
with NaCl. Variation (loss) in the O chain of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) markedly
enhanced the Lf-binding capacity in the isogenic rough strain SFL1070-15 compared
with its smooth parent strain, SFL1070. These data establish that Lf binds to
specific components in the bacterial OM; the heat-modifiable, anti-PoI-reactive, 
and LPS-associated properties suggested that the Lf-binding proteins are porins
in S. flexneri.

PMCID: PMC257212
PMID: 1319403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Pharmacobiodyn. 1992 Jun;15(6):303-9.

Studies on responsiveness of hepatoma cells to catecholamines. VI.
Characteristics of adrenoceptors and adenylate cyclase response in rat ascites
hepatoma cells and human hepatoma cells.

Sanae F(1), Kohei K, Nomura M, Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory for Development of Medicine, School of Pharmacy, Hokuriku 
University, Kanazawa, Japan.

Alpha 1, alpha 2- and beta-Adrenoceptor densities and catecholamine
responsiveness in established hepatoma cells, rat ascites hepatoma AH13, AH66,
AH66F, AH109A, AH130 and AH7974 cells and human hepatocellular carcinoma HLF and 
HepG2 cells, were compared with those in normal rat hepatocytes and Chang liver
cells. Alpha 1-Adrenoceptor densities measured by [3H]prazosin bindings were not 
detected in all hepatoma cell lines. Alpha 2-Adrenoceptor densities measured by
[3H]clonidine bindings were also barely detected in hepatoma cell lines except
for AH130 cells and HepG2 cells. Regarding beta-adrenoceptor, AH109A, AH130 and
AH7974 cells had much more [125I]iodocyanopindolol binding sites than normal rat 
hepatocytes, although we could not detect the binding in HepG2 cells. Adenylate
cyclase of normal rat hepatocyte and Chang liver cells were stimulated by beta
2-adrenergic agonist salbutamol, while the cyclase in hepatoma cells had no beta 
2-adrenergic response but a beta 1-type response. These findings indicate that
the characteristics of adrenergic response in hepatoma cell lines is very
different from that in normal hepatocytes, suggesting a participation in the
hepatocarcinogenesis and/or the autonomous proliferation of hepatoma cells.

PMID: 1331393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Med Microbiol. 1992 Mar;36(3):177-83.

Identification of a human lactoferrin-binding protein in Staphylococcus aureus.

Naidu AS(1), Andersson M, Forsgren A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Lund, Malmö General
Hospital, Sweden.

Human lactoferrin (HLf) is an iron-binding protein with antimicrobial activity
that is present in high concentrations in milk and various exocrine secretions.
HLf is also an acute-phase protein secreted by polymorphonuclear leucocytes, and 
its binding to a large number of clinical isolates of Staphylococcus aureus has
been described recently from our laboratory. We have now characterised the
HLf-staphylococcal interaction in S. aureus strain MAS-89. The binding of
125I-HLf to strain MAS-89 reached saturation in less than 90 min and was maximal 
between pH 4 and 9. Unlabelled HLf displaced 125I-HLf binding. Various plasma and
subepithelial matrix proteins, such as IgG, fibrinogen, fibronectin, collagen and
laminin, which are known to interact specifically with S. aureus, did not
interfere with HLf binding. A Scatchard plot was non-linear; this implied a low
affinity (1.55 x 10(7) L/mol) and a high affinity (2.70 x 10(8) L/mol) binding
mechanism. We estimated that there were c. 5700 HLf binding sites/cell. The
staphylococcal HLf-binding protein (HLf-BP) was partially susceptible to
proteolytic enzymes or periodate treatment and was resistant to glycosidases. An 
active HLf-BP with an apparent Mr of c. 450 Kda was isolated from strain MAS-89
cell lysate by ion-exchange chromatography on Q-sepharose. In SDS-PAGE, the
reduced HLf-BP was resolved into two components of 67 and 62 Kda. The two
components demonstrated a positive reaction with HLf-HRPO in a Western blot.
These data establish that there is a specific receptor for HLf in S. aureus.

PMID: 1548691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Lab Clin Med. 1992 Mar;119(3):273-9.

Characterization of the ferritin receptors of human T lymphoid (MOLT-4) cells.

Moss D(1), Powell LW, Arosio P, Halliday JW.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia.

We have previously demonstrated that distinct binding sites exist for human
recombinant H ferritin (HrHF) and human liver ferritin (HLF) on human T lymphoid 
cells (MOLT-4). This study demonstrates that these binding sites have the
characteristics of receptors specific for HrHF, and the binding characteristics
and internalization of HrHF to MOLT-4 cells have now been examined. Iodinated
HrHF was displaced by an excess of unlabeled HrHF. Heavy ferritin was the major
subunit bound with only a small amount of light-ferritin binding, consistent with
our immunofluorescence studies. Scatchard plot analysis of the competitive
binding data for HrHF revealed an association constant of 6.3 to 6.7 x 10(7)
L/mol with approximately 6000 to 15,000 receptor sites per MOLT-4 cell.
Internalization of HrHF was demonstrated with pronase. Chloroquine substantially 
reduced the uptake of HrHF. Release of internalized HrHF was not observed when
cells were rewarmed to 37 degrees C. These results indicate that HrHF is
internalized by a mechanism consistent with receptor-mediated endocytosis, with
possible involvement of the lysosome. The internalized HrHF remains associated
with the cell. Although lymphoid cell growth and differentiation were not
examined in this study, the presence of the demonstrated receptors may indicate a
regulatory role for heavy ferritin in such cells.

PMID: 1311740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1991 Dec;35(12):2538-43.

Correlation between human lactoferrin binding and colicin susceptibility in
Escherichia coli.

Gadó I(1), Erdei J, Laszlo VG, Pászti J, Czirók E, Kontrohr T, Tóth I, Forsgren
A, Naidu AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Malmö General Hospital, University of
Lund, Sweden.

Escherichia coli H10407 demonstrated low 125I-human lactoferrin (HLf) binding
(7%) and was insusceptible to group A (A, E1, E2, E3, E6, and K) and group B (B, 
D, Ia, Ib, and V) colicins. Conversely, a spontaneous HLf high-binding (44%)
variant, H10407(Lf), demonstrated an increase susceptibility to both colicin
groups. Colicin-insusceptible E. coli wild-type strains 75ColT, 84ColT, and
981ColT showed a low degree of HLf binding, i.e., 4, 8, and 10%, respectively.
The HLf binding capacity was high in the corresponding colicin-susceptible
mutants 75ColS (43%), 84ColS (32%), and 981ColS (43%). Furthermore, HLf low-
(less than 5%) and high- (greater than 35%) binding E. coli clinical isolates (10
in each category) were tested for susceptibility against 11 colicins. Colicin V
susceptibility did not correlate with HLf binding in either categories. However, 
with the remaining colicins, three distinct HLf-binding, colicin susceptibility
patterns were observed; (i) 10 of 10 HLf low-binding strains were colicin
insusceptible, (ii) 6 of 10 HLf high-binding strains were also colicin
insusceptible, and (iii) the remaining HLf high binders were highly colicin
susceptible. Certain proteins in the cell envelope and outer membrane of
wild-type H10407 (HLf low binder, colicin insusceptible) showed a lower mobility 
in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis compared to the
corresponding proteins of mutant H10407(Lf) (HLf high binder, colicin
susceptible). These mobility differences were also associated with HLf-binding
proteins in Western blot (ligand blot) analysis. The wild type showed a smooth
form of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) with a distinct ladder of O-chains, compared to 
the rough LPS of the mutant.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC245427
PMID: 1810187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. APMIS. 1991 Dec;99(12):1142-50.

Specific binding of lactoferrin to Escherichia coli isolated from human
intestinal infections.

Naidu SS(1), Erdei J, Czirók E, Kalfas S, Gadó I, Thorén A, Forsgren A, Naidu AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Malmö General Hospital, Sweden.

The degrees of human lactoferrin (HLf) and bovine lactoferrin (BLf) binding in
169 Escherichia coli strains isolated from human intestinal infections, and in an
additional 68 strains isolated from healthy individuals, were examined in a
125I-labelled protein binding assay. The binding was expressed as a percentage
calculated from the total labelled ligand added to bacteria. The HLf and BLf
binding to E. coli was in the range 3.7 to 73.4% and 4.8 to 61.6%, respectively. 
Enterotoxigenic strains demonstrated a significantly higher HLf binding (median =
19%) than enteropathogenic, enteroinvasive, enterohaemorrhagic strains or normal 
intestinal E. coli isolates (medians 6 to 9). Enteropathogenic strains belonging 
to serotypes O44 and O127 demonstrated significantly higher HLf binding compared 
to O26, O55, O111, O119 and O126. No significant differences in the degree of HLf
or BLf binding were found between aerobactin-producing and non-producing strains.
The interaction was further characterized in a high Lf-binding EPEC strain,
E34663 (serotype O127). The binding was stable in the pH range 4.0 to 7.5, did
not dissociate in the presence of 2M NaCl or 2M urea, and reached saturation
within two h. Unlabelled HLf and BLf displaced the 125I-HLf binding to E34663 in 
a dose-dependent manner. Apo- and iron-saturated forms of Lf demonstrated similar
binding to E34663. Among various unlabelled subepithelial matrix proteins and
carbohydrates tested (in 10(4)-fold excess) only fibronectin and fibrinogen
caused a moderate inhibition of 125I-HLf binding. According to Scatchard plot
analysis, 5,400 HLf-binding sites/cell, with an affinity constant (Ka) of 1.4 x
10(-7) M, were estimated in strain E34663. These data establish the presence of a
specific Lf-binding mechanism in E. coli.

PMID: 1772651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 1991 Dec;6(6):350-5.

Human lactoferrin binding to Porphyromonas gingivalis, Prevotella intermedia and 
Prevotella melaninogenica.

Kalfas S(1), Andersson M, Edwardsson S, Forsgren A, Naidu AS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Lund, Sweden.

Human isolates of Porphyromonas gingivalis (n = 16), Prevotella intermedia n =
82) and Prevotella melaninogenica (n = 18) from diseased periodontal pockets were
examined for interaction with human lactoferrin (HLf) in a standardized
125I-labeled protein binding assay. The highest HLf binding was found in P.
intermedia strains, followed by P. gingivalis and P. melaninogenica. Further
characterization of the interaction was performed with 1 representative strain
from each species. HLf binding to P. gingivalis reached a saturation instantly
and was optimal at pH 5.0-6.5. The corresponding values for P. melaninogenica
were 90 min and pH 3.0-5.5. The HLf binding to the 2 strains seem to be
nonspecific. In contrast, P. intermedia demonstrated specific binding, and a
time-saturability within 60 min with an optimal uptake at pH 6.0-7.5. Scatchard
analysis implied 45,000 receptors per cell with an affinity constant of 5.5 x
10(-7) M on P. intermedia strain 4H. The binding capacity in all 3 strains was
affected by the culture medium. HLf binding components in these strains were
susceptible to heat or proteases. Binding was eliminated in P. gingivalis and was
enhanced in P. intermedia and P. melaninogenica by periodate treatment. Unlabeled
HLf or bovine lactoferrin effectively displaced labeled HLf binding. Various
proteins and carbohydrates did not inhibit HLf binding. Our data suggest that HLf
binds to these periodontitis-associated species and that this mechanism is
distinct from the previously known ligand interactions in oral bacteria.

PMID: 1726544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Protozool. 1991 Nov-Dec;38(6):105S-111S.

Culture, electron microscopy, and immunoblot studies on a microsporidian parasite
isolated from the urine of a patient with AIDS.

Visvesvara GS(1), Leitch GJ, Moura H, Wallace S, Weber R, Bryan RT.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitic Diseases Branch, Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, GA 30333.

Microsporidian spores isolated from a urine sample of an HIV-positive patient
were inoculated onto monolayers of six different cell cultures. The parasites
(CDC:0291:V213) grew profusely in two of the cultures (HLF and E6) and extruded
spores into the culture medium. The spores were Gram-positive, 2.25- to
2.8-microns long, 1.25- to 1.8-microns broad, and smooth-walled. Some of the
spores had already extruded their polar tubes, which were either straight or
slightly coiled. Infected host cells contained parasitophorous vacuoles filled
with developing stages of the parasite, including mature spores. Each spore was
surrounded by a thin, electron-dense exospore; a thick electron-lucent endospore;
and a thin cell membrane. Cross-sections of six coils of the polar tube were seen
inside the spore. Proteins extracted from spores of our isolate and those from
Encephalitozoon cuniculi were separated on gradient sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gels and either silver-stained or transferred to
nitrocellulose membranes. As many as 35 bands, ranging in molecular mass from
10,000 to 200,000, were visualized in the silver-stained gel. When reacted with
the serum of our patient, strips cut from the membrane showed a number of bands
ranging in molecular weight from 25,000 to 200,000. However, unique differences
between the profiles of the two parasites were seen both in the immunoblot and
the silver-stained protein profiles. Based on these findings, we conclude that
our isolate belongs to the genus Encephalitozoon, but more studies are needed to 
identify our isolate to the species level.

PMID: 1818126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1991 Sep 15;67(1):115-9.

Specific binding of lactoferrin to Aeromonas hydrophila.

Kishore AR(1), Erdei J, Naidu SS, Falsen E, Forsgren A, Naidu AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Malmö General Hospital, University of
Lund, Sweden.

The interaction of lactoferrin (Lf) with Aeromonas hydrophila (n = 28) was tested
in a 125I-labeled protein-binding assay. The mean per cent binding values for
human Lf (HLf) and bovine Lf (BLf) were 13.4 +/- 2.0 (SEM), and 17.5 +/- 2.7
(SEM), respectively. The Lf binding was characterized in type strain A.
hydrophila subsp. hydrophila CCUG 14551. The HLf and BLf binding reached a
complete saturation within 2 h. Unlabeled HLf and BLf displaced 125I-HLf binding 
in a dose-dependent manner, and more effectively by the heterologous (1 microgram
for 50% inhibition) than the homologous (10 micrograms for 50% inhibition)
ligand. Apo- and holo-forms of HLf and BLf both inhibited more than 80%, while
mucin caused approx. 50% inhibition of the HLf binding. Various other proteins
(including transferrin) or carbohydrates did not block the binding. Two
HLf-binding proteins with an estimated molecular masses of 40 kDa and 30 kDa were
identified in a boiled-cell-envelope preparation, while the unboiled cell
envelope demonstrated a short-ladder pattern at the top of the separating gel and
a second band at approx. 60 kDa position. These data establish a specific
interaction of Lf and the Lf-binding proteins seem to be porins in A. hydrophila.

PMID: 1778417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Med Microbiol. 1991 Jun;34(6):323-8.

Human lactoferrin binding in clinical isolates of Staphylococcus aureus.

Naidu AS(1), Miedzobrodzki J, Musser JM, Rosdahl VT, Hedström SA, Forsgren A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Lund, Malmö General
Hospital, Sweden.

Human lactoferrin (HLf) is an iron-binding protein and a host-defence component
at the mucosal surface. Recently, a specific receptor for HLf has been identified
on a strain of Staphylococcus aureus associated with toxic shock syndrome. We
have looked for the occurrence of 125I-HLf binding among 489 strains of S. aureus
isolated from various clinical sources. HLf binding was common among S. aureus
strains associated with furunculosis (94.3%), toxic shock syndrome (94.3%),
endocarditis (83.3%) and septicaemia (82.8%) and other (nasal, vaginal or ocular)
infections (96.1%) with a mean binding (in fmol) of 29.1, 21.9, 16.9, 22.2 and
29.2 respectively; the differences between mean HLf binding values of 29.1-29.2, 
21.9-22.2 and 16.9 were significant. Furunculosis-associated (low-invasive or
localised) isolates were high-to-moderate binders of HLf; 50% gave positive
results at a threshold of greater than 31 fmol of 125I-HLf bound. In contrast,
endocarditis-associated (high-invasive or systemic) isolates demonstrated low
binding and did not bind 125I-HLf at the above threshold level. S. aureus
recognised human or bovine Lf. However, bound 125I-HLf was more effectively
inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by unlabelled bovine Lf than by homologous
HLf. Binding of 125I-HLf to staphylococci was optimal with organisms grown in
agar compared with those from broth cultures. The binding capacity of S. aureus
was abolished when strains were grown on carbohydrate- and salt-rich agar media. 
HLf-binding ability of S. aureus did not correlate with fibronectin, fibrinogen, 
immunoglobulin G or laminin binding.

PMID: 2056516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1991 Mar;16(3):280-7.

Thoracic myelopathy caused by ossification of the ligamentum flavum.
Clinicopathologic study and surgical treatment.

Okada K(1), Oka S, Tohge K, Ono K, Yonenobu K, Hosoya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kagawa Medical School, Japan.

The authors reviewed 14 patients with thoracic myelopathy caused by ossification 
of the ligamentum flavum (OLF). The predominant locality of symptomatic OLF was
at the thoracolumbar junction, particularly at T10-11 followed by T11-12. At the 
level of the thickest OLF in each patient, there were three types of OLF from
computed tomography and operative findings: a lateral type in 3 patients, diffuse
in 8, and thickened nodular in 3. The diagnosis of OLF-related thoracic spinal
canal stenosis was best made by enhanced computed tomography. Histologic study
revealed that the developmental mode of OLF was mainly endochondral ossification.
Numerous fibrocartilaginous cells were found in the increased and swollen
collagen fibers forming the hypertrophic ligamentum flavum (HLF). Ossification
extended along the superficial layer of HLF. The size or extension of OLF was
relevant to the corresponding diathesis of spinalhyperostosis. Results of
laminectomy for OLF were poor because of the high occurrence of complications
early on or later deterioration. Therefore, laminoplasty is recommended as a
successful procedure for OLF-related thoracic myelopathy, avoiding further local 
mechanical stress due to tensile force.

PMID: 1902988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hum Cell. 1991 Mar;4(1):63-6.

Detection of PIVKA II produced by human hepatoma cells in nude mice.

Kohda H(1), Ono M, Sekiya C, Ohta H, Ohhira M, Ohhira M, Yoshida Y, Ikeda N,
Namiki M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College.

A novel experimental nude mouse model, which is useful for investigation of the
mechanisms of PIVKA II synthesis, was established by inoculation with PIVKA
II-producing human hepatoma cells (huH-1). We have found markedly elevated levels
of PIVKA II in the plasma of nude mice transplanted with huH-1 cells and
increased PIVKA II content in huH-1 tumor tissues. Whereas we have not found
detectable level of PIVKA II neither in the plasma nor in tumor tissues of nude
mice transplanted different human hepatoma cells (HLF) which is not producing
PIVKA II. Histology of the tumor tissues produced by huH-1 cells revealed a thick
trabecular pattern with blood spaces.

PMID: 1653598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Res. 1990 Dec 1;50(23):7457-9.

Production of interleukin 6 from human liver cell lines: production of
interleukin 6 is not concurrent with the production of alpha-fetoprotein.

Matsuguchi T(1), Okamura S, Kawasaki C, Niho Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

The production of interleukin (IL) 6 from six human liver cell lines, including
Chang liver, HLF, HLE, HepG2, PLC/PRF/5, and HuH-7, was investigated using
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Northern blot analysis. When cells were
cultured in the presence of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, significant
amounts of IL6 were detected in the culture supernatants of Chang liver cells,
HLF cells, and HLE cells. However, IL6 was not detected in the culture
supernatants from HepG2 cells, PLC/PRF/5 cells, or HuH-7 cells which had been
treated similarly. To further investigate the production of IL6, expression of
the IL6 gene was studied. Results of Northern blot analysis using IL6
complementary DNA as a probe showed that the induction was initiated at the mRNA 
level. Moreover, IL6 mRNA was also induced by IL1 beta and tumor necrosis factor 
but not by a calcium ionophore (A23187) or IL6 itself in Chang liver cells. This 
is the first study to demonstrate the production of human IL6 in liver cells.
Furthermore, when the production of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) from the liver cell
lines was examined, the three that were able to produce IL6 failed to produce
AFP, whereas the other three cell lines succeeded in producing AFP. These
observations may indicate the heterogeneous origin of the liver cell lines.

PMID: 1701344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1990 Feb;141(2):433-9.

Lung fibroblasts produce growth stimulatory activity for bronchial epithelial
cells.

Shoji S(1), Rickard KA, Takizawa H, Ertl RF, Linder J, Rennard SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 
68105.

Interaction between lung fibroblasts and airway epithelial cells may play an
important role in lung morphogenesis and airway repair after injury. Even though 
many reports have suggested that mesenchymal fibroblasts have a growth
stimulatory effect on surrounding epithelial cells, very few have attempted to
confirm and characterize the growth stimulatory activity in isolated cell
systems. We cultured human fetal lung (HFL-1) fibroblasts, harvested
supernatant-conditioned media under serum-free conditions, and examined their
growth stimulatory effect on bovine bronchial epithelial cells by a variety of
techniques, including direct enumeration, thymidine uptake, and metaphase arrest.
We also partially characterized the growth stimulatory activity and examined the 
effect of an inhibitor of DNA synthesis on its release. The results demonstrate
that HLF-1 fibroblasts release growth stimulatory activity for bovine bronchial
epithelial cells. This activity is nondialyzable, protease-sensitive,
acid-stable, and lipid-inextractable and thus appears to have the property of
protein; it may be produced by de novo synthesis. Molecular sieve chromatography 
on Sephadex G-75 indicates an approximate molecular mass of 6,000 D. This growth 
stimulatory activity is likely to play roles in lung morphogenesis and airway
repair after injury.

PMID: 2301859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1989 Apr;86(4):876-81.

[Effects of interferon on the cell cycle of human hepatoma HLF cells analyzed by 
flow cytometry].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda T, Nishiguchi S, Kuroki T, Ichiba K, Shimizu Y, Nakajima S, Shiomi S,
Kobayashi K.

Growth inhibition by interferon (IFN) was investigated in human hepatoma HLF
cells by use of flow cytometry to study the cell cycle. INF-alpha or -beta
inhibited growth more than IFN-gamma. Use of either IFN-alpha or -beta and
IFN-gamma at the same time inhibited growth more than with any one kind of IFN,
but use of IFN-alpha and -beta together did not cause much inhibition. IFN
inhibited growth by causing cells to accumulate in the S phase instead of moving 
on to the G2 phase. Accumulation in the S phase was less with IFN-gamma than with
-alpha or -beta. It increased with the combination of IFN-alpha or -beta with
IFN-gamma, but not with the combination of IFN-alpha and -beta.

PMID: 2474080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. FEBS Lett. 1988 Nov 7;239(2):245-50.

A cAMP-triggered release of a hormone-like peptide.

Riven-Kreitman R(1), Ribon V, Tauber-Finkelstein M, Shaltiel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

Preparations of the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase from
rabbit skeletal muscle, which appear to be homogeneous by SDS-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis, were often found to contain a hormone-like factor (HLF) which
causes an immediate rise, then a decline of intracellular cAMP in a B-lymphoma
cell line. Active HLF is released when the fractions that contain it in an
inactive form are incubated with cAMP prior to chromatography, or passed through 
an immobilized cAMP column. HLF seems to be a peptide: it loses its
cell-stimulating capability after proteolysis and has an apparent molecular mass 
of 2.2-2.5 kDa.

PMID: 2846357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Carcinogenesis. 1988 Mar;9(3):511-4.

The tumor-promoter-induced release of phosphorylated fibronectin from human lung 
fibroblasts.

Zerlauth G(1), Wolf G.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Applied Sciences,
Cambridge 02139.

The role of fibronectin (FN) phosphorylation was examined for its involvement in 
tumor-promoter-induced FN release from normal fibroblasts. We investigated
phosphorylated FN in spent media and in cell layers of human lung fibroblasts
(HLF) cultured in the presence and absence of the tumor-promoter
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Our data, obtained by metabolic
labeling of HLF with [32P]orthophosphate, revealed that 32P-labeled FN
accumulated rapidly in the cell layer in the absence of TPA. With TPA present,
accumulation of 32P-labeled FN at the cell layer of HLF was much slower than
under control conditions. On the other hand, treatment of the cells with TPA
caused a marked increase in the amount of medium-released FN. This increase in
released FN, however, was caused by unlabeled FN and was not paralleled by an
increase in 32P-labeled FN. We investigated the ability of FN from normal and
TPA-treated cells to bind to normal HLF monolayers. We found no difference in
re-binding ability, regardless of whether FN was derived from cell extracts of
control cultures (showing highly phosphorylated FN) or from the medium of
TPA-treated cultures with low phosphorylation of FN.

PMID: 3345591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1987 Mar 13;143(2):600-8.

Phorbol ester, retinoic acid and diacylglycerol decrease ecto- but increase total
basal-protein kinase activity of human fibroblasts.

Gmeiner BM.

Studies have been carried out on intact human lung fibroblasts (HLF) in situ to
investigate the effect of the tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA) and the anti-tumor promoter retinoic acid (RA) on ecto-protein kinases. The
ecto-kinase reaction of the HLF-cells was cAMP-independent, showed an apparent Km
for ATP of 6.99 +/- 0.35 (microM) and was substantially inhibited by TPA and RA. 
With the notable exception of a approximately 57 kD phosphoprotein both compounds
decreased the overall phosphorylation of intact cells. In contrast to
RA-treatment, however, TPA caused the release of a high molecular weight
(approximately 210 kD) phosphoprotein from the HLF. RA was the most potent
retinoid in reducing ecto-kinase activity. The physiological modulators of
protein kinase C: 1,2- and 1,3-diolein as well the synthetic
1,2-dioctanoylglycerol decreased the ecto-kinase activity to an extent similar to
that of TPA. The drop in ecto-kinase activity of HLF-cells in situ caused by TPA,
RA and the diacylglycerols was accompanied by an increase in total
basal-(Mg++-dependent) protein kinase activity present in extracts of treated
cells. The results suggest an important role of ecto-kinase in the response of
intact cells to TPA and RA.

PMID: 3566738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Oncogene. 1987 Mar;1(1):13-8.

Transactivation of human immunodeficiency virus by herpesviruses.

Rando RF(1), Pellett PE, Luciw PA, Bohan CA, Srinivasan A.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Exanthems and Herpesvirus Branch, Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30333.

We examined the interaction of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and herpes
group viruses. For this purpose, a chimeric plasmid (pLTR-CAT) was constructed in
which the long terminal repeat (LTR) sequences derived from a molecular clone of 
HIV were fused to a bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene (CAT).
Transient expression assays in transfected tissue culture cells were used to
monitor the activity of the LTR. Basal levels of CAT activity were measured in
HeLa and human lung fibroblast (HLF) cells transfected with pLTR-CAT. When HeLa
or HLF cells transfected with pLTR-CAT were infected with herpesviruses, HIV
LTR-directed expression of the CAT gene was detected. An enhancement of the HIV
LTR-directed expression of CAT was observed for herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 and 
HSV-2, cytomegalovirus and varicella zoster virus. Enhanced CAT expression
directed by the LTR was also shown by cotransfection of recombinant plasmids
containing two non-overlapping regions of HSV-1, a fragment from HSV-2 which is
non-colinear with the regions used from HSV-1, the immediate early gene of
pseudorabies virus and the adenovirus early gene EIA. HIV LTR-directed expression
may be a useful model for studying the effects on HIV of various infectious
agents known to be present in individuals with AIDS or HIV infection.

PMID: 2830574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Chromatogr. 1987 Jan 30;387:323-31.

Analysis of lipids by one-dimensional thin-layer chromatography.

Entezami AA, Venables BJ, Daugherty KE.

A high-efficiency silica gel, (type HLF) thin-layer chromatography plate (HETLC),
linear high-performance thin-layer chromatography plate (HPTLC) and densitometry 
method has been devised in order to resolve the major lipid classes obtained from
rat brain tissues. This methodology, which has largely overcome prior problems,
enhances the opportunity for assessing the glycerophospholipid and glycolipid
compositions of tissues. DEAE-Sephadex column chromatography was used to separate
the crude lipids extract into neutral and acidic lipid fractions. The lipid
fractions were then spotted on separate HPTLC and HETLC plates and
chromatographed in one dimension using one solvent system. Quantitation was by in
situ densitometry with the absolute quantity of the lipid classes determined from
co-chromatographed standards. Sensitivity was increased by using cupric sulfate
reagent, which was found to be more sensitive than the conventional cupric
acetate reagent. This method is applicable to a broader separation of lipid
classes and has improved sensitivity.

PMID: 3558628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Eur J Biochem. 1986 Jul 15;158(2):351-9.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans of human lung fibroblasts. Occurrence of distinct
membrane, matrix and secreted forms.

Lories V, David G, Cassiman JJ, Van den Berghe H.

Human lung fibroblasts (HLF) were labeled with 35SO2-4 for 48 h and extracted
with a guanidinium chloride buffer. A fraction of the extracted heparan sulfate
proteoglycan (HSPG) appeared micelle-associated. In the absence of detergent
these HSPG eluted in the void volume of Sepharose CL2B columns. In the presence
of detergent these HSPG were included in Sepharose CL2B (Kav = 0.55) and 4B (Kav 
= 0.3) columns. This type of HSPG was specifically associated with isolated HLF
cell membranes, suggesting that it may represent a fraction of integral membrane 
proteoglycans. Most of the HSPG in the HLF monolayers, however, eluted in the
included volume of Sepharose CL2B (Kav = 0.4) and CL4B (Kav = 0.1) columns in the
absence of detergent. This type of HSPG was not affected by detergent and was
specifically retained in 'extracellular matrix' preparations. The medium of HLF
monolayers contained HSPG of similar Mr as the membrane-associated HSPG. Of these
three distinct HSPG fractions only the membrane-associated form could be
incorporated in liposomes, confirming that the HSPG in this fraction may be
integral membrane components.

PMID: 2942402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nihon Sanka Fujinka Gakkai Zasshi. 1985 Dec;37(12):2775-83.

[Production of monoclonal antibodies to ferritin and development of the
enzymeimmunoassay system].

[Article in Japanese]

Nozawa S, Tsukazaki K, Narisawa S.

A sandwich enzymeimmunoassay (EIA) system for serum ferritin was developed by
newly obtained monoclonal antibodies to human placental ferritin (HPF). And serum
ferritin values in 3 groups (normal control, normal pregnant women and
gynecological cancer patients groups) were measured. These values were compared
with those measured by the conventional sandwich EIA system, in which human liver
ferritin (HLF) and conventional polyclonal antibody to HLF were used as standard 
substance and horseradish peroxidase (HRPO) conjugated antibodies,
respectively.RESULTS: The high coefficient of correlation of ferritin values
between the new monoclonal assay and conventional assay indicated that this
monoclonal assay system was useful in measuring serum ferritin. The distribution 
of the ferritin value in the normal control was 84.5 +/- 26.6ng/ml. The peak
ferritin value in 136 normal pregnant women was found around the early second
trimester. The serum ferritin value in 184 women with cancer usually exceeded the
upper limit or normal range and some of them were more than 1000ng/ml. These
results indicate that ferritin was a useful marker for cancer. When the
correlation curve of the cancer group was compared with that of the normal
control, it appeared that the assay system using HPF as the standard substance
might be useful in correcting the false negative which the conventional assay
system using HLF for the standard failed to pick up in the measurement of acidic 
ferritin (HPF or cancer ferritin).

PMID: 3910740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Carcinogenesis. 1985 Apr;6(4):531-4.

Studies on the tumour promoter-induced release of fibronectin from human lung
fibroblasts, and its counteraction by retinoic acid.

Zerlauth G, Wolf G.

The purpose of the experiments reported here is to improve our understanding of
the mechanism whereby tumour promoters (e.g.,
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA) stimulate increased release of
fibronectin (FN) from human lung fibroblasts (HLF) in culture. We investigated
whether pretreatment of these cultures with a brief pulse of TPA would be
sufficient to cause this effect, or whether continuous presence of TPA is
required. We found that a pretreatment of 5-15 min with TPA caused the increased 
FN release when followed by a 2-h TPA-free incubation. The increased release did 
not cease upon removal of TPA. Longer exposure to TPA (1-2 h) also gave higher FN
release than control cultures, but the effect was less pronounced. Pretreatment
with retinoic (RA) for up to 30 min did not counteract the subsequent TPA effect 
after the RA was removed, even though we could show with labeled RA that it had
entered the cells. Therefore, RA must be present simultaneously with TPA; it
presumably acts on the cell surface when antagonizing the effect of TPA on FN
release. When all cell-surface FN was removed by trypsinization and the cells
were incubated with TPA, an increased release of FN into the medium occurred and 
a decreased accumulation of cell-associated FN compared to controls. These
results suggest that FN is released even if the pericellular matrix is absent and
that TPA interferes with the subsequent build-up of the matrix.

PMID: 3986959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Am J Physiol. 1985 Apr;248(4 Pt 1):G463-9.

Interaction of human lactoferrin with the rat liver.

Debanne MT, Regoeczi E, Sweeney GD, Krestynski F.

Binding of human lactoferrin (hLf) by purified rat liver plasma membranes was
studied to clarify whether the liver possesses specific hLf receptors. The
binding was rapid between 4 degrees and 37 degrees C, with a pH optimum close to 
5.0. At 22 degrees C and in glycine-NaOH (5 mM, pH 7.4) containing 150 mM NaCl
and 0.5% albumin, 1 microgram of membrane bound a maximum of 11.8 ng hLf. The
dissociation constant of the interaction was 1.6 X 10(-7) M. Other proteins of
high isoelectric points (lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, and particularly salmine
sulfate) and a piperazine derivative inhibited hLf binding in a
concentration-dependent manner. In contrast, monosaccharides (galactose,
N-acetylgalactosamine, mannose, and fucose) were ineffective. By omitting NaCl
from the incubation buffer, binding was increased 3.6-fold. Erythrocyte ghosts
bound hLf less firmly and alveolar macrophages more firmly than hepatic plasma
membranes. Liver cell fractionations performed after the intravenous injection of
labeled hLf showed that approximately 88% of the hepatic radioligand was
associated with parenchymal cells. When binding was expressed per unit of cell
volume, however, more hLf was present in nonparenchymal than in parenchymal
cells, implying that the above value was determined by the relative cell masses
rather than affinities alone. It is concluded that the binding of hLf by hepatic 
plasma membranes is electrostatic, i.e., is mediated by the cationic nature of
the ligand, and that it is explicable in terms of a "specific nonreceptor
interaction" of the generalized type proposed by Cuatrecasas and Hollenberg (Adv.
Protein Chem. 30: 251-451, 1976).

PMID: 2984944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Infect Immun. 1984 Dec;46(3):697-702.

Adherence of Bordetella bronchiseptica to hamster lung fibroblasts.

Plotkin BJ, Bemis DA.

The adherence of Bordetella bronchiseptica smooth-, intermediate-, and
rough-phase isolates to hamster lung fibroblasts (HLF) (Don line) was
characterized by competitive inhibition studies and enzyme and chemical
treatments of both the bacteria and the HLF. The adherence of the rough- and
intermediate-phase isolates (n = 13) was altered by coincubation of the bacteria 
and HLF with cationic chelators, including EGTA and citrate. EGTA inhibition of
the adherence of the rough- and intermediate-phase isolates could be overcome by 
the addition of Ca2+, Mn2+, Cd2+, or Sr2+ to the reaction mixture. In addition,
citrate released bound bacteria from the HLF. Although the adherence of the
smooth-phase isolates (n = 4) was unaltered by cationic chelators, binding was
inhibited by N-acetylated amino sugars, with N-acetylglucosamine inhibiting 98%
of the adherence of the smooth-phase isolates. Homogenization, protease K, and
heat treatment (60 min, 60 degrees C) of the bacteria also resulted in a loss of 
adherence. It was concluded that B. bronchiseptica can adhere to HLF by at least 
two mechanisms and that the ligand responsible appears to be a proteinacious,
heat labile cell surface component.

PMCID: PMC261600
PMID: 6437989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Carcinogenesis. 1984 Jul;5(7):863-8.

Kinetics of fibronectin release from fibroblasts in response to
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate and retinoic acid.

Zerlauth G, Wolf G.

We have studied the effects of the tumor promoter
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and its in vivo and in vitro
antagonist retinoic acid (RA) on the synthesis and release of a major
extracellular glycoprotein, fibronectin (FN), in human lung fibroblasts (HLF).
The studies reported here investigate the question of whether the increased
amounts of FN released by TPA treatment are cell-surface derived or require de
novo synthesis of FN. Untransformed HLF continuously released FN into the medium.
Addition of TPA rapidly enhanced this release of FN into the culture medium, as
shown with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. RA, given simultaneously with TPA, 
prevented the increased release and resulted in a normal FN accumulation in the
medium. RA alone did not influence FN release. To study the effect of TPA or RA
on synthesis rates of FN, HLF were labeled metabolically: FN synthesis rates with
or without TPA, RA, or with TPA and RA were similar, as judged by assaying
cell-layer-associated and medium [3H]FN. Pre-existing (unlabeled) FN accumulated 
in the medium as a result of TPA treatment at a time when newly synthesized
(labeled) FN was still intracellular. Cycloheximide, in concentrations which
inhibited protein synthesis by 95%, did not prevent but only reduced the normal
FN release, nor did it prevent the effect of TPA at this reduced level. We
conclude that phorbol ester action and RA counteraction on the release of FN
takes place on a cell-surface target; that FN which is released into the medium
by TPA is derived from pre-existing FN; that RA specifically antagonizes TPA
action. No protein synthesis is required to release FN, to mediate enhanced FN
release by TPA, or to counteract the enhanced release by RA.

PMID: 6733848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1984 Jun;129(6):943-7.

Demonstration of a free elastolytic metalloenzyme in human lung lavage fluid and 
its relationship to alpha 1-antiprotease.

Niederman MS, Fritts LL, Merrill WW, Fick RB, Matthay RA, Reynolds HY, Gee JB.

Although the human alveolar macrophage in tissue culture can secrete an
elastolytic metalloenzyme that is not inactivated by alpha 1-antiprotease (AAP), 
levels of this proteolytic activity and its relationship to AAP in human lung
lavage fluid ( HLF ) are unknown from previous studies. Therefore, we measured
elastolytic activity in concentrated (20- to 30-fold) HLF from 15 smokers and 10 
nonsmokers and related results to measurements of AAP in these fluids. Activity
(mean +/- SEM) against a C elastin substrate (expressed as nanograms of porcine
pancreatic elastase equivalents per milligram of lavage fluid protein) in
smokers, 18.9 +/- 6.7, significantly exceeded (p = 0.05) levels present in
nonsmokers, 4.4 +/- 1.8. With the synthetic elastin-like chromophore substrate
succinyl-trialanine-nitroanilide ( SLAPN ), activity in individual samples was
reduced 79% by EDTA, a metalloproteinase inhibitor, whereas activity was reduced 
by only 29% in the presence of PMSF, a serine proteinase inhibitor. In addition, 
using a pooled sample of HLF and C elastin substrate, 80% of activity against the
elastin substrate was eliminated by EDTA, whereas 51% was eliminated by PMSF. The
activity measured with C elastin substrate correlated inversely with antigenic
AAP (r = -0.05, p = 0.01), but no correlations were found between this activity
and HLF cell number, cell viability, differential count, or subject smoking
history. The detection of activity with C elastin in HLF , with primarily a
metalloenzyme inhibitor profile, in the presence of antigenically detectable AAP,
may have pathogenetic relevance for emphysema in humans.

PMID: 6428285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 1981 Mar 25;256(6):2973-81.

Extracellular regulation of fibroblast multiplication. Quantitative differences
in nutrient and serum factor requirements for multiplication of normal and SV40
virus-transformed human lung cells.

McKeehan WL, McKeehan KA, Calkins D.

The principles of Henri-Michaelis-Menten kinetic analysis were applied to
directly relate the concentration of serum growth factors and individual
nutrients in the culture medium to the multiplication rate of a population of
normal (N-HLF) and SV40 virus-transformed (SV-HLF) human lung fibroblasts. When
all nutrient concentrations were optimal and in steady state, the concentration
of serum factors that was required to support a half-maximal rate of
proliferation of both N-HLF and SV-HLF was similar. When the serum factor
concentration was optimal and constant, SV-HLF cells exhibited a reduced
requirement (p less than 0.001) for 12 of 27 individual nutrients that were
examined. Serum factors control the cellular requirement for Ca2+, K+, Mg2+,
phosphate ions, and 2-oxocarboxylic acids for multiplication of N-HLF (McKeehan, 
W. L., and McKeehan, K. A. (1980) Proc. Natl, Acad, Sci, U. S. A. 77, 3417-3421).
SV-HLF exhibited a constitutively reduced requirement for Ca2+, K+, and Mg2+
which partially removed the requirement for the 3 ions for multiplication of
SV-HLF from the control of serum factors. The results suggest that SV40 virus
transformation confers a growth advantage on human lung fibroblasts by alteration
of their quantitative requirements for specific nutrients.

PMID: 6259146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Poult Sci. 1980 Jun;59(6):1197-1202.

In vitro antibiotic activity on cecal anaerobes with emphasis on uric
acid-utilizing bacteria.

Beck JR, Chang TS.

A total of 741 individual colonies or representative colonial types were isolated
on basal-hlf-uric acid (UA) agar plates containing various antibiotics and on two
types of control media. All of the antibiotics utilized in this study were
capable of reducing bacterial numbers and/or bacterial groups in vitro when
compared to the control plates. None of the antibiotics were selective for the
uric acid bacteria. The majority (96%) of the cecal isolates utilizing uric acid 
were gram-positive. The basal-half-uric acid agar was a nonselective growth
medium and supported the growth of virtually every bacterial group reported to be
present in the avian cecum. The cecal flora of the adult White Leghorn hens
tested was observed to be composed of 23% G+ (gram-positive) rods, 24% G-
(gram-negative) rods, 26% G+ cocci, 9% G- cocci, and 18% G+ coccal-bacilli.

PMID: 7402985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Gan. 1975 Aug;66(4):385-92.

Establishment and some biological characteristics of human hepatoma cell lines.

Dor I, Namba M, Sato J.

Two cell lines of human hepatoma, HLE and HLF lines, were established in vitro
from the hepatocellular carcinoma of a 68-year-old patient. One clone (HLEC) was 
obtained from a single HLE cell. The cells of HLE and HLEC were epithelial-like
and both of these cells demonstrated glycogen granules in the cytoplasm when
stained with periodic acid and Schiff reagent. Although HLF cells resembled
fibroblasts in morphology, they appear to have originated from hepatoma cells,
judging from epithelial characteristics in aggregates reconstituted by rotation
culture and heterotransplantability. HLE cells produced alpha-fetoprotein until
day 187 of culture, but HLF cells did not produce alpa-fetoprotein at any period 
examined. Chromosome number of both cell lines was distributed near the triploid 
range. HLF cells were transplantable into the cheek pouch of adult hamsters
treated with cortisone acetate, but not HLE cells.

PMID: 52570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


