
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 23. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8288. [Epub ahead of print]

HMGA2 overexpression plays a critical role in the progression of esophageal
squamous carcinoma.

Palumbo A Jr(1,)(2), Da Costa NM(1), Esposito F(3), De Martino M(3), D'Angelo
D(3), de Sousa VP(1), Martins I(4), Nasciutti LE(2), Fusco A(1,)(3), Pinto LF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Carcinogênese Molecular, Instituto Nacional de Câncer - INCA, Rua 
André Cavalcanti, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. (2)Laboratório de Interações
Celulares, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro Prédio de Ciências da Saúde - Cidade Universitária, Ilha do Fundão, A.
Carlos Chagas, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil. (3)Istituto di Endocrinologia e
Oncologia Sperimentale - CNR c/o Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e
Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples,
Italy. (4)Divisão de Patologia, Instituto Nacional de Câncer - INCA, Rua Cordeiro
da Graça, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (ESCC) is the most common esophageal tumor
worldwide. However, there is still a lack of deeper knowledge about biological
alterations involved in ESCC development. High Mobility Group A (HMGA) protein
family has been related with poor outcome and malignant cell transformation in
several tumor types. In this way, the aim of this study was to analyze the
expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 expression in ESCC and their role in crucial
cellular features. We evaluated HMGA1 and HMGA2 mRNA expression in 52 paired ESCC
and normal surrounding tissue samples by qRT-PCR. Here, we show that HMGA2, but
not HMGA1, is overexpressed in ESCC samples. This result was further confirmed by
the immunohistochemical analysis. Indeed, accordingly to mRNA expression data,
HMGA2, but not HMGA1, was overexpressed in approximately 90% of ESCC samples,
while it was barely expressed in the respective control. Conversely, HMGA1, but
not HMGA2, was overexpressed in esophageal adenocarcinoma samples. Interestingly,
HMGA2 abrogation attenuated the malignant phenotype of two ESCC cell lines,
suggesting that HMGA2 overexpression is involved in ESCC progression.

PMID: 27027341  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Mar 28. pii: gkw205. [Epub ahead of print]

MiR-26 down-regulates TNF-a/NF-<U+03BA>B signalling and IL-6 expression by silencing
HMGA1 and MALT1.

Chen CA(1), Chang JT(2), Ho YF(1), Shyu AB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, McGovern Medical
School, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Integrative Biology and
Pharmacology, McGovern Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA School of
Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
McGovern Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA Ann-Bin.Shyu@uth.tmc.edu.

MiR-26 has emerged as a key tumour suppressor in various cancers. Accumulating
evidence supports that miR-26 regulates inflammation and tumourigenicity largely 
through down-regulating IL-6 production, but the underlying mechanism remains
obscure. Here, combining a transcriptome-wide approach with manipulation of
cellular miR-26 levels, we showed that instead of directly targeting IL-6 mRNA
for gene silencing, miR-26 diminishes IL-6 transcription activated by TNF-a
through silencing NF-<U+03BA>B signalling related factors HMGA1 and MALT1. We
demonstrated that miR-26 extensively dampens the induction of many
inflammation-related cytokine, chemokine and tissue-remodelling genes that are
activated via NF-<U+03BA>B signalling pathway. Knocking down both HMGA1 and MALT1 by
RNAi had a silencing effect on NF-<U+03BA>B-responsive genes similar to that caused by
miR-26. Moreover, we discovered that poor patient prognosis in human lung
adenocarcinoma is associated with low miR-26 and high HMGA1 or MALT1 levels and
not with levels of any of them individually. These new findings not only unravel 
a novel mechanism by which miR-26 dampens IL-6 production transcriptionally but
also demonstrate a direct role of miR-26 in down-regulating NF-<U+03BA>B signalling
pathway, thereby revealing a more critical and broader role of miR-26 in
inflammation and cancer than previously realized.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 27025651  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Transl Med. 2016 Mar 23;14(1):80. doi: 10.1186/s12967-016-0824-x.

The association between S100A13 and HMGA1 in the modulation of thyroid cancer
proliferation and invasion.

Zhong J(1), Liu C(1,)(2), Chen YJ(1,)(3), Zhang QH(1), Yang J(4), Kang X(1), Chen
SR(1), Wen GB(1,)(4), Zu XY(5), Cao RX(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of
South China, 421001, Hengyang, Hunan, People's Republic of China. (2)Department
of Metabolism and Endocrinology, The First People's Hospital of Chenzhou,
Luojiajing Road, 102, 423000, Chenzhou, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Metabolism and Endocrinology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
University of South China, 421001, Hengyang, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Metabolism and Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
University of South China, 421001, Hengyang, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(5)Institute of Clinical Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of
South China, 421001, Hengyang, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
zuxuyu0108@hotmail.com. (6)Institute of Clinical Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital of University of South China, 421001, Hengyang, Hunan, People's Republic
of China. caorenxian@hotmail.com. (7)Department of Metabolism and Endocrinology, 
The First Affiliated Hospital of University of South China, 421001, Hengyang,
Hunan, People's Republic of China. caorenxian@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: S100A13 and high mobility group A (HMGA1) are known to play essential
roles in the carcinogenesis and progression of cancer. However, the correlation
between S100A13 and HMGA1 during cancer progression is not yet well understood.
In this study, we determined the effects of S100A13 on HMGA1 expression in
thyroid cancer cells and examined the role of HMGA1 in thyroid cancer
progression.
METHODS: Stable ectopic S100A13 expression TT cellular proliferation was
evaluated by nude mice xenografts assays. The effect of lentivirus-mediated
S100A13 knockdown on thyroid cancer cellular oncogenic properties were evaluated 
by MTT, colony formation assays and transwell assays in TPC1 and SW579 cells. The
effect of siRNA-mediated HMGA1 knockdown on thyroid cancer cellular proliferation
and invasion were evaluated by MTT, colony formation assays and transwell assays.
The tissue microarray was performed to investigate the correlation between
S100A13 and HMGA1 expression in tumor tissues.
RESULTS: The ectopic expression of S100A13 could increase tumor growth in a TT
cell xenograft mouse model. Moreover, lentivirus-mediated S100A13 knockdown led
to the inhibition of cellular oncogenic properties in thyroid cancer cells, and
HMGA1 was found to be involved in the effect of S100A13 on thyroid cancer growth 
and invasion. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated HMGA1 knockdown was proved to inhibit
the growth of TPC1 cells and invasive abilities of SW579 cells. Clinically, it
was revealed that both S100A13 and HMGA1 showed a higher expression levels in
thyroid cancer cases compared with those in matched normal thyroid cases
(P = 0.007 and P = 0.000); S100A13 and HMGA1 expressions were identified to be
positively correlated (P = 0.004, R = 0.316) when analyzed regardless of thyroid 
cancer types.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report for the association between HMGA1 and
S100A13 expression in the modulation of thyroid cancer growth and invasion. Those
results would provide an essential insight into the effect of S100A13 on
carcinogenesis of thyroid tumor, rending S100A13 to be potential biological
marker for the diagnosis of thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC4804518
PMID: 27008379  [PubMed - in process]


4. Gynecol Oncol. 2016 Mar 18. pii: S0090-8258(16)30076-2. doi:
10.1016/j.ygyno.2016.03.020. [Epub ahead of print]

The High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) gene is highly overexpressed in human uterine 
serous carcinomas and carcinosarcomas and drives Matrix Metalloproteinase-2
(MMP-2) in a subset of tumors.

Hillion J(1), Roy S(1), Heydarian M(2), Cope L(3), Xian L(1), Koo M(1), Luo
LZ(1), Kellyn K(4), Ronnett BM(5), Huso T(1), Armstrong D(3), Reddy K(6), Huso
DL(7), Resar LM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, United States; Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. (2)Department of
Biologic Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, United States. (3)Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. (4)Pathobiology Graduate Program, The 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States;
Department of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. (5)Pathobiology
Graduate Program, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
United States. (6)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States; Department of Biologic Chemistry, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(7)Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, United States; Department of Molecular and Comparative
Pathobiology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
United States. (8)Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States; Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States; Department of
Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United 
States; Pathobiology Graduate Program, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States; Department of Pediatrics, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States; Institute
for Cellular Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, United States. Electronic address: lresar@jhmi.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Although uterine cancer is the fourth most common cause for cancer
death in women worldwide, the molecular underpinnings of tumor progression remain
poorly understood. The High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) gene is overexpressed in
aggressive cancers and high levels portend adverse outcomes in diverse tumors. We
previously reported that Hmga1 transgenic mice develop uterine tumors with
complete penetrance. Because HMGA1 drives tumor progression by inducing
MatrixMetalloproteinase (MMP) and other genes involved in invasion, we explored
the HMGA1-MMP-2 pathway in uterine cancer.
METHODS: To investigate MMP-2 in uterine tumors driven by HMGA1, we used a
genetic approach with mouse models. Next, we assessed HMGA1 and MMP-2 expression 
in primary human uterine tumors, including low-grade carcinomas (endometrial
endometrioid) and more aggressive tumors (endometrial serous carcinomas, uterine 
carcinosarcomas/malignant mesodermal mixed tumors).
RESULTS: Here, we report for the first time that uterine tumor growth is impaired
in Hmga1a transgenic mice crossed on to an Mmp-2 deficient background. In human
tumors, we discovered that HMGA1 is highest in aggressive carcinosarcomas and
serous carcinomas, with lower levels in the more indolent endometrioid
carcinomas. Moreover, HMGA1 and MMP-2 were positively correlated, but only in a
subset of carcinosarcomas. HMGA1 also occupies the MMP-2 promoter in human
carcinosarcoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our studies define a novel HMGA1-MMP-2 pathway involved in
a subset of human carcinosarcomas and tumor progression in murine models. Our
work also suggests that targeting HMGA1 could be effective adjuvant therapy for
more aggressive uterine cancers and provides compelling data for further
preclinical studies.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27001612  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Curr Mol Med. 2016 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

The High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) Transcriptome in Cancer & Development.

Sumter TF, Xian L, Huso T, Koo M, Chang YT, Almasri TN, Chia L, Inglis C, Reid D,
Resar LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of the Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, 720 Rutland Avenue, Ross Research Building, Room 1025, Baltimore, MD
21205-2109, USA. lresar@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Chromatin structure is the single most important feature
that distinguishes a cancer cell from a normal cell histologically. Chromatin
remodeling proteins regulate chromatin structure and high mobility group A
(HMGA1) proteins are among the most abundant, nonhistone chromatin remodeling
proteins found in cancer cells. These proteins include HMGA1a/HMGA1b isoforms,
which result from alternatively spliced mRNA. The HMGA1 gene is overexpressed in 
cancer and high levels portend a poor prognosis in diverse tumors. HMGA1 is also 
highly expressed during embryogenesis and postnatally in adult stem cells.
Overexpression of HMGA1 drives neoplastic transformation in cultured cells, while
inhibiting HMGA1 blocks oncogenic and cancer stem cell properties. Hmga1
transgenic mice succumb to aggressive tumors, demonstrating that dysregulated
expression of HMGA1 causes cancer in vivo. HMGA1 is also required for
reprogramming somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells. HMGA1 proteins
function as ancillary transcription factors that bend chromatin and recruit other
transcription factors to DNA. They induce oncogenic transformation by activating 
or repressing specific genes involved in this process and an HMGA1
"transcriptome" is emerging. Although prior studies reveal potent oncogenic
properties of HMGA1, we are only beginning to understand the molecular mechanisms
through which HMGA1 functions. In this review, we summarize the list of putative 
downstream transcriptional targets regulated by HMGA1. We also briefly discuss
studies linking HMGA1 to Alzheimer's disease and type-2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Further elucidation of HMGA1 function should lead to novel
therapeutic strategies for cancer and possibly for other diseases associated with
aberrant HMGA1 expression.

PMID: 26980699  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Curr Microbiol. 2016 Mar 10. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of the Impact of Rosuvastatin on Bacterial Mevalonate Production Using a
UPLC-Mass Spectrometry Approach.

Nolan JA(1,)(2), Kinsella M(3,)(4), Hill C(1,)(2), Joyce SA(5,)(6), Gahan
CG(7,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)APC Microbiome Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. (2)School of
Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. (3)School of Food and
Nutritional Sciences, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. (4)Department of
Science, School of Science & Computing, Waterford Institute of Technology,
Waterford, Ireland. (5)APC Microbiome Institute, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland. s.joyce@ucc.ie. (6)School of Biochemistry & Cell Biology, University
College Cork, Cork, Ireland. s.joyce@ucc.ie. (7)APC Microbiome Institute,
University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. c.gahan@ucc.ie. (8)School of
Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. c.gahan@ucc.ie. (9)School
of Pharmacy, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. c.gahan@ucc.ie.

Statins are widely prescribed cholesterol-lowering medications and act through
inhibition of the human enzyme 3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMG-R)
which produces mevalonate (MVAL), a key substrate for cholesterol biosynthesis.
Some important microbial species also express an isoform of HMG-R; however, the
nature of the interaction between statins and bacteria is currently unclear and
studies would benefit from protocols to quantify MVAL in complex microbial
environments. The objective of this study was to develop a protocol for the
analytical quantification of MVAL in bacterial systems and to utilise this
approach to analyse the effects of Rosuvastatin (RSV) on bacterial MVAL
formation. To determine the effective concentration range of RSV, we examined the
dose-dependent inhibition of growth in the HMG-R(+) bacterial pathogens Listeria 
monocytogenes, Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus faecium at various
concentrations of pure RSV. Growth inhibition generally correlated with a
reduction in bacterial MVAL levels, particularly in culture supernatants at high 
RSV concentrations, as determined using our ultra-performance liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry protocol. This work therefore outlines a refined
protocol for the analysis of MVAL in microbial cultures and provides evidence for
statin-mediated inhibition of bacterial HMG-R. Furthermore, we show that MVAL is 
readily transported and secreted from bacterial cells into the growth media.

PMID: 26960292  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 9;11(3):e0141084. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141084.
eCollection 2016.

Mevalonate-Farnesal Biosynthesis in Ticks: Comparative Synganglion
Transcriptomics and a New Perspective.

Zhu J(1), Khalil SM(1), Mitchell RD(1), Bissinger BW(1), Egekwu N(2), Sonenshine 
DE(2), Roe RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina, 27695, United States of America. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, 
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia, 23529, United States of America.

Juvenile hormone (JH) controls the growth, development, metamorphosis, and
reproduction of insects. For many years, the general assumption has been that JH 
regulates tick and other acarine development and reproduction the same as in
insects. Although researchers have not been able to find the common insect JHs in
hard and soft tick species and JH applications appear to have no effect on tick
development, it is difficult to prove the negative or to determine whether
precursors to JH are made in ticks. The tick synganglion contains regions which
are homologous to the corpora allata, the biosynthetic source for JH in insects. 
Next-gen sequencing of the tick synganglion transcriptome was conducted
separately in adults of the American dog tick, Dermacentor variabilis, the deer
tick, Ixodes scapularis, and the relapsing fever tick, Ornithodoros turicata as a
new approach to determine whether ticks can make JH or a JH precursor. All of the
enzymes that make up the mevalonate pathway from acetyl-CoA to farnesyl
diphosphate (acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase, HMG-S, HMG-R, mevalonate kinase,
phosphomevalonate kinase, diphosphomevalonate decarboxylase, and farnesyl
diphosphate synthase) were found in at least one of the ticks studied but most
were found in all three species. Sequence analysis of the last enzyme in the
mevalonate pathway, farnesyl diphosphate synthase, demonstrated conservation of
the seven prenyltransferase regions and the aspartate rich motifs within those
regions typical of this enzyme. In the JH branch from farnesyl diphosphate to JH 
III, we found a putative farnesol oxidase used for the conversion of farnesol to 
farnesal in the synganglion transcriptome of I. scapularis and D. variabilis.
Methyltransferases (MTs) that add a methyl group to farnesoic acid to make methyl
farnesoate were present in all of the ticks studied with similarities as high as 
36% at the amino acid level to insect JH acid methyltransferase (JHAMT). However,
when the tick MTs were compared to the known insect JHAMTs from several insect
species at the amino acid level, the former lacked the farnesoic acid binding
motif typical in insects. The P450s shown in insects to add the C10,11 epoxide to
methyl farnesoate, are in the CYP15 family; this family was absent in our tick
transcriptomes and in the I. scapularis genome, the only tick genome available.
These data suggest that ticks do not synthesize JH III but have the mevalonate
pathway and may produce a JH III precursor.

PMCID: PMC4785029
PMID: 26959814  [PubMed - in process]


8. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Mar 8:1-4. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT3 inhibitor has potent antitumor activity in B-lineage acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cells overexpressing the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1)-STAT3 pathway.

Belton A(1), Xian L(1), Huso T(1), Koo M(1), Luo LZ(1), Turkson J(2), Page BD(3),
Gunning PT(3), Liu G(4), Huso DL(4,)(5), Resar LM(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Hematology Division, Department of Medicine , Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD , USA ; (2)b Cell and Molecular Biology
Department , John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii , Honolulu , 
HI , USA ; (3)c Department of Chemistry , University of Toronto , Ontario ,
Canada ; (4)d Department of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology , Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD , USA ; (5)e Department of
Oncology, Institute for Cellular Engineering , the Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD , USA.

PMID: 26952843  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2016 Mar 21:1-15. [Epub ahead of print]

Triplex forming oligonucleotides targeted to hmga1 selectively inhibit its
expression and induce apoptosis in human cervical cancer.

Akhter MZ(1), Rajeswari MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry , All India Institute of Medical Sciences , New
Delhi - 110029 , India.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) is a non-histone chromosomal protein, which is
known as 'architectural' transcription factor that facilitates the assembly of
'enhanceosome.' Because of its elevated expression in a number of human
malignancies, with barely minimal levels in healthy adults, HMGA1 is considered
as potential 'tumor marker.' Therefore, we looked at the inhibition of hmga1
using anti-gene strategy, as an attractive therapeutic approach. This was
achieved by two triplex forming oligonucleotides (TFOs), TFO1 and TFO2 targeted
to the promoter of hmga1 at positions, -284--304 and -2800--2826, respectively.
The stability of two DNA triplexes was characterized using a variety of
biophysical and thermodynamics techniques and was confirmed by gel retardation
assay using <U+03B3>-(32)P [ATP]. The efficacy of TFOs on HMGA1 expression was evaluated
in HeLa cells using MTT assay, Flow cytometry, Western blot, and RT-PCR. Results 
revealed that DNA Triplex1 formed by TFO1 is more stable and stronger than the
corresponding Triplex2. Although both TFOs downregulated hmga1 expression at mRNA
and protein levels and caused apoptotic cell death in HeLa cell line, TFO1
demonstrated a greater effect at low concentration which corroborates well with
the stability data. Thus, TFO-mediated inhibition of hmga1 expression can be a
promising strategy for the development of novel anti-cancer therapeutics.

PMID: 26923360  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.22. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigenetic modulation of a miR-296-5p:HMGA1 axis regulates Sox2 expression and
glioblastoma stem cells.

Lopez-Bertoni H(1,)(2), Lal B(1,)(2), Michelson N(1), Guerrero-Cázares H(3),
Quiñones-Hinojosa A(3,)(4,)(5), Li Y(1,)(2), Laterra J(1,)(2,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hugo W Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. (4)Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (5)Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Solid malignancies contain subsets of multipotent cells that grow as spheres and 
efficiently propagate tumors in xenograft models, reflecting a stem-like,
self-renewing and tumor-propagating phenotype. These cancer 'stem cells (SCs)'
have been shown to maintain tumor growth, contribute to resistance and drive
tumor recurrence. Cancer cell stemness is dynamically influenced by epigenetic
mechanisms and differentially regulated coding and noncoding RNAs. How these
mechanisms specifically contribute to the generation and/or maintenance of cancer
SCs remains unclear. This study identifies a novel epigenetically regulated
circuit that integrates microRNA, chromatin remodeling and the reprogramming
transcription factor Sox2 to regulate glioblastoma (GBM)-propagating SCs. We show
that miR-296-5p expression is repressed in a DNA methylation-dependent manner
under conditions that promote GBM cell stemness and that miR-296-5p inhibits GBM 
cell stemness and their capacity to self-renew as spheres and propagate glioma
xenografts in vivo. We show that the chromatin remodeling protein HMGA1 functions
as a downstream effector of these biological responses to miR-296-5p and
regulates Sox2 expression, a master driver of cell stemness, by modifying
chromatin architecture at the Sox2 promoter. These results show for the first
time that miR-296-5p inhibits transcriptional mechanisms that support GBM SCs and
identify a miR-296-5p:HMGA1:Sox2 axis as a novel regulator of GBM SCs and
candidate pathway for targeting therapies directed at depleting tumors of their
tumor-propagating stem cell subsets.Oncogene advance online publication, 22
February 2016; doi:10.1038/onc.2016.22.

PMID: 26898758  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7427. [Epub ahead of print]

HMGA1-pseudogenes and cancer.

De Martino M(1), Forzati F(1), Arra C(2), Fusco A(1), Esposito F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Scuola di Medicina e Chirurgia di
Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(2)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy.

Pseudogenes are DNA sequences with high homology to the corresponding functional 
gene, but, because of the accumulation of various mutations, they have lost their
initial functions to code for proteins. Consequently, pseudogenes have been
considered until few years ago dysfunctional relatives of the corresponding
ancestral genes, and then useless in the course of genome evolution. However,
several studies have recently established that pseudogenes are owners of key
biological functions. Indeed, some pseudogenes control the expression of
functional genes by competitively binding to the miRNAs, some of them generate
small interference RNAs to negatively modulate the expression of functional
genes, and some of them even encode functional mutated proteins. Here, we
concentrate our attention on the pseudogenes of the HMGA1 gene, that codes for
the HMGA1a and HMGA1b proteins having a critical role in development and cancer
progression. In this review, we analyze the family of HMGA1 pseudogenes through
three aspects: classification, characterization, and their possible function and 
involvement in cancer.

PMID: 26895108  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Cell Cycle. 2016 Mar 18;15(6):812-8. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2016.1146835.

Hmga1 null mouse embryonic fibroblasts display downregulation of spindle assembly
checkpoint gene expression associated to nuclear and karyotypic abnormalities.

Pierantoni GM(1), Conte A(1), Rinaldo C(2), Tornincasa M(1), Gerlini R(1),
Valente D(2), Izzo A(1), Fusco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR and
Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di Napoli
"Federico II" , Naples , Italy. (2)b Istituto di Biologia e Patologie Molecolari 
del CNR c/o Università "Sapienza" di Roma , Rome , Italy.

The High Mobility Group A1 proteins (HMGA1) are nonhistone chromatinic proteins
with a critical role in development and cancer. We have recently reported that
HMGA1 proteins are able to increase the expression of spindle assembly checkpoint
(SAC) genes, thus impairing SAC function and causing chromosomal instability in
cancer cells. Moreover, we found a significant correlation between HMGA1 and SAC 
genes expression in human colon carcinomas. Here, we report that mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts null for the Hmga1 gene show downregulation of Bub1, Bub1b, Mad2l1
and Ttk SAC genes, and present several features of chromosomal instability, such 
as nuclear abnormalities, binucleation, micronuclei and karyotypic alterations.
Interestingky, also MEFs carrying only one impaired Hmga1 allele present
karyotypic alterations. These results indicate that HMGA1 proteins regulate SAC
genes expression and, thereby, genomic stability also in embryonic cells.

PMID: 26889953  [PubMed - in process]


13. BMC Syst Biol. 2016 Feb 4;10(1):14. doi: 10.1186/s12918-016-0258-3.

Enhanceosome transcription factors preferentially dimerize with high mobility
group proteins.

Jankowski A(1,)(2), Obara P(3), Mathur U(4), Tiuryn J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics, University of Warsaw,
Banacha 2, Warsaw, 02-097, Poland. ajank@mimuw.edu.pl. (2)Current address: Genome
Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstraße 1,
Heidelberg, 69117, Germany. ajank@mimuw.edu.pl. (3)Faculty of Mathematics and
Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, Lojasiewicza 6, Kraków, 30-348,
Poland. kraw.paulina@gmail.com. (4)Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and
Mechanics, University of Warsaw, Banacha 2, Warsaw, 02-097, Poland.
utsav26@gmail.com. (5)Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics,
University of Warsaw, Banacha 2, Warsaw, 02-097, Poland. tiuryn@mimuw.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: The enhanceosome is an enhancer located upstream of the human
interferon ß gene, bound by transcription factor (TF) complex of extremely rigid 
structure. Within these rigid constraints, even a slight change of distances
between transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) results in loss of
functionality of the enhanceosome. We hypothesized that smaller subunits of the
enhanceosome may entail TF complex formation in other regulatory regions.
RESULTS: In order to verify this hypothesis we systematically searched for
dimerization preferences of the TFs that have TFBS in the enhanceosome. For this 
we utilized our recently developed tool, TACO. We performed this computational
experiment in a cell-type-specific manner by utilizing cell-type-specific
DNase-seq data for 105 human cell types. We also used 20 TRANSFAC motifs
comprising not only the usual TFs constituting the enhanceosome but also the
architectural proteins of High Mobility Group I(Y) (HMG I). A similar experiment 
used 42 DNase-seq data sets for mouse cell types. We found 137 statistically
significant dimer predictions in the human genome, and 37 predictions in the
mouse genome, that matched the positioning on the enhanceosome with ±2 bp
tolerance. To characterize these predicted TF dimers, we performed functional
analysis (Gene Ontology enrichment) for sets of genes which were in the
neighbourhood of predicted dimer instances. A notable feature of these instances 
is that (1) most of them are located in introns of genes, (2) they are enriched
in regulatory states, and (3) those instances that are located near transcription
start sites are enriched for inclusion in computationally predicted enhancers. We
also investigated similarity of dimer predictions between human and mouse.
CONCLUSIONS: It follows from our experiments that, except for homodimer formed by
IRF proteins, the rest of the dimers were formed exclusively between one of the
transcriptional activators (ATF-2/c-Jun and IRF) and a HMG I protein. NF- <U+03BA>B did 
not participate in forming dimers with other proteins. Dimers predicted in mouse 
were fully contained in those predicted in human, with exactly the same spacing
and orientation. Intriguingly, in most of the cases the enhanceosome motifs have 
1 bp wider spacing than the corresponding dimers predicted genome-wide, which is 
likely caused by the overall 3D structure constraints of the enhanceosome-bound
complex.

PMCID: PMC4743414
PMID: 26847699  [PubMed - in process]


14. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):782-788. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

Association of SIRT1 and HMGA1 expression in non-small cell lung cancer.

Lin SY(1), Peng F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310013, P.R.
China.

The roles of Silent mating type information regulation 2 homolog 1 (SIRT1) and
High mobility group A1 (HMGA1) in human diseases have been extensively studied
separately; however, to the best of our knowledge, the current study is the first
to report on their interrelationship in lung cancer. The association of SIRT1 and
HMGA1 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was investigated by evaluating their 
expression and prognostic significance in 260 patients with NSCLC using
immunohistochemistry. SIRT1 and HMGA1 expression were found to be significantly
correlated with each other (P<0.001), and both were significantly associated with
clinicopathological parameters, including histological type and degree of
differentiation. In squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), SIRT1(+) specimens were
significantly associated with shorter overall survival (OS) time (P=0.019).
However, in patients with adenocarcinoma (AD), no association was identified
between SIRT1 and OS. In addition, HMGA1(+) specimens were significantly
associated with poor differentiation (P=0.028), and were more frequent in SCC
than AD (P=0.015). However, HMGA1 was not associated with OS on univariate Cox
regression analysis or Kaplan-Meier analysis (both P>0.05). SIRT1/HMGA1
coexpression was significantly associated with male gender (P=0.016), and
moderately and poorly differentiated histological grade (P=0.025). The findings
indicate that SIRT1 and HMGA1 may have significant effects during tumor
progression in NSCLC, particularly in patients with SCC, and are potentially
useful as prognostic indicators for patients with NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4726940
PMID: 26834854  [PubMed]


15. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 1;411(1):25-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.014. Epub 2016
Jan 22.

Hmga2 is required for neural crest cell specification in Xenopus laevis.

Macrì S(1), Simula L(1), Pellarin I(2), Pegoraro S(2), Onorati M(1), Sgarra R(2),
Manfioletti G(2), Vignali R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Unità di Biologia Cellulare e dello Sviluppo,
Università degli Studi di Pisa, SS12 Abetone e Brennero 4, 56127 Pisa, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita, Università degli Studi di Trieste, via
Giorgieri 5, 34127 Trieste, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Biologia, Unità di Biologia
Cellulare e dello Sviluppo, Università degli Studi di Pisa, SS12 Abetone e
Brennero 4, 56127 Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: robert.vignali@unipi.it.

HMGA proteins are small nuclear proteins that bind DNA by conserved AT-hook
motifs, modify chromatin architecture and assist in gene expression. Two HMGAs
(HMGA1 and HMGA2), encoded by distinct genes, exist in mammals and are highly
expressed during embryogenesis or reactivated in tumour progression. We here
addressed the in vivo role of Xenopus hmga2 in the neural crest cells (NCCs). We 
show that hmga2 is required for normal NCC specification and development. hmga2
knockdown leads to severe disruption of major skeletal derivatives of anterior
NCCs. We show that, within the NCC genetic network, hmga2 acts downstream of
msx1, and is required for msx1, pax3 and snail2 activities, thus participating at
different levels of the network. Because of hmga2 early effects in NCC
specification, the subsequent epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
migration of NCCs towards the branchial pouches are also compromised. Strictly
paralleling results on embryos, interfering with Hmga2 in a breast cancer cell
model for EMT leads to molecular effects largely consistent with those observed
on NCCs. These data indicate that Hmga2 is recruited in key molecular events that
are shared by both NCCs and tumour cells.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26806704  [PubMed - in process]


16. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 19;470(4):838-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.122. Epub 2016 Jan 22.

miR-625 suppresses cell proliferation and migration by targeting HMGA1 in breast 
cancer.

Zhou WB(1), Zhong CN(1), Luo XP(1), Zhang YY(1), Zhang GY(1), Zhou DX(2), Liu
LP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan
University, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China.
(2)Department of Breast Surgery, Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan
University, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China.
Electronic address: 1072241978@qq.com. (3)Department of Hepatobiliary and
Pancreas Surgery, Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Shenzhen
People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China. Electronic address:
leoliping@aliyun.com.

Dysregulation of microRNA contributes to the high incidence and mortality of
breast cancer. Here, we show that miR-625 was frequently down-regulated in breast
cancer. Decrease of miR-625 was closely associated with estrogen receptor
(P = 0.004), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (P = 0.003) and clinical
stage (P = 0.001). Kaplan-Meier and multivariate analyses indicated miR-625 as an
independent factor for unfavorable prognosis (hazard ratio = 2.654, 95% confident
interval: 1.300-5.382, P = 0.007). Re-expression of miR-625 impeded, whereas
knockdown of miR-625 enhanced cell viabilities and migration abilities in breast 
cancer cells. HMGA1 was confirmed as a direct target of miR-625. The expressions 
of HMGA1 mRNA and protein were induced by miR-625 mimics, but reduced by miR-625 
inhibitor. Re-introduction of HMGA1 in cells expressing miR-625 distinctly
abrogated miR-625-mediated inhibition of cell growth. Taken together, our data
demonstrate that miR-625 suppresses cell proliferation and migration by targeting
HMGA1 and suggest miR-625 as a promising prognostic biomarker and a potential
therapeutic target for breast cancer.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26806308  [PubMed - in process]


17. Curr Eye Res. 2015 Dec 30:1-5. [Epub ahead of print]

Association of ICAM-1 and HMGA1 Gene Variants with Retinopathy in Type 2 Diabetes
Mellitus Among Chinese Individuals.

Lv Z(1), Li Y(1), Wu Y(2), Qu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Ophthalmology , Qilu Hospital of Shandong University , Jinan ,
China. (2)b State Key Lab of Crystal Materials, Shandong University , Jinan ,
China.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the association of intercellular cell-adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1) and high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) gene variants with diabetic
retinopathy (DR) in a Chinese type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) cohort.
METHODS: A total of 792 patients with T2DM were enrolled and categorized into two
groups: (1) the DR group consisted of 448 patients, which was further
subclassified into the proliferative DR (PDR) group with 220 patients and the
nonproliferative DR (NPDR) group with 228 patients; (2) the diabetes without
retinopathy (DNR) group comprised 344 patients who had no signs of DR. The
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs5498 in ICAM-1 gene and IVS5-13insC
variant in HMGA1 gene were genotyped.
RESULTS: No evident association was found in the allele frequencies between SNP
rs5498 in ICAM-1 gene and DR patients; the combined p values for the additive,
dominant, and recessive models in genotype were greater than 0.05. No significant
association was identified between the IVS5-13insC variant in HMGA1 gene and DR
individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed that SNP rs5498 in ICAM-1 gene and IVS5-13insC 
variant in HMGA1 gene were not associated with the susceptibility of DR in the
Chinese T2DM cohort.

PMID: 26717491  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Int J Oncol. 2016 Mar;48(3):1242-50. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3310. Epub 2015 Dec
28.

Fusion of the TBL1XR1 and HMGA1 genes in splenic hemangioma with t(3;6)(q26;p21).

Panagopoulos I(1), Gorunova L(1), Bjerkehagen B(2), Lobmaier I(2), Heim S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway. (2)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

RNA-sequencing of a splenic hemangioma with the karyotype
45~47,XX,t(3;6)(q26;p21) showed that this translocation generated a chimeric
TBL1XR1-HMGA1 gene. This is the first time that this tumor has been subjected to 
genetic analysis, but the finding of an acquired clonal chromosome abnormality in
cells cultured from the lesion and the presence of the TBL1XR1-HMGA1 fusion in
them strongly favor the conclusion that splenic hemangiomas are of a neoplastic
nature. Genomic PCR confirmed the presence of the TBL1XR1-HMGA1 fusion gene, and 
RT-PCR together with Sanger sequencing verified the presence of the fusion
transcripts. The molecular consequences of the t(3;6) would be substantial. The
cells carrying the translocation would retain only one functional copy of the
wild-type TBL1XR1 gene while the other, rearranged allele could produce a
putative truncated form of TBL1XR1 protein containing the LiSH and F-box-like
domains. In the TBL1XR1-HMGA1 fusion transcript, furthermore, untranslated exons 
of HMGA1 are replaced by the first 5 exons of the TBL1XR1 gene. The result is
that the entire coding region of HMGA1 comes under the control of the TBL1XR1
promoter, bringing about dysregulation of HMGA1. This is reminiscent of similar
pathogenetic mechanisms involving high mobility genes in benign connective tissue
tumors such as lipomas and leiomyomas.

PMCID: PMC4750536
PMID: 26708416  [PubMed - in process]


19. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Mar;15(3):1032-47. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.055723. Epub
2015 Dec 23.

Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)-Activated ATM-Dependent Phosphorylation of
Cytoplasmic Substrates Identified by Large-Scale Phosphoproteomics Screen.

Kozlov SV(1), Waardenberg AJ(2), Engholm-Keller K(3), Arthur JW(2), Graham ME(4),
Lavin M(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, University of
Queensland, Royal Brisbane & Women's Hospital Campus, Herston, Brisbane, QLD 4029
Australia; (2)§Bioinformatics Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute,
University of Sydney, 214 Hawkesbury Road, Westmead, NSW, 2145, Australia;
(3)¶Synapse Proteomics Group, Children's Medical Research Institute, University
of Sydney, 214 Hawkesbury Road, Westmead, NSW, 2145, Australia; <U+2016>Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5230
Odense M, Denmark. (4)¶Synapse Proteomics Group, Children's Medical Research
Institute, University of Sydney, 214 Hawkesbury Road, Westmead, NSW, 2145,
Australia; (5)From the University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research,
University of Queensland, Royal Brisbane & Women's Hospital Campus, Herston,
Brisbane, QLD 4029 Australia; m.lavin@uq.edu.au.

Ataxia-telangiectasia, mutated (ATM) protein plays a central role in
phosphorylating a network of proteins in response to DNA damage. These proteins
function in signaling pathways designed to maintain the stability of the genome
and minimize the risk of disease by controlling cell cycle checkpoints,
initiating DNA repair, and regulating gene expression. ATM kinase can be
activated by a variety of stimuli, including oxidative stress. Here, we confirmed
activation of cytoplasmic ATM by autophosphorylation at multiple sites. Then we
employed a global quantitative phosphoproteomics approach to identify cytoplasmic
proteins altered in their phosphorylation state in control and
ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) cells in response to oxidative damage. We
demonstrated that ATM was activated by oxidative damage in the cytoplasm as well 
as in the nucleus and identified a total of 9,833 phosphorylation sites,
including 6,686 high-confidence sites mapping to 2,536 unique proteins. A total
of 62 differentially phosphorylated peptides were identified; of these, 43 were
phosphorylated in control but not in A-T cells, and 19 varied in their level of
phosphorylation. Motif enrichment analysis of phosphopeptides revealed that
consensus ATM serine glutamine sites were overrepresented. When considering
phosphorylation events, only observed in control cells (not observed in A-T
cells), with predicted ATM sites phosphoSerine/phosphoThreonine glutamine, we
narrowed this list to 11 candidate ATM-dependent cytoplasmic proteins. Two of
these 11 were previously described as ATM substrates (HMGA1 and UIMCI/RAP80),
another five were identified in a whole cell extract phosphoproteomic screens,
and the remaining four proteins had not been identified previously in DNA damage 
response screens. We validated the phosphorylation of three of these proteins
(oxidative stress responsive 1 (OSR1), HDGF, and ccdc82) as ATM dependent after
H2O2 exposure, and another protein (S100A11) demonstrated ATM-dependence for
translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. These data provide new insights 
into the activation of ATM by oxidative stress through identification of novel
substrates for ATM in the cytoplasm.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26699800  [PubMed - in process]


20. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Dec 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of High-mobility Group Protein A Isoforms and Their Clinicopathologic
Significance in Primary Retinoblastoma.

Singh MK(1), Singh L, Sen S, Pushker N, Sharma A, Ahamad FC, Chawla B, Kashyap S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Ocular Pathology Ophthalmology Ocular Microbiology, Dr. R.
P. Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: High-mobility group proteins A (HMGA) are more abundant in rapidly
dividing and transformed cells. These are a group of proteins regulating
tumorigenesis and tumor invasion. Increased expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 has
been reported in various benign and malignant tumors. The aim of the present
study was to analyze expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 proteins in retinoblastoma.
METHODS: Protein expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 in 80 formalin-fixed
retinoblastoma tissues was performed by immunohistochemistry, and their mRNA
expressions were analyzed on 40 fresh primary enucleated retinoblastoma samples
by semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Results were
then correlated with clinicopathologic parameters.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis of HMGA1 and HMGA2 was seen in 56.25% and
58.75% of retinoblastoma cases, respectively. mRNA expressions of HMGA1 and HMGA2
was found to be 57.55% and 62.5%, respectively. The mRNA results correlated well 
with immunostaining results. Expression of both HMGA1 and HMGA2 was significantly
associated with choroidal invasion and poor tumor differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: HMGA1 and HMGA2 proteins may contribute to tumorigenesis of Rb.
Expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 predicts poor prognosis and could serve as a
therapeutic target in the management of RB. Further experiments are needed to
determine the role of these proteins as therapeutic targets in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 26657872  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016 Apr;24(4):655-63. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2015.10.019.
Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Targeted re-sequencing of linkage region on 2q21 identifies a novel functional
variant for hip and knee osteoarthritis.

Taipale M(1), Jakkula E(2), Kämäräinen OP(3), Gao P(3), Skarp S(1), Barral S(4), 
Kiviranta I(5), Kröger H(6), Ott J(7), Wei GH(3), Ala-Kokko L(8), Männikkö M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Oulu, Finland; Center for Life Course Epidemiology and Systems Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (2)Biocenter Oulu and
Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Finland;
Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
Finland. (3)Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
University of Oulu, Finland. (4)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College for
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, USA. (5)Department of
Orthopaedics and Traumatology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology,
Jyväskylä Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, Finland. (6)Department of Orthopaedics and
Traumatology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland; Bone and Cartilage
Research Unit, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. (7)Institute of
Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (8)Connective Tissue
Gene Tests, Allentown, PA, USA. (9)Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and
Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Finland; Center for Life Course
Epidemiology and Systems Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland. Electronic address: minna.mannikko@oulu.fi.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to identify genetic variants predisposing to 
primary hip and knee osteoarthritis (OA) in a sample of Finnish families.
METHODS: Genome wide analysis was performed using 15 independent families (279
individuals) originating from Central Finland identified as having multiple
individuals with primary hip and/or knee OA. Targeted re-sequencing was performed
for three samples from one 33-member, four-generation family contributing most
significantly to the LOD score. In addition, exome sequencing was performed in
three family members from the same family.
RESULTS: Genome wide linkage analysis identified a susceptibility locus on
chromosome 2q21 with a multipoint LOD score of 3.91. Targeted re-sequencing and
subsequent linkage analysis revealed a susceptibility insertion variant
rs11446594. It locates in a predicted strong enhancer element region with maximum
LOD score 3.42 under dominant model of inheritance. Insertion creates a
recognition sequence for ELF3 and HMGA1 transcription factors. Their DNA-binding 
affinity is highly increased in the presence of A-allele compared to wild type
null allele.
CONCLUSION: A potentially novel functional OA susceptibility variant was
identified by targeted re-sequencing. This variant locates in a predicted
regulatory site and creates a recognition sequence for ELF3 and HMGA1
transcription factors that are predicted to play a significant role in articular 
cartilage homeostasis.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26603474  [PubMed - in process]


22. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 1;76(3):664-74. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0828. Epub
2015 Nov 20.

Elucidation and Pharmacological Targeting of Novel Molecular Drivers of
Follicular Lymphoma Progression.

Bisikirska B(1), Bansal M(1), Shen Y(1), Teruya-Feldstein J(2), Chaganti R(3),
Califano A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York. (3)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York. (4)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, 
New York. ac2248@cumc.columbia.edu.

Follicular lymphoma, the most common indolent subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, is
associated with a relatively long overall survival rate ranging from 6 to 10
years from the time of diagnosis. However, in 20% to 60% of follicular lymphoma
patients, transformation to aggressive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
reduces median survival to only 1.2 years. The specific functional and genetic
determinants of follicular lymphoma transformation remain elusive, and genomic
alterations underlying disease advancement have only been identified for a subset
of cases. Therefore, to identify candidate drivers of follicular lymphoma
transformation, we performed systematic analysis of a B-cell-specific regulatory 
model exhibiting follicular lymphoma transformation signatures using the Master
Regulator Inference algorithm (MARINa). This analysis revealed FOXM1, TFDP1,
ATF5, HMGA1, and NFYB to be candidate master regulators (MR) contributing to
disease progression. Accordingly, validation was achieved through synthetic
lethality assays in which RNAi-mediated silencing of MRs individually or in
combination reduced the viability of (14;18)-positive DLBCL (t-DLBCL) cells.
Furthermore, specific combinations of small-molecule compounds targeting
synergistic MR pairs induced loss of viability in t-DLBCL cells. Collectively,
our findings indicate that MR analysis is a valuable method for identifying bona 
fide contributors to follicular lymphoma transformation and may therefore guide
the selection of compounds to be used in combinatorial treatment strategies.
Cancer Res; 76(3); 664-74. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4738055 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26589882  [PubMed - in process]


23. Int J Surg. 2015 Dec;24(Pt A):39-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2015.10.031. Epub 2015
Oct 30.

HMGA1/HMGA2 protein expression and prognostic implications in gastric cancer.

Jun KH(1), Jung JH(2), Choi HJ(3), Shin EY(4), Chin HM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, St. Vincent's Hospital, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Hospital
Pathology, St. Vincent's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: patholjjh7633@catholic.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Hospital Pathology, St. Vincent's Hospital, College of Medicine,
The Catholic University of Korea, Republic of Korea. (4)Clinical Medical
Laboratory, St. Vincent's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University 
of Korea, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) and high mobility group A2 (HMGA2)
proteins are architectural transcription factors that have been implicated in the
pathogenesis and progression of multiple malignant tumors, including gastric
cancer. The aim of this study was to explore the roles of HMGA1 and HMGA2 in
gastric carcinogenesis.
METHODS: The expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 was examined in 110 gastric
adenocarcinomas, 29 gastric adenomas, and 30 normal controls. The results were
correlated with the clinicopathological parameters of the tumors and patient
outcome.
RESULTS: The levels of HMGA1 and HMGA2 proteins were significantly increased in
gastric cancer samples compared with adenoma and normal gastric tissues. High
HMGA1 nuclear immunoreactivity was not correlated with clinicopathological
features; however, high levels of HMGA2 protein were significantly associated
with T stage, N stage, lymphatic invasion, perineural invasion, and TNM stage.
Moreover, HMGA2 expression was significantly associated with shorter recurrence
free survival. Multivariate analysis showed that HMGA2 expression was an
independent prognostic factor for tumor recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that HMGA1 and HMGA2 are implicated in gastric
carcinogenesis and may play a role in tumor progression towards a more malignant 
phenotype. The HMGA2 protein may be a useful prognostic marker for predicting
tumor recurrence.

Copyright © 2015 IJS Publishing Group Limited. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26537313  [PubMed - in process]


24. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Jan;15(1):109-23. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.050401. Epub
2015 Nov 2.

Translating Proteomic Into Functional Data: An High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1)
Proteomic Signature Has Prognostic Value in Breast Cancer.

Maurizio E(1), Wisniewski JR(2), Ciani Y(3), Amato A(4), Arnoldo L(1), Penzo
C(1), Pegoraro S(1), Giancotti V(1), Zambelli A(5), Piazza S(3), Manfioletti
G(6), Sgarra R(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, 34127 Trieste,
Italy; (2)§Biochemical Proteomics Group, Department of Proteomics and Signal
Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152
Martinsried, Germany; (3)¶Laboratorio Nazionale CIB, (LNCIB), Area Science Park, 
34149 Trieste, Italy; (4)¶¶Laboratory of Experimental Oncology and
Pharmacogenomics IRCCS - Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, 27100 Pavia, Italy;
(5)<U+2016>Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Papa Giovanni XXIII, 24127 Bergamo, 
Italy. (6)From the Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, 34127
Trieste, Italy; rsgarra@units.it manfiole@units.it.

Cancer is a very heterogeneous disease, and biological variability adds a further
level of complexity, thus limiting the ability to identify new genes involved in 
cancer development. Oncogenes whose expression levels control cell aggressiveness
are very useful for developing cellular models that permit differential
expression screenings in isogenic contexts. HMGA1 protein has this unique
property because it is a master regulator in breast cancer cells that control the
transition from a nontumorigenic epithelial-like phenotype toward a highly
aggressive mesenchymal-like one. The proteins extracted from HMGA1-silenced and
control MDA-MB-231 cells were analyzed using label-free shotgun mass
spectrometry. The differentially expressed proteins were cross-referenced with
DNA microarray data obtained using the same cellular model and the overlapping
genes were filtered for factors linked to poor prognosis in breast cancer gene
expression meta-data sets, resulting in an HMGA1 protein signature composed of 21
members (HRS, HMGA1 reduced signature). This signature had a prognostic value
(overall survival, relapse-free survival, and distant metastasis-free survival)
in breast cancer. qRT-PCR, Western blot, and immunohistochemistry analyses
validated the link of three members of this signature (KIFC1, LRRC59, and TRIP13)
with HMGA1 expression levels both in vitro and in vivo and wound healing assays
demonstrated that these three proteins are involved in modulating tumor cell
motility. Combining proteomic and genomic data with the aid of bioinformatic
tools, our results highlight the potential involvement in neoplastic
transformation of a restricted list of factors with an as-yet-unexplored role in 
cancer. These factors are druggable targets that could be exploited for the
development of new, targeted therapeutic approaches in triple-negative breast
cancer.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4762532
PMID: 26527623  [PubMed - in process]


25. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Nov 15;339(1):10-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.09.017. Epub
2015 Sep 30.

PKCe as a novel promoter of skeletal muscle differentiation and regeneration.

Di Marcantonio D(1), Galli D(2), Carubbi C(3), Gobbi G(2), Queirolo V(3), Martini
S(3), Merighi S(4), Vaccarezza M(5), Maffulli N(6), Sykes SM(7), Vitale M(8),
Mirandola P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical, Biotechnological and Translational Sciences
(S.Bi.Bi.T.), University of Parma, Via Gramsci, 14, 43100 Parma, Italy; Immune
Cell Development and Host Defense, Research Institute of Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Biomedical, Biotechnological and
Translational Sciences (S.Bi.Bi.T.), University of Parma, Via Gramsci, 14, 43100 
Parma, Italy; Centre for Molecular and Translational Oncology (COMT), University 
of Parma, Italy; Sport and Exercise Medicine Center (SEM), University of Parma,
Italy. (3)Department of Biomedical, Biotechnological and Translational Sciences
(S.Bi.Bi.T.), University of Parma, Via Gramsci, 14, 43100 Parma, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Science, University of Ferrara, Italy. (5)Department of 
Human Sciences, Society and Health (HSSH), University of Cassino, FR, Italy;
School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072,
Australia. (6)Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, UK; Department of Musculoskeletal Disorders, University of 
Salerno School of Medicine and Surgery, Salerno, Italy. (7)Immune Cell
Development and Host Defense, Research Institute of Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (8)Department of Biomedical, Biotechnological and
Translational Sciences (S.Bi.Bi.T.), University of Parma, Via Gramsci, 14, 43100 
Parma, Italy; Centre for Molecular and Translational Oncology (COMT), University 
of Parma, Italy; Sport and Exercise Medicine Center (SEM), University of Parma,
Italy. Electronic address: marco.vitale@unipr.it.

INTRODUCTION: Satellite cells are muscle resident stem cells and are responsible 
for muscle regeneration. In this study we investigate the involvement of PKCe
during muscle stem cell differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Here, we describe
the identification of a previously unrecognized role for the PKCe-HMGA1 signaling
axis in myoblast differentiation and regeneration processes.
METHODS: PKCe expression was modulated in the C2C12 cell line and primary murine 
satellite cells in vitro, as well as in an in vivo model of muscle regeneration. 
Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence, RT-PCR and shRNA silencing
techniques were used to determine the role of PKCe and HMGA1 in myogenic
differentiation.
RESULTS: PKCe expression increases and subsequently re-localizes to the nucleus
during skeletal muscle cell differentiation. In the nucleus, PKCe blocks Hmga1
expression to promote Myogenin and Mrf4 accumulation and myoblast formation.
Following in vivo muscle injury, PKCe accumulates in regenerating,
centrally-nucleated myofibers. Pharmacological inhibition of PKCe impairs the
expression of two crucial markers of muscle differentiation, namely MyoD and
Myogenin, during injury induced muscle regeneration.
CONCLUSION: This work identifies the PKCe-HMGA1 signaling axis as a positive
regulator of skeletal muscle differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26431586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 28;5:14487. doi: 10.1038/srep14487.

HMGA1 overexpression in adipose tissue impairs adipogenesis and prevents
diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance.

Arce-Cerezo A(1,)(2), García M(1,)(2,)(3), Rodríguez-Nuevo A(1,)(2), Crosa-Bonell
M(1,)(2), Enguix N(4), Peró A(1,)(2), Muñoz S(1,)(2,)(3), Roca C(1,)(2,)(3),
Ramos D(1,)(3,)(5), Franckhauser S(1,)(2,)(3), Elias I(1,)(2,)(3), Ferre
T(1,)(2,)(3), Pujol A(1,)(2,)(3), Ruberte J(1,)(3,)(5), Villena JA(3,)(4), Bosch 
F(1,)(2,)(3), Riu E(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Animal Biotechnology and Gene Therapy, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain. (3)Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas
(CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain. (4)Laboratory of Metabolism and Obesity, Vall
d'Hebron-Institut de Recerca, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain. (5)Department of Anatomy and Animal Health, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.

High-Mobility-Group-A1 (HMGA1) proteins are non-histone proteins that regulate
chromatin structure and gene expression during embryogenesis, tumourigenesis and 
immune responses. In vitro studies suggest that HMGA1 proteins may be required to
regulate adipogenesis. To examine the role of HMGA1 in vivo, we generated
transgenic mice overexpressing HMGA1 in adipose tissues. HMGA1 transgenic mice
showed a marked reduction in white and brown adipose tissue mass that was
associated with downregulation of genes involved in adipogenesis and concomitant 
upregulation of preadipocyte markers. Reduced adipogenesis and decreased fat mass
were not associated with altered glucose homeostasis since HMGA1 transgenic mice 
fed a regular-chow diet exhibited normal glucose tolerance and insulin
sensitivity. However, when fed a high-fat diet, overexpression of HMGA1 resulted 
in decreased body-weight gain, reduced fat mass, but improved insulin sensitivity
and glucose tolerance. Although HMGA1 transgenic mice exhibited impaired glucose 
uptake in adipose tissue due to impaired adipogenesis, the increased glucose
uptake observed in skeletal muscle may account for the improved glucose
homeostasis. Our results indicate that HMGA1 plays an important function in the
regulation of white and brown adipogenesis in vivo and suggests that impaired
adipocyte differentiation and decreased fat mass is not always associated with
impaired whole-body glucose homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4585969
PMID: 26411793  [PubMed - in process]


27. Cancer Genet. 2015 Nov;208(11):537-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.07.005. Epub
2015 Jul 31.

A translocation t(6;14) in two cases of leiomyosarcoma: Molecular cytogenetic and
array-based comparative genomic hybridization characterization.

de Graaff MA(1), de Jong D(2), Briaire-de Bruijn IH(1), Hogendoorn PC(1), Bovée
JV(1), Szuhai K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The 
Netherlands. (2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, LUMC, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, LUMC, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: k.szuhai@lumc.nl.

Leiomyosarcomas are malignant mesenchymal tumors that recapitulate smooth muscle 
cell differentiation. Tumors are characterized by a genetic heterogeneity with
complex karyotypes without a tumor-specific genetic aberration. Their
pathobiology is still poorly understood and no specific targeted treatment is
currently available for these aggressive tumors. For six leiomyosarcomas, cells
were cultured and analyzed by combined binary ratio labeling fluorescence in situ
hybridization (COBRA-FISH) karyotyping. A t(6;14) was identified in two cases.
FISH breakpoint mapping of case L1339 reveals a breakpoint at chromosome 6p21.31 
close to HMGA1, and a small deletion was observed on the distal side of the gene.
A small homozygous deletion was also found in the breakpoint region of chromosome
14q24.1 involving ACTN1. The second case revealed a der(6)t(6;14)(p21.1;q21.3),
with a duplication adjacent to the breakpoint at chromosome 6. Confirmatory FISH 
revealed a second leiomyosarcoma with an aberration at 14q24.1. Alterations at
this locus were found in 5% (2 of 39) of the leiomyosarcomas in this study. The
other identified breakpoints appeared to be non-recurrent, because they were not 
detected in other leiomyosarcomas, uterine leiomyomas, undifferentiated spindle
cell sarcomas, or undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomas.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26361850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Antiviral Res. 2015 Nov;123:78-85. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.09.002. Epub
2015 Sep 4.

Mixed effects of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) on the host transcriptome
and proteome and their implications for HIV reactivation from latency.

White CH(1), Johnston HE(2), Moesker B(3), Manousopoulou A(4), Margolis DM(5),
Richman DD(6), Spina CA(7), Garbis SD(8), Woelk CH(9), Beliakova-Bethell N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; San Diego VA Medical Center and
Veterans Medical Research Foundation, San Diego, CA 92161, USA. (2)Cancer
Sciences Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, Hants SO16 
6YD, UK; Centre for Proteomic Research, Institute for Life Sciences, University
of Southampton, Highfield Campus, Southampton, UK. (3)Clinical and Experimental
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, Hants SO16
6YD, UK. (4)Centre for Proteomic Research, Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Southampton, Highfield Campus, Southampton, UK; Clinical and
Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton, Hants SO16 6YD, UK. (5)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology and
Immunology, Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)San Diego VA Medical Center and Veterans Medical Research Foundation, San
Diego, CA 92161, USA; Department of Pathology, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department of Medicine, University of California 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (7)San Diego VA Medical Center and Veterans
Medical Research Foundation, San Diego, CA 92161, USA; Department of Pathology,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (8)Cancer Sciences
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, Hants SO16 6YD, UK; 
Centre for Proteomic Research, Institute for Life Sciences, University of
Southampton, Highfield Campus, Southampton, UK; Clinical and Experimental
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, Hants SO16
6YD, UK. Electronic address: s.d.garbis@soton.ac.uk. (9)Clinical and Experimental
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, Hants SO16
6YD, UK. Electronic address: c.h.woelk@soton.ac.uk. (10)Department of Medicine,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: 
nbeliako@ucsd.edu.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) has been assessed in clinical trials as
part of a "shock and kill" strategy to cure HIV-infected patients. While it was
effective at inducing expression of HIV RNA ("shock"), treatment with SAHA did
not result in a reduction of reservoir size ("kill"). We therefore utilized a
combined analysis of effects of SAHA on the host transcriptome and proteome to
dissect its mechanisms of action that may explain its limited success in "shock
and kill" strategies. CD4+ T cells from HIV seronegative donors were treated with
1µM SAHA or its solvent dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for 24h. Protein expression and
post-translational modifications were measured with iTRAQ proteomics using ultra 
high-precision two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
Gene expression was assessed by Illumina microarrays. Using limma package in the 
R computing environment, we identified 185 proteins, 18 phosphorylated forms, 4
acetylated forms and 2982 genes, whose expression was modulated by SAHA. A
protein interaction network integrating these 4 data types identified the HIV
transcriptional repressor HMGA1 to be upregulated by SAHA at the transcript,
protein and acetylated protein levels. Further functional category assessment of 
proteins and genes modulated by SAHA identified gene ontology terms related to
NF<U+03BA>B signaling, protein folding and autophagy, which are all relevant to HIV
reactivation. In summary, SAHA modulated numerous host cell transcripts, proteins
and post-translational modifications of proteins, which would be expected to have
very mixed effects on the induction of HIV-specific transcription and protein
function. Proteome profiling highlighted a number of potential counter-regulatory
effects of SAHA with respect to viral induction, which transcriptome profiling
alone would not have identified. These observations could lead to a more informed
selection and design of other HDACi with a more refined targeting profile, and
prioritization of latency reversing agents of other classes to be used in
combination with SAHA to achieve more potent induction of HIV expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26343910  [PubMed - in process]


29. Cancer Genet. 2015 Oct;208(10):469-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.06.005. Epub
2015 Jun 26.

Molecular cytogenetics of pediatric adipocytic tumors.

Dadone B(1), Refae S(1), Lemarié-Delaunay C(2), Bianchini L(3), Pedeutour F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Solid Tumors Genetics, Nice University Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine, Nice, France; Institute for Research on Cancer and Aging of Nice
(IRCAN), CNRS UMR 7284/INSERM U1081, University of Nice - Sophia Antipolis,
Faculty of Medicine, Nice, France. (2)Department of Pathology, Brabois Hospital, 
Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France. (3)Institute for Research on Cancer and Aging of
Nice (IRCAN), CNRS UMR 7284/INSERM U1081, University of Nice - Sophia Antipolis, 
Faculty of Medicine, Nice, France. (4)Laboratory of Solid Tumors Genetics, Nice
University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Nice, France; Institute for Research on
Cancer and Aging of Nice (IRCAN), CNRS UMR 7284/INSERM U1081, University of Nice 
- Sophia Antipolis, Faculty of Medicine, Nice, France. Electronic address:
florence.pedeutour@unice.fr.

Both epidemiologic and cytogenetic data on pediatric adipose tissue tumors are
scarce. Pediatric adipose tumors are mainly represented by lipomas, though only
28 cytogenetic descriptions of pediatric lipoma have been reported to date.
Similar to adult cases, most of these pediatric lipomas harbored rearrangements
of the chromosomal regions 12q14-q15 and 6p21, involving the HMGA2 and HMGA1
genes. Further cytogenetic studies of pediatric lipoma would be useful to
determinate whether some partner genes of HMGA2, such as NFIB, may have a
specific role in the early onset of these tumors. Cytogenetically, the best
documented pediatric adipose tumor is lipoblastoma, which is the second most
frequent adipose tumor in children. Chromosomal alterations in lipoblastoma,
observed in 61% of cases studied by conventional cytogenetics, typically involve 
the 8q11-q12 region. The target gene of this rearrangement is PLAG1. Anomalies of
PLAG1 have been observed in 70% of cases of pediatric adipose tumors studied by
molecular cytogenetics methods, such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
or comparative genomic hybridization on array (array-CGH). The rare described
cases of malignant pediatric adipose tumors in children are mostly myxoid
liposarcomas. In the 27 cases explored at the genetic level, all pediatric myxoid
liposarcomas showed the classical rearrangement of the DDIT3 gene at 12q13. In
conclusion, the epidemiology and the prevalence of histological types of adipose 
tissue tumors differ in the pediatric population compared with adults, whereas
chromosomal and genic rearrangements are similar to those of adult cases in each 
histological type.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26319758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 21;10(8):e0136077. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136077.
eCollection 2015.

The Association between HMGA1 rs146052672 Variant and Type 2 Diabetes: A
Transethnic Meta-Analysis.

Bianco A(1), Chiefari E(1), Nobile CG(1), Foti D(1), Pavia M(1), Brunetti A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University "Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro,
Catanzaro, Italy.

The high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) gene has been previously identified as a
potential novel candidate gene for susceptibility to insulin resistance and type 
2 diabetes (T2D) mellitus. For this reason, several studies have been conducted
in recent years examining the association of the HMGA1 gene variant rs146052672
(also designated IVS5-13insC) with T2D. Because of non-univocal data and
non-overlapping results among laboratories, we conducted the current
meta-analysis with the aim to yield a more precise and reliable conclusion for
this association. Using predetermined inclusion criteria, MEDLINE, PubMed, Web of
Science, Scopus, Google Scholar and Embase were searched for all relevant
available literature published until November 2014. Two of the authors
independently evaluated the quality of the included studies and extracted the
data. Values from the single studies were combined to determine the meta-analysis
pooled estimates. Heterogeneity and publication bias were also examined. Among
the articles reviewed, five studies (for a total of 13,789 cases and 13,460
controls) met the predetermined criteria for inclusion in this meta-analysis. The
combined adjusted odds ratio estimates revealed that the rs146052672 variant
genotype had an overall statistically significant effect on increasing the risk
of development of T2D. As most of the study subjects were Caucasian, further
studies are needed to establish whether the association of this variant with an
increased risk of T2D is generalizable to other populations. Also, in the light
of this result, it would appear to be highly desirable that further in-depth
investigations should be undertaken to elucidate the biological significance of
the HMGA1 rs146052672 variant.

PMCID: PMC4546600
PMID: 26296198  [PubMed - in process]


31. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 7;6(22):19087-101.

A novel HMGA1-CCNE2-YAP axis regulates breast cancer aggressiveness.

Pegoraro S(1), Ros G(1), Ciani Y(1,)(2), Sgarra R(1), Piazza S(2), Manfioletti
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita, Università degli Studi di Trieste,
Trieste, Italy. (2)Laboratorio Nazionale CIB (LNCIB), Area Science Park, Trieste,
Italy.

High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) is an architectural chromatin factor that promotes
neoplastic transformation and progression. However, the mechanism by which HMGA1 
exerts its oncogenic function is not fully understood. Here, we show that cyclin 
E2 (CCNE2) acts downstream of HMGA1 to regulate the motility and invasiveness of 
basal-like breast cancer cells by promoting the nuclear localization and activity
of YAP, the downstream mediator of the Hippo pathway. Mechanistically, the
activity of MST1/2 and LATS1/2, the core kinases of the Hippo pathway, are
required for the HMGA1- and CCNE2-mediated regulation of YAP localization. In
breast cancer patients, high levels of HMGA1 and CCNE2 expression are associated 
with the YAP/TAZ signature, supporting this connection. Moreover, we provide
evidence that CDK inhibitors induce the translocation of YAP from the nucleus to 
the cytoplasm, resulting in a decrease in its activity. These findings reveal an 
association between HMGA1 and the Hippo pathway that is relevant to stem cell
biology, tissue homeostasis, and cancer.

PMCID: PMC4662477
PMID: 26265440  [PubMed - in process]


32. J Clin Pathol. 2016 Feb;69(2):117-21. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-202907. Epub
2015 Aug 6.

HMGA1 overexpression is associated with a particular subset of human breast
carcinomas.

Sepe R(1), Piscuoglio S(2), Quintavalle C(3), Perrina V(3), Quagliata L(3),
Formisano U(1), Terracciano LM(3), Fusco A(4), Pallante P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto per l'Endocrinologia e l'Oncologia Sperimentale (IEOS) "G.
Salvatore", Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Dipartimento di Medicina
Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche (DMMBM), Università degli Studi di Napoli
"Federico II", Naples, Italy. (2)Molecular Pathology Division, Institute of
Pathology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland Department of Pathology,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (3)Molecular
Pathology Division, Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland. (4)Istituto per l'Endocrinologia e l'Oncologia Sperimentale (IEOS)
"G. Salvatore", Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Dipartimento di
Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche (DMMBM), Università degli Studi di
Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy Instituto Nacional de Câncer-INCA, Rua André 
Cavalcanti, 37-Centro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: Breast cancer represents the second leading cause of cancer mortality
among American women and accounts for more than 40 000 deaths annually.
High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) expression has been implicated in the pathogenesis
and progression of human malignant tumours, including breast carcinomas. The aim 
of this study was to evaluate HMGA1 detection as an indicator for the diagnosis
and prognosis of human breast carcinoma.
METHODS: HMGA1 expression has been analysed by immunohistochemistry in a large
series of breast carcinoma resections (1338) combined on a tissue microarray
mainly including the ductal carcinoma variant. The results were then correlated
with clinicopathological parameters of patients.
RESULTS: HMGA1 overexpression was found in the large majority of breast carcinoma
samples and its overexpression positively correlated with HER-2/neu amplification
and progesterone receptor, while a negative correlation was found with oestrogen 
receptor. Conversely, no HMGA1 expression was found in normal breast tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: The data reported here indicate that HMGA1 is overexpressed in human
breast carcinomas and its levels are associated with a particular endocrine
status.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26251519  [PubMed - in process]


33. PLoS Genet. 2015 Aug 5;11(8):e1005408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005408.
eCollection 2015.

Let-7 Represses Carcinogenesis and a Stem Cell Phenotype in the Intestine via
Regulation of Hmga2.

Madison BB(1), Jeganathan AN(2), Mizuno R(3), Winslow MM(4), Castells A(5),
Cuatrecasas M(6), Rustgi AK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Department of Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America. (3)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America; Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (4)Department of 
Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United
States of America. (5)Gastroenterology Department, Hospital Clínic, CIBERehd,
IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. (6)Department of Pathology, Pharmacology
and Microbiology, Hospital Clínic, CDB, University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain. (7)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America; Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.

Let-7 miRNAs comprise one of the largest and most highly expressed family of
miRNAs among vertebrates, and is critical for promoting differentiation,
regulating metabolism, inhibiting cellular proliferation, and repressing
carcinogenesis in a variety of tissues. The large size of the Let-7 family of
miRNAs has complicated the development of mutant animal models. Here we describe 
the comprehensive repression of all Let-7 miRNAs in the intestinal epithelium via
low-level tissue-specific expression of the Lin28b RNA-binding protein and a
conditional knockout of the MirLet7c-2/Mirlet7b locus. This ablation of Let-7
triggers the development of intestinal adenocarcinomas concomitant with reduced
survival. Analysis of both mouse and human intestinal cancer specimens reveals
that stem cell markers were significantly associated with loss of Let-7 miRNA
expression, and that a number of Let-7 targets were elevated, including Hmga1 and
Hmga2. Functional studies in 3-D enteroids revealed that Hmga2 is necessary and
sufficient to mediate many characteristics of Let-7 depletion, namely
accelerating cell cycle progression and enhancing a stem cell phenotype. In
addition, inactivation of a single Hmga2 allele in the mouse intestine epithelium
significantly represses tumorigenesis driven by Lin28b. In aggregate, we conclude
that Let-7 depletion drives a stem cell phenotype and the development of
intestinal cancer, primarily via Hmga2.

PMCID: PMC4526516
PMID: 26244988  [PubMed - in process]


34. BMC Genet. 2015 Jul 29;16:95. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0257-1.

A meta analysis of genome-wide association studies for limb bone lengths in four 
pig populations.

Guo Y(1), Hou L(2), Zhang X(3,)(4), Huang M(5), Mao H(6), Chen H(7), Ma J(8),
Chen C(9), Ai H(10), Ren J(11), Huang L(12).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and Production Technology,
Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. gyuanmei@hotmail.com.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and Production Technology,
Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 397999166@qq.com.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and Production Technology,
Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 604120811@qq.com.
(4)Current address: Wenzhou Medical University, WenZhou, 325000, China.
604120811@qq.com. (5)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and
Production Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 
1549765280@qq.com. (6)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and
Production Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 
maohuirong82@hotmail.com. (7)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and
Production Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 
378639708@qq.com. (8)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and
Production Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 
ma_junwu@hotmail.com. (9)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and
Production Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 
chcy75@hotmail.com. (10)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and
Production Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 
aihsh@hotmail.com. (11)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and
Production Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 
renjunjxau@hotmail.com. (12)State Key Laboratory for Pig Genetic Improvement and 
Production Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 330045, China. 
lushenghuang@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Limb bone length is an economically important trait in pigs, because 
it is negatively correlated with backfat thickness, and is also a determinant to 
the yield of hip and loin. Moreover, abnormal growth of the limb bone leads to
leg structural weakness. Until now, the genetic architecture of the pig lime bone
length remains poorly understood. The object of this study was to map genomic
loci for limb bone length by genome-wide association study (GWAS) on 4 pig
populations.
RESULTS: We measured the lengths of five limb bones including scapula, humerus,
ulna, femur and tibia that were dissected from the right-side carcass of 925,
331, 314 and 434 animals from White Duroc × Erhualian F2 intercross, Erhualian,
Laiwu and Sutai populations, respectively. We genotyped the 2004 pigs for 62,163 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the Porcine SNP60 BeadChip, and
performed GWAS and a GWAS meta analysis in the 4 populations. In total, we
identified 12 and 4 loci associated with the limb bone lengths at suggestive and 
genome-wide significant levels respectively, of which 4 loci were reported for
the first time. The most prominent locus was identified in a 924-kb (kilo base
pairs) linkage disequilibrium block on Sus Scrofa chromosome (SSC) 7, and High
Mobility Group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) appears to be a strong candidate gene in this
region. Another promising locus is located in the middle of SSC4, and
Pleiomorphic Adenoma Gene 1 (PLAG1) is a functionally plausible candidate gene
underlying the locus. Because the lengths of the 5 limb bones are highly
correlated to each other, most of significant loci were associated with all of
the 5 traits; however, several loci showed specific effect on the length of one
limb bone, such as the locus at the proximal end of SSC2 associated with only the
scapula length.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this study was the first GWAS meta analysis for
limb bone lengths in pigs. As expected, the meta analysis is more powerful to
identify genomic loci. A total of 16 loci were identified in this study,
including four novel loci. HMGA1 and PLAG1 are two appearing candidate genes for 
pig limb bone lengths, which warrant further investigations.

PMCID: PMC4518597
PMID: 26219668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Meat Sci. 2015 Dec;110:46-51. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2015.06.011. Epub 2015 Jun
30.

Effects of genetic variants for the swine FABP3, HMGA1, MC4R, IGF2, and FABP4
genes on fatty acid composition.

Hong J(1), Kim D(1), Cho K(1), Sa S(1), Choi S(1), Kim Y(1), Park J(1), Schmidt
GS(2), Davis ME(3), Chung H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Swine Science Division, National Institute of Animal Science, Cheonan 330-801,
Republic of Korea. (2)International Technical Cooperation Center, Rural
Development Administration, Suwon 441-707, Republic of Korea. (3)The Ohio State
University, Department of Animal Sciences, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (4)Animal
Genomics and Bioinformatics Division, National Institute of Animal Science, Suwon
441-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: chung133@rda.go.kr.

This study aimed to verify genetic relationships between fatty acid composition
(FAC) and genotypes of several genes (FABP3, HMGA1, MC4R, IGF2, and FABP4) using 
pig breeds. The effects of genetic variations on FAC of the longissimus muscle
were statistically significant with additive and dominance effects. The
polymorphisms of FABP3 and IGF2 had the largest effects on stearic (C18:0,
P=0.009) and <U+03B3>-linoleic (C18:3n6, P=0.039) acids, respectively, whereas HMGA1 and
FABP4 did not show significances. The analysis revealed that MC4R was
significantly associated with palmitoleic acid (C16:ln7) and MUFA. Allele
frequencies of the genes examined in this analysis were significantly skewed or
fixed in the Korean native pig (KNP), whereas the allele frequencies of the
crossbreds tended to fall between those of the purebreds except that HMGA1 and
FABP4 had approximately the same allele frequencies with Duroc and KNP,
respectively. The polymorphisms found in this study could be used as genetic
markers in breeding programs to simultaneously change proportions of fatty acids 
in muscle tissues.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26172243  [PubMed - in process]


36. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0131102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131102.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Human Embryonic Stem Cell Regulators Identified by Conserved and Distinct
CpG Island Methylation State.

Pells S(1), Koutsouraki E(2), Morfopoulou S(2), Valencia-Cadavid S(2), Tomlinson 
SR(2), Kalathur R(3), Futschik ME(3), De Sousa PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, School of Clinical Studies, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, United Kingdom; Centre for Clinical Brain
Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, United Kingdom. (2)MRC
Centre for Regenerative Medicine, School of Clinical Studies, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, United Kingdom. (3)Centre for Molecular and
Structural Biomedicine, University of Algarve, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) undergo epigenetic changes in vitro which may 
compromise function, so an epigenetic pluripotency "signature" would be
invaluable for line validation. We assessed Cytosine-phosphate-Guanine Island
(CGI) methylation in hESCs by genomic DNA hybridisation to a CGI array, and saw
substantial variation in CGI methylation between lines. Comparison of hESC CGI
methylation profiles to corresponding somatic tissue data and hESC mRNA
expression profiles identified a conserved hESC-specific methylation pattern
associated with expressed genes. Transcriptional repressors and activators were
over-represented amongst genes whose associated CGIs were methylated or
unmethylated specifically in hESCs, respectively. Knockdown of candidate
transcriptional regulators (HMGA1, GLIS2, PFDN5) induced differentiation in
hESCs, whereas ectopic expression in fibroblasts modulated iPSC colony formation.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed interaction between the candidates and
the core pluripotency transcription factor network. We thus identify novel
pluripotency genes on the basis of a conserved and distinct epigenetic
configuration in human stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4495055
PMID: 26151932  [PubMed - in process]


37. Front Med (Lausanne). 2015 Jun 8;2:39. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2015.00039. eCollection 
2015.

Epigenetic Mechanisms Leading to Overexpression of HMGA Proteins in Human
Pituitary Adenomas.

D'Angelo D(1), Esposito F(1), Fusco A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Istituto per
l'Endocrinologia e l'Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Università degli Studi di
Napoli "Federico II" , Naples , Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e
Biotecnologie Mediche, Istituto per l'Endocrinologia e l'Oncologia Sperimentale
del CNR, Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II" , Naples , Italy ;
Instituto Nacional de Câncer - INCA , Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro , Brazil.

Overexpression of the high-mobility group A (HMGA)1 and HMGA2 proteins is a
feature of all human pituitary adenoma (PAs) subtypes. However, amplification
and/or rearrangement of the HMGA2 have been described in human prolactinomas, but
rarely in other pituitary subtypes, and no genomic amplification of HMGA1 was
detected in PAs. Here, we summarize the functional role of HMGA proteins in
pituitary tumorigenesis and the epigenetic mechanisms contributing to HMGA
overexpression in these tumors focusing on recent studies indicating a critical
role of non-coding RNAs in modulating HMGA protein levels.

PMCID: PMC4469109
PMID: 26137461  [PubMed]


38. Biomolecules. 2015;5(2):943-57.

RNA-Mediated Regulation of HMGA1 Function.

Benecke AG, Eilebrecht S.

The high mobility group protein A1 (HMGA1) is a master regulator of chromatin
structure mediating its major gene regulatory activity by direct interactions
with A/T-rich DNA sequences located in the promoter and enhancer regions of a
large variety of genes. HMGA1 DNA-binding through three AT-hook motifs results in
an open chromatin structure and subsequently leads to changes in gene expression.
Apart from its significant expression during development, HMGA1 is over-expressed
in virtually every cancer, where HMGA1 expression levels correlate with tumor
malignancy. The exogenous overexpression of HMGA1 can lead to malignant cell
transformation, assigning the protein a key role during cancerogenesis. Recent
studies have unveiled highly specific competitive interactions of HMGA1 with
cellular and viral RNAs also through an AT-hook domain of the protein,
significantly impacting the HMGA1-dependent gene expression. In this review, we
discuss the structure and function of HMGA1-RNA complexes during transcription
and epigenomic regulation and their implications in HMGA1-related diseases.

PMCID: PMC4496703
PMID: 26117853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 Aug;211(8):596-600. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.05.004. Epub
2015 May 28.

High mobility group A1 expression shows negative correlation with recurrence time
in patients with glioblastoma multiforme.

Liu B(1), Pang B(2), Liu H(3), Arakawa Y(4), Zhang R(3), Feng B(3), Zhong P(3),
Murata D(4), Fan H(3), Xin T(3), Zhao G(3), Liu W(3), Guo H(5), Luan L(3), Xu
S(3), Miyamoto S(4), Pang Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, Jinan 250021, PR China; Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8527, Japan. (2)Department of
Neurosurgery, Shandong University Graduate School of Medicine, Jinan 250012, PR
China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to 
Shandong University, Jinan 250021, PR China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8527, Japan. (5)Department of
Neurosurgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University,
Jinan 250021, PR China. Electronic address: guohua71@hotmail.com. (6)Department
of Neurosurgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, 
Jinan 250021, PR China. Electronic address: pangqisdu@126.com.

The aim of this study was to explore the difference in high mobility group A1
(HMGA1) expression and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) 1 R132H point mutation in
initial and recurrent glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), and to further identify
whether the expression of HMGA1 has a role in the malignant progression of GBM.
Paired initial and recurrent GBM specimens from the same patient were evaluated
using immunohistochemical analysis. The association between HMGA1 expression and 
progression-free survival time (PFST) was analyzed. Three patients were confirmed
with IDH-1 R132H mutations in both initial and recurrent groups (3/25, 12%).
There was a significant difference in HMGA1 expression between initial and
recurrent GBM (P=0.002), and patients with tumors expressing HMGA1 at higher
level had a significantly shorter PFST (7.3 months versus 11.1months; P=0.044).
Our study indicates that recurrent GBM express HMGA1 at a higher level and that
HMGA1 overexpressoin is associated with shorter PFST in patients with GBM. These 
findings suggest that HMGA1 potentially plays an important role in the treatment 
of GBM.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26092597  [PubMed - in process]


40. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2016 Apr;34(4):877-91. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2015.1057617.
Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Molecular aspects on adriamycin interaction with hmga1 regulatory region and its 
inhibitory effect on HMGA1 expression in human cervical cancer.

Akhter MZ(1), Luthra K(1), Rajeswari MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry , All India Institute of Medical Sciences , New
Delhi 110029 , India.

High mobility group A1 (HMGA1), a non-histone chromosomal protein, is highly
expressed in a wide range of human cancers including cervical, breast, and
prostate cancers. Therefore, hmga1 gene is considered as an attractive potential 
target for anticancer drugs. We have chosen 27 bp DNA sequence from a regulatory 
region of hmga1 promoter and studied its interaction with adriamycin (ADM) and in
vitro expression of HMGA1 in the presence of ADM in HeLa cell line. A variety of 
biophysical techniques were employed to understand the characteristics of
[DNA-ADM] complex. Spectrophotometric titration data, DNA denaturation profiles, 
and quenching of fluorescence of ADM in the presence of DNA demonstrated a strong
complexation between DNA and ADM with a high binding affinity (Ka) of
1.3 × 10(6) M(-1) and a stoichiometry of 1:3 (drug:nucleotide). The energetics of
binding obtained from isothermal titration calorimetry and differential scanning 
calorimetry suggest the binding to be exothermic and enthalpy (<U+2206>H,
-6.7 ± 2.4 kcal M(-1)) and entropy (T<U+0394>S, 18.5 ± 6.4 kcal M(-1)) driven (20°C),
which is typical of intercalative mode of binding. Further, results on decreased 
expression (by ~70%) of HMGA1 both at mRNA and protein levels in association with
the observed cell death (by ~75%) in HeLa cell line, clearly confirm that ADM
does target hmga1; however, the effect of ADM on genes other than hmga1 either
directly or via hmga1-mediated pathways cannot be ruled out in the observed
cytotoxicity. Therefore, hmga1 in general and particularly the regulatory region 
is a promising target for therapeutic strategy in combating cancer.

PMID: 26084422  [PubMed - in process]


41. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 17;290(29):17909-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.665521. Epub
2015 Jun 4.

An RNA-binding Protein, Lin28, Recognizes and Remodels G-quartets in the
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and mRNAs It Regulates.

O'Day E(1), Le MT(2), Imai S(3), Tan SM(2), Kirchner R(4), Arthanari H(3),
Hofmann O(4), Wagner G(5), Lieberman J(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biological Chemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, the Cellular and Molecular Medicine 
Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and. (2)the
Cellular and Molecular Medicine Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115 and. (3)From the Department of Biological Chemistry &
Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115. (5)From the Department of Biological Chemistry & Molecular
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
Gerhard_wagner@hms.harvard.edu. (6)the Cellular and Molecular Medicine Program,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and
Judy.Lieberman@childrens.harvard.edu.

Lin28 is an evolutionarily conserved RNA-binding protein that inhibits processing
of pre-let-7 microRNAs (miRNAs) and regulates translation of mRNAs that control
developmental timing, pluripotency, metabolism, and tumorigenesis. The RNA
features that mediate Lin28 binding to the terminal loops of let-7 pre-miRNAs and
to Lin28-responsive elements (LREs) in mRNAs are not well defined. Here we show
that Lin28 target datasets are enriched for RNA sequences predicted to contain
stable planar structures of 4 guanines known as G-quartets (G4s). The imino NMR
spectra of pre-let-7 loops and LREs contain resonances characteristic of G4
hydrogen bonds. These sequences bind to a G4-binding fluorescent dye,
N-methyl-mesoporphyrin IX (NMM). Mutations and truncations in the RNA sequence
that prevent G4 formation also prevent Lin28 binding. The addition of Lin28 to a 
pre-let-7 loop or an LRE reduces G4 resonance intensity and NMM binding,
suggesting that Lin28 may function to remodel G4s. Further, we show that NMM
inhibits Lin28 binding. Incubation of a human embryonal carcinoma cell line with 
NMM reduces its stem cell traits. In particular it increases mature let-7 levels,
decreases OCT4, HMGA1, CCNB1, CDK4, and Lin28A protein, decreases sphere
formation, and inhibits colony formation. Our results suggest a previously
unknown structural feature of Lin28 targets and a new strategy for manipulating
Lin28 function.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505039 [Available on 2016-07-17]
PMID: 26045559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 10;6(19):17342-53.

Deregulation of HMGA1 expression induces chromosome instability through
regulation of spindle assembly checkpoint genes.

Pierantoni GM(1), Conte A(1), Rinaldo C(2), Tornincasa M(1), Gerlini R(1),
Federico A(1), Valente D(2), Medico E(3), Fusco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR and Dipartimento 
di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di Napoli "Federico
II", 80131, Naples, Italy. (2)Istituto di Biologia e Patologie Molecolari del CNR
c/o Università "Sapienza" di Roma, 00185, Rome, Italy. (3)Laboratorio di
Oncogenomica, Istituto per la ricerca sul cancro, 10060 Candiolo, Turin, Italy.

The mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) is an essential control system of
the cell cycle that contributes to mantain the genomic stability of eukaryotic
cells. SAC genes expression is often deregulated in cancer cells, leading to
checkpoint impairment and chromosome instability. The mechanisms responsible for 
the transcriptional regulation and deregulation of these genes are still largely 
unknown. Herein we identify the nonhistone architectural nuclear proteins High
Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1), whose overexpression is a feature of several human
malignancies and has a key role in cancer progression, as transcriptional
regulators of SAC genes expression. In particular, we show that HMGA1 proteins
are able to increase the expression of the SAC genes Ttk, Mad2l1, Bub1 and Bub1b,
binding to their promoter regions. Consistently, HMGA1-depletion induces SAC
genes downregulation associated to several mitotic defects. In particular, we
observed a high number of unaligned chromosomes in metaphase, a reduction of
prometaphase time, a delay of anaphase, a higher cytokinesis time and a higher
percentage of cytokinesis failure by using live-cell microscopy. Finally, a
significant direct correlation between HMGA1 and SAC genes expression was
detected in human colon carcinomas indicating a novel mechanism by which HMGA1
contributes to cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4627312
PMID: 26009897  [PubMed - in process]


43. PLoS One. 2015 May 26;10(5):e0127910. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127910.
eCollection 2015.

CRMP1 Inhibits Proliferation of Medulloblastoma and Is Regulated by HMGA1.

Li KK(1), Qi Y(2), Xia T(2), Yao Y(3), Zhou L(3), Lau KM(2), Ng HK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, 30-32 Ngan Shing Street, Shatin, 
Hong Kong, China; Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, No.10, 2nd Yuexing Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, China. (2)Department
of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, 30-32 Ngan Shing Street, Shatin, Hong Kong,
China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University,
Wulumuqi Zhong Road 12, Shanghai, China.

Many facets of the tumor biology of medulloblastoma (MB) have not been fully
elucidated. Collapsin response mediator protein 1 (CRMP1) is a member of
cytoplasmic family of proteins that regulate the development of central nervous
system. Recent studies demonstrated that CRMP1 could function as an invasion
suppressor. We reported previously that high mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1)
contributed to development of MB and regulated its growth and migration/invasion.
Transcriptional profiling and quantitative RT-PCR revealed increased expression
of CRMP1 in HMGA1-depleted cells, suggesting that CRMP1 may be a downstream
target of HMGA1 in MB. In this study, we showed HMGA1 can bind CRMP1 promoter by 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Luciferase assay demonstrated a
marked enhancement of CRMP1 transcription activity in HMGA1-depleted cells.
Furthermore, quantitative RT-PCR revealed a negative correlation between HMGA1
and CRMP1 in 32 MB samples. To investigate the biological roles of CRMP1 in MB
pathogenesis, we established MB clones stably expressing CRMP1. Functional
analysis revealed that expression of CRMP1 significantly inhibited proliferation,
migration, invasion and formation of filopodia and intense stress fiber of MB
cells. Our data suggest that HMGA1 regulates CRMP1 expression and CRMP1 is
implicated in MB pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4444180
PMID: 26009886  [PubMed - in process]


44. Meta Gene. 2015 May 15;4:129-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2015.04.002. eCollection
2015.

Enriched transcription factor signatures in triple negative breast cancer
indicates possible targeted therapies with existing drugs.

Willis S(1), De P(1), Dey N(1), Long B(2), Young B(1), Sparano JA(3), Wang V(4), 
Davidson NE(5), Leyland-Jones BR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Avera Cancer Institute, Sioux Falls, SD, United States. (2)The Scripps
Research Institute, Jupiter, FL, United States. (3)Montefiore Medical Center,
Bronx, NY, United States. (4)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United
States. (5)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and UPMC Cancer Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

PURPOSE: Triple negative (TN) breast cancers which lack expression of the
estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR), and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)
receptors convey a poor prognosis due in part to a lack of targeted therapies.
METHODS: To identify viable targets for the treatment of TN disease, we have
conducted a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on seven different breast cancer 
whole genome gene expression cohorts comparing TN vs. ER + HER2 - to identify
consistently enriched genes that share a common promoter motif. The seven cohorts
were profiled on three different genome expression platforms (Affymetrix,
Illumina and RNAseq) consisting in total of 2088 samples with IHC metadata.
RESULTS: GSEA identified enriched gene expression patterns in TN samples that
share common promoter motifs associated with SOX9, E2F1, HIF1A, HMGA1, MYC BACH2,
CEBPB, and GCNF/NR6A1. Unexpectedly, NR6A1 an orphan nuclear receptor normally
expressed in germ cells of gonads is highly expressed in TN and ER + HER2 -
samples making it an ideal drug target.
CONCLUSION: With the increasing number of large sample size breast cancer
cohorts, an exploratory analysis of genes that are consistently enriched in TN
sharing common promoter motifs allows for the identification of possible
therapeutic targets with extensive validation in patient derived data sets.

PMID: 26005638  [PubMed]


45. Eur J Cancer. 2015 Apr;51(6):789. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.03.001.

Retraction notice to Expression of a truncated Hmga1b gene induces gigantism,
lipomatosis and B-cell lymphomas in mice [Eur J Cancer 47 (2011) 470478].

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Fedele M, Visone R, De Martino I, Palmieri D, Valentino T, Esposito F,
Klein-Szanto A, Arra C, Ciarmiello A, Croce CM, Fusco A. Eur J Cancer. 2011
Feb;47(3):470-8.

PMID: 25977969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. RNA. 2015 Jun;21(6):1187-202. doi: 10.1261/rna.049890.115. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Role of six single nucleotide polymorphisms, risk factors in coronary disease, in
OLR1 alternative splicing.

Tejedor JR(1), Tilgner H(1), Iannone C(1), Guigó R(1), Valcárcel J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Regulació Genòmica, 08003 Barcelona, Spain Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
08003 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Centre de Regulació Genòmica, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i
Estudis Avançats, 08020 Barcelona, Spain.

The OLR1 gene encodes the oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor (LOX-1),
which is responsible for the cellular uptake of oxidized LDL (Ox-LDL), foam cell 
formation in atheroma plaques and atherosclerotic plaque rupture. Alternative
splicing (AS) of OLR1 exon 5 generates two protein isoforms with antagonistic
functions in Ox-LDL uptake. Previous work identified six single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in linkage disequilibrium that influence the inclusion
levels of OLR1 exon 5 and correlate with the risk of cardiovascular disease. Here
we use minigenes to recapitulate the effects of two allelic series (Low- and
High-Risk) on OLR1 AS and identify one SNP in intron 4 (rs3736234) as the main
contributor to the differences in exon 5 inclusion, while the other SNPs in the
allelic series attenuate the drastic effects of this key SNP. Bioinformatic,
proteomic, mutational and functional high-throughput analyses allowed us to
define regulatory sequence motifs and identify SR protein family members (SRSF1, 
SRSF2) and HMGA1 as factors involved in the regulation of OLR1 AS. Our results
suggest that antagonism between SRSF1 and SRSF2/HMGA1, and differential
recognition of their regulatory motifs depending on the identity of the rs3736234
polymorphism, influence OLR1 exon 5 inclusion and the efficiency of Ox-LDL
uptake, with potential implications for atherosclerosis and coronary disease.

© 2015 Tejedor et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the
RNA Society.

PMCID: PMC4436670 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25904137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(9):1471-5. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1021520.

HMGA1-pseudogene expression is induced in human pituitary tumors.

Esposito F(1), De Martino M, D'Angelo D, Mussnich P, Raverot G, Jaffrain-Rea ML, 
Fraggetta F, Trouillas J, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)a Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o
Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche; Scuola di Medicina e
Chirurgia di Napoli; Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II" , Naples ,
Italy.

Numerous studies have established that High Mobility Group A (HMGA) proteins play
a pivotal role on the onset of human pituitary tumors. They are overexpressed in 
pituitary tumors, and, consistently, transgenic mice overexpressing either the
Hmga1 or the Hmga2 gene develop pituitary tumors. In contrast with HMGA2, HMGA1
overexpression is not related to any rearrangement or amplification of the HMGA1 
locus in these tumors. We have recently identified 2 HMGA1 pseudogenes, HMGA1P6
and HMGA1P7, acting as competitive endogenous RNA decoys for HMGA1 and other
cancer related genes. Here, we show that HMGA1 pseudogene expression
significantly correlates with HMGA1 mRNA levels in growth hormone and
nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas likely inhibiting the repression of HMGA1
through microRNAs action. According to our functional studies, these HMGA1
pseudogenes enhance the proliferation and migration of the mouse pituitary tumor 
cell line, at least in part, through their upregulation. Our results point out
that the overexpression of HMGA1P6 and HMGA1P7 could contribute to increase HMGA1
levels in human pituitary tumors, and then to pituitary tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4615119 [Available on 2016-04-20]
PMID: 25894544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Sci Rep. 2015 Apr 20;5:9592. doi: 10.1038/srep09592.

CRISPR/Cas9-mediated endogenous protein tagging for RESOLFT super-resolution
microscopy of living human cells.

Ratz M(1), Testa I(1), Hell SW(1), Jakobs S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of
NanoBiophotonics, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany. (2)1] Max Planck
Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of NanoBiophotonics, Am Fassberg 
11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany [2] University of Göttingen Medical Faculty, Dept.
of Neurology, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.

Overexpression is a notorious concern in conventional and especially in
super-resolution fluorescence light microscopy studies because it may cause
numerous artifacts including ectopic sub-cellular localizations, erroneous
formation of protein complexes, and others. Nonetheless, current live cell
super-resolution microscopy studies generally rely on the overexpression of a
host protein fused to a fluorescent protein. Here, we establish
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated generation of heterozygous and homozygous human knockin cell
lines expressing fluorescently tagged proteins from their respective native
genomic loci at close to endogenous levels. We tagged three different proteins,
exhibiting various localizations and expression levels, with the reversibly
switchable fluorescent protein rsEGFP2. We demonstrate the benefit of endogenous 
expression levels compared to overexpression and show that typical
overexpression-induced artefacts were avoided in genome-edited cells.
Fluorescence activated cell sorting analysis revealed a narrow distribution of
fusion protein expression levels in genome-edited cells, compared to a pronounced
variability in transiently transfected cells. Using low light intensity RESOLFT
(reversible saturable optical fluorescence transitions) nanoscopy we show
sub-diffraction resolution imaging of living human knockin cells. Our strategy to
generate human cell lines expressing fluorescent fusion proteins at endogenous
levels for RESOLFT nanoscopy can be extended to other fluorescent tags and
super-resolution approaches.

PMCID: PMC4402611
PMID: 25892259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Genet Sel Evol. 2015 Mar 14;47:17. doi: 10.1186/s12711-015-0089-5.

Genome-wide association analyses reveal significant loci and strong candidate
genes for growth and fatness traits in two pig populations.

Qiao R(1), Gao J(2), Zhang Z(3), Li L(4), Xie X(5), Fan Y(6), Cui L(7), Ma J(8), 
Ai H(9), Ren J(10), Huang L(11).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry
of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China.
qrm480@hotmail.com. (2)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi
Province and the Ministry of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural
University, Nanchang, China. jungaochina@hotmail.com. (3)Key Laboratory for
Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry of Agriculture of
China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China. bioducklily@hotmail.com.
(4)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry
of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China.
li_lin1011@hotmail.com. (5)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi
Province and the Ministry of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural
University, Nanchang, China. xiexianhua19880521@163.com. (6)Key Laboratory for
Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry of Agriculture of
China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China. fanyin8662@126.com.
(7)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry
of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China.
leileicui_xuan@hotmail.com. (8)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi
Province and the Ministry of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural
University, Nanchang, China. ma_junwu@hotmail.com. (9)Key Laboratory for Animal
Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry of Agriculture of China,
Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China. aihsh@hotmail.com. (10)Key
Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China.
renjunjxau@hotmail.com. (11)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi
Province and the Ministry of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural
University, Nanchang, China. lushenghuang@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Recently, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been reported
on various pig traits. We performed a GWAS to analyze 22 traits related to growth
and fatness on two pig populations: a White Duroc × Erhualian F2 intercross
population and a Chinese Sutai half-sib population.
RESULTS: We identified 14 and 39 loci that displayed significant associations
with growth and fatness traits at the genome-wide level and chromosome-wide
level, respectively. The strongest association was between a 750 kb region on
SSC7 (SSC for Sus scrofa) and backfat thickness at the first rib. This region had
pleiotropic effects on both fatness and growth traits in F2 animals and contained
a promising candidate gene HMGA1 (high mobility group AT-hook 1). Unexpectedly,
population genetic analysis revealed that the allele at this locus that reduces
fatness and increases growth is derived from Chinese indigenous pigs and
segregates in multiple Chinese breeds. The second strongest association was
between the region around 82.85 Mb on SSC4 and average backfat thickness. PLAG1
(pleiomorphic adenoma gene 1), a gene under strong selection in European domestic
pigs, is proximal to the top SNP and stands out as a strong candidate gene. On
SSC2, a locus that significantly affects fatness traits mapped to the region
around the IGF2 (insulin-like growth factor 2) gene but its non-imprinting
inheritance excluded IGF2 as a candidate gene. A significant locus was also
detected within a recombination cold spot that spans more than 30 Mb on SSCX,
which hampered the identification of plausible candidate genes. Notably, no
genome-wide significant locus was shared by the two experimental populations;
different loci were observed that had both constant and time-specific effects on 
growth traits at different stages, which illustrates the complex genetic
architecture of these traits.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirm several previously reported QTL and provide a list of
novel loci for porcine growth and fatness traits in two experimental populations 
with Chinese Taihu and Western pigs as common founders. We showed that distinct
loci exist for these traits in the two populations and identified HMGA1 and PLAG1
as strong candidate genes on SSC7 and SSC4, respectively.

PMCID: PMC4358731
PMID: 25885760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Front Med (Lausanne). 2015 Mar 25;2:15. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2015.00015. eCollection
2015.

High mobility group a proteins as tumor markers.

Pallante P(1), Sepe R(1), Puca F(1), Fusco A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto per l'Endocrinologia e l'Oncologia Sperimentale, Consiglio Nazionale 
delle Ricerche, Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche,
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II , Naples , Italy. (2)Istituto per
l'Endocrinologia e l'Oncologia Sperimentale, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli
Studi di Napoli Federico II , Naples , Italy ; Instituto Nacional de Câncer , Rio
de Janeiro , Brazil.

Almost 30<U+2009>years ago, overexpression of HMGA proteins was associated with
malignant phenotype of rat thyroid cells transformed with murine retroviruses.
Thereafter, several studies have analyzed HMGA expression in a wide range of
human neoplasias. Here, we summarize all these results that, in the large
majority of the cases, confirm the association of HMGA overexpression with high
malignant phenotype as outlined by chemoresistance, spreading of metastases, and 
a global poor survival. Even though HMGA proteins' overexpression indicates a
poor prognosis in almost all malignancies, their detection may be particularly
useful in determining the prognosis of breast, lung, and colon carcinomas,
suggesting for the treatment a more aggressive therapy. In particular, the
expression of HMGA2 in lung carcinomas is frequently associated with the presence
of metastases. Moreover, recent data revealed that often the cause for the high
HMGA proteins levels detected in human malignancies is a deregulated expression
of non-coding RNA. Therefore, the HMGA proteins represent tumor markers whose
detection can be a valid tool for the diagnosis and prognosis of neoplastic
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4373383
PMID: 25859543  [PubMed]


51. Int J Oncol. 2015;46(6):2526-34. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2949. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Let-7a inhibits growth and migration of breast cancer cells by targeting HMGA1.

Liu K(1), Zhang C(2), Li T(1), Ding Y(1), Tu T(1), Zhou F(1), Qi W(1), Chen H(3),
Sun X(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Clinical
Laboratory Medicine, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 212013, P.R. China. (2)The Second
People's Hospital of Kunshan, Kunshan, Jiangsu 215300, P.R. China. (3)Vaccine and
Immunotherapy Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Let-7 is one of the earliest discovered microRNAs (miRNAs) and has been reported 
to regulate self renewal and tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells. Let-7a is a
member of this family and its function has not been fully characterized in breast
cancer. First, total RNAs of breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231, MCF-7), breast
cancer tissues and corresponding adjacent normal tissues were extracted and used 
to detect let-7a expression by qRT-PCR. Secondly, the effects of let-7a on
proliferation, colony formation, migration and invasion of breast cancer cells
were assessed by in vitro cell culture experiments. Finally, western blotting was
performed to demonstrate how let-7a regulated HMGA1 expression. We found that
let-7a expression was significantly lower in breast cancer cells and breast
cancer tissues compared to corresponding adjacent normal tissues. Cell
proliferation, colony formation, migration and invasion were decreased after
overexpression of let-7a in breast cancer cells and vice versa. Furthermore, we
identified the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) as a potential target gene of
let-7a. Protein expression of the target gene was significantly downregulated in 
let-7a mimic transfected breast cancer cells and significantly upregulated in
let-7a inhibitor transfected breast cancer cells. Our data suggest that let-7a
plays an important role as a tumor suppressor gene by targeting HMGA1, which may 
open novel perspectives for clinical treatments against breast cancer.

PMID: 25846193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jun;33(6):2675-80. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3882. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

HMGA2 expression pattern and TERT mutations in tumors of the vulva.

Agostini A(1), Panagopoulos I(1), Andersen HK(1), Johannesen LE(1), Davidson
B(2), Tropé CG(3), Heim S(1), Micci F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway. (2)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (3)Department of Gynecology, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

Malignant tumors of the vulva account for only 5% of cancers of the female
genital tract in the USA. The most frequent cancers of the vulva are squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) and malignant melanoma (MM). Little is known about the
genetic aberrations carried by these tumors. We report a detailed study of 25
vulva tumors [22 SCC, 2 MM, 1 atypical squamous cell hyperplasia (AH)] analyzed
for expression of the high-mobility group AT-hook family member genes HMGA2 and
HMGA1, for mutations in the IDH1, IDH2 and TERT genes, and for methylation of the
MGMT promoter. The RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry analyses showed that HMGA2 was
expressed in the great majority of analyzed samples (20 out of 24; SCC as well as
MM) but not in the normal controls. HMGA1, on the other hand, was expressed in
both tumors and normal tissues. Five of the 24 tumors (all SCC) showed the C228T 
mutation in the TERT promoter. Our results showed that HMGA2 and TERT may be of
importance in the genesis and/or the progression of tumors of the vulva.

PMCID: PMC4431449
PMID: 25823555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jun;404(1-2):251-7. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2384-4. Epub
2015 Mar 13.

Overexpression of HMGA1 correlates with the malignant status and prognosis of
breast cancer.

Huang R(1), Huang D, Dai W, Yang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, 
Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, China.

High mobility group A1 (HMGA1), as a major member of HMGA family, plays an
important part in promotion of cell proliferation and motility, induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and maintenance of stemness, but little is
known about the pathological role of HMGA1 in breast cancer patients. The aim of 
this study was to identify the pathological roles of HMGA1 in breast cancer. In
our results, we found that mRNA and protein expression levels of HMGA1 were
markedly higher in breast cancer tissues than in normal breast tissues. Using
immunohistochemistry, high levels of HMGA1 protein were positively correlated
with the status of histological grade (I-II vs. III-IV; P = 0.023), clinical
stage (I-II vs. III-IV; P = 0.008), tumor size (T1-T2 vs. T3-T4; P = 0.015),
lymph node metastasis (N0-N1 vs. N2-N3; P = 0.002), distant metastasis (M0 vs.
M1; P < 0.001), and triple-negative breast cancer (No vs. Yes; P = 0.014) of
breast cancer patients. Patients with higher HMGA1 expression had a significantly
shorter overall survival time than did patients with low HMGA1 expression.
Multivariate analysis indicated that the level of HMGA1 expression was an
independent prognostic indicator (P < 0.001) for the survival of patients with
breast cancer. In conclusion, HMGA1 plays an important role on breast cancer
aggressiveness and prognosis and may act as a promising target for prognostic
prediction.

PMID: 25772486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):368-73. eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-26a inhibits proliferation by targeting high mobility group AT-hook 1 in
breast cancer.

Zhao XX(1), Yuan QZ(1), Mu DP(1), Sun DW(1), Bo QA(1), Pan GZ(1), Li GQ(1), Cui
T(1), Ding PP(1), You FP(1), Hao L(1), Wang MX(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary and Breast Surgery, Shengli Oilfield Central
Hospital Dongying 257034, Shandong, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the crucial role of miR-26a in breast cancer and to
validate whether miR-26a could regulate proliferation of breast cancer cells by
targeting high mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1).
METHODS: Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to
quantify the expression levels of miR-26a in breast cancer and adjacent
non-cancerous breast tissues. MTT, cell migration and invasion assay were carried
out to characterize the miR-26a function. Finally, to validate the target gene of
miR-26a, luciferase reporter assay was employed, followed by RT-PCR and Western
blot confirmation.
RESULTS: Compared with normal tissues, a significant down-regulation of miR-26a
expression was observed in breast cancer tissues (P=0.002). miR-26a suppresses
MDA-MB-231 and Mcf-7 breast cancer cell lines proliferation and motility. The
luciferase activity was significantly decreased after co-transfection with
psiCHECK-2/HMGA1 3'-UTR and miR-26a mimics in comparison with control cells, and 
qRT-PCR and Western blotting analysis found that HMGA1 expression at the mRNA and
protein levels decreased in the miR-26a mimic-treatment group relative to NC. MTT
assay showed that down regulation of HMGA1 by siRNA could significantly enhance
the tumor-suppressive effect of miR-26a (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study indicate that miR-26a may be
associated with human breast carcinogenesis, which inhibits tumor cell
proliferation by targeting HMGA1.

PMCID: PMC4348937
PMID: 25755724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 25;5:8552. doi: 10.1038/srep08552.

A novel mechanism of post-translational modulation of HMGA functions by the
histone chaperone nucleophosmin.

Arnoldo L(1), Sgarra R(1), Chiefari E(2), Iiritano S(2), Arcidiacono B(2),
Pegoraro S(1), Pellarin I(1), Brunetti A(2), Manfioletti G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, 34127, Italy.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University "Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro,
Catanzaro, 88100, Italy.

High Mobility Group A are non-histone nuclear proteins that regulate chromatin
plasticity and accessibility, playing an important role both in physiology and
pathology. Their activity is controlled by transcriptional, post-transcriptional,
and post-translational mechanisms. In this study we provide evidence for a novel 
modulatory mechanism for HMGA functions. We show that HMGAs are complexed in vivo
with the histone chaperone nucleophosmin (NPM1), that this interaction requires
the histone-binding domain of NPM1, and that NPM1 modulates both DNA-binding
affinity and specificity of HMGAs. By focusing on two human genes whose
expression is directly regulated by HMGA1, the Insulin receptor (INSR) and the
Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) genes, we demonstrated that
occupancy of their promoters by HMGA1 was NPM1-dependent, reflecting a mechanism 
in which the activity of these cis-regulatory elements is directly modulated by
NPM1 leading to changes in gene expression. HMGAs need short stretches of AT-rich
nucleosome-free regions to bind to DNA. Therefore, many putative HMGA binding
sites are present within the genome. Our findings indicate that NPM1, by exerting
a chaperoning activity towards HMGAs, may act as a master regulator in the
control of DNA occupancy by these proteins and hence in HMGA-mediated gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC4339810
PMID: 25711412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Proteome Res. 2015 Mar 6;14(3):1420-31. doi: 10.1021/pr501084s. Epub 2015 Feb
23.

HMGA1 drives metabolic reprogramming of intestinal epithelium during
hyperproliferation, polyposis, and colorectal carcinogenesis.

Williams MD(1), Zhang X, Belton AS, Xian L, Huso T, Park JJ, Siems WF, Gang DR,
Resar LM, Reeves R, Hill HH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Washington State University , 100 Dairy Road,
Pullman, Washington 99164, United States.

Although significant progress has been made in the diagnosis and treatment of
colorectal cancer (CRC), it remains a leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
Early identification and removal of polyps that may progress to overt CRC is the 
cornerstone of CRC prevention. Expression of the High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1)
gene is significantly elevated in CRCs as compared with adjacent, nonmalignant
tissues. We investigated metabolic aberrations induced by HMGA1 overexpression in
small intestinal and colonic epithelium using traveling wave ion mobility mass
spectrometry (TWIMMS) in a transgenic model in which murine Hmga1 was
misexpressed in colonic epithelium. To determine if these Hmga1-induced metabolic
alterations in mice were relevant to human colorectal carcinogenesis, we also
investigated tumors from patients with CRC and matched, adjacent, nonmalignant
tissues. Multivariate statistical methods and manual comparisons were used to
identify metabolites specific to Hmga1 and CRC. Statistical modeling of data
revealed distinct metabolic patterns in Hmga1 transgenics and human CRC samples
as compared with the control tissues. We discovered that 13 metabolites were
specific for Hmga1 in murine intestinal epithelium and also found in human CRC.
Several of these metabolites function in fatty acid metabolism and membrane
composition. Although further validation is needed, our results suggest that high
levels of HMGA1 protein drive metabolic alterations that contribute to CRC
pathogenesis through fatty acid synthesis. These metabolites could serve as
potential biomarkers or therapeutic targets.

PMID: 25643065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2015 Jan 13;5:237. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00237.
eCollection 2014.

Cooperation between HMGA1, PDX-1, and MafA is Essential for Glucose-Induced
Insulin Transcription in Pancreatic Beta Cells.

Arcidiacono B(1), Iiritano S(1), Chiefari E(1), Brunetti FS(2), Gu G(3), Foti
DP(1), Brunetti A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University "Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro ,
Catanzaro , Italy. (2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University
"Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro , Catanzaro , Italy. (3)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Center of Stem Cell Biology, Vanderbilt Medical Center ,
Nashville, TN , USA.

The high-mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) protein is a nuclear architectural
factor that can organize chromatin structures. It regulates gene expression by
controlling the formation of stereospecific multiprotein complexes called
"enhanceosomes" on the AT-rich regions of target gene promoters. Previously, we
reported that defects in HMGA1 caused decreased insulin receptor expression and
increased susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus in humans and mice.
Interestingly, mice with disrupted HMGA1 gene had significantly smaller islets
and decreased insulin content in their pancreata, suggesting that HMGA1 may have 
a direct role in insulin transcription and secretion. Herein, we investigate the 
regulatory roles of HMGA1 in insulin transcription. We provide evidence that
HMGA1 physically interacts with PDX-1 and MafA, two critical transcription
factors for insulin gene expression and beta-cell function, both in vitro and in 
vivo. We then show that the overexpression of HMGA1 significantly improves the
transactivating activity of PDX-1 and MafA on human and mouse insulin promoters, 
while HMGA1 knockdown considerably decreased this transactivating activity.
Lastly, we demonstrate that high glucose stimulus significantly increases the
binding of HMGA1 to the insulin (INS) gene promoter, suggesting that HMGA1 may
act as a glucose-sensitive element controlling the transcription of the INS gene.
Together, our findings provide evidence that HMGA1, by regulating PDX-1- and
MafA-induced transactivation of the INS gene promoter, plays a critical role in
pancreatic beta-cell function and insulin production.

PMCID: PMC4292585
PMID: 25628604  [PubMed]


58. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 26;10(1):e0117010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117010.
eCollection 2015.

Novel KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion gene identified by RNA sequencing in retroperitoneal
leiomyoma with t(10;17)(q22;q21).

Panagopoulos I(1), Gorunova L(1), Bjerkehagen B(2), Heim S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway. (2)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (3)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute 
for Cancer Genetics and Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Retroperitoneal leiomyoma is a rare type of benign smooth muscle tumor almost
exclusively found in women and with histopathological features similar to uterine
leiomyomas. The pathogenesis of retroperitoneal leiomyoma is unclear and next to 
nothing is known about the cytogenetics and molecular genetics of the tumor. Here
we present the first cytogenetically analyzed retroperitoneal leiomyoma. It had a
t(10;17)(q22;q21) as the sole chromosomal abnormality. Using RNA-Sequencing and
the 'grep' command to search the fastq files of the sequence data we found that
the translocation resulted in fusion of the genes KAT6B (10q22) with KANSL1
(17q21). RT-PCR together with direct (Sanger) sequencing verified the presence of
a KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion transcript. No reciprocal KANSL1-KAT6B transcript was
amplified suggesting that it was either absent or unexpressed. The KAT6B-KANSL1
fusion transcript consists of exons 1 to 3 of KAT6B and exons 11 to 15 of KANSL1,
is 3667 bp long, has a 1398 bp long open reading frame, and codes for a 466 amino
acid residue protein. The corresponding KAT6B-KANSL1 protein contains the NEMM
domain (including the linker histone H1/H5, domain H15) of KAT6B and the PEHE
domain of KANSL1. The function of the fusion protein might be regulation of
transcription with an affinity for chromatin (linker histone H1/H5) and
interaction with the HAT domain of KAT8 (PEHE domain). The tumor expressed HMGA2 
and HMGA1 even though 12q14-15 and 6p looked normal by G-banding analysis. The
tumor also expressed MED12 in the absence of exon 2 mutations. Overall, the data 
show that the examined retroperitoneal leiomyoma resembles a subset of uterine
leiomyomas in terms of histology and genetics.

PMCID: PMC4306483
PMID: 25621995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):2680-92.

CBX7 and HMGA1b proteins act in opposite way on the regulation of the SPP1 gene
expression.

Sepe R(1), Formisano U(1), Federico A(1), Forzati F(1), Bastos AU(1,)(2),
D'Angelo D(1), Cacciola NA(1), Fusco A(1,)(3), Pallante P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto per l'Endocrinologia e l'Oncologia Sperimentale (IEOS) "G.
Salvatore", Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), c/o Dipartimento di
Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche (DMMBM), Università degli Studi di
Napoli "Federico II", 80131 Naples, Italy. (2)Laboratório as Bases Genéticas dos 
Tumores da Tiroide, Disciplina de Genética, Universidade Federal de São Paulo -
UNIFESP, 04039-032 São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (3)Instituto Nacional de Câncer - INCA,
20230-130 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Several recent studies have reported the Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 member
CBX7 as a tumor-suppressor gene whose expression progressively decreases in
different human carcinomas in relation with tumor grade, malignant stage and poor
prognosis. We have previously demonstrated that CBX7 is able to inhibit the
expression of the SPP1 gene, encoding the chemokine osteopontin that is
over-expressed in cancer and has a critical role in cancer progression. Here, we 
have analyzed the mechanism by which CBX7 regulates the SPP1 gene expression. We 
show that the SPP1 transcriptional regulation mechanism involves the
CBX7-interacting protein HMGA1b, that acts as a positive regulator of the SPP1
gene. In fact, we demonstrate that, in contrast with the transcriptional activity
of CBX7, HMGA1b is able to increase the SPP1 expression by inducing the activity 
of its promoter. Moreover, we show that CBX7 interferes with HMGA1b on the SPP1
promoter and counteracts the positive transcriptional activity of HMGA1b on the
SPP1 expression. Furthermore, since we found that also the NF-<U+03BA>B complex resulted
involved in the modulation of the SPP1 expression in thyroid cells, we suppose
that CBX7/HMGA1b/NF-<U+03BA>B could take part in the same transcriptional mechanism that
finally leads to the regulation of the SPP1 gene expression. Taken together, our 
data show the important role played by CBX7 in the negative regulation of the
SPP1 gene expression, thus contributing to prevent the acquisition of a malignant
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4413610
PMID: 25595895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cancer Biomark. 2015;15(3):325-31. doi: 10.3233/CBM-150457.

Increases urinary HMGA1 in serous epithelial ovarian cancer patients.

Zhou J(1,)(2,)(3), Xie M(3), He H(3), Shi Y(1,)(2), Luo B(1,)(2), Gong G(1,)(2), 
Li J(1,)(2), Wang J(1,)(2), Wu X(1,)(2), Wen J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Science, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Xiang Ya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (3)Department of
Pathology, Xiangnan University, Chenzhou, Hunan, China.

BACKGROUND: Serous epithelial ovarian cancer is the most common variety of
ovarian cancer and is currently diagnosed using serum CA-125 levels. HMGA1 a
small 10.6-12 kDa protein, has been implicated as a potentially important tumor
biomarker and may enter the urinary trace, thus potentially able to serve as a
disease biomarker.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if urine HMGA1 can be detected and potentially serve as a
clinical diagnostic biomarkers.
METHOD: Urine was collected from 20 healthy normal control patients, 20 patients 
with benign gynecological disease and 55 epithelial ovarian specimens of which 20
exhibited G1/2 ovarian cancer and 35 G3 ovarian cancers. Serum was also collected
from 20 healthy normal control patients and 55 serous epithelial ovarian cancers 
patients. HMGA1 levels were examined via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and were reported independently and normalized to urine creatinine
levels. Serum CA-125 levels were examined via enzyme assay and the data was
analyzed via box and ROC analysis.
RESULTS: Urine HMGA1 was significantly elevated in serous epithelial ovarian
cancer specimen relative to healthy control specimens with G3 specimens
exhibiting higher levels than G1-G2 specimens. ROC analysis revealed a high
degree of sensitivity and specificity for urine HMGA1 detection in ovarian
cancer, with a higher AUC value noted for urine HMGA1 than serum CA-125.
Furthermore, urine HMGA1 and serum CA-125 combined AUC indicated that urine HMGA1
is an excellent diagnostic biomarker for serous epithelial ovarian cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicates that measuring urine HMGA1 may serve as a useful
diagnostic tool.

PMID: 25586095  [PubMed - in process]


61. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Mar;35(3):693-701. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2062. Epub 2015 Jan
5.

TGF-ß1 induces HMGA1 expression in human breast cancer cells: implications of the
involvement of HMGA1 in TGF-ß signaling.

Zu X(1), Zhong J(1), Tan J(1), Tan L(1), Yang D(1), Zhang Q(1), Ding W(1), Liu
W(1), Wen G(1), Liu J(1), Cao R(1), Jiang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of
South China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, P.R. China. (2)Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Chemical Biology, Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University,
Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, P.R. China.

Transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) signaling and high mobility group A
(HMGA1) are known to play essential roles in the progression of breast cancer by 
inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition. However, the correlation between
TGF-ß1 and HMGA1 in breast cancer cell is not yet well understood. In this study,
we determined the effects of TGF-ß1 on HMGA1 expression in breast cancer cells
and examined the role of HMGA1 in breast cancer progression. Our results
demonstrated that TGF-ß1 induced the expression of HMGA1 in both MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, as shown by RT-qPCR and immunofluorescence
staining; however, the TGF-ß1-induced expression of HMGA was blocked by treatment
of the cells with phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) signaling inhibitors.
Moreover, the HMGA1 promoter activity was found to be activated by TGF-ß1 in the 
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells and we found that specificity protein 1 (Sp1) was
involved in the TGF-ß1-induced HMGA1 promoter activity, as shown by luciferase
activity assay. Furthermore, the enforced expression of HMGA1 by transfection
with a HMGA1 promoter enhanced cellular oncogenic properties, including
proliferation, migration and invasion, and a tissue microarray revealed that
breast tumors expressing human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) showed
higher expression levels of HMGA1 (P=0.007). In addition, higher HMGA1 expression
levels were also observed in the ductal breast cancer cases compared with the
lobular breast cancer cases (P=0.000). These findings establish the first link
between HMGA1 and TGF-ß1 in breast cancer, providing further evidence of the
pivotal role of HMGA1 in breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4314408
PMID: 25572132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Pituitary. 2015 Oct;18(5):674-84. doi: 10.1007/s11102-014-0630-5.

Epidrug mediated re-expression of miRNA targeting the HMGA transcripts in
pituitary cells.

Kitchen MO(1), Yacqub-Usman K, Emes RD, Richardson A, Clayton RN, Farrell WE.

Author information: 
(1)Human Disease and Genomics Group, Institute of Science and Technology in
Medicine, School of Medicine, Keele University, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire,
ST4 7QB, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Transgenic mice overexpressing the high mobility group A (HMGA)
genes, Hmga1 or Hmga2 develop pituitary tumours and their overexpression is also 
a frequent finding in human pituitary adenomas. In some cases, increased
expression of HMGA2 but not that of HMGA1 is consequent to genetic perturbations.
However, recent studies show that down-regulation of microRNA (miRNA), that
contemporaneously target the HMGA1 and HMGA2 transcripts, are associated with
their overexpression.
RESULTS: In a cohort of primary pituitary adenoma we determine the impact of
epigenetic modifications on the expression of HMGA-targeting miRNA. For these
miRNAs, chromatin immunoprecipitations showed that transcript down-regulation is 
correlated with histone tail modifications associated with condensed silenced
genes. The functional impact of epigenetic modification on miRNA expression was
determined in the rodent pituitary cell line, GH3. In these cells, histone tail, 
miRNA-associated, modifications were similar to those apparent in human adenoma
and likely account for their repression. Indeed, challenge of GH3 cells with the 
epidrugs, zebularine and TSA, led to enrichment of the histone modification,
H3K9Ac, associated with active genes, and depletion of the modification,
H3K27me3, associated with silent genes and re-expression of HMGA-targeting miRNA.
Moreover, epidrugs challenges were also associated with a concomitant decrease in
hmga1 transcript and protein levels and concurrent increase in bmp-4 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show that the inverse relationship between HMGA
expression and targeting miRNA is reversible through epidrug interventions. In
addition to showing a mechanistic link between epigenetic modifications and miRNA
expression these findings underscore their potential as therapeutic targets in
this and other diseases.

PMID: 25557289  [PubMed - in process]


63. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(24):4171-6.

A scoring system for prediction of early recurrence after liver resection for
Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer stage B hepatocellular carcinoma.

Qian H(1), Wei M(1), Qiu H(1), Wu J(1), Liu B(1), Lyu A(1), Liu Q(1), Li C(1),
Leng J(1), Zhang J(1), Hao C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery, Peking University School of
Oncology, Beijing Cancer Hospital, Beijing 100142, China. (2)Department of
Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing
Cancer Hospital, Beijing 100142, China. Email: doctorhao@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The management of Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) stage B
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is controversial due to the early recurrence after
curative hepatectomy, and many variables were related to the prognosis. The
purpose of this study was to predict the tumor recurrence in early postoperative 
period of the patients with BCLC stage B HCC.
METHODS: From January 2004 to January 2012, 104 patients with BCLC stage B HCC
underwent hepatectomy. Clinicopathological factors and follow-up data were
statistically analyzed to establish a predicting scoring system.
RESULTS: The overall survival rates for one, three, and five years were 69.2%,
52.7%, and 42.3%, and the disease-free survival rates for one, three, and five
years were 52.9%, 47.3%, and 37.5%, respectively. The multiple factors analysis
showed that the micro-vessel invasion, lymph nodes metastasis, multiple lesions, 
and the high expression of HMGB1 were independent factors (P < 0.05). A scoring
system was established to predict the early recurrence within one year after the 
surgery for BCLC stage B HCC, according to the analysis results with a
specificity of 85.1% and a sensitivity of 80.3%.
CONCLUSION: Variant clinicopathological factors were associated with early
postoperative recurrence for BCLC stage B HCC and recurrence early after
hepatectomy was more likely in patients with a higher score of the scoring
system.

PMID: 25533817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(23):3636-9. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.974440.

HMGA1-pseudogene overexpression contributes to cancer progression.

Esposito F(1), De Martino M, Forzati F, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)a Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o
Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Scuola di Medicina e
Chirurgia di Napoli ; Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II," ; Naples , 
Italy.

Two pseudogenes for HMGA1, whose overexpression has a critical role in cancer
progression, have been identified. They act as decoy for miRNAs that are able to 
target the HMGA1 gene then enhancing cell proliferation and migration. Moreover, 
these pseudogenes contain sequences that are potential target sites for
cancer-related miRNAs. Interestingly, HMGA1 pseudogenes are highly expressed in
human anaplastic thyroid carcinomas, that is one of the most aggressive tumor in 
mankind, but almost undetectable in well differentiated thyroid carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4613653
PMID: 25483074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biomed Pharmacother. 2014 Oct;68(8):929-34. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.10.003.
Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Prognostic value of miR-26a and HMGA1 in urothelial bladder cancer.

Lin R(1), Shen W(1), Zhi Y(1), Zhou Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Urological Research Institute of PLA, Southwest Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China. (2)Urological Research Institute of 
PLA, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038,
China. Electronic address: zhouzsxn@163.com.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNA-26a (miR-26a) functions as a tumor suppressor by regulating 
its direct target gene high mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1). This study was
aimed to investigate the associations of differential expression of miR-26a and
HMGA1 with tumor progression and prognosis in urothelial bladder cancer (UBC)
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred and twenty-six UBC patients were selected and 
quantitative real-time PCR was performed to detect the expression of miR-26a and 
HMGA1 mRNA in the respective tumors.
RESULTS: Our data showed the decreased expression of miR-26a and the increased
expression of HMGA1 mRNA in UBC tissues compared with corresponding non-cancerous
tissues (both P<0.001). Then, the expression levels of miR-26a in UBC tissues
were negatively correlated with those of HMGA1 mRNA significantly (r=-0.72,
P<0.001). In addition, UBC patients with combined miR-26a downregulation and
HMGA1 upregulation (miR-26a-low/HMGA1-high) more frequently had advanced
pathological stage (P<0.001) and high tumor grade (P<0.001). Moreover,
miR-26a-low/HMGA1-high expression was associated with a significantly shortest
disease-free survival (P<0.001) and overall survival (P<0.001) of all
miR-26a/HMGA1 combined expression groups. Furthermore, multivariate analysis
indicated that miR-26a/HMGA1 expression was an independent prognostic factor for 
both disease-free survival and overall survival (both P=0.001) in UBC patients.
CONCLUSION: Interaction between miR-26a and its target gene HMGA1 may contribute 
to the malignant progression of human UBC. Tumors with miR-26a downregulation in 
combination with high expression of HMGA1 showed a worse prognosis than the other
tumors. Combined detection of their expression might be particularly helpful for 
surveillance of disease progression and treatment stratification.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25455159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;93(1):54-62. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2014-0104. Epub 2014
Sep 29.

Identification of transcription factors involved in the transcriptional
regulation of the CXCL12 gene in rat pancreatic insulinoma Rin-5F cell line.

Markovic J(1), Uskokovic A, Grdovic N, Dinic S, Mihailovic M, Jovanovic JA,
Poznanovic G, Vidakovic M.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Biology, Institute for Biological Research,
University of Belgrade, Bulevar despota Stefana 142, 10060 Belgrade, Serbia.

Diabetes is characterized by a deficit in the number of functional pancreatic
ß-cells. Understanding the mechanisms that stimulate neogenesis of ß-cells should
contribute to improved maintenance of ß-cell mass. Chemokine CXCL12 has recently 
become established as a novel ß-cell growth factor, however the mechanisms
controlling its expression require clarification. We investigated the proteins
involved in the transcriptional regulation of the rat ß-cell CXCL12 gene
(Cxcl12). Using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we established the in vitro and in vivo binding of C/EBPß,
C/EBPa, STAT3, p53, FOXO3a, and HMG I/Y to the Cxcl12 promoter.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed protein-protein interactions between 
YY1 and PARP-1, FOXO3a and PARP-1, Sp1 and PARP-1, p53 and PARP-1, C/EBPß and
PARP-1, YY1 and p53, YY1 and FOXO3a, p53 and FOXO3a, Sp1 and FOXO3a, C/EBPß and
FOXO3a, C/EBPa and FOXO3a, Sp1 and STAT3. Our data lay the foundation for
research into the interplay of signaling pathways that determine the ß-cell
Cxcl12 expression profile.

PMID: 25453873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BMC Cancer. 2014 Nov 20;14:851. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-851.

High mobility group A1 protein expression reduces the sensitivity of colon and
thyroid cancer cells to antineoplastic drugs.

D'Angelo D(1), Mussnich P, Rosa R, Bianco R, Tortora G, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o, Università di Napoli
Federico II, Via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. daniela.dangelo@unina.it.

BACKGROUND: Development of resistance to conventional drugs and novel biological 
agents often impair long-term chemotherapy. HMGA gene overexpression is often
associated with antineoplastic drug resistance and reduced survival. Inhibition
of HMGA expression in thyroid cancer cells reduces levels of ATM protein, the
main cellular sensor of DNA damage, and enhances cellular sensitivity to
DNA-damaging agents. HMGA1 overexpression promotes chemoresistance to gemcitabine
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells through an Akt-dependent mechanism.
METHODS: To elucidate the role of HMGA1 proteins in chemoresistance we analyzed
resistance to conventional drugs and targeted therapies of human colon carcinoma 
cells (GEO) that are sensitive to the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor 
cetuximab, and express minimal levels of HMGA1 and cetuximab-resistant (GEO CR)
cells expressing high HMGA1 protein levels.
RESULTS: GEO CR cells were less sensitive than GEO cells to cetuximab and
5-fluorouracil. GEO CR cells silenced for HMGA1 expression were more susceptible 
than empty vector-transfected cells to the drugs' cytotoxicity. Similar results
were obtained with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cells expressing or not HMGA1
proteins, treated with doxorubicin or the HDAC inhibitor LBH589. Finally, HMGA1
overexpression promoted the DNA-damage response and stimulated Akt
phosphorylation and prosurvival signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the blockage of HMGA1 expression is a
promising approach to enhance cancer cell chemosensitivity, since it could
increase the sensitivity of cancer cells to antineoplastic drugs by inhibiting
the survival signal and DNA damage repair pathways.

PMCID: PMC4247615
PMID: 25409711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Genet Sel Evol. 2014 Nov 4;46:56. doi: 10.1186/s12711-014-0056-6.

A genome-wide association study of limb bone length using a Large White<U+2009>×<U+2009>Minzhu 
intercross population.

Zhang LC, Li N, Liu X, Liang J, Yan H, Zhao KB, Pu L, Shi HB, Zhang YB, Wang
LG(1), Wang LX.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Germplasm Innovation of
Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100193, China. ligwang@126.com.

BACKGROUND: In pig, limb bone length influences ham yield and body height to a
great extent and has important economic implications for pig industry. In this
study, an intercross population was constructed between the indigenous Chinese
Minzhu pig breed and the western commercial Large White pig breed to examine the 
genetic basis for variation in limb bone length. The aim of this study was to
detect potential genetic variants associated with porcine limb bone length.
METHODS: A total of 571 F2 individuals from a Large White and Minzhu intercross
population were genotyped using the Illumina PorcineSNP60K Beadchip, and
phenotyped for femur length (FL), humerus length (HL), hipbone length (HIPL),
scapula length (SL), tibia length (TL), and ulna length (UL). A genome-wide
association study was performed by applying the previously reported approach of
genome-wide rapid association using mixed model and regression. Statistical
significance of the associations was based on Bonferroni-corrected P-values.
RESULTS: A total of 39 significant SNPs were mapped to a 11.93 Mb long region on 
pig chromosome 7 (SSC7). Linkage analysis of these significant SNPs revealed
three haplotype blocks of 495 kb, 376 kb and 492 kb, respectively, in the
11.93 Mb region. Annotation based on the pig reference genome identified 15 genes
that were located near or contained the significant SNPs in these linkage
disequilibrium intervals. Conditioned analysis revealed that four SNPs, one on
SSC2 and three on SSC4, showed significant associations with SL and HL,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of the 15 annotated genes that were identified in these
three haplotype blocks indicated that HMGA1 and PPARD, which are expressed in
limbs and influence chondrocyte cell growth and differentiation, could be
considered as relevant biological candidates for limb bone length in pig, with
potential applications in breeding programs. Our results may also be useful for
the study of the mechanisms that underlie human limb length and body height.

PMCID: PMC4219012
PMID: 25366846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Tumour Biol. 2015 Feb;36(2):1213-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2749-4. Epub 2014 Oct
25.

Elevated expression of HMGA1 correlates with the malignant status and prognosis
of non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhang Z(1), Wang Q, Chen F, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Norman Bethune Health Science Center, Jilin University, 130000, Changchun,
Jilin, China.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) has been suggested to play a significant role in
tumor progression, but little is known about the accurate significance of HMGA1
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. The aim of this study was to
identify the role of HMGA1 in NSCLC. The expression status of HMGA1 was observed 
initially in NSCLC by Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). The expression of HMGA1
messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein was examined in NSCLC and adjacent normal lung
tissues through real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. Meanwhile, the
relationship of HMGA1 expression levels with clinical features and prognosis of
NSCLC patients was analyzed. In our results, HMGA1 was overexpressed in NSCLC
tissues compared with adjacent normal lung tissues in microarray data (GSE19804).
HMGA1 mRNA and protein expressions were markedly higher in NSCLC tissues than in 
normal lung tissues (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 and P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010, respectively). Using
immunohistochemistry, high levels of HMGA1 protein were positively correlated
with the status of clinical stage (I-II vs. III-IV, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), T classification 
(T1-T vs. T3-T4, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), N classification (N0N1 vs. N2-N3, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), M
classification (M0 vs. M1, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002), and differentiated degree (high or middle 
vs. low or undifferentiated, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) in NSCLC. Patients with higher HMGA1
expression had a significantly shorter overall survival time than did patients
with low HMGA1 expression. Multivariate analysis indicated that the level of
HMGA1 expression was an independent prognostic factor (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) for the
survival of patients with NSCLC. In conclusion, HMGA1 plays an important role on 
NSCLC progression and prognosis and may act as a convictive biomarker for
prognostic prediction.

PMID: 25344216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2014 Dec;141:36-46. doi:
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2014.08.026. Epub 2014 Sep 19.

Interaction of doxorubicin with a regulatory element of hmga1 and its in vitro
anti-cancer activity associated with decreased HMGA1 expression.

Akhter MZ(1), Rajeswari MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India. Electronic address: zahidaasim@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 110029, India.
Electronic address: rajeswari3011@hotmail.com.

High mobility group A1 (HMGA1) non-histone chromatin protein is known as an
architectural transcription factor that regulates transcription of various genes.
HMGA1 is highly expressed in almost all human cancers and considered as a potent 
tumor marker. Because of its association with cancers, hmga1 is considered as a
critical target for anti-cancer drugs. In the present study, we report
interaction of doxorubicin (DOX) with a short deoxyoligonucleotide (-1917 to
-1940) within a regulatory element of hmga1 and its subsequent effect on
expression of HMGA1 in breast cancer MCF7 cells. Binding of DOX to DNA was found 
to be strong (K(a), 5.2 × 10(5)M(-1)) and thermodynamically favorable by both
negative enthalpy (<U+0394>H, -8.1 ± 0.25 kcal M(-1)) and positive entropy changes (T<U+0394>S,
21.1 ± 5.2 kcal M(-1)) at 20 °C. A significant increase in melting temperature of
DNA in presence of DOX by +10 °C was accompanied by substantial quenching of
fluorescence of DOX (~ 85%) at 595 nm and hypochromic change (~ 40%) at 500 nm
absorption spectra of DOX along with a bathochromic shift of ~ 5 nm. Reduced
expression of HMGA1 by ~ 60% both at mRNA and protein level and associated cell
death in presence of DOX was observed in breast cancer cells. Therefore, hmga1 is
a promising chemotherapeutic target in treating human malignancies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25313540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 30;5(18):8341-54.

HMGA1 pseudogenes as candidate proto-oncogenic competitive endogenous RNAs.

Esposito F(1), De Martino M(1), Petti MG(1), Forzati F(1), Tornincasa M(1),
Federico A(1), Arra C(2), Pierantoni GM(1), Fusco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Scuola di Medicina e Chirurgia di
Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(2)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy.

The High Mobility Group A (HMGA) are nuclear proteins that participate in the
organization of nucleoprotein complexes involved in chromatin structure,
replication and gene transcription. HMGA overexpression is a feature of human
cancer and plays a causal role in cell transformation. Since non-coding RNAs and 
pseudogenes are now recognized to be important in physiology and disease, we
investigated HMGA1 pseudogenes in cancer settings using bioinformatics analysis. 
Here we report the identification and characterization of two HMGA1 non-coding
pseudogenes, HMGA1P6 and HMGA1P7. We show that their overexpression increases the
levels of HMGA1 and other cancer-related proteins by inhibiting the suppression
of their synthesis mediated by microRNAs. Consistently, embryonic fibroblasts
from HMGA1P7-overexpressing transgenic mice displayed a higher growth rate and
reduced susceptibility to senescence. Moreover, HMGA1P6 and HMGA1P7 were
overexpressed in human anaplastic thyroid carcinomas, which are highly
aggressive, but not in differentiated papillary carcinomas, which are less
aggressive. Lastly, the expression of the HMGA1 pseudogenes was significantly
correlated with HMGA1 protein levels thereby implicating HMGA1P overexpression in
cancer progression. In conclusion, HMGA1P6 and HMGA1P7 are potential
proto-oncogenic competitive endogenous RNAs.

PMCID: PMC4226687
PMID: 25268743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2014;312:79-100. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800178-3.00003-8.

Recent advances in molecular and cell biology of testicular germ-cell tumors.

Chieffi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology II, University of Naples, Caserta, Italy. Electronic 
address: paolo.chieffi@unina2.it.

Testicular germ-cell tumors (TGCTs) are the most frequent solid malignant tumors 
in men 20-40 years of age and the most frequent cause of death from solid tumors 
in this age group. TGCTs comprise two major histologic groups: seminomas and
nonseminomas germ-cell tumors (NSGCTs). NSGCTs can be further divided into
embryonal, carcinoma, Teratoma, yolk sac tumor, and choriocarcinoma. Seminomas
and NSGCTs present significant differences in clinical features, therapy, and
prognosis, and both show characteristics of the primordial germ cells. Many
discovered biomarkers including OCT3/4, SOX2, SOX17, HMGA1, Nek2, GPR30,
Aurora-B, estrogen receptor ß, and others have given further advantages to
discriminate between histological subgroups and could represent useful novel
molecular targets for antineoplastic strategies. More insight into the
pathogenesis of TGCTs is likely to improve disease management not only to better 
treatment of these tumors but also to a better understanding of stem cells and
oncogenesis.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25262239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. BMC Cancer. 2014 Sep 23;14:694. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-694.

HMGA1 and HMGA2 expression and comparative analyses of HMGA2, Lin28 and let-7
miRNAs in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Sterenczak KA, Eckardt A, Kampmann A, Willenbrock S, Eberle N, Länger F,
Kleinschmidt S, Hewicker-Trautwein M, Kreipe H, Nolte I(1), Murua Escobar H,
Gellrich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Small Animal Clinic, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Bünteweg 9,
30559 Hannover, Germany. Ingo.Nolte@tiho-hannover.de.

BACKGROUND: Humans and dogs are affected by squamous cell carcinomas of the oral 
cavity (OSCC) in a considerably high frequency. The high mobility group A2
(HMGA2) protein was found to be highly expressed in human OSCC and its expression
was suggested to act as a useful predictive and prognostic tool in clinical
management of oral carcinomas. Herein the expression of HMGA2 and its sister gene
HMGA1 were analysed within human and canine OSCC samples. Additionally, the HMGA 
negatively regulating miRNAs of the let-7 family as well as the let-7 regulating 
gene Lin28 were also comparatively analysed. Deregulations of either one of these
members could affect the progression of human and canine OSCC.
METHODS: Expression levels of HMGA1, HMGA2, Lin28, let-7a and mir-98 were
analysed via relative qPCR in primary human and canine OSCC, thereof derived cell
lines and non-neoplastic samples. Additionally, comparative HMGA2 protein
expression was analysed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In both species, a significant up-regulation of the HMGA2 gene was found
within the neoplastic samples while HMGA1 expression did not show significant
deregulations. Comparative analyses showed down-regulation of mir-98 in human
samples and up-regulation of let-7a and mir-98 in canine neoplastic samples.
HMGA2 immunostainings showed higher intensities within the invasive front of the 
tumours than in the centre of the tumour in both species.
CONCLUSIONS: HMGA2 could potentially serve as tumour marker in both species while
HMGA1 might play a minor role in OSCC progression. Comparative studies indicate
an inverse correlation of HMGA2 and mir-98 expression in human samples whereas in
dogs no such characteristic could be found.

PMCID: PMC4190370
PMID: 25245141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 26;452(3):382-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.079. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

A polyphenol rescues lipid induced insulin resistance in skeletal muscle cells
and adipocytes.

Gogoi B(1), Chatterjee P(2), Mukherjee S(2), Buragohain AK(3), Bhattacharya S(2),
Dasgupta S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Tezpur
784028, Napaam, Sonitpur, Assam, India. (2)Department of Zoology, School of Life 
Science, Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan 731235, West Bengal, India.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Tezpur
784028, Napaam, Sonitpur, Assam, India; Dibrugarh University, National Highway
37, Dibrugarh 786004, Assam, India. (4)Department of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Tezpur 784028, Napaam, Sonitpur, Assam, India. 
Electronic address: suman@tezu.ernet.in.

Skeletal muscle and adipose tissues are known to be two important insulin target 
sites. Therefore, lipid induced insulin resistance in these tissues greatly
contributes in the development of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Ferulic acid (FRL)
purified from the leaves of Hibiscus mutabilis, showed impressive effects in
preventing saturated fatty acid (SFA) induced defects in skeletal muscle cells.
Impairment of insulin signaling molecules by SFA was significantly waived by FRL.
SFA markedly reduced insulin receptor ß (IRß) in skeletal muscle cells, this was 
affected due to the defects in high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein obtruded by
phospho-PKCe and that adversely affects IRß mRNA expression. FRL blocked PKCe
activation and thereby permitted HMGA1 to activate IRß promoter which improved IR
expression deficiency. In high fat diet (HFD) fed diabetic rats, FRL reduced
blood glucose level and enhanced lipid uptake activity of adipocytes isolated
from adipose tissue. Importantly, FRL suppressed fetuin-A (FetA) gene expression,
that reduced circulatory FetA level and since FetA is involved in adipose tissue 
inflammation, a significant attenuation of proinflammatory cytokines occurred.
Collectively, FRL exhibited certain unique features for preventing lipid induced 
insulin resistance and therefore promises a better therapeutic choice for T2D.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25157809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2014 Jun;79(6):538-44. doi: 10.1134/S0006297914060078.

HMGA1 is a new target of miR-195 involving isoprenaline-induced cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy.

You XY(1), Huang JH, Liu B, Liu SJ, Zhong Y, Liu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Department, Second Hospital Affiliated to Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Guangzhou, 510260, PR 
China. gzliushiming@126.com.

Emerging data have shown that microRNAs (miRNAs) have important functions in the 
processes of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure that occur during the
postnatal period. Cardiac overexpression of miR-195 results in pathological
cardiac growth and heart failure in transgenic mice. In the present study, we
analyzed the roles of miR-195 in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and found that miR-195
was greatly upregulated during isoprenaline-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. By
using mRNA microarray and molecular approach, we identified a novel putative
target of miR-195 called high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1). Total mRNA microarray
showed that HMGA1 was downregulated in primary cardiomyocytes that overexpressed 
miR-195. Using luciferase activity assay, we demonstrated that miR-195 interacts 
with the 3'-untranslated region of HMGA1 mRNA. Moreover, we showed that miR-195
in primary cardiomyocytes downregulates the expression of HMGA1 at the protein
level. Taken together, our data demonstrated that miR-195 can negatively regulate
a new target, HMGA1, which is involved in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

PMID: 25100012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 4;9(8):e103766. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103766. eCollection
2014.

Genome-wide association studies identify the loci for 5 exterior traits in a
Large White × Minzhu pig population.

Wang L(1), Zhang L(1), Yan H(1), Liu X(1), Li N(2), Liang J(1), Pu L(1), Zhang
Y(1), Shi H(1), Zhao K(1), Wang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Germplasm Innovation of
Ministry of Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Farm Animal Genetic
Resources and Germplasm Innovation of Ministry of Agriculture of China, Institute
of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China;
Jilin Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun, China.

As one of the main breeding selection criteria, external appearance has special
economic importance in the hog industry. In this study, an Illumina Porcine SNP60
BeadChip was used to conduct a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 605 pigs
of the F2 generation derived from a Large White × Minzhu intercross. Traits under
study were abdominal circumference (AC), body height (BH), body length (BL),
cannon bone circumference (CBC), chest depth (CD), chest width (CW), rump
circumference (RC), rump width (RW), scapula width (SW), and waist width (WW). A 
total of 138 SNPs (the most significant being MARC0033464) on chromosome 7 were
found to be associated with BH, BL, CBC, and RC (P-value=<U+200A>4.15E-6). One SNP on
chromosome 1 was found to be associated with CD at genome-wide significance
levels. The percentage phenotypic variance of these significant SNPs ranged from 
0.1-25.48%. Moreover, a conditional analysis revealed that the significant SNPs
were derived from a single quantitative trait locus (QTL) and indicated
additional chromosome-wide significant association for 25 SNPs on SSC4 (BL, CBC) 
and 9 SNPs on SSC7 (RC). Linkage analysis revealed two complete linkage
disequilibrium haplotype blocks that contained seven and four SNPs, respectively.
In block 1, the most significant SNP, MARC0033464, was present. Annotations from 
pig reference genome suggested six genes (GRM4, HMGA1, NUDT3, RPS10, SPDEF and
PACSIN1) in block 1 (495 kb), and one gene (SCUBE3) in block 3 (124 kb).
Functional analysis indicated that HMGA1 and SCUBE3 genes are the potential genes
controlling BH, BL, and RC in pigs, with an application in breeding programs. We 
screened several candidate intervals and genes based on SNP location and gene
function, and predicted their function using bioinformatics analyses.

PMCID: PMC4121205
PMID: 25090094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Hum Pathol. 2014 Sep;45(9):1859-65. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.05.003. Epub 2014
May 23.

Benign lipomatous masses of the heart: a comprehensive series of 47 cases with
cytogenetic evaluation.

Bois MC(1), Bois JP(2), Anavekar NS(2), Oliveira AM(1), Maleszewski JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905. (2)Division 
of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905. (3)Division of
Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905. Electronic address:
maleszewski.joseph@mayo.edu.

Benign lipomatous lesions of the heart encompass an apparently etiologically
diverse group of entities including neoplastic, congenital, and reparative
phenomena. Among these, lipomas and lipomatous hypertrophy of the atrial septum
(LHAS) represent 2 commonly encountered mass lesions. To date, no study has
systematically and comparatively evaluated the morphologic and genetic
characteristics of these lesions. Tissue registry archives of Mayo Clinic were
queried for cases of cardiac lipoma and LHAS (1994-2011). Clinical, imaging, and 
pathologic findings were reviewed. Representative cases in each cohort were
evaluated by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for HMGA1 and HMGA2 loci
rearrangement and for MDM2/CPM locus amplification. Five cases of cardiac lipoma 
were identified (mean age, 67 years; range, 48-101; 3 men): 4 right atrial and 1 
left ventricular. Forty-two cases of LHAS were identified (mean age, 75.6 years; 
range 45-95; 20 men), 39 of which were autopsy derived. The median size was 3.4
cm for lipomas and 2.8 cm for LHAS (n = 14). A single case each of cardiac lipoma
and LHAS were found to harbor HMGA2 rearrangement, whereas no case showed
cytogenetic abnormality of HMGA1 or CPM. This represents the largest series of
histopathologically confirmed cardiac lipomas from a single institution. In
addition, it is the first to evaluate cardiac lipomas and LHAS for genetic
alterations associated with extracardiac lipomatous lesions. The genetic and
morphologic similarities found provide evidence in support of the neoplastic
classification of cardiac lipomas. A single case of LHAS contained an HMGA2
rearrangement, challenging the currently accepted hypothesis of pathogenesis for 
this lesion.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24996689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biomed Mater. 2014 Aug;9(4):045005. doi: 10.1088/1748-6041/9/4/045005. Epub 2014 
Jun 19.

An integrated study of natural hydroxyapatite-induced osteogenic differentiation 
of mesenchymal stem cells using transcriptomics, proteomics and microRNA
analyses.

Zhang Z(1), Wang J, Lü X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, School of Biological Science and
Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, People's Republic of 
China.

This work combined transcriptomics, proteomics, and microRNA (miRNA) analyses to 
elucidate the mechanism of natural hydroxyapatite (NHA)-induced osteogenic
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). First, NHA powder was obtained 
from pig bones and fabricated into disc-shaped samples. Subsequently, the
proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of MSCs cultured on NHA were
investigated. Then, proteomics was employed to detect the protein expression
profiles of MSCs cultured on NHA, and the effect of NHA on MSCs was analyzed
through an integrated pathway analysis (including proteomics and previous
transcriptomics data) in which specific NHA-induced differentiation pathways were
analyzed. The pathway nodes with expression data at both the mRNA and protein
levels (mRNA-protein pairs) were filtered in differentiation-related pathways.
miRNAs corresponding to these target mRNA-protein pairs were predicted, screened 
and tested, and the regulatory effects of miRNAs on mRNA-protein pairs were
analyzed. Finally, the NHA-induced osteogenic pathways were verified. The results
of an MTT assay and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining showed that the cell
proliferation rate decreased and the osteogenic performance improved in the
presence of NHA. By integrating transcriptomics and proteomics, the genes and
proteins involved in 89 pathways were shown to be differentially expressed. Among
them, 5 differentiation-associated pathways, in which 9 miRNAs and 8
regulated-target mRNA-protein zby inhibiting the target mRNA-protein pair HSPA8
in the MAPK signaling pathway, and miR-26a and miR-26b might inhibit adipogenic
differentiation by repressing the target mRNA-protein pair HMGA1 in the
adipogenesis pathway. A verification experiment for the osteogenic pathway
indicated that the ERK1/2 or JNK MAPK pathways might play an important role in
NHA-induced osteogenic differentiation. In conclusion, NHA affected MSCs at both 
the transcriptional and translational levels, and MSC osteogenic differentiation 
eventually occurred through the MAPK and adipogenesis pathways, in which miRNAs
and target mRNAs/proteins participated cooperatively.

PMID: 24946014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;33(8):550-65. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2198. Epub 2014 Jun
6.

Genomic analysis and differential expression of HMG and S100A family in human
arthritis: upregulated expression of chemokines, IL-8 and nitric oxide by HMGB1.

Amin AR(1), Islam AB.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Bio-Medical Engineering, Virginia Tech and Virginia College of
Osteopathic Medicine , RheuMatrix, Inc., Blacksburg, Virginia.

We applied global gene expression arrays, quantitative real-time PCR,
immunostaining, and functional assays to untangle the role of High Mobility
Groups proteins (HMGs) in human osteoarthritis (OA)-affected cartilage.
Bioinformatics analysis showed increased mRNA expression of Damage-Associated
Molecular Patterns (DAMPs): HMGA, HMGB, HMGN, SRY, LEF1, HMGB1, MMPs, and
HMG/RAGE-interacting molecules (spondins and S100A4, S100A10, and S100A11) in
human OA-affected cartilage as compared with normal cartilage. HMGB2 was
down-regulated in human OA-affected cartilage. Immunohistological staining
identified HMGB1 in chondrocytes in the superficial cartilage. Cells of the deep 
cartilage and subchondral bone showed increased expression of HMGB1 in
OA-affected cartilage. HMGB1 was expressed in the nucleus, cytosol, and
extracellular milieu of chondrocytes in cartilage. Furthermore, HMGB1 was
spontaneously released from human OA-affected cartilage in ex vivo conditions.
The effects of recombinant HMGB1 was tested on human cartilage and chondrocytes
in vitro. HMGB1 stimulated mRNA of 2 NF<U+03BA>B gene enhancers (NF<U+03BA>B1 and NF<U+03BA>B2), 16 CC
and CXC chemokines (IL-8, CCL2, CCL20, CCL3, CCL3L1, CCL3L3, CCL4, CCL4L1,
CCL4L2, CCL5, CCL8, CXCL1, CXCL10, CXCL2, CXCL3, and CXCL6) by =10-fold.
Furthermore, HMGB1 and IL-1ß and/or tumor necrosis factor a (but not HMGI/Y) also
significantly induced inducible nitric oxide synthase, NO, and interleukin (IL)-8
production in human cartilage and chondrocytes. The recombinant HMGB1 utilized in
this study shows properties that are similar to disulfide-HMGB1. The
differential, stage and/or tissue-specific expression of HMGB1, HMGB2, and S100A 
in cartilage was associated with regions of pathology and/or cartilage
homeostasis in human OA-affected cartilage. Noteworthy similarities in the
expression of mouse and human HMGB1 and HMGB2 were conserved in normal and
arthritis-affected cartilage. The multifunctional forms of HMGB1 and S100A could 
perpetuate damage-induced cartilage inflammation in late-stage OA-affected joints
similar to sterile inflammation. The paracrine effects of HMGB1 can induce
chemokines and NO that are perceived to change cartilage homeostasis in human
OA-affected cartilage.

PMCID: PMC4117271
PMID: 24905701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2014 Aug;24(4):112-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2014.03.006. Epub 
2014 May 9.

Transcriptional and epigenetic control of IGF1R gene expression: implications in 
metabolism and cancer.

Werner H(1), Sarfstein R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel. Electronic address:
hwerner@post.tau.ac.il. (2)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and
Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978,
Israel.

IGF1R plays an important role in protection from apoptosis, regulation of cell
growth, differentiation and oncogenic transformation. IGF1R aberrations lead to
intrauterine and postnatal growth failure, microcephaly, mental retardation and
deafness. High levels of IGF1R are detected in a diversity of human tumors. IGF1R
gene transcription is controlled by complex interactions involving DNA-binding
and non DNA-binding transcription factors. This review highlights selected
examples of a series of tumor suppressors, including the breast cancer gene-1
(BRCA1), p53, the Wilm's tumor protein-1 (WT1) and the von Hippel-Lindau gene
(VHL), whose mechanisms of action involve regulation of IGF1R gene expression.
IGF1R gene transcription is also dependent on the presence of stimulatory nuclear
proteins, including zinc-finger protein Sp1, EWS-WT1, E2F1, Krüppel-like factor-6
(KLF6), high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1), and others. Loss-of-function of tumor
suppressor genes, usually caused by mutations, may result in non-functional
proteins unable to control IGF1R promoter activity. Impaired regulation of the
IGF1R gene is linked to defective cell division, chromosomal instability and
increased incidence of cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24863809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2014 May 16;9(5):e98037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098037. eCollection
2014.

Hsa-miRNA-765 as a key mediator for inhibiting growth, migration and invasion in 
fulvestrant-treated prostate cancer.

Leung YK(1), Chan QK(2), Ng CF(3), Ma FM(2), Tse HM(2), To KF(4), Maranchie J(5),
Ho SM(6), Lau KM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Center for Environmental Genetics, and
Cancer Institute, University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio,
United States of America. (2)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. 
(3)Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region, China. (4)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
China; State Key Laboratory in Southern China in Oncology, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. (5)Department of
Urology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of
America. (6)Department of Environmental Health, Center for Environmental
Genetics, and Cancer Institute, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America; Cincinnati Veteran Affairs Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

Fulvestrant (ICI-182,780) has recently been shown to effectively suppress
prostate cancer cell growth in vitro and in vivo. But it is unclear whether
microRNAs play a role in regulating oncogene expression in fulvestrant-treated
prostate cancer. Here, this study reports hsa-miR-765 as the first
fulvestrant-driven, ERß-regulated miRNA exhibiting significant tumor suppressor
activities like fulvestrant, against prostate cancer cell growth via blockage of 
cell-cycle progression at the G2/M transition, and cell migration and invasion
possibly via reduction of filopodia/intense stress-fiber formation. Fulvestrant
was shown to upregulate hsa-miR-765 expression through recruitment of ERß to the 
5'-regulatory-region of hsa-miR-765. HMGA1, an oncogenic protein in prostate
cancer, was identified as a downstream target of hsa-miR-765 and fulvestrant in
cell-based experiments and a clinical study. Both the antiestrogen and the
hsa-miR-765 mimic suppressed HMGA1 protein expression. In a neo-adjuvant study,
levels of hsa-miR-765 were increased and HMGA1 expression was almost completely
lost in prostate cancer specimens from patients treated with a single dose (250
mg) of fulvestrant 28 days before prostatectomy. These findings reveal a novel
fulvestrant signaling cascade involving ERß-mediated transcriptional upregulation
of hsa-miR-765 that suppresses HMGA1 protein expression as part of the mechanism 
underlying the tumor suppressor action of fulvestrant in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4024001
PMID: 24837491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Oncotarget. 2014 May 30;5(10):3234-45.

HMGA1 silencing restores normal stem cell characteristics in colon cancer stem
cells by increasing p53 levels.

Puca F(1), Colamaio M, Federico A, Gemei M, Tosti N, Bastos AU, Del Vecchio L,
Pece S, Battista S, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale - CNR e/o Dipartimento di
Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Studi di Napoli
"Federico II", Naples, Italy.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) proteins are architectural chromatinic proteins,
abundantly expressed during embryogenesis and in most cancer tissues, but
expressed at low levels or absent in normal adult tissues. Several studies have
demonstrated that HMGA1 proteins play a causal role in neoplastic cell
transformation. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of these
proteins in the control of cancer stem cells (CSCs), which have emerged as a
preferred target in cancer therapy, because of their role in cancer recurrence.
We observed that HMGA1 is overexpressed in colon tumour stem cell (CTSC) lines
compared to normal and colon cancer tissues. We demonstrated that HMGA1 silencing
in CTSCs increases stem cell quiescence and reduces self-renewal and
sphere-forming efficiency (SFE). The latter, together with the upregulation and
asymmetric distribution of NUMB, is indicative of the recovery of an asymmetric
division pattern, typical of normal stem cells. We further found that HMGA1
transcriptionally regulates p53, which is known to control the balance between
symmetric and asymmetric divisions in CSCs. Therefore, our data indicate a
critical role for HMGA1 in regulating both self-renewal and the
symmetric/asymmetric division ratio in CSCs, suggesting that blocking HMGA1
function may be an effective anti-cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4102806
PMID: 24833610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nature. 2014 May 22;509(7501):465-70. doi: 10.1038/nature13317. Epub 2014 May 14.

Cell competition is a tumour suppressor mechanism in the thymus.

Martins VC(1), Busch K(2), Juraeva D(3), Blum C(4), Ludwig C(4), Rasche V(5),
Lasitschka F(6), Mastitsky SE(3), Brors B(3), Hielscher T(7), Fehling HJ(4),
Rodewald HR(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany [2] Institute of Immunology, University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, 
Germany. (2)Division of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German
Cancer Research Center, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Institute of Immunology, 
University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany. (5)Core Facility Small Animal MRI,
University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany. (6)Institute of Pathology, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 224, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Division of Biostatistics, German Cancer Research Center, D-69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Comment in
    Mol Ther. 2014 Sep;22(9):1562-3.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 Jun;14(6):381.
    Nature. 2014 May 22;509(7501):435-6.

Cell competition is an emerging principle underlying selection for cellular
fitness during development and disease. Competition may be relevant for cancer,
but an experimental link between defects in competition and tumorigenesis is
elusive. In the thymus, T lymphocytes develop from precursors that are constantly
replaced by bone-marrow-derived progenitors. Here we show that in mice this
turnover is regulated by natural cell competition between 'young'
bone-marrow-derived and 'old' thymus-resident progenitors that, although
genetically identical, execute differential gene expression programs. Disruption 
of cell competition leads to progenitor self-renewal, upregulation of Hmga1,
transformation, and T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) resembling the
human disease in pathology, genomic lesions, leukaemia-associated transcripts,
and activating mutations in Notch1. Hence, cell competition is a tumour
suppressor mechanism in the thymus. Failure to select fit progenitors through
cell competition may explain leukaemia in X-linked severe combined immune
deficiency patients who showed thymus-autonomous T-cell development after therapy
with gene-corrected autologous progenitors.

PMID: 24828041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;33(5):1329-39. doi: 10.1159/000358700. Epub 2014 Apr
28.

MiR-142-3p functions as a potential tumor suppressor in human osteosarcoma by
targeting HMGA1.

Xu G(1), Wang J, Jia Y, Shen F, Han W, Kang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Mounting evidence has shown that aberrant expression of miRNAs
correlates with human cancers, and that miRNAs can function as tumor suppressors 
or oncogenes. Here, we investigated the role and mechanism of miR-142-3p in human
osteosarcoma.
METHODS: We used quantitative real-time RT-PCR to measure the expression of
miR-142-3p in human osteosarcoma cell lines and tissues. The roles of miR-142-3p 
in osteosarcoma development were studied using cultured HOS, MG63 and Saos-2
cells and tumor xenograft analyses in nude mice; their target genes were also
investigated.
RESULTS: We found that miR-142-3p was significantly downregulated in osteosarcoma
cell lines and clinical specimens. Overexpression of miR-142-3p suppressed
osteosarcoma cell proliferation, migration and invasion, whereas miR-142-3p
knockdown increased these parameters. The xenograft mouse model also revealed the
suppressive effect of miR-142-3p on tumor growth. High mobility group AT-hook 1
(HMGA1) was identified as a target of miR-142-3p. Downregulation of HMGA1 induced
effects on osteosarcoma cell lines similar to those induced by miR-142-3p. In
contrast, restoration of HMGA1 abrogated the effects induced by miR-142-3p
up-regulation.
CONCLUSION: These results indicated that miR-142-3p may function as a tumor
suppressor by targeting HMGA1 in osteosarcoma.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24803022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Anim Genet. 2014 Aug;45(4):524-33. doi: 10.1111/age.12163. Epub 2014 May 5.

Three novel quantitative trait loci for skin thickness in swine identified by
linkage and genome-wide association studies.

Ai H(1), Xiao S, Zhang Z, Yang B, Li L, Guo Y, Lin G, Ren J, Huang L.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry
of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, 330045, Nanchang,
China.

Skin is the largest organ in the pig body and plays a key role in protecting the 
body against pathogens and excessive water loss. Deciphering the genetic basis of
swine skin thickness would enrich our knowledge about the skin. To identify the
loci for porcine skin thickness, we first performed a genome scan with 194
microsatellite markers in a White Duroc × Erhualian F2 intercross. We identified 
three genome-wide significant QTL on pig chromosomes (SSC) 4, 7 and 15 using
linkage analysis. The most significant QTL was found on SSC7 with a small
confidence interval of ~5 cM, explaining 23.9 percent of phenotypic variance.
Further, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) using Illumina
PorcineSNP60 Beadchips for the F2 pedigree and a population of Chinese Sutai
pigs. We confirmed significant QTL in the F2 pedigree and replicated QTL on SSC15
in Chinese Sutai pigs. A meta-analysis of GWASs on both populations detected a
genomic region associated with skin thickness on SSC4. GWAS results were
generally consistent with QTL mapping. Identical-by-descent analysis defined QTL 
on SSC7 in a 683-kb region harboring an interesting candidate gene: HMGA1. On
SSC15, the linkage disequilibrium analysis showed a haplotype block of 2.20 Mb
that likely harbors the gene responsible for skin thickness. Our findings provide
novel insights into the genetic basis of swine skin thickness, which would
benefit further understanding of porcine skin function.

© 2014 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

PMID: 24796629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. World J Diabetes. 2014 Apr 15;5(2):128-40. doi: 10.4239/wjd.v5.i2.128.

Recent advances in the molecular genetics of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Brunetti A(1), Chiefari E(1), Foti D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Antonio Brunetti, Eusebio Chiefari, Daniela Foti, Department of Health
Sciences, University "Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a complex disease in which both genetic and
environmental factors interact in determining impaired ß-cell insulin secretion
and peripheral insulin resistance. Insulin resistance in muscle, liver and fat is
a prominent feature of most patients with T2DM and obesity, resulting in a
reduced response of these tissues to insulin. Considerable evidence has been
accumulated to indicate that heredity is a major determinant of insulin
resistance and T2DM. It is believed that, among individuals destined to develop
T2DM, hyperinsulinemia is the mechanism by which the pancreatic ß-cell initially 
compensates for deteriorating peripheral insulin sensitivity, thus ensuring
normal glucose tolerance. Most of these people will develop T2DM when ß-cells
fail to compensate. Despite the progress achieved in this field in recent years, 
the genetic causes of insulin resistance and T2DM remain elusive. Candidate gene 
association, linkage and genome-wide association studies have highlighted the
role of genetic factors in the development of T2DM. Using these strategies, a
large number of variants have been identified in many of these genes, most of
which may influence both hepatic and peripheral insulin resistance, adipogenesis 
and ß-cell mass and function. Recently, a new gene has been identified by our
research group, the HMGA1 gene, whose loss of function can greatly raise the risk
of developing T2DM in humans and mice. Functional genetic variants of the HMGA1
gene have been associated with insulin resistance syndromes among white
Europeans, Chinese individuals and Americans of Hispanic ancestry. These findings
may represent new ways to improve or even prevent T2DM.

PMCID: PMC3990314
PMID: 24748926  [PubMed]


87. Biol Open. 2014 Apr 11;3(5):372-8. doi: 10.1242/bio.20146759.

Hmga1/Hmga2 double knock-out mice display a "superpygmy" phenotype.

Federico A(1), Forzati F(1), Esposito F(1), Arra C(2), Palma G(3), Barbieri A(2),
Palmieri D(1), Fedele M(1), Pierantoni GM(1), De Martino I(1), Fusco A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II", via Pansini 5, 80131
Naples, Italy. (2)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Fondazione Pascale, 80131
Naples, Italy. (3)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR
c/o Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Facoltà di
Medicina e Chirurgia di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II",
via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Fondazione
Pascale, 80131 Naples, Italy. (4)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia
Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie
Mediche, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia di Napoli, Università degli Studi di
Napoli "Federico II", via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy alfusco@unina.it.

The HMGA1 and HMGA2 genes code for proteins belonging to the High Mobility Group 
A family. Several genes are negatively or positively regulated by both these
proteins, but a number of genes are specifically regulated by only one of them.
Indeed, knock-out of the Hmga1 and Hmga2 genes leads to different phenotypes:
cardiac hypertrophy and type 2 diabetes in the former case, and a large reduction
in body size and amount of fat tissue in the latter case. Therefore, to better
elucidate the functions of the Hmga genes, we crossed Hmga1-null mice with mice
null for Hmga2. The Hmga1(-/-)/Hmga2(-/-) mice showed reduced vitality and a very
small size (75% smaller than the wild-type mice); they were even smaller than
pygmy Hmga2-null mice. The drastic reduction in E2F1 activity, and consequently
in the expression of the E2F-dependent genes involved in cell cycle regulation,
likely accounts for some phenotypic features of the Hmga1(-/-)/Hmga2(-/-) mice.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4021359
PMID: 24728959  [PubMed]


88. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Oct;20(4):847-51. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9763-0. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

HMGA1 interacts with ß-catenin to positively regulate Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in 
colorectal cancer cells.

Xing J(1), Cao G, Fu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

The high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein plays an important role in numerous
biological processes, such as embryogenesis, cell proliferation, differentiation,
apoptosis and carcinogenesis. Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway plays a key role in
development and cancer. Although previous reports have shown HMGA1 protein level 
can be induced by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, however, the specific
mechanism of HMGA1 on regulating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling remains unclear. Here,
we reported that HMGA1 interacted with ß-catenin by using coimmunoprecipitation
approach with exogenous and endogenous protein samples. HMGA1 positively
regulated Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, as determined by that HMGA1 increased the
TOP-FLASH activity in a dose-dependent manner and ß-catenin downstream target
gene expression. Moreover, HMGA1 induced proliferation of colorectal cancer
cells. Mechanistically, HMGA1 increased the ß-catenin-TCF4 complex formation.
Importantly, there was a correlation between HMGA1 and ß-catenin expression in
human colorectal cancer tissues. In summary, HMGA1 positively regulates
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling through interacting with ß-catenin, which leads to
increase the ß-catenin-TCF4 complex formation. This suggests that targeting HMGA1
may be a useful therapeutic option in clinical application.

PMID: 24696416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014 May;18(5):541-53. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2014.900045. Epub 2014 Mar 31.

The high mobility group A1 molecular switch: turning on cancer - can we turn it
off?

Huso TH(1), Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Hematology Division , Ross
Research Building, Room 1015, 720 Rutland Avenue, Baltimore MD 21205 , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Emerging evidence demonstrates that the high mobility group A1
(HMGA1) chromatin remodeling protein is a key molecular switch required by cancer
cells for tumor progression and a poorly differentiated, stem-like state. Because
the HMGA1 gene and proteins are expressed at high levels in all aggressive tumors
studied to date, research is needed to determine how to 'turn off' this master
regulatory switch in cancer.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, we describe prior studies that underscore the
central role of HMGA1 in refractory cancers and we discuss approaches to target
HMGA1 in cancer therapy.
EXPERT OPINION: Given the widespread overexpression of HMGA1 in diverse,
aggressive tumors, further research to develop technology to target HMGA1 holds
immense promise as potent anticancer therapy. Previous work in preclinical models
indicates that delivery of short hairpin RNA or interfering RNA molecules to
'switch off' HMGA1 expression dramatically impairs cancer cell growth and tumor
progression. The advent of nanoparticle technology to systemically deliver DNA or
RNA molecules to tumors brings this approach even closer to clinical
applications, although further efforts are needed to translate these advances
into therapies for cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4404637
PMID: 24684280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neuroscience. 2014 Jun 6;269:112-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.03.036.
Epub 2014 Mar 27.

The high-mobility group I-Y transcription factor is involved in cerebral ischemia
and modulates the expression of angiogenic proteins.

Camós S(1), Gubern C(2), Sobrado M(3), Rodríguez R(2), Romera VG(3), Moro MA(3), 
Lizasoain I(3), Serena J(2), Mallolas J(4), Castellanos M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IdIBGi), Grup Cerebrovascular -
Servei de Neurologia, Hospital Universitari de Girona Dr. Josep Trueta, Av.
França s/n. 17007, Girona, Spain. Electronic address: su.camosbadia@gmail.com.
(2)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IdIBGi), Grup Cerebrovascular -
Servei de Neurologia, Hospital Universitari de Girona Dr. Josep Trueta, Av.
França s/n. 17007, Girona, Spain. (3)Unidad Neurovascular, Departamento de
Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM), and 
Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre (i+12), Avenida Complutense
s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain. (4)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona
(IdIBGi), Grup Cerebrovascular - Servei de Neurologia, Hospital Universitari de
Girona Dr. Josep Trueta, Av. França s/n. 17007, Girona, Spain. Electronic
address: judithmallolas@cofgi.org.

The present study aims to identify transcription factors (TFs) contributing to
angiogenesis, a mechanism involved in giving plasticity to the brain, as
potential therapeutic targets after cerebral ischemia. The promoter sequences
from candidate genes involved in angiogenesis were submitted to a comparative
analysis by bioinformatics software. High-mobility group I-Y protein (HMGIY) TF
characterization in a rat permanent focal cerebral ischemia model was performed
by quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot for the TF
expression profile study. The TF functional study was carried out using a TF-TF
interaction array and gene silencing by siRNA in rat brain microvascular
endothelial cells. The results showed that the promoters shared a common TF
binding site for HMGIY. The expression profile analysis in ischemic rat brain
showed an increase in HMGIY mRNA in the acute phase and a progressive
overexpression of protein over time post-ischemia. The interaction array analysis
revealed that ischemia promotes the interaction of HMGIY with TFs involved in
different cerebral plasticity processes. In vitro knockdown studies showed that
angiopoietin 1 and vascular endothelial growth factor expression is controlled by
HMGIY and that this TF is involved in cell survival in brain endothelial cells.
These findings suggest that HMGIY is a potential therapeutic target that could
promote brain repair functions after stroke.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24680881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Histol Histopathol. 2014 Aug;29(8):999-1006. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

An up-date on newly discovered immunohistochemical biomarkers for the diagnosis
of human testicular germ cell tumors.

Chieffi P(1), Chieffi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology II University of Naples, Caserta, Italy.
Paolo.Chieffi@unina2.it. (2)Department of Experimental Medicine, II University of
Naples, Naples, Italy.

Although testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) are relatively uncommon, they are
particularly important, as they tend to affect children and young men, the most
common tumor being in males aged from 20 to 40 years, and the incidence has been 
increasing in the last years. TGCTs comprise two major histologic groups:
seminomas and non-seminomas germ cell tumors (NSGCTs). NSGCTs can be further
divided into embryonal, carcinoma, Teratoma, yolk sac tumor, and choriocarcinoma.
Seminomas and NSGCTs present significant differences in clinical features,
therapy, and prognosis, and both show characteristics of the Primordial Germ
Cells (PGCs). For proper diagnosis of the different histological subgroups,
immunohistochemistry is required using different molecular markers, such as
Aurora B, GPR30, Nek2, HMGA1, HMGA2, and others, and they could represent useful 
novel molecular targets for antineoplastic strategies. More insight into the
pathogenesis of TGCTs is likely to contribute not only to better treatment of
these tumors but also to a better understanding of stem cells and oncogenesis.

PMID: 24627150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(8):4962-71. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku168. Epub 2014 Mar
11.

HMGA1 recruits CTIP2-repressed P-TEFb to the HIV-1 and cellular target promoters.

Eilebrecht S(1), Le Douce V, Riclet R, Targat B, Hallay H, Van Driessche B,
Schwartz C, Robette G, Van Lint C, Rohr O, Benecke AG.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Institute, INSERM U955, Institut Mondor de Recherche
Biomédicale, 8 rue du général Sarrail, 94011 Créteil, France, Institut des Hautes
Études Scientifiques-Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 35 route de
Chartres, 91440 Bures sur Yvette, France, Institut de Parasitologie et de
Pathologie Tropicale, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle, University of
Strasbourg, 3 rue Koeberlé, 67000 Strasbourg, France, IUT Louis Pasteur, 1 Allée 
d'Athénes, 67300 Schiltigheim, France, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),
Service of Molecular Virology, Institute for Molecular Biology and Medicine
(IBMM), 12 rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium, Institut
Universitaire de France-IUF, Paris, France and CNRS UMR 7224, Université Pierre
et Marie Curie, 7 quai Saint Bernard, 75005 Paris, France.

Active positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) is essential for
cellular and human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcription
elongation. CTIP2 represses P-TEFb activity in a complex containing 7SK RNA and
HEXIM1. Recently, the inactive 7SK/P-TEFb small nuclear RNP (snRNP) has been
detected at the HIV-1 core promoter as well as at the promoters of cellular
genes, but a recruiting mechanism still remains unknown to date. Here we show
global synergy between CTIP2 and the 7SK-binding chromatin master-regulator HMGA1
in terms of P-TEFb-dependent endogenous and HIV-1 gene expression regulation.
While CTIP2 and HMGA1 concordingly repress the expression of cellular
7SK-dependent P-TEFb targets, the simultaneous knock-down of CTIP2 and HMGA1 also
results in a boost in Tat-dependent and independent HIV-1 promoter activity.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments reveal a significant loss of
CTIP2/7SK/P-TEFb snRNP recruitment to cellular gene promoters and the HIV-1
promoter on HMGA1 knock-down. Our findings not only provide insights into a
recruiting mechanism for the inactive 7SK/P-TEFb snRNP, but may also contribute
to a better understanding of viral latency.

PMCID: PMC4005653
PMID: 24623795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. BMC Genomics. 2013;14 Suppl 6:S5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-S6-S5. Epub 2013 Oct 
25.

A novel in silico reverse-transcriptomics-based identification and blood-based
validation of a panel of sub-type specific biomarkers in lung cancer.

Barh D, Jain N, Tiwari S, Field JK, Padin-Iruegas E, Ruibal A, López R, Herranz
M, Bhattacharya A, Juneja L, Viero C, Silva A, Miyoshi A, Kumar A, Blum K,
Azevedo V, Ghosh P, Liloglou T.

Lung cancer accounts for the highest number of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Early diagnosis significantly increases the disease-free survival rate and a
large amount of effort has been expended in screening trials and the development 
of early molecular diagnostics. However, a gold standard diagnostic strategy is
not yet available. Here, based on miRNA expression profile in lung cancer and
using a novel in silico reverse-transcriptomics approach, followed by analysis of
the interactome; we have identified potential transcription factor (TF) markers
that would facilitate diagnosis of subtype specific lung cancer. A subset of
seven TF markers has been used in a microarray screen and was then validated by
blood-based qPCR using stage-II and IV non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC).
Our results suggest that overexpression of HMGA1, E2F6, IRF1, and TFDP1 and
downregulation or no expression of SUV39H1, RBL1, and HNRPD in blood is suitable 
for diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma sub-types of
NSCLC. Here, E2F6 was, for the first time, found to be upregulated in NSCLC blood
samples. The miRNA-TF-miRNA interaction based molecular mechanisms of these seven
markers in NSCLC revealed that HMGA1 and TFDP1 play vital roles in lung cancer
tumorigenesis. The strategy developed in this work is applicable to any other
cancer or disease and can assist in the identification of potential biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC3908344
PMID: 24564251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2014 Mar;156(3):451-61; discussion 461. doi:
10.1007/s00701-014-1993-0. Epub 2014 Jan 23.

Nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas: association of Ki-67 and HMGA-1 labeling
indices with residual tumor growth.

teno A(1), Bocko J, Rychlý B, Chorváth M, Celec P, Fabian M, Belan V, teno J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Comenius University, Faculty of Medicine,
University Hospital Bratislava, Limbová 5, 833 05, Bratislava, Slovakia,
andrej.steno@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The postoperative biological behavior of nonfunctioning pituitary
adenomas (NFPAs) is variable. Some residual NFPAs are stable long-term, others
grow, and some recur despite complete removal. The usual histological markers of 
tumor aggressiveness are often similar between recurring, regrowing, and stable
tumors, and therefore are not reliable as prognostic parameters. In this study,
the clinical utility of proliferation indices (labeling index, Li) based on
immunohistochemistry targeted at antigens Ki-67 and High-mobility group A1
(HMGA-1) for prediction of NFPA prognosis was investigated.
METHODS: Fifty patients with NFPAs were investigated. In each patient, Ki-67 and 
HMGA-1 Li were evaluated. Based on postoperative magnetic resonance images,
patients were classified as tumor-free (18 patients), or harboring a residual
tumor (32 patients). The latter group was further subdivided into groups with
stable tumor remnants (11 patients) or progressive tumor remnants (21 patients).
RESULTS: The median follow-up period was 8 years. No significant relationship
between HMGA-1 Li and residual tumor growth was found. Growing residual tumors
showed a trend towards higher Ki-67 Li compared with stable ones (p = 0.104). All
tumor remnants with Ki-67 Li above 2.2% were growing. The relationship between
residual tumor growth and Ki-67 Li exceeding the cutoff value of 2.2% was
significant (p = 0.01 in univariate, p = 0.044 in multivariate analysis).
CONCLUSIONS: The prognostic significance of the HMGA-1 antigen was not confirmed.
In contrast, the Ki-67 Li provides useful and valuable information for the
postoperative management of NFPAs. In residual adenomas with a Ki-67 Li above
2.2%, regrowth should be expected, and these tumors may require shorter intervals
of follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and/or early adjuvant therapy.
Future larger studies are needed to confirm the results of this study.

PMID: 24452592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jun 1;23(11):1266-74. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0592. Epub 2014 
Mar 3.

Knockdown of E2F2 inhibits tumorigenicity, but preserves stemness of human
embryonic stem cells.

Suzuki DE(1), Nakahata AM, Okamoto OK.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Federal University of São Paulo , 
São Paulo, Brazil .

Tumorigenicity of human pluripotent stem cells is a major threat limiting their
application in cell therapy protocols. It remains unclear, however, whether
suppression of tumorigenic potential can be achieved without critically affecting
pluripotency. A previous study has identified hyperexpressed genes in cancer stem
cells, among which is E2F2, a gene involved in malignant transformation and stem 
cell self-renewal. Here we tested whether E2F2 knockdown would affect the
proliferative capacity and tumorigenicity of human embryonic stem cells (hESC).
Transient E2F2 silencing in hESC significantly inhibited expression of the
proto-oncogenes BMI1 and HMGA1, in addition to proliferation of hESC, indicated
by a higher proportion of cells in G1, fewer cells in G2/M phase, and a reduced
capacity to generate hESC colonies in vitro. Nonetheless, E2F2-silenced cells
kept expression of typical pluripotency markers and displayed differentiation
capacity in vitro. More importantly, E2F2 knockdown in hESC significantly
inhibited tumor growth in vivo, which was considerably smaller than tumors
generated from control hESC, although displaying typical teratoma traits, a major
indicator of pluripotency retention in E2F2-silenced cells. These results suggest
that E2F2 knockdown can inhibit hESC proliferation and tumorigenicity without
significantly harming stemness, providing a rationale to future protocols aiming 
at minimizing risks related to therapeutic application of cells and/or products
derived from human pluripotent cells.

PMID: 24446828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2014 Jan;14(1):23-30. doi:
10.1586/14737140.2013.859988.

Hitting the bull's eye: targeting HMGA1 in cancer stem cells.

Yanagisawa BL(1), Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pathobiology Graduate Program, Hematology Division,
Oncology, the Institute for Cellular Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Emerging evidence suggests that when cancer cells hijack normal stem cell
properties, they acquire the ability to invade, metastasize to distant sites and 
evade therapy. Thus, eliminating cancer cells with stem cell properties, or
cancer stem cells, is of prime importance for the successful treatment of cancer,
regardless of the tissue of origin. Previous efforts to target cancer stem cells 
(CSCs), however, have been largely unsuccessful. Recent studies led to the
discovery of a novel role for the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein as a
master regulator in both CSCs and normal embryonic stem cells. Here, we present
exciting new work unveiling HMGA1 as a promising target for therapies directed at
eradicating CSCs.

PMCID: PMC4333104
PMID: 24410339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e85046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085046.
eCollection 2013.

Human surfactant protein D alters oxidative stress and HMGA1 expression to induce
p53 apoptotic pathway in eosinophil leukemic cell line.

Mahajan L(1), Pandit H(2), Madan T(3), Gautam P(4), Yadav AK(2), Warke H(5),
Sundaram CS(6), Sirdeshmukh R(6), Sarma PU(7), Kishore U(8), Surolia A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Institute of Genomics and Integrative 
Biology (IGIB), New Delhi, Delhi, India ; Centre for Molecular Medicine, National
Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi, India. (2)Innate Immunity, National
Institute for Research in Reproductive Health (NIRRH), Mumbai, Maharashtra,
India. (3)Molecular Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Institute of Genomics and
Integrative Biology (IGIB), New Delhi, Delhi, India ; Innate Immunity, National
Institute for Research in Reproductive Health (NIRRH), Mumbai, Maharashtra,
India. (4)Molecular Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Institute of Genomics and
Integrative Biology (IGIB), New Delhi, Delhi, India ; Proteomics Research
Facility, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad, Andhra
Pradesh, India. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, K E M Hospital and
Seth G. S. Medical College, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India. (6)Proteomics Research
Facility, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad, Andhra
Pradesh, India. (7)Molecular Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Institute of Genomics 
and Integrative Biology (IGIB), New Delhi, Delhi, India. (8)Centre for Infection,
Immunity and Disease Mechanisms (CIIDM), Brunel University, London, United
Kingdom. (9)Centre for Molecular Medicine, National Institute of Immunology
(NII), New Delhi, India.

Surfactant protein D (SP-D), an innate immune molecule, has an indispensable role
in host defense and regulation of inflammation. Immune related functions
regulated by SP-D include agglutination of pathogens, phagocytosis, oxidative
burst, antigen presentation, T lymphocyte proliferation, cytokine secretion,
induction of apoptosis and clearance of apoptotic cells. The present study
unravels a novel ability of SP-D to reduce the viability of leukemic cells
(eosinophilic leukemic cell line, AML14.3D10; acute myeloid leukemia cell line,
THP-1; acute lymphoid leukemia cell lines, Jurkat, Raji; and human breast
epithelial cell line, MCF-7), and explains the underlying mechanisms. SP-D and a 
recombinant fragment of human SP-D (rhSP-D) induced G2/M phase cell cycle arrest,
and dose and time-dependent apoptosis in the AML14.3D10 eosinophilic leukemia
cell line. Levels of various apoptotic markers viz. activated p53, cleaved
caspase-9 and PARP, along with G2/M checkpoints (p21 and Tyr15 phosphorylation of
cdc2) showed significant increase in these cells. We further attempted to
elucidate the underlying mechanisms of rhSP-D induced apoptosis using proteomic
analysis. This approach identified large scale molecular changes initiated by
SP-D in a human cell for the first time. Among others, the proteomics analysis
highlighted a decreased expression of survival related proteins such as HMGA1,
overexpression of proteins to protect the cells from oxidative burst, while a
drastic decrease in mitochondrial antioxidant defense system. rhSP-D mediated
enhanced oxidative burst in AML14.3D10 cells was confirmed, while antioxidant,
N-acetyl-L-cysteine, abrogated the rhSP-D induced apoptosis. The rhSP-D mediated 
reduced viability was specific to the cancer cell lines and viability of human
PBMCs from healthy controls was not affected. The study suggests involvement of
SP-D in host's immunosurveillance and therapeutic potential of rhSP-D in the
eosinophilic leukemia and cancers of other origins.

PMCID: PMC3877357
PMID: 24391984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 18;8(12):e83969. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083969.
eCollection 2013.

Transcriptional regulation of the HMGA1 gene by octamer-binding proteins Oct-1
and Oct-2.

Chiefari E(1), Arcidiacono B(1), Possidente K(1), Iiritano S(1), Ventura V(1),
Pandolfo R(1), Brunetti FS(2), Greco M(3), Foti D(1), Brunetti A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University "Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro, Viale
Europa (Loc. Germaneto), Catanzaro, Italy. (2)Department of Medical and Surgical 
Sciences, University "Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro, Viale Europa (Loc. Germaneto), 
Catanzaro, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University
"Magna Græcia" of Catanzaro, Viale Europa (Loc. Germaneto), Catanzaro, Italy.

The High-Mobility Group AT-Hook 1 (HMGA1) protein is an architectural
transcription factor that binds to AT-rich sequences in the promoter region of
DNA and functions as a specific cofactor for gene activation. Previously, we
demonstrated that HMGA1 is a key regulator of the insulin receptor (INSR) gene
and an important downstream target of the INSR signaling cascade. Moreover, from 
a pathogenic point of view, overexpression of HMGA1 has been associated with
human cancer, whereas functional variants of the HMGA1 gene have been recently
linked to type 2 diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome. However, despite of
this biological and pathological relevance, the mechanisms that control HMGA1
gene expression remain unknown. In this study, to define the molecular
mechanism(s) that regulate HMGA1 gene expression, the HMGA1 gene promoter was
investigated by transient transfection of different cell lines, either before or 
after DNA and siRNA cotransfections. An octamer motif was identified as an
important element of transcriptional regulation of this gene, the interaction of 
which with the octamer transcription factors Oct-1 and Oct-2 is crucial in
modulating HMGA1 gene and protein expression. Additionally, we demonstrate that
HMGA1 binds its own promoter and contributes to its transactivation by Oct-2 (but
not Oct-1), supporting its role in an auto-regulatory circuit. Overall, our
results provide insight into the transcriptional regulation of the HMGA1 gene,
revealing a differential control exerted by both Oct-1 and Oct-2. Furthermore,
they consistently support the hypothesis that a putative defect in Oct-1 and/or
Oct-2, by affecting HMGA1 expression, may cause INSR dysfunction, leading to
defects of the INSR signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3867479
PMID: 24367622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Mar;21(3):503. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.183. Epub 2013 Dec
6.

Retraction: High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) proteins interact with p53 and inhibit
its apoptotic activity.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Pierantoni GM, Rinaldo C, Esposito F, Mottolese M, Soddu S, Fusco A. Cell Death
Differ. 2006 Sep;13(9):1554-63.

PMCID: PMC3921599
PMID: 24317197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Jan;66:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.10.020. Epub 2013
Nov 4.

Impact of gestational chronodisruption on fetal cardiac genomics.

Galdames HA(1), Torres-Farfan C(2), Spichiger C(3), Mendez N(4), Abarzua-Catalan 
L(5), Alonso-Vazquez P(6), Richter HG(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, Institute of Anatomy, Histology and
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.
Electronic address: hugogaldames168@gmail.com. (2)Laboratory of Developmental
Chronobiology, Institute of Anatomy, Histology and Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. Electronic address:
claudia.torres@uach.cl. (3)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, Institute
of Anatomy, Histology and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Austral de 
Chile, Valdivia, Chile. Electronic address: cspichiger@uach.cl. (4)Laboratory of 
Developmental Chronobiology, Institute of Anatomy, Histology and Pathology,
Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. Electronic
address: natamendezc@gmail.com. (5)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology,
Institute of Anatomy, Histology and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad
Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. Electronic address: lorena.abarzua@gmail.com. 
(6)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, Institute of Anatomy, Histology and
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.
Electronic address: pamelalonso.1@gmail.com. (7)Laboratory of Developmental
Chronobiology, Institute of Anatomy, Histology and Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. Electronic address:
hrichter@uach.cl.

We recently reported that gestational chronodisruption induces fetal growth
restriction and marked effects on fetal adrenal physiology. Here,
whole-transcriptome profiling was used to test whether gestational
chronodisruption modifies gene expression in the fetal heart, potentially
altering cardiac development. At day 10 of gestation (E10), pregnant rats were
randomized in two groups: constant light (LL) and control 12 h light/12 h dark
photoperiod (LD). RNA isolated from E18 heart was subjected to microarray
analysis (Affymetrix platform for 28,000 genes). Integrated transcriptional
changes were assessed by gene ontology and pathway analysis. Significant
differential expression was found for 383 transcripts in LL relative to LD fetal 
heart (280 up-regulated and 103 down-regulated); with 42 of them displaying a
1.5-fold or greater change in gene expression. Deregulated markers of
cardiovascular disease accounted for alteration of diverse gene networks in LL
fetal heart, including local steroidogenesis and vascular calcification, as well 
as cardiac hypertrophy, stenosis and necrosis/cell death. DNA integrity was also 
overrepresented, including a 2.1-fold increase of Hmga1 mRNA, which encodes for a
profuse architectural transcription factor. microRNA analysis revealed
up-regulation of miRNAs 218-1 and 501 and concurrent down-regulation of their
validated target genes. In addition, persistent down-regulation of Kcnip2 mRNA
and hypertrophy of the left ventricle were found in the heart from 90 days-old
offspring from LL mothers. The dysregulation of a relevant fraction of the fetal 
cardiac transcriptome, together with the diversity and complexity of the gene
networks altered by gestational chronodisruption, suggest enduring molecular
changes which may shape the hypertrophy observed in the left ventricle of adult
LL offspring.

© 2013.

PMID: 24200829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Front Genet. 2013 Oct 29;4:209. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00209. eCollection 2013.

A comprehensive promoter landscape identifies a novel promoter for CD133 in
restricted tissues, cancers, and stem cells.

Sompallae R(1), Hofmann O, Maher CA, Gedye C, Behren A, Vitezic M, Daub CO,
Devalle S, Caballero OL, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y, Lawlor ER, Cebon J, Hide W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health Boston, MA, USA.

PROM1 is the gene encoding prominin-1 or CD133, an important cell surface marker 
for the isolation of both normal and cancer stem cells. PROM1 transcripts
initiate at a range of transcription start sites (TSS) associated with distinct
tissue and cancer expression profiles. Using high resolution Cap Analysis of Gene
Expression (CAGE) sequencing we characterize TSS utilization across a broad range
of normal and developmental tissues. We identify a novel proximal promoter (P6)
within CD133(+) melanoma cell lines and stem cells. Additional exon array
sampling finds P6 to be active in populations enriched for mesenchyme, neural
stem cells and within CD133(+) enriched Ewing sarcomas. The P6 promoter is
enriched with respect to previously characterized PROM1 promoters for a HMGI/Y
(HMGA1) family transcription factor binding site motif and exhibits different
epigenetic modifications relative to the canonical promoter region of PROM1.

PMCID: PMC3810939
PMID: 24194746  [PubMed]


102. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2014 Feb;12(1):25-30. doi: 10.1089/met.2013.0086. Epub 
2013 Oct 22.

Evidence that an HMGA1 gene variant associates with type 2 diabetes, body mass
index, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in a Hispanic-American
population.

Pullinger CR(1), Goldfine ID, Tanyolaç S, Movsesyan I, Faynboym M, Durlach V,
Chiefari E, Foti DP, Frost PH, Malloy MJ, Brunetti A, Kane JP.

Author information: 
(1)1 Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Physiological Nursing,
University of California , San Francisco, California.

BACKGROUND: High-mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) is an important regulator of
the insulin receptor gene. We have previously shown in three populations of white
European ancestry that the HMGA1 gene variant rs146052672 (also designated
IVS5-13insC) is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The aim of this 
study was to measure the frequency of this variant and to determine the degree of
the association with T2DM and other features of the metabolic syndrome in a
replication cohort of Hispanic Americans.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study of well-characterized
Hispanic-American participants analyzed in the Genomic Resource in
Atherosclerosis (GRA) (Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco). A total of 1144 individuals were studied, 320 of whom
had T2DM. We examined associations of the rs146052672 SNP with T2DM, plasma
lipids, lipoproteins, and body mass index (BMI).
RESULTS: In this Hispanic-American cohort, the HMGA1 rs146052672 minor allele
(C-insertion) frequency (MAF) was 21.4% with a carrier frequency of 37.4%,
considerably higher than we previously observed among GRA white Europeans (MAF
3.1%). The prevalence of the IVS5-13insC variant was significantly higher in
those with T2DM compared to controls [42.2% vs. 35.5%; odds ratio (OR) 1.44 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.09-1.90, P=0.011). The variant was also associated
with BMI (positively, P=0.045) and plasma high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C) (negatively, P=0.047).
CONCLUSIONS: As we saw previously among white Europeans, a functional HMGA1
variant was associated with T2DM in individuals of Hispanic-American ethnicity
and was present at a much higher frequency.

PMID: 24148075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Anticancer Res. 2013 Oct;33(10):4261-6.

Expression of high mobility group A proteins in oral leukoplakia.

Larsson L(1), Jäwert F, Magnusson B, Hasséus B, Kjeller G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Institute of Odontology, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, P.O. Box 450, SE40530 Gothenburg, Sweden.
lena.larsson@odontologi.gu.se.

BACKGROUND: Oral leukoplakia (LPL) is considered a potentially malignant disorder
in the oral cavity and the gastric tract. High mobility group A (HMGA) proteins
are important in the transformation of normal cells into cancer cells, but there 
is a lack of knowledge on their importance in oral cancer development. The aim of
the current project was to investigate HMGA expression in LPLs with different
levels of dysplasia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Biopsies were histologically processed to visualize the
expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: An increase of HMGA1-positive cells correlating to the degree of
dysplasia was registered in the epithelium and in the connective tissue. HMGA2
expression was seen in the epithelium and in the connective tissue but with no
obvious correlation to the level of dysplasia.
CONCLUSION: This is, to our knowledge, the first study showing the expression of 
HMGA proteins in healthy and non-healthy oral mucosa.

PMID: 24122990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Nov;37(11):1715-21. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182a115c9.

Endobronchial lipomatous tumors: clinicopathologic analysis of 12 cases with
molecular cytogenetic evidence supporting classification as "lipoma".

Boland JM(1), Fritchie KJ, Erickson-Johnson MR, Oliveira AM, Colby TV, Folpe AL.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ.

Lipomatous lesions rarely involve the bronchial tree, and detailed morphologic
and molecular cytogenetic analysis of these tumors is lacking. The
clinicopathologic features of 12 endobronchial lipomatous neoplasms were studied,
with ancillary fluorescence in situ hybridization performed in subsets of cases
for CPM, which is amplified in atypical lipomatous tumors/well-differentiated
liposarcomas (ALT/WDL), and HMGA1 and HMGA2, which are often rearranged in
lipomas. The cases occurred predominately in older men (91%) (age range 44 to 80 
y, mean 65 y). Most patients (80%) had a former or current history of heavy
smoking (20 to 100 pack-years). Three patients had concurrent pulmonary squamous 
cell carcinoma, and 1 had a history of multiple lung cancers. Most lesions were
small (<2.5 cm) and discovered incidentally. A subset of tumors showed atypical
morphologic features that would be suggestive of ALT/WDL in soft tissue sites,
including regions of fibrosis and scattered hyperchromatic stromal cells.
However, all cases with atypia were CPM negative and behaved in a clinically
benign manner. Seven cases were tested for HMGA1 and HMGA2 rearrangement; 4
showed HMGA2 rearrangement, and 1 showed HMGA1 rearrangement, consistent with
lipomas. Two cases were negative for HMGA1/2 rearrangements. We conclude that
endobronchial lipomatous neoplasms represent lipomas, even in the presence of
morphologic features suggestive of ALT/WDL. Ancillary fluorescence in situ
hybridization testing may be very valuable in the analysis of these rare tumors, 
as true ALT/WDL seem to be very rare or nonexistent at this anatomic site.

PMID: 24121172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Feb 1;23(3):657-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt453. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

Dynamic changes in DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation when hES cells undergo 
differentiation toward a neuronal lineage.

Kim M(1), Park YK, Kang TW, Lee SH, Rhee YH, Park JL, Kim HJ, Lee D, Lee D, Kim
SY, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-806, Korea.

DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation have been implicated in normal development
and differentiation, but our knowledge is limited about the genome-wide
distribution of 5-methylcytosine (5 mC) and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5 hmC)
during cellular differentiation. Using an in vitro model system of gradual
differentiation of human embryonic stem (hES) cells into ventral midbrain-type
neural precursor cells and terminally into dopamine neurons, we observed dramatic
genome-wide changes in 5 mC and 5 hmC patterns during lineage commitment. The 5
hmC pattern was dynamic in promoters, exons and enhancers. DNA hydroxymethylation
within the gene body was associated with gene activation. The
neurogenesis-related genes NOTCH1, RGMA and AKT1 acquired 5 hmC in the gene body 
and were up-regulated during differentiation. DNA methylation in the promoter was
associated with gene repression. The pluripotency-related genes POU5F1, ZFP42 and
HMGA1 acquired 5 mC in their promoters and were down-regulated during
differentiation. Promoter methylation also acted as a locking mechanism to
maintain gene silencing. The mesoderm development-related genes NKX2-8, TNFSF11
and NFATC1 acquired promoter methylation during neural differentiation even
though they were already silenced in hES cells. Our findings will help elucidate 
the molecular mechanisms underlying lineage-specific differentiation of
pluripotent stem cells during human embryonic development.

PMID: 24087792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Open Biochem J. 2013 Sep 4;7:73-81. doi: 10.2174/1874091X01307010073. eCollection
2013.

Characterization of the Stoichiometry of HMGA1/DNA Complexes.

Watanabe M(1), Ni S, Lindenberger AL, Cho J, Tinch SL, Kennedy MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056, 
USA.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) non-histone chromatin architectural transcription 
factors regulate gene expression, embryogenesis, cell differentiation, and
adaptive immune responses by binding DNA and other transcription factors. HMGA1
has also been shown to be highly over-expressed in many human cancers and is
considered to be a valuable cancer biomarker. Elevated HMGA1 expression levels
also make cancer cells resistant to chemotherapy. Here, HMGA1/DNA complex
formation was investigated using electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA).
Collectively, the EMSA results indicated that full length HMGA1 mixed with DNA
containing three AT-hook binding sites formed four distinct HMGA1/DNA complexes
ranging in stoichiometry from 1:2 to 3:1 in HMGA1:DNA ratio. The data indicated
that the distribution of complexes with different HMGA1 to DNA stoichiometries
depended on the molar ratio of HMGA1 to DNA in solution, which could have
significant biological implications given that HMGA1 is highly over-expressed in 
human cancer cells. The two naturally occurring isoforms of HMGA1, HMGA1a and
HMGA1b, the latter containing an 11 amino acid deletion between the first and
second AT-hooks, were observed to have slightly different DNA binding profiles.
Finally, HMGA1 binding affinity to DNA was found to be influenced by the DNA A:T 
segment sequence context, with higher specificity be observed in HMGA1 binding to
TnAn segments, which have two local minor groove minima on either side of the TpA
step, compared to An:Tn segments, which have a single minor groove minimum at the
3' end of the An run, implying AT-hook binding favors narrow minor groove
structure.

PMCID: PMC3778555
PMID: 24062859  [PubMed]


107. Nutr Diabetes. 2013 Aug 26;3:e85. doi: 10.1038/nutd.2013.26.

Generalization of adiposity genetic loci to US Hispanic women.

Graff M(1), Fernández-Rhodes L, Liu S, Carlson C, Wassertheil-Smoller S,
Neuhouser M, Reiner A, Kooperberg C, Rampersaud E, Manson JE, Kuller LH, Howard
BV, Ochs-Balcom HM, Johnson KC, Vitolins MZ, Sucheston L, Monda K, North KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Obesity is a public health concern. Yet the identification of
adiposity-related genetic variants among United States (US) Hispanics, which is
the largest US minority group, remains largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To interrogate an a priori list of 47 (32 overall body mass and 15
central adiposity) index single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously
studied in individuals of European descent among 3494 US Hispanic women in the
Women's Health Initiative SNP Health Association Resource (WHI SHARe).
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis of measured body mass index (BMI), waist
circumference (WC) and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) were inverse normally transformed
after adjusting for age, smoking, center and global ancestry. WC and WHR models
were also adjusted for BMI. Genotyping was performed using the Affymetrix 6.0
array. In the absence of an a priori selected SNP, a proxy was selected (r(2)<U+E2F6>0.8
in CEU).
RESULTS: Six BMI loci (TMEM18, NUDT3/HMGA1, FAIM2, FTO, MC4R and KCTD15) and two 
WC/WHR loci (VEGFA and ITPR2-SSPN) were nominally significant (P<0.05) at the
index or proxy SNP in the corresponding BMI and WC/WHR models. To account for
distinct linkage disequilibrium patterns in Hispanics and further assess
generalization of genetic effects at each locus, we interrogated the evidence for
association at the 47 surrounding loci within 1<U+2009>Mb region of the index or proxy
SNP. Three additional BMI loci (FANCL, TFAP2B and ETV5) and five WC/WHR loci
(DNM3-PIGC, GRB14, ADAMTS9, LY86 and MSRA) displayed Bonferroni-corrected
significant associations with BMI and WC/WHR. Conditional analyses of each index 
SNP (or its proxy) and the most significant SNP within the 1<U+2009>Mb region supported 
the possible presence of index-independent signals at each of these eight loci as
well as at KCTD15.
CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence for the generalization of nine BMI and
seven central adiposity loci in Hispanic women. This study expands the current
knowledge of common adiposity-related genetic loci to Hispanic women.

PMCID: PMC3759132
PMID: 23978819  [PubMed]


108. Oncotarget. 2013 Aug;4(8):1293-308.

HMGA1 promotes metastatic processes in basal-like breast cancer regulating EMT
and stemness.

Pegoraro S(1), Ros G, Piazza S, Sommaggio R, Ciani Y, Rosato A, Sgarra R, Del Sal
G, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita, Università degli Studi di Trieste,
Trieste, Italy.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that progresses to the critical hallmark
of metastasis. In the present study, we show that the High Mobility Group A1
(HMGA1) protein plays a fundamental role in this process in basal-like breast
cancer subtype. HMGA1 knockdown induces the mesenchymal to epithelial transition 
and dramatically decreases stemness and self-renewal. Notably, HMGA1 depletion in
basal-like breast cancer cell lines reduced migration and invasion in vitro and
the formation of metastases in vivo. Mechanistically, HMGA1 activated stemness
and key migration-associated genes which were linked to the Wnt/beta-catenin,
Notch and Pin1/mutant p53 signalling pathways. Moreover, we identified a specific
HMGA1 gene expression signature that was activated in a large subset of human
primary breast tumours and was associated with poor prognosis. Taken together,
these data provide new insights into the role of HMGA1 in the acquisition of
aggressive features in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3787158
PMID: 23945276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 25;8(7):e69866. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069866. Print 2013.

Expression and functional characterization of Xhmg-at-hook genes in Xenopus
laevis.

Macrì S(1), Sgarra R, Ros G, Maurizio E, Zammitti S, Milani O, Onorati M, Vignali
R, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

High Mobility Group A proteins (HMGA1 and HMGA2) are architectural nuclear
factors involved in development, cell differentiation, and cancer formation and
progression. Here we report the cloning, developmental expression and functional 
analysis of a new multi-AT-hook factor in Xenopus laevis (XHMG-AT-hook) that
exists in three different isoforms. Xhmg-at-hook1 and 3 isoforms, but not isoform
2, are expressed throughout the entire development of Xenopus, both in the
maternal and zygotic phase. Localized transcripts are present in the animal pole 
in the early maternal phase; during the zygotic phase, mRNA can be detected in
the developing central nervous system (CNS), including the eye, and in the neural
crest. We show evidence that XHMG-AT-hook proteins differ from typical HMGA
proteins in terms of their properties in DNA binding and in protein/protein
interaction. Finally, we provide evidence that they are involved in early CNS
development and in neural crest differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3723657
PMID: 23936116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e68724. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068724. Print 2013.

Overexpression of high mobility group A1 protein in human uveal melanomas:
implication for prognosis.

Qu Y(1), Wang Y, Ma J, Zhang Y, Meng N, Li H, Wang Y, Wei W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
China. drquyi@gmail.com

There is increasing evidence that the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein,
which functions as a transcriptional master regulator, plays critical roles in
tumor progression. We evaluated HMGA1 expression in 89 primary uveal melanomas
(UM) by immunohistochemistry to determine the clinicopathological and prognostic 
value of HMGA1 in UM after adjusting for other prognostic variables. Nuclear
expression of HMGA1 was detected in 44% UMs. High expression levels of HMGA1 were
more frequent in UMs with high levels of epithelioid cell pattern, mitoses count,
and Ki67 labeling index (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.025, P<0.0001, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0018; respectively), and
HMGA1 expression levels were directly correlated with Ki67 labeling indexes and
mitoses counts (R<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.31, P <0.0001; R<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.27, P<0.0068; respectively). High
expression of HMGA1 was also independently associated with an increased risk of
distant metastases as determined using the Cox proportional hazards regression
model (multivariate hazard ratio: 3.44; 95% confidence interval: 1.56-7.60; log
rank P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0022). Moreover, high HMGA1 expression was associated with shorter
UM-specific survival (multivariate hazard ratio: 2.41; 95% confidence interval:
1.10-5.53; log rank P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.041). These findings suggest that high levels of HMGA1 
are associated with adverse clinical outcomes in UM patients and that further
evaluation of HMGA1 as a potential therapeutic target in UM is warranted.

PMCID: PMC3720810
PMID: 23935884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Oncol Rep. 2013 Sep;30(3):1488-96. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2602. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Microarray analysis reveals that high mobility group A1 is involved in colorectal
cancer metastasis.

Takahashi Y(1), Sawada G, Sato T, Kurashige J, Mima K, Matsumura T, Uchi R, Ueo
H, Ishibashi M, Takano Y, Akiyoshi S, Eguchi H, Sudo T, Sugimachi K, Tanaka J,
Kudo SE, Doki Y, Mori M, Mimori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Japan.

Tumor size indicates the extent of cell proliferation in most cases of colorectal
cancer (CRC), although there are some advanced small tumors with metastases.
Lymph node metastasis is a significant factor that greatly impacts disease
prognosis in CRC cases. The underlying factors that cause lymph node metastasis
in CRC cells are not fully understood. We investigated the mechanism that might
induce CRC metastasis by focusing on smaller sized (<2 cm) invasive tumors. We
carried out gene expression array analysis for CRC cases; group 1 consisted of 6 
cases with tumors <2 cm with metastases, and group 2 consisted of 65 cases with
tumors >2 cm without metastases. Results were validated using gene expression
array data from an additional 77 cases and another bulk case set of 172 cases.
Gene ontology and pathway analysis using microarray data revealed that
anti-apoptotic activity had a crucial role in CRC metastasis. High mobility group
A1 (HMGA1) was identified as a biomarker for poor prognosis and metastasis
formation. HMGA1 expression levels were higher in lymph node-positive cases than 
in lymph node-negative cases, even in subgroup analysis of submucosal invasive
cases. The present study strongly supports the clinical significance of HMGA1
expression as a predictive indicator of lymph node metastasis in CRC cases, even 
in submucosal invasive cases which could be cured by local resection.

PMID: 23835740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 May;55(5):1194-7. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.821202. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Nanoparticle delivery of inhibitory signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 G-quartet oligonucleotides blocks tumor growth in HMGA1
transgenic model of T-cell leukemia.

Hillion J(1), Belton AM, Shah SN, Turkson J, Jing N, Tweardy DJ, di Cello F, Huso
DL, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division.

PMCID: PMC4390121
PMID: 23829279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 14;8(6):e65064. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065064. Print 2013.

Distinct microRNA expression profile in prostate cancer patients with early
clinical failure and the impact of let-7 as prognostic marker in high-risk
prostate cancer.

Schubert M(1), Spahn M, Kneitz S, Scholz CJ, Joniau S, Stroebel P, Riedmiller H, 
Kneitz B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Pediatric Urology, Comprehensive Cancer Center (CCC)
Mainfranken, University Hospital, Würzburg, Germany.
Schubert_M@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de

BACKGROUND: The identification of additional prognostic markers to improve risk
stratification and to avoid overtreatment is one of the most urgent clinical
needs in prostate cancer (PCa). MicroRNAs, being important regulators of gene
expression, are promising biomarkers in various cancer entities, though the
impact as prognostic predictors in PCa is poorly understood. The aim of this
study was to identify specific miRNAs as potential prognostic markers in
high-risk PCa and to validate their clinical impact.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed miRNA-microarray analysis in a
high-risk PCa study group selected by their clinical outcome (clinical
progression free survival (CPFS) vs. clinical failure (CF)). We identified seven 
candidate miRNAs (let-7a/b/c, miR-515-3p/5p, -181b, -146b, and -361) that showed 
differential expression between both groups. Further qRT-PCR analysis revealed
down-regulation of members of the let-7 family in the majority of a large,
well-characterized high-risk PCa cohort (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>98). Expression of let-7a/b/and -c
was correlated to clinical outcome parameters of this group. While let-7a showed 
no association or correlation with clinical relevant data, let-7b and let-7c were
associated with CF in PCa patients and functioned partially as independent
prognostic marker. Validation of the data using an independent high-risk study
cohort revealed that let-7b, but not let-7c, has impact as an independent
prognostic marker for BCR and CF. Furthermore, we identified HMGA1, a non-histone
protein, as a new target of let-7b and found correlation of let-7b
down-regulation with HMGA1 over-expression in primary PCa samples.
CONCLUSION: Our findings define a distinct miRNA expression profile in PCa cases 
with early CF and identified let-7b as prognostic biomarker in high-risk PCa.
This study highlights the importance of let-7b as tumor suppressor miRNA in
high-risk PCa and presents a basis to improve individual therapy for high-risk
PCa patients.

PMCID: PMC3683014
PMID: 23798998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. FEBS Lett. 2013 Aug 2;587(15):2467-73. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.06.021. Epub
2013 Jun 22.

miR-26a inhibits proliferation and motility in bladder cancer by targeting HMGA1.

Lin Y(1), Chen H, Hu Z, Mao Y, Xu X, Zhu Y, Xu X, Wu J, Li S, Mao Q, Zheng X, Xie
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.

It is increasingly clear that microRNAs play a crucial role in tumorigenesis.
Recently, emerging evidence suggested that miR-26a is aberrantly expressed in
tumor tissues. In our study, frequent down-regulation of miR-26a was observed in 
10 human bladder cancer tissues. Forced expression of miR-26a in the bladder
cancer cell line T24 inhibited cell proliferation and impaired cell motility.
High mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1), a gene that modulates cell cycle
transition and cell motility, was verified as a novel target of miR-26a in
bladder cancer. These findings indicate an important role for miR-26a in the
molecular etiology of bladder cancer and implicate the potential application of
miR-26a in bladder cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23796420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2013 May 2;8(5):e63419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063419. Print 2013.

HMGA1: a master regulator of tumor progression in triple-negative breast cancer
cells.

Shah SN(1), Cope L, Poh W, Belton A, Roy S, Talbot CC Jr, Sukumar S, Huso DL,
Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Emerging evidence suggests that tumor cells metastasize by co-opting stem cell
transcriptional networks, although the molecular underpinnings of this process
are poorly understood. Here, we show for the first time that the high mobility
group A1 (HMGA1) gene drives metastatic progression in triple negative breast
cancer cells (MDA-MB-231, Hs578T) by reprogramming cancer cells to a stem-like
state. Silencing HMGA1 expression in invasive, aggressive breast cancer cells
dramatically halts cell growth and results in striking morphologic changes from
mesenchymal-like, spindle-shaped cells to cuboidal, epithelial-like cells.
Mesenchymal genes (Vimentin, Snail) are repressed, while E-cadherin is induced in
the knock-down cells. Silencing HMGA1 also blocks oncogenic properties, including
proliferation, migration, invasion, and orthotopic tumorigenesis. Metastatic
progression following mammary implantation is almost completely abrogated in the 
HMGA1 knock-down cells. Moreover, silencing HMGA1 inhibits the stem cell property
of three-dimensional mammosphere formation, including primary, secondary, and
tertiary spheres. In addition, knock-down of HMGA1 depletes cancer
initiator/cancer stem cells and prevents tumorigenesis at limiting dilutions. We 
also discovered an HMGA1 signature in triple negative breast cancer cells that is
highly enriched in embryonic stem cells. Together, these findings indicate that
HMGA1 is a master regulator of tumor progression in breast cancer by
reprogramming cancer cells through stem cell transcriptional networks. Future
studies are needed to determine how to target HMGA1 in therapy.

PMCID: PMC3642138
PMID: 23658826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 26;434(1):70-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.064. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Knockdown of HMGA1 inhibits human breast cancer cell growth and metastasis in
immunodeficient mice.

Di Cello F(1), Shin J, Harbom K, Brayton C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. fdicello@hotmail.com

The high mobility group A1 gene (HMGA1) has been previously implicated in breast 
carcinogenesis, and is considered an attractive target for therapeutic
intervention because its expression is virtually absent in normal adult tissue.
Other studies have shown that knockdown of HMGA1 reduces the tumorigenic
potential of breast cancer cells in vitro. Therefore, we sought to determine if
silencing HMGA1 can affect breast cancer development and metastatic progression
in vivo. We silenced HMGA1 expression in the human breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231 using an RNA interference vector, and observed a significant reduction
in anchorage-independent growth and tumorsphere formation, which respectively
indicate loss of tumorigenesis and self-renewal ability. Moreover, silencing
HMGA1 significantly impaired xenograft growth in immunodeficient mice, and while 
control cells metastasized extensively to the lungs and lymph nodes,
HMGA1-silenced cells generated only a few small metastases. Thus, our results
show that interfering with HMGA1 expression reduces the tumorigenic and
metastatic potential of breast cancer cells in vivo, and lend further support to 
investigations into targeting HMGA1 as a potential treatment for breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3662800
PMID: 23545254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Histopathology. 2013 Apr;62(5):778-87. doi: 10.1111/his.12084. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Diagnostic value of HMGAs, p53 and ß-catenin in discriminating adenocarcinoma
from adenoma or reactive atypia in ampulla and common bile duct biopsies.

Zakharov V(1), Ren B, Ryan C, Cao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

AIMS: Biopsies from the ampulla of Vater and the common bile duct often pose
diagnostic challenges. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression
patterns of HMGA1, HMGA2, ß-catenin and p53 in biopsy specimens, in order to
evaluate the potential diagnostic value of these proteins in differentiating
adenocarcinoma from reactive atypia or adenoma.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Forty-eight biopsies (10 from the common bile duct and 38
from the ampulla) were selected for immunohistochemical studies; they included 14
cases of reactive atypia, 12 adenomas, and 22 adenocarcinomas. Expression of
HMGA1 was seen in 21% of the reactive atypia cases, 42% of adenomas, and 91% of
adenocarcinomas. HMGA2 was positive in 14% of reactive atypias, 42% of adenomas, 
and 86% of adenocarcinomas. The staining intensity of HMGA1 and HMGA2 was also
significantly higher in adenocarcinomas than in adenomas or reactive atypias.
Interestingly, coexpression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 was found in 86% of
adenocarcinomas, 0% of reactive atypias, and 8% of adenomas. p53 and ß-catenin
expression seemed not to provide additional value for discriminating
adenocarcinoma from reactive atypia or adenoma.
CONCLUSIONS: HMGA1 and HMGA2 might serve to discriminate between reactive atypia,
adenoma and adenocarcinoma in ampulla and common bile duct biopsies.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23530587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2013 Jun;139(6):1073-81. doi: 10.1007/s00432-013-1420-6.
Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Can HMGI-C be used as an aid with MDM2 and CDK4 to differentiate liposarcoma
subtypes from their mimics?

Alshenawy H(1).

Author information: 
(1)hanan_alshenawy@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: Liposarcoma represents the most common soft tissue tumors in adults. The
tumors are characterized by a high morphological diversity and a great variation 
in biological behavior. Atypical lipomatous tumors represent a distinctive subset
of mesenchymal neoplasms featuring mature adipocytic differentiation.
Histologically, atypical lipomatous tumor might be easily confused with lipoma.
Conversely, dedifferentiated liposarcoma may be confused with other spindle
cell/pleomorphic undifferentiated tumors.
METHODS: A group of liposarcomas was analyzed by investigating the MDM2, CDK4,
and HMGI-C proteins. The study was extended to a group of lipomas and
non-lipomatous sarcomas, to determine whether the immunohistochemical
investigation of these proteins might play any diagnostic role.
RESULTS: Our data suggest that ordinary lipomas may form a molecular genetic and 
morphological continuum with atypical lipomatous tumor. At one end of the
spectrum are lipomas characterized by HMGI-C activation and at the other end are 
atypical lipomatous tumors with overrepresentation of the HMGI-C, CDK4, or MDM2
proteins. These findings not only provide insights into the molecular
pathogenesis of lipomatous tumors, but also indicate that the immunohistochemical
analysis of HMGI-C, CDK4, or MDM2 may help to increase diagnostic accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: HMGI-C is a useful adjunct in the diagnosis of atypical lipomatous
tumor and dedifferentiated liposarcoma and differentiates them from their mimics.
Therefore, in our experience, HMGI-C expression alone is of rather limited value 
in the differential diagnosis of liposarcoma subtypes.

PMID: 23529275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1491. doi: 10.1038/srep01491.

A polymorphism of HMGA1 is associated with increased risk of metabolic syndrome
and related components.

Chiefari E(1), Tanyolaç S, Iiritano S, Sciacqua A, Capula C, Arcidiacono B,
Nocera A, Possidente K, Baudi F, Ventura V, Brunetti G, Brunetti FS, Vero R, Maio
R, Greco M, Pavia M, Hodoglugil U, Durlach V, Pullinger CR, Goldfine ID,
Perticone F, Foti D, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University Magna Græcia of Catanzaro, 88100
Catanzaro, Italy.

The metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a common disorder, where systemic
insulin-resistance is associated with increased risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D)
and cardiovascular disease. Identifying genetic traits influencing risk and
progression of MetS is important. We and others previously reported a functional 
HMGA1 gene variant, rs146052672, predisposing to T2D. Here we investigated the
association of rs146052672 variant with MetS and related components. In a
case-control study from Italy and Turkey, increased risk of MetS was seen among
carriers of the HMGA1 variant. In the larger Italian cohort, this variant
positively correlated with BMI, hyperglycemia and insulin-resistance, and
negatively correlated with serum HDL-cholesterol. Association between rs146052672
variant and MetS occurred independently of T2D, indicating that HMGA1 gene
defects play a pathogenetic role in MetS and other insulin-resistance-related
conditions. Overall, our results indicate that the rs146052672 variant represents
an early predictive marker of MetS, as well as a predictive tool for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3603272
PMID: 23512162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Jun;52(6):580-90. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22055. Epub
2013 Mar 18.

Identification of PPAP2B as a novel recurrent translocation partner gene of HMGA2
in lipomas.

Bianchini L(1), Birtwisle L, Saâda E, Bazin A, Long E, Roussel JF, Michiels JF,
Forest F, Dani C, Myklebost O, Birtwisle-Peyrottes I, Pedeutour F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Solid Tumors Genetics, Nice University Hospital, Institute for
Research on Cancer and Aging of Nice (IRCAN), CNRS UMR 7284/INSERM U1081,
University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France. laurence.bianchini@unice.fr

Most lipomas are characterized by translocations involving the HMGA2 gene in
12q14.3. These rearrangements lead to the fusion of HMGA2 with an ectopic
sequence from the translocation chromosome partner. Only five fusion partners of 
HMGA2 have been identified in lipomas so far. The identification of novel fusion 
partners of HMGA2 is important not only for diagnosis in soft tissue tumors but
also because these genes might have an oncogenic role in other tumors. We
observed that t(1;12)(p32;q14) was the second most frequent translocation in our 
series of lipomas after t(3;12)(q28;q14.3). We detected overexpression of HMGA2
mRNA and protein in all t(1;12)(p32;q14) lipomas. We used a fluorescence in situ 
hybridization-based positional cloning strategy to characterize the 1p32
breakpoint. In 11 cases, we identified PPAP2B, a member of the lipid phosphate
phosphatases family as the 1p32 target gene. Reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction analysis followed by nucleotide sequencing of the fusion
transcript indicated that HMGA2 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) fused with exon 6 
of PPAP2B in one case. In other t(1;12) cases, the breakpoint was extragenic,
located in the 3'region flanking PPAP2B 3'UTR. Moreover, in one case showing a
t(1;6)(p32;p21) we observed a rearrangement of PPAP2B and HMGA1, which suggests
that HMGA1 might also be a fusion partner for PPAP2B. Our results also revealed
that adipocytic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells derived from
adipose tissue was associated with a significant decrease in PPAP2B mRNA
expression suggesting that PPAP2B might play a role in adipogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23508853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Nov;54(11):2565-7. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.782610. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

HMGA1 overexpression correlates with relapse in childhood B-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Roy S(1), Di Cello F, Kowalski J, Hristov AC, Tsai HL, Bhojwani D, Meyer JA,
Carroll WL, Belton A, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine ,
Baltimore, MD , USA.

PMID: 23472968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Aug;54(8):1577-8. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.777069. Epub
2013 Mar 27.

High motility group overexpression accelerates T-cell leukemogenesis.

Heath JL(1), Wechsler DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology  Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA

Comment on
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Aug;54(8):1762-8.

PMID: 23418894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55362. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055362. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Multiple genetic alterations within the PI3K pathway are responsible for AKT
activation in patients with ovarian carcinoma.

De Marco C(1), Rinaldo N, Bruni P, Malzoni C, Zullo F, Fabiani F, Losito S,
Scrima M, Marino FZ, Franco R, Quintiero A, Agosti V, Viglietto G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University Magna Graecia,
Catanzaro, Italy.

The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway is activated in multiple
cancers including ovarian carcinoma (OC). However, the relative contribution of
the single components within the PI3K pathway to AKT activation in OC is still
unclear. We examined 98 tumor samples from Italian OC patients for alterations in
the members of the PI3K pathway. We report that AKT is significantly hyperactive 
in OC compared to normal tissue (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>93; p<0.0001) and that AKT activation is
preferentially observed in the elderly (>58 years old; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>93; p<0.05). The most 
frequent alteration is the overexpression of the p110a catalytic subunit of PI3K 
(63/93, ~68%); less frequent alterations comprise the loss of PTEN (24/89, 27%)
and the overexpression of AKT1 (18/96, 19%) or AKT2 (11/88,12.5%). Mutations in
the PIK3CA or KRAS genes were detected at lower frequency (12% and 10%,
respectively) whereas mutations in AKT1 or AKT2 genes were absent. Although many 
tumors presented a single lesion (28/93, of which 23 overexpressed PIK3CA, 1
overexpressed AKT and 4 had lost PTEN), many OC (35/93) presented multiple
alterations within the PI3K pathway. Apparently, aberrant PI3K signalling was
mediated by activation of the canonical downstream AKT-dependent mTOR/S6K1/4EBP1 
pathway and by regulation of expression of oncogenic transcription factors that
include HMGA1, JUN-B, FOS and MYC but not by AKT-independent activation of SGK3. 
FISH analysis indicated that gene amplification of PIK3CA, AKT1 and AKT2 (but not
of PI3KR1) and the loss of PTEN are common and may account for changes in the
expression of the corresponding proteins. In conclusion, our results indicate
that p110a overexpression represents the most frequent alteration within the
PI3K/AKT pathway in OC. However, p110a overexpression may not be sufficient to
activate AKT signalling and drive ovarian tumorigenesis since many tumors
overexpressing PI3K presented at least one additional alteration.

PMCID: PMC3567053
PMID: 23408974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Acta Otolaryngol. 2013 Jun;133(6):626-32. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2012.758388. Epub
2013 Feb 11.

Expression of HMGA1 and ezrin in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Wang DS(1), Pan CC, Lai HC, Huang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Affiliated Union Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Fujian, Fuzhou, China. fzwds@yahoo.com

CONCLUSION: The overexpression of HMGA1 or Ezrin may contribute to the
carcinogenesis, development, and metastasis of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma 
(LSCC).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of HMGA1 and Ezrin in LSCC and analyze
their clinical significance.
METHODS: The expression of HMGA1 and Ezrin was analyzed by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) in 50 cases of LSCC. Thirty cases of laryngeal polyp and 30 cases of
atypical hyperplasia of larynx were studied as controls. The expression of HMGA1 
and Ezrin was analyzed by real-time PCR and by Western blot in 30 cases of LSCC; 
samples from adjacent normal epithelial tissues in 30 cases were studied as
controls.
RESULTS: (1) IHC revealed that the positive rate of HMGA1 protein was 68.0%
(34/50), 53.3% (16/30), and 13. 3% (4/30) in LSCC, atypical hyperplasia of
larynx, and laryngeal polyp (p < 0.05), and the positive rate of Ezrin protein
was 64.0% (32/50), 50.0% (15/30), and 23.3% (7/30) (p < 0.01), respectively. (2) 
Real-time PCR demonstrated that the mean relative mRNA expression levels of HMGA1
in LSCC and in normal tissues were 2.41 ± 0.40 and 1.05 ± 0.18, respectively (p <
0.01). The mRNA levels of Ezrin in LSCC and in normal tissues were 1.79 ± 0.27
and 1.04 ± 0.22, respectively (p < 0.05). (3) Western blotting revealed that the 
mean relative protein expression levels of HMGA1 in LSCC and in normal tissues
were 1.73 ± 0.60 and 0.35 ± 0.17, respectively (p < 0.01). The protein levels of 
Ezrin in LSCC and in normal tissues were 1.82 ± 0.77 and 0.42 ± 0.20,
respectively (p < 0.01).

PMID: 23394223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. RNA Biol. 2013 Mar;10(3):436-44. doi: 10.4161/rna.23686. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

HMGA1 directly interacts with TAR to modulate basal and Tat-dependent HIV
transcription.

Eilebrecht S(1), Wilhelm E, Benecke BJ, Bell B, Benecke AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques - Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique; Bures sur Yvette; France & Vaccine Research Institute; Institut
Mondor de Recherche Biomédicale; Créteil, France.

The transactivating response element (TAR) of human immunodeficiency virus 1
(HIV-1) is essential for promoter transactivation by the viral transactivator of 
transcription (Tat). The Tat-TAR interaction thereby recruits active positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) from its inactive, 7SK/HEXIM1-bound
form, leading to efficient viral transcription. Here, we show that the 7SK
RNA-associating chromatin regulator HMGA1 can specifically bind to the HIV-1 TAR 
element and that 7SK RNA can thereby compete with TAR. The HMGA1-binding
interface of TAR is located within the binding site for Tat and other cellular
activators, and we further provide evidence for competition between HMGA1 and Tat
for TAR-binding. HMGA1 negatively influences the expression of a HIV-1
promoter-driven reporter in a TAR-dependent manner, both in the presence and in
the absence of Tat. The overexpression of the HMGA1-binding substructure of 7SK
RNA results in a TAR-dependent gain of HIV-1 promoter activity similar to the
effect of the shRNA-mediated knockdown of HMGA1. Our results support a model in
which the HMGA1/TAR interaction prevents the binding of transcription-activating 
cellular co-factors and Tat, subsequently leading to reduced HIV-1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC3672287
PMID: 23392246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Oncol. 2013 Jun;7(3):531-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.01.002. Epub 2013 Jan
17.

The High Mobility Group A proteins contribute to thyroid cell transformation by
regulating miR-603 and miR-10b expression.

Mussnich P(1), D'Angelo D, Leone V, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, c/o Dipartimento
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Erratum in
    Mol Oncol. 2014 Feb;8(1):159.

The overexpression of the HMGA1 proteins is a feature of human malignant
neoplasias and has a causal role in cell transformation. The aim of our study has
been to investigate the microRNAs (miRNAs or miRs) regulated by the HMGA1
proteins in the process of cell transformation analyzing the miRNA expression
profile of v-ras-Ki oncogene-transformed thyroid cells expressing or not HMGA1
proteins. We demonstrate that, among the miRNAs regulated by cell transformation,
there are miR-10b, miR-21, miR-125b, miR-221 and miR-222 that are positively and 
miR-34a and miR-603 that are negatively regulated by HMGA1 expression. Then, we
focused our attention on the miR-10b and miR-603 whose expression was dependent
on the presence of HMGA1 also in other cell systems. We found that miR-10b is
able to target the PTEN gene, whereas miR-603 targets the CCND1 and CCND2 genes
coding for the cyclin D1 and cyclin D2 proteins, respectively. Moreover,
functional studies showed that miR-10b and miR-603 regulate positively and
negatively, respectively, cell proliferation and migration suggesting a role of
their dysregulation in thyroid cell transformation.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23384558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Aug;228(8):1641-6. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24328.

Molecular biomarkers as potential targets for therapeutic strategies in human
testicular germ cell tumors: an overview.

Chieffi P(1), Chieffi S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Psicologia, II Università di Napoli, Caserta, Italy.
paolo.chieffi@unina2.it

Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs), the most common malignancy in males between 
15 and 34 years of age and the most frequent cause of death from solid tumors in 
this age group. TGCTs can be subdivided into seminoma and non-seminoma germ cell 
tumors (NSGCTs), including embryonal cell carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, yolk sac
tumor, and teratoma. Seminomas and NSGCTs do not only present distinctive
clinical features, but they also show significant differences as far as therapy
and prognosis are concerned. Seminomas are highly sensitive to both radiation and
chemotherapy, with a good prognosis, non-seminomas are sensitive to
platinum-based combination chemotherapy and are less susceptible to radiation,
with the exception of teratomas. The different therapeutic outcome might be
explained by inherent properties of the cells from which testicular neoplasia
originate. The unique treatment sensitivity of TGCTs is unexplained so far, but
it is likely to be related to intrinsic molecular characteristics of the
PGCs/gonocytes, from which these tumors originate. Many discovered bio-markers
including OCT3/4, SOX2, SOX17, HMGA1, HMGA2, PATZ1, GPR30, Aurora B, estrogen
receptor ß, and others have given further advantages to discriminate between
histological subgroups. In addition, therapeutic approaches for the treatment of 
TGCTs have been proposed: humanized antibodies against receptors/surface
molecules on cancer cells, inhibitors of serine-threonine, and tyrosine kinases, 
and others. The mini-review will be an overview on the molecular alterations
identified in TGCTs and on novel targeted antineoplastic strategies that might
help to treat chemotherapy resistant TGCTs.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23359388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53750. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053750. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Identification and characterization of new molecular partners for the protein
arginine methyltransferase 6 (PRMT6).

Lo Sardo A(1), Altamura S, Pegoraro S, Maurizio E, Sgarra R, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(11).
doi:10.1371/annotation/37947ebc-7ddb-4500-8441-8a4804b0fb5e.

PRMT6 is a protein arginine methyltransferase that has been implicated in
transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, and human immunodeficiency virus
pathogenesis. Only few substrates of this enzyme are known and therefore its
cellular role is not well understood. To identify in an unbiased manner
substrates and potential regulators of PRMT6 we have used a yeast two-hybrid
approach. We identified 36 new putative partners for PRMT6 and we validated the
interaction in vivo for 7 of them. In addition, using invitro methylation assay
we identified 4 new substrates for PRMT6, extending the involvement of this
enzyme to other cellular processes beyond its well-established role in gene
expression regulation. Holistic approaches create molecular connections that
allow to test functional hypotheses. The assembly of PRMT6 protein network
allowed us to formulate functional hypotheses which led to the discovery of new
molecular partners for the architectural transcription factor HMGA1a, a known
substrate for PRMT6, and to provide evidences for a modulatory role of HMGA1a on 
the methyltransferase activity of PRMT6.

PMCID: PMC3542376
PMID: 23326497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Aug;54(8):1762-8. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.764422. Epub
2013 Feb 1.

Inactivation of the Cdkn2a locus cooperates with HMGA1 to drive T-cell
leukemogenesis.

Di Cello F(1), Dhara S, Hristov AC, Kowalski J, Elbahloul O, Hillion J, Roy S,
Meijerink JP, Winter SS, Larson RS, Huso DL, Resar L.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA,

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Aug;54(8):1577-8.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive leukemia with high
relapse rates compared to B-lineage ALL. We previously showed that HMGA1a
transgenic mice develop aggressive T-ALL, indicating that HMGA1 causes leukemic
transformation in vivo. HMGA1 is also highly expressed in embryonic stem cells,
hematopoietic stem cells and diverse, refractory human cancers. Disruption of the
CDKN2A tumor suppressor locus occurs in most cases of T-ALL and is thought to
contribute to leukemic transformation. To determine whether loss of function of
CDKN2A cooperates with HMGA1 in T-ALL, we crossed HMGA1a transgenics onto a
Cdkn2a null background. We discovered that T-ALL is markedly accelerated in
HMGA1a transgenic Cdkn2a null mice. In addition, these mice recapitulate salient 
clinical and pathologic features of human T-ALL. HMGA1 is also highly
overexpressed in human T-ALL. These findings suggest that HMGA1 plays a causative
role in T-ALL and could represent a rational therapeutic target.

PMID: 23311322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Transl Med. 2013 Jan 9;11:12. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-12.

Lack of association of the HMGA1 IVS5-13insC variant with type 2 diabetes in an
ethnically diverse hypertensive case control cohort.

Karnes JH(1), Langaee TY, McDonough CW, Chang SW, Ramos M, Catlin JR Jr, Casanova
OE, Gong Y, Pepine CJ, Johnson JA, Cooper-Dehoff RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashiville, TN
37232-0575, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recently, the high-mobility group A1 gene (HMGA1) variant IVS5-13insC
has been associated with type 2 diabetes, but reported associations are
inconsistent and data are lacking in Hispanic and African American populations.
We sought to investigate the HMGA1-diabetes association and to characterize
IVS5-13insC allele frequencies and linkage disequilibrium (LD) in 3,070
Caucasian, Hispanic, and African American patients from the INternational
VErapamil SR-Trandolapril STudy (INVEST).
METHODS: INVEST was a randomized, multicenter trial comparing two
antihypertensive treatment strategies in an ethnically diverse cohort of
hypertensive, coronary artery disease patients. Controls, who were diabetes-free 
throughout the study, and type 2 diabetes cases, either prevalent or incident,
were genotyped for IVS5-13insC using Taqman®, confirmed with Pyrosequencing and
Sanger sequencing. For LD analysis, genotyping for eight additional HMGA1 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was performed using the Illumina® HumanCVD
BeadChip. We used logistic regression to test association of the HMGA1
IVS5-13insC and diabetes, adjusted for age, gender, body mass index, and
percentage European, African, and Native American ancestry.
RESULTS: We observed IVS5-13insC minor allele frequencies consistent with
previous literature in Caucasians and African Americans (0.03 in cases and 0.04
in controls for both race/ethnic groups), and higher frequencies in Hispanics
(0.07 in cases and 0.07 in controls). The IVS5-13insC was not associated with
type 2 diabetes overall (odds ratio 0.98 [0.76-1.26], p=0.88) or in any
race/ethnic group. Pairwise LD (r2) of IVS5-13insC and rs9394200, a SNP
previously used as a tag SNP for IVS5-13insC, was low (r2=0.47 in Caucasians,
r2=0.25 in Hispanics, and r2=0.06 in African Americans). Furthermore, in silico
analysis suggested a lack of functional consequences for the IVS5-13insC variant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that IVS5-13insC is not a functional variant and
not associated with type 2 diabetes in an ethnically diverse, hypertensive,
coronary artery disease population. Larger, more adequately powered studies need 
to be performed to confirm our findings.

PMCID: PMC3558451
PMID: 23302499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Feb;374(1-2):173-80. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1517-2. Epub 
2012 Nov 16.

High mobility group A1 protein acts as a new target of Notch1 signaling and
regulates cell proliferation in T leukemia cells.

Xi Y(1), Li YS, Tang HB.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China.

Active mutations of Notch1 play pivotal roles during leukemogenesis, but the
downstream targets and molecular mechanisms of activated Notch1 signaling have
not yet been fully clarified. In this study, we detected the overexpression of
the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) and activation of Notch1 signaling in mouse
thymic lymphomas. A direct regulation of Notch1 on HMGA1 transcription was
demonstrated and two Notch1/RBPJ cobinding sites of T/CTCCCACA were found in
HMGA1 promoter regions. It was the first time demonstrated that HMGA1 was the
downstream target of Notch1 signaling. Moreover, knockdown of HMGA1 resulted in
significantly impaired cell growth and decreased expressions of cyclin D and
cyclin E in human T leukemia cells. The formation of complexes was also observed 
between HMGA1 and retinoblastoma (RB) protein indicating a mechanism of cell
cycle regulation. These findings suggest that activated HMGA1 regulates cell
proliferation through the Notch1 signaling pathway, which represents an important
molecular pathway leading to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 23229232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Gastroenterology. 2013 Mar;144(3):624-635.e4. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.11.033. 
Epub 2012 Nov 27.

MicroRNA-137, an HMGA1 target, suppresses colorectal cancer cell invasion and
metastasis in mice by directly targeting FMNL2.

Liang L(1), Li X, Zhang X, Lv Z, He G, Zhao W, Ren X, Li Y, Bian X, Liao W, Liu
W, Yang G, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, PR China. redsnow007@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Formin-like (FMNL)2 is up-regulated in colorectal tumors and
has been associated with tumor progression, but little is known about regulatory 
mechanisms. We investigated whether microRNAs regulate levels of FMNL2 in
colorectal cancer (CRC) cells.
METHODS: We used real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunoblot analyses to
measure levels of miR-137, high-mobility group AT-hook (HMGA)1, and FMNL2 in CRC 
cells and tissue samples from patients (n = 50). We used luciferase reporter
assays to determine the association between miR-137 and the FMNL2 3' untranslated
region, and HMGA1 and the miR-137 promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays 
were used to assess direct binding of HMGA1 to the miR-137 promoter.
RESULTS: miR-137 and miR-142-3p were predicted to bind FMNL2 based on
bioinformatic data. Only the level of miR-137 had a significant inverse
correlation with the level of FMNL2 protein in CRC cell lines and tissues. FMNL2 
messenger RNA was targeted by miR-137; expression of miR-137 inhibited
proliferation and invasion by CRC cells in vitro, and metastasis to liver and
intestine by CRC xenografts in nude mice. HMGA1 bound to the promoter of miR-137 
and activated its transcription, which reduced levels of FMNL2 in CRC cells.
Ectopic expression of miR-137 in CRC cells inhibited phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Akt, which reduced levels of matrix
metalloproteinase 2, matrix metalloproteinase 9, and vascular endothelial growth 
factor; it also reduced invasiveness of CRC cells, inhibiting signaling via
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, Akt, and MAPK.
CONCLUSIONS: Levels of miR-137 and HMGA1 are reduced, and levels of FMNL2 are
increased, in CRC samples compared with adjacent normal mucosa. In CRC cells,
miR-137 targets FMNL2 messenger RNA and is regulated by the transcription factor 
HMGA1. Expression of miR-137 reduces CRC cell invasion in vitro and metastasis of
tumor xenografts in mice. FMNL2 appears to activate
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, protein kinase B (Akt), and MAPK 
signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23201162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048533. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

HMGA1 reprograms somatic cells into pluripotent stem cells by inducing stem cell 
transcriptional networks.

Shah SN(1), Kerr C, Cope L, Zambidis E, Liu C, Hillion J, Belton A, Huso DL,
Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although recent studies have identified genes expressed in human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) that induce pluripotency, the molecular
underpinnings of normal stem cell function remain poorly understood. The high
mobility group A1 (HMGA1) gene is highly expressed in hESCs and poorly
differentiated, stem-like cancers; however, its role in these settings has been
unclear.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We show that HMGA1 is highly expressed in fully
reprogrammed iPSCs and hESCs, with intermediate levels in ECCs and low levels in 
fibroblasts. When hESCs are induced to differentiate, HMGA1 decreases and
parallels that of other pluripotency factors. Conversely, forced expression of
HMGA1 blocks differentiation of hESCs. We also discovered that HMGA1 enhances
cellular reprogramming of somatic cells to iPSCs together with the Yamanaka
factors (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, cMYC - OSKM). HMGA1 increases the number and size of
iPSC colonies compared to OSKM controls. Surprisingly, there was normal
differentiation in vitro and benign teratoma formation in vivo of the
HMGA1-derived iPSCs. During the reprogramming process, HMGA1 induces the
expression of pluripotency genes, including SOX2, LIN28, and cMYC, while
knockdown of HMGA1 in hESCs results in the repression of these genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation shows that HMGA1 binds to the promoters of these pluripotency
genes in vivo. In addition, interfering with HMGA1 function using a short hairpin
RNA or a dominant-negative construct blocks cellular reprogramming to a
pluripotent state.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate for the first time that HMGA1 enhances
cellular reprogramming from a somatic cell to a fully pluripotent stem cell.
These findings identify a novel role for HMGA1 as a key regulator of the stem
cell state by inducing transcriptional networks that drive pluripotency. Although
further studies are needed, these HMGA1 pathways could be exploited in
regenerative medicine or as novel therapeutic targets for poorly differentiated, 
stem-like cancers.

PMCID: PMC3499526
PMID: 23166588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Bacteriol. 2013 Jan;195(2):378-88. doi: 10.1128/JB.01766-12. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

High-mobility-group a-like CarD binds to a DNA site optimized for affinity and
position and to RNA polymerase to regulate a light-inducible promoter in
Myxococcus xanthus.

García-Heras F(1), Abellón-Ruiz J, Murillo FJ, Padmanabhan S, Elías-Arnanz M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Microbiología, Área de Genética (Unidad Asociada al
Instituto de Química Física Rocasolano, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas), Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain.

The CarD-CarG complex controls various cellular processes in the bacterium
Myxococcus xanthus including fruiting body development and light-induced
carotenogenesis. The CarD N-terminal domain, which defines the large
CarD_CdnL_TRCF protein family, binds to CarG, a zinc-associated protein that does
not bind DNA. The CarD C-terminal domain resembles eukaryotic high-mobility-group
A (HMGA) proteins, and its DNA binding AT hooks specifically recognize the minor 
groove of appropriately spaced AT-rich tracts. Here, we investigate the
determinants of the only known CarD binding site, the one crucial in CarD-CarG
regulation of the promoter of the carQRS operon (P(QRS)), a light-inducible
promoter dependent on the extracytoplasmic function (ECF) s factor CarQ. In
vitro, mutating either of the 3-bp AT tracts of this CarD recognition site
(TTTCCAGAGCTTT) impaired DNA binding, shifting the AT tracts relative to P(QRS)
had no effect or marginally lowered DNA binding, and replacing the native site by
the HMGA1a binding one at the human beta interferon promoter (with longer AT
tracts) markedly enhanced DNA binding. In vivo, however, all of these changes
deterred P(QRS) activation in wild-type M. xanthus, as well as in a strain with
the CarD-CarG pair replaced by the Anaeromyxobacter dehalogenans CarD-CarG
(CarD(Ad)-CarG(Ad)). CarD(Ad)-CarG(Ad) is functionally equivalent to CarD-CarG
despite the lower DNA binding affinity in vitro of CarD(Ad), whose C-terminal
domain resembles histone H1 rather than HMGA. We show that CarD physically
associates with RNA polymerase (RNAP) specifically via interactions with the RNAP
ß subunit. Our findings suggest that CarD regulates a light-inducible, ECF
s-dependent promoter by coupling RNAP recruitment and binding to a specific DNA
site optimized for affinity and position.

PMCID: PMC3553843
PMID: 23144251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Front Oncol. 2012 Oct 12;2:141. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00141. eCollection 2012.

Molecular mechanisms of MYCN-dependent apoptosis and the MDM2-p53 pathway: an
Achille's heel to be exploited for the therapy of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma.

Petroni M(1), Veschi V, Gulino A, Giannini G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University "La Sapienza" Rome, Italy.

The p53 oncosuppressor is very seldom mutated in neuroblastoma, but several
mechanisms cooperate to its functional inactivation in this tumor. Increased MDM2
levels, due to genetic amplification or constitutive inhibition of p14( ARF),
significantly contribute to this event highlighting p53 reactivation as an
attractive perspective for neuroblastoma treatment. In addition to its role in
tumorigenesis, MYCN sensitizes untransformed and cancer cells to apoptosis. This 
is associated to a fine modulation of the MDM2-p53 pathway. Indeed MYCN induces
p53 and MDM2 transcription, and, by evoking a DNA damage response (DDR), it
stabilizes p53 and its proapoptotic kinase Homeodomain Interacting Protein Kinase
2 (HIPK2). Through the regulation of the HIPK2-p53 inhibitor High Mobility Group 
protein A1 (HMGA1) and the homeobox proteins BMI-1 and TWIST-1, MYCN establishes 
a delicate balance between pro- and antiapoptotic molecules that might be easily 
perturbed by a variety of insults, leading to cell death. MDM2-p53 antagonists,
such as Nutlin-3, are strikingly prone to inducing death in MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma, by further pushing on HIPK2 accumulation. Here we discuss
implications and caveats of exploiting this pathway and its connections to
MYCN-induced DDR for a tailored therapy of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma.

PMCID: PMC3470040
PMID: 23091802  [PubMed]


136. Tumori. 2012 Jul-Aug;98(4):478-84. doi: 10.1700/1146.12643.

Comparative analysis of immunohistochemical markers for differential diagnosis of
hepatocelluar carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma.

Ryu HS(1), Lee K, Shin E, Kim SH, Jing J, Jung HY, Lee H, Jang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chung-Ang University Medical Center, Chung-Ang
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Differential diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma and
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is sometimes difficult to accurately perform.
METHODS: Eight markers including cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin 19 (CK19),
MOC31, CD10, glypican 3 (GPC3), claudin 4, biglycan and high mobility group A1
(HMGA1) were immunohistochemically stained in samples from 179 surgically
resected hepatocellular carcinomas and 127 intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, and 
the rates of marker expression were statistically compared.
RESULTS: With the exception of biglycan, 7 of the 8 markers were found to have
significantly different expression patterns when comparing the two types of
cancer (P <0.05). In intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, the expression rates of
CK7, CK19, MOC31, claudin 4 and HMGA1 were 83.4%, 89.0%, 88.2%, 69.2%, and 31.5%,
respectively. These rates of expression in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas were 
all higher than in those in hepatocellular carcinomas (CK7, 31.3%; CK19, 10.1%;
MOC31, 34.0%; claudin 4, 11.2%; and HMGA1, 19.5%). The expression rates of GPC3, 
CD10, and biglycan were 72.6%, 39.7% and 10.0%, respectively, in hepatocellular
carcinoma. These were higher than the rates found in intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas (GPC3, 7.0%; CD10, 18.1%; and biglycan, 7.0%). In a
multivariate logistic regression analysis, GPC3, CK19, MOC31 and claudin 4 were
found to be independent markers for differentially diagnosing intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our results, GPC3 and CK19 can be used as first-line
markers for differential diagnoses of hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (accuracy rate, 73.5%), and additional combined screening for 
claudin 4 and MOC31 markers in GPC3(-) and CK19(-) tumors might increase the
accuracy rate for distinguishing hepatocellular carcinoma from intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma to 88.5%.

PMID: 23052165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Oct 4;14(5):R207. doi: 10.1186/ar4045.

Functional relationship between high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein and
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) in human chondrocytes.

Gasparini G, De Gori M, Paonessa F, Chiefari E, Brunetti A, Galasso O.

INTRODUCTION: Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) regulates articular cartilage 
homeostasis. During osteoarthritis (OA), the anabolic responses of chondrocytes
to IGF-I are likely to be prevented by the enhanced production of IGF-binding
proteins (IGFBPs), especially IGFBP-3. The aim of this study is to evaluate
whether the architectural transcription factor high mobility group A1 (HMGA1)
influences IGFBP-3 overexpression in vitro, in cultured chondrocytic cell lines, 
and ex vivo, in human osteoarthritic cartilage compared to healthy human
cartilage controls.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed
to assess the relative transcript levels of HMGA1 and IGFBP-3 in vitro, in the
human chondrocytic cell lines T/C-28a4 and C-28/I2. An electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA), chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and transient
transfection assays were performed to investigate the HMGA1-IGFBP-3 gene
interaction. Samples of articular cartilage were harvested from osteoarthritic
patients and controls and analyzed by qRT-PCR for HMGA1 and IGFBP-3 mRNA levels.
RESULTS: A parallelism between HMGA1 protein levels and IGFBP-3 gene expression
has been observed in T/C-28a4 and C-28/I2 cells. The interaction of HMGA1 with
the IGFBP-3 gene promoter has been demonstrated by EMSA and ChIP. In transient
transfections, IGFBP-3 promoter activity increased in cells overexpressing HMGA1 
and decreased in cells pretreated with siRNA detected against HMGA1. IGFBP-3 mRNA
expression was higher in cartilage from patients with OA, where the increased
expression of IGFBP-3 closely paralleled the increased expression of HMGA1 mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations indicate that increased HMGA1 expression in human
chondrocytes is associated with increased expression of IGFBP-3. It is tempting
to speculate that, through the regulation of IGFBP3 expression, HMGA1 may act as 
a pathogenetic factor for OA.

PMCID: PMC3580519
PMID: 23036517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Jan;52(1):11-23. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22001. Epub 2012
Sep 10.

Identification of CUX1 as the recurrent chromosomal band 7q22 target gene in
human uterine leiomyoma.

Schoenmakers EF(1), Bunt J, Hermers L, Schepens M, Merkx G, Janssen B, Kersten M,
Huys E, Pauwels P, Debiec-Rychter M, van Kessel AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre and
Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Eric.Schoenmakers@Pfizer.com

Uterine leiomyomas are benign solid tumors of mesenchymal origin which occur with
an estimated incidence of up to 77% of all women of reproductive age. The
majority of these tumors remains symptomless, but in about a quarter of cases
they cause leiomyoma-associated symptoms including chronic pelvic pain,
menorrhagia-induced anemia, and impaired fertility. As a consequence, they are
the most common indication for pre-menopausal hysterectomy in the USA and Japan
and annually translate into a multibillion dollar healthcare problem.
Approximately 40% of these neoplasms present with recurring structural
cytogenetic anomalies, including del(7)(q22), t(12;14)(q15;q24), t(1;2)(p36;p24),
and anomalies affecting 6p21 and/or 10q22. Using positional cloning strategies,
we and others previously identified HMGA1, HMGA2, RAD51L1, MORF, and, more
recently, NCOA1 as primary target (fusion) genes associated with tumor initiation
in four of these distinct cytogenetic subgroups. Despite the fact that the
del(7)(q22) subgroup is the largest among leiomyomas, and was first described
more than twenty years ago, the 7q22 leiomyoma target gene still awaits
unequivocal identification. We here describe a positional cloning effort from two
independent uterine leiomyomas, containing respectively a pericentric and a
paracentric chromosomal inversion, both affecting band 7q22. We found that both
chromosomal inversions target the cut-like homeobox 1 (CUX1) gene on chromosomal 
band 7q22.1 in a way which is functionally equivalent to the more frequently
observed del(7q) cases, and which is compatible with a mono-allelic knock-out
scenario, similar as was previously described for the cytogenetic subgroup
showing chromosome 14q involvement.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22965931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Apr;31(3):228-36. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2876. Epub 2012 Sep
7.

The Wnt/ß-catenin/T-cell factor 4 pathway up-regulates high-mobility group A1
expression in colon cancer.

Bush BM(1), Brock AT, Deng JA, Nelson RA, Sumter TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Physics, and Geology, Winthrop University, Rock Hill,
SC 29733, USA.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) encodes proteins that act as mediators in viral
integration, modification of chromatin structure, neoplastic transformation and
metastatic progression. Because HMGA1 is overexpressed in most cancers and has
transcriptional relationships with several Wnt-responsive genes, we explored the 
involvement of HMGA1 in Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling. In adenomatous polyposis 
coli (APC(Min/+)) mice, we observed significant up-regulation of HMGA1 mRNA and
protein in intestinal tumours when compared with normal intestinal mucosa.
Conversely, restoration of Wnt signalling by the zinc induction of wild-type APC 
resulted in HMGA1 down-regulation in HT-29 cells. Because APC mutations are
associated with mobilization of the ß-catenin/TCF-4 transcriptional complex and
subsequent activation of downstream oncogenic targets, we analyzed the
5'-flanking sequence of HMGA1 for putative TCF-4 binding elements. We identified 
two regions that specifically bind the ß-catenin/TCF-4 complex in vitro and in
vivo, identifying HMGA1 as an immediate target of the ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling 
pathway in colon cancer. Collectively, these findings strongly implicate
Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling in regulating HMGA1 to further expand the
extensive regulatory network affected by Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-4 signalling.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3616152
PMID: 22961697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Hum Pathol. 2013 Jan;44(1):122-32. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.05.001. Epub 2012 
Aug 30.

The expression of the high-mobility group A2 protein in colorectal cancer and
surrounding fibroblasts is linked to tumor invasiveness.

Rizzi C(1), Cataldi P, Iop A, Isola M, Sgarra R, Manfioletti G, Giancotti V.

Author information: 
(1)Health Service Company ASS 5 Bassa Friulana, S.O.S Pathologic Anatomy and
Histology and S.O.C. Oncology, Palmanova Hospital, 33057 Palmanova, Udine, Italy.

Tumor staging of colorectal cancer is typically based on conventional TNM and
Dukes classifications. However, additional information could be useful, and there
is a significant interest in identifying molecular markers that are related to
genetic or epigenetic processes. Using immunohistochemistry, we analyzed the
expression of the high-mobility group A2 (previously high-mobility group 1-C
[HMGI-C]) protein in 103 colorectal cancer cases to determine its use as a
biomarker in colorectal cancer to integrate morphological staging. We found a
progressive increase of the high-mobility group A2 protein expression in
colorectal cancer tumor samples from cases in which all of the tumor cells were
negative up to cases in which all of the tumor cells stained positive. Increased 
high-mobility group A2 expression is strongly associated with an increase in
tumor invasiveness, which was measured through both budding and vascular invasion
(P < .0001). Kaplan-Meier estimates showed a decrease in overall survival when
vascular invasion is present (P = .023). Moreover, a fraction of the analyzed
samples showed high-mobility group A2-positive stromal fibroblasts. Although
high-mobility group A2-positive tumors were associated with cell invasiveness,
high-mobility group A2-positive stromal fibroblasts were correlated with less
invasive tumors. High-mobility group A2 protein expression could be used as a
prognostic marker to provide prospective information on patient outcome,
complementing the data obtained using conventional pathologic staging systems.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22939952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Aug 30;3:e383. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.126.

High-mobility group A1 protein inhibits p53-mediated intrinsic apoptosis by
interacting with Bcl-2 at mitochondria.

Esposito F(1), Tornincasa M, Federico A, Chiappetta G, Pierantoni GM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Retraction in
    Cell Death Dis. 2014;5:e1206.

The high-mobility group A (HMGA) proteins are a family of non-histone chromatin
factors, encoded by the HMGA1 and HMGA2 genes. Several studies demonstrate that
HMGA proteins have a critical role in neoplastic transformation, and their
overexpression is mainly associated with a highly malignant phenotype, also
representing a poor prognostic index. Even though a cytoplasmic localization of
these proteins has been previously reported in some highly malignant neoplasias, 
a clear role for this localization has not been defined. Here, we first confirm
the localization of the HMGA1 proteins in the cytoplasm of cancer cells, and then
we report a novel mechanism through which HMGA1 inhibits p53-mitochondrial
apoptosis by counteracting the binding of p53 to the anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-2.
Indeed, we demonstrate a physical and functional interaction between HMGA1 and
Bcl-2 proteins. This interaction occurs at mitochondria interfering with the
ability of p53 protein to bind Bcl-2, thus counteracting p53-mediated
mitochondrial apoptosis. This effect is associated with the inhibition of
cytochrome c release and activation of caspases. Consistent with this mechanism, 
a strong correlation between HMGA1 cytoplasmic localization and a more aggressive
histotype of thyroid, breast and colon carcinomas has been observed. Therefore,
cytoplasmic localization of HMGA1 proteins in malignant tissues is a novel
mechanism of inactivation of p53 apoptotic function.

PMCID: PMC3434658
PMID: 22932725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2012 Aug 29;5(1):15. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-5-15.

Deacetylation of H4-K16Ac and heterochromatin assembly in senescence.

Contrepois K(1), Thuret JY, Courbeyrette R, Fenaille F, Mann C.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, iBiTecS, Service de Biologie Intégrative et de Génétique Moléculaire
(SBIGeM), F-91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. carl.mann@cea.fr.

BACKGROUND: Cellular senescence is a stress response of mammalian cells leading
to a durable arrest of cell proliferation that has been implicated in tumor
suppression, wound healing, and aging. The proliferative arrest is mediated by
transcriptional repression of genes essential for cell division by the
retinoblastoma protein family. This repression is accompanied by varying degrees 
of heterochromatin assembly, but little is known regarding the molecular
mechanisms involved.
RESULTS: We found that both deacetylation of H4-K16Ac and expression of HMGA1/2
can contribute to DNA compaction during senescence. SIRT2, an NAD-dependent class
III histone deacetylase, contributes to H4-K16Ac deacetylation and DNA compaction
in human fibroblast cell lines that assemble striking senescence-associated
heterochromatin foci (SAHFs). Decreased H4-K16Ac was observed in both replicative
and oncogene-induced senescence of these cells. In contrast, this mechanism was
inoperative in a fibroblast cell line that did not assemble extensive
heterochromatin during senescence. Treatment of senescent cells with trichostatin
A, a class I/II histone deacetylase inhibitor, also induced rapid and reversible 
decondensation of SAHFs. Inhibition of DNA compaction did not significantly
affect the stability of the senescent state.
CONCLUSIONS: Variable DNA compaction observed during senescence is explained in
part by cell-type specific regulation of H4 deacetylation and HMGA1/2 expression.
Deacetylation of H4-K16Ac during senescence may explain reported decreases in
this mark during mammalian aging and in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3487866
PMID: 22932127  [PubMed]


143. Diabetes. 2012 Sep;61(9):e15. doi: 10.2337/db12-0800.

Response to comment on: Marquez et al. Low-frequency variants in HMGA1 are not
associated with type 2 diabetes risk. Diabetes 2012;61:524-530.

Froguel P, Marquez M, Cauchi S.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2012 May;61(5):e3.

PMCID: PMC3425425
PMID: 22923658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Pancreatology. 2012 Jul-Aug;12(4):372-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pan.2012.05.005. Epub
2012 May 29.

The HMGA1-COX-2 axis: a key molecular pathway and potential target in pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma.

Hillion J(1), Smail SS, Di Cello F, Belton A, Shah SN, Huso T, Schuldenfrei A,
Nelson DM, Cope L, Campbell N, Karikari C, Aderinto A, Maitra A, Huso DL, Resar
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, United States.

CONTEXT: Although pancreatic cancer is a common, highly lethal malignancy, the
molecular events that enable precursor lesions to become invasive carcinoma
remain unclear. We previously reported that the high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1)
protein is overexpressed in >90% of primary pancreatic cancers, with absent or
low levels in early precursor lesions.
METHODS: Here, we investigate the role of HMGA1 in reprogramming pancreatic
epithelium into invasive cancer cells. We assessed oncogenic properties induced
by HMGA1 in non-transformed pancreatic epithelial cells expressing activated
K-RAS. We also explored the HMGA1-cyclooxygenase (COX-2) pathway in human
pancreatic cancer cells and the therapeutic effects of COX-2 inhibitors in
xenograft tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: HMGA1 cooperates with activated K-RAS to induce migration, invasion, and
anchorage-independent cell growth in a cell line derived from normal human
pancreatic epithelium. Moreover, HMGA1 and COX-2 expression are positively
correlated in pancreatic cancer cell lines (r(2) = 0.93; p < 0.001). HMGA1 binds 
directly to the COX-2 promoter at an AT-rich region in vivo in three pancreatic
cancer cell lines. In addition, HMGA1 induces COX-2 expression in pancreatic
epithelial cells, while knock-down of HMGA1 results in repression of COX-2 in
pancreatic cancer cells. Strikingly, we also discovered that Sulindac (a
COX-1/COX-2 inhibitor) or Celecoxib (a more specific COX-2 inhibitor) block
xenograft tumorigenesis from pancreatic cancer cells expressing high levels of
HMGA1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies identify for the first time an important role for the
HMGA1-COX-2 pathway in pancreatic cancer and suggest that targeting this pathway 
could be effective to treat, or even prevent, pancreatic cancer.

Copyright © 2012 IAP and EPC. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3466102
PMID: 22898640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Autophagy. 2012 Nov;8(11):1684-5. doi: 10.4161/auto.21487. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

CAV1/caveolin 1 enhances aerobic glycolysis in colon cancer cells via activation 
of SLC2A3/GLUT3 transcription.

Ha TK(1), Chi SG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.

Although elevated expression of CAV1/caveolin 1 is associated with the malignant 
progression of various human cancers, the molecular mechanism underlying its
oncogenic functions is largely unknown. We found that CAV1 is frequently
overexpressed in advanced colorectal tumors due to aberrant promoter CpG site
hypomethylation, and its elevation is implicated in enhanced aerobic glycolysis
of tumor cells. Depletion of elevated CAV1 downregulates glucose uptake,
intracellular ATP level and lactate accumulation, and triggers autophagy through 
activation of AMPK-TP53/p53 signaling. CAV1 elevation increases glucose uptake
and ATP production by stimulating transcription of the glucose transporter
SLC2A3/GLUT3 via an HMGA1-binding site within the promoter. Collectively, our
study suggests that elevated CAV1 expression may contribute to colorectal tumor
progression by providing tumor cells growth and survival advantages under
nutritional stress conditions.

PMCID: PMC3494600
PMID: 22874559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Hum Mutat. 2012 Oct;33(10):1429-34. doi: 10.1002/humu.22175. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

Loss of function mutation in LARP7, chaperone of 7SK ncRNA, causes a syndrome of 
facial dysmorphism, intellectual disability, and primordial dwarfism.

Alazami AM(1), Al-Owain M, Alzahrani F, Shuaib T, Al-Shamrani H, Al-Falki YH,
Al-Qahtani SM, Alsheddi T, Colak D, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Primordial dwarfism (PD) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous condition.
Various molecular mechanisms are known to underlie the disease including impaired
mitotic mechanics, abnormal IGF2 expression, perturbed DNA damage response,
defective spliceosomal machinery, and abnormal replication licensing. Here, we
describe a syndromic form of PD associated with severe intellectual disability
and distinct facial features in a large multiplex Saudi family. Analysis reveals 
a novel underlying mechanism for PD involving depletion of 7SK, an abundant
cellular noncoding RNA (ncRNA), due to mutation of its chaperone LARP7. We show
that 7SK levels are tightly linked to LARP7 expression across cell lines, and
that this chaperone is ubiquitously expressed in the mouse embryo. The 7SK is
known to influence the expression of a wide array of genes through its inhibitory
effect on the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) as well as its 
competing role in HMGA1-mediated transcriptional regulation. This study documents
a critical role played by ncRNA in human development and adds to the growing list
of molecular mechanisms that, when perturbed, converge on the PD phenotype.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22865833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 14;287(38):31833-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.374462. Epub
2012 Jul 27.

Opposite orientations of a transcription factor heterodimer bind DNA
cooperatively with interaction partners but have different effects on
interferon-ß gene transcription.

Burns V(1), Kerppola TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

ATF2-Jun, IRF3, and HMGI recognize a composite regulatory element within the
interferon-ß enhancer (IFNb). Cooperative ATF2-Jun-IRF3 complex formation at IFNb
has been proposed to require a fixed orientation of ATF2-Jun binding. Our results
show that ATF2-Jun heterodimers bound IFNb in both orientations alone and in
association with IRF3 and HMGI. Two sets of symmetrically located amino acid
residues in ATF2 and Jun facilitated the interactions between heterodimers bound 
in opposite orientations and IRF3 at IFNb. IRF3 and HMGI bound IFNb in
association with both orientations of ATF2-Jun heterodimers with the same
cooperativity. ATF2-Jun heterodimers that bound IFNb in opposite orientations in 
vitro had different effects on interferon-ß gene transcription when they were
co-expressed with IRF3 in cultured cells. These heterodimers had different
transcriptional activities at different endogenous genes. Different regions of
ATF2 and Jun mediated their orientation-dependent transcriptional activities at
different genes. These studies revealed that cooperative DNA binding does not
require a unique nucleoprotein complex configuration, and that transcription
factor complexes that bind the same enhancer in different configurations can have
different transcriptional activities.

PMCID: PMC3442517
PMID: 22843696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Sep;26(9):1578-89. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1379. Epub 2012 Jun 
28.

The HMGA1-IGF-I/IGFBP system: a novel pathway for modulating glucose uptake.

Iiritano S(1), Chiefari E, Ventura V, Arcidiacono B, Possidente K, Nocera A,
Nevolo MT, Fedele M, Greco A, Greco M, Brunetti G, Fusco A, Foti D, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Università di Catanzaro Magna Græcia,
88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

We previously showed that loss of the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein
expression, induced in mice by disrupting the Hmga1 gene, considerably decreased 
insulin receptor expression in the major target tissues of insulin action,
causing a type 2-like diabetic phenotype, in which, however, glucose intolerance 
was paradoxically associated with increased peripheral insulin sensitivity.
Insulin hypersensitivity despite impairment of insulin action supports the
existence of molecular adaptation mechanisms promoting glucose disposal via
insulin-independent processes. Herein, we provide support for these compensatory 
pathways/circuits of glucose uptake in vivo, the activation of which under
certain adverse metabolic conditions may protect against hyperglycemia. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with protein-protein interaction studies
of nuclear proteins in vivo, and transient transcription assays in living cells, 
we show that HMGA1 is required for gene activation of the IGF-binding proteins 1 
(IGFBP1) and 3 (IGFBP3), two major members of the IGF-binding protein
superfamily. Furthermore, by using positron emission tomography with
(18)F-labeled 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose, in combination with the euglycemic
clamp with IGF-I, we demonstrated that IGF-I's bioactivity was increased in
Hmga1-knockout mice, in which both skeletal muscle Glut4 protein expression and
glucose uptake were enhanced compared with wild-type littermates. We propose
that, by affecting the expression of both IGFBP protein species, HMGA1 can serve 
as a modulator of IGF-I activity, thus representing an important novel mediator
of glucose disposal.

PMID: 22745191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 15;72(16):4097-109. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0448. Epub
2012 Jun 15.

Caveolin-1 increases aerobic glycolysis in colorectal cancers by stimulating
HMGA1-mediated GLUT3 transcription.

Ha TK(1), Her NG, Lee MG, Ryu BK, Lee JH, Han J, Jeong SI, Kang MJ, Kim NH, Kim
HJ, Chi SG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.

Caveolin-1 (CAV1) acts as a growth suppressor in various human malignancies, but 
its expression is elevated in many advanced cancers, suggesting the oncogenic
switch of its role during tumor progression. To understand the molecular basis
for the growth-promoting function of CAV1, we characterized its expression
status, differential roles for tumor growth, and effect on glucose metabolism in 
colorectal cancers. Abnormal elevation of CAV1 was detected in a substantial
fraction of primary tumors and cell lines and tightly correlated with promoter
CpG sites hypomethylation. Depletion of elevated CAV1 led to AMPK activation
followed by a p53-dependent G1 cell-cycle arrest and autophagy, suggesting that
elevated CAV1 may contribute to ATP generation. Furthermore, CAV1 depletion
downregulated glucose uptake, lactate accumulation, and intracellular ATP level, 
supporting that aerobic glycolysis is enhanced by CAV1. Consistently, CAV1 was
shown to stimulate GLUT3 transcription via an HMGA1-binding site within the GLUT3
promoter. HMGA1 was found to interact with and activate the GLUT3 promoter and
CAV1 increased the HMGA1 activity by enhancing its nuclear localization. Ectopic 
expression of HMGA1 increased glucose uptake, whereas its knockdown caused AMPK
activation. In addition, GLUT3 expression was strongly induced by cotransfection 
of CAV1 and HMGA1, and its overexpression was observed predominantly in tumors
harboring high levels of CAV1 and HMGA1. Together, these data show that elevated 
CAV1 upregulates glucose uptake and ATP production through HMGA1-mediated GLUT3
transcription, suggesting that CAV1 may render tumor cells growth advantages by
enhancing aerobic glycolysis.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22706202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cancer Genet. 2012 May;205(5):249-54. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.04.005.

Genomic imbalances in benign metastasizing leiomyoma: characterization by
conventional karyotypic, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and whole genome SNP
array analysis.

Bowen JM(1), Cates JM, Kash S, Itani D, Gonzalez A, Huang D, Oliveira A, Bridge
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, USA.

Benign metastasizing leiomyoma, a rare condition of controversial origin, is
characterized by the occurrence of extrauterine smooth muscle tumors primarily
affecting the lungs of women with a history of uterine leiomyomas. Numerous
genetic studies of uterine leiomyoma with rearrangements of the HMGA2 and HMGA1
loci defined in prominent subgroups have been conducted. In contrast, cytogenetic
and molecular descriptions of benign metastasizing leiomyoma are few, and, in
particular, this entity has not been previously subjected to single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) array analysis. In this study, conventional karyotypic, and/or
molecular cytogenetic, and SNP array characterization of a pleuropulmonary benign
mestasizing leiomyoma and a synchronous deep soft tissue leiomyoma of the thigh, 
which arose in a 56-year-old female with a remote history of uterine leiomyomata,
revealed rearrangement of the HMGA1 (6p21) locus and nearly identical genomic
profiles, including loss of chromosome 7 material in both lesions. These findings
suggest that both the deep soft tissue and pleuropulmonary lesions were derived
from the same abnormal clone and are genetically related to uterine leiomyomata.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3582220
PMID: 22682624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Nov;69(22):3819-34. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1022-5. Epub 
2012 May 23.

What model organisms and interactomics can reveal about the genetics of human
obesity.

Williams MJ(1), Almén MS, Fredriksson R, Schiöth HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Functional Pharmacology, Biomedical Center,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. michael.williams@neuro.uu.se

Genome-wide association studies have identified a number of genes associated with
human body weight. While some of these genes are large fields within obesity
research, such as MC4R, POMC, FTO and BDNF, the majority do not have a clearly
defined functional role explaining why they may affect body weight. Here, we
searched biological databases and discovered 33 additional genes associated with 
human obesity (CADM2, GIPR, GPCR5B, LRP1B, NEGR1, NRXN3, SH2B1, FANCL, GNPDA2,
HMGCR, MAP2K5, NUDT3, PRKD1, QPCTL, TNNI3K, MTCH2, DNAJC27, SLC39A8, MTIF3,
RPL27A, SEC16B, ETV5, HMGA1, TFAP2B, TUB, ZNF608, FAIM2, KCTD15, LINGO2, POC5,
PTBP2, TMEM18, TMEM160). We find that the majority have orthologues in distant
species, such as D. melanogaster and C. elegans, suggesting that they are
important for the biology of most bilateral species. Intriguingly, signalling
cascade genes and transcription factors are enriched among these obesity genes,
and several of the genes show properties that could be useful for potential drug 
discovery. In this review, we demonstrate how information from several distant
model species, interactomics and signalling pathway analysis represents an
important way to better understand the functional diversity of the surprisingly
high number of molecules that seem to be important for human obesity.

PMID: 22618246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37120. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037120. Epub 2012 May 16.

Crystal structure of a complex of DNA with one AT-hook of HMGA1.

Fonfría-Subirós E(1), Acosta-Reyes F, Saperas N, Pous J, Subirana JA, Campos JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departament d'Enginyeria Química, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Barcelona, Spain.

We present here for the first time the crystal structure of an AT-hook domain. We
show the structure of an AT-hook of the ubiquitous nuclear protein HMGA1,
combined with the oligonucleotide d(CGAATTAATTCG)(2), which has two potential
AATT interacting groups. Interaction with only one of them is found. The
structure presents analogies and significant differences with previous NMR
studies: the AT-hook forms hydrogen bonds between main-chain NH groups and
thymines in the minor groove, DNA is bent and the minor groove is widened.

PMCID: PMC3353895
PMID: 22615915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jul;97(7):E1128-38. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3482. Epub
2012 May 7.

Altered microRNA expression profile in human pituitary GH adenomas:
down-regulation of miRNA targeting HMGA1, HMGA2, and E2F1.

D'Angelo D(1), Palmieri D, Mussnich P, Roche M, Wierinckx A, Raverot G, Fedele M,
Croce CM, Trouillas J, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche (CNR) c/o Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e
Molecolare, Universita` degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.

CONTEXT: MicroRNA (miRNA) are an important class of regulators of gene
expression. Altered miRNA expression has been constantly found in human
neoplasias and plays an important role in the process of carcinogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify specific miRNA whose expression 
is altered in GH-secreting pituitary adenomas.
DESIGN: Using a miRNACHIP microarray, we have analyzed the miRNA expression
profile of human GH adenomas vs. normal pituitary gland.
RESULTS: We report the identification of a set of miRNA, including miR-34b,
miR-326, miR-432, miR-548c-3p, miR-570, and miR-603, drastically and constantly
down-regulated in GH adenomas. We demonstrate that these miRNA target genes such 
as high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1), HMGA2, and E2F1, whose overexpression and/or
activation plays a critical role in pituitary tumorigenesis. We also show that
the enforced expression of the down-regulated miRNA has a negative role on the
growth regulation of pituitary adenoma cells. Finally, an inverse correlation is 
found between the expression of these miRNA and HMGA1 and HMGA2 protein levels in
GH adenomas.
CONCLUSION: Our study identifies a specific subset of miRNA, whose
down-regulation might contribute to pituitary tumorigenesis.

PMID: 22564666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Diabetes. 2012 May;61(5):e3. doi: 10.2337/db12-0051.

Comment on: Marquez et al. Low-frequency variants in HMGA1 are not associated
with type 2 diabetes risk. Diabetes 2012;61:524-530.

Brunetti A, Chiefari E, Pullinger CR, Tanyolac S, Foti D, Durlach V, Goldfine ID.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2012 Sep;61(9):e15.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2012 Feb;61(2):524-30.

PMCID: PMC3331749
PMID: 22517660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 18;14(2):R63.

Effects of BRCA2 cis-regulation in normal breast and cancer risk amongst BRCA2
mutation carriers.

Maia AT(1), Antoniou AC, O'Reilly M, Samarajiwa S, Dunning M, Kartsonaki C, Chin 
SF, Curtis CN, McGuffog L, Domchek SM; EMBRACE, Easton DF, Peock S, Frost D,
Evans DG, Eeles R, Izatt L, Adlard J, Eccles D; GEMO Study Collaborators,
Sinilnikova OM, Mazoyer S, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Gauthier-Villars M, Faivre L,
Venat-Bouvet L, Delnatte C, Nevanlinna H, Couch FJ, Godwin AK, Caligo MA;
SWE-BRCA, Barkardottir RB; kConFab Investigators, Chen X, Beesley J, Healey S,
Caldas C, Chenevix-Trench G, Ponder BA.

Collaborators: Easton DF, Peock S, Frost D, Ellis S, Fineberg E, Platte R,
Miedzybrodzka Z, Gregory H, Morrison P, Jeffers L, Cole T, Ong KR, Hoffman J,
Donaldson A, James M, Paterson J, Downing S, Taylor A, Murray A, Rogers MT,
McCann E, Kennedy M, Barton D, Porteous M, Drummond S, Brewer C, Kivuva E, Searle
A, Goodman S, Hill K, Davidson R, Murday V, Bradshaw N, Snadden L, Longmuir M,
Watt C, Gibson S, Haque E, Tobias E, Duncan A, Izatt L, Jacobs C, Langman C,
Whaite A, Dorkins H, Barwell J, Adlard J, Chu C, Miller J, Ellis I, Houghton C,
Evans DG, Lalloo F, Taylor J, Side L, Male A, Berlin C, Eason J, Collier R,
Douglas F, Claber O, Jobson I, Walker L, McLeod D, Halliday D, Durell S, Stayner 
B, Eeles R, Shanley S, Rahman N, Houlston R, Bancroft E, D'Mello L, Page E,
Ardern-Jones A, Kohut K, Wiggins J, Castro E, Mitra A, Robertson L, Cook J,
Quarrell O, Bardsley C, Hodgson S, Goff S, Brice G, Winchester L, Eddy C,
Tripathi V, Attard V, Eccles D, Lucassen A, Crawford G, McBride D, Smalley S,
Sinilnikova O, Mazoyer S, Barjhoux L, Verny-Pierre C, Giraud S, Léone M,
Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Gauthier-Villars M, Buecher B, Houdayer C, Moncoutier V,
Belotti M, Tirapo C, de Pauw A, Bressac-de-Paillerets B, Remenieras A, Byrde V,
Caron O, Lenoir G, Bignon YJ, Uhrhammer N, Lasset C, Bonadona V, Hardouin A,
Berthet P, Sobol H, Bourdon V, Noguchi T, Eisinger F, Coulet F, Colas C, Soubrier
F, Coupier I, Pujol P, Peyrat JP, Fournier J, Révillion F, Vennin P, Adenis C,
Rouleau E, Lidereau R, Demange L, Nogues C, Muller D, Fricker J, Barouk-Simonet
E, Bonnet F, Bubien V, Sevenet N, Longy M, Toulas C, Guimbaud R, Gladieff L,
Feillel V, Leroux D, Dreyfus H, Rebischung C, Peysselon M, Coron F, Faivre L,
Prieur F, Lebrun M, Kientz C, Ferrer SF, Frénay M, Vénat-Bouvet L, Mortemousque
I, Lynch HT, Karlsson CL, Nordling M, Bergman A, Einbeigi Z, Stenmark-Askmalm M, 
Liedgren S, Borg LÅ, Loman N, Olsson H, Kristoffersson U, Jernström H, Harbst K, 
Henriksson K, Lindblom A, Arver B, von Wachenfeldt A, Liljegren A,
Barbany-Bustinza G, Rantala J, Melin B, Grönberg H, Stattin EL, Emanuelsson M,
Ehrencrona H, Brandell RR, Dahl N.

INTRODUCTION: Cis-acting regulatory single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at
specific loci may modulate penetrance of germline mutations at the same loci by
introducing different levels of expression of the wild-type allele. We have
previously reported that BRCA2 shows differential allelic expression and we
hypothesize that the known variable penetrance of BRCA2 mutations might be
associated with this mechanism.
METHODS: We combined haplotype analysis and differential allelic expression of
BRCA2 in breast tissue to identify expression haplotypes and candidate
cis-regulatory variants. These candidate variants underwent selection based on in
silico predictions for regulatory potential and disruption of transcription
factor binding, and were functionally analyzed in vitro and in vivo in normal and
breast cancer cell lines. SNPs tagging the expression haplotypes were correlated 
with the total expression of several genes in breast tissue measured by Taqman
and microarray technologies. The effect of the expression haplotypes on breast
cancer risk in BRCA2 mutation carriers was investigated in 2,754 carriers.
RESULTS: We identified common haplotypes associated with differences in the
levels of BRCA2 expression in human breast cells. We characterized three
cis-regulatory SNPs located at the promoter and two intronic regulatory elements 
which affect the binding of the transcription factors C/EBPa, HMGA1, D-binding
protein (DBP) and ZF5. We showed that the expression haplotypes also correlated
with changes in the expression of other genes in normal breast. Furthermore,
there was suggestive evidence that the minor allele of SNP rs4942440, which is
associated with higher BRCA2 expression, is also associated with a reduced risk
of breast cancer (per-allele hazard ratio (HR) = 0.85, 95% confidence interval
(CI) = 0.72 to 1.00, P-trend = 0.048).
CONCLUSIONS: Our work provides further insights into the role of cis-regulatory
variation in the penetrance of disease-causing mutations. We identified
small-effect genetic variants associated with allelic expression differences in
BRCA2 which could possibly affect the risk in mutation carriers through altering 
expression levels of the wild-type allele.

PMCID: PMC3446398
PMID: 22513257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Urol. 2012 Jun;187(6):2215-22. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.01.069. Epub 2012 Apr
13.

Expression and role of HMGA1 in renal cell carcinoma.

Takaha N(1), Sowa Y, Takeuchi I, Hongo F, Kawauchi A, Miki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Cancer Drug Development, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. ntakaha@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

PURPOSE: Although molecular targeted therapy has improved the clinical outcome of
metastatic renal cell carcinoma, a complete response is rare and there are
various side effects. Identifying novel target molecules is necessary to improve 
the clinical outcome of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. HMGA1 is over expressed 
in many types of cancer and it is associated with metastatic potential. It is
expressed at low levels or not expressed in normal tissue. We examined HMGA1
expression and function in human renal cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HMGA1 expression in surgical specimen from patients with
renal cell carcinoma was examined by immunoblot. HMGA1 expression in 6 human
renal cell carcinoma cell lines was examined by immunoblot and
immunofluorescence. The molecular effects of siRNA mediated knockdown of HMGA1
were examined in ACHN and Caki-1 cells.
RESULTS: Immunoblot using surgical specimen showed that HMGA1 was not expressed
in normal kidney tissue but it was expressed in tumor tissue in 1 of 30
nonmetastatic (3%) and 6 of 18 metastatic (33%) cases (p=0.008). Immunoblot and
immunofluorescence revealed significant nuclear expression of HMGA1 in ACHN and
Caki-1 cells derived from metastatic sites. HMGA1 knockdown remarkably suppressed
colony formation and induced significant apoptosis in ACHN and Caki-1 cells.
HMGA1 knockdown significantly inhibited invasion and migration in vitro, and
induced anoikis associated with P-Akt down-regulation in ACHN cells.
CONCLUSIONS: HMGA1 is a potential target for novel therapeutic modalities for
metastatic renal cell carcinoma.

Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22503056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Hum Reprod. 2012 Jun;27(6):1829-39. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des101. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

The value of anti-Mullerian hormone measurement in the long GnRH agonist
protocol: association with ovarian response and gonadotrophin-dose adjustments.

Anckaert E(1), Smitz J, Schiettecatte J, Klein BM, Arce JC.

Author information: 
(1)UZ Brussel, Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Radio-immunology, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the predictive value of serum and follicular
fluid (FF) concentrations of anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) with respect to
treatment outcome variables in an IVF cycle.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was performed with data from 731
normogonadotrophic women undergoing controlled ovarian stimulation after
stimulation with highly purified menotrophin (HP-hMG) or rFSH following a long
GnRH agonist protocol.
RESULTS: In both treatment groups, the serum AMH concentration at the start of
the stimulation was significantly (P < 0.001) positively correlated with the
serum levels of estradiol (HP-hMG: r = 0.45; rFSH: r = 0.55), androstenedione
(HP-hMG: r = 0.50; rFSH: 0.49) and total testosterone (HP-hMG: r = 0.40; rFSH: r 
= 0.36) at the end of the stimulation as well as the number of oocytes retrieved 
(HP-hMG: r = 0.48; rFSH: r = 0.62), the AMH concentration in FF (HP-hMG: r =
0.55; rFSH: 0.61) and the serum progesterone concentration (HP-hMG: r = 0.39;
rFSH: r = 0.50) at oocyte retrieval. For both treatments, serum AMH at the start 
of the stimulation was a good predictor of the need to increase or decrease the
gonadotrophin dose on stimulation day 6 and of ovarian response below (<7
oocytes) or above (>15 oocytes) the target. No significant relationships were
observed between serum AMH and embryo quality or ongoing pregnancy.
CONCLUSION: The serum AMH concentration at the start of the stimulation in IVF
patients down-regulated with GnRH agonist in the long protocol revealed a
positive relationship with ovarian response to gonadotrophins in terms of oocytes
retrieved and accompanying endocrine response. AMH is a good predictor of the
need for gonadotrophin-dose adjustment on stimulation day 6 for patients with a
fixed starting dose, but a poor predictor of embryo quality and pregnancy chances
in individual patients.

PMCID: PMC3357198
PMID: 22473395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Vet Med Int. 2012;2012:752083. doi: 10.1155/2012/752083. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Effects of high-mobility group a protein application on canine adipose-derived
mesenchymal stem cells in vitro.

Ismail AA(1), Wagner S, Murua Escobar H, Willenbrock S, Sterenczak KA, Samy MT,
Abd El-Aal AM, Nolte I, Wefstaedt P.

Author information: 
(1)Small Animal Hospital, University of Veterinary Medicine Foundation, 30559
Hannover, Germany.

Multipotency and self-renewal are considered as most important features of stem
cells to persist throughout life in tissues. In this context, the role of HMGA
proteins to influence proliferation of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cell
(ASCs) while maintaining their multipotent and self-renewal capacities has not
yet been investigated. Therefore, extracellular HMGA1 and HMGA2 application alone
(10-200<U+2009>ng/mL) and in combination with each other (100, 200<U+2009>ng/mL each) was
investigated with regard to proliferative effects on canine ASCs (cASCs) after 48
hours of cultivation. Furthermore, mRNA expression of multipotency marker genes
in unstimulated and HMGA2-stimulated cASCs (50, 100<U+2009>ng/mL) was analyzed by
RT-qPCR. HMGA1 significantly reduced cASCs proliferation in concentrations of
10-200<U+2009>ng/mL culture medium. A combination of HMGA1 and HMGA2 protein (100 and
200<U+2009>ng/mL each) caused the same effects, whereas no significant effect on cASCs
proliferation was shown after HMGA2 protein application alone. RT-qPCR results
showed that expression levels of marker genes including KLF4, SOX2, OCT4, HMGA2, 
and cMYC mRNAs were on the same level in both HMGA2-protein-stimulated and
-unstimulated cASCs. Extracellular HMGA protein application might be valuable to 
control proliferation of cASCs in context with their employment in regenerative
approaches without affecting their self-renewal and multipotency abilities.

PMCID: PMC3289926
PMID: 22448338  [PubMed]


159. Histol Histopathol. 2012 May;27(5):567-79.

High mobility group A1 and cancer: potential biomarker and therapeutic target.

Shah SN(1), Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205, USA.

The High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1, formerly HMG-I/Y) gene is highly expressed
during embryogenesis and in virtually all aggressive human cancers studied to
date, although its role in these settings is only beginning to emerge. Moreover, 
high levels of expression portend a poor prognosis in some tumors. Increasing
evidence suggests that the HMGA1 protein functions as a master regulator with a
critical role in normal development and tumor progression in diverse
malignancies. These proteins contain AT-hook DNA binding domains that mediate
binding to AT-rich regions of chromatin. After binding to DNA, HMGA1 alters DNA
structure, and orchestrates the assembly of a transcriptional complex or
"enhanceosome" to regulate gene expression. Previous studies indicate that HMGA1 
participates in regulating fundamental cellular processes, including
transcription, cell cycle progression, embryonic development, neoplastic
transformation, differentiation, senescence, viral integration, and DNA repair by
virtue of its ability to interact with other proteins, bind to DNA, and modulate 
gene expression. Recent studies also link HMGA1 expression to poor
differentiation status and a refractory, stem cell-like state in aggressive
cancers. Together, these findings suggest that HMGA1 could serve as a useful
biomarker and therapeutic target in advanced malignancies. Here, we focus on
prior studies implicating HMGA1 in the pathogenesis of refractory human tumors
arising from diverse tissues and its potential role as a biomarker. We also
review previous attempts to target HMGA1 pathways in cancer. Further study of
HMGA1 promises to have a major impact on our ability to understand and treat
cancer.

PMID: 22419021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Diabetologia. 2012 Jun;55(6):1685-8. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2518-0. Epub 2012
Mar 13.

Polymorphism of HMGA1 is associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes among 
Chinese individuals.

Liu L(1), Ding H, Wang HR, Xu YJ, Cui GL, Wang PH, Yuan G, Yu XF, Wang DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, 430030 Wuhan,
People's Republic of China.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Variants of the high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) gene have been
shown to be associated with insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes in individuals
of European origin. We aimed to determine whether this locus confers significant 
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in the Han Chinese population, and thus
cross-race susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Polymorphisms in HMGA1 were identified by direct sequencing of genomic
DNA derived from 192 Chinese participants (96 patients with type 2 diabetes and
96 controls). We then genotyped the common variant IVS5-13insC
(c.136-14_136-13insC) in two other independent cohorts, including a total of
2,533 cases and 2,643 ethnically matched controls.
RESULTS: We confirmed the association of the HMGA1 variant IVS5-13insC
(c.136-14_136-13insC) with type 2 diabetes with an OR of 1.34 (95% CI 1.15, 1.56,
p = 0.0002 under a dominant model, and 95% CI 1.16, 1.55, p = 0.0002 under an
additive model) in the Han Chinese population, corresponding to a population
attributable risk fraction of 5.0%.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: HMGA1 is an important susceptibility locus that
confers a high cross-race risk of the development of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 22411136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Immunobiology. 2013 Feb;218(2):135-44. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2012.02.006. Epub
2012 Feb 14.

Ultraviolet B induces high mobility group box 1 release from mouse peritoneal
macrophages in vitro via caspase-1 mediated secretion pathway.

Chakraborty R(1), Bhatt KH, Sodhi A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi 221005, India.

High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein is a unique non histone nuclear protein
that acts extracellularly as a mediator of delayed inflammation. Sub lethal dose 
of UVB triggers the release of cytokines from macrophages (MFs). Adding to the
panoply of UVB induced cytokines; it is reported that UVB induces HMGB1 release
from mouse peritoneal MFs in time and partially dose dependent manner,
independent of TNF-a. UVB also enhanced the transcription of HMGB1 gene and
expression of cellular protein, which influences its subsequent release. HMGB1 is
secreted by an unconventional secretion pathway of unknown mechanism. Caspase-1
has been shown to function as a general regulator of stress induced
unconventional secretion for a number of cytokines. In the present study, we have
observed that pharmacological inhibitors specific for caspase-1 (ZVAD and YVAD)
abrogated UVB induced HMGB1 release from MFs. This effect was most likely
mediated via physical interaction between HMGB1 and active caspase-1 (p10 and
p20) as demonstrated by immunoprecipitation. In addition, it was found that HMGB1
and active caspase-1 p20 release depends on UVB mediated enhancement of
intracellular Ca(2+). Thus our data suggests that optimal dose of UVB (50
mJ/cm(2)) induces HMGB1 upregulation and active release from mouse peritoneal MFs
which is mediated by caspase-1 in a Ca(2+) dependent manner.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22398161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Dec;227(12):3749-55. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24087.

The high-mobility group A1-estrogen receptor ß nuclear interaction is impaired in
human testicular seminomas.

Esposito F(1), Boscia F, Gigantino V, Tornincasa M, Fusco A, Franco R, Chieffi P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, II Università di Napoli, Via
Costantinopoli, Naples, Italy.

It is well established that estrogens participate in the control of normal
spermatogenesis and endogenous or environmental estrogens are involved in
pathological germ cell proliferation including testicular germ cell tumors. The
effects of estrogen are now known to be mediated by estrogen receptor-a (ERa) and
ERß subtypes, but only ERß has been found in human germ cells of normal testis.
However, its expression was markedly diminished in human testicular seminomas.
The expression and the possible interaction of ERß and HMGA1 were studied in
normal germ cells and in human testicular seminomas. GC1 and TCam-2 germ cell
lines, were used; in addition, a tissue micro-array (TMA) was built using the
most representative areas from 35 cases of human testicular seminomas. The
expression and the interaction of ERß and HMGA1 were observed by using
immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses in combination with
immunocytochemistry and immunofluorescence analyses. Here, we show that ERß
interacts with HMGA1 in normal germ cells, while down regulation of ERß
associates with transcriptional co-regulator HMGA1 over-expression and
cytoplasmic localization both in human testicular seminomas and in TCam-2 cell
line. In addition, we show that 17ß-oestradiol induces an HMGA1 increased
cytoplasmic expression associated to an ERß down-regulation in TCam-2 cell line. 
Taken together, our results suggest that exposure to estrogens or
estrogen-mimics, in some as of yet undefined manner, diminishes the ERß-mediated 
growth restraint in human testicular seminoma, probably due to the HMGA1
cytoplasmic delocalization associated with ERß down-regulation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22392906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Jul;52(7):526-34. doi: 10.1002/mc.21887. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

The HMGA1 protoncogene frequently deregulated in cancer is a transcriptional
target of E2F1.

Massimi I(1), Guerrieri F, Petroni M, Veschi V, Truffa S, Screpanti I, Frati L,
Levrero M, Gulino A, Giannini G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Reactivation of the HMGA1 protoncogene is very frequent in human cancer, but
still very little is known on the molecular mechanisms leading to this event.
Prompted by the finding of putative E2F binding sites in the human HMGA1 promoter
and by the frequent deregulation of the RB/E2F1 pathway in human carcinogenesis, 
we investigated whether E2F1 might contribute to the regulation of HMGA1 gene
expression. Here we report that E2F1 induces HMGA1 by interacting with a 193<U+2009>bp
region of the HMGA1 promoter containing an E2F binding site surrounded by three
putative Sp1 binding sites. Both gain and loss of function experiments indicate
that Sp1 functionally interacts with E2F1 to promote HMGA1 expression. However,
while Sp1 constitutively binds HMGA1 promoter, it is the balance between
different E2F family members that tunes the levels of HMGA1 expression between
quiescence and proliferation. Finally, we found increased HMGA1 expression in
pituitary and thyroid tumors developed in Rb(+/-) mice, supporting the hypothesis
that E2F1 is a novel important regulator of HMGA1 expression and that
deregulation of the RB/E2F1 path might significantly contribute to HMGA1
deregulation in cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22389255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Virol. 2012 May;86(9):5179-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00169-12. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

A protein array screen for Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus LANA
interactors links LANA to TIP60, PP2A activity, and telomere shortening.

Shamay M(1), Liu J, Li R, Liao G, Shen L, Greenway M, Hu S, Zhu J, Xie Z,
Ambinder RF, Qian J, Zhu H, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Oncology Program, Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) LANA protein functions in
latently infected cells as an essential participant in KSHV genome replication
and as a driver of dysregulated cell growth. To identify novel LANA protein-cell 
protein interactions that could contribute to these activities, we performed a
proteomic screen in which purified, adenovirus-expressed Flag-LANA protein was
incubated with an array displaying 4,192 nonredundant human proteins. Sixty-one
interacting cell proteins were consistently detected. LANA interactions with
high-mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1), HMGB1, telomeric repeat binding factor 1
(TRF1), xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group A (XPA), pygopus homolog 2
(PYGO2), protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)B subunit, Tat-interactive protein 60
(TIP60), replication protein A1 (RPA1), and RPA2 proteins were confirmed in
coimmunoprecipitation assays. LANA-associated TIP60 retained acetyltransferase
activity and, unlike human papillomavirus E6 and HIV-1 TAT proteins, LANA did not
reduce TIP60 stability. The LANA-bound PP2A B subunit was associated with the
PP2A A subunit but not the catalytic C subunit, suggesting a disruption of PP2A
phosphatase activity. This is reminiscent of the role of simian virus 40 (SV40)
small t antigen. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed binding of
RPA1 and RPA2 to the KSHV terminal repeats. Interestingly, LANA expression
ablated RPA1 and RPA2 binding to the cell telomeric repeats. In U2OS cells that
rely on the alternative mechanism for telomere maintenance, LANA expression had
minimal effect on telomere length. However, LANA expression in telomerase
immortalized endothelial cells resulted in telomere shortening. In KSHV-infected 
cells, telomere shortening may be one more mechanism by which LANA contributes to
the development of malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3347335
PMID: 22379092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30427. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030427. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Signaling networks associated with AKT activation in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC): new insights on the role of phosphatydil-inositol-3 kinase.

Scrima M(1), De Marco C, Fabiani F, Franco R, Pirozzi G, Rocco G, Ravo M, Weisz
A, Zoppoli P, Ceccarelli M, Botti G, Malanga D, Viglietto G.

Author information: 
(1)Biogem scarl, Institute for Genetic Research Gaetano Salvatore, Ariano Irpino 
(Avellino), Italy.

Aberrant activation of PI3K/AKT signalling represents one of the most common
molecular alterations in lung cancer, though the relative contribution of the
single components of the cascade to the NSCLC development is still poorly
defined. In this manuscript we have investigated the relationship between
expression and genetic alterations of the components of the PI3K/AKT pathway
[KRAS, the catalytic subunit of PI3K (p110a), PTEN, AKT1 and AKT2] and the
activation of AKT in 107 surgically resected NSCLCs and have analyzed the
existing relationships with clinico-pathologic features. Expression analysis was 
performed by immunohistochemistry on Tissue Micro Arrays (TMA); mutation analysis
was performed by DNA sequencing; copy number variation was determined by FISH. We
report that activation of PI3K/AKT pathway in Italian NSCLC patients is
associated with high grade (G3-G4 compared with G1-G2; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>83; p<0.05) and more
advanced disease (TNM stage III vs. stages I and II; n<U+200A>=<U+200A>26; p<0.05). In
addition, we found that PTEN loss (41/104, 39%) and the overexpression of p110a
(27/92, 29%) represent the most frequent aberration observed in NSCLCs. Less
frequent molecular lesions comprised the overexpression of AKT2 (18/83, 22%) or
AKT1 (17/96, 18%), and KRAS mutation (7/63, 11%). Our results indicate that,
among all genes, only p110a overexpression was significantly associated to AKT
activation in NSCLCs (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02). Manipulation of p110a expression in lung cancer 
cells carrying an active PI3K allele (NCI-H460) efficiently reduced proliferation
of NSCLC cells in vitro and tumour growth in vivo. Finally, RNA profiling of lung
epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) expressing a mutant allele of PIK3 (E545K) identified 
a network of transcription factors such as MYC, FOS and HMGA1, not previously
recognised to be associated with aberrant PI3K signalling in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC3281846
PMID: 22363436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Sci Rep. 2012;2:251. doi: 10.1038/srep00251. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

HMGA1 is a novel downstream nuclear target of the insulin receptor signaling
pathway.

Chiefari E, Nevolo MT, Arcidiacono B, Maurizio E, Nocera A, Iiritano S, Sgarra R,
Possidente K, Palmieri C, Paonessa F, Brunetti G, Manfioletti G, Foti D, Brunetti
A.

High-mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) protein is an important nuclear factor that
activates gene transcription by binding to AT-rich sequences in the promoter
region of DNA. We previously demonstrated that HMGA1 is a key regulator of the
insulin receptor (INSR) gene and individuals with defects in HMGA1 have decreased
INSR expression and increased susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus. In
addition, there is evidence that intracellular regulatory molecules that are
employed by the INSR signaling system are involved in post-translational
modifications of HMGA1, including protein phosphorylation. It is known that
phosphorylation of HMGA1 reduces DNA-binding affinity and transcriptional
activation. In the present study, we investigated whether activation of the INSR 
by insulin affected HMGA1 protein phosphorylation and its regulation of gene
transcription. Collectively, our findings indicate that HMGA1 is a novel
downstream target of the INSR signaling pathway, thus representing a new critical
nuclear mediator of insulin action and function.

PMCID: PMC3273854
PMID: 22355763  [PubMed]


167. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2012 Jan-Feb;59(1):1-5. doi: 10.1002/bab.56. Epub 2012
Jan 23.

Knockdown of HMGA1 expression by short/small hairpin RNA inhibits growth of
ovarian carcinoma cells.

Liu Y(1), Wang Y, Zhang Y, Fu J, Zhang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin University, Harbin, People's Republic of China.

The aim of the current study was to investigate the influence of downregulating
high-mobility group protein A1 (HMGA1) on the tumor gene and the mechanisms
underlying the antitumor of HMGA1. The efficient short/small hairpin RNAs
(shRNAs) of HMGA1 were constructed and transfected into human ovarian carcinoma
OVCAR cells. The changes were identified by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR),
Western blotting, methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium, and invasion assay. The knockdown
of HMGA1 expression in OVCAR cells could obviously change cell morphology,
decrease cell proliferation, and reduce invasion in vitro. BALB/C nude mice
injected with OVCAR cells transfected HMGA1 shRNA showed a significantly lower
tumor weight and volume than those in the control group. Taken together, HMGA1
knockdown could reduce the growth and metastasis potentials of OVCAR cells.

Copyright © 2012 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 22332738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Histopathology. 2012 Feb;60(3):397-404. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04121.x.

HMGA1 and HMGA2 protein expression correlates with advanced tumour grade and
lymph node metastasis in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Piscuoglio S(1), Zlobec I, Pallante P, Sepe R, Esposito F, Zimmermann A,
Diamantis I, Terracciano L, Fusco A, Karamitopoulou E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

AIMS: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma follows a multistep model of progression
through precursor lesions called pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN).
The high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) and high mobility group A2 (HMGA2) proteins
are architectural transcription factors that have been implicated in the
pathogenesis and progression of malignant tumours, including pancreatic cancer.
The aim of this study was to explore the role of HMGA1 and HMGA2 in pancreatic
carcinogenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: HMGA1 and HMGA2 expression was examined in 210 ductal
pancreatic adenocarcinomas from resection specimens, combined on a tissue
microarray also including 40 examples of PanIN and 40 normal controls. The
results were correlated with the clinicopathological parameters of the tumours
and the outcome of the patients. The percentage of tumour cells showing HMGA1 and
HMGA2 nuclear immunoreactivity correlated positively with increasing malignancy
grade and lymph node metastasis. Moreover, HMGA1 and HMGA2 expression was
significantly higher in invasive carcinomas than in PanINs. No, or very low,
expression was found in normal pancreatic tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that HMGA1 and HMGA2 are implicated in
pancreatic carcinogenesis and may play a role in tumour progression towards a
more malignant phenotype.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 22276603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30034. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030034. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

HMGA1 induces intestinal polyposis in transgenic mice and drives tumor
progression and stem cell properties in colon cancer cells.

Belton A(1), Gabrovsky A, Bae YK, Reeves R, Iacobuzio-Donahue C, Huso DL, Resar
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Although metastatic colon cancer is a leading cause of cancer death
worldwide, the molecular mechanisms that enable colon cancer cells to metastasize
remain unclear. Emerging evidence suggests that metastatic cells develop by
usurping transcriptional networks from embryonic stem (ES) cells to facilitate an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasion, and metastatic progression.
Previous studies identified HMGA1 as a key transcription factor enriched in ES
cells, colon cancer, and other aggressive tumors, although its role in these
settings is poorly understood.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To determine how HMGA1 functions in metastatic colon 
cancer, we manipulated HMGA1 expression in transgenic mice and colon cancer
cells. We discovered that HMGA1 drives proliferative changes, aberrant crypt
formation, and intestinal polyposis in transgenic mice. In colon cancer cell
lines from poorly differentiated, metastatic tumors, knock-down of HMGA1 blocks
anchorage-independent cell growth, migration, invasion, xenograft tumorigenesis
and three-dimensional colonosphere formation. Inhibiting HMGA1 expression blocks 
tumorigenesis at limiting dilutions, consistent with depletion of tumor-initiator
cells in the knock-down cells. Knock-down of HMGA1 also inhibits metastatic
progression to the liver in vivo. In metastatic colon cancer cells, HMGA1 induces
expression of Twist1, a gene involved in embryogenesis, EMT, and tumor
progression, while HMGA1 represses E-cadherin, a gene that is down-regulated
during EMT and metastatic progression. In addition, HMGA1 is among the most
enriched genes in colon cancer compared to normal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate for the first time that HMGA1 drives
proliferative changes and polyp formation in the intestines of transgenic mice
and induces metastatic progression and stem-like properties in colon cancer
cells. These findings indicate that HMGA1 is a key regulator, both in metastatic 
progression and in the maintenance of a stem-like state. Our results also suggest
that HMGA1 or downstream pathways could be rational therapeutic targets in
metastatic, poorly differentiated colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC3262796
PMID: 22276142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Recenti Prog Med. 2011 Dec;102(12):468-75. doi: 10.1701/998.10858.

[Perspectives on the contribution of genetics to the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Italian]

Brunetti A(1), Chiefari E, Foti D.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di endocrilogia, Dipartmento di Scienze della Salute, Università
Magna Grsscia, Catanzaro. brunetti@unicz.it

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common metabolic-endocrine disorder often
associated with overweight or obesity. It is a complex disease determined by both
predisposing genetic factors and non-genetic environmental factors and
interactions between them, leading to impaired beta-cell insulin secretion and
peripheral insulin resistance. Insulin resistance is a prominent feature of most 
patients with type 2 DM and obesity, resulting in a reduced response of target
tissues (muscle, liver and fat) to both endogenous and exogenous insulin. There
is considerable evidence that heredity is a major contributor to the insulin
resistance of type 2 DM. Initially, among those destined to develop diabetes, the
beta cells of the pancreas compensate with increased insulin secretion to
maintain normal glucose tolerance. Type 2 DM develops when beta cells fail to
compensate. Despite of the numerous studies in the recent years, the actual
genetic causes of insulin resistance and type 2 DM have not yet been clearly
elucidated. Through linkage and "genome-wide" studies, genes were identified most
frequently associated with type 2 DM, such as TCF7L2, considered, until recently,
the most important gene among those predisposing to type 2 DM. On the other hand,
numerous candidate genes have been analyzed for genetic variants that increase
susceptibility to type 2 DM. Several variants have been identified in many of
these genes, including the insulin receptor gene, INSR, and other genes involved 
in adipogenesis and beta-cell insulin secretion. In this context, recently our
group has identified a new gene involved in the pathogenesis of insulin
resistance and type 2 DM: the HMGA1 gene. Functional genetic variants of the
HMGA1 gene, capable of reducing the intracellular levels of INSR in insulin
target tissues, were found in 10% of patients with type 2 DM in three distinct
populations: Italian, North American and French.

PMID: 22258190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 Apr;123(4):553-71. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0934-8. Epub
2012 Jan 17.

Overexpression of HMGA1 deregulates tumor growth via cdc25A and alters
migration/invasion through a cdc25A-independent pathway in medulloblastoma.

Lau KM(1), Chan QK, Pang JC, Ma FM, Li KK, Yeung WW, Cheng AS, Feng H, Chung NY, 
Li HM, Zhou L, Wang Y, Mao Y, Ng HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong.
kmlau@cuhk.edu.hk

Overexpression of high mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) is common in human
cancers. Little is known about the mechanisms underlying its deregulation and
downstream targets, and information about its clinical and biological
significance in medulloblastoma (MB) is lacking. Here, we demonstrated frequent
genomic gain at 6p21.33-6p21.31 with copy number increase leading to
overexpression of HMGA1 in MB. The overexpression correlated with a high
proliferation index and poor prognosis. Moreover, we found that hsa-miR-124a
targeted 3'UTR of HMGA1 and negatively modulated the expression in MB cells,
indicating that loss/downregulation of hsa-miR-124a reported in our previous
study could contribute to the overexpression. Regarding the biological
significance of HMGA1, siRNA knockdown and ectopic expression studies revealed
the crucial roles of HMGA1 in controlling MB cell growth and migration/invasion
through modulation of apoptosis and formation of filopodia and stress fibers,
respectively. Furthermore, we identified cdc25A as a target of HMGA1 and showed
that physical interaction between HMGA1 and the cdc25A promoter is required for
transcriptional upregulation. In clinical samples, HMGA1 and cdc25A were
concordantly overexpressed. Functionally, cdc25A is involved in the
HMGA1-mediated control of MB cell growth. Finally, netropsin, which competes with
HMGA1 in DNA binding, reduced the expression of cdc25A by suppression of its
promoter activity and inhibited in vitro and in vivo intracranial MB cell growth.
In conclusion, our results delineate the mechanisms underlying the deregulation
and reveal the functional significance of HMGA1 in controlling MB cell growth and
migration/invasion. Importantly, the results highlight the therapeutic potential 
of targeting HMGA1 in MB patients.

PMID: 22249617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 May;96(2):187-95. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2011.12.028. Epub 2012 Jan 14.

Metformin alters the expression profiles of microRNAs in human pancreatic cancer 
cells.

Li W(1), Yuan Y, Huang L, Qiao M, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, 197 Ruijin Second Road, Shanghai 200025, PR China.

AIMS: To investigate the effect of metformin on the expression profiles of
microRNAs in human pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: MicroRNAs real-time PCR Array was applied to investigate differentially 
expressed miRNAs in Sw1990 cells treated with or without metformin. Stem-loop
real time RT-PCR was used to confirm the results of the array assay in Sw1990 and
Panc-1 cells. The effects of miR-26a on cell growth, apoptosis, invasion and
migration abilities were respectively examined by CCK8 assay, Apoptosis assay,
Matrigel invasion and migration assay. HMGA1 was proved to be a target of miR-26a
by Luciferase reporter assay, Real-time PCR and Western-blotting.
RESULTS: Nine miRNAs were significantly up-regulated in metformin treated cells. 
Metformin up-regulated the expression of miR-26a, miR-192 and let-7c in a
dose-dependent manner. Forced expression of miR-26a significantly inhibited cell 
proliferation, invasion, migration and increased cell apoptosis, whereas
knockdown of miR-26a obtained the opposite effect. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that HMGA1, an oncogene, is a direct target of miR-26a. Nude mice xenograft
models confirmed that metformin up-regulated the level of miR-26a and surpressed 
the expression of HMGA1 in vivo.
CONCLUSION: These observations suggested that modulation of miRNA expression may 
be an important mechanism underlying the biological effects of metformin.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Hum Pathol. 2012 Aug;43(8):1243-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.09.013. Epub 2012 
Jan 4.

HMGA gene rearrangement is a recurrent somatic alteration in polypoid
endometriosis.

Medeiros F(1), Wang X, Araujo AR, Erickson-Johnson MR, Lima JF, Meuter A,
Winterhoff B, Oliveira AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

The pathogenesis of endometriosis is unclear, and several genetic, endocrine,
immune, and environmental agents have been evaluated with no putative causative
factors identified. Here, we show somatic genetic alterations involving HMGA1
(6p21) and HMGA2 (12q15) in 3 cases of polypoid endometriosis. The lesions
involved the small bowel mesentery and perirectal soft tissue in 1 case and the
posterior vaginal fornix and sigmoid colon serosa in 2 other cases, respectively.
All had a polypoid configuration with cystically dilated irregular glands and
fibrotic stroma, containing thick-walled vessels. Conventional cytogenetic
analysis of 1 case showed 46,XX,t(5;12)(q13;q15) in all metaphases. Fluorescence 
in situ hybridization studies confirmed the balanced rearrangement of HMGA2.
HMGA1 rearrangements were present in 2 additional cases. Rearrangements were
exclusively found in the stromal component but not in the glandular component.
These findings suggest that HMGA rearrangements likely contribute to the
pathogenesis of endometriosis. However, additional studies are needed to better
define the biologic role of this genetic alteration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22221703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Prostate. 2012 Jul 1;72(10):1124-32. doi: 10.1002/pros.22460. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

High mobility group protein AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) is associated with the development 
of androgen independence in prostate cancer cells.

Takeuchi I(1), Takaha N, Nakamura T, Hongo F, Mikami K, Kamoi K, Okihara K,
Kawauchi A, Miki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported that the level of high mobility group protein 
AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) is low in androgen-dependent prostate cancer (PCa) cells
(LNCaP), but is high in androgen-independent PCa cells (DU145 and PC-3) and that 
HMGA1 is a strong candidate gene playing a potential role in the progression of
PCa. These findings have prompted us to evaluate the effect of HMGA1 on
developing androgen independency, which is associated with the progression of
PCa.
METHODS: Expression of HMGA1 in PCa cells and mouse tissues was examined by
Western blot. In order to examine the effect of HMGA1 on cell growth under
androgen-deprived condition, we transfected HMGA1 into LNCaP cells, and siRNA
into both DU145 and PC-3 cells, respectively.
RESULTS: Androgen-deprivation induced an increase in the level of HMGA1 in LNCaP 
cells in vitro and in vivo, but did not in normal prostate tissue. Overexpression
of HMGA1 maintained the cell growth of LNCaP under androgen-deprived condition.
Furthermore, knockdown of HMGA1 suppressed the cell growth of DU145 and PC-3.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that elevated expression of HMGA1 is associated
with the transition of PCa cells from androgen-sensitive to androgen-independent 
growth and plays a role in the cell growth of androgen-independent PCa cells.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22213442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Diabetes. 2012 Feb;61(2):524-30. doi: 10.2337/db11-0728. Epub 2011 Dec 30.

Low-frequency variants in HMGA1 are not associated with type 2 diabetes risk.

Marquez M(1), Huyvaert M, Perry JR, Pearson RD, Falchi M, Morris AP, Vivequin S, 
Lobbens S, Yengo L, Gaget S, Pattou F, Poulain-Godefroy O, Charpentier G,
Carlsson LM, Jacobson P, Sjöström L, Lantieri O, Heude B, Walley A, Balkau B,
Marre M, Froguel P, Cauchi S; DIAGRAM Consortium.

Collaborators: Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch 
RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, McCulloch LJ, Ferreira T,
Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, McCarroll SA, Langenberg C, 
Hofmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, 
Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Boström KB,
Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier G, Chines PS, Cornelis M, Couper
DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS, Franklin CS, 
Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Hadjadj 
S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Kao WH, 
Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M, Lieverse A, Lindgren CM,
Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P,
Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou C, Proença C, Prokopenko I,
Rathmann W, Rayner NW, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G, Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, 
Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T, Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun 
Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt 
T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters GB, Weedon MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J,
Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL, Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA,
Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Laakso M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer
CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A,
Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR, Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ,
Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS, Pedersen O, Wichmann HE, Barroso I,
Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R, Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig
T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2012 May;61(5):e3.

It has recently been suggested that the low-frequency c.136-14_136-13insC variant
in high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) may strongly contribute to insulin resistance
and type 2 diabetes risk. In our study, we attempted to confirm that HMGA1 is a
novel type 2 diabetes locus in French Caucasians. The gene was sequenced in 368
type 2 diabetic case subjects with a family history of type 2 diabetes and 372
normoglycemic control subjects without a family history of type 2 diabetes. None 
of the 41 genetic variations identified were associated with type 2 diabetes. The
lack of association between the c.136-14_136-13insC variant and type 2 diabetes
was confirmed in an independent French group of 4,538 case subjects and 4,015
control subjects and in a large meta-analysis of 16,605 case subjects and 46,179 
control subjects. Finally, this variant had no effects on metabolic traits and
was not involved in variations of HMGA1 and insulin receptor (INSR) expressions. 
The c.136-14_136-13insC variant was not associated with type 2 diabetes in
individuals of European descent. Our study emphasizes the need to analyze a large
number of subjects to reliably assess the association of low-frequency variants
with the disease.

PMCID: PMC3266400
PMID: 22210315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Circ Res. 2012 Feb 3;110(3):394-405. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.253658. Epub
2011 Dec 29.

High-mobility group A1 protein: a new coregulator of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>-mediated transrepression in the vasculature.

Bloch M(1), Prock A, Paonessa F, Benz V, Bähr IN, Herbst L, Witt H, Kappert K,
Spranger J, Stawowy P, Unger T, Fusco A, Sedding D, Brunetti A, Foryst-Ludwig A, 
Kintscher U.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research, Institute of Pharmacology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.

RATIONALE: The nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
(PPAR<U+03B3>) is an important regulator of gene transcription in vascular cells and
mediates the vascular protection observed with antidiabetic glitazones.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the molecular mechanism of ligand-dependent
transrepression in vascular smooth muscle cells and their impact on the vascular 
protective actions of PPAR<U+03B3>.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we report a molecular pathway in vascular smooth
muscle cells by which ligand-activated PPAR<U+03B3> represses transcriptional activation
of the matrix-degrading matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) gene, a crucial
mediator of vascular injury. PPAR<U+03B3>-mediated transrepression of the MMP-9 gene was
dependent on the presence of the high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein, a gene
highly expressed in vascular smooth muscle cells, newly identified by
oligonucleotide array expression analysis. Transrepression of MMP-9 by PPAR<U+03B3> and 
regulation by HMGA1 required PPAR<U+03B3> SUMOylation at K367. This process was
associated with formation of a complex between PPAR<U+03B3>, HMGA1, and the SUMO E2
ligase Ubc9 (ubiquitin-like protein SUMO-1 conjugating enzyme). After PPAR<U+03B3>
ligand stimulation, HMGA1 and PPAR<U+03B3> were recruited to the MMP-9 promoter, which
facilitated binding of SMRT (silencing mediator of retinoic acid and thyroid
hormone receptor), a nuclear corepressor involved in transrepression. The
relevance of HMGA1 for vascular PPAR<U+03B3> signaling was underlined by the complete
absence of vascular protection through a PPAR<U+03B3> ligand in HMGA1(-/-) mice after
arterial wire injury.
CONCLUSIONS: The present data suggest that ligand-dependent formation of
HMGA1-Ubc9-PPAR<U+03B3> complexes facilitates PPAR<U+03B3> SUMOylation, which results in the
prevention of SMRT corepressor clearance and induction of MMP-9 transrepression. 
These data provide new information on PPAR<U+03B3>-dependent vascular transcriptional
regulation and help us to understand the molecular consequences of therapeutic
interventions with PPAR<U+03B3> ligands in the vasculature.

PMID: 22207709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Apr 10;19(2):123-35. doi: 10.1530/ERC-11-0135. Print
2012 Apr.

PIT1 upregulation by HMGA proteins has a role in pituitary tumorigenesis.

Palmieri D(1), Valentino T, De Martino I, Esposito F, Cappabianca P, Wierinckx A,
Vitiello M, Lombardi G, Colao A, Trouillas J, Pierantoni GM, Fusco A, Fedele M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

We have previously demonstrated that HMGA1B and HMGA2 overexpression in mice
induces the development of GH and prolactin (PRL) pituitary adenomas mainly by
increasing E2F1 transcriptional activity. Interestingly, these adenomas showed
very high expression levels of PIT1, a transcriptional factor that regulates the 
gene expression of Gh, Prl, Ghrhr and Pit1 itself, playing a key role in
pituitary gland development and physiology. Therefore, the aim of our study was
to identify the role of Pit1 overexpression in pituitary tumour development
induced by HMGA1B and HMGA2. First, we demonstrated that HMGA1B and HMGA2
directly interact with both PIT1 and its gene promoter in vivo, and that these
proteins positively regulate Pit1 promoter activity, also co-operating with PIT1 
itself. Subsequently, we showed, by colony-forming assays on two different
pituitary adenoma cell lines, GH3 and aT3, that Pit1 overexpression increases
pituitary cell proliferation. Finally, the expression analysis of HMGA1, HMGA2
and PIT1 in human pituitary adenomas of different histological types revealed a
direct correlation between PIT1 and HMGA expression levels. Taken together, our
data indicate a role of Pit1 upregulation by HMGA proteins in pituitary tumours.

PMID: 22199144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Genet Mol Res. 2011 Dec 14;10(4):3090-7. doi: 10.4238/2011.December.14.2.

Detection of novel SNPs and mapping of the fatness QTL on pig chromosome
7q1.1-1.4 region.

Huang WH(1), Ma ZX, Xu ZY, Xiong YZ, Zuo B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, PR China.

Many QTLs for fatness traits have been mapped on pig chromosome 7q1.1-1.4 in
various pig resource populations. Eight novel markers, including seven SNPs and
one insertion or deletion within BTNL1, COL21A1, PPARD, GLP1R, MDFI, GNMT,
ABCC10, and PLA2G7 genes, as well as two previously reported SNPs in SLC39A7 and 
HMGA1 genes, were genotyped in Large White and Meishan pig breeds. Except for two
SNPs in HMGA1 and ABCC10 genes, allele frequencies of the other eight markers are
highly significant different between Chinese indigenous Meishan breeds and Large 
White pig breeds. Eight polymorphic sites were then used for linkage and QTL
mapping to refine the fatness QTL in a Large White × Meishan F(2) resource
population. Five chromosome-wise significant QTLs were detected, of which the
QTLs for leaf fat weight, backfat thickness at 6-7th rib and rump, and mean
backfat thickness were narrowed to the interval between PPARD and GLP1R genes and
the QTL for backfat thickness at thorax-waist between GNMT and PLA2G7 genes on
SSC7p1.1-q1.4.

PMID: 22194164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Genes Dev. 2011 Dec 1;25(23):2513-24. doi: 10.1101/gad.177360.111.

Core promoter-selective function of HMGA1 and Mediator in Initiator-dependent
transcription.

Xu M(1), Sharma P, Pan S, Malik S, Roeder RG, Martinez E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California at Riverside, Riverside, 
California 92521, USA.

The factors and mechanisms underlying the differential activity and regulation of
eukaryotic RNA polymerase II on different types of core promoters have remained
elusive. Here we show that the architectural factor HMGA1 and the Mediator
coregulator complex cooperate to enhance basal transcription from core promoters 
containing both a TATA box and an Initiator (INR) element but not from
"TATA-only" core promoters. INR-dependent activation by HMGA1 and Mediator
requires the TATA-binding protein (TBP)-associated factors (TAFs) within the
TFIID complex and counteracts negative regulators of TBP/TATA-dependent
transcription such as NC2 and Topoisomerase I. HMGA1 interacts with TFIID and
Mediator and is required for the synergy of TATA and INR elements in mammalian
cells. Accordingly, natural HMGA1-activated genes in embryonic stem cells tend to
have both TATA and INR elements in a synergistic configuration. Our results
suggest a core promoter-specific regulation of Mediator and the basal
transcription machinery by HMGA1.

PMCID: PMC3243061
PMID: 22156211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Oncogene. 2012 Aug 23;31(34):3857-65. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.557. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Downregulation of HMGA-targeting microRNAs has a critical role in human pituitary
tumorigenesis.

Palmieri D(1), D'Angelo D, Valentino T, De Martino I, Ferraro A, Wierinckx A,
Fedele M, Trouillas J, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR Dipartimento di
Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia di
Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Previous studies have demonstrated that high mobility group A proteins have a
critical role on the onset of human pituitary adenomas. Indeed, both high
mobility group A (HMGA) genes are overexpressed in pituitary adenomas, and
consistently transgenic mice overexpressing either the Hmga1 or the Hmga2 gene
develop mixed growth hormone/prolactin (GH-PRL)-secreting pituitary adenomas.
Trisomy of chromosome 12, where HMGA2 is located, and/or amplification of the
HMGA2 gene locus account for the HMGA2 overexpression in most human
prolactinomas. Conversely, HMGA1 overexpression is not associated to any
rearrangement or amplification of the HMGA1 locus. We have first identified micro
RNAs (miRNAs) able to target both HMGA1 and HMGA2 messenger RNAs. Then, all of
these miRNAs have been found downregulated in pituitary adenomas of different
histotypes, compared with normal pituitary. Interestingly, their downregulation
was also observed in nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas where HMGA2 overexpression
is not associated to any alteration of the HMGA2 locus. Functional studies show
that all these HMGA-targeting miRNAs inhibit the proliferation of the rat
pituitary adenoma cell line GH3. Therefore, these results indicate that the
downregulation of the miRNAs able to target the HMGA genes could contribute to
increase HMGA protein levels in human pituitary adenomas, and then to pituitary
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 22139073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cancer Sci. 2012 Mar;103(3):439-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02159.x. Epub
2011 Dec 28.

Hmga1 is differentially expressed and mediates silencing of the CD4/CD8 loci in T
cell lineages and leukemic cells.

Xi Y(1), Watanabe S, Hino Y, Sakamoto C, Nakatsu Y, Okada S, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, and Global Center of Excellence Cell Fate Regulation Research and
Education Unit, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

High-mobility group A1 (Hmga1) protein is an architectural chromatin factor, and 
aberrant Hmga1 expression in mice causes hematopoietic malignancies with defects 
in cellular differentiation. However, the functional involvement of Hmga1 in
hematopoietic development and leukemic cells remains to be elucidated. Using
Hmga1-green fluorescent protein (GFP) knock-in mice that endogenously express an 
Hmga1-GFP fusion protein, we examined Hmga1 expression in undifferentiated and
differentiated populations of hematopoietic cells. During early T cell
development in the thymus, Hmga1 is highly expressed in CD4/CD8-double negative
(DN) cells and is transiently downregulated in CD4/CD8-double positive (DP)
cells. Consistently, Hmga1 directly binds to cis-regulatory elements in the
CD4/CD8 loci and the heterochromatin foci in DN-stage cells, but not in DP cells.
Interestingly, CD4/CD8 expression in DN-stage leukemic cells is induced by
inhibition of Hmga1 binding to nuclear DNA or RNA interference-mediated Hmga1
knockdown. In addition, Hmga1-depleted leukemic T cells markedly diminish
proliferation, with transcriptional activation of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor genes as a direct target of Hmga1. The data in the present study reveal
a role of Hmga1 in transcriptional silencing in T cell lineages and leukemic
cells.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22106824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. BMC Genomics. 2011 Nov 4;12:549. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-549.

HMGA1 drives stem cell, inflammatory pathway, and cell cycle progression genes
during lymphoid tumorigenesis.

Schuldenfrei A(1), Belton A, Kowalski J, Talbot CC Jr, Di Cello F, Poh W, Tsai
HL, Shah SN, Huso TH, Huso DL, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) gene is widely
overexpressed in diverse cancers and portends a poor prognosis in some tumors,
the molecular mechanisms that mediate its role in transformation have remained
elusive. HMGA1 functions as a potent oncogene in cultured cells and induces
aggressive lymphoid tumors in transgenic mice. Because HMGA1 chromatin remodeling
proteins regulate transcription, HMGA1 is thought to drive malignant
transformation by modulating expression of specific genes. Genome-wide studies to
define HMGA1 transcriptional networks during tumorigenesis, however, are lacking.
To define the HMGA1 transcriptome, we analyzed gene expression profiles in
lymphoid cells from HMGA1a transgenic mice at different stages in tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: RNA from lymphoid samples at 2 months (before tumors develop) and 12
months (after tumors are well-established) was screened for differential
expression of > 20,000 unique genes by microarray analysis (Affymetrix) using a
parametric and nonparametric approach. Differential expression was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR in a subset of genes. Differentially expressed genes were
analyzed for cellular pathways and functions using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.
Early in tumorigenesis, HMGA1 induced inflammatory pathways with NFkappaB
identified as a major node. In established tumors, HMGA1 induced pathways
involved in cell cycle progression, cell-mediated immune response, and cancer. At
both stages in tumorigenesis, HMGA1 induced pathways involved in cellular
development, hematopoiesis, and hematologic development. Gene set enrichment
analysis showed that stem cell and immature T cell genes are enriched in the
established tumors. To determine if these results are relevant to human tumors,
we knocked-down HMGA1 in human T-cell leukemia cells and identified a subset of
genes dysregulated in both the transgenic and human lymphoid tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that HMGA1 induces inflammatory pathways early in lymphoid 
tumorigenesis and pathways involved in stem cells, cell cycle progression, and
cancer in established tumors. HMGA1 also dyregulates genes and pathways involved 
in stem cells, cellular development and hematopoiesis at both early and late
stages of tumorigenesis. These results provide insight into HMGA1 function during
tumor development and point to cellular pathways that could serve as therapeutic 
targets in lymphoid and other human cancers with aberrant HMGA1 expression.

PMCID: PMC3245506
PMID: 22053823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Curr Med Chem. 2011;18(33):5033-40.

New prognostic markers and potential therapeutic targets in human testicular germ
cell tumors.

Chieffi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Via Costantinopoli 16, 80138 Naples,
Italy. Paolo.Chieffi@unina2.it

Although testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) are relatively uncommon, they are
particularly important as they tend to affect children and young men,
representing the most common tumor in male aged from 20 to 40 years, and the
incidence has been increasing over the last decades. TGCTs are a heterogeneous
group of tumors, with specific peculiarities reflecting on epidemiologic
distribution and clinic-pathological features. Seminomas are highly sensitive to 
both radiation and chemotherapy, with a good prognosis, non- seminomas are
sensitive to platinum-based combination chemotherapy and are less susceptible to 
radiation, with the exception of teratomas. However, up to 30% of patients
diagnosed with metastatic nonseminomas do not achieve a durable remission, and in
metastatic teratomas cisplatin-based treatment resistance has been observed. The 
different therapeutic outcome might be explained by inherent properties of the
cells from which testicular neoplasia originate. The unique treatment sensitivity
of TGCTs is unexplained so far, but it is likely to be related to intrinsic
molecular characteristics of the PGCs/gonocytes, from which these tumours
originate. In the last years novel markers, including OCT3/4, SOX2, SOX17, HMGA1,
HMGA2, PATZ1, GPR30, Aurora B, and others has given further advantages to
discriminate between histological subgroups. In addition, therapeutic approaches 
for the treatment of TGCTs have been proposed: humanized antibodies against
receptors/surface molecules on cancer cells, inhibitors of serine-threonine, and 
tyrosine kinases, angiogenesis inhibitors, and others. In same cases the clinical
trials have confirmed the efficacy of these approaches. The review will focus on 
the molecular alteration identified in post-puberal TGCTs and on novel targeted
antineoplastic strategies that could contribute to the cure of chemotherapy
resistant TGCTs.

PMID: 22050751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nature. 2011 Oct 30;480(7376):254-8. doi: 10.1038/nature10575.

Mapping intact protein isoforms in discovery mode using top-down proteomics.

Tran JC(1), Zamdborg L, Ahlf DR, Lee JE, Catherman AD, Durbin KR, Tipton JD,
Vellaichamy A, Kellie JF, Li M, Wu C, Sweet SM, Early BP, Siuti N, LeDuc RD,
Compton PD, Thomas PM, Kelleher NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and the Institute for Genomic
Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2011 Dec;8(12):1002.

A full description of the human proteome relies on the challenging task of
detecting mature and changing forms of protein molecules in the body. Large-scale
proteome analysis has routinely involved digesting intact proteins followed by
inferred protein identification using mass spectrometry. This 'bottom-up' process
affords a high number of identifications (not always unique to a single gene).
However, complications arise from incomplete or ambiguous characterization of
alternative splice forms, diverse modifications (for example, acetylation and
methylation) and endogenous protein cleavages, especially when combinations of
these create complex patterns of intact protein isoforms and species. 'Top-down' 
interrogation of whole proteins can overcome these problems for individual
proteins, but has not been achieved on a proteome scale owing to the lack of
intact protein fractionation methods that are well integrated with tandem mass
spectrometry. Here we show, using a new four-dimensional separation system,
identification of 1,043 gene products from human cells that are dispersed into
more than 3,000 protein species created by post-translational modification (PTM),
RNA splicing and proteolysis. The overall system produced greater than 20-fold
increases in both separation power and proteome coverage, enabling the
identification of proteins up to 105 kDa and those with up to 11 transmembrane
helices. Many previously undetected isoforms of endogenous human proteins were
mapped, including changes in multiply modified species in response to accelerated
cellular ageing (senescence) induced by DNA damage. Integrated with the latest
version of the Swiss-Prot database, the data provide precise correlations to
individual genes and proof-of-concept for large-scale interrogation of whole
protein molecules. The technology promises to improve the link between proteomics
data and complex phenotypes in basic biology and disease research.

PMCID: PMC3237778
PMID: 22037311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Neurooncol. 2012 Feb;106(3):543-9. doi: 10.1007/s11060-011-0710-6. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

HMGA1 expression in human gliomas and its correlation with tumor proliferation,
invasion and angiogenesis.

Pang B(1), Fan H, Zhang IY, Liu B, Feng B, Meng L, Zhang R, Sadeghi S, Guo H,
Pang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan, 250012, People's Republic of
China.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein is an architectural transcription factor
widely expressed during embryonic development and tumor progression. The purpose 
of this research was to investigate the expression of HMGA1 in malignant gliomas 
with different WHO classification and to study the correlation of HMGA1
expression with tumor proliferation, invasion, and angiogenesis. Expression of
HMGA1, Ki-67, MMP-9, VEGF-A, and MVD in malignant gliomas and their correlation
were studied in 60 samples of different WHO classification by use of
immunohistochemistry, and in 27 randomly selected samples by use of real-time
quantitative PCR. Immunohistochemistry results showed that nuclear immunostaining
of HMGA1 protein was not observed in normal brain tissues but was observed in
96.7% (58 of 60) of malignant gliomas including high (+++) in 15 (25.0%),
moderate (++) in 28 (46.7%), and negligible to low (0-+) in 17 (28.3%) samples.
Expression of HMGA1 protein was significantly higher in glioblastoma multiforme
than in WHO grade II (P = 0.002) and WHO grade III gliomas (P = 0.024). HMGA1
protein expression correlated significantly with expression of Ki-67 (r = 0.530, 
P = 0.000), MMP-9 (r = 0.508, P = 0.000), VEGF-A (r = 0.316, P = 0.014), and MVD 
(r = 0.321, P = 0.012), but not with sex (r = 0.087, P = 0.510) and age (r =
-0.121, P = 0.358). Real-time quantitative PCR results, also, were indicative of 
HMGA1 overexpression in glioblastoma multiforme compared with WHO grade II (P =
0.043) and WHO grade III (P = 0.031) gliomas. HMGA1 gene expression correlated
significantly with gene expression of Ki-67 (r = 0.429, P = 0.025), MMP-9 (r =
0.443, P = 0.024), and VEGF-A (r = 0.409, P = 0.034). These results indicated
that expression of HMGA1 correlates significantly with malignancy, proliferation,
invasion, and angiogenesis of gliomas. We conclude that HMGA1 may be a potential 
biomarker and rational therapeutic target for human tumors.

PMID: 21984063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. RNA Biol. 2011 Nov-Dec;8(6):1084-93. doi: 10.4161/rna.8.6.17015. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

7SK snRNA-mediated, gene-specific cooperativity of HMGA1 and P-TEFb.

Eilebrecht S(1), Benecke BJ, Benecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques & Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Bures sur Yvette, France.

7SK small-nuclear RNA has been shown to negatively regulate P-TEFb transcription 
elongation on the one hand and control HMGA1 transcription initiation and
chromatin remodeling on the other. The non-coding 7SK RNA thereby directly
interacts with both factors through different regions. While the loop 2 of the
RNA specifically binds to the first HMGA1 A/T hook, thereby competing with DNA
binding to the same domain, loops 1, 3 and 4 are involved in P-TEFb interaction. 
This raises the question of whether HMGA1 and P-TEFb cooperate during gene
transcription. Using transcriptome profiling, we have identifed genes that are
oppositely regulated by 7SK RNA over-expression versus shRNA mediated knock-down.
Inhibition of P-TEFb by competitive expression of a dominant-negative Cdk9
protein leads to highly similar changes in global gene expression as the
over-expression of 7SK RNA, confirming the importance of P-TEFb inhibition by 7SK
RNA. Furthermore, we have similarly assembled genes affected concomitantly by
HMGA1 over-expression. HMGA1 and P-TEFb, in the case of select target genes, show
strong cooperation in transcriptional activation. Finally, we provide evidence
for 7SK RNA complexes containing simultaneously HMGA1 and P-TEFb. 7SK RNA thus
establishes gene-dependent plasticity between HMGA1 chromatin remodeling and
transcription initiation and P-TEFb transcription elongation.

PMID: 21957495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Genetika. 2011 Aug;47(8):1140-4.

[Expression profiling of candidate genes for abdominal fat mass in domestic
chicken Gallus gallus].

[Article in Russian]

Larkina TA, Sazanova AL, Fomichev KA, Barkova OIu, Sazanova AA, Malwski T,
Jaszczak K.

The quantitative traits of mass and percentage of abdominal fat in chicken and
various types of obesity in mammals are homologous and functionally similar.
Therefore, the genes involved in obesity development in humans and laboratory
rodents as well as those responsible for pig lard thickness could be involved in 
abdominal fat deposition in broilers. Expression of candidate genes FABP1, FABP2,
FABP3, HMGA1, MC4R, PPARG, PPARGC1A, POMC and PTPN1 was studied in fat, liver,
colon, muscle, hypophysis, and brain in chicken (broilers) using real-time PCR.
Significant difference in the HMGA1 gene expression in the liver of broiler
chicken with high (3.5 +/- 0.18%) and low (1.9 +/- 0.56%) abdominal fat
concentration has been revealed. The expression of this gene was been shown to
correlate with the amount (0.7, P < or = 0.01) and mass (0.7, P < or = 0.01) of
abdominal fat. The PPARG gene expression in liver in the same chicken subsets was
also significantly different. Correlation coefficients of the gene expression
with the abdominal fat amount and mass were respectively 0.55 (P < or = 0.05) and
0.57 (P < or = 0.01). Based on these results, we suggest that the HMGA1 and PPARG
genes are involved in abdominal fat deposition. The search for single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the HMGA and PPARG regulatory regions could facilitate
identifying genetic markers for broiler breeding according to the mass and
percentage of abdominal fat.

PMID: 21954625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochemistry. 2011 Sep 27;50(38):8107-16. doi: 10.1021/bi200822c. Epub 2011 Aug
30.

Molecular basis for the inhibition of HMGA1 proteins by distamycin A.

Smith AE(1), Buchmueller KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Furman University, Greenville, South Carolina 29613, 
USA.

The molecular mechanism for the displacement of HMGA1 proteins from DNA is
integral to disrupting their cellular function, which is linked to many
metastatic cancers. Chemical shift and NOESY NMR experiments provide structural
evidence for the displacement of an AT hook peptide (DNA binding motif of HMGA1
proteins) by both monomeric and dimeric distamycin. However, the displaced AT
hook alters distamycin binding by weakening the distamycin:DNA complex, while
slowing monomeric distamycin dissociation when AT hook is in excess. The central 
role of the AT hook was evaluated by monitoring full-length HMGA1a protein
binding using fluorescence anisotropy. HMGA1a was effectively displaced by
distamycin, but the cooperative binding exhibited by distamycin was eliminated by
displaced HMGA1a. Additionally, these studies indicate that HMGA1a is displaced
from the DNA by 1 equiv of distamycin, suggesting the ability to develop
therapeutics that take advantage of the positively cooperative nature of HMGA1a
binding.

PMID: 21854010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;31(18):3857-70. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05411-11. Epub 2011 Jul 
26.

The midblastula transition defines the onset of Y RNA-dependent DNA replication
in Xenopus laevis.

Collart C(1), Christov CP, Smith JC, Krude T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 
3EJ, United Kingdom.

Noncoding Y RNAs are essential for the initiation of chromosomal DNA replication 
in mammalian cell extracts, but their role in this process during early
vertebrate development is unknown. Here, we use antisense morpholino nucleotides 
(MOs) to investigate Y RNA function in Xenopus laevis and zebrafish embryos. We
show that embryos in which Y RNA function is inhibited by MOs develop normally
until the midblastula transition (MBT) but then fail to replicate their DNA and
die before gastrulation. Consistent with this observation, Y RNA function is not 
required for DNA replication in Xenopus egg extracts but is required for
replication in a post-MBT cell line. Y RNAs do not bind chromatin in karyomeres
before MBT, but they associate with interphase nuclei after MBT in an origin
recognition complex (ORC)-dependent manner. Y RNA-specific MOs inhibit the
association of Y RNAs with ORC, Cdt1, and HMGA1a proteins, suggesting that these 
molecular associations are essential for Y RNA function in DNA replication. The
MBT is thus a transition point between Y RNA-independent and Y RNA-dependent
control of vertebrate DNA replication. Our data suggest that in vertebrates Y
RNAs function as a developmentally regulated layer of control over the
evolutionarily conserved eukaryotic DNA replication machinery.

PMCID: PMC3165727
PMID: 21791613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Oct;52(10):1999-2006. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.591012. Epub
2011 Jul 5.

Flavopiridol induces BCL-2 expression and represses oncogenic transcription
factors in leukemic blasts from adults with refractory acute myeloid leukemia.

Nelson DM(1), Joseph B, Hillion J, Segal J, Karp JE, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Flavopiridol is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor that induces cell cycle
arrest, apoptosis, and clinical responses in selected patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). A better understanding of the molecular pathways targeted by
flavopiridol is needed to design optimal combinatorial therapy. Here, we report
that in vivo administration of flavopiridol induced expression of the BCL-2
anti-apoptotic gene in leukemic blasts from adult patients with refractory AML.
Moreover, flavopiridol repressed the expression of genes encoding oncogenic
transcription factors (HMGA1, STAT3, E2F1) and the major subunit of RNA
Polymerase II. Our results provide mechanistic insight into the cellular pathways
targeted by flavopiridol. Although further studies are needed, our findings also 
suggest that blocking anti-apoptotic pathways could enhance cytotoxicity with
flavopiridol.

PMCID: PMC3214625
PMID: 21728742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Reprod Infertil. 2011 Jul;12(3):181-91.

The genetic bases of uterine fibroids; a review.

Medikare V(1), Kandukuri LR, Ananthapur V, Deenadayal M, Nallari P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, India.

Uterine leiomyomas/fibroids are the most common pelvic tumors of the female
genital tract. The initiators remaining unknown, estrogens and progesterone are
considered as promoters of fibroid growth. Fibroids are monoclonal tumors showing
40-50% karyo-typically detectable chromosomal abnormalities. Cytogenetic
aberrations involving chromosomes 6, 7, 12 and 14 constitute the major chromosome
abnormalities seen in leiomyomata. This has led to the discovery that disruptions
or dysregulations of HMGIC and HMGIY genes contribute to the development of these
tumors. Genes such as RAD51L1 act as translocation partners to HMGIC and lead to 
disruption of gene structure leading to the pathogenesis of uterine fibroids. The
mechanism underlying this disease is yet to be identified. The occurrence of
PCOLCE amid a cluster of at least eight Alu sequences is potentially relevant to 
the possible involvement of PCOLCE in the 7q22 rearrangements that occur in many 
leiomyomata. PCOLCE is implicated in cell growth processes. Involvement of Alu
sequences in rearrangements can lead to the disruption of this gene and, hence,
loss of control for gene expression leading to uncontrolled cell growth. This can
also lead to the formation of fibroids. Though, cytogenetics provides a broad
perspective on uterine fibroid formation, further molecular analysis is required 
to understand the etiopathogenesis of uterine fibroids.

PMCID: PMC3719293
PMID: 23926501  [PubMed]


192. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Nov;357(1-2):363-71. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-0907-1. Epub 
2011 Jun 9.

High-mobility group A1 proteins enhance the expression of the oncogenic miR-222
in lung cancer cells.

Zhang Y(1), Ma T, Yang S, Xia M, Xu J, An H, Yang Y, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center
Affiliated to Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) is a non-histone chromatin protein that has the
ability to regulate the transcriptional activity of many genes. Overexpression of
HMGA1 is associated with malignant cellular behavior in a range of human cancers 
but the underlying mechanism is largely unknown. Here we showed that in a cohort 
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumors, HMGA1 overexpression was
immediately associated with enhanced expression of an oncogenic miRNA, namely,
miR-222. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assay revealed that HMGA1 directly 
binds to the proximal promoter of miR-222 in NSCLC cells. We further showed that 
HMGA1 silencing reduced miR-222 transcriptional activity, whereas forced HMGA1
expression increased it, indicating that miR-222 is directly regulated by HMGA1. 
Based on in silico prediction, one of the putative targets of miR-222 is
phosphatase 2A subunit B (PPP2R2A) which inhibits Akt phosphorylation (p-Akt). We
demonstrated that miR-222 inhibited protein expression of PPP2R2A in NSCLC cells 
by directly interacting with its 3'-UTR region, leading to an obvious increase of
p-Akt. HMGA1 silencing augmented PPP2R2A protein expression and inhibited Akt
signaling, resulting in significantly retarded cell growth response to IGF-I.
These results suggested that HMGA1 is a positive regulator of miR-222, and HMGA1 
overexpression might contribute to dysregulation of Akt signaling in NSCLC.

PMID: 21656127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Sep 1;39(16):7124-33. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr396. Epub 2011 
May 19.

Cross-linking of DNA through HMGA1 suggests a DNA scaffold.

Vogel B(1), Löschberger A, Sauer M, Hock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Department of Biotechnology
and Biophysics, University of Wuerzburg, Biocenter, Am Hubland, D-97074
Wuerzburg, Germany.

Binding of proteins to DNA is usually considered 1D with one protein bound to one
DNA molecule. In principle, proteins with multiple DNA binding domains could also
bind to and thereby cross-link different DNA molecules. We have investigated this
possibility using high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) proteins, which are
architectural elements of chromatin and are involved in the regulation of
multiple DNA-dependent processes. Using direct stochastic optical reconstruction 
microscopy (dSTORM), we could show that overexpression of HMGA1a-eGFP in Cos-7
cells leads to chromatin aggregation. To investigate if HMGA1a is directly
responsible for this chromatin compaction we developed a DNA cross-linking assay.
We were able to show for the first time that HMGA1a can cross-link DNA directly. 
Detailed analysis using point mutated proteins revealed a novel DNA cross-linking
domain. Electron microscopy indicates that HMGA1 proteins are able to create DNA 
loops and supercoils in linearized DNA confirming the cross-linking ability of
HMGA1a. This capacity has profound implications for the spatial organization of
DNA in the cell nucleus and suggests cross-linking activities for additional
nuclear proteins.

PMCID: PMC3167630
PMID: 21596776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Sep 1;39(16):6908-18. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr303. Epub 2011 
May 17.

Cis-regulation of microRNA expression by scaffold/matrix-attachment regions.

Chavali PL(1), Funa K, Chavali S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Cancer Center Sahlgrenska, University of Gothenburg,
Medicinaregatan, Sweden.

microRNAs (miRNAs) spatio-temporally modulate gene expression; however, very
little is known about the regulation of their expression. Here, we hypothesized
that the well-known cis-regulatory elements of gene expression,
scaffold/matrix-attachment regions (MARs) could modulate miRNA expression.
Accordingly, we found MARs to be enriched in the upstream regions of miRNA genes.
To determine their role in cell type-specific expression of miRNAs, we examined
four individual miRNAs (let-7b, miR-17, miR-93 and miR-221) and the miR-17-92
cluster, known to be overexpressed in neuroblastoma. Our results show that MARs
indeed define the cell-specific expression of these miRNAs by tethering the
chromatin to nuclear matrix. This is brought about by cell type-specific binding 
of HMG I/Y protein to MARs that then promotes the local acetylation of histones, 
serving as boundary elements for gene activation. The binding, chromatin
tethering and gene activation by HMG I/Y was not observed in fibroblast control
cells but were restricted to neuroblastoma cells. This study implies that the
association of MAR binding proteins to MARs could dictate the tissue/context
specific regulation of miRNA genes by serving as a boundary element signaling the
transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC3167628
PMID: 21586588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Sep;355(1-2):281-7. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-0865-7. Epub
2011 May 15.

Silencing of HMGA1 expression by RNA interference suppresses growth of osteogenic
sarcoma.

Yuan S(1), Pan Q, Fu C, Bi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150001, People's Republic of China.

The expression of high mobility group protein A1 (HMGA1) protein has been closely
related to various malignant and prognostic degrees of tumor. To investigate the 
influence of down-regulating HMGA1 on the tumor and the mechanism underlying
antitumor of HMGA1, we transfected the HMGA1 shRNA vector into the osteogenic
sarcoma MG-63 cell and observed the changes of cell proliferation, invasion
abilities, and the tumor growth. HMGA1 gene expression could be efficiently
inhibited, and cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and matrix
metalloprotease level were also decreased. BALB/C nude mice injected with the
MG-63 cells transfected HMGA1 shRNA showed the significant lower tumor weight,
tumor volume, and longer tumor-forming time compared with the control group. Our 
results suggest that knockdown of HMGA1 could inhibit growth and metastasis
potentials of MG-63 cells, which may be a therapeutic target protein for
osteogenic sarcoma and may be of biological importance.

PMID: 21573994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Apr;124(7):1061-8.

Silencing of high mobility group A1 enhances gemcitabine chemosensitivity of lung
adenocarcinoma cells.

Cao YD(1), Huang PL, Sun XC, Ma J, Jin ZL, Cheng HY, Xu RZ, Li F, Qin SK, Deng
YX, Ge XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Zhong Da Hospital Affiliated to Southeast University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, China.

BACKGROUND: The high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) proteins are architectural
transcription factors found to be overexpressed in lung adenocarcinoma.
Lentivirus-mediated RNA interference (RNAi) technology is a powerful tool for
silencing endogenous or exogenous genes in human cancer cells. Our preliminary
study shows that gemcitabine inhibits growth of the human lung cancer cell line
SPCA-1 and induces apoptosis, and this effect might link with down-regulation of 
HMGA1 expression. This study aimed to investigate the chemosensitivity change of 
the lung adenocarcinoma cells SPCA-1 after HMGA1 inhibition by
lentivirus-mediated RNAi.
METHODS: We studied a highly malignant lung adenocarcinoma cell line (SPCA-1
cells). Lentiviral short-hairpin RNA (shHMGA1) expression vectors targeting HMGA1
were used for generation of lentiviral particles. After being transfected into
the lung adenocarcinoma cell line SPCA-1, the expression of HMGA1 was determined 
by retrotranscriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting.
The effect of gemcitabine on proliferation of positive and negative cells was
observed by methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay and clonogenic survival
assay. Apoptosis was observed by flow cytometery. Chemosensitivity to gemcitabine
was determined by IC50 analysis. Caspase activity was quantitated by a caspase
colorimetric protease assay kit.
RESULTS: HMGA1-siRNA silenced its target mRNA specifically and effectively in
SPCA-1 cells. The apoptotic rates of the scramble control group were (7.43 ±
0.21)%, (11.00 ± 0.20)%, and (14.93 ± 0.31)%, and the apoptotic rates in the
silenced group were (9.53 ± 0.42)%, (16.67 ± 0.45)%, and (25.40 ± 0.79)% under
exposure to 0.05, 0.5 and 5.0 µg/ml of gemcitabine (P < 0.05). The IC(50) of the 
silenced group was (0.309 ± 0.003) µg/ml which was significantly lower than in
the scramble control group, (0.653 ± 0.003) µg/ml (P < 0.05). It reduced cancer
cell proliferation and increased apoptotic cell death after being treated with
gemcitabine compared with the scramble control group. HMGA1 silencing resulted in
reduction in the phosphorylation of Akt, and promoted the activation of caspases 
3, 8 and 9 upon exposure to gemcitabine.
CONCLUSIONS: Lentivirus-mediated RNA interference of HMGA1 enhanced
chemosensitivity to gemcitabine in lung adenocarcinoma cells. The mechanism may
be associated with the PI-3K/Akt signal pathway. HMGA1 may represent a novel
therapeutic target in lung cancer.

PMID: 21542969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 13;6(4):e18811. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018811.

Mechanics of the IL2RA gene activation revealed by modeling and atomic force
microscopy.

Milani P(1), Marilley M, Sanchez-Sevilla A, Imbert J, Vaillant C, Argoul F, Egly 
JM, Rocca-Serra J, Arneodo A.

Author information: 
(1)RGFCP EA 3290, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France.

Transcription implies recruitment of RNA polymerase II and transcription factors 
(TFs) by DNA melting near transcription start site (TSS). Combining atomic force 
microscopy and computer modeling, we investigate the structural and dynamical
properties of the IL2RA promoter and identify an intrinsically negative supercoil
in the PRRII region (containing Elf-1 and HMGA1 binding sites), located upstream 
of a curved DNA region encompassing TSS. Conformational changes, evidenced by
time-lapse studies, result in the progressive positioning of curvature apex
towards the TSS, likely facilitating local DNA melting. In vitro assays confirm
specific binding of the General Transcription Factors (GTFs) TBP and TFIIB over
TATA-TSS position, where an inhibitory nucleosome prevented preinitiation complex
(PIC) formation and uncontrolled DNA melting. These findings represent a
substantial advance showing, first, that the structural properties of the IL2RA
promoter are encoded in the DNA sequence and second, that during the initiation
process DNA conformation is dynamic and not static.

PMCID: PMC3076448
PMID: 21533205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Jul 1;317(11):1503-12. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.04.004. Epub 
2011 Apr 20.

The response of HMGA1 to changes in oxygen availability is evolutionarily
conserved.

Moussavi Nik SH(1), Newman M, Lardelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Genetics, School of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences, The
University of Adelaide, Australia. seyyed.moussavinik@adelaide.edu.au

Zebrafish embryos have evolved to cope with hypoxia during development. This
includes the ability to completely suspend embryo development for extended
periods until normoxia is restored. However, only a limited number of studies
have examined the gene regulatory responses of zebrafish embryos to hypoxia. The 
High Mobility Group A1 protein encoded by the mammalian gene HMGA1 is widely
expressed during embryo development but not in adults. Its expression can be
induced in adult neurons by hypoxia/oxidative stress and it is commonly
reactivated in many types of cancer. We report the identification by phylogenetic
and conserved synteny analyses of an HMGA1 orthologue in zebrafish, hmga1
(hmg-i/y) and analysis of sodium azide as a chemical agent for inducing
hypoxia-like responses in zebrafish embryos including temporary suspension of
development ("suspended animation"). Evidence was only found for the existence of
the "a" isoform of HMGA1 in fish. The "b" and "c" isoforms were not detected. We 
show that zebrafish hmga1 is expressed in a manner similar to in mammals
including its induction by hypoxia during hatching stage and in adult zebrafish
brain. However, earlier during development, hypoxia causes a decrease in hmga1
transcript levels. By analysis of conservation of the HMGA1a isoform binding site
in zebrafish psen2 gene transcripts, we predict that a zebrafish equivalent of
the PS2V isoform of human PSEN2 is not formed and we support this by RT-PCR
analyses. Thus, analysis of hmga1 function in zebrafish embryogenesis may be
valuable for understanding its wider role in vertebrate development, cancer and
cellular responses to hypoxia but not for analysis of the action of HMGA1 in PS2V
formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21530505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Nov;68(22):3741-56. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0675-9. Epub 
2011 Apr 2.

Different roles of the human Orc6 protein in the replication initiation process.

Thomae AW(1), Baltin J, Pich D, Deutsch MJ, Ravasz M, Zeller K, Gossen M,
Hammerschmidt W, Schepers A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center 
for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany.

In eukaryotes, binding of the six-subunit origin recognition complex (ORC) to DNA
provides an interactive platform for the sequential assembly of pre-replicative
complexes. This process licenses replication origins competent for the subsequent
initiation step. Here, we analyze the contribution of human Orc6, the smallest
subunit of ORC, to DNA binding and pre-replicative complex formation. We show
that Orc6 not only interacts with Orc1-Orc5 but also with the initiation factor
Cdc6. Biochemical and imaging experiments reveal that this interaction is
required for licensing DNA replication competent. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that Orc6 contributes to the interaction of ORC with the chaperone protein HMGA1a
(high mobility group protein A1a). Binding of human ORC to replication origins is
not specified at the level of DNA sequence and the functional organization of
origins is poorly understood. We have identified HMGA1a as one factor that might 
direct ORC to AT-rich heterochromatic regions. The systematic analysis of the
interaction between ORC and HMGA1a revealed that Orc6 interacts with the acidic
C-terminus of HMGA1a and also with its AT-hooks. Both domains support autonomous 
replication if targeted to DNA templates. As such, Orc6 functions at different
stages of the replication initiation process. Orc6 can interact with ORC
chaperone proteins such as HMGA1a to facilitate chromatin binding of ORC and is
also an essential factor for pre-RC formation.

PMID: 21461783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochemistry. 2011 May 3;50(17):3462-8. doi: 10.1021/bi200101f. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

HMGA Interactome: new insights from phage display technology.

Malini E(1), Maurizio E, Bembich S, Sgarra R, Edomi P, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Italy.

High mobility group A proteins (HMGA1 and HMGA2) are architectural factors
involved in chromatin remodelling and regulation of gene expression. HMGA are
highly expressed during embryogenesis and in cancer cells and are involved in
development and cell differentiation as well as cancer formation and progression.
These factors, by binding to DNA and interacting with other nuclear proteins, can
organize macromolecular complexes involved in transcription, chromatin dynamics, 
RNA processing, and DNA repair. The identification of protein partners for HMGA
has greatly contributed to our understanding of their multiple functions. He we
report the identification of HMGA molecular partners using a gene fragment
library in a phage display screening. Using an ORF-enriched cDNA library, we have
isolated several HMGA1 interacting clones and for two of them, TBP associated
factor 3 (TAF3) and chromatin assembly factor 1 p150/CAF-1, have demonstrated an 
in vivo association with HMGA1. The identification of these new partners suggests
that HMGA can also influence general aspects of transcription and once more
underlines their involvement in chromatin remodelling and dynamics.

PMID: 21417337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. JAMA. 2011 Mar 2;305(9):938-9. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.236.

HMGA1, a novel locus for type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Garg A.

Comment on
    JAMA. 2011 Mar 2;305(9):903-12.

PMID: 21364145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. JAMA. 2011 Mar 2;305(9):903-12. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.207.

Functional variants of the HMGA1 gene and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Chiefari E(1), Tanyolaç S, Paonessa F, Pullinger CR, Capula C, Iiritano S, Mazza 
T, Forlin M, Fusco A, Durlach V, Durlach A, Malloy MJ, Kane JP, Heiner SW,
Filocamo M, Foti DP, Goldfine ID, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G. Salvatore, Università di
Catanzaro Magna Græcia, Viale Europa, Germaneto Catanzaro, 88100 Italy.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2011 Mar 2;305(9):938-9.

CONTEXT: High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein is a key regulator of insulin
receptor (INSR) gene expression. We previously identified a functional HMGA1 gene
variant in 2 insulin-resistant patients with decreased INSR expression and type 2
diabetes mellitus (DM).
OBJECTIVE: To examine the association of HMGA1 gene variants with type 2 DM.
DESIGN, SETTINGS, AND PARTICIPANTS: Case-control study that analyzed the HMGA1
gene in patients with type 2 DM and controls from 3 populations of white European
ancestry. Italian patients with type 2 DM (n = 3278) and 2 groups of controls (n 
= 3328) were attending the University of Catanzaro outpatient clinics and other
health care sites in Calabria, Italy, during 2003-2009; US patients with type 2
DM (n = 970) were recruited in Northern California clinics between 1994 and 2005 
and controls (n = 958) were senior athletes without DM collected in 2004 and
2009; and French patients with type 2 DM (n = 354) and healthy controls (n = 50) 
were enrolled at the University of Reims in 1992. Genomic DNA was either directly
sequenced or analyzed for specific HMGA1 mutations. Messenger RNA and protein
expression for HMGA1 and INSR were measured in both peripheral lymphomonocytes
and cultured Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblasts from patients with type 
2 DM and controls.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The frequency of HMGA1 gene variants among cases and
controls. Odds ratios (ORs) for type 2 DM were estimated by logistic regression
analysis.
RESULTS: The most frequent functional HMGA1 variant, IVS5-13insC, was present in 
7% to 8% of patients with type 2 DM in all 3 populations. The prevalence of
IVS5-13insC variant was higher among patients with type 2 DM than among controls 
in the Italian population (7.23% vs 0.43% in one control group; OR, 15.77 [95%
confidence interval {CI}, 8.57-29.03]; P < .001 and 7.23% vs 3.32% in the other
control group; OR, 2.03 [95% CI, 1.51-3.43]; P < .001). In the US population, the
prevalence of IVS5-13insC variant was 7.7% among patients with type 2 DM vs 4.7% 
among controls (OR, 1.64 [95% CI, 1.05-2.57]; P = .03). In the French population,
the prevalence of IVS5-13insC variant was 7.6% among patients with type 2 DM and 
0% among controls (P = .046). In the Italian population, 3 other functional
variants were observed. When all 4 variants were analyzed, HMGA1 defects were
present in 9.8% of Italian patients with type 2 DM and 0.6% of controls. In
addition to the IVS5 C-insertion, the c.310G>T (p.E104X) variant was found in 14 
patients and no controls (Bonferroni-adjusted P = .01); the c.*82G>A variant
(rs2780219) was found in 46 patients and 5 controls (Bonferroni-adjusted P <
.001); the c.*369del variant was found in 24 patients and no controls
(Bonferroni-adjusted P < .001). In circulating monocytes and Epstein-Barr
virus-transformed lymphoblasts from patients with type 2 DM and the IVS5-13insC
variant, the messenger RNA levels and protein content of both HMGA1 and the INSR 
were decreased by 40% to 50%, and these defects were corrected by transfection
with HMGA1 complementary DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with healthy controls, the presence of functional HMGA1
gene variants in individuals of white European ancestry was associated with type 
2 DM.

PMID: 21364139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Oncogene. 2011 Jul 7;30(27):3024-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.21. Epub 2011 Feb 21.

HMGA proteins promote ATM expression and enhance cancer cell resistance to
genotoxic agents.

Palmieri D(1), Valentino T, D'Angelo D, De Martino I, Postiglione I, Pacelli R,
Croce CM, Fedele M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare c/o Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

DNA-damaging therapies represent a keystone in cancer treatment. Unfortunately,
many tumors often relapse because of a group of cancer cells, which are resistant
to conventional therapies. High-mobility group A (HMGA) proteins has a key role
in cell transformation, and their overexpression is a common feature of human
malignant neoplasias, representing a poor prognostic index often correlated to
anti-cancer drug resistance. Our previous results demonstrated that HMGA1 is a
substrate of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), the main cellular sensor of
genotoxic stress. Here we also report thatHMGA2, the other member of the HMGA
family, is a novel substrate of ATM. Interestingly, we found that HMGA proteins
positively regulate ATM gene expression. Moreover, induction of ATM kinase
activity by DNA-damaging agents enhances HMGA-dependent transcriptional
activation of ATM promoter, suggesting that ATM expression is modulated by a
DNA-damage- and HMGA-dependent positive feedback loop. Finally, inhibition of
HMGA expression in mouse embryonic fibroblasts and in cancer cells strongly
reduces ATM protein levels, impairing the cellular DNA-damage response and
enhancing the sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents. These findings indicate this
novel HMGA-ATM pathway as a new potential target to improve the effectiveness of 
conventional anti-neoplastic treatments on the genotoxic-drug resistant cancer
cells.

PMID: 21339738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Biosyst. 2011 Apr;7(4):1336-46. doi: 10.1039/c0mb00247j. Epub 2011 Feb 19.

Interaction of adriamycin with a promoter region of hmga1 and its inhibitory
effect on HMGA1 expression in A431 human squamous carcinoma cell line.

Akhter MZ(1), Sharma A, Rajeswari MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India.

The high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) are non-histone chromosomal proteins
consisting of HMGA1a and HMGA1b which act as architectural transcription factors.
Elevated levels of HMGA1 are reported in a number of human cancers and suggested 
as tumor markers. Due to their role in neoplastic transformation and tumor
progression, we considered HMGA1 as a potential target for downregulation at the 
transcriptional level. The present paper deals with the binding of a widely used 
chemotherapeutic agent, adriamycin (ADM), to hmg a1 gene promoter (-304 to -284),
21RY, and its effect on the expression of hmga1 at the mRNA and protein levels
and further its cytotoxic efficacy in A431 cells. A strong complex (21RY-ADM)
formation caused hypochromic and bathochromic changes in UV-absorption,
considerable spectral changes in circular dichroism of adriamycin and DNA and
significant quenching of fluorescence emission of ADM. Thermodynamics of 21RY-ADM
interaction was studied by isothermal titration and differential scanning
calorimetric techniques that revealed the binding to be exothermic and favored by
both negative enthalpy and positive entropy changes. Further, even low
concentrations (10.3 nM) of ADM showed cytotoxicity on human squamous carcinoma
cells (A431) and caused downregulation (by ~ 70%) of hmga1 at mRNA and protein
levels. Present findings clearly support the inhibitory effect of ADM on hmg a1
which quite probably is the consequence of its binding to the targeted region of 
hmg a1. Therefore, it appears that hmg a1 is a novel potential chemotherapeutic
target in treating carcinomas of epithelial origin like prostate, breast, thyroid
etc.

PMID: 21336378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Mar 25;406(4):512-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.02.059. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

HMGA1a is involved in specific splice site regulation of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1.

Tsuruno C(1), Ohe K, Kuramitsu M, Kohma T, Takahama Y, Hamaguchi Y, Hamaguchi I, 
Okuma K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Musashimurayama, Tokyo 208-0011,
Japan.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) utilizes a highly complex splice site
regulation system, taking advantage of host proteins, to express its own viral
protein in an orderly way. We show here that one of the host proteins, high
mobility group A protein 1a (HMGA1a), is involved in splice site regulation of 3'
splice site 2 (A2) and 5'splice site 3 (D3) of HIV-1 genomic RNA. shRNA knockdown
of HMGA1 in HeLa cells resulting in a decrease of HMGA1 showed a significant
decrease of Vpr mRNA. RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed HMGA1a
specifically binds to a sequence adjacently upstream D3. In vitro splicing using 
heterologous pre-mRNA with A2 and D3, showed HMGA1a induced a splicing
intermediate which decreased when an RNA decoy of the HMGA1a binding site was
added. RT-PCR of in vitro splicing products revealed that HMGA1a induced an
incomplete splicing product resulting from usage of A2 but inhibition of D3,
which is reminiscent of the splicing pattern necessary for Vpr mRNA formation.
HMGA1a interacted with hnRNPA1 shown by coimmunoprecipitation and supershifted U1
snRNP in an RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assay. We conclude that HMGA1a
anchors U1 snRNP to inhibit D3 function, and that HMGA1a inhibits hnRNPA1
function on exon splicing silencer of Vpr (ESSV) to activate A2 function. We show
here for the first time that HMGA1a is involved in specific splice site
regulation of HIV-1.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Brain Res. 2011 Apr 12;1384:9-14. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.01.105. Epub 2011 
Feb 25.

The different HMGA1 expression of total population of glioblastoma cell line U251
and glioma stem cells isolated from U251.

Fan H(1), Guo H, Zhang IY, Liu B, Luan L, Xu S, Hou X, Liu W, Zhang R, Wang X,
Pang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan 250021, PR China.

The high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein is a non-histone architectural nuclear
factor and participates in diverse biological processes, including gene
transcription, embryogenesis, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and even
neoplastic transformation. In our study, glioma stem cells (GSCs) expressing the 
surface marker CD133 from human glioblastoma cell line U251 were isolated using
MACS column and were analyzed using immunofluorescence and flow cytometry (FCM). 
The different expression of HMGA1 was detected using real-time RT-PCR and Western
blot at transcriptional and translational levels between U251 and isolated GSCs. 
The results show that GSCs were successfully isolated from U251 and cultured in
serum-free medium (SMF). The percentage of GSCs in U251 was 0.32%±0.07%. HMGA1
expression was significantly higher in GSCs than in glioblastoma cells (P<0.05), 
up to 6.13±0.25-fold and 2.75±0.99-fold at transcriptional and translational
levels, respectively. These results indicated HMGA1 is overexpressed in GSCs as
compared to glioblastoma cell line U251, which points to the expression of HMGA1 
being closely related to malignant proliferation, invasion, and differentiation
of tumors from the prospective of tumor stem cells (TSCs). We conclude that HMGA1
may be a potential biomarker and rational therapeutic target for glioblastoma and
GSC.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21300033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. RNA Biol. 2011 Jan-Feb;8(1):143-57. Epub 2011 Jan 1.

HMGA1-dependent and independent 7SK RNA gene regulatory activity.

Eilebrecht S(1), Bécavin C, Léger H, Benecke BJ, Benecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques & CNRS USR3078, Bures sur Yvette,
France.

The small nuclear 7SK RNA negatively controls transcription by inactivating
positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) and is an integral component 
of Tat-dependent and independent HIV-1 transcription initiation complexes. 7SK
RNA has recently been shown to also directly control HMGA1 transcription
activity. HMGA1 is a master regulator of gene expression and its deregulation is 
associated with virtually any type of human cancer. The degree of HMGA1
over-expression thereby correlates with tumor malignancy and metastatic
potential. 7SK snRNA directly interacts through its loop2 (7SK L2) with the first
A/T-hook DNA binding motif of HMGA1. We have developed several 7SK L2 RNA chimera
with the Epstein Barr Virus expressed RNA 2 (EBER2) to target HMGA1 function in
transcription regulation. The efficiency of interfering with HMGA1 transcription 
activity by the chimeric 7SK L2-EBER2 fusions by large exceeds the efficiency of 
7SK wild-type RNA due to the stronger EBER2 promoter activity. Furthermore, the
7SK L2-EBER2 chimera do not interfere with P-TEFb controlled transcription
elongation or the formation of 7SK sn/hnRNPs. The comparison of the effects of
wild-type 7SK RNA on cellular transcriptome dynamics with those induced by the
two 7SK L2 mutants as well as the changes in gene expression following inhibition
of HMGA1 allow the identification and characterization of HMGA1-dependent and
independent effects of 7SK snRNA. We furthermore also present evidence for P-TEFb
and HMGA1-independent 7SK RNA L2 regulatory activity.

PMID: 21282977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Apr;1812(4):495-506. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.01.001. Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Mechanism of lipid induced insulin resistance: activated PKCe is a key regulator.

Dasgupta S(1), Bhattacharya S, Maitra S, Pal D, Majumdar SS, Datta A,
Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, School
of Life Science, Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan 731235, India.

Fatty acids (FAs) are known to impair insulin signaling in target cells.
Accumulating evidences suggest that one of the major sites of FAs adverse effect 
is insulin receptor (IR). However, the underlying mechanism is yet unclear. An
important clue was indicated in leptin receptor deficient (db/db) diabetic mice
where increased circulatory FAs was coincided with phosphorylated PKCe and
reduced IR expression. We report here that central to this mechanism is the
phosphorylation of PKCe by FAs. Kinase dead mutant of PKCe did not augment FA
induced IRß downregulation indicating phosphorylation of PKCe is crucial for FA
induced IRß reduction. Investigation with insulin target cells showed that kinase
independent phosphorylation of PKCe by FA occurred through palmitoylation.
Mutation at cysteine 276 and 474 residues in PKCe suppressed this process
indicating participation of these two residues in palmitoylation. Phosphorylation
of PKCe endowed it the ability to migrate to the nuclear region of insulin target
cells. It was intriguing to search about how translocation of phosphorylated PKCe
occurred without having canonical nuclear localization signal (NLS). We found
that F-actin recognized phospho-form of PKCe and chaperoned it to the nuclear
region where it interact with HMGA1 and Sp1, the transcription regulator of IR
and HMGA1 gene respectively and impaired HMGA1 function. This resulted in the
attenuation of HMGA1 driven IR transcription that compromised insulin signaling
and sensitivity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21236337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Dec;203(2):247-52. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.08.005.

6p21 rearrangements in uterine leiomyomas targeting HMGA1.

Nezhad MH(1), Drieschner N, Helms S, Meyer A, Tadayyon M, Klemke M, Belge G,
Bartnitzke S, Burchardt K, Frantzen C, Schmidt EH, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Bremen, Leobener Str. ZHG, D-28359
Bremen, Germany.

To quantify the expression of HMGA1 mRNA in uterine leiomyomas, the expression of
HMGA1 was analyzed in a series including tumors with aberrations of chromosome 6 
(n = 7) and cytogenetically normal tumors (n = 8) as a control group by
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The average
expression level in the 6p21 group was found to be 5.6 times higher than that in 
the control group, and with one exception, all cases with 6p21 alteration
revealed a high expression of HMGA1 mRNA than cytogenetically normal tumors.
Nevertheless, compared to fibroids with a normal karyotype, the upregulation of
the HMGA1 mRNA in these cases was much less strong than that of HMGA2 mRNA in
case of 12q14~15 aberrations identified in previous studies.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21156240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 15;17(6):1297-305. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0993. 
Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Regulation of HMGA1 expression by microRNA-296 affects prostate cancer growth and
invasion.

Wei JJ(1), Wu X, Peng Y, Shi G, Basturk O, Yang X, Daniels G, Osman I, Ouyang J, 
Hernando E, Pellicer A, Rhim JS, Melamed J, Lee P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Aug 15;17(16):5523. Olca, Basturk [corrected to Basturk,
Olca].

PURPOSE: High-motility group AT-hook gene 1 (HMGA1) is a non-histone nuclear
binding protein that is developmentally regulated. HMGA1 is significantly
overexpressed in and associated with high grade and advance stage of prostate
cancer (PC). The oncogenic role of HMGA1 is at least mediated through chromosomal
instability and structural aberrations. However, regulation of HMGA1 expression
is not well understood. Identification of microRNA-mediated HMGA1 regulation will
provide a promising therapeutic target in treating PC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In this study, we examined the functional relation between
miR-296 and HMGA1 expression in several PC cell lines and a large PC cohort. We
further examined the oncogenic property of HMGA1 regulated by miR-296.
RESULTS: Here we report that miR-296, a microRNA predicted to target HMGA1,
specifically represses HMGA1 expression by promoting degradation and inhibiting
HMGA1translation. Repression of HMGA1 by miR-296 is direct and sequence specific.
Importantly, ectopic miR-296 expression significantly reduced PC cell
proliferation and invasion, in part through the downregulation of HMGA1.
Examining PC patient samples, we found an inverse correlation between HMGA1 and
miR-296 expression: high levels of HMGA1 were associated with low miR-296
expression and strongly linked to more advanced tumor grade and stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that miR-296 regulates HMGA1 expression and is 
associated with PC growth and invasion.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3196617
PMID: 21138859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2010 Nov 30;3(1):21. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-3-21.

Chromatin remodeling enzyme Brg1 is required for mouse lens fiber cell terminal
differentiation and its denucleation.

He S(1), Pirity MK, Wang WL, Wolf L, Chauhan BK, Cveklova K, Tamm ER,
Ashery-Padan R, Metzger D, Nakai A, Chambon P, Zavadil J, Cvekl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, 
USA. ales.cvekl@einstein.yu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Brahma-related gene 1 (Brg1, also known as Smarca4 and Snf2ß) encodes
an adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP)-dependent catalytical subunit of the
(switch/sucrose nonfermentable) (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complexes. SWI/SNF
complexes are recruited to chromatin through multiple mechanisms, including
specific DNA-binding factors (for example, heat shock transcription factor 4
(Hsf4) and paired box gene 6 (Pax6)), chromatin structural proteins (for example,
high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1)) and/or acetylated core histones. Previous studies
have shown that a single amino acid substitution (K798R) in the Brg1 ATPase
domain acts via a dominant-negative (dn) mechanism. Genetic studies have
demonstrated that Brg1 is an essential gene for early (that is, prior
implantation) mouse embryonic development. Brg1 also controls neural stem cell
maintenance, terminal differentiation of multiple cell lineages and organs
including the T-cells, glial cells and limbs.
RESULTS: To examine the roles of Brg1 in mouse lens development, a dnBrg1
transgenic construct was expressed using the lens-specific aA-crystallin promoter
in postmitotic lens fiber cells. Morphological studies revealed abnormal lens
fiber cell differentiation in transgenic lenses resulting in cataract. Electron
microscopic studies showed abnormal lens suture formation and incomplete
karyolysis (that is, denucleation) of lens fiber cells. To identify genes
regulated by Brg1, RNA expression profiling was performed in embryonic day 15.5
(E15.5) wild-type and dnBrg1 transgenic lenses. In addition, comparisons between 
differentially expressed genes in dnBrg1 transgenic, Pax6 heterozygous and Hsf4
homozygous lenses identified multiple genes coregulated by Brg1, Hsf4 and Pax6.
DNase IIß, a key enzyme required for lens fiber cell denucleation, was found to
be downregulated in each of the Pax6, Brg1 and Hsf4 model systems. Lens-specific 
deletion of Brg1 using conditional gene targeting demonstrated that Brg1 was
required for lens fiber cell differentiation, for expression of DNase IIß, for
lens fiber cell denucleation and indirectly for retinal development.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate a cell-autonomous role for Brg1 in lens
fiber cell terminal differentiation and identified DNase IIß as a potential
direct target of SWI/SNF complexes. Brg1 is directly or indirectly involved in
processes that degrade lens fiber cell chromatin. The presence of nuclei and
other organelles generates scattered light incompatible with the optical
requirements for the lens.

PMCID: PMC3003251
PMID: 21118511  [PubMed]


212. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 1;186(1):164-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0904170. Epub 2010 Nov
24.

H5N1 virus activates signaling pathways in human endothelial cells resulting in a
specific imbalanced inflammatory response.

Viemann D(1), Schmolke M, Lueken A, Boergeling Y, Friesenhagen J, Wittkowski H,
Ludwig S, Roth J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
viemannd@uni-muenster.de

H5N1 influenza virus infections in humans cause a characteristic systemic
inflammatory response syndrome; however, the molecular mechanisms are largely
unknown. Endothelial cells (ECs) play a pivotal role in hyperdynamic septic
diseases. To unravel specific signaling networks activated by H5N1 we used a
genome-wide comparative systems biology approach analyzing gene expression in
human ECs infected with three different human and avian influenza strains of high
and low pathogenicity. Blocking of specific signaling pathways revealed that H5N1
induces an exceptionally NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent gene response in human endothelia.
Additionally, the IFN-driven antiviral program in ECs is shown to be dependent on
IFN regulatory factor 3 but significantly impaired upon H5N1 infection compared
with low pathogenic influenza virus. As additional modulators of this
H5N1-specific imbalanced gene response pattern, we identified HMGA1 as a novel
transcription factor specifically responsible for the overwhelming
proinflammatory but not antiviral response, whereas NFATC4 was found to regulate 
transcription of specifically H5N1-induced genes. We describe for the first time,
to our knowledge, defined signaling patterns specifically activated by H5N1,
which, in contrast to low pathogenic influenza viruses, are responsible for an
imbalance of an overwhelming proinflammatory and impaired antiviral gene program.

PMID: 21106851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2009 Dec;54(16 Suppl):2245-50.

[Oncogenic HMGA1a protein causes sporadic Alzheimer's disease-associated aberrant
splicing].

[Article in Japanese]

Mayeda A(1), Manabe T, Ohe K.

Author information: 
(1)mayeda@fujita-hu.ac.jp

PMID: 21089648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Mar;39(6):2057-72. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1153. Epub 2010
Nov 17.

7SK small nuclear RNA directly affects HMGA1 function in transcription
regulation.

Eilebrecht S(1), Brysbaert G, Wegert T, Urlaub H, Benecke BJ, Benecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques & Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique USR3078, 35 route de Chartres, 91440 Bures sur Yvette, France.

Non-coding (nc) RNAs are increasingly recognized to play important regulatory
roles in eukaryotic gene expression. The highly abundant and essential 7SK ncRNA 
has been shown to negatively regulate RNA Polymerase II transcription by
inactivating the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) in cellular 
and Tat-dependent HIV transcription. Here, we identify a more general,
P-TEFb-independent role of 7SK RNA in directly affecting the function of the
architectural transcription factor and chromatin regulator HMGA1. An important
regulatory role of 7SK RNA in HMGA1-dependent cell differentiation and
proliferation regulation is uncovered with the identification of over 1500
7SK-responsive HMGA1 target genes. Elevated HMGA1 expression is observed in
nearly every type of cancer making the use of a 7SK substructure in the
inhibition of HMGA1 activity, as pioneered here, potentially useful in therapy.
The 7SK-HMGA1 interaction not only adds an essential facet to the comprehension
of transcriptional plasticity at the coupling of initiation and elongation, but
also might provide a molecular link between HIV reprogramming of cellular gene
expression-associated oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3064786
PMID: 21087998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Eur J Cancer. 2011 Feb;47(3):470-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.09.045. Epub 2010
Oct 31.

Expression of a truncated Hmga1b gene induces gigantism, lipomatosis and B-cell
lymphomas in mice.

Fedele M(1), Visone R, De Martino I, Palmieri D, Valentino T, Esposito F,
Klein-Szanto A, Arra C, Ciarmiello A, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Università degli
Studi di Napoli Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Retraction in
    Eur J Cancer. 2015 Apr;51(6):789.

HMGA1 gene rearrangements have been frequently described in human lipomas. In
vitro studies suggest that HMGA1 proteins have a negative role in the control of 
adipocyte cell growth, and that HMGA1 gene truncation acts in a dominant-negative
fashion. Therefore, to define better the role of the HMGA1 alterations in the
generation of human lipomas, we generated mice carrying an Hmga1b truncated
(Hmga1b/T) gene. These mice develop a giant phenotype together with a drastic
expansion of the retroperitoneal and subcutaneous white adipose tissue. We show
that the activation of the E2F pathway likely accounts, at least in part, for
this phenotype. Interestingly, the Hmga1b/T mice also develop B-cell lymphomas
similar to that occurring in Hmga1-knockout mice, supporting a dominant-negative 
role of the Hmga1b/T mutant also in vivo.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21044834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nat Commun. 2010 Jul 27;1:40. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1040.

Pseudogene-mediated posttranscriptional silencing of HMGA1 can result in insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes.

Chiefari E(1), Iiritano S, Paonessa F, Le Pera I, Arcidiacono B, Filocamo M, Foti
D, Liebhaber SA, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G. Salvatore, Università di
Catanzaro Magna Græcia, viale Europa (Loc. Germaneto), Catanzaro 88100, Italy.

Processed pseudogenes are non-functional copies of normal genes that arise by a
process of mRNA retrotransposition. The human genome contains thousands of
pseudogenes; however, knowledge regarding their biological role is limited.
Previously, we demonstrated that high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein regulates
the insulin receptor (INSR) gene and that two diabetic patients demonstrated a
marked destabilization of HMGA1 mRNA. In this paper we report that this
destabilization of HMGA1 mRNA is triggered by enhanced expression of RNA from an 
HMGA1 pseudogene, HMGA1-p. Targeted knockdown of HMGA1-p mRNA in patient cells
results in a reciprocal increase in HMGA1 mRNA stability and expression levels
with a parallel correction in cell-surface INSR expression and insulin binding.
These data provide evidence for a regulatory role of an expressed pseudogene in
humans and establishes a novel mechanistic linkage between pseudogene HMGA1-p
expression and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 20975707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 17;285(51):40012-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.178533. Epub 2010
Oct 20.

Polyetheylenimine-polyplexes of Spiegelmer NOX-A50 directed against intracellular
high mobility group protein A1 (HMGA1) reduce tumor growth in vivo.

Maasch C(1), Vater A, Buchner K, Purschke WG, Eulberg D, Vonhoff S, Klussmann S.

Author information: 
(1)NOXXON Pharma AG, Max-Dohrn-Strasse 8-10, D-10589 Berlin, Germany.

High mobility group A1 (HMGA1) proteins belong to a group of architectural
transcription factors that are overexpressed in a range of human malignancies,
including pancreatic adenocarcinoma. They promote anchorage-independent growth
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition and are therefore suggested as potential
therapeutic targets. Employing in vitro selection techniques against a chosen
fragment of HMGA1, we have generated biostable l-RNA oligonucleotides, so-called 
Spiegelmers, that specifically bind HMGA1b with low nanomolar affinity. We
demonstrate that the best binding Spiegelmers, NOX-A50 and NOX-f33, compete
HMGA1b from binding to its natural binding partner, AT-rich double-stranded DNA. 
We describe a formulation method based on polyplex formation with branched
polyethylenimine for efficient delivery of polyethylene glycol-modified
Spiegelmers and show improved tissue distribution and persistence in mice. In a
xenograft mouse study using the pancreatic cancer cell line PSN-1, subcutaneous
administration of 2 mg/kg per day NOX-A50 formulated in polyplexes showed an
enhanced delivery of NOX-A50 to the tumor and a significant reduction of tumor
volume. Our results demonstrate that intracellular targets can be successfully
addressed with a Spiegelmer using polyethylenimine-based delivery and underline
the importance of HMGA1 as a therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3000983
PMID: 20961861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Nov 29;42A(4):259-66. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00098.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Angiotensin II-regulated transcription regulatory genes in adrenal
steroidogenesis.

Romero DG(1), Gomez-Sanchez EP, Gomez-Sanchez CE.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology, G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi 39216,
USA. dromero@umc.edu

Transcription regulatory genes are crucial modulators of cell physiology and
metabolism whose intracellular levels are tightly controlled in response to
extracellular stimuli. We previously reported a set of 29 transcription
regulatory genes modulated by angiotensin II in H295R human adrenocortical cells 
and their roles in regulating the expression of the last and unique enzymes of
the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid biosynthetic pathways, 11ß-hydroxylase
and aldosterone synthase, respectively, using gene expression reporter assays. To
study the effect of this set of transcription regulatory genes on adrenal
steroidogenesis, H295R cells were transfected by high-efficiency nucleofection
and aldosterone and cortisol were measured in cell culture supernatants under
basal and angiotensin II-stimulated conditions. BCL11B, BHLHB2, CITED2, ELL2,
HMGA1, MAFF, NFIL3, PER1, SERTAD1, and VDR significantly stimulated aldosterone
secretion, while EGR1, FOSB, and ZFP295 decreased aldosterone secretion. BTG2,
HMGA1, MITF, NR4A1, and ZFP295 significantly increased cortisol secretion, while 
BCL11B, NFIL3, PER1, and SIX2 decreased cortisol secretion. We also report the
effect of some of these regulators on the expression of endogenous aldosterone
synthase and 11ß-hydroxylase under basal and angiotensin II-stimulated
conditions. In summary, this study reports for the first time the effects of a
set of angiotensin II-modulated transcription regulatory genes on aldosterone and
cortisol secretion and the expression levels of the last and unique enzymes of
the mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid biosynthetic pathways. Abnormal
regulation of mineralocorticoid or glucocorticoid secretion is involved in
several pathophysiological conditions. These transcription regulatory genes may
be involved in adrenal steroidogenesis pathologies; thus they merit additional
study as potential candidates for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3008366
PMID: 20876845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Breast Care (Basel). 2010;5(2):81-85. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

High-Mobility Group A (HMGA) Proteins and Breast Cancer.

Peluso S(1), Chiappetta G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy.

The high-mobility group A (HMGA) protein family includes HMGA1a, HMGA1b and
HMGA1c, which are encoded by the same gene through alternative splicing, and the 
closely related HMGA2 protein. HMGA proteins have been found to be abundant in
several malignant neoplasias, including colorectal, prostate, cervical, lung,
thyroid and breast carcinoma. HMGA proteins can be ideal candidates for the
identification of new prognosis and diagnosis factors with non-invasive methods. 
To provide some clarity regarding the abundance of articles on this topic, here
we focus on the relationship between HMGA proteins and breast cancer and their
clinical perspective in the development of new therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2931040
PMID: 20847819  [PubMed]


220. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2010 Sep 16;8:112. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-8-112.

Recombinant human follicle-stimulating hormone produces more oocytes with a lower
total dose per cycle in assisted reproductive technologies compared with highly
purified human menopausal gonadotrophin: a meta-analysis.

Lehert P(1), Schertz JC, Ezcurra D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Faculty of Economics FUCAM, Louvain Academy, 151,
chaussée de Binche, B-7000 Mons, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Human menopausal gonadotrophins and recombinant human follicle
stimulating hormone are the two main gonadotrophin products utilized for
controlled ovarian stimulation in assisted reproductive technologies. In this
meta-analysis, the number of oocytes was designated as the most relevant endpoint
directly resulting from ovarian stimulation, and therefore where the drug effect 
may be estimated with the best sensitivity.
METHODS: All published randomized controlled trials on ovarian stimulation
comparing the two gonadotrophin products were evaluated. Internal validity was
determined using Chalmers' validated scale. If trials did not meet the
established quality criteria, a sensitivity analysis assessed the stability of
the results. The comparison of continuous variables was conducted following the
weighted mean difference and the standardized mean difference (Cohen's effect
size) with the random model. Given the known relationship of baseline conditions 
on treatment endpoints, results were adjusted for age, body mass index and type
of infertility.
RESULTS: Sixteen studies involving 4040 patients were included. Treatment with
human menopausal gonadotrophins resulted in fewer oocytes (-1.54; 95% CI: -2.53
to -0.56; P < 0.0001) compared to recombinant human follicle-stimulating hormone.
When adjusting for baseline conditions, the mean difference estimate was -2.10
(95% CI: -2.83 to -1.36; P < 0.001). A higher total dose of human menopausal
gonadotrophin was necessary (mean difference, 235.46 IU [95% CI: 16.62 to 454.30;
P = 0.03]; standardized mean difference, 0.33 [95% CI: 0.08 to 0.58; P = 0.01]). 
The pregnancy absolute risk difference (RD [hMG-r-hFSH]) for fresh transfers was 
3% (P = 0.051), and the relative risk 1.10 (P = 0.06). When adjusted for baseline
conditions, the relative risk was 1.04 (P = 0.49) and absolute difference was
0.01 (P = 0.34), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Because baseline conditions are predictive of outcome, meta-analytic
results are more sensitive when these variables are considered. Using an endpoint
closely associated with the stimulation period, sufficient sensitivity is
achieved to compare gonadotrophin treatments. As the largest meta-analysis
published to date on this subject, treatment with human menopausal gonadotrophins
is characterized by fewer oocytes and a higher total dose. When considering only 
fresh transfers, pregnancy rates were similar.

PMCID: PMC2954883
PMID: 20846363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Eur J Cancer. 2010 Dec;46(18):3393-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.07.024. Epub 2010 
Aug 17.

Differential expression and prognostic value of HMGA1 in pancreatic head and
periampullary cancer.

van der Zee JA(1), ten Hagen TL, Hop WC, van Dekken H, Dicheva BM, Seynhaeve AL, 
Koning GA, Eggermont AM, van Eijck CH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Surgical Oncology, Section Surgical Oncology,
Department of Surgery, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
j.a.vanderzee@erasmusmc.nl

The high mortality rate and minimal progress made in the treatment of pancreatic 
cancer over the last few decades, warrant an alternative approach. Treatment
protocols should be individualised to the patient guided by prognostic markers. A
particularly interesting target would be the architectural transcription factor
high mobility group A1 (HMGA1), that is low or undetectable in normal tissue,
induced during neoplastic transformation and consequently often exceptionally
high in cancer. The aim of the current study was therefore to determine the
differential expression of HMGA1 in pancreatic head and periampullary cancer and 
investigate its relation with outcome. HMGA1 expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry on original paraffin embedded tissue from 99 pancreatic
head- and 112 periampullary cancers (with R0). Expression was investigated for
associations with recurrence free (RFS), cancer specific (CSS) and overall
survival (OS) and conventional prognostic factors. HMGA1 was expressed in 47% and
26% of pancreatic head- and periampullary cancer, respectively and associated
with poor RFS, CSS and OS in periampullary cancer. CSS 5years following surgery
was 25% and 44% for patients with tumours which were positive or negative for
HMGA1 protein, respectively. HMGA1 expression was not associated with survival in
pancreatic head cancer. In conclusion HMGA1 was identified as an independent
prognostic marker predicting poor outcome in periampullary cancer. Although
expressed to a higher extent as compared to periampullary cancer, HMGA1 was not
associated with survival in pancreatic head cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20724141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Aug 11;11:64. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-64.

HMGA1 down-regulation is crucial for chromatin composition and a gene expression 
profile permitting myogenic differentiation.

Brocher J(1), Vogel B, Hock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14
Science Drive 4, Block S1A, Level 6, 117543 Singapore.

BACKGROUND: High mobility group A (HMGA) proteins regulate gene transcription
through architectural modulation of chromatin and the formation of multi-protein 
complexes on promoter/enhancer regions. Differential expression of HMGA variants 
has been found to be important for distinct differentiation processes and
deregulated expression was linked to several disorders. Here we used mouse C2C12 
myoblasts and C2C12 cells stably over-expressing HMGA1a-eGFP to study the impact 
of deregulated HMGA1 expression levels on cellular differentiation.
RESULTS: We found that induction of the myogenic or osteogenic program of C2C12
cells caused an immediate down-regulation of HMGA1. In contrast to wild type
C2C12 cells, an engineered cell line with stable over-expression of HMGA1a-eGFP
failed to differentiate into myotubes. Immunolocalization studies demonstrated
that sustained HMGA1a-eGFP expression prevented myotube formation and chromatin
reorganization that normally accompanies differentiation. Western Blot analyses
showed that elevated HMGA1a-eGFP levels affected chromatin composition through
either down-regulation of histone H1 or premature expression of MeCP2. RT-PCR
analyses further revealed that sustained HMGA1a expression also affected myogenic
gene expression and caused either down-regulation of genes such as MyoD,
myogenin, Igf1, Igf2, Igfbp1-3 or up-regulation of the transcriptional repressor 
Msx1. Interestingly, siRNA experiments demonstrated that knock-down of HMGA1a was
required and sufficient to reactivate the myogenic program in induced HMGA1a
over-expressing cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that HMGA1 down-regulation after induction is
required to initiate the myogenic program in C2C12 cells. Sustained HMGA1a
expression after induction prevents expression of key myogenic factors. This may 
be due to specific gene regulation and/or global effects on chromatin. Our data
further corroborate that altered HMGA1 levels influence the expression of other
chromatin proteins. Thus, HMGA1 is able to establish a specific chromatin
composition. This work contributes to the understanding of how differential HMGA1
expression is involved in chromatin organization during cellular differentiation 
processes and it may help to comprehend effects of HMGA1 over-expression
occurring in malign or benign tumours.

PMCID: PMC2928187
PMID: 20701767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Vet Comp Oncol. 2010 Jun;8(2):87-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5829.2010.00207.x.

Expression of the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) and A2 (HMGA2) genes in canine
lymphoma: analysis of 23 cases and comparison to control cases.

Joetzke AE(1), Sterenczak KA, Eberle N, Wagner S, Soller JT, Nolte I, Bullerdiek 
J, Murua Escobar H, Simon D.

Author information: 
(1)Small Animal Clinic and Research Cluster of Excellence 'REBIRTH', University
of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
alexa.joetzke@tiho-hannover.de

Overexpression of high mobility group A (HMGA) genes was described as a
prognostic marker in different human malignancies, but its role in canine
haematopoietic malignancies was unknown so far. The objective of this study was
to analyse HMGA1 and HMGA2 gene expression in lymph nodes of canine lymphoma
patients. The expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 was analysed in lymph node samples of
23 dogs with lymphoma and three control dogs using relative quantitative
real-time RT-PCR. Relative quantity of HMGA1 was significantly higher in dogs
with lymphoma compared with reference samples. HMGA2 expression did not differ
between lymphoma and control dogs. With the exception of immunophenotype,
comparison of disease parameters did not display any differences in HMGA1 and
HMGA2 expression. The present findings indicate a role of HMGA genes in canine
lymphoma. This study represents the basis for future veterinary and comparative
studies dealing with their diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic values.

PMID: 20579321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jun 14;11:96. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-96.

The role of height-associated loci identified in genome wide association studies 
in the determination of pediatric stature.

Zhao J(1), Li M, Bradfield JP, Zhang H, Mentch FD, Wang K, Sleiman PM, Kim CE,
Glessner JT, Hou C, Keating BJ, Thomas KA, Garris ML, Deliard S, Frackelton EC,
Otieno FG, Chiavacci RM, Berkowitz RI, Hakonarson H, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human height is considered highly heritable and correlated with
certain disorders, such as type 2 diabetes and cancer. Despite environmental
influences, genetic factors are known to play an important role in stature
determination. A number of genetic determinants of adult height have already been
established through genome wide association studies.
METHODS: To examine 51 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) corresponding to
the 46 previously reported genomic loci for height in 8,184 European American
children with height measurements. We leveraged genotyping data from our ongoing 
GWA study of height variation in children in order to query the 51 SNPs in this
pediatric cohort.
RESULTS: Sixteen of these SNPs yielded at least nominally significant association
to height, representing fifteen different loci including EFEMP1-PNPT1, GPR126,
C6orf173, SPAG17, Histone class 1, HLA class III and GDF5-UQCC. Other loci
revealed no evidence for association, including HMGA1 and HMGA2. For the 16
associated variants, the genotype score explained 1.64% of the total variation
for height z-score.
CONCLUSION: Among 46 loci that have been reported to associate with adult height 
to date, at least 15 also contribute to the determination of height in childhood.

PMCID: PMC2894790
PMID: 20546612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 1;70(13):5379-88. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4199. Epub
2010 Jun 8.

High-mobility group A1 proteins regulate p53-mediated transcription of Bcl-2
gene.

Esposito F(1), Tornincasa M, Chieffi P, De Martino I, Pierantoni GM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Università
degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

We have previously described a mechanism through which the high-mobility group A1
(HMGA1) proteins inhibit p53-mediated apoptosis by delocalizing the p53
proapoptotic activator homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 from the nucleus 
to the cytoplasm. By this mechanism, HMGA1 modulates the transcription of p53
target genes such as Mdm2, p21(waf1), and Bax, inhibiting apoptosis. Here, we
report that HMGA1 antagonizes the p53-mediated transcriptional repression of
another apoptosis-related gene, Bcl-2, suggesting a novel mechanism by which
HMGA1 counteracts apoptosis. Moreover, HMGA1 overexpression promotes the
reduction of Brn-3a binding to the Bcl-2 promoter, thereby blocking the Brn-3a
corepressor function on Bcl-2 expression following p53 activation. Consistently, 
a significant direct correlation between HMGA1 and Bcl-2 overexpression has been 
observed in human breast carcinomas harboring wild-type p53. Therefore, this
study suggests a novel mechanism, based on Bcl-2 induction, by which HMGA1
overexpression contributes to the escape from apoptosis leading to neoplastic
transformation.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20530667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Anticancer Res. 2010 Apr;30(4):1083-91.

Gene expression analysis by cDNA microarray in oral cancers from two Western
populations.

Lunde ML(1), Warnakulasuriya S, Sand L, Hirsch JM, Vasstrand EN, Ibrahim SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Jonas Lies vei 91, 5009 Bergen, Norway.
mai.suhr@biomed.uib.no

BACKGROUND: In this work, gene expression profile was examined in 19 cases of
oral cancer (OC) obtained from patients from Sweden (n=8) and UK (n=11) and the
findings were tested for correlation to patient's clinicopathological data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Following total RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, labeling
with fluorescent dyes and hybridization to the 21 k human oligonucleotide
microarrays, slides were scanned and images were subjected to Genepix and
J-Express analysis. Results for selected genes were validated by quantitative
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (Q-RT-PCR).
RESULTS: 42 genes were identified as being differentially expressed. These
included 39 genes of known functions (such as fatty acid synthase (FASN), 5'
nucleotidase, ecto (NT5E), high mobility group AT-hook (HMGA1), and v-fos FBJ
murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS)) and 3 novel genes; 26 (67%) of 
the 39 genes with known functions were previously reported in oral/head and neck 
tumors examined from other populations. Hierarchical clustering of the samples
using the 42 genes demonstrated that samples mainly clustered in the same
population.
CONCLUSION: These results illustrate that microarrays can be used to identify
distinct patterns of gene expression in different populations, but with no direct
association to clinicopathological parameters. The fact that 67% of the 39 genes 
with known functions found in this work were previously reported in oral/head and
neck tumors from other populations provides clear evidence that development of
these tumors follows the same biological pathways irrespective of the source of
the samples used.

PMID: 20530413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS One. 2010 May 14;5(5):e10656. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010656.

Distamycin A inhibits HMGA1-binding to the P-selectin promoter and attenuates
lung and liver inflammation during murine endotoxemia.

Baron RM(1), Lopez-Guzman S, Riascos DF, Macias AA, Layne MD, Cheng G, Harris C, 
Chung SW, Reeves R, von Andrian UH, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. rbaron@partners.org

BACKGROUND: The architectural transcription factor High Mobility Group-A1 (HMGA1)
binds to the minor groove of AT-rich DNA and forms transcription factor complexes
("enhanceosomes") that upregulate expression of select genes within the
inflammatory cascade during critical illness syndromes such as acute lung injury 
(ALI). AT-rich regions of DNA surround transcription factor binding sites in
genes critical for the inflammatory response. Minor groove binding drugs (MGBs), 
such as Distamycin A (Dist A), interfere with AT-rich region DNA binding in a
sequence and conformation-specific manner, and HMGA1 is one of the few
transcription factors whose binding is inhibited by MGBs.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether MGBs exert beneficial effects during endotoxemia
through attenuating tissue inflammation via interfering with HMGA1-DNA binding
and modulating expression of adhesion molecules.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Administration of Dist A significantly decreased 
lung and liver inflammation during murine endotoxemia. In intravital microscopy
studies, Dist A attenuated neutrophil-endothelial interactions in vivo following 
an inflammatory stimulus. Endotoxin induction of P-selectin expression in lung
and liver tissue and promoter activity in endothelial cells was significantly
reduced by Dist A, while E-selectin induction was not significantly affected.
Moreover, Dist A disrupted formation of an inducible complex containing NF-kappaB
that binds an AT-rich region of the P-selectin promoter. Transfection studies
demonstrated a critical role for HMGA1 in facilitating cytokine and NF-kappaB
induction of P-selectin promoter activity, and Dist A inhibited binding of HMGA1 
to this AT-rich region of the P-selectin promoter in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We describe a novel targeted approach in modulating
lung and liver inflammation in vivo during murine endotoxemia through decreasing 
binding of HMGA1 to a distinct AT-rich region of the P-selectin promoter. These
studies highlight the ability of MGBs to function as molecular tools for
dissecting transcriptional mechanisms in vivo and suggest alternative treatment
approaches for critical illness.

PMCID: PMC2871042
PMID: 20498830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Int J Cancer. 2011 Mar 1;128(5):1069-79. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25453.

A genomic strategy for the functional validation of colorectal cancer genes
identifies potential therapeutic targets.

Grade M(1), Hummon AB, Camps J, Emons G, Spitzner M, Gaedcke J, Hoermann P, Ebner
R, Becker H, Difilippantonio MJ, Ghadimi BM, Beissbarth T, Caplen NJ, Ried T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Medicine Göttingen,
Georg-August-University, Göttingen, Germany.

Genes that are highly overexpressed in tumor cells can be required for tumor cell
survival and have the potential to be selective therapeutic targets. In an
attempt to identify such targets, we combined a functional genomics and a systems
biology approach to assess the consequences of RNAi-mediated silencing of
overexpressed genes that were selected from 140 gene expression profiles from
colorectal cancers (CRCs) and matched normal mucosa. In order to identify
credible models for in-depth functional analysis, we first confirmed the
overexpression of these genes in 25 different CRC cell lines. We then identified 
five candidate genes that profoundly reduced the viability of CRC cell lines when
silenced with either siRNAs or short-hairpin RNAs (shRNAs), i.e., HMGA1, TACSTD2,
RRM2, RPS2 and NOL5A. These genes were further studied by systematic analysis of 
comprehensive gene expression profiles generated following siRNA-mediated
silencing. Exploration of these RNAi-specific gene expression signatures allowed 
the identification of the functional space in which the five genes operate and
showed enrichment for cancer-specific signaling pathways, some known to be
involved in CRC. By comparing the expression of the RNAi signature genes with
their respective expression levels in an independent set of primary rectal
carcinomas, we could recapitulate these defined RNAi signatures, therefore,
establishing the biological relevance of our observations. This strategy
identified the signaling pathways that are affected by the prominent oncogenes
HMGA1 and TACSTD2, established a yet unknown link between RRM2 and PLK1 and
identified RPS2 and NOL5A as promising potential therapeutic targets in CRC.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3008507
PMID: 20473941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Jul;49(7):630-4. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20772.

HMGA1 and HMGA2 rearrangements in mass-forming endometriosis.

Medeiros F(1), Araujo AR, Erickson-Johnson MR, Kashyap PC, Dal Cin P, Nucci M,
Wang X, Bell DA, Oliveira AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Endometriosis is a common gynecologic disorder characterized by ectopic
endometrium associated with pelvic pain and infertility. The pathogenesis of
endometriosis is unclear, and several genetic, endocrine, immune, and
environmental agents have been studied as putative causative factors. However,
consistent somatic genetic alterations have not been identified. Rarely,
endometriosis presents as a mass lesion with an infiltrative pattern reminiscent 
of malignancy. We describe cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic findings of
mass-forming endometriosis. The index case of pulmonary endometriosis underwent
conventional and molecular cytogenetics analysis. In addition, 16 cases of
mass-forming endometriosis, 11 cases of usual endometriosis, and six
endometriomas were investigated by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for 
HMGA1 and HMGA2 loci, performed on paraffin-embedded thin tissue sections with
custom-designed probes. The index patient had an endometriotic lung nodule, with 
a 46,XX, t(5;6)(q13;p21) karyotype and HMGA1 rearrangement by FISH. A second
patient had decidualized endometriosis forming a large abdominal mass and HMGA1
rearrangement by FISH. Of the 15 other cases of mass-forming endometriosis, one
had HMGA1 rearrangement and two had HMGA2 rearrangement. The rearrangements were 
found in the stromal component exclusively. None of the usual endometriosis cases
or endometriomas had HMGA1 or HMGA2 rearrangements. In conclusion, mass-forming
endometriosis is an uncommon subset of endometriosis that harbors HMGA1 or HMGA2 
rearrangements in up to 29% of cases. The present findings support the concept
that endometriosis is clonal and that rearrangement of HMGA genes likely
contributes to its pathogenesis.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20461755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Histopathology. 2010 Mar;56(4):501-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2010.03495.x.

Increased expression of HMGA1 correlates with tumour invasiveness and
proliferation in human pituitary adenomas.

Wang EL(1), Qian ZR, Rahman MM, Yoshimoto K, Yamada S, Kudo E, Sano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University
of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

AIMS: High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) is highly expressed in various benign and
malignant tumours. The development of pituitary adenoma in Hmga1 transgenic mice 
has been reported. However, no studies have investigated HMGA1 expression and its
clinical significance in human pituitary adenomas.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemical expression of HMGA1 was analysed with
respect to various clinicopathological factors in 95 pituitary adenomas. Nuclear 
expression of HMGA1 was observed in 62% of pituitary adenomas, whereas normal
adenohypophysial tissues were negative. Although HMGA1 expression was frequently 
detected in clinically non-functioning adenomas - 90% of silent
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 76.2% of follicle-stimulating
hormone/luteinizing hormone and 100% of null cell adenomas - it was also detected
in 48.1% of growth hormone (GH), 60% of mixed GH/prolactin (PRL), 62.5% of PRL,
66.6% of thyroid-stimulating hormone and 37.5% of ACTH adenomas. HMGA1 expression
was significantly higher in invasive adenomas or macroadenomas than in
non-invasive adenomas or microadenomas (invasive versus non-invasive, P < 0.05;
macroadenoma versus microadenoma, P < 0.05). In addition, HMGA1 showed the
highest level in grade IV, more aggressive pituitary adenomas, than in grades I, 
II and III (IV versus I, P = 0.01; IV versus II, P = 0.01; IV versus III, P =
0.07). Furthermore, a significant correlation between HMGA1 expression and MIB-1 
labelling index was observed (R = 0.368, P < 0.0002).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that HMGA1 up-regulation has an important
oncogenic role in pituitary tumorigenesis, as well as being a novel molecular
marker of tumour proliferation and invasiveness.

PMID: 20459557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Ther. 2010 Jun;18(6):1192-9. doi: 10.1038/mt.2010.55. Epub 2010 Apr 20.

Engineering of human pluripotent stem cells by AAV-mediated gene targeting.

Khan IF(1), Hirata RK, Wang PR, Li Y, Kho J, Nelson A, Huo Y, Zavaljevski M, Ware
C, Russell DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA.

Comment in
    Mol Ther. 2010 Jun;18(6):1061-3.

Precise genetic manipulation of human pluripotent stem cells will be required to 
realize their scientific and therapeutic potential. Here, we show that
adeno-associated virus (AAV) gene targeting vectors can be used to genetically
engineer human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs). Different types of sequence-specific changes, including the creation and
correction of mutations, were introduced into the human HPRT1 and HMGA1 genes
(HPRT1 mutations being responsible for Lesch-Nyhan syndrome). Gene targeting
occurred at high frequencies in both ESCs and iPSCs, with over 1% of all
colony-forming units (CFUs) undergoing targeting in some experiments. AAV vectors
could also be used to target genes in human fibroblasts that were subsequently
used to derive iPSCs. Accurate and efficient targeting took place with minimal or
no cytotoxicity, and most of the gene-targeted stem cells produced were euploid
and pluripotent.

PMCID: PMC2889726
PMID: 20407427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Jan;45(1):51-5.

[Effects of small interfering RNA specific to stably transfected HMGA1 gene on
biological characters of ovarian carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu YL(1), Zheng JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin 150001, China. liuyinglan1@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of biological characters of the human
ovarian cell line (OVCAR) by stable transfection short hairpin RNA into the
target HMGA1 gene.
METHODS: Experiments were divided into two groups: transfected the OVCAR cells
with pSilence4.1-CMV-Hs plasmid as group A, while transfected OVCAR cells with
pSilence4.1-CMV-Hn plasmid as group B, in which stably transfected cells were
gained by antibiotic screening. The comparative expressions of HMGA1 were
detected by RT-PCR and western blot. Methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) method
was applied to measure cell proliferation and at the same time, the cell growth
curve was also be mapped. Vitro invasion assay was used to observe the invasion
ability of the cancer cells, and the tumor growth of the nude mice inoculated of 
tumor cells were compared with before and after transfection.
RESULTS: In group A, the expression level of mRNA and protein HMGA1 gene in OVCAR
cells were remarkably reduced before and after the stable transfected with HMGA1 
siRNA, in which the percents of mRNA expression were [(86.3 ± 2.7)% vs. (35.8 ±
3.1)%, P < 0.05], the expression of protein were [(68.6 ± 2.8)% vs. (22.3 ±
4.2)%, P < 0.05)]. The OVCAR cell growth in stable transfection status was more
significantly decreased than that in non-transfection status (P < 0.05). In group
B, there were no statistical difference in the expression of HMGA1 siRNA, protein
and the cell growth between before and after transfection states (P > 0.05). The 
invasion cell numbers were reduced from before to after transfection state in
group A [(53 ± 6) vs. (21 ± 6), P < 0.05], while there was no significant
difference in group B [(51 ± 6) vs. (47 ± 8), P > 0.05]. After inoculated
transfected cells into nude mice, it took (6.0 ± 0.9) days to grow the planed
tumors in group A, which was much shorter than that (12.3 ± 3.9) days in group B 
(P < 0.05). After 5 weeks, the tumor weight and volume in group A was were
significantly lower than those in group B [(0.8 ± 0.3) g vs. (2.1 ± 0.4) g, (205 
± 34) mm(3) vs. (987 ± 82) mm(3), all P < 0.05].
CONCLUSION: HMGA1 siRNA could remarkably reduce the expression of HMGA1 gene in
ovarian cell and also inhabit the ovarian cell growth.

PMID: 20367927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Sep 15;326(1-2):19-24. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.03.019. 
Epub 2010 Mar 27.

HMGA2: A pituitary tumour subtype-specific oncogene?

Fedele M(1), Palmieri D, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale (IEOS) del CNR, Naples,
Italy c/o Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università
degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy. mfedele@unina.it

The high mobility group AT-hook (HMGA) proteins, a family of DNA architectural
factors, are highly expressed during embryogenesis and play a crucial role in
several different biological processes, as well as in tumorigenesis of a wide
range of tissues, including pituitary. Indeed, HMGA2 has been found rearranged
and amplified in human prolactinomas, and transgenic mice overexpressing either
Hmga1 or Hmga2 develop pituitary adenomas secreting prolactin and growth hormone.
Here, we overview HMGA proteins in human tumours, focusing on pituitary adenomas 
and the mechanisms by which the HMGA proteins are involved in their onset and
development. Different HMGA-dependent potential drives of pituitary oncogenesis
are discussed as future research directions in the field.

2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20347930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Neurochem Int. 2010 May-Jun;56(6-7):736-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2010.03.011.
Epub 2010 Mar 27.

The expression of HMGA1a is increased in lymphoblastoid cell lines from
schizophrenia patients.

Morikawa T(1), Manabe T, Ito Y, Yamada S, Yoshimi A, Nagai T, Ozaki N, Mayeda A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Expression Mechanism, Institute for Comprehensive Medical
Science, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.

The high-mobility group A protein 1a (HMGA1a) is a well-documented DNA-binding
protein acting as an architectural transcription regulator. Recently, HMGA1a
protein has been identified as a hypoxia-inducible RNA-binding trans-acting
factor for aberrant splicing of presenilin-2 (PS2) pre-mRNA observed in the
brains of sporadic Alzheimer's disease. Interestingly, this aberrant splicing of 
PS2 was also observed in the brains of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Many
downstream genes under the control of HMGA1a could be associated with
schizophrenia. On the other hand, many gene transcripts are aberrantly spliced in
schizophrenia. Therefore, we examined the expression at the mRNA and protein
levels of this DNA- and RNA-binding factor HMGA1a in the lymphoblastoid cell
lines obtained from 16 schizophrenia patients with age-matched controls. We
observed markedly higher HMGA1a mRNA and the increased HMGA1a protein in the
nuclear fractions of schizophrenia patients. In contrast, there were no
significant differences in the expression levels of HMGA1b, which is an
alternatively spliced isoform of HMGA1a. The present study is the first to report
a significant upregulation of HMGA1a in schizophrenia, suggesting its potential
roles in both transcription and splicing of target genes linked with
schizophrenia.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20347905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Eur J Cancer. 2010 Jul;46(10):1919-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.02.050. Epub 2010
Mar 23.

HMGA1 protein is a positive regulator of the insulin-like growth factor-I
receptor gene.

Aiello A(1), Pandini G, Sarfstein R, Werner H, Manfioletti G, Vigneri R, Belfiore
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Endocrinology, University of
Catanzaro, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

The IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) is often overexpressed in cancer and is believed to
play a crucial role in cancer progression. High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) is a
non-histone chromatin protein that has the ability to regulate gene expression
through DNA binding and involvement in enhanceosome complexes. HMGA1 is expressed
at low level in adult differentiated cells, whereas it is expressed at high level
in embryonic and malignant cells. We evaluated whether the HMGA1 aberrant
expression has a role in IGF-IR overexpression in cancer. We found that HMGA1
silencing induces a marked decrease in IGF-IR expression in various human cancer 
cell lines. Conversely, forced HMGA1 overexpression in cells with low endogenous 
HMGA1 levels was associated with IGF-IR upregulation. HMGA1 silencing reduced
igf-ir promoter activity whereas forced HMGA1 expression increased it. Using the 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, HMGA1 protein was found to bind to the
igf-ir promoter. Moreover, HMGA1 was found to associate with both p53 and Sp1,
two major regulators of igf-ir gene transcription and to antagonise the p53
inhibitory activity while enhancing the Sp1 stimulatory activity. Our data
indicate, therefore, that HMGA1 protein is a positive regulator of IGF-IR
expression and that HMGA1 overexpression may contribute to IGF-IR dysregulation
in cancer cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20335021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mod Pathol. 2010 May;23(5):673-81. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.49. Epub 2010 Mar 
12.

HMGA2: a biomarker significantly overexpressed in high-grade ovarian serous
carcinoma.

Mahajan A(1), Liu Z, Gellert L, Zou X, Yang G, Lee P, Yang X, Wei JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Ovarian carcinoma consists of a group of histologically heterogeneous diseases
involving distinct tumorigenic pathways. High-grade papillary serous carcinoma of
the ovary is commonly associated with p53 mutations. HMGA2, an oncofetal protein,
is found to be overexpressed in ovarian cancer. To study the function of HMGA2 in
ovarian cancer, it is important to know which subtypes of ovarian cancer are
associated with HMGA2 overexpression. In this study, we collected six different
types of ovarian cancer and examined HMGA2 expression by immunohistochemistry,
along with HMGA1, p53 and Ki-67. We found that HMGA2 overexpression was
significantly higher in high-grade papillary serous carcinoma (64%) and
carcinosarcoma (60%) than in other types of ovarian cancers (7-23%). HMGA2
overexpression was moderately associated with dominant p53 mutations (R=0.51). In
addition, the microRNA in situ analysis revealed that let-7b, the HMGA2-negative 
regulators, were significantly lost in high-grade serous carcinoma. Our findings 
suggest that HMGA2 is an important molecular change significantly related to
high-grade papillary serous carcinoma and is less common in other histological
types of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 20228781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2010 Jun;21(6):960-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jasms.2010.01.020. 
Epub 2010 Jan 28.

Collective mass spectrometry approaches reveal broad and combinatorial
modification of high mobility group protein A1a.

Young NL(1), Plazas-Mayorca MD, DiMaggio PA, Flaniken IZ, Beltran AJ, Mishra N,
LeRoy G, Floudas CA, Garcia BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

Transcriptional states are formed and maintained by the interaction and
post-translational modification (PTM) of several chromatin proteins, such as
histones and high mobility group (HMG) proteins. Among these, HMGA1a, a small
heterochromatin-associated nuclear protein has been shown to be
post-translationally modified, and some of these PTMs have been linked to
apoptosis and cancer. In cancerous cells, HMGA1a PTMs differ between metastatic
and nonmetastatic cells, suggesting the existence of an HMGA1a PTM code analogous
to the "histone code." In this study, we expand on current knowledge by
comprehensively characterizing PTMs on HMGA1a purified from human cells using
both nanoflow liquid chromatography collision activated dissociation mediated
Bottom Up and electron-transfer dissociation facilitated middle and Top Down mass
spectrometry (MS). We find HMGA1a to be pervasively modified with many types of
modifications such as methylation, acetylation, and phosphorylation, including
finding novel sites. While Bottom Up MS identified lower level modification
sites, Top and Middle Down MS were utilized to identify the most commonly
occurring combinatorially modified forms. Remarkably, although we identify
several individual modification sites through our Bottom Up and Middle Down MS
analyses, we find relatively few combinatorially modified forms dominate the
population through Top Down proteomics. The main combinatorial PTMs we find
through the Top Down approach are N-terminal acetylation, Arg25 methylation along
with phosphorylation of the three most C-terminal serine residues in primarily a 
diphosphorylated form. This report presents one of the most detailed analyses of 
HMGA1a to date and illustrates the strength of using a combined MS effort.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3321734
PMID: 20202861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 May;30(9):2220-8. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00114-10. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

HMGA1a trapping of U1 snRNP at an authentic 5' splice site induces aberrant exon 
skipping in sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Ohe K(1), Mayeda A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science (ICMS), Fujita Health University, 
1-98 Dengakugakubo, Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan.

Overexpression of high-mobility group A protein 1a (HMGA1a) causes aberrant exon 
5 skipping of the Presenilin-2 (PS2) pre-mRNA, which is almost exclusively
detected in patients with sporadic Alzheimer's disease. An electrophoretic
mobility shift assay confirmed aberrant U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein
particle (snRNP)-HMGA1a complex formation (via the U1-70K component), with RNA
containing a specific HMGA1a-binding site and an adjacent 5' splice site.
Psoralen cross-linking analysis demonstrated that the binding of HMGA1a adjacent 
to the 5' splice site induces unusually extended association of U1 snRNP to the
5' splice site. As a result, spliceosome assembly across either the intron or the
exon is arrested at an early ATP-independent stage. We conclude that the
HMGA1a-induced aberrant exon skipping is caused by impaired dissociation of U1
snRNP from the 5' splice site, leading to a defect in exon definition. The
proposed molecular mechanism has profound implications for other known
posttranscriptional modulation strategies in various organisms, all of which are 
triggered by aberrant U1 snRNP binding.

PMCID: PMC2863597
PMID: 20194618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jun 1;19(11):2303-12. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq091. Epub 2010 Feb 
26.

A genome-wide association study in 19 633 Japanese subjects identified LHX3-QSOX2
and IGF1 as adult height loci.

Okada Y(1), Kamatani Y, Takahashi A, Matsuda K, Hosono N, Ohmiya H, Daigo Y,
Yamamoto K, Kubo M, Nakamura Y, Kamatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research,
RIKEN, Kanagawa, Japan.

Previous genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified several loci
associated with human height; however, such evidence was mostly reported in
Caucasian populations. Since the different distributions of height between
populations suggest their different genetic backgrounds, analysis in different
populations would be useful. Here, we present the results of a GWAS for adult
height in 19 633 Japanese subjects. We found eight significantly associated loci 
that satisfied the genome-wide significance level (P < 5.0 x 10(-8)). Of these,
the association to the LHX3-QSOX2 locus was entirely novel (rs12338076, P = 2.2 x
10(-8)). We also identified the association to the IGF1 locus (rs17032362, P =
8.1 x 10(-9)). Conditional association analysis in the IGF1 locus with rs17032362
suggested the existence of an additional independent association with height to
this locus (rs1457595, P = 1.2 x 10(-5)). We observed large differences in the
allele frequencies of rs17032362 and rs1457595 between Japanese (34 and 9%,
respectively) and Caucasian (1.7 and 0%, respectively) populations, thereby
suggesting weak statistical powers for the IGF1 locus in the previous Caucasian
GWASs for height. We extensively compared our results with those of previous
reports on the Caucasian and Korean populations. We were able to replicate all
four loci previously reported in Koreans (EFEMP1, ZBTB38, HMGA1 and PLAG1, P <
5.0 x 10(-8)) and 15 loci identified in Caucasians (P < 0.001). The combination
of the height-associated loci identified in our study and the previous GWASs
demonstrated an effect size of 1.26 cm (95% confidence interval: 1.18-1.34) per
1.0 increase of the normalized Z score for height-increasing alleles, explaining 
4.6% of the total variance of adult height.

PMID: 20189936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Genes Cancer. 2010 Mar;1(3):210-24. doi: 10.1177/1947601910366860.

Identification of a New Pathway for Tumor Progression: MicroRNA-181b
Up-Regulation and CBX7 Down-Regulation by HMGA1 Protein.

Mansueto G(1), Forzati F, Ferraro A, Pallante P, Bianco M, Esposito F, Iaccarino 
A, Troncone G, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Università di Napoli "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.

High mobility group A (HMGA) overexpression plays a critical role in neoplastic
transformation. To investigate whether HMGA acts by regulating the expression of 
microRNAs, we analyzed the microRNA expression profile of human breast
adenocarcinoma cells (MCF7) transfected with the HMGA1 gene, which results in a
highly malignant phenotype. Among the microRNAs induced by HMGA1, we focused on
miR-181b, which was overexpressed in several malignant neoplasias including
breast carcinomas. We show that miR-181b regulates CBX7 protein levels, which are
down-regulated in cancer, and promotes cell cycle progression. We also
demonstrate that CBX7, being negatively regulated by HMGA, is able to negatively 
regulate miR-181b expression. Finally, there was a direct correlation between
HMGA1 and miR-181b expression and an inverse correlation between HMGA1 and CBX7
expression in human breast carcinomas. These data indicate the presence of a
novel pathway involving HMGA1, miR-181b, and CBX7, which leads to breast cancer
progression.

PMCID: PMC3092193
PMID: 21779448  [PubMed]


241. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Mar 10;58(5):2812-7. doi: 10.1021/jf904255b.

Comparison of five endogenous reference genes for specific PCR detection and
quantification of Brassica napus.

Wu G(1), Zhang L, Wu Y, Cao Y, Lu C.

Author information: 
(1)Oil Crops Research Institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Key Laboratory of Oil Crop Biology of the Ministry of Agriculture, No. 2 Xudong
Second Road, Wuhan, 430062, China.

Five previously reported Brassica napus endogenous reference genes, including
acetyl-CoA carboxylase gene (BnACCg8), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEP),
oleoyl hydrolase gene (FatA), high-mobility-group protein I/Y gene (HMG-I/Y) and 
cruciferin A gene (CruA), were analyzed for their PCR specificity between B.
napus and other species and the quantification stability among different B. napus
cultivars. PCR and sequencing results indicated that none of these systems was
species-specific as required by the genetically modified organism labeling
policy. When these genes were employed in real-time PCR, BnACCg8 and HMG-I/Y
systems showed relatively greater heterogeneity among 10 different cultivars. The
sequencing results showed that the single nucleotide polymorphism in the primer
binding sites was the potential source of the instability in the HMG-I/Y system. 
The bias of BnACCg8 was thought to be associated with the inconsistent copy
number of this gene.

PMID: 20143854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):436-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1212. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

The high mobility group A1 gene: transforming inflammatory signals into cancer?

Resar LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21205-2109., USA. lresar@jhmi.edu

High mobility group A1 (HMGA1) is highly expressed during embryogenesis and in
poorly differentiated cancers, and high levels portend a poor prognosis in some
tumors. HMGA1 induces oncogenic transformation in cultured cells and causes
aggressive cancers in transgenic mice, whereas blocking it interferes with
transformation in experimental models. These findings suggest a pivotal role for 
HMGA1 in cancer. This review focuses on two recently described HMGA1
transcriptional targets that mediate inflammatory signals and drive malignant
transformation because they could serve as biomarkers or therapeutic targets.
Further elucidation of HMGA1 function in transformation promises to have a major 
impact on our war on cancer.

PMCID: PMC2807996
PMID: 20068164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Hum Pathol. 2010 Apr;41(4):493-502. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.08.022. Epub 2009
Dec 11.

Correlation of overexpression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 with poor tumor differentiation,
invasion, and proliferation associated with let-7 down-regulation in
retinoblastomas.

Mu G(1), Liu H, Zhou F, Xu X, Jiang H, Wang Y, Qu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Jinan Central Hospital affiliated to Shandong
University, No. 105, Jiefang Road, Jinan 250013, China.

In addition to RB1, the causative genes involved in the tumorigenesis and
progression of retinoblastomas remain to be elucidated. High-mobility group A1
and high-mobility group A2 proteins are expressed at high levels in various
benign and malignant tumors and are associated with expressions of malignant
phenotypes and poor prognoses. Reduction in let-7 expression levels was detected 
in cancers; it may be related to high-mobility group A1 and high-mobility group
A2 overexpressions. Little is known about the correlations among high-mobility
group A1, high-mobility group A2, and let-7 expression and clinicopathologic
features of retinoblastoma. In our study, the expressions of high-mobility group 
A1 and high-mobility group A2 were studied in 44 retinoblastomas by
immunohistochemical analysis. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction was used to assay the let-7 expression levels in 28 nontumor
retina and 44 tumor samples. Nuclear immunostaining of high-mobility group A1 and
high-mobility group A2 was frequently observed in retinoblastomas (68% and 75%,
respectively). Expression levels of both high-mobility group A1 and high-mobility
group A2 were significantly higher in poorly differentiated retinoblastomas than 
in well-differentiated retinoblastomas (P < .05 and P < .0001, respectively). In 
addition, overexpressions of high-mobility group A1 and high-mobility group A2
were more frequently detected in poorly differentiated tumors than in
well-differentiated tumors (P < .01 and P = .0001, respectively). High-mobility
group A2 expression levels were significantly higher in invasive tumors than in
noninvasive tumors (P < .05). In addition, the MIB-1 labeling index was higher in
poorly differentiated tumors than in well-differentiated tumors (P < .0001). Our 
study revealed that high-mobility group A1 and high-mobility group A2 expressions
correlated with the MIB-1 labeling index (R = 0.327, P = .029; R = 0.602, P <
.0001; respectively). The let-7 was expressed in high levels in all 28 nontumor
retina samples. However, reduced expression levels of let-7 were observed in 17
(39%) tumors. A potentially inverse correlation exists between the expression
levels of let-7 and high-mobility group A1 (r = -0.247, P = .105). In addition, a
significantly inverse association was detected between let-7 and high-mobility
group A2 and MIB-1 labeling index (r = -0.31, P = .04; r = -0.392, P = .007,
respectively). Our findings imply that the overexpressions of high-mobility group
A1, high-mobility group A2, and down-regulation of let-7 may be associated with
tumorigenesis and progression of retinoblastomas.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20004941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Jan 1;196(1):64-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.09.003.

Fusion of HMGA1 to the LPP/TPRG1 intergenic region in a lipoma identified by
mapping paraffin-embedded tissues.

Wang X(1), Zamolyi RQ, Zhang H, Pannain VL, Medeiros F, Erickson-Johnson M,
Jenkins RB, Oliveira AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Ordinary lipoma frequently harbors rearrangement of HMGA2. LPP is the most common
partner gene to HMGA2, but has not been seen fused to HMGA1. We report the fusion
of HMGA1 to the intergenic region between LPP and TPRG1 in a lipoma. Conventional
cytogenetic analysis of an abdominal-wall lipoma diagnosed in a 60-year-old woman
showed a t(3;6)(q27;p21). Molecular cytogenetic mapping of available
paraffin-embedded tissues revealed the fusion of HMGA1 to a 139-kb genomic region
between the LPP and TPRG1 loci. No rearrangement of HMGA2 was found. The
biological function of this novel fusion could be similar to the role of
HMGA2-LPP in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19963137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 24;4(11):e8004. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008004.

HMGA1a recognition candidate DNA sequences in humans.

Manabe T(1), Katayama T, Tohyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Expression Mechanism, Institute for Comprehensive Medical
Science, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. manabe@fujita-hu.ac.jp

High mobility group protein A1a (HMGA1a) acts as an architectural transcription
factor and influences a diverse array of normal biological processes. It binds
AT-rich sequences, and previous reports have demonstrated HMGA1a binding to the
authentic promoters of various genes. However, the precise sequences that HMGA1a 
binds to remain to be clarified. Therefore, in this study, we searched for the
sequences with the highest affinity for human HMGA1a using an existing SELEX
method, and then compared the identified sequences with known human promoter
sequences. Based on our results, we propose the sequences
"-(G/A)-G-(A/T)-(A/T)-A-T-T-T-" as HMGA1a-binding candidate sequences.
Furthermore, these candidate sequences bound native human HMGA1a from SK-N-SH
cells. When candidate sequences were analyzed by performing FASTAs against all
known human promoter sequences, 500-900 sequences were hit by each one. Some of
the extracted genes have already been proven or suggested as HMGA1a-binding
promoters. The candidate sequences presented here represent important information
for research into the various roles of HMGA1a, including cell differentiation,
death, growth, proliferation, and the pathogenesis of cancer.

PMCID: PMC2777381
PMID: 19956671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Jan-Feb;1799(1-2):93-100. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.11.018. Epub 2009 Nov 27.

Signalling to chromatin through post-translational modifications of HMGN.

Pogna EA(1), Clayton AL, Mahadevan LC.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Signalling Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK.

The DNA of eukaryotic genomes is highly packaged by its organisation into
chromatin, the fundamental repeating unit of which is the nucleosome core
particle, consisting of 147 base pairs of DNA wrapped around an octamer of two
copies each of the four core histone proteins H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 (K. Luger, A.W.
Mader, R.K. Richmond, D.F. Sargent, T.J. Richmond, Crystal structure of the
nucleosome core particle at 2.8 A resolution, Nature 389 (1997) 251-260 [1] and
references therein). Accessibility of DNA within chromatin is a central factor
that affects DNA-dependent nuclear function such as transcription, replication,
recombination and repair. To integrate complex signalling networks associated
with these events, many protein and multi-protein complexes associate transiently
with nucleosomes. One class of such are the High-Mobility Group (HMG) proteins
which are architectural DNA and nucleosome-binding proteins that may be
subdivided into three families; HMGA (HMGI/Y/C), HMGB (HMG1/2) and HMGN
(HMG14/17). The structure of chromatin and nucleosomes can be altered, both
locally and globally, by interaction with such architectural proteins thereby
influencing accessibility of DNA. This chapter deals with the HMGN protein
family, specifically their post-translational modification as part of regulatory 
networks. We focus particularly on HMGN1, the most extensively studied family
member to date, and to a lesser extent on HMGN2. We critically evaluate evidence 
for the role of post-translational modification of these proteins in response to 
different signals, exploring the sites and potential significance of such
modification.

Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 19948258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. IUBMB Life. 2009 Dec;61(12):1153-8. doi: 10.1002/iub.271.

Nuclear protein 1 induced by ATF4 in response to various stressors acts as a
positive regulator on the transcriptional activation of ATF4.

Jin HO(1), Seo SK, Woo SH, Choe TB, Hong SI, Kim JI, Park IC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Nowon-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Nuclear protein 1 (NUPR1) was originally identified as p8, a member of the family
of HMG-I/Y transcription factors induced in response to various cellular
stressors. However, the signaling pathway underlying NUPR1 induction by cellular 
stresses remains to be established. In this study, we found that the expression
of NUPR1 by various stresses induced by activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4).
Loss of ATF4 using siRNA significantly diminished NUPR1 expression.
Overexpression of ATF4 caused NUPR1 levels to rise. NUPR1 expression was
associated with enhanced transcriptional activation of genes of ATF4 downstream, 
suggesting that the protein promoted the transcription of stress-regulated genes 
via positive feedback on the ATF4 pathway.

(c) 2009 IUBMB

PMID: 19946894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cancer Invest. 2010 May;28(4):340-9. doi: 10.3109/07357900903286933.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein expression correlates with
cisplatin-induced cell death in squamous cell carcinoma of skin.

Sharma A(1), Ray R, Rajeswari MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

It is well known that HMGA1 group of non-histone chromosomal proteins are
up-regulated in several human cancers. We studied the HMGA1 expression in
squamous cell carcinoma of skin in mice followed by the treatment with Cisplatin,
which is often used in combination therapies of cancers. A short course of
Cisplatin treatment led to apoptotic cell death and downregulation (by 40%) of
HMGA1. However, extended treatment of Cisplatin caused necrotic cell death;
concomitantly HMGA1 expression decreased by 90%. Present results indicate a
strong association of HMGA1 with Cisplatin-linked tumor regression. Therefore,
HMGA1 could be a potential target in designing therapeutic strategies against
cancer.

PMID: 19916743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Nov;7(11):1803-12. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0336. Epub 
2009 Nov 10.

Upregulation of MMP-2 by HMGA1 promotes transformation in undifferentiated,
large-cell lung cancer.

Hillion J(1), Wood LJ, Mukherjee M, Bhattacharya R, Di Cello F, Kowalski J,
Elbahloul O, Segal J, Poirier J, Rudin CM, Dhara S, Belton A, Joseph B, Zucker S,
Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Although lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide, the precise 
molecular mechanisms that give rise to lung cancer are incompletely understood.
Here, we show that HMGA1 is an important oncogene that drives transformation in
undifferentiated, large-cell carcinoma. First, we show that the HMGA1 gene is
overexpressed in lung cancer cell lines and primary human lung tumors. Forced
overexpression of HMGA1 induces a transformed phenotype with
anchorage-independent cell growth in cultured lung cells derived from normal
tissue. Conversely, inhibiting HMGA1 expression blocks anchorage-independent cell
growth in the H1299 metastatic, undifferentiated, large-cell human lung carcinoma
cells. We also show that the matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) gene is a
downstream target upregulated by HMGA1 in large-cell carcinoma cells. In
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, HMGA1 binds directly to the MMP-2
promoter in vivo in large-cell lung cancer cells, but not in squamous cell
carcinoma cells. In large-cell carcinoma cell lines, there is a significant,
positive correlation between HMGA1 and MMP-2 mRNA. Moreover, interfering with
MMP-2 expression blocks anchorage-independent cell growth in H1299 large-cell
carcinoma cells, indicating that the HMGA1-MMP-2 pathway is required for this
transformation phenotype in these cells. Blocking MMP-2 expression also inhibits 
migration and invasion in the H1299 large-cell carcinoma cells. Our findings
suggest an important role for MMP-2 in transformation mediated by HMGA1 in
large-cell, undifferentiated lung carcinoma and support the development of
strategies to target this pathway in selected tumors.

PMCID: PMC3069640
PMID: 19903768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Eur J Cancer. 2010 Jan;46(2):332-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2009.10.015. Epub 2009
Nov 5.

HMGA1 protein expression in familial breast carcinoma patients.

Chiappetta G(1), Ottaiano A, Vuttariello E, Monaco M, Galdiero F, Gallipoli A,
Pilotti S, Jodice G, Siranoush M, Colombo M, Ripamonti CB, Pallante PL, Radice P,
Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Fondazione Pascale, 80131 Naples, Italy.
chiappetta.osd@fondazionepascale.it

HMGA protein overexpression is associated with a highly malignant phenotype and
it is also causally related to neoplastic cell transformation. Our previous
results have shown that HMGA1 was not expressed in normal breast tissue whereas
HMGA1 staining was intense in 25% of hyperplastic lesions with cellular atypia
and in 60% of sporadic ductal carcinomas. Moreover, HMGA1 protein levels were
significantly correlated with c-Erb-B2 expression. These results suggested HMGA1 
expression as a novel prognostic factor in breast ductal carcinomas. In order to 
investigate whether the HMGA1 detection might have a prognostic role also for
inherited breast carcinomas we have analysed the expression of the HMGA1 proteins
in 116 breast familial carcinomas associated with BRCA1 or BRCA2 or negative for 
mutations in both genes (BRCAX). HMGA1 expression was weakly positive in 23
(20%), moderately positive in 34 (29%) and strongly positive in 20 (17%) breast
carcinomas, and was not detected in 39 of them (34%). Statistical analysis of the
immunostaining data showed that HMGA1 was significantly overexpressed, with a
more intense staining, in BRCA2 (p=0.0009) and BRCAX (p=0.0134) patients compared
to BRCA1 ones. Furthermore, in BRCA2 positive patients, the expression of HMGA1
seems to correlate with a favourable prognosis with a median overall survival of 
65 months and a 5-year survival rate of 80% for HMGA1-negative patients, while
median overall survival in the HMGA1-positive subsets was not reached with 5-year
survival rates ranging from 84% to 100% of patients (p=0.0198). Conversely, no
correlation was found between HMGA1 expression and overall survival in patients
carrying inherited mutations in the BRCA1 and in BRCAX patients.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19896837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Surgeon. 2009 Oct;7(5):297-306.

High mobility group A: a novel biomarker and therapeutic target in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma.

Liau SS(1), Whang E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge.
liauss@doctors.org.uk

High mobility group A1 (HMGA1) proteins are architectural transcriptional factors
that are over-expressed in a wide range of human malignancies. Recently published
evidence suggests HMGA1 is a promising candidate biomarker and therapeutic target
in pancreatic cancer. This review summarises data implicating HMGA1 as an
important mediator of progression in human cancer and in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3064443
PMID: 19848064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Mar;336(1-2):97-107. doi: 10.1007/s11010-009-0257-4. Epub 
2009 Oct 14.

Insulin resistance due to lipid-induced signaling defects could be prevented by
mahanine.

Biswas A(1), Bhattacharya S, Dasgupta S, Kundu R, Roy SS, Pal BC, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, School
of Life Science, Visva-Bharati (A Central University), Santiniketan, 731235, West
Bengal, India.

It is well known that free fatty acids (FFAs) play a key role in implementing
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Resources of chemical compounds that
intervene the derogatory effect of FFAs are indeed very limited. We have isolated
mahanine, a carbazole alkaloid, from the leaves of Murraya koenegii that
prevented palmitate-induced inhibition of insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of
IRbeta, PI3K, PDK1, and Akt in L6 myotubes. This was also reflected in the
palmitate-induced inhibition of insulin-stimulated [(3)H] 2-DOG uptake by L6
myotubes, where palmitate adverse effect was significantly blocked by mahanine.
Previous reports indicated that one of the major targets of lipid-induced damage 
in insulin signaling pathway resulting impairment of insulin sensitivity is
insulin receptor (IR). Here, we have observed that palmitate significantly
increased pPKCepsilon in both cytosol and nuclear region of L6 myotubes in
comparison to control. Translocation of pPKCepsilon to the nucleus was associated
with the impairment of HMGA1, the architectural transcription factor of IR gene
and all these were reversed by mahanine. Palmitate-induced activation of
IKK/IkappaBeta/NF-kappaBeta pathway was also attenuated by mahanine. Taken
together, mahanine showed encouraging possibility to deal with lipid induced
insulin resistance. In order to examine it further, mahanine was administered on 
nutritionally induced type 2 diabetic golden hamsters; it significantly improved 
hyperglycemia in all the treated animals. Our results, therefore, suggest that
mahanine acts on two important sites of lipid induced insulin resistance (i)
impairment of IR gene expression and (ii) activation of NF-kappaBeta pathway,
thus, showing promise for its therapeutic choice for type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 19826769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jan;23(1):98-104. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.139. Epub 2009 Oct
9.

HMGA1 correlates with advanced tumor grade and decreased survival in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma.

Hristov AC(1), Cope L, Di Cello F, Reyes MD, Singh M, Hillion JA, Belton A,
Joseph B, Schuldenfrei A, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Maitra A, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Although pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is a common and almost uniformly fatal 
cancer, little is known about the molecular events that lead to tumor
progression. The high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein is an architectural
transcription factor that has been implicated in the pathogenesis and progression
of diverse human cancers, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In this
study, we investigated HMGA1 expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell 
lines and surgically resected tumors to determine whether it could be a marker
for more advanced disease. By real-time quantitative RT-PCR, we measured HMGA1a
mRNA in cultured pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines and found increased 
levels in all cancer cells compared with normal pancreatic tissue. To investigate
HMGA1 in primary human tumors, we performed immunohistochemical analysis of 125
cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma and 99 precursor lesions (PanIN 1-3). We found
nuclear staining for HMGA1 in 98% of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma, but only
43% of cases of PanIN precursor lesions. Moreover, HMGA1 immunoreactivity
correlates positively with decreased survival and advanced tumor and PanIN grade.
These results suggest that HMGA1 promotes tumor progression in pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma and could be a useful biomarker and rational therapeutic target in
advanced disease.

PMCID: PMC3092591
PMID: 19820691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Hum Gene Ther. 2010 Feb;21(2):221-37. doi: 10.1089/hum.2009.133.

Functional efficacy of dystrophin expression from plasmids delivered to mdx mice 
by hydrodynamic limb vein injection.

Zhang G(1), Wooddell CI, Hegge JO, Griffin JB, Huss T, Braun S, Wolff JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Medical Genetics, Waisman Center,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

In these studies we delivered by hydrodynamic limb vein (HLV) injection plasmid
DNA (pDNA) expressing the full-length mouse dystrophin gene to skeletal muscles
throughout the hind limbs of the mdx mouse model for Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
(DMD). We evaluated the levels and stability of dystrophin expression and
measured the resulting muscle protection, using Evans blue dye (EBD) to mark the 
damaged myofibers. Plasmid delivery was as efficient in the dystrophic mice as in
wild-type mice and equally efficient in young adult and old mice, as long as the 
dose of pDNA was adjusted for the target muscle weight. The HLV gene delivery
procedure was tolerated well by the dystrophic mice and repeat injections could
be performed over an extended period of time. Multiple gene deliveries additively
increased the amount of dystrophin protein and also increased the percentages of 
dystrophin-expressing myofibers. Plasmids expressing dystrophin from a
cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter construct containing the HMG1 intron provided
stable dystrophin expression for the life of the mouse and provided significant
benefit to the limbs. EBD staining showed that dystrophin gene delivery preserved
myofibers in the CMV-HMGi-mDys-injected leg by 2.5- to 5-fold in large groups of 
muscles and by 2.5-fold throughout the injected legs, compared with the
contralateral control legs injected with a nonexpressing plasmid. A similar
degree of protection was measured in young adult mice evaluated soon after the
last gene delivery and in aged mice injected over an extended period of time.
This degree of protection resulted from 18 to 20% of the normal level of
dystrophin protein, with 11-16% dystrophin-expressing myofibers. These studies
show promise for the use of HLV injections to deliver therapeutic doses of
full-length dystrophin-expressing plasmids for long-lasting protection of
skeletal muscles in patients with DMD.

PMID: 19788386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Int J Oncol. 2009 Nov;35(5):1037-43.

Synergistic effects of lovastatin and celecoxib on caveolin-1 and its down-stream
signaling molecules: Implications for colon cancer prevention.

Guruswamy S(1), Rao CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hem-Onc Section, University of Oklahoma Cancer
Institute, OUHSC, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Progression of colon cancer is associated with the up-regulation of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and hydroxymethyl glutaryl CoA reductase (HMG-R).
Clinical and preclinical evidence shows that a combination of COX-2 and HMG-R
inhibitors provide additive/synergistic chemopreventive effects against
colorectal cancer. However, the mechanism by which statins and NSAIDs inhibit
cancer growth is not yet fully understood. We aimed to identify critical
molecules and signal pathways modulated by a combination of lovastatin and
celecoxib in the human HCT-116 colon cancer cell line. HCT-116 cells were exposed
to 50 microM celecoxib, 25 microM lovastatin or a combination of both to assess
their effect in modulating caveolin-1 expression and its down-stream signaling
pathways. Our results suggest that a combination of lovastatin and/or celecoxib
suppressed caveolin-1 expression and membrane localization profoundly when
compared to either agent alone. Lovastatin and/or celecoxib also inhibited
caveolin-1-dependent cell survival signals mediated through Akt activation as
well as its down-stream effectors such as phosphorylated ERK and STAT3 in HCT-116
cells. Treatment with lovastatin or celecoxib decreased the levels of cyclin D1, 
CDK2, pRb and E2F1, while the combination treatment showed more pronounced
suppression. In addition, lovastatin and celecoxib also decreased the amount of
cholesterol rich cytoplasmic lipid bodies (storehouses of esteridied
arachidonates) by 80%, while the combination showed a complete inhibition.
Overall, our data suggest that a combination of COX-2 and HMG-R inhibitors
synergistically inhibits caveolin-1 and its associated signaling pathways.

PMID: 19787257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Nov 1;108(4):791-801. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22281.

The nuclear architectural protein HMGA1a triggers receptor-mediated endocytosis.

Wu W(1), Wan W, Li AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Materials Research, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington 99164, USA.

High mobility group proteins A (HMGA), nuclear architectural factors, locate in
the cell nuclei and mostly execute gene-regulation function. However, our results
reveal that a HMGA member (HMGA1a) has a unique plasma membrane receptor; this
receptor specifically binds to HMGA-decorated species, effectively mediates
endocytosis, and internalizes extracellular HMGA-functionalized cargoes. Indeed, 
dyes or nanoparticles labeled with HMGA1a protein readily enter Hela cells. Using
a stratagem chemical cross-linker, we covalently bonded the HMGA receptor to the 
HMGA1a-GFP fusion protein, thus capturing the plasma membrane receptor.
Subsequent Western blots and SDS-PAGE gel revealed that the HMGA receptor is a
26-kDa protein. Confocal live-cell microscopic imaging was used to monitor the
whole endocytic process, in which the internalized HMGA1a-decorated species are
transported by motor proteins on microtubules and eventually arrive at the late
endosomes/lysosomes. Cell viability assays also suggested that extracellular
HMGA1a protein directly influences the survival ability of Hela cells in a
dose-dependent manner, implying versatility of HMGA1a protein and its potent role
to suppress cancer cell survivability and to regulate growth.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19739099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Am J Pathol. 2009 Oct;175(4):1675-85. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.090069. Epub 2009 
Sep 3.

HMGA1 is induced by Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and maintains cell proliferation in 
gastric cancer.

Akaboshi S(1), Watanabe S, Hino Y, Sekita Y, Xi Y, Araki K, Yamamura K, Oshima M,
Ito T, Baba H, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The development of stomach cancer is closely associated with chronic
inflammation, and the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is activated in most
cases of this cancer. High-mobility group A (HMGA) proteins are oncogenic
chromatin factors that are primarily expressed not only in undifferentiated
tissues but also in various tumors. Here we report that HMGA1 is induced by the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and maintains proliferation of gastric cancer cells.
Specific knockdown of HMGA1 resulted in marked reduction of cell growth. The loss
of beta-catenin or its downstream c-myc decreased HMGA1 expression, whereas Wnt3a
treatment increased HMGA1 and c-myc transcripts. Furthermore, Wnt3a-induced
expression of HMGA1 was inhibited by c-myc knockdown, suggesting that HMGA1 is a 
downstream target of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Enhanced expression of HMGA1
coexisted with the nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin in about 30% of gastric
cancer tissues. To visualize the expression of HMGA1 in vivo, transgenic mice
expressing endogenous HMGA1 fused to enhanced green fluorescent protein were
generated and then crossed with K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, which develop gastric tumors 
through activation of both the Wnt and prostaglandin E2 pathways. Expression of
HMGA1-enhanced green fluorescent protein was normally detected in the
forestomach, along the upper border of the glandular stomach, but its expression 
was also up-regulated in cancerous glandular stomach. These data suggest that
HMGA1 is involved in proliferation and gastric tumor formation via the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.

PMCID: PMC2751563
PMID: 19729480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;29(20):5426-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00105-09. Epub 2009 Aug 
17.

HMGA1 levels influence mitochondrial function and mitochondrial DNA repair
efficiency.

Mao L(1), Wertzler KJ, Maloney SC, Wang Z, Magnuson NS, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University,
Biotechnology/Life Sciences Bldg., Rm. 143, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

HMGA chromatin proteins, a family of gene regulatory factors found at only low
concentrations in normal cells, are almost universally overexpressed in cancer
cells. HMGA proteins are located in the nuclei of normal cells except during the 
late S/G(2) phases of the cell cycle, when HMGA1, one of the members of the
family, reversibly migrates to the mitochondria, where it binds to mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA). In many cancer cells, this controlled shuttling is lost and HMGA1 is
found in mitochondria throughout the cell cycle. To investigate the effects of
HMGA1 on mitochondria, we employed a genetically engineered line of human MCF-7
cells in which the levels of transgenic HMGA1 protein could be reversibly
controlled. "Turn-ON" and "turn-OFF" time course experiments were performed with 
these cells to either increase or decrease intracellular HMGA1 levels, and
various mitochondrial changes were monitored. Results demonstrated that changes
in both mtDNA levels and mitochondrial mass inversely paralleled changes in HMGA1
concentrations, strongly implicating HMGA1 in the regulation of these parameters.
Additionally, the level of cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) increased and
the efficiency of repair of oxidatively damaged mtDNA decreased as consequences
of elevated HMGA1 expression. Increased ROS levels and reduced repair efficiency 
in HMGA1-overexpressing cells likely contribute to the increased occurrence of
mutations in mtDNA frequently observed in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2756874
PMID: 19687300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biol. 2009;8(7):64. doi: 10.1186/jbiol164. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

From bending DNA to diabetes: the curious case of HMGA1.

Semple RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of Metabolic Science, University of
Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QR, UK. rks16@cam.ac.uk

Although mice lacking the architectural DNA binding factor HMGA1 are diabetic and
express very low levels of the insulin receptor, they have increased insulin
sensitivity. A study in BMC Biology now suggests that changes in circulating
retinol binding protein partly account for this paradox.

PMCID: PMC2736670
PMID: 19664187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 18;284(38):25993-6004. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.034280. Epub
2009 Jul 26.

Interaction between HMGA1 and retinoblastoma protein is required for adipocyte
differentiation.

Esposito F(1), Pierantoni GM, Battista S, Melillo RM, Scala S, Chieffi P, Fedele 
M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia di Napoli, Università degli Studi
di Napoli Federico II, Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.

It is generally accepted that the regulation of adipogenesis prevents obesity.
However, the mechanisms controlling adipogenesis have not been completely
defined. We have previously demonstrated that HMGA1 proteins play a critical role
in adipogenesis. In fact, suppression of HMGA1 protein synthesis by antisense
technology dramatically increased growth rate and impaired adipocyte
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Furthermore, we showed that HMGA1 strongly
potentiates the capacity of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta)
transcriptional factor to transactivate the leptin promoter, an
adipocytic-specific promoter. In this study we demonstrate that HMGA1 physically 
interacts with retinoblastoma protein (RB), which is also required in adipocyte
differentiation. Moreover, we show that RB, C/EBPbeta, and HMGA1 proteins all
cooperate in controlling both Id1 and leptin gene transcriptions, which are down-
and up-regulated during adipocyte differentiation, respectively. We also
demonstrate that HMGA1/RB interaction regulates CDC25A and CDC6 promoter
activities, which are induced by E2F-1 protein during early adipocyte
differentiation, by displacing HDAC1 from the RB-E2F1 complex. Furthermore, by
using Hmga1(-/-) embryonic stem cells, which failed to undergo adipocyte
differentiation, we show the crucial role of HMGA1 proteins in adipocyte
differentiation due to its pivotal involvement in the formation of the
RB-C/EBPbeta complex. Altogether these data demonstrate a key role of the
interaction between HMGA1 and RB in adipocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2758000
PMID: 19633359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2009 Nov;24(11):1281-6. doi: 10.1007/s00384-009-0770-7.
Epub 2009 Jul 17.

Gene expressions of HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) are associated with stage and metastasis
in colorectal cancer.

Huang ML(1), Chen CC, Chang LC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Proctology, Department of Surgery, ZuoYing Armed Forces General
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Comment in
    Int J Colorectal Dis. 2010 May;25(5):661.

PURPOSE: The high mobility group proteins (HMGs) include the HMGI family members 
HMGI-C and HMGI(Y), whose expressions in adult tissues generally correlate with
malignant tumor phenotypes. The aim of this study was to assess the relationship 
of HMGI-C or HMGI(Y) gene expression and prognosis in colorectal cancer patients.
METHODS: The gene expressions of HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) in 31 paired samples of
colorectal tumor and corresponding non-tumor were determined by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The expression of HMGI(Y) in a colorectal cancer tumor was associated
with Dukes staging (p = 0.044), while, in non-tumor, the expression of this gene 
was significant with metastasis (p = 0.003). Patients with Dukes stage A and B
present high HMGI(Y) expression in non-tumor of colorectal cancer (p = 0.006).
However, patients with Dukes stage C and D present high HMGI-C expression in
colorectal tumor (p = 0.023). In the non-metastasis group, HMGI(Y) was highly
expressed in non-tumor of colorectal cancer. However, in the metastasis group,
there was no significant difference between tumor and non-tumor tissues in both
HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) gene expressions.
CONCLUSIONS: The HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) quantitations by real-time RT-PCR are
associated with Dukes staging and metastasis; hence, the gene expression levels
may be useful in clinical practice.

PMID: 19609535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Aug;193(1):54-62. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.03.011.

Characterization of a recurrent t(1;2)(p36;p24) in human uterine leiomyoma.

van Rijk A(1), Sweers M, Huys E, Kersten M, Merkx G, van Kessel AG,
Debiec-Rychter M, Schoenmakers EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, and 
Nijmegen Center for Molecular Life Sciences, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Uterine leiomyomas are the most common neoplasms in women of reproductive age.
Approximately 40% of these neoplasms show recurring structural cytogenetic
anomalies, including del(7)(q22), t(12;14)(q15;q24), t(1;2)(p36;p24), and
anomalies affecting 6p21 or 10q22. Using positional cloning strategies, we and
others had previously identified HMGA1, HMGA2, RAD51L1, and MYST4 (previously
referred to as MORF); as primary target (fusion) genes associated with tumor
development in three of these distinct cytogenetic subgroups. Here, we report the
positional cloning of a single, recurrent, leiomyoma-associated anomaly,
t(1;2)(p36;p24). Molecular characterization of the reciprocal breakpoint
intervals showed that that AJAP1 (alias SHREW1) and NPHP4 flank the breakpoint on
chromosome 1 and that ITSN2 and NCOA1 flank the breakpoint on chromosome 2.
Detailed analysis of the breakpoint regions revealed that in this particular case
the translocation was associated with a 27-bp deletion on chromosome 1 and a
136-bp duplication on chromosome 2. No breakpoint-spanning (fusion) genes were
identified. In silico prediction of transcription factor binding sites, however, 
indicated the presence of several such sites in the respective breakpoint
regions, and major changes therein as a result of the t(1;2)(p36;p24) under
investigation. We postulate that transcriptional deregulation of one or more of
these breakpoint-flanking genes may contribute to the development of human
uterine leiomyomas.

PMID: 19602464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2009 Jun;15(6):534-7.

[Expression of high mobility group protein A in male mouse testicular cell
lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma ZB(1), Yang Y, Wang J, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710038, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression of high mobility group protein A (HMGA) in
male mouse testicular cell lines TM4, GC-1spg and GC-2spd(ts), and to pave the
theoretical ground for further investigation of the action mechanism of the HMGA 
gene in male mouse spermatogenesis.
METHODS: We detected the expressions of HMGA1 and HMGA2 by RT-PCR and Western
blot in the male mouse testicular cell lines TM4, GC-1spg and GC-2spd(ts).
RESULTS: HMGA1 and HMGA2 were expressed in the male mouse testicular cell lines
TM4, GC-1spg and GC-2spd(ts) at both mRNA and protein levels. Western blot and
RT-PCR methods showed similar results.
CONCLUSION: The expression of HMGA may be involved in the cell division and
proliferation of TM4, GC-1spg and GC-2spd(ts) and play an important role in
spermatogenesis of male mice.

PMID: 19593995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jul;37(13):4371-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp375. Epub 2009
May 21.

HMGA2 exhibits dRP/AP site cleavage activity and protects cancer cells from
DNA-damage-induced cytotoxicity during chemotherapy.

Summer H(1), Li O, Bao Q, Zhan L, Peter S, Sathiyanathan P, Henderson D, Klonisch
T, Goodman SD, Dröge P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomics and Genetics, School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.

HMGA proteins are not translated in normal human somatic cells, but are present
in high copy numbers in pluripotent embryonic stem cells and most neoplasias.
Correlations between the degree of malignancy, patient prognostic index and HMGA 
levels have been firmly established. Intriguingly, HMGA2 is also found in rare
tumor-inducing cells which are resistant to chemotherapy. Here, we demonstrate
that HMGA1a/b and HMGA2 possess intrinsic dRP and AP site cleavage activities,
and that lysines and arginines in the AT-hook DNA-binding domains function as
nucleophiles. We also show that HMGA2 can be covalently trapped at genomic abasic
sites in cancer cells. By employing a variety of cell-based assays, we provide
evidence that the associated lyase activities promote cellular resistance against
DNA damage that is targeted by base excision repair (BER) pathways, and that this
protection directly correlates with the level of HMGA2 expression. In addition,
we demonstrate an interaction between human AP endonuclease 1 and HMGA2 in cancer
cells, which supports our conclusion that HMGA2 can be incorporated into the
cellular BER machinery. Our study thus identifies an unexpected role for HMGA2 in
DNA repair in cancer cells which has important clinical implications for disease 
diagnosis and therapy.

PMCID: PMC2715238
PMID: 19465398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. BMC Biol. 2009 May 21;7:24. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-7-24.

The cAMP-HMGA1-RBP4 system: a novel biochemical pathway for modulating glucose
homeostasis.

Chiefari E(1), Paonessa F, Iiritano S, Le Pera I, Palmieri D, Brunetti G, Lupo A,
Colantuoni V, Foti D, Gulletta E, De Sarro G, Fusco A, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G. Salvatore, Catanzaro,
Italy. echiefari@libero.it

BACKGROUND: We previously showed that mice lacking the high mobility group A1
gene (Hmga1-knockout mice) developed a type 2-like diabetic phenotype, in which
cell-surface insulin receptors were dramatically reduced (below 10% of those in
the controls) in the major targets of insulin action, and glucose intolerance was
associated with increased peripheral insulin sensitivity. This particular
phenotype supports the existence of compensatory mechanisms of insulin resistance
that promote glucose uptake and disposal in peripheral tissues by either
insulin-dependent or insulin-independent mechanisms. We explored the role of
these mechanisms in the regulation of glucose homeostasis by studying the
Hmga1-knockout mouse model. Also, the hypothesis that increased insulin
sensitivity in Hmga1-deficient mice could be related to the deficit of an insulin
resistance factor is discussed.
RESULTS: We first show that HMGA1 is needed for basal and cAMP-induced
retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4) gene and protein expression in living cells of
both human and mouse origin. Then, by employing the Hmga1-knockout mouse model,
we provide evidence for the identification of a novel biochemical pathway
involving HMGA1 and the RBP4, whose activation by the cAMP-signaling pathway may 
play an essential role for maintaining glucose metabolism homeostasis in vivo, in
certain adverse metabolic conditions in which insulin action is precluded. In
comparative studies of normal and mutant mice, glucagon administration caused a
considerable upregulation of HMGA1 and RBP4 expression both at the mRNA and
protein level in wild-type animals. Conversely, in Hmga1-knockout mice, basal and
glucagon-mediated expression of RBP4 was severely attenuated and correlated
inversely with increased Glut4 mRNA and protein abundance in skeletal muscle and 
fat, in which the activation state of the protein kinase Akt, an important
downstream mediator of the metabolic effects of insulin on Glut4 translocation
and carbohydrate metabolism, was simultaneously increased.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that HMGA1 is an important modulator of RBP4
gene expression in vivo. Further, they provide evidence for the identification of
a novel biochemical pathway involving the cAMP-HMGA1-RBP4 system, whose
activation may play a role in glucose homeostasis in both rodents and humans.
Elucidating these mechanisms has importance for both fundamental biology and
therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC2698822
PMID: 19460132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Nov;41(11):2189-203. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.04.011. Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Transcriptional activity of the murine retinol-binding protein gene is regulated 
by a multiprotein complex containing HMGA1, p54 nrb/NonO, protein-associated
splicing factor (PSF) and steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1)/liver receptor homologue 1
(LRH-1).

Bianconcini A(1), Lupo A, Capone S, Quadro L, Monti M, Zurlo D, Fucci A, Sabatino
L, Brunetti A, Chiefari E, Gottesman ME, Blaner WS, Colantuoni V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biologiche ed Ambientali, Facoltà di Scienze
MM.FF.NN., Università del Sannio, Via Port'Arsa 11, 82100 Benevento, Italy.

Retinol-binding protein (RBP4) transports retinol in the circulation from hepatic
stores to peripheral tissues. Since little is known regarding the regulation of
this gene, we analysed the cis-regulatory sequences of the mouse RBP4 gene. Our
data show that transcription of the gene is regulated through a bipartite
promoter: a proximal region necessary for basal expression and a distal segment
responsible for cAMP-induction. This latter region contains several binding sites
for the structural HMGA1 proteins, which are important to promoter regulation. We
further demonstrate that HMGA1s play a key role in basal and cAMP-induction of
Rbp4 transcription and the RBP4 and HMGA1 genes are coordinately regulated in
vitro and in vivo. HMGA1 acts to recruit transcription factors to the RBP4
promoter and we specifically identified p54(nrb)/NonO and protein-associated
splicing factor (PSF) as components that interact with this complex.
Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1) or the related liver receptor homologue 1 (LRH-1)
are also associated with this complex upon cAMP-induction. Depletion of SF1/LRH-1
by RNA interference resulted in a dramatic loss of cAMP-induction. Collectively, 
our results demonstrate that basal and cAMP-induced Rbp4 transcription is
regulated by a multiprotein complex that is similar to ones that modulate
expression of genes of steroid hormone biosynthesis. Since genes related to
glucose metabolism are regulated in a similar fashion, this suggests that Rbp4
expression may be regulated as part of a network of pathways relevant to the
onset of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2753725
PMID: 19389484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Proteome Res. 2009 Jun;8(6):2978-89. doi: 10.1021/pr900087r.

Macroscopic differences in HMGA oncoproteins post-translational modifications:
C-terminal phosphorylation of HMGA2 affects its DNA binding properties.

Sgarra R(1), Maurizio E, Zammitti S, Lo Sardo A, Giancotti V, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

HMGA is a family of nuclear proteins involved in a huge number of functions at
the chromatin level. It consists of three members, HMGA1a, HMGA1b, and HMGA2,
having high sequence homology and sharing the same structural organization (three
highly conserved DNA-binding domains, an acidic C-terminal tail, and a
protein-protein interaction domain). They are considered important nodes in the
chromatin context, establishing a complex network of interactions with both
promoter/enhancer sequences and nuclear factors. They are involved in a plethora 
of biological processes and their activities are finely tuned by several
different post-translational modifications. We have performed an LC/MS screening 
on several different cell lines to investigate HMGA proteins expression and their
post-translational modifications in order to detect distinctive modification
patterns for each. Our analyses evidenced relevant macroscopic differences in the
phosphorylation and methylation patterns of these proteins. These differences
occur both within the HMGA family members and in the different cell types.
Focusing on HMGA2, we have mapped its in vivo phosphorylation sites demonstrating
that, similarly to the HMGA1 proteins, it is highly phosphorylated on the acidic 
C-terminal tail and that these modifications affect its DNA binding properties.

PMID: 19317492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004882. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

Regulation of clock-controlled genes in mammals.

Bozek K(1), Relógio A, Kielbasa SM, Heine M, Dame C, Kramer A, Herzel H.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany.

The complexity of tissue- and day time-specific regulation of thousands of
clock-controlled genes (CCGs) suggests that many regulatory mechanisms contribute
to the transcriptional output of the circadian clock. We aim to predict these
mechanisms using a large scale promoter analysis of CCGs.Our study is based on a 
meta-analysis of DNA-array data from rodent tissues. We searched in the promoter 
regions of 2065 CCGs for highly overrepresented transcription factor binding
sites. In order to compensate the relatively high GC-content of CCG promoters, a 
novel background model to avoid a bias towards GC-rich motifs was employed. We
found that many of the transcription factors with overrepresented binding sites
in CCG promoters exhibit themselves circadian rhythms. Among the predicted
factors are known regulators such as CLOCKratioBMAL1, DBP, HLF, E4BP4, CREB,
RORalpha and the recently described regulators HSF1, STAT3, SP1 and HNF-4alpha.
As additional promising candidates of circadian transcriptional regulators PAX-4,
C/EBP, EVI-1, IRF, E2F, AP-1, HIF-1 and NF-Y were identified. Moreover, GC-rich
motifs (SP1, EGR, ZF5, AP-2, WT1, NRF-1) and AT-rich motifs (MEF-2, HMGIY, HNF-1,
OCT-1) are significantly overrepresented in promoter regions of CCGs. Putative
tissue-specific binding sites such as HNF-3 for liver, NKX2.5 for heart or
Myogenin for skeletal muscle were found. The regulation of the erythropoietin
(Epo) gene was analysed, which exhibits many binding sites for circadian
regulators. We provide experimental evidence for its circadian regulated
expression in the adult murine kidney. Basing on a comprehensive literature
search we integrate our predictions into a regulatory network of core clock and
clock-controlled genes. Our large scale analysis of the CCG promoters reveals the
complexity and extensiveness of the circadian regulation in mammals. Results of
this study point to connections of the circadian clock to other functional
systems including metabolism, endocrine regulation and pharmacokinetics.

PMCID: PMC2654074
PMID: 19287494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Apr 1;131(12):4245-52. doi: 10.1021/ja805150g.

Single-chromophore-based photoswitchable nanoparticles enable
dual-alternating-color fluorescence for unambiguous live cell imaging.

Tian Z(1), Wu W, Wan W, Li AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Materials Research, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington 99164, USA.

We have developed a class of spiropyran dyes and their fluorescence colors can be
reversibly photoswitched from red to green, blue, or nearly dark, thus
alternating between two colors. Such individual dyes emit either one color or the
other but not both simultaneously. Nanoparticles enabled with these
photoswitchable dyes, however, emit either one pure color or a combination of
both colors because the nanoparticle fluorescence originates from multiple dyes
therein. As a result, the nanoparticle shines >30 times brighter than
state-of-the-art organic dyes such as fluorescein. Interestingly, these copolymer
nanoparticles exhibit tunable nonspecific interactions with live cells, and
nanoparticles containing properly balanced butyl acrylate and acrylamide monomers
render essentially very little nonspecific binding to live cells. Decorated with 
HMGA1 protein, these optically switchable dual-color nanoparticles undergo
endocytosis and unambiguously identify themselves from fluorescence interference 
including autofluorescence, thus enabling a new tool for live cell imaging.

PMCID: PMC2667703
PMID: 19275146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biol Cell. 2009 Sep;101(9):511-24. doi: 10.1042/BC20080213.

Two new miR-16 targets: caprin-1 and HMGA1, proteins implicated in cell
proliferation.

Kaddar T(1), Rouault JP, Chien WW, Chebel A, Gadoux M, Salles G, Ffrench M,
Magaud JP.

Author information: 
(1)LBMC, CNRS UMR5239, IFR128, Faculté de Médecine Lyon Sud, Université Lyon 1,
Pierre Bénite, France.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: miRNAs (microRNAs) are a class of non-coding RNAs that
inhibit gene expression by binding to recognition elements, mainly in the 3' UTR 
(untranslated region) of mRNA. A single miRNA can target several hundred mRNAs,
leading to a complex metabolic network. miR-16 (miRNA-16), located on chromosome 
13q14, is involved in cell proliferation and apoptosis regulation; it may
interfere with either oncogenic or tumour suppressor pathways, and is implicated 
in leukaemogenesis. These data prompted us to search for and validate novel
targets of miR-16.
RESULTS: In the present study, by using a combined bioinformatics and molecular
approach, we identified two novel putative targets of miR-16, caprin-1
(cytoplasmic activation/proliferation-associated protein-1) and HMGA1
(high-mobility group A1), and we also studied cyclin E which had been previously 
recognized as an miR-16 target by bioinformatics database. Using luciferase
activity assays, we demonstrated that miR-16 interacts with the 3' UTR of the
three target mRNAs. We showed that miR-16, in MCF-7 and HeLa cell lines,
down-regulates the expression of caprin-1, HMGA1a, HMGA1b and cyclin E at the
protein level, and of cyclin E, HMGA1a and HMGA1b at the mRNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data demonstrated that miR-16 can negatively
regulate two new targets, HMGA1 and caprin-1, which are involved in cell
proliferation. In addition, we also showed that the inhibition of cyclin E
expression was due, at least in part, to a decrease in its mRNA stability.

PMID: 19250063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Virol. 2009 May;83(9):4227-35. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02578-08. Epub 2009 Feb 25.

Optimal transactivation by Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen 1 requires the UR1 and
ATH1 domains.

Singh G(1), Aras S, Zea AH, Koochekpour S, Aiyar A.

Author information: 
(1)Stanley S Scott Cancer Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1) is essential for Epstein-Barr virus to
immortalize naïve B cells. EBNA1 transactivates viral promoters for genes that
are necessary for immortalization when it is bound to a cluster of 20 cognate
binding sites, termed the family of repeats. A region of EBNA1 from amino acids
(aa) 40 to 89, termed linking region 1 (LR1), has been identified previously as
being sufficient for transactivation. LR1 contains two domains that are conserved
in the EBNA1 orthologs of other gamma herpesviruses. The first of these, termed
unique region 1 (UR1), corresponds to aa 65 to 89 of EBNA1. UR1 is necessary for 
transactivation and contains a conserved recognition site for cyclic
AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), corresponding to serine 78 of EBNA1. We have 
pharmacologically modulated PKA activity to determine if PKA controls EBNA1's
ability to transactivate. Our results indicate that PKA activators and inhibitors
do not affect transactivation by EBNA1. In addition, site-directed mutagenesis
demonstrates that transactivation is not influenced by the phosphorylation status
of serine 78 in the UR1 domain. The second conserved domain within LR1 is a
glycine-arginine repeat, corresponding to aa 40 to 54 of EBNA1. This domain,
termed ATH1, functions as an AT-hook, a DNA-binding motif found in architectural 
transcription factors such as HMGA1a. We demonstrate that deletion of the ATH1
domain decreases EBNA1 transactivation ability, which is consistent with a
transcriptional role for ATH1. Furthermore, transactivation is restored when ATH1
is replaced by equivalent AT-hook motifs from HMGA1a. Our data strongly indicate 
a role for AT-hooks in EBNA1's ability to transactivate, a function necessary for
EBV to immortalize naïve B-cells.

PMCID: PMC2668496
PMID: 19244333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;69(5):1844-50. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4133. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

HMGA proteins up-regulate CCNB2 gene in mouse and human pituitary adenomas.

De Martino I(1), Visone R, Wierinckx A, Palmieri D, Ferraro A, Cappabianca P,
Chiappetta G, Forzati F, Lombardi G, Colao A, Trouillas J, Fedele M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche c/o Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare,
Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia di Napoli, Italy.

The high mobility group As (HMGAs) belong to a family of nonhistone nuclear
proteins that orchestrate the assembly of nucleoprotein complexes. Through a
complex network of protein-DNA and protein-protein interaction, they play
important roles in gene transcription, recombination, and chromatin structure.
This protein family is involved, through different mechanisms, in both benign and
malignant neoplasias. We have recently reported that transgenic mice carrying the
Hmga1 or Hmga2 genes under transcriptional control of the cytomegalovirus
promoter develop pituitary adenomas secreting prolactin and growth hormone. We
have shown that the mechanism of the HMGA2-induced pituitary adenoma is based on 
the increased E2F1 activity. The expression profile of mouse normal pituitary
glands and adenomas induced in HMGA transgenic mice revealed an increased
expression of the ccnb2 gene, coding for the cyclin B2 protein, in the neoplastic
tissues compared with the normal pituitary gland. Here, we show, by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation, a direct 
binding of HMGA proteins to the promoter of ccnb2 gene, whereas luciferase assays
showed that HMGAs are able to up-regulate ccnb2 promoter activity. Finally, we
report an increased CCNB2 expression in human pituitary adenomas of different
histotypes that is directly correlated with HMGA1 and HMGA2 expression. Because
cyclin B2 is involved in the regulation of the cell cycle, these results taken
together indicate that HMGA-induced cyclin B2 overexpression gives an important
contribution to experimental and human pituitary tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19223528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Fertil Steril. 2010 Apr;93(6):2020-6. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.12.116. Epub
2009 Feb 12.

Cellular senescence in usual type uterine leiomyoma.

Laser J(1), Lee P, Wei JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York, USA.

Comment in
    Fertil Steril. 2010 Jul;94(2):e43; author reply e44.
    Fertil Steril. 2010 Nov;94(6):e79; author reply e80.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of senescence in symptomatic patients with
multifibroids.
DESIGN: A cohort study.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Eighty-six fibroids collected from 14 patients who underwent
myomectomy or hysterectomy.
INTERVENTION(S): Senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-beta-Gal) stain in 
fresh-frozen tissue; reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR);
MicroRNA in situ hybridization (MISH); immunohistochemistry in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Senescence measured by percentage of
SA-beta-Gal-positive cells; levels of let-7 microRNAs measured by RT-PCR and
MISH; expression of p16(INK4a), Ki-67, HMGA1, and HMGA2 scaled by
immunoreactivity.
RESULT(S): About 58% (48 of 82) of tumors showed significant senescent change
(SA-beta-Gal positive) in >10% of the tumor volume. The overall trend was a
higher level of senescence in small fibroids and older-aged women. Senescent
fibroids were additionally shown to have, high levels of let-7 c, d, and f-2 and 
a low Ki-67 index.
CONCLUSION(S): Senescence is a common cellular change in a large proportion of
usual type fibroids. Similarly, senescence may explain the variation in growth
rates of these tumors, and may prove to be an important molecular and cellular
target in prevention of fibroid growth.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19217096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Med Chem. 2009 Mar 12;52(5):1247-50. doi: 10.1021/jm801278g.

Discovery of novel Myc-Max heterodimer disruptors with a three-dimensional
pharmacophore model.

Mustata G(1), Follis AV, Hammoudeh DI, Metallo SJ, Wang H, Prochownik EV, Lazo
JS, Bahar I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15260, USA. gmustata@pitt.edu

A three-dimensional pharmacophore model was generated utilizing a set of known
inhibitors of c-Myc-Max heterodimer formation. The model successfully identified 
a set of structurally diverse compounds with potential inhibitory activity
against c-Myc. Nine compounds were tested in vitro, and four displayed affinities
in the micromolar range and growth inhibitory activity against
c-Myc-overexpressing cells. These studies demonstrate the applicability of
pharmacophore modeling to the identification of novel and potentially more
puissant inhibitors of the c-Myc oncoprotein.

PMCID: PMC2765518
PMID: 19215087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Oncogene. 2009 Mar 19;28(11):1432-42. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.495. Epub 2009 Jan
26.

Regulation of microRNA expression by HMGA1 proteins.

De Martino I(1), Visone R, Fedele M, Petrocca F, Palmieri D, Martinez Hoyos J,
Forzati F, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

The High Mobility Group proteins HMGA1 are nuclear architectural factors that
play a critical role in a wide range of biological processes. Since recent
studies have identified the microRNAs (miRNAs) as important regulators of gene
expression, modulating critical cellular functions such as proliferation,
apoptosis and differentiation, the aim of our work was to identify the miRNAs
that are physiologically regulated by HMGA1 proteins. To this purpose, we have
analysed the miRNA expression profile of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
carrying two, one or no Hmga1 functional alleles using a microarray (miRNA
microarray). By this approach, we found a miRNA expression profile that
differentiates Hmga1-null MEFs from the wild-type ones. In particular, a
significant decrease in miR-196a-2, miR-101b, miR-331 and miR-29a was detected in
homozygous Hmga1-knockout MEFs in comparison with wild-type cells. Consistently, 
these miRNAs are downregulated in most of the analysed tissues of Hmga1-null mice
in comparison with the wild-type mice. ChIP assay shows that HMGA1 is able to
bind regions upstream of these miRNAs. Moreover, we identified the HMGA2 gene
product as a putative target of miR-196a-2, suggesting that HMGA1 proteins are
able to downregulate the expression of the other member of the HMGA family
through the regulation of the miR-196a-2 expression. Finally, ATXN1 and STC1 gene
products have been identified as targets of miR-101b. Therefore, it is reasonable
to hypothesize that HMGA1 proteins are involved in several functions by
regulating miRNA expression.

PMID: 19169275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Br J Cancer. 2009 Feb 10;100(3):501-10. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604883. Epub 2009
Jan 20.

Frequent overexpression of HMGA1 and 2 in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine
tumours and its relationship to let-7 downregulation.

Rahman MM(1), Qian ZR, Wang EL, Sultana R, Kudo E, Nakasono M, Hayashi T,
Kakiuchi S, Sano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Health Biosciences, University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

The molecular pathogenesis of gastroenteropancreatic (GEP) neuroendocrine tumours
(NETs) remains to be elucidated. High-mobility group A (HMGA) proteins play
important roles in the regulation of transcription, differentiation, and
neoplastic transformation. In this study, the expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 was
studied in 55 GEP NETs. Overexpression of HMGA1 and 2 was frequently detected in 
GEP NETs compared with normal tissues. Nuclear immunostaining of HMGA1 and 2 was 
observed in GEP NETs (38 of 55, 69%; 40 of 55, 73%, respectively). High-mobility 
group A2 expression increased from well-differentiated NET (WNET) to
well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma (WNEC) and poorly differentiated NEC
(PNEC) (P<0.005) and showed the highest level in stage IV tumours (P<0.01). In
WNECs, the expression of HMGA1 and 2 was significantly higher in metastatic
tumours than those without metastasis (P<0.05). Gastroenteropancreatic NETs in
foregut showed the highest level of HMGA1 and 2 expressions. MIB-1 labelling
index (MIB-1 LI) correlated with HMGA1 and 2 overexpression (R=0.28, P<0.05;
R=0.434, P<0.001; respectively) and progressively increased from WNETs to WNECs
and PNECs (P<0.001). Let-7 expression was addressed in 6 normal organs, 30 tumour
samples, and 24 tumour margin non-tumour tissues. Compared with normal tissues,
let-7 downregulation was frequent in NETs (19 of 30, 63%). Higher expression of
HMGA1 and 2 was frequently observed in tumours with let-7 significant reduction
(53, 42%, respectively). The reverse correlation could be detected between HMGA1 
and let-7 (P<0.05). Our findings suggested that HMGA1 and 2 overexpression and
let-7 downregulation might relate to pathogenesis of GEP NETs.

PMCID: PMC2658538
PMID: 19156147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Ocul Biol Dis Infor. 2008;1(1):37-45.

Prediction of Cis-Regulatory Elements Controlling Genes Differentially Expressed 
by Retinal and Choroidal Vascular Endothelial Cells.

Choi D(1), Appukuttan B, Binek SJ, Planck SR, Stout JT, Rosenbaum JT, Smith JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health & Preventive Medicine, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Cultured endothelial cells of the human retina and choroid demonstrate distinct
patterns of gene expression. We hypothesized that differential gene expression
reflected differences in the interactions of transcription factors and respective
cis-regulatory motifs(s) in these two emdothelial cell subpopulations,
recognizing that motifs often exist as modules. We tested this hypothesis in
silico by using TRANSFAC Professional and CisModule to identify cis-regulatory
motifs and modules in genes that were differentially expressed by human retinal
versus choroidal endothelial cells, as identified by analysis of a microarray
data set. Motifs corresponding to eight transcription factors were significantly 
(p < 0.05) differentially abundant in genes that were relatively highly expressed
in retinal (i.e., GCCR, HMGIY, HSF1, p53, VDR) or choroidal (i.e., E2F, YY1, ZF5)
endothelial cells. Predicted cis-regulatory modules were quite different for
these two groups of genes. Our findings raise the possibility of exploiting
specific cis-regulatory motifs to target therapy at the ocular endothelial cells 
subtypes responsible for neovascular age-related macular degeneration or
proliferative diabetic retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC2573398
PMID: 19122891  [PubMed]


278. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 15;68(24):10121-7. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2121.

The high-mobility group A1a/signal transducer and activator of transcription-3
axis: an achilles heel for hematopoietic malignancies?

Hillion J(1), Dhara S, Sumter TF, Mukherjee M, Di Cello F, Belton A, Turkson J,
Jaganathan S, Cheng L, Ye Z, Jove R, Aplan P, Lin YW, Wertzler K, Reeves R,
Elbahlouh O, Kowalski J, Bhattacharya R, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Although HMGA1 (high-mobility group A1; formerly HMG-I/Y) is an oncogene that is 
widely overexpressed in aggressive cancers, the molecular mechanisms underlying
transformation by HMGA1 are only beginning to emerge. HMGA1 encodes the HMGA1a
and HMGA1b protein isoforms, which function in regulating gene expression. To
determine how HMGA1 leads to neoplastic transformation, we looked for genes
regulated by HMGA1 using gene expression profile analysis. Here, we show that the
STAT3 gene, which encodes the signaling molecule signal transducer and activator 
of transcription 3 (STAT3), is a critical downstream target of HMGA1a. STAT3 mRNA
and protein are up-regulated in fibroblasts overexpressing HMGA1a and activated
STAT3 recapitulates the transforming activity of HMGA1a in fibroblasts. HMGA1a
also binds directly to a conserved region of the STAT3 promoter in vivo in human 
leukemia cells by chromatin immunoprecipitation and activates transcription of
the STAT3 promoter in transfection experiments. To determine if this pathway
contributes to HMGA1-mediated transformation, we investigated STAT3 expression in
our HMGA1a transgenic mice, all of which developed aggressive lymphoid
malignancy. STAT3 expression was increased in the leukemia cells from our
transgenics but not in control cells. Blocking STAT3 function induced apoptosis
in the transgenic leukemia cells but not in controls. In primary human leukemia
samples, there was a positive correlation between HMGA1a and STAT3 mRNA.
Moreover, blocking STAT3 function in human leukemia or lymphoma cells led to
decreased cellular motility and foci formation. Our results show that the
HMGA1a-STAT3 axis is a potential Achilles heel that could be exploited
therapeutically in hematopoietic and other malignancies overexpressing HMGA1a.

PMCID: PMC2913892
PMID: 19074878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Oncogene. 2009 Feb 12;28(6):876-85. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.438. Epub 2008 Dec 8.

HAND1 gene expression is negatively regulated by the High Mobility Group A1
proteins and is drastically reduced in human thyroid carcinomas.

Martinez Hoyos J(1), Ferraro A, Sacchetti S, Keller S, De Martino I, Borbone E,
Pallante P, Fedele M, Montanaro D, Esposito F, Cserjesi P, Chiariotti L, Troncone
G, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare e/o Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

HMGA1 proteins exert their major physiological function during embryonic
development and play a critical role in neoplastic transformation. Here, we show 
that Hand1 gene, which codes for a transcription factor crucial for
differentiation of trophoblast giant cells and heart development, is upregulated 
in hmga1 minus embryonic stem cells. We demonstrate that HMGA1 proteins bind
directly to Hand1 promoter both in vitro and in vivo and inhibit Hand1 promoter
activity. We have also investigated HAND1 expression in human thyroid carcinoma
cell lines and tissues, in which HMGA proteins are overexpressed, with respect to
normal thyroid; an inverse correlation between HMGA1 and HAND1 expression was
found in all thyroid tumor histotypes. A correlation between HAND1 gene
repression and promoter hypermethylation was found in anaplastic carcinomas but
not in other thyroid tumor histotypes. Therefore, we can hypothesize that HMGA1
overexpression plays a key role on HAND1 silencing in differentiated thyroid
carcinomas and that promoter hypermethylation occurs in later stages of thyroid
tumor progression. Finally, the restoration of the HAND1 gene expression reduces 
the clonogenic ability of two human thyroid carcinoma-derived cell lines,
suggesting that HAND1 downregulation may have a role in the process of thyroid
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19060921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. EMBO J. 2008 Nov 19;27(22):3024-35. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.221. Epub 2008 Oct
23.

RNA-dependent recruitment of the origin recognition complex.

Norseen J(1), Thomae A, Sridharan V, Aiyar A, Schepers A, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Expression and Regulation, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

The origin recognition complex (ORC) has an important function in determining the
initiation sites of DNA replication. In higher eukaryotes, ORC lacks
sequence-specific DNA binding, and the mechanisms of ORC recruitment and origin
determination are poorly understood. ORC is recruited with high efficiency to the
Epstein-Barr virus origin of plasmid replication (OriP) through a complex
mechanism involving interactions with the virus-encoded EBNA1 protein. We present
evidence that ORC recruitment to OriP and DNA replication function depends on
RGG-like motifs, referred to as LR1 and LR2, in the EBNA1 amino-terminal domain. 
Moreover, we show that LR1 and LR2 recruitment of ORC is RNA dependent. HMGA1a,
which can functionally substitute for LR1 and LR2 domain, can also recruit ORC in
an RNA-dependent manner. EBNA1 and HMGA1a RGG motifs bound to structured G-rich
RNA, as did ORC1 peptides, which interact with EBNA1. RNase A treatment of
cellular chromatin released a fraction of the total ORC, suggesting that ORC
association with chromatin, and possibly cellular origins, is stabilized by RNA. 
We propose that structural RNA molecules mediate ORC recruitment at some cellular
and viral origins, similar to OriP.

PMCID: PMC2585170
PMID: 18946490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Biochem J. 2009 Feb 15;418(1):103-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20081427.

Netropsin improves survival from endotoxaemia by disrupting HMGA1 binding to the 
NOS2 promoter.

Grant MA(1), Baron RM, Macias AA, Layne MD, Perrella MA, Rigby AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Vascular Medicine, Center for Vascular Biology
Research, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 99
Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The inducible form of nitric oxide synthase (NOS2) plays an important role in
sepsis incurred as a result of infection with Gram-negative bacteria that
elaborate endotoxin. The HMGA1 (high-mobility group A1) architectural
transcription factor facilitates NOS2 induction by binding a specific AT-rich Oct
(octamer) sequence in the core NOS2 promoter via AT-hook motifs. The
small-molecule MGB (minor-groove binder) netropsin selectively targets AT-rich
DNA sequences and can interfere with transcription factor binding. We therefore
hypothesized that netropsin would improve survival from murine endotoxaemia by
attenuating NOS2 induction through interference with HMGA1 DNA binding to the
core NOS2 promoter. Netropsin improved survival from endotoxaemia in wild-type
mice, yet not in NOS2-deficient mice, supporting an important role for NOS2 in
the beneficial effects of MGB administration. Netropsin significantly attenuated 
NOS2 promoter activity in macrophage transient transfection studies and the
AT-rich HMGA1 DNA-binding site was critical for this effect. EMSAs
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) demonstrated that netropsin interferes
with HMGA1 NOS2 promoter binding and NMR spectroscopy was undertaken to
characterize this disruption. Chemical shift perturbation analysis identified
that netropsin effectively competes both HMGA1 DNA-binding AT-hooks from the
AT-rich NOS2 promoter sequence. Furthermore, NOESY data identified direct
molecular interactions between netropsin and A/T base pairs within the NOS2
promoter HMGA1-binding site. Finally, we determined a structure of the
netropsin/NOS2 promoter Oct site complex from molecular modelling and dynamics
calculations. These findings represent important steps toward refined
structure-based ligand design of novel compounds for therapeutic benefit that can
selectively target key regulatory regions within genes that are important for the
development of critical illness.

PMCID: PMC2821790
PMID: 18937643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Mol Biol. 2008 Dec 12;384(2):335-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.09.015. Epub 2008 
Sep 16.

Assembling the human IFN-beta enhanceosome in solution.

Dragan AI(1), Carrillo R, Gerasimova TI, Privalov PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Assembly of interferon-beta enhanceosome from its individual protein components
and of enhancer DNA has been studied in solution using a combination of
fluorescence anisotropy, microcalorimetry, and CD titration. It was shown that
the enhancer binds only one full-length phosphomimetic IRF-3 dimer at the
PRDIII-PRDI sites, and this binding does not exhibit cooperativity with binding
of the ATF-2/c-Jun bZIP (leucine zipper dimer with basic DNA recognition
segments) heterodimer at the PRDIV site. The orientation of the bZIP pair is,
therefore, not determined by the presence of the IRF-3 dimer, but is
predetermined by the asymmetry of the PRDIV site. In contrast, bound IRF-3 dimer 
interacts strongly with the NF-kappaB (p50/p65) heterodimer bound at the
neighboring PRDII site. The orientation of bound NF-kappaB is also predetermined 
by the asymmetry of the PRDII site and is the opposite of that found in the
crystal structure. The HMG-I/Y protein, proposed as orchestrating enhanceosome
assembly, interacts specifically with the PRDII site of the interferon-beta
enhancer by inserting its DNA-binding segments (AT hooks) into the minor groove, 
resulting in a significant increase in NF-kappaB binding affinity for the major
groove of this site.

PMID: 18823997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Eur J Cancer. 2008 Nov;44(17):2668-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2008.07.033. Epub 2008
Sep 8.

HMGA1 protein is a novel target of the ATM kinase.

Pentimalli F(1), Palmieri D, Pacelli R, Garbi C, Cesari R, Martin E, Pierantoni
GM, Chieffi P, Croce CM, Costanzo V, Fedele M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

The high mobility group HMGA1 protein belongs to a family of architectural
factors that play a role in chromosomal organisation and gene transcription
regulation. HMGA1 overexpression represents a common feature of human malignant
tumours and is causally associated with neoplastic transformation and metastatic 
progression. Recently, HMGA1 expression has been correlated with the presence of 
chromosomal rearrangements and suggested to promote genomic instability. Here, we
report a novel interaction between HMGA1 protein and the ataxia-telangiectasia
mutated (ATM) kinase, the major key player in the cellular response to DNA damage
caused by several agents such as ionising radiation (IR). We identified an SQ
motif on HMGA1, which is effectively phosphorylated by ATM in vitro and in vivo. 
Interestingly, confocal microscopy revealed that HMGA1 colocalises with the
activated form of ATM (ATM S1981p). Moreover, HMGA1 ectopic expression decreases 
cell survival following exposure to IR as assessed by clonogenic survival in
MCF-7 cells, further supporting the hypothesis that HMGA1 might act as a
downstream target of the ATM pathway in response to DNA damage.

PMID: 18783938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Tissue Eng Part A. 2009 Mar;15(3):473-7. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2007.0308.

Application of high-mobility-group-A proteins increases the proliferative
activity of chondrocytes in vitro.

Richter A(1), Hauschild G, Murua Escobar H, Nolte I, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.

The low capability of self-repair in hyaline cartilage tissue and chondrocytes
de-differentiating when grown in vitro (e.g., for tissue engineering approaches) 
limits articular cartilage repair. It has been shown that the embryonic
architectural transcription factors of the high-mobility-group-A (HMGA) protein
family affect the regulation of cell differentiation by influencing the state of 
cell chromatin and are involved in hyaline cartilage development by affecting the
expression of chondrocyte-specific marker genes. Thus, the control of cartilage
cell proliferation and differentiation by HMGA proteins promises to be an
important aspect in cartilage tissue repair. To elucidate the effects on the
proliferative activity of hyaline chondrocytes, HMGA proteins were recombinantly 
expressed, highly purified, and applied to porcine hyaline cartilage cells
growing in in vitro monolayer cell culture. Direct application of HMGA1a, HMGA1b,
and HMGA2 proteins onto porcine chondrocytes was shown to have a highly
significant influence on cell proliferation. Greater proliferation of
chondrocytes was achieved than in the untreated control group, indicating a
promising approach to enhancing cartilage tissue repair.

PMID: 18721076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Neoplasia. 2008 Aug;10(8):773-81.

Human papilloma virus-dependent HMGA1 expression is a relevant step in cervical
carcinogenesis.

Mellone M(1), Rinaldi C, Massimi I, Petroni M, Veschi V, Talora C, Truffa S,
Stabile H, Frati L, Screpanti I, Gulino A, Giannini G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome 00161, Italy.

HMGA1 is a member of a small family of architectural transcription factors
involved in the coordinate assembly of multiprotein complexes referred to as
enhanceosomes. In addition to their role in cell proliferation, differentiation, 
and development, high-mobility group proteins of the A type (HMGA) family members
behave as transforming protoncogenes either in vitro or in animal models. Recent 
reports indicated that HMGA1 might counteract p53 pathway and provided an
interesting hint on the mechanisms determining HMGA's transforming potential.
HMGA1 expression is deregulated in a very large array of human tumors, including 
cervical cancer, but very limited information is available on the molecular
mechanisms leading to HMGA1 deregulation in cancer cells. Here, we report that
HMGA1 expression is sustained by human papilloma virus (HPV) E6/E7 proteins in
cervical cancer, as demonstrated by either E6/E7 overexpression or by repression 
through RNA interference. Knocking down HMGA1 expression by means of RNA
interference, we also showed that it is involved in cell proliferation and
contributes to p53 inactivation in this type of neoplasia. Finally, we show that 
HMGA1 is necessary for the full expression of HPV18 E6 and E7 oncoproteins thus
establishing a positive autoregulatory loop between HPV E6/E7 and HMGA1
expression.

PMCID: PMC2481567
PMID: 18670638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Oct 3;374(4):653-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.091. Epub 2008 Jul 26.

Physcomitrella HMGA-type proteins display structural differences compared to
their higher plant counterparts.

Lyngaard C(1), Stemmer C, Stensballe A, Graf M, Gorr G, Decker E, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49,
DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGA family are chromatin-associated
proteins that act as architectural factors in nucleoprotein structures involved
in gene transcription. To date, HMGA-type proteins have been studied in various
higher plant species, but not in lower plants. We have identified two HMGA-type
proteins, HMGA1 and HMGA2, encoded in the genome of the moss model Physcomitrella
patens. Compared to higher plant HMGA proteins, the two Physcomitrella proteins
display some structural differences. Thus, the moss HMGA proteins have six
(rather than four) AT-hook DNA-binding motifs and their N-terminal domain lacks
similarity to linker histone H1. HMGA2 is expressed in moss protonema and it
localises to the cell nucleus. Typical of HMGA proteins, HMGA2 interacts
preferentially with A/T-rich DNA, when compared with G/C-rich DNA. In
cotransformation assays in Physcomitrella protoplasts, HMGA2 stimulated reporter 
gene expression. In summary, our data show that functional HMGA-type proteins
occur in Physcomitrella.

PMID: 18662672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. BMC Genet. 2008 Jul 23;9:49. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-9-49.

Genomic characterisation, chromosomal assignment and in vivo localisation of the 
canine high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) gene.

Beuing C(1), Soller JT, Muth M, Wagner S, Dolf G, Schelling C, Richter A,
Willenbrock S, Reimann-Berg N, Winkler S, Nolte I, Bullerdiek J, Murua Escobar H.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Small Animals and Research Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH,
University of Veterinary Medicine Hanover, Bischofsholer Damm 15, 30173 Hanover, 
Germany. claudia.beuing@tiho-hannover.de

BACKGROUND: The high mobility group A1 proteins (HMGA1a/HMGA1b) are highly
conserved between mammalian species and widely described as participating in
various cellular processes. By inducing DNA conformation changes the HMGA1
proteins indirectly influence the binding of various transcription factors and
therefore effect the transcription regulation. In humans chromosomal aberrations 
affecting the HMGA1 gene locus on HSA 6p21 were described to be the cause for
various benign mesenchymal tumours while high titres of HMGA1 proteins were shown
to be associated with the neoplastic potential of various types of cancer.
Interestingly, the absence of HMGA1 proteins was shown to cause insulin
resistance and diabetes in humans and mice. Due to the various similarities in
biology and presentation of human and canine cancers the dog has joined the
common rodent animal model for therapeutic and preclinical studies. Accordingly, 
the canine genome was sequenced completely twice but unfortunately this could not
solve the structure of canine HMGA1 gene.
RESULTS: Herein we report the characterisation of the genomic structure of the
canine HMGA1 gene consisting of 7 exons and 6 introns spanning in total 9524 bp, 
the in vivo localisation of the HMGA1 protein to the nucleus, and a chromosomal
assignment of the gene by FISH to CFA12q11. Additionally, we evaluated a
described canine HMGA1 exon 6 SNP in 55 Dachshunds.
CONCLUSION: The performed characterisations will make comparative analyses of
aberrations affecting the human and canine gene and proteins possible, thereby
providing a basis for revealing mechanisms involved in HMGA1 related pathogenesis
in both species.

PMCID: PMC2500044
PMID: 18651940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Jul;7(7):2090-5. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-2282.

Cyclooxygenase inhibitors block uterine tumorigenesis in HMGA1a transgenic mice
and human xenografts.

Di Cello F(1), Hillion J, Kowalski J, Ronnett BM, Aderinto A, Huso DL, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Uterine cancer is a common cause for cancer death in women and there is no
effective therapy for metastatic disease. Thus, research is urgently needed to
identify new therapeutic agents. We showed previously that all female HMGA1a
transgenic mice develop malignant uterine tumors, indicating that HMGA1a causes
uterine cancer in vivo. We also demonstrated that HMGA1a up-regulates
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) during tumorigenesis in this model. Similarly, we found 
that HMGA1a and COX-2 are overexpressed in human leiomyosarcomas, a highly
malignant uterine cancer. Although epidemiologic studies indicate that
individuals who take COX inhibitors have a lower incidence of some tumors, these 
inhibitors have not been evaluated in uterine cancer. Here, we show that HMGA1a
mice on sulindac (a COX-1/COX-2 inhibitor) have significantly smaller uterine
tumors than controls. To determine if COX inhibitors are active in human uterine 
cancers that overexpress HMGA1a, we treated cultured cells with sulindac sulfide 
or celecoxib (a specific COX-2 inhibitor). Both drugs block anchorage-independent
growth in high-grade human uterine cancer cells that overexpress HMGA1a (MES-SA
cells). In contrast, neither inhibitor blocked transformation in cells that do
not overexpress HMGA1a. Moreover, xenograft tumors from MES-SA cells were
significantly inhibited in mice on sulindac. More strikingly, no tumors formed in
mice on celecoxib. These preclinical studies suggest that COX inhibitors could
play a role in preventing tumor onset or progression in uterine cancers with
dysregulation of the HMGA1a-COX-2 pathway. Importantly, these drugs have lower
toxicity than chemotherapeutic agents used to treat advanced-stage uterine
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2593419
PMID: 18645019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Aug;36(13):e83. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn273. Epub 2008 Jun
19.

Conditional gene vectors regulated in cis.

Pich D(1), Humme S, Spindler MP, Schepers A, Hammerschmidt W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center
for Environmental Health, Marchioninistr. 25, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Non-integrating gene vectors, which are stably and extrachromosomally maintained 
in transduced cells would be perfect tools to support long-term expression of
therapeutic genes but preserve the genomic integrity of the cellular host. Small 
extrachromosomal plasmids share some of these ideal characteristics but are
primarily based on virus blueprints. These plasmids are dependent on viral
trans-acting factors but they can replicate their DNA molecules in synchrony with
the chromosome of the cellular host and segregate to daughter cells in an
autonomous fashion. On the basis of the concept of the latent origin of DNA
replication of Epstein-Barr virus, oriP, we devised novel derivatives, which
exclusively rely on an artificial replication factor for both nuclear retention
and replication of plasmid DNA. In addition, an allosteric switch regulates the
fate of the plasmid molecules, which are rapidly lost upon addition of
doxycycline. Conditional maintenance of these novel plasmid vectors allows the
reversible transfer of genetic information into target cells for the first time.

PMCID: PMC2490737
PMID: 18566006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun;36(6):1990. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31817c3b6a.

Assessment of vagal activity during transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation in
mice.

Schmidt H, Müller-Werdan U, Werdan K.

Comment on
    Crit Care Med. 2007 Dec;35(12):2762-8.

PMID: 18520671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Arch Virol. 2008;153(7):1251-62. doi: 10.1007/s00705-008-0112-z. Epub 2008 May
28.

High-mobility group protein A1 binds herpes simplex virus gene regulatory
sequences and affects their expression.

Matta MK(1), Panagiotidis CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.

The high-mobility group protein A1 (HMGA1), which regulates mammalian gene
expression by altering chromatin architecture, was found to bind at multiple
sites within the promoter regions of all of the herpes simplex virus type 1
(HSV-1) immediate early genes, as well as a representative early (tk) gene and
one late (gC) gene, both in vitro and in vivo. Infected cell polypeptide (ICP) 4,
the major HSV-1 regulatory protein, binds these promoters both in vitro and in
vivo, and HMGA1 enhances its in vitro binding. In transient expression
experiments, HMGA1 modified the effects of both ICP4 and ICP0, another virus
transactivator, on virus gene expression in a promoter-specific manner, but it
had no effect on the transactivation of immediate-early promoters by VP16. These 
data indicate that host-cell architectural chromatin proteins could influence the
interactions of host-cell and viral transcription factors with the virus DNA
regulatory elements and affect HSV-1 gene expression.

PMID: 18506571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 May;6(5):743-50. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0095.

HMGA2 participates in transformation in human lung cancer.

Di Cello F(1), Hillion J, Hristov A, Wood LJ, Mukherjee M, Schuldenfrei A,
Kowalski J, Bhattacharya R, Ashfaq R, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Although previous studies have established a prominent role for HMGA1 (formerly
HMG-I/Y) in aggressive human cancers, the role of HMGA2 (formerly HMGI-C) in
malignant transformation has not been clearly defined. The HMGA gene family
includes HMGA1, which encodes the HMGA1a and HMGA1b protein isoforms, and HMGA2, 
which encodes HMGA2. These chromatin-binding proteins function in transcriptional
regulation and recent studies also suggest a role in cellular senescence. HMGA1
proteins also appear to participate in cell cycle regulation and malignant
transformation, whereas HMGA2 has been implicated primarily in the pathogenesis
of benign, mesenchymal tumors. Here, we show that overexpression of HMGA2 leads
to a transformed phenotype in cultured lung cells derived from normal tissue.
Conversely, inhibiting HMGA2 expression blocks the transformed phenotype in
metastatic human non-small cell lung cancer cells. Moreover, we show that HMGA2
mRNA and protein are overexpressed in primary human lung cancers compared with
normal tissue or indolent tumors. In addition, there is a statistically
significant correlation between HMGA2 protein staining by immunohistochemical
analysis and tumor grade (P < 0.001). Our results indicate that HMGA2 is an
oncogene important in the pathogenesis of human lung cancer. Although additional 
studies with animal models are needed, these findings suggest that targeting
HMGA2 could be therapeutically beneficial in lung cancer and other cancers
characterized by increased HMGA2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3086547
PMID: 18505920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. BMC Syst Biol. 2008 May 22;2:46. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-46.

Transcription profiling of lung adenocarcinomas of c-myc-transgenic mice:
identification of the c-myc regulatory gene network.

Reymann S(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Center for Drug 
Research and Medical Biotechnology, Nikolai-Fuchs-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover,
Germany. reymann@item.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional regulator c-Myc is the most frequently
deregulated oncogene in human tumors. Targeted overexpression of this gene in
mice results in distinct types of lung adenocarcinomas. By using microarray
technology, alterations in the expression of genes were captured based on a
female transgenic mouse model in which, indeed, c-Myc overexpression in alveolar 
epithelium results in the development of bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma (BAC) and 
papillary adenocarcinoma (PLAC). In this study, we analyzed exclusively the
promoters of induced genes by different in silico methods in order to elucidate
the c-Myc transcriptional regulatory network.
RESULTS: We analyzed the promoters of 361 transcriptionally induced genes with
respect to c-Myc binding sites and found 110 putative binding sites in 94
promoters. Furthermore, we analyzed the flanking sequences (+/- 100 bp) around
the 110 c-Myc binding sites and found Ap2, Zf5, Zic3, and E2f binding sites to be
overrepresented in these regions. Then, we analyzed the promoters of 361 induced 
genes with respect to binding sites of other transcription factors (TFs) which
were upregulated by c-Myc overexpression. We identified at least one binding site
of at least one of these TFs in 220 promoters, thus elucidating a potential
transcription factor network. The analysis correlated well with the significant
overexpression of the TFs Atf2, Foxf1a, Smad4, Sox4, Sp3 and Stat5a. Finally, we 
analyzed promoters of regulated genes which where apparently not regulated by
c-Myc or other c-Myc targeted TFs and identified overrepresented Oct1, Mzf1,
Ppargamma, Plzf, Ets, and HmgIY binding sites when compared against control
promoter background.
CONCLUSION: Our in silico data suggest a model of a transcriptional regulatory
network in which different TFs act in concert upon c-Myc overexpression. We
determined molecular rules for transcriptional regulation to explain, in part,
the carcinogenic effect seen in mice overexpressing the c-Myc oncogene.

PMCID: PMC2430022
PMID: 18498649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cancer. 2008 Jul 15;113(2):302-14. doi: 10.1002/cncr.23560.

High mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) is an independent prognostic factor and
novel therapeutic target in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Liau SS(1), Rocha F, Matros E, Redston M, Whang E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: High mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) proteins are architectural
transcription factors that are overexpressed by pancreatic adenocarcinomas. The
authors hypothesized that tumor HMGA1 status represents a novel prognostic marker
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. They also tested the hypothesis that HMGA1 promotes
anchorage-independent cellular proliferation and in vivo tumorigenicity.
METHODS: Tumor HMGA1 expression was examined by immunohistochemical analysis of
tissues from 89 consecutive patients who underwent resection for pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Short-hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated RNA interference was used to
silence HMGA1 expression in MiaPaCa2 and PANC1 pancreatic cancer cells.
Anchorage-independent proliferation was assessed by using soft agar assays. The
roles of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K)/Akt and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling were investigated by using specific
inhibitors and adenoviral dominant-negative/active Akt constructs. In vivo
tumorigenicity was assessed by using a nude mouse xenograft model.
RESULTS: Tumor HMGA1 expression was detected in 93% of patients with pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Patients with HMGA1-negative tumors had a significantly longer
median survival than patients with HMGA1-expressing cancers in univariate
analysis (P = .0028) and in multivariate analysis (P<.05). shRNA-mediated HMGA1
silencing resulted in significant reductions in anchorage-independent
proliferation in soft agar. Forced HMGA1 overexpression promoted proliferation in
soft agar through a process that was dependent on PI3-K/Akt-activited signaling, 
but not on mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK)/ERK signaling. Targeted
silencing of HMGA1 reduced tumor growth in vivo through reduced proliferation
(Ki-67 index) and increased apoptosis (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
nick-end labeling).
CONCLUSIONS: The current findings suggested that HMGA1 is an independent
predictor of poor postoperative survival in patients with pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, HMGA1 promotes tumorigenicity through a
PI3-K/Akt-dependent mechanism. HMGA1 warrants further evaluation as a prognostic 
marker and therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC2997611
PMID: 18473350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Growth Factors. 2007 Dec;25(6):426-36. doi: 10.1080/08977190801931081.

Identification of putative targets of DNA (cytosine-5) methylation-mediated
transcriptional silencing using a novel conditionally active form of DNA
methyltransferase 3a.

Samuel MS(1), Lundgren-May T, Ernst M.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, P. O. Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Vic., Australia.

Aberrant DNA methylation of gene promoters is a recurrent finding associated with
diseases such as cancer and inflammation, and is thought to contribute to disease
through its role in transcriptional repression. Indeed, recent evidence suggests 
that DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferases (DNMTs) may mediate the activity of
factors promoting cell growth. Here, we utilise a novel experimental system for
the conditional and reversible activation of a de novo DNMT by constructing a
steroid-hormone analogue activated version, Dnmt3a-mERtrade mark. Following
treatment with the oestrogen analogue 4-hydroxy tamoxifen of murine embryonic
stem cells expressing this protein, we have identified by microarray analysis,
several potential targets of Dnmt3a mediated transcriptional repression including
the cancer associated genes Ssx2ip, Hmga1 and Wrnip. These results were validated
using quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR and we confirm the biological
significance of these in vitro observations by demonstrating a reduction in mRNA 
transcripts of the same genes within the intestinal epithelium of cancer-prone
transgenic knock-in mutant mice over-expressing Dnmt3a throughout the intestinal 
epithelium.

PMID: 18365873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;14(5):1470-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-1450.

HMGA1 is a molecular determinant of chemoresistance to gemcitabine in pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma.

Liau SS(1), Whang E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;14(5):1284-5.

PURPOSE: HMGA1 proteins are architectural transcription factors that are
overexpressed by pancreatic adenocarcinomas. We previously have shown that RNA
interference targeting the HMGA1 gene may represent a potential chemosensitizing 
strategy in pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells. In this study, we tested the
hypothesis that HMGA1 promotes chemoresistance to gemcitabine in pancreatic
cancer cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS: Stable short hairpin RNA-mediated HMGA1
silencing in BxPC3 and MiaPaCa2 cells promoted chemosensitivity to gemcitabine,
with reductions in gemcitabine IC(50) and increases in gemcitabine-induced
apoptosis and caspase-3 activation. In contrast, forced HMGA1 overexpression in
MiaPaCa2 cells promoted chemoresistance to gemcitabine, with increases in
gemcitabine IC(50) and reductions in gemcitabine-induced apoptosis and caspase-3 
activation. Dominant negative Akt abrogated HMGA1 overexpression-induced
increases in chemoresistance to gemcitabine. Finally, HMGA1 silencing promoted
chemosensitivity to gemcitabine in vivo in a nude mouse xenograft model of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that HMGA1 promotes chemoresistance to
gemcitabine through an Akt-dependent mechanism. Targeted therapies directed at
HMGA1 represent a potential strategy for ameliorating chemoresistance in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2652398
PMID: 18316571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. FEBS Lett. 2008 Mar 5;582(5):810-4. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.008. Epub 2008
Feb 13.

High mobility group A1 protein mediates human nitric oxide synthase 2 gene
expression.

Takamiya R(1), Baron RM, Yet SF, Layne MD, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Nitric oxide synthase (NOS)2, an inducible enzyme that produces NO during
inflammation, is transcriptionally regulated. Our goal was to determine whether
high mobility group (HMG)A1 contributes to human (h)NOS2 gene regulation. Using a
small molecule inhibitor of HMGA1 binding to DNA, or a dominant-negative form of 
HMGA1, we blunted the induction of hNOS2 by pro-inflammatory stimuli. Binding of 
HMGA1 in the region -3506 to -3375 of the hNOS2 promoter, a region not previously
known to be involved in hNOS2 regulation, contributed to the induction of hNOS2
promoter in conjunction with upstream enhancer regions. We demonstrate a
previously unknown role for HMGA1 in the regulation of hNOS2.

PMCID: PMC2271050
PMID: 18279675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 5;105(5):1692-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0707260105.
Epub 2008 Jan 30.

Interaction between HMGA1a and the origin recognition complex creates
site-specific replication origins.

Thomae AW(1), Pich D, Brocher J, Spindler MP, Berens C, Hock R, Hammerschmidt W, 
Schepers A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Zentrum München Deutsches
Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt, Marchioninistrasse 25, 81377
München, Germany.

In all eukaryotic cells, origins of DNA replication are characterized by the
binding of the origin recognition complex (ORC). How ORC is positioned to sites
where replication initiates is unknown, because metazoan ORC binds DNA without
apparent sequence specificity. Thus, additional factors might be involved in ORC 
positioning. Our experiments indicate that a family member of the high-mobility
group proteins, HMGA1a, can specifically target ORC to DNA.
Coimmunoprecipitations and imaging studies demonstrate that HMGA1a interacts with
different ORC subunits in vitro and in vivo. This interaction occurs mainly in
AT-rich heterochromatic regions to which HMGA1a localizes. Fusion proteins of
HMGA1a and the DNA-binding domain of the viral factor EBNA1 or the prokaryotic
tetracycline repressor, TetR, can recruit ORC to cognate operator sites forming
functional origins of DNA replication. When HMGA1a is targeted to plasmid DNA,
the prereplicative complex is assembled during G(1) and the amount of ORC
correlates with the local concentration of HMGA1a. Nascent-strand abundance
assays demonstrate that DNA replication initiates at or near HMGA1a-rich sites.
Our experiments indicate that chromatin proteins can target ORC to DNA,
suggesting they might specify origins of DNA replication in metazoan cells.

PMCID: PMC2234206
PMID: 18234858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(9):2930-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00654-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Parafibromin, a component of the human PAF complex, regulates growth factors and 
is required for embryonic development and survival in adult mice.

Wang P(1), Bowl MR, Bender S, Peng J, Farber L, Chen J, Ali A, Zhang Z, Alberts
AS, Thakker RV, Shilatifard A, Williams BO, Teh BT.

Author information: 
(1)Van Andel Research Institute, 333 Bostwick Avenue, N.E., Grand Rapids, MI
49503, USA.

Parafibromin, a transcription factor associated with the PAF complex, is encoded 
by the HRPT2 gene, mutations of which cause the hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor
syndrome (OMIM145001). To elucidate the function of parafibromin, we generated
conventional and conditional Hrpt2 knockout mice and found that Hrpt2(-/-) mice
were embryonic lethal by embryonic day 6.5 (E6.5). Controlled deletion of Hrpt2
after E8.5 resulted in apoptosis and growth retardation. Deletion of Hrpt2 in
adult mice led to severe cachexia and death within 20 days. To explore the
mechanism underlying the embryonic lethality and death of adult mice, mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were cultured and Hrpt2 was deleted in vitro.
Hrpt2(-/-) MEFs underwent apoptosis, while Hrpt2(+/+) and Hrpt2(+/-) MEFs grew
normally. To study the mechanism of this apoptosis, Hrpt2(+/+) and Hrpt2(-/-)
MEFs were used in cDNA microarray, semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR,
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to identify genes regulated by
parafibromin. These revealed that Hrpt2 expression and the parafibromin/PAF
complex directly regulate genes involved in cell growth and survival, including
H19, Igf1, Igf2, Igfbp4, Hmga1, Hmga2, and Hmgcs2. Thus, our results show that
expression of Hrpt2 and parafibromin is pivotal in mammalian development and
survival in adults and that these functions are likely mediated by the
transcriptional regulation of growth factors.

PMCID: PMC2293088
PMID: 18212049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Int J Oncol. 2008 Feb;32(2):289-305.

The HMGA proteins: a myriad of functions (Review).

Cleynen I(1), Van de Ven WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Leuven, Herestraat 49/bus 602, Leuven, Belgium.

The 'high mobility group' HMGA protein family consists of four members: HMGA1a,
HMGA1b and HMGA1c, which result from translation of alternative spliced forms of 
one gene and HMGA2, which is encoded for by another gene. HMGA proteins are
characterized by three DNA-binding domains, called AT-hooks, and an acidic
carboxy-terminal tail. HMGA proteins are architectural transcription factors that
both positively and negatively regulate the transcription of a variety of genes. 
They do not display direct transcriptional activation capacity, but regulate gene
expression by changing the DNA conformation by binding to AT-rich regions in the 
DNA and/or direct interaction with several transcription factors. In this way,
they influence a diverse array of normal biological processes including cell
growth, proliferation, differentiation and death. Both HMGA1 and HMGA2 are hardly
detectable in normal adult tissue but are abundantly and ubiquitously expressed
during embryonic development. In malignant epithelial tumors as well as in
leukemia, however, expression of HMGA1 is again strongly elevated to embryonic
levels thus leading to ectopic expression of (fetal) target genes. HMGA2
overexpression also has a causal role in inducing neoplasia. Besides
overexpression of full length HMGA proteins in different tumors, the HMGA genes
are often involved in chromosomal rearrangements. Such translocations are mostly 
detected in benign tumors of mesenchymal origin and are believed to be one of the
most common chromosomal rearrangements in human neoplasia. To provide clarity in 
the abundance of articles on this topic, this review gives a general overview of 
the nuclear functions and regulation of the HMGA genes and corresponding
proteins.

PMID: 18202751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J AOAC Int. 2007 Nov-Dec;90(6):1639-46.

Interlaboratory trial validation of an event-specific qualitative polymerase
chain reaction-based detection method for genetically modified RT73 rapeseed.

Pan L(1), Zhang S, Yang L, Broll H, Tian F, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Entry-Exit Inspection & Quarantine Bureau, GMO Detection Laboratory, 
1208 Minsheng Rd, Shanghai 200135, People's Republic of China. panlw888@126.com

The qualitative event-specific polymerase chain reaction detection method of
genetically modified (GM) RT73 rapeseed was developed based on the cloned 3' end 
flanking sequence of RT73 rapeseed integration. The specificity of the method for
GM RT73 rapeseed was validated using several different GM rapeseed lines, GM
maize lines, GM soybean line, non-GM rapeseed, and other non-GM crops. In this
study, the developed method was validated through an interlaboratory study by 12 
laboratories from 6 countries. The sensitivity of this method was evaluated using
several mixed rapeseed meals with different GM RT73 rapeseed contents from 5.0 to
0.01% prepared by our laboratory. The evaluated results showed that all of the
rapeseed endogenous reference high mobility group protein gene (HMG I/Y), figwort
mosaic virus 35S (FMV 35S) promoter, and RT73 event-specific fragment could be
detected from rapeseed samples at 0.1% (w/w) with a confidence level of more than
95%. All results from the 12 laboratories indicated that the developed method
could be considered fit for the detection and identification of GM RT73 rapeseed.

PMID: 18193742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Eur J Cancer. 2008 Jan;44(2):318-25. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Hmga1 null mice are less susceptible to chemically induced skin carcinogenesis.

Visone R(1), Iuliano R, Palmieri D, Server IN, Chiappetta G, De Martino I, Fedele
M, Costinean S, Oberyszyn TM, Kusewitt DF, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli Federico II, via Pansini, 5, 80131, Naples, Italy.

The HMGA1 proteins have a critical role in the process of carcinogenesis. They
are overexpressed in most human malignant neoplasias, and the inhibition of their
expression has been shown to prevent cell transformation and results in malignant
cell death. To determine whether HMGA1 proteins are also required for in vivo
carcinogenesis, we compared the tumour susceptibility of mice wild-type or
knockout for the Hmga1-null allele using a two-stage chemical skin carcinogenesis
protocol. Hmga1-/- mice exhibited a decreased number and a delayed onset of skin 
papillomas in comparison with wild-type mice. Moreover, the progression of skin
papillomas to carcinomas was observed in only 5% of Hmga1-/- compared to 18% of
wild-type mice. These results suggest a lower susceptibility of Hmga1-/- mice to 
skin carcinogenesis induced by chemical agents.

PMID: 18155899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Periodontal Res. 2008 Feb;43(1):76-83. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha stimulates gingival epithelial cells to release high 
mobility-group box 1.

Morimoto Y(1), Kawahara KI, Tancharoen S, Kikuchi K, Matsuyama T, Hashiguchi T,
Izumi Y, Maruyama I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical 
and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: High-mobility-group box 1 functions as a late-phase
inflammatory mediator. It can be released extracellularly by macrophages and
necrotic cells through lipopolysaccharide and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. The
objective of this study was to clarify the source of high-mobility-group box 1 in
chronic periodontitis tissues and tumor necrosis factor-alpha-stimulated gingival
epithelial cells, and subsequently elucidate its inducible inflammatory pathway.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Chronic periodontitis and healthy gingival sections were
stained for high-mobility-group box 1 by immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence. The amounts of high-mobility-group box 1 released into the
gingival crevicular fluid and supernatants from gingival epithelial cells
stimulated by tumor necrosis factor-alpha were examined by western blot. The
phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) in gingival
epithelial cells was also examined.
RESULTS: High-mobility-group box 1 was detected in the cytoplasm and nucleus of
gingival epithelial cells with periodontitis. Western blotting revealed a
significant increase in high-mobility-group box 1 expression in the gingival
crevicular fluid from periodontitis patients. High-mobility-group box 1
production in gingival epithelial cells was increased following stimulation with 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha. The molecular dialogue between tumor necrosis
factor-alpha and gingival epithelial cells involved modulation of the activities 
of p38MAPK, Jun N-terminal kinase and p44/42. Interestingly, only phosphorylation
of p38MAPK contributed to more than half of the signaling initiated by tumor
necrosis factor-alpha-elicited high-mobility-group box 1 release.
CONCLUSION: High-mobility-group box 1 is continuously released from the gingival 
epithelial cells modulated by tumor necrosis factor-alpha. These findings imply
that high-mobility-group box 1 expression and possibly p38MAPK constitute
important features in periodontitis.

PMID: 18067550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Chembiochem. 2008 Jan 25;9(2):304-11.

HMGA1a protein unfolds or refolds synthetic DNA-chromophore hybrid polymers: a
chaperone-like behavior.

Wan W(1), Wang W, Li AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.

High group mobility protein, HMGA1a, was found to play a chaperone-like role in
the folding or unfolding of hybrid polymers that contained well-defined synthetic
chromophores and DNA sequences. The synthetic and biological hybrid polymers
folded into hydrophobic chromophoric nanostructures in water, but existed as
partially unfolded configurations in pH or salt buffers. The presence of HMGA1a
induced unfolding of the hybrid DNA-chromophore polymer in pure water, whereas
the protein promoted refolding of the same polymer in various pH or salt buffers.
The origin of the chaperone-like properties probably comes from the ability of
HMGA1a to reversibly bind both synthetic chromophores and single stranded DNA.
The unfolding mechanisms and the binding stoichiometry of protein-hybrid polymers
depended on the sequence of the synthetic polymers.

PMID: 18067116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2007 Dec;16(4):243-8.

Malignant ectomesenchymoma: genetic profile reflects rhabdomyosarcomatous
differentiation.

Floris G(1), Debiec-Rychter M, Wozniak A, Magrini E, Manfioletti G, De Wever I,
Tallini G, Sciot R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Morphology and Molecular Pathology, University of Leuven,
Belgium.

Malignant ectomesenchymoma (MEM) represents a heterogeneous group of tumors, most
likely originating from pluripotent primitive neural crest cells. In this report,
we present an 8-month-old infant boy with an MEM on the left scrotum.
Retrospective review of the incision biopsy showed the presence of a few ganglion
cells in an otherwise classic embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), whereas in the
resection specimen after chemotherapy the combined RMS and ganglioneuroma
components were very obvious. Cytogenetic analysis of the residual lesion showed 
an abnormal karyotype, 49, XY, +2, -6, +11, +20, +mar, with a hyperploidy in a
subset of cells. By fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, the marker
chromosome was identified as originating from chromosome 6, and the tumor cells
were negative for PAX3/PAX7 disrupting translocations specific for alveolar RMS. 
Gains of chromosomes 2, 11, and 20, found in the current case, are a common
finding in embryonal RMS. These gains probably reflect the myogenic
differentiation of MEM and support the genetic link between these 2 neoplasms. In
addition to the conventional cytogenetics, array comparative genomic
hybridization analysis was performed on the primary and residual tumors. The
genomic profiles of both specimens were basically the same including the presence
of 2 distinctive chromosome 6p21.32-p21.2 and 6p11.2 amplification regions in the
primary tumor, which vanished in the postchemotherapy specimen. The pretreatment 
biopsy exhibited strong expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 proteins in
immunohistochemistry, with the shift toward the loss of expression of both genes 
in the posttreatment tumoral tissue. This finding supports the oncogenic
properties of the HMGA family of proteins and their role in the process of
malignant transformation.

PMID: 18043289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Proteome Res. 2007 Dec;6(12):4711-9. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Homeodomain-interacting protein kinase-2 (HIPK2) phosphorylates HMGA1a at Ser-35,
Thr-52, and Thr-77 and modulates its DNA binding affinity.

Zhang Q(1), Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)yinsheng.wang@ucr.edu.

The chromosomal high-mobility group A (HMGA) proteins, composed of HMGA1a, HMGA1b
and HMGA2, play important roles in the regulation of numerous processes in
eukaryotic cells, such as transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, RNA processing,
and chromatin remodeling. The biological activities of HMGA1 proteins are highly 
regulated by their post-translational modifications (PTMs), including
acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation. Recently, it was found that the
homeodomain-interacting protein kinase-2 (HIPK2), a newly identified
serine/threonine kinase, co-immunoprecipitated with, and phosphorylated, HMGA1
proteins. However, the sites and the biological significance of the
phosphorylation have not been elucidated. Here, we found that HIPK2
phosphorylates HMGA1a at Ser-35, Thr-52, and Thr-77, and HMGA1b at Thr-41 and
Thr-66. In addition, we demonstrated that cdc2, which is known to phosphorylate
HMGA1 proteins, could induce the phosphorylation of HMGA1 proteins at the same
Ser/Thr sites. The two kinases, however, exhibited different site preferences for
the phosphorylation: The preference for HIPK2 phosphorylation followed the order 
of Thr-77 > Thr-52 > Ser-35, whereas the order for cdc2 phosphorylation was
Thr-52 > Thr-77 > Ser-35. Moreover, we found that the HIPK2-phosphorylated HMGA1a
reduced the binding affinity of HMGA1a to human germ line promoter, and the drop 
in binding affinity induced by HIPK2 phosphorylation was lower than that
introduced by cdc2 phosphorylation, which is consistent with the notion that the 
second AT-hook in HMGA1a is more important for DNA binding than the third
AT-hook.

PMCID: PMC2547408
PMID: 17960875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Pathol. 2008 Jan;214(1):58-64.

Detection of high-mobility group proteins A1 and A2 represents a valid diagnostic
marker in post-pubertal testicular germ cell tumours.

Franco R(1), Esposito F, Fedele M, Liguori G, Pierantoni GM, Botti G, Tramontano 
D, Fusco A, Chieffi P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori Fondazione G Pascale, 80131, Naples, Italy.

The high-mobility group A (HMGA) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMGA1 and HMGA2
are architectural factors. They are abundantly expressed during embryogenesis and
in most malignant neoplasias, whereas their expression is low or absent in normal
adult tissues. Their over-expression is known to have a causal role in cellular
neoplastic transformation. Previous studies from our group have shown that their 
expression is restricted to specific germinal cells. In this study we have
evaluated, by immunohistochemistry, the expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 in a series
of post-pubertal testicular tumours of different histological types, including 30
seminomas, 15 teratomas, 15 embryonal carcinomas and 10 mixed germinal tumours
with a prominent yolk sac tumour component. HMGA1 protein expression was detected
in all seminomas and embryonal carcinomas analysed, but not in teratomas or yolk 
sac carcinomas. Conversely, HMGA2 was present only in embryonal carcinomas and
yolk sac carcinomas, but not in seminomas or teratomas. The immunohistochemical
data were further confirmed by Western blot and, at the mRNA level, by RT-PCR
analyses. These findings indicate that HMGA1 and HMGA2 are differently expressed 
with respect to the state of differentiation of testicular germ cell tumours
(TGCTs), with over-expression of both proteins in pluripotential embryonal
carcinoma cells and loss of expression of HMGA1 in yolk sac tumours and of both
proteins in the mature adult tissue of teratoma areas. Therefore, the different
profiles of HMGA1 and HMGA2 protein expression could represent a valuable
diagnostic tool in some cases in which the histological differential diagnosis is
problematic.

PMID: 17935122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Genes Cells. 2007 Oct;12(10):1179-91.

HMGA1a: sequence-specific RNA-binding factor causing sporadic Alzheimer's
disease-linked exon skipping of presenilin-2 pre-mRNA.

Manabe T(1), Ohe K, Katayama T, Matsuzaki S, Yanagita T, Okuda H, Bando Y,
Imaizumi K, Reeves R, Tohyama M, Mayeda A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Aberrant exon 5 skipping of presenilin-2 (PS2) pre-mRNA produces a deleterious
protein isoform PS2V, which is almost exclusively observed in the brains of
sporadic Alzheimer's disease patients. PS2V over-expression in vivo enhances
susceptibility to various endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stresses and increases
production of amyloid-beta peptides. We previously purified and identified high
mobility group A protein 1a (HMGA1a) as a trans-acting factor responsible for
aberrant exon 5 skipping. Using heterologous pre-mRNAs, here we demonstrate that 
a specific HMGA1a-binding sequence in exon 5 adjacent to the 5' splice site is
necessary for HMGA1a to inactivate the 5' splice site. An aberrant HMGA1a-U1
snRNP complex was detected on the HMGA1a-binding site adjacent to the 5' splice
site during the early splicing reaction. A competitor 2'-O-methyl RNA (2'-O-Me
RNA) consisting of the HMGA1a-binding sequence markedly repressed exon 5 skipping
of PS2 pre-mRNA in vitro and in vivo. Finally, HMGA1a-induced cell death under ER
stress was prevented by transfection of the competitor 2'-O-Me RNA. These results
provide insights into the molecular basis for PS2V-associated neurodegenerative
diseases that are initiated by specific RNA binding of HMGA1a.

PMID: 17903177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Proteomics. 2007 Oct;7(20):3735-42.

Identification of new high mobility group A1 associated proteins.

Pierantoni GM(1), Esposito F, Giraud S, Bienvenut WV, Diaz JJ, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di
Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples,
Italy.

High mobility group A (HMGA) proteins (HMGA1a, HMGA1b, HMGA1c and HMGA2) are
nonhistone chromosomal proteins that do not have transcriptional activity per se,
but they orchestrate the assembly of multiprotein complexes involved in gene
transcription, replication and chromatin structure through a complex network of
protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. To better understand their
mechanisms of action, we have used a combination of coimmunoprecipitation, 1-D
gel SDS-PAGE and MS to identify new potential molecular interactors. We have
found 11 proteins that associate with HMGA1. These proteins belong to three
different classes: mRNA processing proteins, RNA helicases and protein
chaperones. Some interactions were confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and
pull-down experiments in human embryonal kidney 293 cells. These experimental
data suggest that HMGA1 proteins can associate with proteins that are strictly
involved in chromatin structure and in several important mRNA processing steps,
supporting the idea that HMGA1 proteins can also participate in these events.

PMID: 17880001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cancer Sci. 2007 Dec;98(12):1893-901. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

High mobility group protein HMGA1 inhibits retinoblastoma protein-mediated
cellular G0 arrest.

Ueda Y(1), Watanabe S, Tei S, Saitoh N, Kuratsu J, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regeneration Medicine, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Retinoblastoma protein (RB) acts as a tumor suppressor in many tissue types, by
promoting cell arrest via E2F-mediated transcriptional repression. In addition to
the aberrant forms of the RB gene found in different types of cancers, many viral
oncoproteins including the simian virus 40 large T antigen target RB. However,
cellular factors that inhibit RB function remain to be elucidated. Here, we
report that RB interacts with the high mobility group protein A1 (HMGA1),
a-non-histone architectural chromatin factor that is frequently overexpressed in 
cancer cells. HMGA1 binds the small pocket domain of RB, and competes with HDAC1.
Subsequently, overexpression of HMGA1 abolishes the inhibitory effect of RB on
E2F-activated transcription from the cyclin E promoter. Under serum starvation,
T98G cells had been previously shown to be arrested in the G0 phase in an
RB-mediated manner. The G0 phase was characterized by growth arrest and low
levels of transcription, together with the hypophosphorylation of RB and the
downregulation of HMGA1. In contrast, such serum-depleted G0 arrest was abrogated
in T98G cells overexpressing HMGA1. The overexpressed HMGA1 was found to form
complexes with cellular RB, suggesting that downregulation of HMGA1 is required
for G0 arrest. There were no phenotypic changes in HMGA1-expressing T98G cells in
the presence of serum, but the persistent expression of HMGA1 under serum
starvation caused various nuclear abnormalities, which were similarly induced in 
T antigen-expressing T98G cells. Our present findings indicate that
overexpression of HMGA1 disturbs RB-mediated cell arrest, suggesting a negative
control of RB by HMGA1.

PMID: 17877762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. DNA Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;26(10):745-52.

HMGA1 mediates the activation of the CRYAB promoter by BRG1.

Duncan B(1), Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

alphaB-Crystallin (CRYAB) is a small heat-shock protein that is implicated in
many cellular processes, such as transcription and differentiation, as well as
pathologic process. It is expressed at high levels in vertebrate eye lens and at 
low levels in a variety of other cell types. We previously identified CRYAB as a 
target gene of the chromatin-remodeling SWI/SNF-like Brg or hBrm-associated
factors (BAF) complexes. In this report, we identify a 30 bp DNA element required
for mediating the activation of CRYAB by brahma-related gene 1 (BRG1). This
BRG1-response element is located at the edge of a positioned nucleosome
immediately upstream of the transcription initiation site. An AT-rich sequence
within this region is bound by the high-mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) proteins
in vitro and in vivo. We demonstrate that the HMGA1 target sequences and HMGA1
proteins are required for the maximal activation of the CRYAB promoter by BRG1.
Our data indicate that HMGA1 nonhistone chromatin proteins, the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complexes, and sequence-specific transcription factors act together to
regulate the expression of the CRYAB gene.

PMID: 17723105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Nov;46(11):981-90.

Frequency and characterization of HMGA2 and HMGA1 rearrangements in mesenchymal
tumors of the lower genital tract.

Medeiros F(1), Erickson-Johnson MR, Keeney GL, Clayton AC, Nascimento AG, Wang X,
Oliveira AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Mesenchymal tumors of the lower genital tract predominantly occur in women of
reproductive age and are mainly represented by aggressive angiomyxoma (AAM) and
angiomyofibroblastoma (AMF). Whether these tumors are different phenotypic
expressions of the same biological entity is still debatable. Genetic
rearrangements of HMGA2 have been reported in a few cases of AAM but its
frequency and clinicobiological implications have not been studied
systematically. We evaluated 90 cases of mesenchymal tumors of the lower genital 
tract that comprised 42 AAMs, 18 AMFs, 6 cellular angiofibromas, 5
fibroepithelial stromal polyps, 15 genital leiomyomas, 3 superficial
angiomyxomas, and 1 spindle cell lipoma. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was
used to identify rearrangements of HMGA2 and its homologue HMGA1. HMGA2
rearrangements were identified in 14 AAMs (33%) and in 1 vaginal leiomyoma. All
other tumors were negative for HMGA2 rearrangements. HMGA1 rearrangement was not 
found in any of the cases. RT-PCR confirmed transcriptional upregulation of HMGA2
only in tumors with HMGA2 rearrangements. Standard cytogenetic analyses were
performed in two AAMs and one AMF. One AAM had a t(1;12)(p32;q15); the other
tumors had normal karyotypes. Mapping and sequence analysis of the breakpoint
showed fusion to the 3' untranslated region of HMGA2 to genomic sequences derived
from the contig NT 032977.8 on chromosome 1p32. Our findings support the
hypothesis that AAM and AMF are distinct biological entities. The diagnostic
usefulness of HMGA2 rearrangements to differentiate between AAM and other tumors 
of the lower genital tract may be limited due to the their low frequency.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17654722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2007 Sep;18(9):1569-78. Epub 2007 Jun 13.

A quantitative study on the in vitro and in vivo acetylation of high mobility
group A1 proteins.

Zhang Q(1), Zhang K, Zou Y, Perna A, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry-027, University of California, Riverside, California
92521-0403, USA.

High mobility group (HMG) A1 proteins are subject to a number of
post-translational modifications, which may regulate their function in gene
transcription and other cellular processes. We examined, by using mass
spectrometry, the acetylation of HMGA1a and HMGA1b proteins induced by histone
acetyltransferases p300 and PCAF in vitro and in PC-3 human prostate cancer cells
in vivo. It turned out that five lysine residues in HMGA1a, i.e., Lys-14, Lys-64,
Lys-66, Lys-70, and Lys-73, could be acetylated by both p300 and PCAF. We further
quantified the level of acetylation by analyzing, with LC-MS/MS, the proteolytic 
peptides of the in vitro or in vivo acetylated HMGA1 proteins where the
unmodified lysine residues were chemically derivatized with a perdeuterated
acetyl group. Quantification results revealed that p300 and PCAF exhibited
different site preferences for the acetylation; the preference of p300
acetylation followed the order of Lys-64 approximately Lys-70 > Lys-66 > Lys-14
approximately Lys73, whereas the selectivity of PCAF acetylation followed the
sequence of Lys-70 approximately Lys-73 > Lys-64 approximately Lys-66 > Lys-14.
HMGA1b was acetylated in a very similar fashion as HMGA1a. We also demonstrated
that C-terminal phosphorylation of HMGA1 proteins did not affect the in vitro
acetylation of the two proteins by either p300 or PCAF. Moreover, we examined the
acetylation of lysine residues in HMGA1a and HMGA1b isolated from PC-3 human
prostate cancer cells. Our results showed that all the above five lysine residues
were also acetylated in vivo, with Lys-64, Lys-66 and Lys-70 in HMGA1a exhibiting
higher levels of acetylation than Lys-14 and Lys-73.

PMCID: PMC2020522
PMID: 17627840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 1;67(13):6044-52.

High-mobility group A1 proteins inhibit expression of nucleotide excision repair 
factor xeroderma pigmentosum group A.

Adair JE(1), Maloney SC, Dement GA, Wertzler KJ, Smerdon MJ, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4660, USA.

Cells that overexpress high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) proteins exhibit deficient 
nucleotide excision repair (NER) after exposure to DNA-damaging agents, a
condition ameliorated by artificially lowering intracellular levels of these
nonhistone proteins. One possible mechanism for this NER inhibition is
down-regulation of proteins involved in NER, such as xeroderma pigmentosum
complimentation group A (XPA). Microarray and reverse transcription-PCR data
indicate a 2.6-fold decrease in intracellular XPA mRNA in transgenic MCF-7 cells 
overexpressing HMGA1 proteins compared with non-HMGA1-expressing cells. XPA
protein levels are also approximately 3-fold lower in HMGA1-expressing MCF-7
cells. Moreover, whereas a >2-fold induction of XPA proteins is observed in
normal MCF-7 cells 30 min after UV exposure, no apparent induction of XPA protein
is observed in MCF-7 cells expressing HMGA1. Mechanistically, we present both
chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter site-specific mutagenesis evidence
linking HMGA1 to repression of XPA transcription via binding to a negative
regulatory element in the endogenous XPA gene promoter. Phenotypically,
HMGA1-expressing cells exhibit compromised removal of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimer lesions, a characteristic of cells that express low levels of XPA.
Importantly, we show that restoring expression of wild-type XPA in
HMGA1-expressing cells rescues UV resistance comparable with that of normal MCF-7
cells. Together, these data provide strong experimental evidence that HMGA1
proteins are involved in inhibiting XPA expression, resulting in increased UV
sensitivity in cells that overexpress these proteins. Because HMGA1 proteins are 
overexpressed in most naturally occurring cancers, with increasing cellular
concentrations correlating with increasing metastatic potential and poor patient 
prognosis, the current findings provide new insights into previously unsuspected 
mechanisms contributing to tumor progression.

PMID: 17616660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Proteome Res. 2007 Jun;6(6):2052.

Tissues tell the real tale of breast cancer.

Cottingham K.

Comment on
    J Proteome Res. 2007 Jun;6(6):2304-14.

PMID: 17577952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Biochemistry. 2007 Jul 3;46(26):7896-906. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

A mass spectrometric study on the in vitro methylation of HMGA1a and HMGA1b
proteins by PRMTs: methylation specificity, the effect of binding to AT-rich
duplex DNA, and the effect of C-terminal phosphorylation.

Zou Y(1), Webb K, Perna AD, Zhang Q, Clarke S, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry-027, University of California, Riverside, California
92521-0403, USA.

HMGA1a and HMGA1b are members of one subfamily of non-histone chromosomal
high-mobility group (HMG) proteins. They bind to various DNA-related substrates, 
including the minor groove of AT-rich duplex DNA sequences, and have been
postulated to be architectural transcription factors functioning in a wide
variety of cellular processes. Post-translational modifications of HMGA1
proteins, such as phosphorylation, acetylation, and methylation, are widely
observed in tumor cells in vivo and correlated with the modulation of protein
function. Here, we investigated the in vitro methylation of recombinant human
HMGA1a and HMGA1b proteins by three members of the protein arginine
methyltransferase (PRMT) family: PRMT1, PRMT3, and PRMT6. PRMT1 and PRMT3 showed 
a preference for methylating arginine residues in the first AT-hook of HMGA1
proteins, whereas PRMT6 methylated mainly residues in the second AT-hook. The
initial sites of methylation catalyzed by PRMT1 and PRMT3 were mapped by tandem
mass spectrometry to be Arg25 and Arg23, respectively, while we confirmed that
the initial sites of methylation catalyzed by PRMT6 were at Arg57 and Arg59. Our 
results also revealed that binding of HMGA1 proteins to AT-rich duplex DNA, but
not GC-rich duplex DNA, significantly inhibited the methylation efficiency of all
of the PRMTs toward HMGA1 proteins. Moreover, C-terminal constitutive
phosphorylation of HMGA1 proteins induced by protein kinase CK2 did not have any 
appreciable effect on the in vitro methylation of HMGA1. Our results suggest that
PRMT1 might be involved in the previously reported methylation of Arg25 in HMGA1a
in vivo.

PMID: 17550233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. DNA Repair (Amst). 2007 Sep 1;6(9):1371-9. Epub 2007 May 30.

Gene-specific nucleotide excision repair is impaired in human cells expressing
elevated levels of high mobility group A1 nonhistone proteins.

Maloney SC(1), Adair JE, Smerdon MJ, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, P.O. Box 644660,
Pullman, WA 99164, USA.

Previous work has established that stably transfected human MCF7 cells
over-expressing high mobility group A1 proteins (HMGA1) are deficient in global
genomic repair (GGR) following exposure to either UV light or cisplatin. To
investigate whether HMGA1 over-expression also interferes with gene-specific
repair, we employed a rapid and convenient quantitative polymerase chain reaction
assay for measuring repair in unique DNA sequences. Efficiency of UV-induced
lesion removal was assessed for two genes in MCF7 cells either induced, or not,
to over-express transgenic HMGA1 proteins: the constitutively active HPRT gene
and the transcriptionally silent beta-globin gene. As controls, similar
experiments were also performed in non-transgenic MCF7 cells that do not express 
detectable levels of HMGA1 and in normal human embryonic fibroblasts that
naturally over-express HMGA1 proteins. Our results indicate that exposure of
cells to a UV dose of 20 J/m2 produced an average of 0.21+/-0.03 and 0.19+/-0.02 
lesions/kb in the HPRT and beta-globin genes, respectively, with no significant
difference between HMGA1 over-expressing cells and non-expressing cells. On the
other hand, analysis of repair following UV exposure revealed that, compared to
controls, HMGA1 over-expressing cells take considerably longer to repair
photo-lesions in both the active HPRT and the silent beta-globin loci, with
non-expressing cells repairing 50% of lesions in HPRT 3-4 h faster than HMGA1
over-expressing cells. Interestingly, the delay in repair is even more prolonged 
in the silent beta-globin locus in HMGA1 over-expressing cells compared to
control cells. To our knowledge, this is the first report of HMGA1 proteins
inhibiting nucleotide excision repair (NER) within specific genes located in
either transcriptionally active "open", or inactive "closed", chromatin domains. 
Furthermore, taken together with previous findings, these results suggest that
HMGA1 over-expression interferes with repair processes common to both the GGR and
transcription-coupled repair pathways.

PMCID: PMC1994692
PMID: 17540622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Horm Metab Res. 2007 May;39(5):322-35.

ApoA-I-binding protein (AI-BP) and its homologues hYjeF_N2 and hYjeF_N3 comprise 
the YjeF_N domain protein family in humans with a role in spermiogenesis and
oogenesis.

Rudolph C(1), Sigruener A, Hartmann A, Orso E, Bals-Pratsch M, Gronwald W,
Seifert B, Kalbitzer HR, Verdorfer I, Luetjens CM, Ortmann O, Bornstein SR,
Schmitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Regensburg University
Medical Center, Regensburg, Germany.

The screening for additional human YjeF_N domain containing proteins beside the
apolipoprotein A-I interacting protein (AI-BP), identified two other genes
designated hYjeF_N2-15q23 (formerly human homologue of yeast edc3) and
hYjeF_N3-19p13.11 comprising the human YjeF_N family. AI-BP is ubiquitously
expressed, with a predominance of these tissues where the homologues were found
to be restricted including brain, mammary gland, testes and ovaries.
Immunohistochemistry of human testes and ovaries showed an expression of
hYjeF_N3-19p13.11 only in Leydig cells and theca cells, respectively, indicating 
a role in steroid hormone metabolism. Interestingly, the protein was also
strongly expressed in Leydig cell tumors and in thecofibromas. The identification
of hYjeF_N2-15q23 in theca cells and granulosa cells in ovaries, in human
spermatids of meiotic division part II and the apical membrane of Sertoli cells
in testes suggest similar functions in oogenesis and sperm maturation which is
strengthened by the identification of the spermatogenesis regulator HMGA1 as a
conserved transcription factor. However, in contrast to AI-BP, both homologous
proteins are unable to bind apoA-I. These results relate the human YjeF_N domain 
containing protein family to cholesterol processing and steroid hormone
metabolism in spermiogenesis and oogenesis, and AI-BP may link this function to
the HDL pathway.

PMID: 17533573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Phytother Res. 2007 Aug;21(8):777-89.

Analysis of effects of the herbal preparation Circulat on gene expression levels 
in cultured human fibroblasts.

Antoshechkin A(1), Olalde J, Magarici M, Muhammad A, Salom A, Suarez J, Amendola 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Genext Research, Inc., Clearwater, FL 33765, USA. antoshechkin@earthlink.net

Circulat is a systemic standardized plant extract formulation that was developed 
for the prevention of severe manifestations of type 2 diabetes such as necrotic
damage of the plantar foot. With the aim of revealing the molecular mechanisms
underlying Circulat's biological activity, the effects of Circulat treatment on
gene expression levels were examined in the cultured human fibroblast cell line
MRC-5 using Affymetrix oligonucleotide microarrays. The analysis identified 187
genes, the expression levels of which underwent significant changes upon Circulat
treatment. These include four genes (IL6, HMGA1, SLC19A2 and C4A) that have been 
implicated previously in the development of diabetes. A large proportion of the
identified genes are involved in energy metabolism, protein synthesis, glucose
metabolism and signaling pathways. Synergistic action of the Circulat components 
has also been revealed. Prospective applications of microarray analysis in
phytopharmacology are discussed.

(c) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17514633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cancer Res. 2007 May 15;67(10):4679-86.

HMGA1 controls transcription of insulin receptor to regulate cyclin D1
translation in pancreatic cancer cells.

Kolb S(1), Fritsch R, Saur D, Reichert M, Schmid RM, Schneider G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Technical University of Munich,
Ismaninger, Munich, Germany.

The HMGA1 proteins act as architectural transcription factors and are involved in
the regulation of genes important in the process of carcinogenesis. Although
HMGA1 proteins are overexpressed in most types of cancer, signaling circuits
regulated by HMGA1 are not clarified in detail. In this study, we show that HMGA1
proteins promote proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells by accelerating G(1)
phase progression. Transfection of HMGA1-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA)
activates the RB-dependent G(1)-phase checkpoint due to the impaired expression
of cyclin D1. Down-regulation of cyclin D1 after the HMGA1 knockdown is due to
translational control and involves the repressor of the eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) 4E-BP1. We show that 4E-BP1 and cyclin D1 act
downstream of the insulin receptor (IR) in pancreatic cancer cells. At the
molecular level transcription of the IR is controlled by a CAAT/enhancer binding 
protein beta (C/EBPbeta)/HMGA1 complex. Together, this work defines a novel
pathway regulated by HMGA1, which contributes to the proliferation of pancreatic 
cancer cells.

PMID: 17510394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cancer Res. 2007 May 15;67(10):4620-9.

Transcriptional control of the human high mobility group A1 gene: basal and
oncogenic Ras-regulated expression.

Cleynen I(1), Huysmans C, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa S, Van de Ven W, Peeters K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Leuven, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, Herestraat, Leuven,
Belgium.

Several studies have already shown that the high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) gene
is up-regulated in most common types of cancer and immortalized tissue culture
cell lines. HMGA1 expression is also much higher during embryonic development
than in adult life. The elevated expression of HMGA1 in cancer thus likely occurs
through oncofetal transcriptional mechanisms, which to date have not been well
characterized. In the present study, we have cloned and functionally analyzed the
TATA-less 5'-flanking regulatory region of human HMGA1. We identified two
proximal regulatory regions that are important for basal transcription and in
which specificity protein 1 (SP1) and activator protein 1 (AP1) transcription
factors seem to be the regulating elements. In addition, we showed that the HMGA1
promoter is strongly inducible by oncogenic Ras, via a distal regulatory region. 
An AP1 site and three SP1-like sites are responsible for this inducible activity.
An even more convincing finding for a role of oncogenic Ras in the regulation of 
HMGA1 in cancers is the discovery that HMGA1 up-regulation in the HCT116 colon
cancer cell line is abolished when the mutated Ras allele is removed from these
cells. Our data constitute the first extensive study of the regulation of basal
and Ras-induced human HMGA1 gene expression and suggest that the elevated
expression of HMGA1 in cancer cells requires, among others, a complex cooperation
between SP1 family members and AP1 factors by the activation of Ras GTPase
signaling.

PMID: 17510387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cancer Res. 2007 May 1;67(9):3998-4004.

The high-mobility group A1 gene up-regulates cyclooxygenase 2 expression in
uterine tumorigenesis.

Tesfaye A(1), Di Cello F, Hillion J, Ronnett BM, Elbahloul O, Ashfaq R, Dhara S, 
Prochownik E, Tworkoski K, Reeves R, Roden R, Ellenson LH, Huso DL, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Uterine cancer is the most common cancer of the female genital tract and is the
fourth most frequent cause of cancer death in women in the U.S. Despite the high 
prevalence of uterine cancers, the molecular events that lead to neoplastic
transformation in the uterus are poorly understood. Moreover, there are limited
mouse models to study these malignancies. We generated transgenic mice with
high-mobility group A1 gene (HMGA1a) expression targeted to uterine tissue and
all female mice developed tumors by 9 months of age. Histopathologically, the
tumors resemble human uterine adenosarcoma and are transplantable. To determine
whether these findings are relevant to human disease, we evaluated primary human 
uterine neoplasms and found that HMGA1a mRNA and protein levels are increased in 
most high-grade neoplasms but not in normal uterine tissue, benign tumors, or
most low-grade neoplasms. We also found that HMGA1a up-regulates cyclooxygenase 2
(COX-2) expression in transgenic tumors. Moreover, both HMGA1a and COX-2
expression are up-regulated in high-grade human leiomyosarcomas. Using chromatin 
immunoprecipitation, HMGA1a binds directly to the COX-2 promoter in human uterine
cancer cells in vivo and activates its expression in transfection experiments. We
also show that blocking either HMGA1a or COX-2 in high-grade human uterine cancer
cells blocks anchorage-independent cell growth in methylcellulose. These findings
show that HMGA1a functions as an oncogene when overexpressed in the uterus and
contributes to the pathogenesis of human uterine cancer by activating COX-2
expression. Although a larger study is needed to confirm these results, HMGA1a
may be a useful marker for aggressive human uterine cancers.

PMID: 17483309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Proteome Res. 2007 Jun;6(6):2304-14. Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Mass spectrometric analysis of high-mobility group proteins and their
post-translational modifications in normal and cancerous human breast tissues.

Zou Y(1), Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry-027, University of California at Riverside, Riverside,
California 92521-0403, USA.

Comment in
    J Proteome Res. 2007 Jun;6(6):2052.

High-mobility group (HMG) A1 proteins including HMGA1a and HMGA1b are chromosomal
proteins that function in a variety of cellular processes such as cell growth,
transcription regulation, neoplastic transformation, and progression.
Overexpression of HMGA1 proteins has been associated with almost every type of
cancer cells. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of HMGA1 proteins in
different types of human cancer cell lines have been extensively explored over
the past decade. Here, we extended the identification of PTMs of HMGA1 proteins
to human breast tumor tissue specimens with different carcinoma progression
stages (metastatic and primary cancer) as well as the paired adjacent normal
breast tissues. In this regard, we employed tandem mass spectrometry to examine
the nature and sites of PTMs of HMGA1 proteins isolated from cancerous/normal
human breast tissues. Novel PTMs of HMGA1a protein, that is, monomethylation at
Lys30 and Lys54 as well as monophosphorylation at Ser43 and Ser48, were detected 
in cancer tissues. In these cancer tissues, we also found C-terminal constitutive
phosphorylation in HMGA1a and HMGA1b as well as mono- and dimethylation of Arg25 
in HMGA1a, which were previously found to be present in these proteins isolated
from human cancer cell lines. Furthermore, a more complex spectrum of PTMs on
HMGA1 proteins was correlated with a more aggressive malignancy in human breast
cancer tissues.

PMID: 17455969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 1;357(2):474-9. Epub 2007 Apr 9.

Fatty acid represses insulin receptor gene expression by impairing HMGA1 through 
protein kinase Cepsilon.

Dey D(1), Bhattacharya A, Roy S, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4,
Raja S.C. Mullick Road, Kolkata 700032, India.

It is known that free fatty acid (FFA) contributes to the development of insulin 
resistance and type2 diabetes. However, the underlying mechanism in FFA-induced
insulin resistance is still unclear. In the present investigation we have
demonstrated that palmitate significantly (p <0.001) inhibited insulin-stimulated
phosphorylation of PDK1, the key insulin signaling molecule. Consequently, PDK1
phosphorylation of plasma membrane bound PKCepsilon was also inhibited.
Surprisingly, phosphorylation of cytosolic PKCepsilon was greatly stimulated by
palmitate; this was then translocated to the nuclear region and associated with
the inhibition of insulin receptor (IR) gene transcription. A PKCepsilon
translocation inhibitor peptide, epsilonV1, suppressed this inhibitory effect of 
palmitate, suggesting requirement of phospho-PKCepsilon migration to implement
palmitate effect. Experimental evidences indicate that phospho-PKCepsilon
adversely affected HMGA1. Since HMGA1 regulates IR promoter activity, expression 
of IR gene was impaired causing reduction of IR on cell surface and that
compromises with insulin sensitivity.

PMID: 17434141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Jun;46(6):594-606.

Assessment of the clinical and molecular impact of different cytogenetic
subgroups in a series of 272 lipomas with abnormal karyotype.

Bartuma H(1), Hallor KH, Panagopoulos I, Collin A, Rydholm A, Gustafson P, Bauer 
HC, Brosjö O, Domanski HA, Mandahl N, Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Conventional lipomas harbor karyotypic changes that could be subdivided into
four, usually mutually exclusive, categories: rearrangement, in particular
through translocations, of chromosome bands 12q13-15, resulting in deregulation
of the HMGA2 gene, loss of material from or rearrangement of chromosome 13,
supernumerary ring or giant marker chromosomes, and aberrations of chromosome
band 6p21. In the present study, 272 conventional lipomas, two-thirds of them
deep-seated, with acquired clonal chromosome changes were assessed with regard to
karyotypic and clinical features. A nonrandom distribution of breakpoints and
imbalances could be confirmed, with 83% of the cases harboring one or more of the
previously known cytogenetic hallmarks. Correlation with clinical features
revealed that lipomas with rings/giant markers were larger, occurred in older
patients, were more often deep-seated, and seemed to have an increased tendency
to recur locally, compared with tumors with other chromosome aberrations. The
possible involvement of the HMGA2 gene in cases that did not show any of the
characteristic cytogenetic changes was further evaluated by locus-specific
metaphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and RT-PCR, revealing
infrequent cryptic disruption of the gene but abundant expression of full length 
or truncated transcripts. By FISH, we could also show that breakpoints in bands
10q22-23 do not affect the MYST4 gene, whereas breakpoints in 6p21 or 8q11-12
occasionally target the HMGA1 or PLAG1 genes, respectively, also in conventional 
lipomas.

PMID: 17370328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Acta Otolaryngol. 2007 Jan;127(1):76-81.

High mobility group HMGI(Y) protein expression in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Rho YS(1), Lim YC, Park IS, Kim JH, Ahn HY, Cho SJ, Shin HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine,
Hallym University, Seoul, South Korea. ys20805@chol.com

CONCLUSION: We conclude that increased expression level of the high mobility
group I (HMGI(Y)) is closely associated with malignant transformation in head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs), and the measurement of HMGI(Y) levels in 
HNSCCs may be useful as a prognostic marker.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether HMGI overexpression is observed in HNSCCs, and
its value as a prognostic marker in HNSCCs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HMGI(Y) expression was determined at the protein level by 
immunohistochemisty using a HMGI(Y)-specific antibody and RT-PCR in 10 surgically
resected specimens of non-neoplastic tissue (normal palatal tissue) and 40
HNSCCs. We also evaluated the association of HMGI(Y) overexpression within
clinicopathologic parameters, i.e. clinical stage, pathologic grade, status of
cervical lymph node metastasis, recurrence rate.
RESULTS: Expression of HMGI(Y) by immunohistochemical staining was observed in 35
of 40 (87.5%) HNSCC samples, whereas normal mucosa and/or the mucosa adjacent to 
the tumor tissue showed negative or weakly positive staining (p<0.05).
Semi-quantification of HMGI(Y) by RT-PCR was 2.98+/-2.24 in cancer and
0.47+/-0.25 in normal tissue (p<0.001). High expression of HMGI(Y) was observed
in recurrent cases, compared with non-recurrent cases (p<0.05). However, no
significant correlation was observed between the levels of HMGI(Y) expression and
other clinical factors such as clinical stage, pathologic grade, and status of
cervical lymph node metastasis.

PMID: 17364334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 4;282(18):13363-71. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

Dual role for SUMO E2 conjugase Ubc9 in modulating the transforming and
growth-promoting properties of the HMGA1b architectural transcription factor.

Li Y(1), Lu J, Prochownik EV.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, The
Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Members of the HMGA1 (high mobility group A1) family of architectural
transcription factors, HMGA1a and HMGA1b, play important roles in many normal
cellular processes and in tumorigenesis. We performed a yeast two-hybrid screen
for HMGA1-interacting proteins and identified the SUMO E2 conjugase Ubc9 as one
such partner. The Ubc9-interacting domain of HMGA1 is bipartite, consisting of a 
proline-rich region near the N terminus and an acidic domain at the extreme C
terminus, whereas the HMGA1-interacting domain of Ubc9 comprises a single region 
previously shown to associate with and SUMOylate other transcription factors.
Consistent with these findings, endogenous HMGA1 proteins and Ubc9 could be
co-immunoprecipitated from several human cell lines. Studies with HMGA1b proteins
containing mutations of either or both Ubc9-interacting domains and with
Ubc9-depleted cell lines indicated that the proline-rich domain of HMGA1b
positively influences transformation and growth, whereas the acidic domain
negatively influences these properties. None of the changes in HMGA1 protein
functions mediated by Ubc9 appears to require SUMOylation. These findings are
consistent with the idea that Ubc9 can act as both a positive and negative
regulator of proliferation and transformation via its non-SUMO-dependent
interaction with HMGA1 proteins.

PMID: 17350957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Br J Cancer. 2007 Mar 26;96(6):993-1000. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Overexpression of HMGA1 promotes anoikis resistance and constitutive Akt
activation in pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells.

Liau SS(1), Jazag A, Ito K, Whang EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA. liauss@hotmail.com

HMGA1 proteins are architectural transcription factors that are overexpressed by 
pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Roles of HMGA1 in mediating the malignant phenotype
of this cancer are poorly understood. We tested the hypothesis that
overexpression of HMGA1 promotes resistance to anoikis (apoptosis induced by
anchorage deprivation) in pancreatic cancer cells. HMGA1 cDNA was stably
transfected into MiaPaCa2 human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells (which have low
baseline expression levels of HMGA1). Cells were grown in suspension on
PolyHEMA-coated plates and their susceptibility to anoikis was assayed using flow
cytometry. Overexpression of HMGA1 was associated with marked reductions in
susceptibility to anoikis in concert with increases in Akt phosphorylation
(Ser473) and in Akt kinase activity and with reductions in caspase 3 activation. 
Inhibition of phosphoinositidyl-3 (PI3-K)/Akt pathway with either the small
molecule inhibitor LY294002 or dominant-negative Akt resulted in reversal of
anoikis resistance induced by HMGA1 overexpression. Further, RNA
interference-mediated HMGA1 silencing in MiaPaCa2 and BxPC3 (a human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell line with high baseline levels of HMGA1 expression) cells
resulted in significant increases in susceptibility to anoikis. Our findings
suggest HMGA1 promotes anoikis resistance through a PI3-K/Akt-dependent
mechanism. Given the putative associations between anoikis resistance and
metastatic potential, HMGA1 represents a potential therapeutic target in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2360112
PMID: 17342093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 15;67(4):1461-71.

Activation of TLX3 and NKX2-5 in t(5;14)(q35;q32) T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia by remote 3'-BCL11B enhancers and coregulation by PU.1 and HMGA1.

Nagel S(1), Scherr M, Kel A, Hornischer K, Crawford GE, Kaufmann M, Meyer C,
Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Department of Cell
Cultures, Inhoffenstrasse 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany. sna@dsmz.de

In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, alternative t(5;14)(q35;q32.2) forms
effect dysregulation of either TLX3 or NKX2-5 homeobox genes at 5q35 by
juxtaposition with 14q32.2 breakpoints dispersed across the BCL11B downstream
genomic desert. Leukemic gene dysregulation by t(5;14) was investigated by DNA
inhibitory treatments with 26-mer double-stranded DNA oligonucleotides directed
against candidate enhancers at, or near, orphan T-cell DNase I hypersensitive
sites located between 3'-BCL11B and VRK1. NKX2-5 down-regulation in t(5;14) PEER 
cells was almost entirely restricted to DNA inhibitory treatment targeting
enhancers within the distal breakpoint cluster region and was dose and sequence
dependent, whereas enhancers near 3'-BCL11B regulated that gene only. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that the four most effectual NKX2-5 ectopic
enhancers were hyperacetylated. These enhancers clustered approximately 1 Mbp
downstream of BCL11B, within a region displaying multiple regulatory stigmata,
including a TCRA enhancer motif, deep sequence conservation, and tight nuclear
matrix attachment relaxed by trichostatin A treatment. Intriguingly, although
TLX3/NKX2-5 promoter/exon 1 regions were hypoacetylated, their expression was
trichostatin A sensitive, implying extrinsic regulation by factor(s) under
acetylation control. Knockdown of PU.1, known to be trichostatin A responsive and
which potentially binds TLX3/NKX2-5 promoters, effected down-regulation of both
homeobox genes. Moreover, genomic analysis showed preferential enrichment near
ectopic enhancers of binding sites for the PU.1 cofactor HMGA1, the knockdown of 
which also inhibited NKX2-5. We suggest that HMGA1 and PU.1 coregulate ectopic
homeobox gene expression in t(5;14) T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia by
interactions mediated at the nuclear matrix. Our data document homeobox gene
dysregulation by a novel regulatory region at 3'-BCL11B responsive to histone
deacetylase inhibition and highlight a novel class of potential therapeutic
target amid noncoding DNA.

PMID: 17308084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Clin Invest. 2007 Mar;117(3):693-702. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

High-mobility group A1 inhibits p53 by cytoplasmic relocalization of its
proapoptotic activator HIPK2.

Pierantoni GM(1), Rinaldo C, Mottolese M, Di Benedetto A, Esposito F, Soddu S,
Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di
Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples,
Italy.

Retraction in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Nov;123(11):4979.

High-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) overexpression and gene rearrangement are frequent
events in human cancer, but the molecular basis of HMGA1 oncogenic activity
remains unclear. Here we describe a mechanism through which HMGA1 inhibits
p53-mediated apoptosis by counteracting the p53 proapoptotic activator
homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2). We found that HMGA1
overexpression promoted HIPK2 relocalization in the cytoplasm and inhibition of
p53 apoptotic function, while HIPK2 overexpression reestablished HIPK2 nuclear
localization and sensitivity to apoptosis. HIPK2 depletion by RNA interference
suppressed the antiapoptotic effect of HMGA1, which indicates that HIPK2 is the
target required for HMGA1 to repress the apoptotic activity of p53. Consistent
with this process, a strong correlation among HMGA1 overexpression, HIPK2
cytoplasmic localization, and low spontaneous apoptosis index (comparable to that
observed in mutant p53-carrying tumors) was observed in WT p53-expressing human
breast carcinomas. Hence, cytoplasmic relocalization of HIPK2 induced by HMGA1
overexpression is a mechanism of inactivation of p53 apoptotic function that we
believe to be novel.

PMCID: PMC1784001
PMID: 17290307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Meat Sci. 2007 Feb;75(2):185-95. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2006.03.022. Epub 2006
Oct 13.

Associations of DNA markers with meat quality traits in pigs with emphasis on
drip loss.

Otto G(1), Roehe R, Looft H, Thoelking L, Knap PW, Rothschild MF, Plastow GS,
Kalm E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Husbandry, Christian-Albrechts-University of 
Kiel, Hermann-Rodewald-Straße 6, D-24118 Kiel, Germany.

Phenotypic information on 1155 market pigs for several pig meat quality traits,
was collected. Genotypes on 12 DNA markers, including RYR1 and PRKAG3 I199V, were
also obtained on all pigs to investigate the relationship between genetic markers
and meat quality. The RYR1 gene had the highest impact on meat quality, however, 
several other markers showed significant effects on one or more traits. Animals
heterozygous at the RYR1 locus were significantly inferior in almost all meat
quality traits, except ultimate pH value, initial conductivity and redness of the
meat. Drip loss from case-ready meat (measured from 1 to 7 days post-mortem) was 
43% higher for heterozygotes than animals of the stress resistant genotype. The
homozygous genotype II at position I199V of the PRKAG3 locus also resulted in
less drip loss than genotypes IV and VV, regardless of the method and time of
measurement. Furthermore, the favourable genotype related to higher ultimate pH
and darker meat. Both loci significantly affected the intercept, linear and
quadratic terms of fitted drip loss development curves. The favourable genotypes 
showed a lower drip loss after one day of measurement and a slower increase and a
more linear development over time. Whilst the RYR1 and PRKAG3 markers influenced 
numerous meat quality traits, some of the other markers were also found to have
significant effects on one or two meat quality traits. Markers at MC4R and HMGA1 
loci significantly affected drip loss, whereas LDHA, CAST (Hpy188I) and ATP2A1
influenced pH value. In addition, the marker ATP2A1 was associated with variation
in intramuscular fat content in M. longissimus dorsi. GLUT4 affected temperature 
45min post-mortem and several markers (MC4R, LDHA, GLUT4, HMGA1, CAST (Hpy188I
and PvuII)) influenced one or two of the different colour measurements. The
markers at MC4R, CKM, AGRP, PRKAG3, and HMGA1 loci were tested for their
interactions with RYR1 regarding drip loss. Only AGRP showed a significant
interaction, but this was based on only a few animals with the homozygous
genotype for one allele. Our results suggest that genetic markers provide a
useful tool to improve meat quality in pigs independently from RYR1, especially
the mutation I199V in the PRKAG3 gene.

PMID: 22063649  [PubMed]


332. Cancer Res. 2007 Jan 1;67(1):41-56.

Gene expression profiling reveals a massive, aneuploidy-dependent transcriptional
deregulation and distinct differences between lymph node-negative and lymph
node-positive colon carcinomas.

Grade M(1), Hörmann P, Becker S, Hummon AB, Wangsa D, Varma S, Simon R, Liersch
T, Becker H, Difilippantonio MJ, Ghadimi BM, Ried T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, University Medical Center, Robert-Koch-Strasse 
40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.

To characterize patterns of global transcriptional deregulation in primary colon 
carcinomas, we did gene expression profiling of 73 tumors [Unio Internationale
Contra Cancrum stage II (n = 33) and stage III (n = 40)] using oligonucleotide
microarrays. For 30 of the tumors, expression profiles were compared with those
from matched normal mucosa samples. We identified a set of 1,950 genes with
highly significant deregulation between tumors and mucosa samples (P < 1e-7). A
significant proportion of these genes mapped to chromosome 20 (P = 0.01).
Seventeen genes had a >5-fold average expression difference between normal colon 
mucosa and carcinomas, including up-regulation of MYC and of HMGA1, a putative
oncogene. Furthermore, we identified 68 genes that were significantly
differentially expressed between lymph node-negative and lymph node-positive
tumors (P < 0.001), the functional annotation of which revealed a preponderance
of genes that play a role in cellular immune response and surveillance. The
microarray-derived gene expression levels of 20 deregulated genes were validated 
using quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR in >40 tumor and normal
mucosa samples with good concordance between the techniques. Finally, we
established a relationship between specific genomic imbalances, which were mapped
for 32 of the analyzed colon tumors by comparative genomic hybridization, and
alterations of global transcriptional activity. Previously, we had conducted a
similar analysis of primary rectal carcinomas. The systematic comparison of colon
and rectal carcinomas revealed a significant overlap of genomic imbalances and
transcriptional deregulation, including activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling cascade, suggesting similar pathogenic pathways.

PMCID: PMC4721580
PMID: 17210682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Biomol NMR. 2007 Jun;38(2):185. Epub 2007 Jan 6.

NMR resonance assignments of the human high mobility group protein HMGA1.

Buchko GW, Ni S, Lourette NM, Reeves R, Kennedy MA.

PMID: 17206468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 15;66(24):11613-22.

HMGA1 is a determinant of cellular invasiveness and in vivo metastatic potential 
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Liau SS(1), Jazag A, Whang EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

HMGA1 proteins are architectural transcription factors that are overexpressed in 
a range of human malignancies, including pancreatic adenocarcinoma. We
hypothesized that HMGA1 expression is a determinant of cellular invasiveness and 
metastasis in pancreatic cancer. Stable silencing of HMGA1 in MiaPaCa2 and PANC1 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells was achieved by transfection of short hairpin
RNA-generating vectors. Additionally, stable overexpression of HMGA1 in MiaPaCa2 
cells (characterized by low levels of inherent HMGA1 expression) was achieved.
HMGA1 silencing resulted in significant reductions in cellular invasiveness
through Matrigel; in cellular matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) activity, mRNA
levels, and gene promoter activity; and in Akt phosphorylation at Ser(473).
Conversely, forced HMGA1 overexpression resulted in significant increases in
cellular invasiveness; in cellular MMP-9 activity, mRNA levels, and promoter
activity; and in Akt phosphorylation at Ser(473). HMGA1 overexpression-induced
increases in invasiveness were MMP-9 dependent. The role of
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt in mediating HMGA1-dependent
invasiveness was elucidated by a specific PI3K inhibitor (LY294002) and
constitutively active and dominant-negative Akt adenoviral constructs.
Akt-dependent modulation of MMP-9 activity contributed significantly to HMGA1
overexpression-induced increases in invasive capacity. Furthermore, HMGA1
silencing resulted in reductions in metastatic potential and tumor growth in vivo
and in tumoral MMP-9 activity. Our findings suggest that HMGA1 may be a novel
molecular determinant of invasiveness and metastasis, as well as a potential
therapeutic target, in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 17178855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biophys Chem. 2007 Feb;125(2-3):497-507. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

Enthalpy distribution functions for protein-DNA complexes: example of the binding
of AT-hooks to target DNA.

Poland D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218,
USA. poland@jhu.edu

In this article we use the published heat capacity data of Dragan et al. [A.I.
Dragan, et al., The energetics of specific binding of AT-hooks from HMGA1 to
target DNA, J. Mol. Biol. 327 (2003) 393-411] on the association of proteins with
DNA duplexes to construct enthalpy probability distributions for the protein/DNA 
complexes formed in these systems. We first analyze the multistep equilibrium
that determines the species concentrations in this system to determine whether or
not the DNA-peptide complex goes cleanly to DNA single-strands and peptide. Using
the heat capacity data for this case we employ the maximum-entropy method to
construct enthalpy probability distribution functions for the species involved in
this equilibrium. We find that the distribution functions for this system clearly
show bimodal behavior indicating a two-state transition from complex to
non-complex form.

PMID: 17116358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Gastrointest Surg. 2006 Nov;10(9):1254-62; discussion 1263.

Lentivirus-mediated RNA interference of HMGA1 promotes chemosensitivity to
gemcitabine in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Liau SS(1), Ashley SW, Whang EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) proteins are overexpressed in pancreatic
cancers. They are architectural nuclear proteins, which regulate expression of
multiple genes implicated in the malignant phenotype. In this study, we
hypothesized that HMG A1 silencing will promote chemosensitivity in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. We studied highly malignant pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines 
(MiaPaCa2 and PANC1). Lentiviral short-hairpin RNA (shHMGA1) expression vectors
targeting HMGA1 were used for generation of lentiviral particles. Stable
transfectants were developed after lentiviral transduction. Nuclear expression of
HMGA1 was assayed using Western blot analysis. Chemosensitivity to gemcitabine
was determined by IC50 analysis. Caspase activity was quantitated using
fluorometric caspase profiling. Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometric
analysis. Lentivirus-mediated RNA interference resulted in 90% silencing of HMGA1
expression in each of MiaPaCa2 and PANC1 cell lines. HMGA1 silencing enhanced
chemosensitivity to gemcitabine with an approximately 50% reduction in IC50 in
each cell line. Lentivirus-mediated HMGA1 silencing promoted the activation of
caspases 3, 2, 9, and 8, on exposure to gemcitabine. HMGA1 silencing resulted in 
reduction in Akt kinase activity. Lentivirus-mediated RNA interference of HMGA1
promoted chemosensitivity to gemcitabine in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. HMGA1 may 
represent a novel therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 17114012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biol Chem. 2006 Oct-Nov;387(10-11):1469-78.

DNA-binding properties of the recombinant high-mobility-group-like
AT-hook-containing region from human BRG1 protein.

Singh M(1), D'Silva L, Holak TA.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.

The hBRG1 protein, a central ATPase of the human switching/sucrose non-fermenting
(SWI/SNF) remodeling complex, has a catalytic ATPase domain, an AT-hook motif and
a bromodomain. Bromodomains, found in many chromatin-associated proteins,
recognize N-acetyl-lysine in histones and other proteins. The AT-hook motif,
first described in the high-mobility group of non-histone chromosomal proteins
HMGA1/2, is a DNA-binding motif. The AT-hook binds to the AT-rich DNA sequences
in the minor groove of B-DNA in a non-sequence specific manner. AT-hook motifs
have been identified in many other DNA-binding proteins. In this study we cloned 
and purified a fragment of hBRG1 encompassing the AT-hook region and the
bromodomain. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and circular dichroism (CD)
analyses show that the recombinant domains are structured. The functionality of
subdomains was checked by assessing their interactions with N-acetylated peptides
from histones and with DNA. Isothermal titration calorimetric (ITC) analysis
demonstrates that the primary micromolar interaction is through the AT-hook
motif. The AT-hook region binds to linear DNA by unwinding it. These properties
resemble the characteristics of the HMGA1/2 proteins and their interaction with
DNA.

PMID: 17081121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Jan 1;313(1):77-87. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Nuclear HMGA1 nonhistone chromatin proteins directly influence mitochondrial
transcription, maintenance, and function.

Dement GA(1), Maloney SC, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Rm. 639, Fulmer 
Hall, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that HMGA1 proteins translocate from the nucleus 
to mitochondria and bind to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) at the D-loop control
region [G.A. Dement, N.R. Treff, N.S. Magnuson, V. Franceschi, R. Reeves, Dynamic
mitochondrial localization of nuclear transcription factor HMGA1, Exp. Cell Res. 
307 (2005) 388-401.] [11]. To elucidate possible physiological roles for such
binding, we employed methods to analyze mtDNA transcription, mitochondrial
maintenance, and other organelle functions in transgenic human MCF-7 cells (HA7C)
induced to over-express an HA-tagged HMGA1 protein and control (parental) MCF-7
cells. Quantitative real-time (RT) PCR analyses demonstrated that mtDNA levels
were reduced approximately 2-fold in HMGA1 over-expressing HA7C cells and flow
cytometric analyses further revealed that mitochondrial mass was significantly
reduced in these cells. Cellular ATP levels were also reduced in HA7C cells and
survival studies showed an increased sensitivity to killing by 2-deoxy-D-glucose,
a glycolysis-specific inhibitor. Flow cytometric analyses revealed additional
mitochondrial abnormalities in HA7C cells that are consistent with a cancerous
phenotype: namely, increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) and increased
mitochondrial membrane potential (Delta Psi(m)). Additional RT-PCR analyses
demonstrated that gene transcripts from both the heavy (ND2, COXI, ATP6) and
light (ND6) strands of mtDNA were up-regulated approximately 3-fold in HA7C
cells. Together, these mitochondrial changes are consistent with many previous
reports and reveal several possible mechanisms by which HMGA1 over-expression, a 
common feature of naturally occurring cancers, may affect tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC1823039
PMID: 17045586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Uirusu. 2006 Jun;56(1):41-50.

[Host factors that regulate the intercellular dynamics of HIV-1 genome during the
early phase of infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Masuda T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunotherapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519,
Japan. tmasu.impt@tmd.ac.jp

An interplay or battle between virus and its host has been observed within a
single cell. Upon an infection with retroviruses including human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1), the viral genome is subjected to several processes that
include uncoating, reverse transcription of the viral genomic RNA into a cDNA
copy, transport of this cDNA into the nucleus, and integration of the cDNA into
the host chromosome. Antiretroviral restriction factors such as TRIM5 alpha and
APOBEC3G have been recently identified. In addition, nuclear membrane protect
host chromosomal DNA against incoming viral genome. For successful retroviral
infection, viral genome must overcome these cellular barriers to establish
proviral state, in which viral cDNA was stably integrated into host chromosomal
DNA. In this review, I would summarize the host factors that regulate the
intercellular dynamics of HIV-1 genome during the early phase of infection,
especially focusing on factors interacting with HIV-1 integrase and the
preintegration complex.

PMID: 17038811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Horm Metab Res. 2006 Sep;38(9):570-4.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha induces the expression of the nuclear protein p8 via 
a novel NF kappaB binding site within the promoter.

Kallwellis K(1), Grempler R, Günther S, Päth G, Walther R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie,
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universität Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.

p8 is a widely expressed HMG-I/Y-like transcription factor which is involved in
regulating cell proliferation and tissue stress. Several studies describe a
strong upregulation of p8 expression during inflammatory processes like
pancreatitis and LPS-induced sepsis. Here we demonstrate that TNFalpha, which is 
an important inducer of innate defence against gram-negative bacteria,
significantly stimulates p8 protein production in H4IIE rat hepatoma cells within
2 hours. Since a putative NF kappaB motif has been described, we further tested
whether TNFalpha stimulates p8 expression via activation of NF kappaB. We
characterized the TNFalpha-induced binding of NF kappaB to this motif. We show
that the TNFalpha-induced NF kappaB pathway contributes to the induction of p8
during pancreatitis and LPS-induced inflammation.

PMID: 16981138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(22):8551-61. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Binding of YY1 to the proximal region of the murine beta interferon promoter is
essential to allow CBP recruitment and K8H4/K14H3 acetylation on the promoter
region after virus infection.

Mokrani H(1), Sharaf el Dein O, Mansuroglu Z, Bonnefoy E.

Author information: 
(1)Régulation de la Transcription et Maladies Génétiques, CNRS UPR2228, UFR
Biomédicale, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris cedex 06, France.

Virus-induced activation of the beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene requires orderly 
recruitment of chromatin-remodeling complexes and time-regulated acetylation of
histone residues K8H4 and K14H3 on the promoter region. We have previously shown 
that transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) binds the murine IFN-beta promoter at 
two sites (-122 and -90) regulating promoter transcriptional capacity with a dual
activator/repressor role. In this work we demonstrate that both YY1 -122 and -90 
sites are required for CBP recruitment and K8H4/K14H3 acetylation to take place
on the IFN-beta promoter region after virus infection. A single point mutation
introduced at either one of these two sites inhibiting YY1 binding completely
disrupted CBP recruitment and K8H4/K14H3 acetylation independently of HMGI or
IRF3 binding to the promoter. We have previously demonstrated that YY1 represses 
the transcriptional capacity of the IFN-beta promoter through its -90 site via
histone deacetylation. Here we demonstrate that, in vivo, the binding of YY1 to
the -90 site is constant all through virus infection whereas the binding of YY1
to the -122 site is activated after infection. We discuss here the capacity of
YY1 to either repress (through histone deacetylase recruitment) or activate
(through CBP recruitment) IFN-beta gene expression according to the occupancy of 
either only its -90 site or both its -122 and -90 sites.

PMCID: PMC1636788
PMID: 16954376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Anim Genet. 2006 Aug;37(4):419-21.

Association of melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) and high mobility group AT-hook 1
(HMGA1) polymorphisms with pig growth and fat deposition traits.

Kim KS(1), Lee JJ, Shin HY, Choi BH, Lee CK, Kim JJ, Cho BW, Kim TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Korea.
kwanskim@chungbuk.ac.kr

The aim of this study was to analyse the combined effect of melanocortin 4
receptor (MC4R) and high mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1) polymorphisms on growth
and fatness traits in Duroc pigs. No significant interaction was observed between
MC4R and HMGA1 for back-fat traits. An additive mode of inheritance of both gene 
effects was found for average daily gain and lean meat content. Maximum mean
differences from combined genotypic effects were over 2 mm for back fat, 70 g/day
for average daily gain and 2% for lean meat content. Therefore, utilization of
polymorphisms in both MC4R and HMGA1 for marker-assisted selection could result
in an economic benefit to the pig industry.

PMID: 16879362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 Sep;33(1):81-7. Epub 2006 Jul 25.

Novel interaction between HMGA1a and StIP1 in murine terminally differentiated
retina.

Okuda H(1), Manabe T, Yanagita T, Matsuzaki S, Bando Y, Katayama T, Wanaka A,
Tohyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

High mobility group protein A1a (HMGA1a) is expressed at high levels in embryonic
cells and has been implicated in their transcriptional regulation. However, it
has been reported that high levels of HMGA1a expression are normally detected in 
the photoreceptor of adult (terminally differentiated cells) murine retina. We
showed that biochemical purification of the recombinant HMGA1a binding activity
in nuclear fractions from murine retina, but not from hippocampus, resulted in
STAT3 interacting protein 1 (StIP1) that formed a novel complex with HMGA1a,
STAT3 and homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2). While StIP1
expressions in brain, liver, lung, heart, skeletal muscle, spleen and thymus have
previously been demonstrated, this is the first report that StIP1 was expressed
in nuclear fractions from murine retina, and that in murine retina there are
several novel complexes of transcriptional regulators consisting of HMGA1a,
StIP1, STAT3 and HIPK2.

PMID: 16870469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Oncogene. 2006 Dec 14;25(59):7714-22. Epub 2006 Jun 26.

Differential regulation of CXC ligand 1 transcription in melanoma cell lines by
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1.

Amiri KI(1), Ha HC, Smulson ME, Richmond A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA.

The continuous production of the CXC ligand 1 (CXCL1) chemokine by melanoma cells
is a major effector of tumor growth. We have previously shown that the
constitutive expression of this chemokine is dependent upon transcription factors
nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB), stimulating protein-1 (SP1), high-mobility
group-I/Y (HMGI/Y), CAAT displacement protein (CDP) and poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (PARP-1). In this study, we demonstrate for the first time the
mechanism of transcriptional regulation of CXCL1 through PARP-1 in melanoma
cells. In its inactive state, PARP-1 binds to the CXCL1 promoter in a
sequence-specific manner and prevents binding of NF-kappaB (p65/p50) to its
element. However, activation of the PARP-1 enzymatic activity enhances CXCL1
expression, owing to the loss of PARP-1 binding to the CXCL1 promoter,
accompanied by enhanced binding of p65 to the promoter. The delineation of the
role of NF-kappaB-interacting factors in the putative CXCL1 enhanceosome will
provide key information in developing strategies to block constitutive expression
of this and other chemokines in cancer and to develop targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC2665274
PMID: 16799643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochemistry. 2006 Jun 13;45(23):7194-201.

Acetylation and phosphorylation of high-mobility group A1 proteins in PC-3 human 
tumor cells.

Jiang X(1), Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, 027, University of California at Riverside,
Riverside, California 92521-0403, USA.

In this paper, we examined the posttranslational modifications (PTMs) of
high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) proteins in PC-3 human prostate cancer cells that 
are either treated or not treated with a histone deacetylase inhibitor, sodium
butyrate. We found that, from a reversed-phase C4 column, the HMGA1a protein
eluted in two different fractions with distinct forms of PTMs: Ser98, Ser101, and
Ser102 were phosphorylated and Arg25 was methylated for both fractions; only the 
minor fraction, however, is hyperphosphorylated where Ser35, Thr52, and Thr77
were also phosphorylated. In addition, Lys14 was acetylated in the major but not 
the minor HMGA1a fraction isolated from the PC-3 cells that were not treated with
butyrate. Likewise, HMGA1b, which is a splicing variant of HMGA1a, was acetylated
on Lys14 and phosphorylated on the corresponding residues, i.e., Thr41, Thr66,
Ser87, Ser90, and Ser91. The acetylation and phosphorylation of the HMGA1a and
HMGA1b proteins may affect their interactions with other protein factors, which
in turn may modulate the binding of HMGA1 proteins to DNA and regulate gene
expression. In addition, the specifically posttranslationally modified HMGA1
proteins may serve as molecular biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and prognosis.

PMID: 16752910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Head Neck. 2006 Nov;28(11):1032-9.

Molecular diagnostic methods in the diagnosis and follow-up of
well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma.

Rodrigo JP(1), Rinaldo A, Devaney KO, Shaha AR, Ferlito A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias,
Oviedo, Spain.

Thyroid cancers are the most common endocrine malignancies and are being
diagnosed with increased frequency in modern clinical practice. Among other
diagnostic modalities, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy of clinically
suspicious thyroid nodules is becoming increasingly popular. Preliminary
investigations have suggested that molecular diagnostic assays using
tumor-specific markers may improve the sensitivity and accuracy of FNA and so may
be expected to reduce the frequency of open surgical procedures by identifying
those patients with demonstrably benign lesions who do not require definitive
surgical excision of their lesions for diagnosis. At the same time,
thyroid-specific mRNA assays (especially thyroglobulin mRNA testing) have been
used by investigators in the postoperative follow-up of patients with thyroid
cancer as a potential means of detecting tumor recurrence in the peripheral
blood. Although these studies have not all reported unqualified
successes--indeed, some problems based on both technical and biologic limitations
have been identified-these assays still hold out the possibility that potentially
important new advances in the management of patients with well-differentiated
thyroid cancer may be offered by these and other molecular diagnostic methods.

PMID: 16732600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cancer Res. 2006 May 15;66(10):5085-93.

Activator protein-2 overexpression accounts for increased insulin receptor
expression in human breast cancer.

Paonessa F(1), Foti D, Costa V, Chiefari E, Brunetti G, Leone F, Luciano F, Wu F,
Lee AS, Gulletta E, Fusco A, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G. Salvatore, Università di
Catanzaro Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.

Various studies have shown that the insulin receptor (IR) is increased in most
human breast cancers, and both ligand-dependent malignant transformation and
increased cell growth occur in cultured breast cells overexpressing the IR.
However, although numerous in vivo and in vitro observations have indicated an
important contributory role for the IR in breast cancer cell biology, the
molecular mechanisms accounting for increased IR expression in breast tumors have
not previously been elucidated. Herein, we did immunoblot analyses of nuclear
protein from cultured breast cancer cells and normal and tumoral tissues from
breast cancer patients combined with promoter studies by using a series of human 
wild-type and mutant IR promoter constructs. We provide evidence that IR
overexpression in breast cancer is dependent on the assembly of a
transcriptionally active multiprotein-DNA complex, which includes the
high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein, the developmentally regulated activator
protein-2 (AP-2) transcription factor and the ubiquitously expressed
transcription factor Sp1. In cultured breast cancer cells and human breast cancer
specimens, the expression of AP-2 was significantly higher than that observed in 
cells and tissues derived from normal breast, and this overexpression paralleled 
the increase in IR expression. However, AP-2 DNA-binding activity was
undetectable with the IR gene promoter, suggesting that transactivation of this
gene by AP-2 might occur indirectly through physical and functional cooperation
with HMGA1 and Sp1. Our findings support this hypothesis and suggest that in
affected individuals, hyperactivation of the AP-2 gene through the overexpression
of IR may play a key role in breast carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16707431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 15;66(6):2980-9.

HMGA1 inhibits the function of p53 family members in thyroid cancer cells.

Frasca F(1), Rustighi A, Malaguarnera R, Altamura S, Vigneri P, Del Sal G,
Giancotti V, Pezzino V, Vigneri R, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, e Medicina Specialistica,
Ospedale Garibaldi, Catania, Italy.

HMGA1 is an architectural transcription factor expressed at high levels in
transformed cells and tumors. Several lines of evidence indicate that HMGA1
up-regulation is involved in the malignant transformation of thyroid epithelial
cells. However, the mechanisms underlying the effect of HMGA1 on thyroid cancer
cell phenotype are not fully understood. We now show that in thyroid cancer
cells, HMGA1 down-regulation by small interfering RNA and antisense techniques
results in enhanced transcriptional activity of p53, TAp63alpha, TAp73alpha, and,
consequently, increased apoptosis. Coimmunoprecipitation and pull-down
experiments with deletion mutants showed that the COOH-terminal oligomerization
domain of p53 family members is required for direct interaction with HMGA1.
Moreover, inhibition of HMGA1 expression in thyroid cancer cells resulted in
increased p53 oligomerization in response to the DNA-damaging agent doxorubicin. 
Finally, electrophoretic mobility shift assay experiments showed that the
p53-HMGA1 interaction results in reduced DNA-binding activity. These results
indicate a new function of HMGA1 in the regulation of p53 family members, thus
providing new mechanistic insights in tumor progression.

PMID: 16540646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Pathol. 2006 Jun;209(2):206-12.

Increased expression of high mobility group A proteins in lung cancer.

Sarhadi VK(1), Wikman H, Salmenkivi K, Kuosma E, Sioris T, Salo J, Karjalainen A,
Knuutila S, Anttila S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Medicine, Finnish Institute of Occupational Health,
Helsinki, Finland.

High mobility group A (HMGA) proteins play an important role in the regulation of
transcription, differentiation, and neoplastic transformation. In this work, the 
expression of HMGA 1 and 2 in 152 lung carcinomas of mainly non-small-cell
histological type has been studied by immunohistochemistry in order to evaluate
their feasibility as lung cancer markers. In 17 lung cancer cases, the related
bronchial epithelial changes were also studied for HMGA1 and 2 expression. RNA
expression of HMGA1a and b isoforms and of HMGA2 was determined by real-time
semi-quantitative RT-PCR in 23 lung carcinomas. High expression of HMGA1 and
HMGA2 at both mRNA and protein levels was detected in lung carcinomas, compared
with normal lung tissue. Nuclear immunostaining for HMGA1 and 2 proteins also
occurred in hyperplastic, metaplastic, and dysplastic bronchial epithelium.
Increased nuclear expression of HMGA1 and 2 correlated with poor survival (for
adenocarcinomas, HMGA1, p=0.006; HMGA2, p=0.05). While the expression of HMGA2
was significantly associated with cell proliferation (p=0.008), HMGA1 expression 
did not show any association with proliferation or apoptotic index. Sequencing of
HMGA2 transcripts from tumours with very high expression showed a normal
full-length transcript. As HMGA proteins were expressed in about 90% of lung
carcinomas and their expression was inversely associated with survival, they may 
provide useful markers for lung cancer diagnosis and prognosis.

Copyright (c) 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 16521118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 1;66(5):2536-43.

Haploinsufficiency of the Hmga1 gene causes cardiac hypertrophy and
myelo-lymphoproliferative disorders in mice.

Fedele M(1), Fidanza V, Battista S, Pentimalli F, Klein-Szanto AJ, Visone R, De
Martino I, Curcio A, Morisco C, Del Vecchio L, Baldassarre G, Arra C, Viglietto
G, Indolfi C, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche c/o Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare,
Università di Napoli Federico II, Italy.

The HMGA1 protein is a major factor in chromatin architecture and gene control.
It plays a critical role in neoplastic transformation. In fact, blockage of HMGA1
synthesis prevents rat thyroid cell transformation by murine transforming
retroviruses, and an adenovirus carrying the HMGA1 gene in the antisense
orientation induces apoptotic cell death in anaplastic human thyroid carcinoma
cell lines, but not in normal thyroid cells. Moreover, both in vitro and in vivo 
studies have established the oncogenic role of the HMGA1 gene. In this study, to 
define HMGA1 function in vivo, we examined the consequences of disrupting the
Hmga1 gene in mice. Both heterozygous and homozygous mice for the Hmga1-null
allele show cardiac hypertrophy due to the direct role of HMGA1 on cardiomyocytic
cell growth regulation. These mice also developed hematologic malignancies,
including B cell lymphoma and myeloid granuloerythroblastic leukemia. The B cell 
expansion and the increased expression of the RAG1/2 endonuclease, observed in
HMGA1-knockout spleen tissues, might be responsible for the high rate of abnormal
IgH rearrangements observed in these neoplasias. Therefore, the data reported
here indicate the critical role of HMGA1 in heart development and growth, and
reveal an unsuspected antioncogenic potential for this gene in hematologic
malignancies.

PMID: 16510570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Mar;17(3):457-63.

Gene expression profile by inhibiting Raf-1 protein kinase in breast cancer
cells.

Mewani RR(1), Tian S, Li B, Danner MT, Carr TD, Lee S, Rahman A, Kasid UN, Jung
M, Dritschilo A, Gokhale PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Raf-1 protein serine-threonine kinase plays an important role in cell growth,
proliferation, and cell survival. Previously, we and others have demonstrated
that antisense raf oligonucleotide-mediated inhibition of Raf-1 expression leads 
to tumor growth arrest, radiosensitization and chemosensitization in vivo. Raf-1 
inhibition is also associated with apoptotic cell death. In this study, we
inhibited Raf-1 using an antisense raf oligonucleotide (AS-raf-ODN) to identify
downstream targets of Raf-1 using microarray gene expression analysis. Treatment 
of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with 250 nM AS-raf-ODN led to significant
inhibition of Raf-1 protein (75.2 +/- 9.6%) and c-raf-1 mRNA levels (86.2 +/-
3.3%) as compared to untreated control cells. The lipofectin control or mismatch 
oligonucleotide had no effect on Raf-1 expression. To determine the changes in
gene expression profiles that were due to inhibition of Raf-1, we simultaneously 
compared the gene expression patterns in AS-raf-ODN treated cells with untreated 
control cells and cells treated with lipofectin alone or MM-ODN. A total of 17
genes (4 upregulated and 13 down-regulated) including c-raf-1 were identified
that were altered after AS-raf-ODN treatment. Functional clustering analysis
revealed genes involved in apoptosis (Bcl-XL), cell adhesion (paxillin, plectin, 
Rho GDIalpha, CCL5), metabolism (GM2A, SLC16A3, PYGB), signal transduction
(protein kinase C nu), and transcriptional regulation (HMGA1), and
membrane-associated genes (GNAS, SLC16A3). Real-time PCR, Northern analysis and
Western analysis confirmed the microarray findings. Our study provides insight
into Raf-1 related signaling pathways and a model system to identify potential
target genes.

PMID: 16465392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Pediatr Surg. 2006 Jan;41(1):25-8; discussion 25-8.

Birth weight and McGoon Index predict mortality in newborn infants with
congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Casaccia G(1), Crescenzi F, Dotta A, Capolupo I, Braguglia A, Danhaive O,
Pasquini L, Bevilacqua M, Bagolan P, Corchia C, Orzalesi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Neonatology, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital-IRCCS, 00165 Rome, Italy. casaccia@opbg.net

BACKGROUND: Despite improvements in clinical management, mortality of congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) remains high. Early prediction of mortality risk helps
in comparing strategies and/or performances of different centers. Birth weight
(BW), Apgar Score at 5 minutes, and modified McGoon Index (MGI) calculated by the
ratio between the diameters of pulmonary arteries and the descending aorta have
been used to determine mortality of CDH.
AIM: The purpose of this study is to evaluate the relationship between early
detectable variables and survival in newborns with CDH intubated at birth,
managed with "gentle" ventilation and delayed surgery.
METHODS: All medical records of patients affected by high-risk CDH and treated
with a standardized protocol at Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy,
between January 2002 and September 2004 were reviewed. Prenatal diagnosis,
gestational age, BW, sex, side of hernia, and MGI were recorded on admission. The
relationship with mortality of each variable was evaluated by univariate
analysis. Subsequently, a predictive model of mortality was developed using a
logistic regression: the explanatory variables, BW, and MGI were dichotomized in 
high (HBW and HMGI) and low (LBW and LMGI) according to the best cutoff found
with receiver-operating characteristic curves.
RESULTS: Thirty-four newborns with CDH, treated with a standardized protocol,
were studied. The main characteristics of the 34 patients were BW, 2886 g
(1500-3620 g); gestational age, 37.7 weeks (32-42 weeks); male/female, 22/12;
right/left, 8/26; prenatal diagnosis, 29; MGI, 1.31 (0.9-1.85). Only BW and MGI
were significantly (P < .05) associated with mortality at the univariate
analysis. The best cutoff values were 2755 g for BW (sensitivity, 70%;
specificity, 74%) and 1.25 for MGI (sensitivity, 73%; specificity, 78%). Using
these limits, BW and MGI resulted independently associated with mortality in the 
multivariate analysis. Using the 4 possible combinations, the LBW associated with
the LMGI presented the highest prediction of mortality (80%).
CONCLUSIONS: Birth weight and MGI, variously combined, were predictive of
mortality. Because they are not influenced by subsequent modalities of care, they
can be considered as valid early severity scores in CDH and used for comparing
strategies and/or performances of different centers.

PMID: 16410102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Trends Biochem Sci. 2006 Feb;31(2):98-105. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

Cellular co-factors of HIV-1 integration.

Van Maele B(1), Busschots K, Vandekerckhove L, Christ F, Debyser Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Molecular Medicine, KULAK and K.U.
Leuven, Kapucijnenvoer 33 3000 Leuven, Flanders, Belgium.

To achieve productive infection, the reverse transcribed cDNA of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is inserted in the host cell genome. The
main protein responsible for this reaction is the viral integrase. However,
studies indicate that the virus is assisted by cellular proteins, or co-factors, 
to achieve integration into the infected cell. The barrier-to-autointegration
factor (BAF) might prevent autointegration. Its ability to bridge DNA and the
finding that the nuclear lamina-associated polypeptide-2alpha interacts with BAF 
suggest a role in nuclear structure organization. Integrase interactor 1 was
found to directly interact with HIV-1 integrase and to activate its DNA-joining
activity, and the high mobility group chromosomal protein A1 might approximate
both long terminal repeat (LTR) ends and facilitate integrase binding by
unwinding the LTR termini. Furthermore, the lens-epithelium-derived growth factor
(LEDGF; also known as p75) seems to tether HIV-1 integrase to the chromosomes.
Although a direct role in integration has only been demonstrated for LEDGF/p75,
to date, each validated cellular co-factor for HIV-1 integration could constitute
a promising new target for antiviral therapy.

PMID: 16403635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Jan 1;164(1):84-7.

Cryptic 6p21.3 duplications and triplication involving HMGA1 partially masked by 
add 6p in four cases of myelodysplasia.

Andrieux J(1), Geffroy S, Bilhou-Nabera C, Dupriez B, Demory JL, Bauters F, Laï
JL, Dastugue N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoires de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, 
France. j-andrieux@chru-lille.fr

Rearrangements of 6p are frequent in both myeloid and lymphoid malignant
hematological disorders. High-mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) rearrangements
have been described in myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia (MMM) and also in
myelodysplasia. High-mobility group A proteins are nonhistone nuclear proteins
that bind DNA and regulate the transcriptional activity of many genes. We used
FISH, with bacterial artificial chromosome RP11-513I15 probe, to study 16 cases
of myeloid malignancies with chromosome 6 short arm rearrangements, most of them 
following myeloproliferative disorders. Among these we found two 6p21.3
duplications and one 6p21.3 triplication involving HMGA1 in four cases of
myelodysplasia with and without myelofibrosis. In these four cases, duplications 
and triplication were partially masked at the cytogenetic level by a derivative
chromosome 6 resulting from translocation with another chromosome. HMGA1 proteins
have been recently found overexpressed in human leukemias, but to our knowledge
this is the first reported duplication of HMGA1.

PMID: 16364769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Sep;13(9):1554-63. Epub 2005 Dec 9.

High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) proteins interact with p53 and inhibit its
apoptotic activity.

Pierantoni GM(1), Rinaldo C, Esposito F, Mottolese M, Soddu S, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di
Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, via S.
Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Retraction in
    Cell Death Differ. 2014 Mar;21(3):503.

HMGA gene overexpression and rearrangements are frequent in several tumours, but 
their oncogenic function is still unclear. Here we report of a physical and
functional interaction between High Mobility Group A1 (HMGA1) protein and p53
oncosuppressor. We found that HMGA1 binds p53 in vitro and in vivo, and both
proteins are present in the same complexes bound to the Bax gene promoter. HMGA1 
interferes with the p53-mediated transcription of p53 effectors Bax and p21(waf1)
while cooperates with p53 in the transcriptional activation of the p53 inhibitor 
mdm2. This transcriptional modulation is associated with a reduced p53-dependent 
apoptosis in cells expressing exogenous HMGA1 and p53, or in cells expressing
endogenously the proteins and in which p53 was activated by UV-irradiation.
Furthermore, antisense inhibition of HMGA1b expression dramatically increases the
UV-induced p53-mediated apoptosis. These data define a new physical and
functional interaction between HMGA1 and p53 that modulates transcription of p53 
target genes and inhibits apoptosis.

PMID: 16341121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2006 Jan;25(1):65-9.

Expression of the high-mobility group protein HMGI(Y) in gestational
trophoblastic diseases.

Briese J(1), Radde J, Schulte HM, Sajin M, Röser K, Löning T, Bamberger AM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Clinic Hamburg, Eppendorf, Germany.

The high-mobility group protein HMGI(Y) is a member of a family of nonhistone
chromosomal proteins, which have been implicated in the regulation of inducible
gene transcription, integration of retroviruses into chromosomes, and induction
of neoplastic transformation and metastatic progression in cancer cells. The
human trophoblast is a tissue that shares proliferation capacity and invasiveness
with neoplastic tissues, but in which these processes are tightly regulated.
Recently we could show that HMGI(Y) is expressed in the normal human placenta,
where it is localized in the nuclei of villous cytotrophoblast, in the anchoring 
villi at the implantation site and in extravillous (intermediate) trophoblast
invading the maternal decidua. In contrast, the majority of the nuclei of the
villous syncytiotrophoblast, a terminally differentiated tissue, was negative.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the expression pattern of HMGI(Y) in
gestational trophoblastic diseases (GTD), which has not been studied so far. To
analyze the expression of HMGI(Y), we performed immunohistochemistry on a total
of 29 cases of GTD, including 21 hydatidiform moles and 8 choriocarcinomas.
Hydatidiform moles showed a positivity for HMGI(Y) in villous cytotrophoblast and
in areas of the trophoblast proliferations on the villous surface; villous
syncytiotrophoblast was negative. The choriocarcinomas showed strong
immunoreactivity in all cases. The expression pattern of HMGI(Y) in gestational
trophoblastic diseases indicates that it might play a role in the pathogenesis of
GTD and might be potentially useful as an additional diagnostic marker for such
lesions.

PMID: 16306787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Apr 1;97(5):1066-79.

Cell growth-dependent subcellular localization of p8.

Valacco MP(1), Varone C, Malicet C, Cánepa E, Iovanna JL, Moreno S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

p8 is a stress-induced protein, biochemically related to the architectural factor
HMG-I/Y, overexpressed in many cancers and required for tumor expansion. The
molecular mechanisms by which p8 may exert its effect in aspects of growth is
unknown. Using immunocytochemistry, we found that p8 presents nuclear
localization in sub-confluent cells, but it localizes throughout the whole cell
in high density grown cells. Cells arrested in Go/G1, either by serum deprivation
or by hydroxyurea treatment, show a nucleo-cytoplasmic localization of p8,
whether in the rest of the cell cycle stages of actively dividing cells the
localization is nuclear. A comparison of p8 sequences from human to fly predicts 
a conserved bipartite nuclear localization sequence (NLS). The putative NLS has
been demonstrated to be functional, since nuclear import is energy dependent
(inhibited by sodium azide plus 2-deoxyglucose), and fusion proteins GFP-p8 and
GFP-NLSp8 localize to the nucleus, whereas GFP-p8NLSmut in which with Lys 65, 69,
76, and 77 mutated to Ala localized to the whole cell. p8 localization does not
involve the CRM1 transporter, since it is insensitive to leptomycin B. Inhibitors
of MAPK pathways did not affect p8 subcellular localization. The inhibition of
deacetylation with Trichostatin A promotes cytoplasmic accumulation of p8. The
results suggest that p8 growth stage-dependent localization is regulated by
acetylation, that p8 is not free within the cell but forming part of a complex
and that it may exert a role in both subcellular localizations.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16294328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 17;281(7):3764-72. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

The AT-hook of the chromatin architectural transcription factor high mobility
group A1a is arginine-methylated by protein arginine methyltransferase 6.

Sgarra R(1), Lee J, Tessari MA, Altamura S, Spolaore B, Giancotti V, Bedford MT, 
Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
University of Trieste, Italy.

The HMGA1a protein belongs to the high mobility group A (HMGA) family of
architectural nuclear factors, a group of proteins that plays an important role
in chromatin dynamics. HMGA proteins are multifunctional factors that associate
both with DNA and nuclear proteins that have been involved in several nuclear
processes, such as transcriptional regulation, viral integration, DNA repair, RNA
processing, and chromatin remodeling. The activity of HMGA proteins is finely
modulated by a variety of post-translational modifications. Arginine methylation 
was recently demonstrated to occur on HMGA1a protein, and it correlates with the 
apoptotic process and neoplastic progression. Methyltransferases responsible for 
these modifications are unknown. Here we show that the protein arginine
methyltransferase PRMT6 specifically methylates HMGA1a protein both in vitro and 
in vivo. By mass spectrometry, the sites of methylation were unambiguously mapped
to Arg(57) and Arg(59), two residues which are embedded in the second AT-hook, a 
region critical for both protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions and whose
modification may cause profound alterations in the HMGA network. The in vivo
association of HMGA and PRMT6 place this yet functionally uncharacterized
methyltransferase in the well established functional context of the chromatin
structure organization.

PMID: 16293633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Immunol. 2006 Mar;43(9):1325-31. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

Identification of an NF-Y/HMG-I(Y)-binding site in the human IL-10 promoter.

Lin SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, Cathay
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. sclin@cgh.org.tw

The cis-acting elements and transcriptional factors that control interleukin 10
(IL-10) promoter activity remain to be clarified. In this report, by performing
electrophoresis mobility shift assay (EMSA) with nuclear extracts from the Raji B
cell line, the nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) was found to be capable of binding to a
CCAAT box-containing region between the -215 and -192bps (the -215/-192 region), 
relative to the transcription initiation site, in the human IL-10 promoter. The
binding of NF-Y to the promoter appears to be enhanced by the presence of
HMG-I(Y), since anti-HMG-I(Y) antibody diminished the NF-Y-binding activity in
EMSA. Two T nucleotides at -192 and -193bps were found to be critical for the
binding of NF-Y and HMG-I(Y) to the -215/-192 promoter region, suggesting the
possibility that HMG-I(Y) binds to the AT-rich promoter region downstream of the 
CCAAT box at the -210/-199 region. These findings suggest that NF-Y and HMG-I(Y) 
may play an important role in regulating the IL-10 promoter activity in B cells.

PMID: 16256199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Dig Dis Sci. 2005 Oct;50(10):1764-70.

Determination of high mobility group A1 (HMGA1) expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma: a potential prognostic marker.

Chang ZG(1), Yang LY, Wang W, Peng JX, Huang GW, Tao YM, Ding X.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Laboratory and Department of General Surgery, Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Hunan, PR China.

Our objective was to investigate the expression of HMGA1 mRNA and protein in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and the correlation between its expression and
clinical pathological characteristics and prognosis. HMGA1 expression was
determined at both the mRNA level and the protein level in 30 HCC tissues and
their corresponding paracancer liver tissues (PCLTs) and 2 normal liver tissues
by RT-PCR and IHC. Follow-up study was done on the 30 patients involved in this
research. HMGA1 mRNA was detected in nine cases of HCC tissues and two PCLTs, for
a positivity rate of 30% and 6.7%, respectively (P < 0.05), whereas no HMGA1 mRNA
expression was found in normal liver tissues. Clinicopathological analysis
revealed that HMGA1 mRNA expression was significantly correlated with Edmondson's
grade (P < 0.05). HMGA1 protein was detected in four HCC tissues by IHC and
located mainly in the nuclei; no positive staining was found in PCLTs. Follow-up 
study showed that HMGA1 mRNA-positive patients had a higher risk of
recurrence/metastasis and a shorter survival than negative cases (P < 0.05). Our 
findings indicate that HMGA1 may be involved in the carcinogenesis and
invasiveness of HCC and the determination of HMGA1 can be of great value in
predicting the prognosis of patients with HCC.

PMID: 16187170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Pathol Res Pract. 2003;199(9):589-98.

Chromosomal aberrations, profiles of expression of growth-related markers
including galectins and environmental hazards in relation to the incidence of
chondroid pulmonary hamartomas.

Kayser K(1), Dünnwald D, Kazmierczak B, Bullerdiek J, Kaltner H, Zick Y, André S,
Gabius HJ.

Author information: 
(1)UICC Telepathology Consultation Center, Institute of Pathology, Charité,
Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany. klkayser@lung.de

This prospective study includes 103 cases of chondroid pulmonary hamartomas,
resected over a period of nearly six years. Genes encoding proteins of the high
motility group (HMGI-C, (Y), chromosomes 12q15 and 6p21) were analyzed
cytogenetically. Furthermore, we examined the expression of growth-regulatory
markers, including galectins-1, -3, -8, heparin-binding lectin (HBL), calcyclin
(S100A6) and macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), as well as that of
Ki-67 (MIB-1). Syntactic structure analysis was applied to automated
classification of stained histological slides and for the detection of
topological properties in hamartomas and disease-free lung. These data were set
in relation to clinical features, including environmental hazards, smoking habit,
and the occurrence of heart-lung disease. Men and women contributed to the study 
in 61 and 42 cases, respectively. Smoking was frequent (75% men and 54% women),
with a mean tobacco consumption of 36 pack years. Aberrations affecting
exclusively the HMGI-C gene and the HGMI(Y) gene were seen in 46 cases (44.7%)
and in 22 cases (21.3%), respectively. Both genes were affected in only one case.
Abnormalities most frequently occurred in chromosomal bands 6p12 and 12q14.
Genetic aberrations were significantly increased in men exposed to environmental 
(occupational) risk factors, excluding smoking (p < 0.05), and in tumors larger
than average hamartomas. There were significant differences in staining profiles,
particularly for calcyclin and MIF. The mean proliferation index was Nv = 9.9 +/-
6.4%; structural entropy was similar in all markers applied. Owing to their
remarkably high values (from 142 to 148), these data were in contrast to a low
current of entropy seen in most markers applied. The staining profile identified 
several markers that delimited cell positivity from normal parenchymal cells.
These results contribute to the definition of biochemical characteristics in
hamartomas and can be useful for distinguishing them from chronic degenerative
disorders.

PMID: 14621194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mod Pathol. 2003 Nov;16(11):1132-40.

Fusion, disruption, and expression of HMGA2 in bone and soft tissue chondromas.

Dahlén A(1), Mertens F, Rydholm A, Brosjö O, Wejde J, Mandahl N, Panagopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
anna.dahlen@klingen.lu.se

Soft tissue and skeletal chondromas are rare entities, and only 21 cases with
abnormal karyotypes have been reported. A survey of these, and 10 new cases
reported herein, showed that the 12q13-15 segment is nonrandomly involved in
structural rearrangements in chondromas. The HMGA2 (HMGI-C) locus in 12q15 is
frequently rearranged in other benign mesenchymal tumors, and this study aimed at
characterizing the expression of HMGA2 in chondromatous tumors. The material
consisted of 8 soft tissue and 6 skeletal chondromas, as well as of 14 skeletal
chondrosarcomas. All cases had been cytogenetically analyzed. Expression of HMGA2
could be assessed by RT-PCR in 8 chondromas and 13 chondrosarcomas. HMGA2 was
expressed in 4 of six soft tissue chondromas, all displaying 12q-rearrangements
at cytogenetic analysis. A truncated transcript (exons 1-3), but not a
full-length (exons 1-5) transcript, was detected in three of them, suggesting
activation through an intragenic rearrangement. One soft tissue chondroma had a
t(3;12)(q27;q15), and the RT-PCR analysis revealed an HMGA2-LPP fusion
transcript, composed of HMGA2 exons 1-3 and LPP exons 9-11. An identical fusion
transcript previously has been identified in lipoma and pulmonary chondroid
hamartoma. In the fourth soft tissue chondroma, a full-length transcript was
detected, indicating expression of at least one intact allele. Both skeletal
chondromas expressed HMGA2. In one of them, a full-length transcript was
detected, even though 12q was cytogenetically unaffected. A truncated or
full-length transcript was found in 8 of 13 chondrosarcomas, 4 of which displayed
12q rearrangements. Possibly, cryptic rearrangements were present among the many 
complex marker chromosomes in the remaining 4 cases.

PMID: 14614053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cancer. 2003 Nov 5;2:37.

p8 inhibits the growth of human pancreatic cancer cells and its expression is
induced through pathways involved in growth inhibition and repressed by factors
promoting cell growth.

Malicet C(1), Lesavre N, Vasseur S, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche INSERM, EMI 0116, 163 Avenue de Luminy, Case 915, Parc
Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy, 13288 Marseille Cedex, France.
malicet@marseille.inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: p8 is a stress-induced protein with multiple functions and
biochemically related to the architectural factor HMG-I/Y. We analyzed the
expression and function of p8 in pancreatic cancer-derived cells.
METHODS: Expression of p8 was silenced in the human pancreatic cancer cell lines 
Panc-1 and BxPc-3 by infection with a retrovirus expressing p8 RNA in the
antisense orientation. Cell growth was measured in control and p8-silenced cells.
Influence on p8 expression of the induction of intracellular pathways promoting
cellular growth or growth arrest was monitored.
RESULTS: p8-silenced cells grew more rapidly than control cells transfected with 
the empty retrovirus. Activation of the Ras-->Raf-->MEK-->ERK and JNK
intracellular pathways down-regulated p8 expression. In addition, the MEK1/2
inhibitor U0126 and the JNK inhibitor SP600125 up-regulates expression of p8.
Conversely, p38 or TGFbeta-1 induced p8 expression whereas the specific p38
inhibitor SB203580 down-regulated p8 expression. Finally, TGFbeta-1 induction was
in part mediated through p38.
CONCLUSIONS: p8 inhibits the growth of human pancreatic cancer cells. p8
expression is induced through pathways involved in growth inhibition and
repressed by factors that promote cell growth. These results suggest that p8
belongs to a pathway regulating the growth of pancreatic cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC280693
PMID: 14613582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Prog Cell Cycle Res. 2003;5:279-86.

HMGA proteins as therapeutic drug targets.

Reeves R(1), Beckerbauer LM.

Author information: 
(1)Washington State University, School of Molecular Biosciences, Pullman, WA
99164-4660, USA.

Members of the HMGA (formerly known as HMGI/Y) family of non-histone chromatin
proteins function as important accessory factors in many normal nuclear
processes, including the modulation of chromosome structure, chromatin and
nucleosome remodeling and the control of gene transcription. The HMGA proteins
are also frequently associated with various malignancies. The aberrant expression
or over-expression of these proteins is, for example, associated with many
different types of tumors. The HMGA proteins also appear to be the host-supplied 
cofactors necessary for efficient integration of retroviruses, such as HIV, into 
the genome. The HMGA proteins appear, therefore, to be promising targets for
therapeutic drugs aimed at alleviating these and other pathological conditions.

PMID: 14593722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Med. 2003 May-Aug;9(5-8):154-65.

Derepression of HMGA2 gene expression in retinoblastoma is associated with cell
proliferation.

Chau KY(1), Manfioletti G, Cheung-Chau KW, Fusco A, Dhomen N, Sowden JC, Sasabe
T, Mukai S, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Ophthalmology, University College
London, University of London, UK.

To assess whether retinoblastoma formation is associated with the expression of
high mobility group (HMG) A2 protein, a transcription factor that is highly
expressed during embryogenesis and completely repressed in normal adult tissues, 
we performed Northern and Western blots and RT-PCR analyses, and
immunohistochemistry to test for HMGA2 expression. We used established
retinoblastoma cell lines in tumors grown in nude mice and clinical
retinoblastoma specimens, and contrasted these tumors with normal embryonic and
adult retina. Adenoviral-mediated antisense experiments were conducted on the
retinoblastoma cell lines to suppress HMGA2 expression and determine if cell
proliferation is HMGA2-dependent. We also transfected a retinoblastoma cell line 
to identify cis-regulatory elements and transcription initiation sites on the
HMGA2 gene promoter. HMGA2 gene expression was silenced in terminally
differentiated retina of 6-wk-old mice, but it was detected in retina of a 13.5-d
postcoitum embryo. Reactivation of HMGA2 gene expression was observed in the
retinoblastoma cell lines Y79, WERI-Rb1, and TOTL-1, in tumors derived from some 
of these cells propagated in nude mice, and in a high frequency of
retinoblastomas excised from human patients. This suggests that expression of
HMGA2 gene in retinoblastoma cells involves a derepression process. By using an
antisense approach to block HMGA2 expression, we observed a decrease in the
number of proliferating retinoblastoma cells. As a 1st step toward understanding 
HMGA2 gene reactivation in retinoblastoma, we mapped the 2 transcription
initiation sites and associated positive regulatory elements within the WERI-Rb1 
cells. Our discovery of derepression of HMGA2 gene expression in retinoblastoma
provides the 1st evidence that this protein might contribute to neoplastic
transformation of retina cells.

PMCID: PMC1430825
PMID: 14571323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Nov 1;290(2):427-36.

Elevated levels of polyamines alter chromatin in murine skin and tumors without
global changes in nucleosome acetylation.

Hobbs CA(1), Paul BA, Gilmour SK.

Author information: 
(1)Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, 100 Lancaster Avenue, Wynnewood, PA
19096, USA.

Polyamines affect nucleosome oligomerization and DNA conformation in vitro, yet
little information exists regarding the influence of naturally synthesized
polyamines on mammalian chromatin. Capitalizing on the relative inefficiency of a
moderate ionic strength extraction buffer to dissociate histones, we obtained
evidence of altered chromatin in transgenic mice that overexpress ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC), which catalyzes polyamine synthesis. Dissociation of
histones from chromatin in ODC transgenic mouse skin, as well as in tumors that
develop spontaneously in ODC/Ras bigenic mice, is dramatically reduced relative
to normal littermate skin. This could reflect tighter tethering of nucleosomes to
DNA or a more compacted chromatin structure due to elevated intracellular
concentrations of polyamines since this effect is reversible upon treatment with 
alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), a specific inhibitor of ODC enzymatic
activity. Impeded release of nonhistone chromatin proteins HP-1beta and
nucleophosmin, but not Lamin B, HDAC-1, HMGB, HMGN2, or HMGA1, suggests that
polyamines exert selective effects on specific chromatin protein complexes.
Moreover, overall acetylation, as well as specific methylation, of nucleosomes in
ODC mice is unaffected, implying that access by histone modifying enzymes is not 
generally restricted. The abnormal chromatin environment fostered by elevated
levels of polyamines may be a necessary prerequisite for epithelial tumor growth 
and maintenance.

PMID: 14568000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Virol. 2003 Nov;77(21):11767-80.

Metaphase chromosome tethering is necessary for the DNA synthesis and maintenance
of oriP plasmids but is insufficient for transcription activation by Epstein-Barr
nuclear antigen 1.

Sears J(1), Kolman J, Wahl GM, Aiyar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2004 May;78(10):5531.

Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) infects resting B cells, within which it establishes
latency as a stable, circular episome with only two EBV components, the cis
element oriP and the latently expressed protein EBNA1. It is believed that
EBNA1's ability to tether oriP episomes to metaphase chromosomes is required for 
its stable replication. We created fusions between the DNA-binding domain (DBD)
of EBNA1 and the cellular chromatin-binding proteins HMGA1a and HMG1 to determine
the minimal requirements for stable maintenance of an oriP-based episome. These
two proteins differ in that HMGA1a can associate with metaphase chromosomes but
HMG1 cannot. Interestingly, coinciding with metaphase chromosome association,
HMGA1a-DBD but not HMG1-DBD supported both the transient replication and stable
maintenance of oriP plasmids, with efficiencies quantitatively similar to that of
EBNA1. However, HMGA1a-DBD activated transcription from EBNA1-dependent episomal 
reporter to only 20% of the level of EBNA1. Furthermore, EBNA1 but not HMGA1a-DBD
activated transcription from a chromosomally integrated EBNA1-dependent
transcription reporter. This indicates that EBNA1 possesses functional domains
that support transcription activation independent of its ability to tether
episomal oriP plasmids to cellular chromosomes. We provide evidence that
metaphase chromosome tethering is a fundamental requirement for maintenance of an
oriP plasmid but is insufficient for EBNA1 to activate transcription.

PMCID: PMC229350
PMID: 14557661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Virchows Arch. 2003 Nov;443(5):649-54. Epub 2003 Sep 11.

Expression of the high-mobility group protein HMGI(Y) in human trophoblast:
potential role in trophoblast invasion of maternal tissue.

Bamberger AM(1), Makrigiannakis A, Röser K, Radde J, Carstens T, Flohr AM,
Bamberger CM, Bullerdiek J, Löning T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecopathology, Institute of Pathology University Hospital
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. bamberger@uke.uni-hamburg.de

The high-mobility group protein HMGI(Y) is a member of a family of non-histone
chromosomal proteins, which have been implicated in the regulation of inducible
gene transcription, integration of retroviruses into chromosomes and induction of
neoplastic transformation and metastatic progression in cancer cells. The human
trophoblast is a tissue that shares proliferation capacity and invasiveness with 
neoplastic tissues, but in which these processes are tightly regulated. In the
present study, we analyzed the expression of HMGI(Y) in the human placenta using 
immunohistochemistry. We found expression of HMGI(Y), with nuclear localization, 
in the villous cytotrophoblast (vCT), which is a highly proliferative cell type. 
In contrast, the majority of the nuclei of the villous syncytiotrophoblast, a
terminally differentiated tissue, was negative. Interestingly, expression of
HMGI(Y) was strongest in anchoring villi at the implantation site and in
extravillous (intermediate) trophoblast (EVT) invading the maternal decidua. As
vCT cells differentiate to become EVT, the HMGI(Y) protein appears to switch from
a nuclear to a cytoplasmic localization. Expression of HMGI(Y) in isolated
trophoblast populations in primary cell culture was also confirmed using
Western-blot analysis. This study shows for the first time expression and
localization of HMGI(Y) in the subpopulations of placental tissue.

PMID: 13680222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Histol Histopathol. 2003 Oct;18(4):999-1004.

High mobility group protein HMGA1 expression in breast cancer reveals a positive 
correlation with tumour grade.

Flohr AM(1), Rogalla P, Bonk U, Puettmann B, Buerger H, Gohla G, Packeisen J,
Wosniok W, Loeschke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.

Summary. Members of the HMGA protein (high mobility group protein A) family act
as master switches of the chromatin structure by bending DNA and thus modulating 
the formation of transcription factor complexes of a number of target genes.
Accordingly, HMGA proteins have been shown to be associated with the development 
and/or progression of a variety of benign and malignant tumours. Nevertheless,
the HMGA1 expression studies published so far have not included primary breast
cancer samples. In this study we have investigated the HMGA1 expression patterns 
in a series of 170 breast cancer samples by immunohistochemistry. We have found a
strong variation in HMGA1 expression between the tumours. Based on an
immunoreactive score (IRS) 14.1% of the tumour samples were scored to IRS 8-12
(strong positivity for HMGA1), 24.7% were scored to IRS 4-6 (moderate
positivity), 25.3% were scored to IRS 1-3 (weak positivity), and 35.9% showed no 
positivity at all. Immunoreaction could be detected in all histological types of 
breast cancers analysed with the exception of invasive papillary and cribriform
carcinoma. Statistical analysis revealed a strong correlation between tumour
grade and HMGA1 expression (rs=0.3516, p<0.0001). Thus, the HMGA1 expression
level can be considered a potential prognostic marker for breast cancer.

PMID: 12973668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Dec;24(12):1861-9. Epub 2003 Sep 11.

A truncated HMGA1 gene induces proliferation of the 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytic cells: 
a model of human lipomas.

Pierantoni GM(1), Battista S, Pentimalli F, Fedele M, Visone R, Federico A,
Santoro M, Viglietto G, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli 'Federico II', via Pansini 5, I-80131
Naples, Italy.

The high mobility group A (HMGA) proteins are non-histone chromosomal proteins
implicated in the organization of chromatin structure and in the assembly of
protein complexes on the promoters of several inducible genes. Rearrangements of 
HMGA1 and HMGA2 genes, consequent to chromosomal translocation, have been
frequently detected in human benign tumours of mesenchymal origin including
lipomas. We have demonstrated previously that 3T3-L1 adipocytic differentiation
is associated with increased HMGA1 protein levels, and that the block of HMGA1
synthesis dramatically increases the growth rate of 3T3-L1 cells and suppresses
adipocytic differentiation. Here we have examined the role of a truncated HMGA1
gene in adipocytic cell growth. We have found that expression of the truncated
Hmga1 gene (Hmga1/T) dramatically increases 3T3-L1 cell growth without blocking
adipocytic differentiation. The Hmga1/T 3T3-L1 cells had higher E2F activity than
the wild-type cells, and a deregulated cell cycle. In fact, the Hmga1/T cells had
a reduced G0/G1 fraction, and a greater number of cells in S-phase. However,
consistent with the benign nature of tumours associated with HMGA1
rearrangements, the Hmga1/T 3T3-L1 cells did not acquire the malignant phenotype.
These results suggest a critical role played by HMGA1 rearrangements in the
generation of human lipomas.

PMID: 12970064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 1;31(17):5025-32.

Construction and analysis of cells lacking the HMGA gene family.

Beitzel B(1), Bushman F.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
10010 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The high mobility group A (HMGA) family of non-histone chromosomal proteins is
encoded by two related genes, HMGA1 and HMGA2. HMGA proteins are architectural
transcription factors that have been found to regulate the transcription of a
large number of genes. They are also some of the most commonly dysregulated genes
in human neoplasias, highlighting a role in growth control. HMGA1 and HMGA2 have 
also been found to stimulate retroviral integration in vitro. In this study, we
have cloned chicken HMGA1, and used the chicken DT40 B-cell lymphoma line to
generate cells lacking HMGA1, HMGA2 and both in combination. We tested these
lines for effects on cellular growth, gene control and retroviral integration.
Surprisingly, we found that the HMGA gene family is dispensable for growth in
DT40 cells, and that there is no apparent defect in retroviral integration in the
absence of HMGA1 or HMGA2. We also analyzed the activity of approximately 4000
chicken genes, but found no significant changes. We conclude that HMGA proteins
are not strictly required for growth control or retroviral integration in DT40
cells and may well be redundant with other factors.

PMCID: PMC212792
PMID: 12930952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 1;12(17):2167-78. Epub 2003 Jul 15.

Chromatin of the Barr body: histone and non-histone proteins associated with or
excluded from the inactive X chromosome.

Chadwick BP(1), Willard HF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University, Box 3382, Durham,
NC 27710, USA.

The Barr body has long been recognized as the cytological manifestation of the
inactive X chromosome (Xi) in interphase nuclei. Despite being known for over 50 
years, relatively few components of the Barr body have been identified. In this
study, we have screened over 30 histone variants, modified histones and
non-histone proteins for their association with or exclusion from the Barr body. 
We demonstrate that, similar to the histone variant macroH2A, heterochromatin
protein-1 (HP1), histone H1 and the high mobility group protein HMG-I/Y are
elevated at the territory of the Xi in interphase in human cell lines, but only
when the Xi chromatin is heteropycnotic, implicating each as a component of the
Barr body. Surprisingly, however, virtually all other candidate proteins involved
in establishing heterochromatin and gene silencing are notably absent from the
Barr body despite being localized generally elsewhere throughout the nucleus,
indicating that the Barr body represents a discrete subnuclear compartment that
is not freely accessible to most chromatin proteins. A similar dichotomous
pattern of association or exclusion describes the spatial relationship of a
number of specific histone methylation patterns in relation to the Barr body.
Notably, though, several methylated forms of histone H3 that are deficient in Xi 
chromatin generally are present at a region near the macrosatellite repeat DXZ4, 
as are the chromatin proteins CTCF and SAP30, indicating a distinctive chromatin 
state in this region of the Xi. Taken together, our data imply that the Xi adopts
a distinct chromatin configuration in interphase nuclei and are consistent with a
mechanism by which HP1, through histone H3 lysine-9 methylation, recognizes and
assists in maintaining heterochromatin and gene silencing at the human Xi.

PMID: 12915472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42106-14. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

HMGA1 co-activates transcription in B cells through indirect association with
DNA.

McCarthy KM(1), McDevit D, Andreucci A, Reeves R, Nikolajczyk BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

The immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer, or mu enhancer, is required for B cell
development. Only the appropriate combination of transcription factors results in
B cell-specific enhancer activation. HMGA1 (formerly (HMG-I(Y)) is a proposed
co-activator of the ETS transcription factors required for mu enhancer activity. 
HMGA1 associates with the ETS factor PU.1, resulting in changes in PU.1
structure, and enhanced transcriptional synergy with Ets-1 on the mu enhancer in 
nonlymphoid cells. New data show HMGA1 directly interacts with Ets-1 in addition 
to PU.1. In vitro HMGA1/Ets-1 interaction facilitates Ets-1/mu enhancer binding
in the absence of an HMGA1.Ets-1.DNA complex. To address whether HMGA1 is present
in the transcriptionally active mu nucleoprotein complex, we completed DNA
pull-down assays to detect protein tethering in the context of protein/DNA
interaction. Results show that HMGA1 is not tightly associated with mu enhancer
DNA through PU.1 or Ets-1, despite strong associations between these proteins in 
solution. However, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show HMGA1 associates
with the endogenous enhancer in B cells. Furthermore, antisense HMGA1
substantially decreases mu enhancer activity in B cells. Taken together, these
data suggest that HMGA1 functions as a transcriptional mu enhancer co-activator
in B cells through indirect association with DNA.

PMID: 12907668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Reprod Dev. 2003 Sep;66(1):81-9.

Hmga1 is required for normal sperm development.

Liu J(1), Schiltz JF, Ashar HR, Chada KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

The Hmgi protein family of chromosomal architectural factors is extensively
studied for its roles in embryogenesis and its association with benign
mesenchymal tumors. Although the biochemical function of Hmga1 has been studied
in vitro, to provide in vivo insight into its biological function, a targeted
disruption of Hmga1 was initiated. Chimeric founder mice were derived from
embryonic stem (ES) cells harboring a targeted mutation in a single Hmga1 allele.
These 14 different chimeric founders produced 494 black progeny. Since none of
these 494 progeny were agouti, none of them were derived from ES cells. Control
injections of the wild-type ES cell lines resulted in ES cell derived agouti
mice, indicating that the ES cells were totipotent. Therefore, our results
indicate that one intact Hmga1 allele was not sufficient for germ-line
transmission of the ES cells. Seven chimeric founder mice that were examined
histologically demonstrated aberrant regions in their reproductive organs.
Aberrant regions of seminiferous tubules were reduced in diameter, demonstrated
vacuolated Sertoli cells, and had an absolute deficiency of sperm. While the
Hmga1(+/-) ES cells were shown to contribute to the formation of the
epididymides, they did not significantly contribute to the testes of chimeric
founder mice. No sperm isolated from any of the Hmga1(+/-) chimeric mice were
shown to arise from the ES cells, as none of them contained the targeted
disruption of the Hmga1 gene. Our results suggest that both alleles of Hmga1 are 
required for normal sperm production in the mouse.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12874803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Plant Pathol. 2003 Jul 1;4(4):249-58. doi: 10.1046/j.1364-3703.2003.00171.x.

Analysis of pea HMG-I/Y expression suggests a role in defence gene regulation.

Klosterman SJ(1), Choi JJ, Hadwiger LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
99164-6430, USA.

SUMMARY HMG-I/Y proteins are characterized by the presence of AT-hook motifs, DNA
binding domains that recognize AT-rich tracts of DNA. By facilitating
protein:protein and protein:DNA interactions in the vicinity of these AT-rich
binding sites, HMG-I/Y positively or negatively regulates gene expression.
Several pea defence gene promoters have AT-rich tracts of DNA that are potential 
targets for modulation via HMG-I/Y. In this study, a comparison of the expression
of a pea defence gene (DRR206) mRNA relative to the expression of HMG-I/Y mRNA
was monitored by Northern analysis following the inoculation of a fungal
pathogen, Fusarium solani or treatment with chitosan and a F. solani DNase (Fsph 
DNase). In pea pod endocarp tissue, HMG-I/Y expression was observed at high
levels in untreated tissue and at lower levels 6 h following inoculation or
wounding of the tissue. Western blots with an antipea HMG-I/Y polyclonal antibody
also revealed that pea HMG-I/Y is expressed at decreased levels 6 h following
inoculation or elicitor treatment. HMG-I/Y extracted from pea caused alterations 
in the gel migration of radio-labelled AT-rich sequences from the pea DRR206
promoter, suggesting that similar interactions could exist in vivo.
Agroinfiltration was utilized to express the pea HMG-I/Y gene in tobacco
containing a chimeric gene fusion of a promoter from the PR gene, DRR206, and the
beta-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene. Transient expression of pea HMG-I/Y led
to a decrease in GUS reporter gene activity in the heterologous tobacco system.
These data implicate pea HMG-I/Y abundance in the down-regulation of DRR206 gene 
expression, and possibly HMG-I/Y depletion in the expression of defence genes in 
pea.

PMID: 20569385  [PubMed]


436. FASEB J. 2003 Aug;17(11):1496-8. Epub 2003 Jun 17.

Loss of Hmga1 gene function affects embryonic stem cell lympho-hematopoietic
differentiation.

Battista S(1), Pentimalli F, Baldassarre G, Fedele M, Fidanza V, Croce CM, Fusco 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare c/o Centro di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, via Pansini 5, 80131
Naples, Italy.

By interacting with transcription machinery, high-mobility group A 1 (HMGA1)
proteins alter the chromatin structure and thereby regulate the transcriptional
activity of several genes. To assess their role in development, we studied the in
vitro differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells that bear one or both
disrupted Hmga1 alleles. Here, we report that Hmga1 null ES cells generate fewer 
T-cell precursors than do wild-type ES cells. Indeed, they preferentially
differentiate to B cells, probably consequent to decreased interleukin 2
expression and increased interleukin 6 expression. Moreover, a lack of HMGA1
expression induces changes in hemopoietic differentiation, i.e., a reduced
monocyte/macrophage population and an increase in megakaryocyte precursor
numbers, erythropoiesis, and globin gene expression. Re-expression of the Hmga1
gene in Hmga1 null ES cells restores the wild-type phenotype. The effect on
megakaryocyte/erythrocyte lineages seems, at least in part, mediated by the
GATA-1 transcription factor, a key regulator of red blood cell differentiation.
In fact, we found that Hmga1-/- ES cells overexpress GATA-1 and that HMGA1
proteins directly control GATA-1 transcription. Taken together, these data
indicate that HMGA1 proteins play a prime role in lymphohematopoietic
differentiation.

PMID: 12824305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2003 Jul;22(3):277-84.

Angiomyofibroblastoma of the vulva: report of a case with immunohistochemical and
molecular analysis.

Horiguchi H(1), Matsui-Horiguchi M, Fujiwara M, Kaketa M, Kawano M,
Ohtsubo-Shimoyamada R, Ohse H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Sciences, Ibaraki Prefectural University of Health
Sciences, Ami, Ibaralki, Japan. horiguchi@ipu.ac.jp

A 43-year-old woman presented with a mass in the subcutaneous tissue of the right
labium majus. A lipoma or Bartholin gland cyst was suspected and excision of the 
lesion was performed. The lesion was well circumscribed, and histological
examination revealed a typical angiomyofibroblastoma. The lesion was composed of 
alternating hypocellular edematous and hypercellular areas with abundant vessels,
and plump tumor cells were loosely dispersed or aggregated mainly around the
vessels. Tumor cells were immunoreactive for vimentin and desmin but negative for
muscle actins. Ultrastructurally, the tumor cells contained a moderate amount of 
rough endoplasmic reticulum and abundant intermediate filaments, and had
primitive junctions. Pinocytotic vesicles or basal lamina were not evident.
Immunohistochemical studies also revealed that the tumor cells expressed basic
fibroblast-growth factor, vascular-endothelial-growth factor, and stem-cell
factor, factors that may contribute to the rich vascularity and mast cells within
the tumor. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction detected high mobility
group I-C (HMGI-C) transcripts in the tumor tissue. Because the expression of
HMGI-C is regulated by developmental and differentiation processes and is not
found in adult normal tissues, HMGI-C may be involved in the tumorigenesis of
angiomyofibroblastoma.

PMID: 12819396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Jul;24(7):1191-8. Epub 2003 May 9.

HMGA1 protein over-expression is a frequent feature of epithelial ovarian
carcinomas.

Masciullo V(1), Baldassarre G, Pentimalli F, Berlingieri MT, Boccia A, Chiappetta
G, Palazzo J, Manfioletti G, Giancotti V, Viglietto G, Scambia G, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, 1020 Locust Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

High mobility group A 1 (HMGA1) proteins are chromatinic factors, which are
absent or expressed at very low levels in normal adult tissues, while they are
over-expressed in several human malignant tumors. In this study, HMGA1 protein
expression was investigated by immunohistochemistry in a series of 44 epithelial 
ovarian specimens, which included four normal ovarian tissues, 29 primary
invasive carcinomas, one metastatic ovarian tumor and 10 low malignant potential 
(LMP) tumors. HMGA1 staining was not detected in normal ovarian surface
epithelium, which is the area from which ovarian adenocarcinoma frequently
arises. HMGA1 proteins were expressed at low levels in some LMP tumors, whereas
they were present in abundance in most of the primary ovarian adenocarcinomas.
RT-PCR and western blot analysis correlated with immunohistochemical data. We
demonstrated that the suppression of HMGA1 protein synthesis by an adenovirus
carrying the HMGA1 gene in antisense orientation (Ad-Yas-GFP) inhibited the
growth of two human ovarian carcinoma cell lines (OVCAR-5 and OVCAR-8). These
results confirm HMGA1 over-expression as a general feature of human malignant
neoplasias, including ovarian cancer and suggest that suppression of HMGA1
protein synthesis by an antisense adenoviral vector may represent a new and
promising gene therapy for the treatment of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 12807722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Br J Cancer. 2003 May 6;88(9):1406-10.

Expression of high-mobility-group-protein HMGI-C mRNA in the peripheral blood is 
an independent poor prognostic indicator for survival in metastatic breast
cancer.

Langelotz C(1), Schmid P, Jakob C, Heider U, Wernecke KD, Possinger K, Sezer O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Charité,
Humboldt-University, Schumannstr 20/21, 10098 Berlin, Germany.

HMGI-C belongs to the high-mobility-group-protein (HMG) family of architectural
transcription factors and considerable interest has recently been shown in its
expression in neoplastic tissues and apparent involvement in tumorigenesis. We
could previously demonstrate an expression of HMGI-C mRNA in the peripheral blood
of breast cancer patients for the first time. In this prospective study, we
evaluated the independent prognostic power of HMGI-C mRNA expression in the
peripheral blood of an unselected cohort of 69 patients with metastatic breast
cancer using a hemi-nested reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) followed by sequence analysis of the resulting PCR products.
Multivariate analysis was performed using the Cox regression model. HMGI-C mRNA
was detected in peripheral blood from 21 out of 69 (30%) patients with metastatic
breast cancer. Median survival was 15.9 months in patients expressing HMGI-C,
while in the group of patients without HMGI-C expression the median survival had 
not been reached yet after a median follow-up of 24.7 months and 85.4% were still
alive in this group. Disease-specific survival was significantly worse for
patients positive for HMGI-C in comparison to those not expressing HMGI-C
(P=0.0001). In a multivariate regression analysis, HMGI-C remained an independent
prognostic factor for overall survival (P=0.001) besides oestrogen receptor
status (P=0.024) and presence of metastases in liver and lungs (P=0.029). HMGI-C 
expression in the peripheral blood of patients with metastatic breast cancer is a
powerful independent indicator for poor overall survival and this is the first
study to demonstrate its prognostic relevance in univariate and multivariate
analysis.

PMCID: PMC2741055
PMID: 12778070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cell Death Differ. 2003 Jun;10(6):698-708.

Induced HMGA1a expression causes aberrant splicing of Presenilin-2 pre-mRNA in
sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Manabe T(1), Katayama T, Sato N, Gomi F, Hitomi J, Yanagita T, Kudo T, Honda A,
Mori Y, Matsuzaki S, Imaizumi K, Mayeda A, Tohyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Japan.

The aberrant splicing isoform (PS2V), generated by exon 5 skipping of the
Presenilin-2 (PS2) gene transcript, is a diagnostic feature of sporadic
Alzheimer's disease (AD). We found PS2V is hypoxia-inducible in human
neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells. We purified a responsible trans-acting factor based 
on its binding to an exon 5 fragment. The factor was identified as the high
mobility group A1a protein (HMGA1a; formerly HMG-I). HMGA1a bound to a specific
sequence on exon 5, located upstream of the 5' splice site. HMGA1a expression was
induced by hypoxia and the protein was accumulated in the nuclear speckles with
the endogenous splicing factor SC35. Overexpression of HMGA1a generated PS2V, but
PS2V was repressed by cotransfection with the U1 snRNP 70K protein that has a
strong affinity to HMGA1a. HMGA1a could interfere with U1 snRNP binding to the 5'
splice site and caused exon 5 skipping. HMGA1a levels were significantly
increased in the brain tissue from sporadic AD patients. We propose a novel
mechanism of sporadic AD that involves HMGA1a-induced aberrant splicing of PS2
pre-mRNA in the absence of any mutations.

PMID: 12761578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. FASEB J. 2003 Jul;17(10):1340-2. Epub 2003 May 8.

Chronic hyperglycemia impairs insulin secretion by affecting insulin receptor
expression, splicing, and signaling in RIN beta cell line and human islets of
Langerhans.

Hribal ML(1), Perego L, Lovari S, Andreozzi F, Menghini R, Perego C, Finzi G,
Usellini L, Placidi C, Capella C, Guzzi V, Lauro D, Bertuzzi F, Davalli A, Pozza 
G, Pontiroli A, Federici M, Lauro R, Brunetti A, Folli F, Sesti G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Rome-Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Recent evidence suggests that insulin signaling through the insulin receptor A
type (Ex11-), regulates insulin gene transcription. Because chronic hyperglycemia
negatively affects insulin receptor function and regulates alternative splicing
of the insulin receptor, we inquired whether chronic exposure of pancreatic
beta-cells to high glucose results in alterations in insulin signaling due to
changes in insulin receptor expression and relative abundance of its spliced
isoforms. Our results demonstrate that the insulin receptor is localized in
insulin secretory vescicles in human pancreatic beta-cells. Furthermore, we find 
that alterations in insulin expression and secretion caused by chronic exposure
to high glucose are paralleled by decreased insulin receptor expression and
increased relative abundance of the Ex11+ isoform in both human islets and RIN
beta-cells. PDX-1 and HMGI(Y) transcription factors are down-regulated by high
glucose. These changes are associated with defects in insulin signaling involving
insulin receptor-associated PI 3-kinase/Akt/PHAS-I pathway in RIN beta-cells.
Re-expression in RIN beta-cells chronically exposed to high glucose of the Ex11-,
but not the Ex11+, isoform restored insulin mRNA expression. These data suggest
that changes in early steps of insulin receptor signaling may play a role in
determining beta-cell dysfunction caused by chronic hyperglycemia.

PMID: 12738810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Oncogene. 2003 May 1;22(17):2689-97.

Identification of H-Ras, RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42 responsive genes.

Teramoto H(1), Malek RL, Behbahani B, Castellone MD, Lee NH, Gutkind JS.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National Institute of Dental Research,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4330, USA.

The superfamily of small GTP-binding proteins has expanded dramatically in recent
years. The Ras family has long been associated with signaling pathways
contributing to normal and aberrant cell growth, while Rho-related protein
function is to integrate extracellular signals with specific targets regulating
cell morphology, cell aggregation, tissue polarity, cell motility and
cytokinesis. Recent findings suggest that certain Rho proteins, including RhoA,
Rac1 and Cdc42, can also play a role in signal transduction to the nucleus and
cell growth control. However, the nature of the genes regulated by Ras and Rho
GTPases, as well as their contribution to their numerous biological effects is
still largely unknown. To approach these questions, we investigated the global
gene expression pattern induced by activated forms of H-Ras, RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42
using cDNA microarrays comprising 19 117 unique elements. Using this approach, we
identified 1184 genes that were up- or downregulated by at least twofold.
Hierarchical cluster analysis revealed the existence of patterns of gene
regulation both unique and common to H-Ras V12, RhoA QL, Rac1 QL and Cdc42 QL
activation. For example, H-Ras V12 upregulated osteopontin and Akt 1, and H-Ras
and RhoA stimulated cyclin G1, cyclin-dependent kinase 8, cyclin A2 and HMGI-C,
while Rac1 QL and Cdc42 QL upregulated extracellular matrix and cell adhesion
proteins such as alpha-actinin 4, procollagen type I and V and neuropilin.
Furthermore, H-Ras V12 downregulated by >eightfold 52 genes compared to only
three genes by RhoA QL, Rac1 QL and Cdc42 QL. These results provide key
information to begin unraveling the complexity of the molecular mechanisms
underlying the transforming potential of Ras and Rho proteins, as well as the
numerous morphological and cell cycle effects induced by these small GTPases.64

PMID: 12730683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Genome Res. 2003 May;13(5):800-12.

Retroposed copies of the HMG genes: a window to genome dynamics.

Strichman-Almashanu LZ(1), Bustin M, Landsman D.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20894, USA.

Retroposed copies (RPCs) of genes are functional (intronless paralogs) or
nonfunctional (processed pseudogenes) copies derived from mRNA through a process 
of retrotransposition. Previous studies found that gene families involved in mRNA
translation or nuclear function were more likely to have large numbers of RPCs.
Here we characterize RPCs of the few families coding for the abundant
high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins in humans. Using an algorithm we developed, we
identified and studied 219 HMG RPCs. For slightly more than 10% of these RPCs, we
found evidence indicating expression. Furthermore, eight of these are potentially
new members of the HMG families of proteins. For three RPCs, the evidence
indicated expression as part of other transcripts; in all of these, we found the 
presence of alternative splicing or multiple polyadenylation signals. RPC
distribution among the HMGs was not even, with 33-65 each for HMGB1, HMGB3,
HMGN1, and HMGN2, and 0-6 each for HMGA1, HMGA2, HMGB2, and HMGN3. Analysis of
the sequences flanking the RPCs revealed that the junction between the target
site duplications and the 5'-flanking sequences exhibited the same TT/AAAA
consensus found for the L1 endonuclease, supporting an L1-mediated
retrotransposition mechanism. Finally, because our algorithm included aligning
RPC flanking sequences with the corresponding HMG genomic sequence, we were able 
to identify transcribed regions of HMG genes that were not part of the published 
mRNA sequences.

PMCID: PMC430908
PMID: 12727900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Nihon Rinsho. 2003 Apr;61(4):677-88.

[Recent progress in 'HMGA1a' which causes aberrant splicing of Presenilin-2
pre-mRNA in sporadic Alzheimer's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Katayama T(1), Manabe T, Tohyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University.

The aberrant splicing isoform(PS2V), generated by exon 5 skipping of the
Presenilin-2(PS2) gene transcript, is a diagnostic feature of sporadic
Alzheimer's disease(sAD). We found PS2V is hypoxia-inducible in SK-N-SH cells and
purified a responsible trans-acting factor based on its binding to an exon 5
fragment. The factor was identified as the High Mobility Group protein A1a:
(HMGA1a). HMGA1a bound to a specific sequence on exon5, located upstream of the
5'-splice site. HMGA1a expression was induced by hypoxia. Over-expression of
HMGA1a generated PS2V, through interference with U1snRNP binding to the 5'-splice
site and caused exon5 skipping. HMGA1a levels were increased in brain from sAD
patients. We propose a novel mechanism of sAD that involves HMGA1a-induced
aberrant splicing of PS2 pre-mRNA in the absence of any mutations.

PMID: 12718095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Histopathology. 2003 May;42(5):466-71.

Expression of HMGI(Y) associated with malignant phenotype of human gastric
tissue.

Nam ES(1), Kim DH, Cho SJ, Chae SW, Kim HY, Kim SM, Han JJ, Shin HS, Park YE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University, Seoul, Korea.

AIMS: We evaluated the association between HMGI(Y) expression and the detection
of malignant cells by simple reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and correlated the level of HMGI(Y) expression and the
clinicopathological data in gastric cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analysed HMGI(Y) expression in 62 gastric cancer tissues 
and 28 normal gastric tissues by RT-PCR and immunohistochemical study. HMGI(Y)
expression evidenced by RT-PCR was observed in 42 (67.7%) of 62 gastric cancer
samples, whereas eight (28.6%) of 28 normal gastric tissues were positive (P =
0.001). In immunohistochemical staining for HMGI(Y), 48 (77.4%) of 62 gastric
cancers were positive for HMGI(Y), whereas four (6.5%) of 62 normal gastric
mucosae around the tumour were weakly positive, particularly in cells of some
hyperplastic glands (P < 0.001). There was no significant correlation between the
levels of HMGI(Y) expression and stage, tumour size, histological grade, invasion
depth, or lymph node metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that HMGI(Y) expression could be associated with
malignant phenotype in human gastric tissue, and that HMGI(Y) may contribute to
gastric tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12713623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 May 1;31(9):2313-22.

The DNA-bending protein HMGB1 is a cellular cofactor of Sleeping Beauty
transposition.

Zayed H(1), Izsvák Z, Khare D, Heinemann U, Ivics Z.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert Rössle Strasse 10, D-13092 
Berlin, Germany.

Sleeping Beauty (SB) is the most active Tc1/ mariner-type transposon in
vertebrates. SB contains two transposase-binding sites (DRs) at the end of each
terminal inverted repeat (IR), a feature termed the IR/DR structure. We
investigated the involvement of cellular proteins in the regulation of SB
transposition. Here, we establish that the DNA-bending, high-mobility group
protein, HMGB1 is a host-encoded cofactor of SB transposition. Transposition was 
severely reduced in mouse cells deficient in HMGB1. This effect was rescued by
transient over-expression of HMGB1, and was partially complemented by HMGB2, but 
not with the HMGA1 protein. Over-expression of HMGB1 in wild-type mouse cells
enhanced transposition, indicating that HMGB1 can be a limiting factor of
transposition. SB transposase was found to interact with HMGB1 in vivo,
suggesting that the transposase may recruit HMGB1 to transposon DNA. HMGB1
stimulated preferential binding of the transposase to the DR further from the
cleavage site, and promoted bending of DNA fragments containing the transposon
IR. We propose that the role of HMGB1 is to ensure that transposase-transposon
complexes are first formed at the internal DRs, and subsequently to promote
juxtaposition of functional sites in transposon DNA, thereby assisting the
formation of synaptic complexes.

PMCID: PMC154227
PMID: 12711676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cell Death Differ. 2003 Mar;10(3):386-9.

Increase of HMGA1a protein methylation is a distinctive characteristic of
leukaemic cells induced to undergo apoptosis.

Sgarra R, Diana F, Rustighi A, Manfioletti G, Giancotti V.

PMID: 12700639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):2720-32.

A nucleoprotein complex containing Sp1, C/EBP beta, and HMGI-Y controls human
insulin receptor gene transcription.

Foti D(1), Iuliano R, Chiefari E, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G. Salvatore, Università degli
Studi di Catanzaro Magna Graecia, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

HMGI-Y is an architectural transcription factor that regulates gene expression in
vivo by controlling the formation of stereospecific multiprotein complexes on the
AT-rich regions of certain gene promoters. Recently, we demonstrated that HMGI-Y 
is required for proper transcription of the insulin receptor (IR) gene. Here we
provide evidence that transcriptional activation of the human IR promoter
requires the assembly of a transcriptionally active multiprotein-DNA complex
which includes, in addition to HMGI-Y, the ubiquitously expressed transcription
factor Sp1 and the CCAAT-enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBP beta). Functional
integrity of this nucleoprotein complex is required for full transactivation of
the IR gene by Sp1 and C/EBP beta in cells readily expressing IRs. We show that
HMGI-Y physically interacts with Sp1 and C/EBP beta and facilitates the binding
of both factors to the IR promoter in vitro. Furthermore, HMGI-Y is needed for
transcriptional synergism between these factors in vivo. Repression of HMGI-Y
function adversely affects both Sp1- and C/EBP beta-induced transactivation of
the IR promoter. Together, these findings demonstrate that HMGI-Y plays
significant molecular roles in the transcriptional activities of these factors in
the context of the IR gene and provide concordant support for the hypothesis
that, in affected individuals, a putative defect in these nuclear proteins may
cause decreased IR expression with subsequent impairment of insulin signaling and
action.

PMCID: PMC152545
PMID: 12665574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Virol. 2003 Apr;77(8):5030-6.

The barrier-to-autointegration factor is a component of functional human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 preintegration complexes.

Lin CW(1), Engelman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Retroviral integration in vivo is mediated by preintegration complexes (PICs)
derived from infectious virions. In addition to the integrase enzyme and cDNA
substrate, PICs contain a variety of viral and host cell proteins. Whereas two
different cell proteins, high-mobility group protein A1 (HMGA1) and the
barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF), were identified as integration cofactors
based on activities in in vitro PIC assays, only HMGA1 was previously identified 
as a PIC component. By using antibodies against known viral and cellular PIC
components, we demonstrate here functional coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous
BAF protein with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) PICs. Since
integrase protein and integration activity were also coimmunoprecipitated by
anti-BAF antibodies, we conclude that BAF is a component of HIV-1 PICs. These
data are consistent with the model that BAF functions as an integration cofactor 
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC152146
PMID: 12663813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biochemistry. 2003 Apr 1;42(12):3575-85.

During apoptosis of tumor cells HMGA1a protein undergoes methylation:
identification of the modification site by mass spectrometry.

Sgarra R(1), Diana F, Bellarosa C, Dekleva V, Rustighi A, Toller M, Manfioletti
G, Giancotti V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, via L. Giorgieri 1, 34127 Trieste, Italy.

Programmed cell death is characterized by posttranslational modifications of a
limited and specific set of nuclear proteins. We demonstrate that during
apoptosis of different types of tumor cells there is a monomethylation of the
nuclear protein HMGA1a that is associated to its previously described
hyperphosphorylation/dephosphorylation process. HMGA1a methylation is strictly
related to the execution of programmed cell death and is a massive event that
involves large amounts of the protein. In some tumor cells, HMGA1a protein is
already methylated to an extent that depends on cell type. The degree of
methylation in any case definitely increases during apoptosis. In the studied
cell systems (human leukaemia, human prostate tumor, and rat thyroid transformed 
cells) among the low-molecular-mass HMG proteins, only HMGA1a was found to be
methylated. A tryptic digestion map of HPLC-purified HMGA1a protein showed that
methylation occurs at arginine 25 in the consensus G(24)R(25)G(26) that belongs
to one of the DNA-binding AT-hooks of the protein. An increase of HMGA1a
methylation could be related to heterochromatin and chromatin remodeling of
apoptotic cells.

PMID: 12653562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(7):2379-94.

Synthesis of signals for de novo DNA methylation in Neurospora crassa.

Tamaru H(1), Selker EU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Institute of Molecular Biology, University of
Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403-1229, USA.

Most 5-methylcytosine in Neurospora crassa occurs in A:T-rich sequences high in
TpA dinucleotides, hallmarks of repeat-induced point mutation. To investigate how
such sequences induce methylation, we developed a sensitive in vivo system. Tests
of various 25- to 100-bp synthetic DNA sequences revealed that both T and A
residues were required on a given strand to induce appreciable methylation.
Segments composed of (TAAA)(n) or (TTAA)(n) were the most potent signals; 25-mers
induced robust methylation at the special test site, and a 75-mer induced
methylation elsewhere. G:C base pairs inhibited methylation, and cytosines 5' of 
ApT dinucleotides were particularly inhibitory. Weak signals could be
strengthened by extending their lengths. A:T tracts as short as two were found to
cooperate to induce methylation. Distamycin, which, like the AT-hook DNA binding 
motif found in proteins such as mammalian HMG-I, binds to the minor groove of
A:T-rich sequences, suppressed DNA methylation and gene silencing. We also found 
a correlation between the strength of methylation signals and their binding to an
AT-hook protein (HMG-I) and to activities in a Neurospora extract. We propose
that de novo DNA methylation in Neurospora cells is triggered by cooperative
recognition of the minor groove of multiple short A:T tracts. Similarities
between sequences subjected to repeat-induced point mutation in Neurospora crassa
and A:T-rich repeated sequences in heterochromatin in other organisms suggest
that related mechanisms control silent chromatin in fungi, plants, and animals.

PMCID: PMC150737
PMID: 12640122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(7):2329-40.

HMG-I(Y) and the CBP/p300 coactivator are essential for human papillomavirus type
18 enhanceosome transcriptional activity.

Bouallaga I(1), Teissier S, Yaniv M, Thierry F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Gene Expression and Diseases, URA 1644 of CNRS, Institut Pasteur,
75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

A strong epithelial specific enhancer drives transcription of the human
papillomavirus type 18 (HPV18) oncogenes. Its activity depends on the formation
of a higher-order nucleoprotein complex (enhanceosome) involving the
sequence-specific JunB/Fra2 transcription factor and the HMG-I(Y) architectural
protein. Here we show that proteins from HeLa cell nuclear extract cover almost
all of the HPV18 enhancer sequences and that it contains seven binding sites for 
the purified HMG-I(Y) protein, providing evidence for a tight nucleoprotein
structure. Binding of HMG-I(Y) and the AP1 heterodimer from HeLa nuclear extract 
to overlapping sites of the core enhanceosome is cooperative. The integrity of
this specific HMG-I(Y) binding site is as essential as the AP1 binding site for
the enhancer function, indicating the fundamental role played by this
architectural protein. We demonstrate that the CBP/p300 coactivator is recruited 
by the HPV18 enhanceosome and that it is limiting for transcriptional activation,
since it is sequestered by the adenovirus E1A protein and by the JunB/Fra2
positive factor in excess. We show the involvement of JunB and p300 in vivo in
the HPV18 transcription by chromatin immunoprecipitation of HPV18 sequences in
HeLa cells.

PMCID: PMC150719
PMID: 12640118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(7):2225-38.

Negative regulation of BRCA1 gene expression by HMGA1 proteins accounts for the
reduced BRCA1 protein levels in sporadic breast carcinoma.

Baldassarre G(1), Battista S, Belletti B, Thakur S, Pentimalli F, Trapasso F,
Fedele M, Pierantoni G, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19107, USA.

A drastic reduction in BRCA1 gene expression is a characteristic feature of
aggressive sporadic breast carcinoma. However, the mechanisms underlying BRCA1
downregulation in breast cancer are not well understood. Here we report that both
in vitro and in vivo HMGA1b protein binds to and inhibits the activity of both
human and mouse BRCA1 promoters. Consistently, murine embryonic stem (ES) cells
with the Hmga1 gene deleted display higher Brca1 mRNA and protein levels than do 
wild-type ES cells. Stable transfection of MCF-7 cells with the HMGA1b cDNA
results in a decrease of BRCA1 gene expression and in a lack of BRCA1 induction
after estrogen treatment. Finally, we found an inverse correlation between HMGA1 
and BRCA1 mRNA and protein expression in human mammary carcinoma cell lines and
tissues. These data indicate that HMGA1 proteins are involved in transcriptional 
regulation of the BRCA1 gene, and their overexpression may have a role in BRCA1
downregulation observed in aggressive mammary carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC150734
PMID: 12640109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Mol Biol. 2003 Mar 21;327(2):393-411.

The energetics of specific binding of AT-hooks from HMGA1 to target DNA.

Dragan AI(1), Liggins JR, Crane-Robinson C, Privalov PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, 144 Mudd Hall, 3400 N Charles
Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-2685, USA.

Erratum in
    J Mol Biol. 2006 Sep 29;362(4):876.

The interaction of the second and third AT-hooks of HMGA1 (formerly HMGI/Y),
which bind selectively in the minor groove of an AT-rich DNA sequence, was
studied at different temperatures and ionic strengths by spectropolarimetry,
spectrofluorimetry, isothermal titration calorimetry and differential scanning
calorimetry. The data show that binding of the ten amino acid core element of the
two AT-hooks, which penetrates deep into the minor groove, is entropically
driven: both the entropy and enthalpy of association of the peptides to the
target DNA are positive up to 50 degrees C. The seven amino acid extension of the
core in the second AT-hook, which extends out from the minor groove and loops
over the phosphodiester backbone, adds a substantial negative enthalpic component
into the binding of the 17 residue DBD2 peptide to DNA that corresponds in
magnitude to the enthalpy of formation of two hydrogen bonds. The ionic strength 
dependence of the association constant allowed an estimation of the electrostatic
component of binding and, by subtraction, the contribution of the
non-electrostatic component, which results from dehydration of the contacting
surfaces and makes up almost 70% of the total energy of complex formation. The
exceptionally large positive entropy and enthalpy of association of the core
AT-hook peptides with target DNA suggest that the water, which is removed from
the minor groove of DNA upon binding, is in a highly ordered state. Acetylation
of the lysine residue in the second AT-hook, which corresponds to Lys65 of HMGA1,
has little effect on the DNA binding; so it appears that repression of the
hIFNbeta gene, which follows this modification, is not a direct result of the
abrogation of DNA binding.

PMID: 12628246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Anim Genet. 2003 Feb;34(1):68-9.

The canine HMGA1 gene maps to CFA 23.

Becker K(1), Murua Escobar H, Richter A, Meyer B, Nolte I, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.

PMID: 12580792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Biochem J. 2003 May 15;372(Pt 1):145-50.

High-mobility group A1 proteins are overexpressed in human leukaemias.

Pierantoni GM(1), Agosti V, Fedele M, Bond H, Caliendo I, Chiappetta G, Lo Coco
F, Pane F, Turco MC, Morrone G, Venuta S, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Molecular/Cellular Pathology, c/o CNR Center for
Endocrinology and Experimental Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery,
Federico II University of Naples, via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.
gmpieran@unina.it

High-mobility group A (HMGA) proteins are non-histone nuclear proteins that bind 
DNA and several transcription factors. They are involved in the regulation of
chromatin structure and function. HMGA protein expression is low in normal adult 
tissues, but abundant during embryonic development and in several human tumours. 
Rearrangements of the HMGA genes have been frequently detected in human benign
tumours of mesenchymal origin, e.g. lipomas, lung hamartomas and uterine
leiomiomas. HMGA proteins have been implicated in the control of cell growth and 
differentiation of the pre-adipocytic cell line 3T3-L1. In an attempt to better
understand the role of HMGA1 proteins in haematological neoplasias and in the
differentiation of haematopietic cells, we have investigated their expression in 
human leukaemias and in leukaemic cell lines induced to terminal differentiation.
Here we report HMGA1 overexpression in most fresh human leukaemias of different
origin and in several leukaemic cell lines. Moreover, differentiation of three
cell lines towards the megakaryocytic phenotype was associated with HMGA1 protein
induction, whereas induction of erythroid and monocytic differentiation generally
resulted in reduced HMGA1 expression.

PMCID: PMC1223365
PMID: 12573034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. BMJ. 2003 Feb 1;326(7383):262-6.

Pathogenesis of sepsis: new concepts and implications for future treatment.

Bochud PY(1), Calandra T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 North 34th Street, Seattle, WA 98103-8904,
USA.

PMCID: PMC1125122
PMID: 12560281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Feb 15;88(3):599-608.

Nuclear matrix localization of high mobility group protein I(Y) in a transgenic
mouse model for prostate cancer.

Leman ES(1), Madigan MC, Brünagel G, Takaha N, Coffey DS, Getzenberg RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pennsylvania 15232, USA.

Nuclear shape and the underlying nuclear structure, the nuclear matrix in cancer 
cells. Since the NM composition is considered to maintain nuclear shape and
architecture, nuclear matrix proteins (NMPs) may be involved in transformation.
Our laboratory has recently characterized a subset of NMPs that are associated
with prostate cancer development in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse
prostate (TRAMP) model. One of the identified NMPs, E3E, has a similar molecular 
weight (22 kDa) with a protein known as HMGI(Y). HMGI(Y) belongs to a group of
non-histone and chromatin-associated proteins, high-mobility-group (HMG)
proteins, and it has been shown to associate with the NM. HMGI(Y) has been
reported to be elevated in different types of cancer including prostate cancer.
In this study, we examined the expression of HMGI(Y) protein in the NMP
composition of the TRAMP model during the progression from normal to neoplasia.
The expression of HMGI(Y) in the NMP extracts of three prostatic epithelial cell 
lines derived from a 32-week TRAMP mouse: TRAMP-C1, TRAMP-C2, and TRAMP-C3 was
also examined. Using both one-dimensional and high-resolution two-dimensional
immunoblot analyses, we found that: (i) HMGI(Y) is a nuclear matrix protein
expressed as two protein bands with MW of 22-24 kDa and (ii) HMGI(Y) expression
is correlated with neoplastic and malignant properties in late stage TRAMP
prostate tumors. Overall, these findings support the evidence that HMGI(Y) can be
utilized as a marker and prognostic tool for prostate cancer.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12532335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Nov;32(11):1525-32.

Male jeffrey pine beetle, Dendroctonus jeffreyi, synthesizes the pheromone
component frontalin in anterior midgut tissue.

Hall GM(1), Tittiger C, Blomquist GJ, Andrews GL, Mastick GS, Barkawi LS, Bengoa 
C, Seybold SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/MS 330, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557-0014, 
USA.

The male Jeffrey pine beetle, Dendroctonus jeffreyi Hopkins (Coleoptera:
Scolytidae), produces the bicyclic ketal frontalin as part of a complex
semiochemical blend. A key regulated enzyme in the mevalonate pathway,
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMG-R), showed high transcript levels
in the anterior midgut of male Jeffrey pine beetles by in situ hybridization.
HMG-R expression in this area of the alimentary canal was related to male
emergence, where emerged males demonstrated significant up-regulation of HMG-R
transcript and pre-emerged males showed only basal levels. Pre-emerged males were
induced to express high levels of HMG-R transcript by treatment with juvenile
hormone (JH) III. Additionally, isolated anterior midgut tissue from JH
III-treated males converted radiolabeled acetate to frontalin, as assayed by
radio-HPLC, providing strong evidence that this is the site of frontalin
production in male beetles.

PMID: 12530220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(3):815-25.

Recruitment of a repressosome complex at the growth hormone receptor promoter and
its potential role in diabetic nephropathy.

Gowri PM(1), Yu JH, Shaufl A, Sperling MA, Menon RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

The growth hormone (GH)-GH receptor (GHR) axis modulates growth and metabolism
and contributes to complications of diabetes mellitus. We analyzed the promoter
region of the dominant transcript (L2) of the murine GHR to determine that a cis 
element, L2C1, interacts with transcription factors NF-Y, BTEB1, and HMG-Y/I.
These proteins individually repress GHR expression and together form a
repressosome complex in conjunction with mSin3b. The histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A increases expression of the murine GHR gene, enhances
association of acetyl-H3 at L2C1, inhibits formation of the repressosome complex,
and decreases NF-Y's association with L2C1. Our studies reveal that murine models
of experimental diabetes mellitus are characterized by reduced hepatic GHR
expression, decreased acetyl-H3 associated with L2C1, and increased formation of 
the repressosome complex. In contrast, in the kidney diabetes mellitus is
associated with enhanced GHR expression and lack of alteration in the assembly of
the repressosome complex, thus permitting exposure of kidneys to the effects of
elevated levels of GH in diabetes mellitus. Our findings define a higher-order
repressosome complex whose formation correlates with the acetylation status of
chromatin histone proteins. The delineation of the role of this repressosome
complex in regulating tissue-specific expression of GHR in diabetes mellitus
provides a molecular model for the role of GH in the genesis of certain
microvascular complications of diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC140700
PMID: 12529387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Virol. 2003 Jan;77(2):1598-603.

Cofactors for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 cDNA integration in vitro.

Gao K(1), Gorelick RJ, Johnson DG, Bushman F.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California 92037,
USA.

We have investigated the function of two DNA binding proteins that stimulate
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 cDNA integration in vitro, the cellular HMGa1
protein and the viral nucleocapsid (NC) protein. Of the three forms of NC (NCp7, 
NCp9, and NCp15), we find that NCp9 is the most effective at increasing
integration in vitro; thus, processing of NC may potentially modulate its
activities during infection. We also found that maximal stimulation by NCp9
required roughly enough NC to coat the reactant DNAs whereas less HMGa1 was
required, and the reactions displayed different optima for divalent metal
cofactors and order of addition. These findings reveal probable distinct
mechanisms of action in vitro.

PMCID: PMC140775
PMID: 12502875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Mol Biol. 2002 Sep 27;322(4):697-706.

Searching for DNA-protein interactions by lambda phage display.

Cicchini C(1), Ansuini H, Amicone L, Alonzi T, Nicosia A, Cortese R, Tripodi M,
Luzzago A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Cellulari ed Ematologia, Sezione di Genetica
Molecolare, Fondazione Istituto Pasteur-Cenci Bolognetti, Università La Sapienza,
00161, Rome, Italy.

We applied phage display technology to DNA-protein interaction studies. A cDNA
expression library displayed on the surface of bacteriophage lambda was generated
from the highly differentiated MMH E14 murine hepatic cell line. Selection of
this library using the promoter sequence of the liver-enriched transcription
factor HNF1alpha gene as ligate identified DNA-binding domains specifically
interacting with different regions of this regulatory sequence. One of the
selected phage showed 100% identity to a DNA-binding domain shared by
differentiation specific element-binding protein, vasoactive intestinal peptide
receptor-repressor protein and replication factor C and was further investigated.
Specific binding of the selected protein domain was confirmed in a
phage-independent context. By combining ELISA and South-Western assays using the 
selected phage and a bacterially expressed glutathione-S-transferase protein
fused to the encoded DNA-binding domain, an array of multiple adjacent
DNA-binding sites sharing a common consensus motif was identified. The strategy
described represents a powerful tool to identify proteins that bind to DNA
regulatory elements.

PMID: 12270707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Jul;60 Suppl 7:224-7.

[Insulin receptor gene, biosynthesis and structure].

[Article in Japanese]

Haruta T(1), Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Laboratories II, Takeda Chemical Industries, Ltd.

PMID: 12238051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Insect Mol Biol. 2002 Oct;11(5):505-15.

An intron enhancer activates the immunoglobulin-related Hemolin gene in
Hyalophora cecropia.

Roxström-Lindquist K(1), Lindström-Dinnetz I, Olesen J, Engström Y, Faye I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.

Hemolin is the only insect member of the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily reported
to be up-regulated during an immune response. In diapausing pupae of Hyalophora
cecropia the gene is expressed in fat body cells and in haemocytes. Like the
mammalian Ig kappa light chain gene, the Hemolin gene harbours an enhancer
including a kappaB motif in one of its introns. This motif binds the H. cecropia 
Rel factor Cif (Cecropia immunoresponsive factor). The Hemolin third intron also 
mediates transient reporter gene expression in immunoresponsive Drosophila mbn-2 
cells. Co-transfections of Drosophila SL2 cells showed that the Drosophila Rel
factor Dif (Dorsal-related immunity factor), transactivates reporter gene
constructs through the intron. Moreover, a 4.8-fold synergistic activation was
obtained when Dif is combined with the rat C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer element-binding 
protein) and human HMGI (high mobility group protein I). This is the first report
of an insect immune-related gene that is up-regulated by an enhancer activity
conferred through an intron.

PMID: 12230549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 1;169(5):2466-76.

The human IL-2 gene promoter can assemble a positioned nucleosome that becomes
remodeled upon T cell activation.

Attema JL(1), Reeves R, Murray V, Levichkin I, Temple MD, Tremethick DJ, Shannon 
MF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory,
Australia.

Controlled production of the cytokine IL-2 plays a key role in the mammalian
immune system. Expression from the gene is tightly regulated with no detectable
expression in resting T cells and a strong induction following T cell activation.
The IL-2 proximal promoter (+1 to -300) contains many well-defined
transcriptional activation elements that respond to T cell stimulation. To
determine the role of chromatin structure in the regulation of interleukin-2 gene
transcription, nucleosome assembly across the IL-2 promoter region was examined
using in vitro chromatin reconstitution assays. The IL-2 promoter assembles a
nucleosome that is both translationally and rotationally positioned, spanning
some of the major functional control elements. The binding of transcription
factors to these elements, with the exception of the architectural protein HMGA1,
was occluded by the presence of the nucleosome. Analysis of the chromatin
architecture of the IL-2 gene in Jurkat T cells provided evidence for the
presence of a similarly positioned nucleosome in vivo. The region encompassed by 
this nucleosome becomes remodeled following activation of Jurkat T cells. These
observations suggest that the presence of a positioned nucleosome across the IL-2
proximal promoter may play an important role in maintaining an inactive gene in
resting T cells and that remodeling of this nucleosome is important for gene
activation.

PMID: 12193716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2002 Jun;2(2):157-90.

Chromatin (dis)organization and cancer: BUR-binding proteins as biomarkers for
cancer.

Galande S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411 007, India.
sanjeev@nccs.res.in

Malignant transformation of cells is associated with changes in gene expression. 
Gross alterations in chromatin organization may be involved in such gene
dysregulation, as well as the involvement of specific transcription factors.
Specialized genomic DNA segments that exhibit high affinity to the nuclear matrix
in vitro have been designated as matrix/scaffold attachment regions (MARs/SARs). 
MARs are postulated to anchor chromatin onto the nuclear matrix, thereby
organizing genomic DNA into topologically distinct loop domains that are
important in replication and transcription. In support of this notion, MARs often
colocalize or exist in close proximity to regulatory sequences including
enhancers. Base unpairing regions (BURs) are typically 100-150 bp regions within 
MARs, possess an intrinsic propensity to unwind under negative superhelical
strain, and are considered to be hallmark of MARs. To investigate a potential
mechanism that could lead to significant alterations in gene expression in cancer
cells, this review focuses on a group of chromatin-associated proteins that
specifically recognize double stranded BURs. Several important proteins have been
identified from cancer cells as BUR-binding proteins, including poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP-1), Ku autoantigen, SAF-A, HMG-I(Y), nucleolin and p53. Many of 
these proteins are dramatically upregulated in malignancy of the breast. Increase
in the amount of these BUR-binding proteins, some of which are known to interact 
with each other, may not only provide an architectural core but also recruit
functional multi-molecular complexes at the base of chromatin loops to affect
multiple distant genes. Experimental strategies by which these proteins can be
exploited as carcinoma-specific diagnostic markers and as targets for
antineoplastic therapy are discussed.

PMID: 12188916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Pancreas. 2002 Aug;25(2):198-204.

Diagnostic significance of high mobility group I(Y) protein expression in
intraductal papillary mucinous tumors of the pancreas.

Abe N(1), Watanabe T, Izumisato Y, Masaki T, Mori T, Sugiyama M, Chiappetta G,
Fusco A, Fujioka Y, Atomi Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. abenbtg@kyorin-u.ac.jp

INTRODUCTION: Overexpression of the high mobility group I(Y), [HMGI(Y)],
gene/proteins has been demonstrated in many types of human malignancies,
suggesting that HMGI(Y) may play a vital role in the oncogenic transformation of 
cells.
AIMS: To analyze HMGI(Y) expression in intraductal papillary mucinous tumor
(IPMT) of the pancreas to verify whether determination of the HMGI(Y) expression 
level could provide any diagnostic advantages in the pathological diagnosis of
IPMT.
METHODOLOGY: Thirty-three different lesions from 25 patients with IPMT, including
20 with mild dysplasia, 7 with moderate dysplasia, and 6 with carcinoma, were
analyzed immunohistochemically with use of an HMGI(Y)-specific antibody.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that, although no significant
immunoreactivity was found in cases of normal pancreatic duct or mild dysplasia, 
28.6% (2/7) of moderate dysplasia showed multifocal immunoreactivity with
moderate intensity. In contrast, in 50% (3/6) of the cases of carcinoma, intense 
multifocal or diffuse immunoreactivity occurred, almost equivalent to that
observed in cases of duct cell carcinoma, whereas in the remaining 3 cases of
carcinoma only a faint focal immunoreactivity occurred. Histologic examination
revealed that these HMGI(Y)-positive carcinomas had an invasive growth pattern,
whereas the HMGI(Y)-negative carcinomas were either carcinomas in situ or tumors 
with minimal invasion. Thus, an increased expression level of HMGI(Y) proteins
was closely associated with the malignant phenotype in IPMT.
CONCLUSION: On the basis of these findings, we propose that HMGI(Y) proteins
could play an important role(s) in a multistage process of carcinogenesis of IPMT
and that the HMGI(Y) protein level could serve as a potential diagnostic marker, 
which may enable the identification of tumor cells with potential to be
biologically malignant.

PMID: 12142746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Cancer Lett. 2002 Oct 28;184(2):197-206.

Identification of genes differentially expressed between gastric cancers and
normal gastric mucosa with cDNA microarrays.

Lee S(1), Baek M, Yang H, Bang YJ, Kim WH, Ha JH, Kim DK, Jeoung DI.

Author information: 
(1)In2Gen Company, Seoul National University Cancer Research Center, 6F, 28,
Yongon-Dong, Chongno-Gu, Seoul 110-799, South Korea.

To identify genes whose alterations lead to gastric cancer, gene expression
profiles have been obtained from 22 gastric cancer tissues and their surrounding 
gastric mucosa tissues. A total of 16 genes were differentially expressed in more
than 50% of gastric cancer tissues compared with surrounding gastric mucosa
tissues. Genes such as HMG-Y, fibroblast collagenase inhibitor, and osteopontin
are among those that are overexpressed in over 50% of the gastric cancer tissues.
Dihydrodiol dehydrogenase, ribonuclease A, and glutathione peroxidase are among
those genes that are underexpressed in over 50% of the gastric cancer tissues. We
identified genes that are associated with clinical phenotypes of patients with
gastric cancers. Alpha-II spectrin, Na/K-ATPase and KIAA0111 are those that are
enhanced in intestinal type of gastric cancer. Gene such as platelet-endothelial 
tetraspan antigen 3 was enhanced in highly metastatic gastric cancer tissues.

PMID: 12127692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cancer Res. 2002 Jul 1;62(13):3766-72.

Aberrant expression of HMGA2 in uterine leiomyoma associated with loss of TSC2
tumor suppressor gene function.

Hunter DS(1), Klotzbücher M, Kugoh H, Cai SL, Mullen JP, Manfioletti G, Fuhrman
U, Walker CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Unregulated proliferation of mesenchymal cells in leiomyomas, lipomas,
hamartomas,and other diseases has been linked to the high mobility group (HMGA)
family of DNA architectural proteins. HMGA genes are primarily expressed during
embryonal development and silenced in adult tissues but can become reactivated in
neoplasia as a result of chromosomal rearrangements. Although the genetic data
suggesting a role for HMGA proteins in tumorigenesis are compelling, the
biological role of these proteins in mesenchymal proliferation and
differentiation is incompletely defined. Uterine myometria and spontaneous
leiomyomas from the Eker rat, which carries a germ-line mutation in the tuberous 
sclerosis complex-2 (Tsc2) tumor suppressor gene, were analyzed for genetic
defects in and expression of the Tsc2 and HMGA proteins. Eker leiomyomas
exhibited a 50% incidence of loss of the wild-type Tsc2 allele and an almost
uniform loss of protein expression, implicating loss of function of the Tsc2 gene
in these tumors. Concomitantly, HMGA2 protein, which was completely absent in
normal myometria, was expressed in 16 of 19 Eker leiomyomas. HMGA1 was expressed 
in both leiomyoma and normal myometria. No structural alterations were observed
at the HMGA2 locus in either primary rat leiomyomas or leiomyoma-derived cell
lines that expressed HMGA2. These data support a role for HMGA2 in the
development of smooth muscle neoplasms and suggest HMGA2 expression is a point of
convergence between the human disease and the Eker rat model. Furthermore, these 
data indicate that aberrant HMGA2 expression can result from dysfunction of the
Tsc2 tumor suppressor gene, in the absence of structural alterations involving
the HMGA2 locus.

PMID: 12097287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Oncogene. 2002 May 2;21(19):2971-80.

Thyroid cell transformation requires the expression of the HMGA1 proteins.

Berlingieri MT(1), Pierantoni GM, Giancotti V, Santoro M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche c/o Dipartimento di Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di
Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Via Pansini 5, 80131
Naples, Italy.

Elevated expression of HMGA1 and HMGA2 proteins is correlated with a highly
malignant phenotype in several human tumors. We previously demonstrated that the 
block of HMGA2 protein synthesis prevented rat thyroid cell transformation by
murine retroviruses. Suppression of HMGA2 synthesis was associated with lack of
induction of HMGA1 proteins suggesting that both HMGA1 and HMGA2 play a role in
the process of neoplastic transformation. To determine the role of the HMGA1 gene
in thyroid cell transformation, we blocked HMGA1 protein synthesis by an
antisense methodology. Here we report that transfection of an HMGA1 cDNA
antisense construct into a normal rat thyroid cell line (FRTL-5 Cl2), followed by
infection with Kirsten murine sarcoma virus (KiMSV), generated a transformed cell
line that expresses high levels of the v-ras-Ki oncogene and that does not
require thyroid-stimulating hormones for growth. However, this cell line does not
show the malignant phenotype, i.e., it neither grows in soft agar nor induces
tumors after injection in athymic mice. Moreover, the lack of the neoplastic
phenotype in the virus-infected thyroid cells carrying the HMGA1 antisense
construct correlates with the absence of induction of AP-1 transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 12082527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 17;21(12):3051-9.

The basis for TCR-mediated regulation of the IL-2 receptor alpha chain gene: role
of widely separated regulatory elements.

Kim HP(1), Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Building 10, Room 7N252, National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. hpkim@helix.nih.gov

The interleukin-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha) chain is a component of
high-affinity IL-2 receptors and thus is a key regulator of lymphocyte
proliferation. Lineage-restricted and activation-dependent IL-2Ralpha
transcription is controlled by four upstream positive regulatory regions (PRRs)
and one downstream PRR. We now demonstrate that T-cell receptor (TCR)
responsiveness requires both upstream sequences and an intronic region, PRRIV,
previously identified as an IL-2 response element. Whereas IL-2 responsiveness
requires Stat5 and HMG-I(Y) binding, TCR responsiveness of PRRIV requires two
AP-1- and two NFAT-binding sites that bind Jun, Fos and NFAT family members in
vitro and in vivo. Moreover, IL-2Ralpha induction is impaired in T lymphocytes
from transgenic mice expressing a dominant-negative c-jun construct, or following
treatment with cyclosporin A. Thus, our data indicate an important role for both 
AP-1 and NFAT proteins for TCR-induced IL-2Ralpha expression and establish that
both upstream and intronic sequences mediate TCR responsiveness of the IL-2Ralpha
gene. Moreover, our data reveal a previously unappreciated link between the
TCR-mediated up-regulation of the IL-2 and IL-2Ralpha genes.

PMCID: PMC126074
PMID: 12065418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jun 1;30(11):2427-34.

Interactions between p53, hMSH2-hMSH6 and HMG I(Y) on Holliday junctions and
bulged bases.

Subramanian D(1), Griffith JD.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, CB 7295 Mason Farm Road, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

The ability of the tumor suppressor protein, p53, to recognize certain types of
DNA lesions may represent one of the mechanisms by which this protein modulates
cellular response to DNA damage. p53 DNA binding properties are regulated by
several factors, such as post-translational modifications including
phosphorylation and acetylation, regulation by its own C-terminal domain and
interactions with other cellular proteins. Substrates resembling Holliday
junctions and extra base bulges were used to study the effect of three nuclear
proteins, HMG-1, HMG I(Y) and hMSH2-hMSH6, on the lesion binding properties of
p53. Gel retardation assays revealed that the three proteins had varying effects 
on p53 binding to these substrates. HMG-1 did not influence p53 binding to
Holliday junctions or 3-cytosine bulges. HMG I(Y) rapidly dissociated p53
complexes with Holliday junctions but not 3-cytosine bulges. Finally, the
mismatch repair protein complex, hMSH2-hMSH6, enhanced p53 binding to both
substrates by 3-4-fold. Together, these results demonstrate that p53 DNA binding 
activity is highly influenced by the presence of other proteins, some having a
dominant effect while others have a negative effect.

PMCID: PMC117204
PMID: 12034830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Oncogene. 2002 May 16;21(22):3644-50.

HMGA1 and HMGA2 protein expression in mouse spermatogenesis.

Chieffi P(1), Battista S, Barchi M, Di Agostino S, Pierantoni GM, Fedele M,
Chiariotti L, Tramontano D, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, II Università di Napoli, via
Costantinopoli 16, 80138 Naples, Italy. Paolo.Chieffi@unina2.it

The high-mobility group A (HMGA) nonhistone chromosomal proteins HMGA1 and HMGA2 
play a role in determining chromatin structure and in regulating the
transcription of several genes. High levels of these proteins are characteristic 
of rapidly dividing cells in embryonic tissue and in tumors. The aim of this
study was to determine the role of HMGA1 and HMGA2 throughout mouse
spermatogenesis. Northern blot analysis and immunocytochemistry showed HMGA1 and 
HMGA2 expression during the progression from spermatocyte to spermatid.
Interestingly, Western blot analysis with antibodies against the HMGA1 gene
product revealed only the HMG1c isoform (27 kDa) in the testis; HMGA1a and HMGA1b
were undetectable. These three isoforms are encoded by the HMGA1 gene through
alternative splicing. Finally, few spermatids and complete absence of spermatozoa
were observed in the testes of HMGA2-null mice, which suggests that the HMGA2
gene plays a critical role in male fertility.

PMID: 12032866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Virchows Arch. 2002 May;440(5):485-90. Epub 2001 Nov 7.

Translocation of the HMGI-C ( HMGA2) gene in a benign mesenchymoma
(chondrolipoangioma).

Van Dorpe J(1), Dal Cin P, Weremowicz S, Van Leuven F, de Wever I, Van den Berghe
H, Fletcher CD, Sciot R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital St-Raphaël, Leuven Catholic
University, Minderbroederstraat 12, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Mesenchymomas are neoplasms in which there are at least two types of
differentiated cells of mesenchymal derivation other than fibrous tissue.
Chondrolipoangioma is a rare type of mesenchymoma composed predominantly of
cartilage and adipose tissue with vascular elements and myxoid tissue present in 
lesser proportions. Cytogenetic analysis was performed on a case of
chondrolipoangioma and revealed a t(12;15) (q13;q26) as the sole chromosome
abnormality in 40 metaphases analyzed. However, using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis, a complex rearrangement was found involving
chromosomes 2, 12, and 15, with a cryptic rearrangement of the gene ( HMGI-C;
HMGA2) coding for high-mobility group I protein. This finding suggests a role for
the HMGI-C gene also in the pathogenesis of this uncommon benign tumor type, in
addition to its well-established role in the pathogenesis of common benign tumors
such as lipomas, uterine leiomyomas, pulmonary chondroid hamartomas, and
endometrial polyps.

PMID: 12021922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Virol. 2002 Jun;76(12):6205-12.

Subcellular localization and integration activities of rous sarcoma virus reverse
transcriptase.

Werner S(1), Hindmarsh P, Napirei M, Vogel-Bachmayr K, Wöhrl BM.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Physiologie, Abteilung Physikalische
Biochemie, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Reverse transcriptases (RTs) alphabeta and beta from avian Rous sarcoma virus
(RSV) harbor an integrase domain which is absent in nonavian retroviral RTs. RSV 
integrase contains a nuclear localization signal which enables the enzyme to
enter the nucleus of the cell in order to perform integration of the proviral DNA
into the host genome. In the present study we analyzed the subcellular
localization of RSV RT, since previous results indicated that RSV finishes
synthesis of the proviral DNA in the nucleus. Our results demonstrate that the
heterodimeric RSV RT alphabeta and the beta subunit, when expressed
independently, can be detected in the nucleus, whereas the separate alpha subunit
lacking the integrase domain is prevalent in the cytoplasm. These data suggest an
involvement of RSV RT in the transport of the preintegration complex into the
nucleus. In addition, to analyze whether the integrase domain, located at the
carboxyl terminus of beta, exhibits integration activities, we investigated the
nicking and joining activities of heterodimeric RSV RT alphabeta with an
oligodeoxynucleotide-based assay system and with a donor substrate containing the
supF gene flanked by the viral long terminal repeats. Our data show that RSV RT
alphabeta is able to perform the integration reaction in vitro; however, it does 
so with an estimated 30-fold lower efficiency than the free RSV integrase,
indicating that RSV RT is not involved in integration in vivo. Integration with
RSV RT alphabeta could be stimulated in the presence of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 nucleocapsid protein or HMG-I(Y).

PMCID: PMC136205
PMID: 12021354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2002 Feb;71(3):181-91.

HMG-I/Y in human breast cancer cell lines.

Dolde CE(1), Mukherjee M, Cho C, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The HMG-I/Y gene encodes the HMG-I and -Y architectural, chromatin binding
proteins originally identified based on their association with chromosomal DNA.
HMG-I/Y proteins bind to AT-rich regions in chromosomal DNA and alter gene
expression. Increased HMG-I/Y protein expression also correlates with neoplastic 
transformation. Previous work from our laboratory has shown that HMG-I/Y is a
direct c-Myc target gene involved in neoplastic transformation in Burkitt's
lymphoma. We also observed that HMG-I/Y proteins have several oncogenic
properties. In this report, we show that HMG-I/Y proteins are increased in
several human breast cancer cell lines compared to a human breast cell line
derived from normal breast cells. Decreasing HMG-I/Y proteins using an antisense 
ribozyme approach inhibits transformation in human breast cancer cells,
suggesting that HMG-I/Y is important for the transformed phenotype observed in
these cells. In addition, increased expression of the HMG-I isoform in normal
human breast cells leads to transformation. These results suggest that HMG-I/Y is
an oncogene important in the pathogenesis of human breast cancer. Although
additional studies with animal models are needed, the antisense experiments,
which result in blocking transformation suggest that this approach may have
therapeutic potential in patients with breast cancer characterized by increased
HMG-I/Y expression.

PMID: 12002338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22314-9. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

The HMG-I/Y-related protein p8 binds to p300 and Pax2 trans-activation
domain-interacting protein to regulate the trans-activation activity of the Pax2A
and Pax2B transcription factors on the glucagon gene promoter.

Hoffmeister A(1), Ropolo A, Vasseur S, Mallo GV, Bodeker H, Ritz-Laser B,
Dressler GR, Vaccaro MI, Dagorn JC, Moreno S, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche INSERM, EMI 0116, 163 avenue de Luminy, Campus de Luminy, 
BP 172, 13276 Marseille cedex 9, France.

p8 is a nuclear DNA-binding protein, which was identified because its expression 
is strongly activated in response to several stresses. Biochemical and
biophysical studies revealed that despite a weak sequence homology p8 is an
HMG-I/Y-like protein, suggesting that p8 may be involved in transcription
regulation. Results reported here strongly support this hypothesis. Using a
pull-down approach, we found that p8 interacts with the general co-activator
p300. We also found that, similar to the HMG proteins, p300 was able to acetylate
recombinant p8 in vitro, although the significance of such modification remains
to be determined. Then a screening by the two-hybrid system, using p8 as bait,
allowed us to identify the Pax2 trans-activation domain-interacting protein
(PTIP) as another partner of p8. Transient transfection studies revealed that
PTIP is a strong inhibitor of the trans-activation activities of Pax2A and Pax2B 
on the glucagon gene promoter, which was chosen as a model because it is a target
of the Pax2A and Pax2B transcription factors. This effect is completely abolished
by co-transfection of p8 in glucagon-producing InRIG9 cells, indicating that p8
binding to PTIP prevents inhibition of the glucagon gene promoter. This was not
observed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts that do not express glucagon. Finally, expression 
of p8 enhances the effect of p300 on Pax2A and Pax2B trans-activation of the
glucagon gene promoter. These observations suggest that in glucagon-producing
cells p8 is a positive cofactor of the activation of the glucagon gene promoter
by Pax2A and Pax2B, both by recruiting the p300 cofactor to increase the Pax2A
and Pax2B activities and by binding the Pax2-interacting protein PTIP to suppress
its inhibition.

PMID: 11940591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cells. 2002 Feb 28;13(1):61-8.

An intronic silencer of the mouse perforin gene.

Youn BS(1), Lim CL, Shin MK, Hill JM, Kwon BS.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunomodulation Research Center and Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Ulsan, Korea. bskwon@uou.ulsan.ac.kr

We have previously shown that the perforin gene locus is comprised of eight DNase
I hypersensitive sites (DHS). Seven (DHS I-DHS VII) of them were CTL-specific
whereas one (DHS VIII) in the second intron was expressed in a wide range of cell
types. DHS VIII was highly AT-rich (75%) and was comprised of multiple sets of
high mobility group (HMG)-I/Y binding site, two potential Special AT-rich Binding
protein (SATB-1)-binding sites, and a long stretch of CTAT repeats, indicating
that DHS VIII may relate to nuclear matrix-associated region (MAR). When DHS VIII
was inserted into the perforin promoter-driven luciferase gene, it silenced the
reporter gene transcription in CTLL-R8 cells in an orientation- and
distance-independent manner. Moreover, this silencing effect was also observed in
other promoters in a variety of non-CTL cell lines, suggesting that DHS VIII
exerted a global silencing effect. Deletion analysis and gel-shift assays
indicated that the silencing effect was mediated by the CTAT repeats and its
binding protein called CTAT repeats-binding protein (CRBP).

PMID: 11911476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 29;292(2):427-33.

Dominant-negative HMGA1 blocks mu enhancer activation through a novel mechanism.

Andreucci A(1), Reeves R, McCarthy KM, Nikolajczyk BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Immunobiology Unit, Evans Memorial Department of
Clinical Research, EBRC-438, Boston Medical Center, 650 Albany Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The immunoglobulin mu intronic enhancer is a potent B cell-specific
transcriptional activator. The enhancer is activated by the appropriate
combination of transcription factors, amongst which are ets and bHLH proteins.
HMGA1 (formerly HMG-I(Y)) is a demonstrated co-activator of the mu enhancer.
HMGA1 functions through direct interaction with PU.1, one of the ets proteins
critical for enhancer activation. New data demonstrates dominant negative HMGA1
dramatically decreases enhancer activity in B cells. EMSA analysis demonstrated
that DN HMGA1 disrupts established PU.1/mu enhancer binding. Similarly, DN HMGA1 
blocks mu enhancer binding by Ets-1. In sharp contrast, DN HMGA1 had no effect on
binding activity of the ETS DNA binding domains of either PU.1 or Ets-1, or the
bHLH-zip protein TFE3, suggesting specificity. Taken together, the data suggest
that DN HMGA1 utilizes a novel mechanism to specifically block interaction
between ets proteins and mu enhancer DNA, suggesting DN HMGA1 represents a new,
highly specific means of regulating mu enhancer activity.

(c)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11906180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Crit Care Med. 2002 Jan;30(1 Supp):S36-S42.

High-mobility group-I/Y proteins: Potential role in the pathophysiology of
critical illnesses.

Carvajal IM(1), Baron RM, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division (IMC, RMB, MAP), Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA; and the Department of Medicine (MAP), Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115.

High-mobility group (HMG) proteins are architectural factors that have been shown
to play a role in the transcriptional regulation of various mammalian genes. One 
family of HMG proteins, HMG-I/Y, is known to facilitate the initiation of gene
transcription by modifying the conformation of DNA and recruiting transcription
factors into an organized complex on transcriptional regulatory regions of
specific genes. In many circumstances, the nuclear factor-kappaB family of
transcription factors is involved in gene regulation that is mediated by HMG-I/Y.
We will review the mechanisms by which HMG-I/Y proteins regulate gene
transcription, give an overview of selected genes regulated by HMG-I/Y, summarize
the potential roles of these genes in critical illnesses, and provide more
detailed information about the role of HMG-I/Y in the regulation of nitric oxide 
synthase-2 during an inflammatory response, such as endotoxemia/sepsis.

PMID: 11891405  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


481. Biochemistry. 2002 Feb 26;41(8):2760-8.

HMGA1 enhances the transcriptional activity and binding of the estrogen receptor 
to its responsive element.

Massaad-Massade L(1), Navarro S, Krummrei U, Reeves R, Beaune P, Barouki R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Toxicologie Moléculaire U-490 INSERM, and UPR-2228 CNRS, 45 rue
des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.
Liliane.Massade@biomedicale.univ-paris5.fr

The estrogen receptor (ER) plays a critical role in the development of
hormone-dependent cancer. Since HMGA1, a member of the "high mobility group"
proteins, is overexpressed in certain malignant cells, we investigated the
interaction between these nuclear proteins. Transfection of the HMGA1 expression 
vector increased 2-fold the transcriptional activation of ERE containing promoter
by E(2). Furthermore, the HMGA1 protein stimulated severalfold the binding of
purified ER to the consensus ERE oligonucleotides in gel mobility shift assays
and saturation assays. However, HMGA1 could not bind alone either to consensus or
to modified EREs, and the minor groove binding drug distamycin A failed to
prevent the synergism between ER and HMGA1. This could suggest that the binding
of HMGA1 to DNA was not required for its stimulatory effect. Antibody supershift 
assays showed that HMGA1 was required for increased binding and suggest a
protein-protein interaction between those factors. This was confirmed by pull
down assay. These data show that HMGA1 acts in concert with the ER to regulate
the expression of estrogen responsive genes through a mechanism that does not
require direct binding to DNA. These observations may be relevant in malignant
cells expressing both proteins.

PMID: 11851423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Anticancer Res. 2001 Sep-Oct;21(5):3221-8.

Transcriptional profiling of cell lines derived from an orthotopic pancreatic
tumor model reveals metastasis-associated genes.

Tarbé N(1), Evtimova V, Burtscher H, Jarsch M, Alves F, Weidle UH.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Pharma Research, Penzberg, Germany.

In order to identify genes associated with metastasis of ductal pancreatic
adenocarcinoma we investigated pancreatic tumor cell lines derived from an
orthotopic pancreatic tumor model in SCID mice. Transcriptional profiling
(Affymetrix Gene Chip Technology) was performed with cell lines derived from the 
primary tumor and metastatic lesions such as mesentery, liver and lungs. We
scored for genes commonly deregulated in the cell lines derived from the
metastatic lesions. Of 7070 genes investigated, 59 (0.83%) were found to be
deregulated in the cell lines derived from the metastatic lesions. We grouped
these genes into different categories such as transcription, translation,
cytoskeleton, cell adhesion, chromosome instability, tumor suppressor genes,
enzymes and "others". The most remarkable features of the system are the
up-regulation of high mobility group protein HMG-I (Y), twenty-one ribosomal
proteins, GAPDH and the laminin receptor in the cell lines derived from the
metastatic lesions, whereas tumor suppressor genes such as maspin and RB1 were
down-regulated. Inhibition or reconstitution of the activity of these targets are
an emerging strategy for inhibition of metastasis in this system.

PMID: 11848476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cancer Res. 2002 Feb 1;62(3):647-51.

High mobility group protein I(Y): a candidate architectural protein for
chromosomal rearrangements in prostate cancer cells.

Takaha N(1), Hawkins AL, Griffin CA, Isaacs WB, Coffey DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Marburg 121, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

The extent of chromosomal rearrangements correlates positively with the level of 
expression of the nuclear matrix high mobility group (HMG) proteins HMGI(Y) when 
tested in three human prostate cancer cell lines (PC-3 > DU-145 > LNCaP).
HMGI(Y), topoisomerase II, and A-T-rich sequences have been reported to be
located at the base of the DNA loop domains in both the nucleus and chromosome
and are juxtapositioned for chromosomal rearrangement. Transfecting and
expressing full-length HMG-I into the LNCaP cell markedly enhanced the presence
and heterogeneity of unbalanced (nonreciprocal) chromosomal rearrangements but
not of balanced rearrangements. Unbalanced chromosomal rearrangements are common 
in solid human tumors.

PMID: 11830513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Int J Cancer. 2002 Feb 10;97(5):608-14.

Establishment of a non-tumorigenic papillary thyroid cell line (FB-2) carrying
the RET/PTC1 rearrangement.

Basolo F(1), Giannini R, Toniolo A, Casalone R, Nikiforova M, Pacini F, Elisei R,
Miccoli P, Berti P, Faviana P, Fiore L, Monaco C, Pierantoni GM, Fedele M,
Nikiforov YE, Santoro M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Oncologia, Università degli Studi di Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
f.basolo@do.med.unipi.it

A novel human thyroid papillary carcinoma cell line (FB-2) has been established
and characterized. FB-2 cells harbor the RET/PTC1 chimeric oncogene in which the 
RET kinase domain is fused to the H4 gene. FB-2 cells neither formed colonies in 
semisolid media nor induced tumors after heterotransplant into severe combined
immunodeficient mice. However, HMGI(Y), HMGI-C and c-myc genes, which are
associated to thyroid cell transformation, were abundantly expressed in FB-2
cells but not in normal thyroid cells. FB-2 cells only partially retained the
differentiated thyroid phenotype. In fact, the PAX-8 gene, which codes for a
transcriptional factor required for thyroid cell differentiation, was expressed, 
while thyroglobulin, TSH-receptor and thyroperoxidase genes were not. Moreover,
FB-2 cells produced high levels of interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11807785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Genetics. 2002 Jan;160(1):279-87.

Molecular characterization of the mouse In(10)17Rk inversion and identification
of a novel muscle-specific gene at the proximal breakpoint.

Benson KF(1), Chada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.
kfbenson@u.washington.edu

Chromosomal rearrangements provide an important resource for molecular
characterization of mutations in the mouse. In(10)17Rk mice contain a paracentric
inversion of approximately 50 Mb on chromosome 10. Homozygous In(10)17Rk mice
exhibit a pygmy phenotype, suggesting that the distal inversion breakpoint is
within the pygmy locus. The pygmy mutation, originally isolated in 1944, is an
autosomal recessive trait causing a dwarf phenotype in homozygous mice and has
been mapped to the distal region of chromosome 10. The pygmy phenotype has
subsequently been shown to result from disruption of the Hmgi-c gene. To identify
the In(10)17Rk distal inversion breakpoint, In(10)17Rk DNA was subjected to RFLP 
analysis with single copy sequences derived from the wild-type pygmy locus. This 
analysis localized the In(10)17Rk distal inversion breakpoint to intron 3 of
Hmgi-c and further study determined that a fusion transcript between novel 5'
sequence and exons 4 and 5 of Hmgi-c is created. We employed 5' RACE to isolate
the 5' end of the fusion transcript and this sequence was localized to the
proximal end of chromosome 10 between markers Cni-rs2 and Mtap7. Northern blot
analysis of individual tissues of wild-type mice determined that the gene at the 
In(10)17Rk proximal inversion breakpoint is a novel muscle-specific gene and its 
disruption does not lead to a readily observable phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1461926
PMID: 11805063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Cell Growth Differ. 2002 Jan;13(1):39-45.

Hmgi-c-independent Activation of MuRantes in Vivo.

Schiltz JF(1), Kesari K, Ashar HR, Chada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

The architectural factor HMGI-C is of considerable interest for its recognized
roles in mammalian development and tumorigenesis. As a result, the identification
of downstream target genes of HMGI-C is the present focus of active research. In 
vitro evidence from macrophage cell lines has previously suggested that Hmgi-c is
necessary for the inducible activation of MuRantes expression. To attempt to
verify this hypothesis, an in vivo analysis was performed that took advantage of 
the existence of the Hmgi-c null mouse strain. The ability of cells and tissues
extracted from Hmgi-c null mice to express the inflammatory chemokine MuRantes
was investigated. The investigation examined MuRantes expression in primary
embryonic fibroblasts and fresh peritoneal macrophages after Newcastle disease
virus induction and whole organs after lipopolysaccharide induction. Each of
these systems clearly demonstrates that Hmgi-c is not required for the activation
of MuRantes expression.

PMID: 11801530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 25;290(3):942-7.

The homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 gene is expressed late in
embryogenesis and preferentially in retina, muscle, and neural tissues.

Pierantoni GM(1), Bulfone A, Pentimalli F, Fedele M, Iuliano R, Santoro M,
Chiariotti L, Ballabio A, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli "Federico II," Naples, 80131, Italy.

The HIPK2 protein is a member of a recently identified family of nuclear protein 
kinases that interact with homeodomain transcription factors and that are well
conserved in various organisms. HIPK2 acts as a transcriptional co-repressor of
homeoproteins and it is a component of a co-repressor complex containing Groucho 
and a histone deacetylase. We have recently demonstrated that the HIPK2 protein
interacts with HMGA1 proteins in vitro and in vivo and that HIPK2 exerts a potent
inhibitory effect on the cell growth of different normal cell lines. Here we
demonstrate that the HIPK2 gene is expressed during the latest phases of
embryogenesis, and preferentially in retina, in muscle and in neural tissues.
Conversely, HIPK2 is ubiquitously expressed in murine and human adult tissues. We
have also found that HIPK2 expression is reduced in breast and thyroid
carcinomas, suggesting a role of this gene in the process of carcinogenesis.

PMID: 11798164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 29;277(13):10938-48. Epub 2002 Jan 11.

Changes in the mechanism of DNA integration in vitro induced by base
substitutions in the HIV-1 U5 and U3 terminal sequences.

Brin E(1), Leis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

We have reconstituted concerted human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
integration with specially designed mini-donor DNA, a supercoiled plasmid
acceptor, purified bacterial-derived HIV-1 integrase (IN), and host HMG-I(Y)
protein (Hindmarsh, P., Ridky, T., Reeves, R., Andrake, M., Skalka, A. M., and
Leis, J. (1999) J. Virol. 73, 2994-3003). Integration in this system is dependent
upon the mini donor DNA having IN recognition sequences at both ends and the
reaction products have all of the features associated with integration of viral
DNA in vivo. Using this system, we explored the relationship between the HIV-1 U3
and U5 IN recognition sequences by analyzing substrates that contain either two
U3 or two U5 terminal sequences. Both substrates caused severe defects to
integration but with different effects on the mechanism indicating that the U3
and the U5 sequences are both required for concerted DNA integration. We have
also used the reconstituted system to compare the mechanism of integration
catalyzed by HIV-1 to that of avian sarcoma virus by analyzing the effect of
defined mutations introduced into U3 or U5 ends of the respective wild type DNA
substrates. Despite sequence differences between avian sarcoma virus and HIV-1 IN
and their recognition sequences, the consequences of analogous base pair
substitutions at the same relative positions of the respective IN recognition
sequences were very similar. This highlights the common mechanism of integration 
shared by these two different viruses.

PMID: 11788585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Crit Care Med. 2002 Jan;30(1 Suppl):S36-42.

High-mobility group-I/Y proteins: potential role in the pathophysiology of
critical illnesses.

Carvajal IM(1), Baron RM, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

High-mobility group (HMG) proteins are architectural factors that have been shown
to play a role in the transcriptional regulation of various mammalian genes. One 
family of HMG proteins, HMG-I/Y, is known to facilitate the initiation of gene
transcription by modifying the conformation of DNA and recruiting transcription
factors into an organized complex on transcriptional regulatory regions of
specific genes. In many circumstances, the nuclear factor-kappa B family of
transcription factors is involved in gene regulation that is mediated by HMG-I/Y.
We will review the mechanisms by which HMG-I/Y proteins regulate gene
transcription, give an overview of selected genes regulated by HMG-I/Y, summarize
the potential roles of these genes in critical illnesses, and provide more
detailed information about the role of HMG-I/Y in the regulation of nitric oxide 
synthase-2 during an inflammatory response, such as endotoxemia/sepsis.

PMID: 11782559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Differentiation. 2001 Dec;69(1):18-26.

Replication timing and cell differentiation.

Flickinger R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo,
14260, USA.

Cell differentiation may depend in part upon a type of unbalanced growth in which
several cell cycles occur with a reduced level of total protein synthesis. During
this period the synthesis of the chromatin protein HMG-I/Y is reduced since its
synthesis is correlated with that of total protein. The synthesis of histone H1
shows less reduction since its synthesis is entrained with that of DNA. This
greater reduction of HMG-I/Y than of histone H1 is thought to delay or prevent
replicon initiations within AT-enriched isochores. This shifts their time of
replication from early to late S phase. This may restrict certain pathways of
cell differentiation in multipotent progenitor cells and allow one particular
type of differentiation.

PMID: 11776391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Ital J Anat Embryol. 2001 Jul-Sep;106(3):251-60.

Further considerations on the intranuclear distribution of HMGI/Y proteins.

Tabellini G(1), Riccio M, Baldini G, Bareggi R, Billi AM, Grill V, Narducci P,
Martelli AM.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Morfologia Umana Normale, Università di Trieste, Italy.

We have investigated the intranuclear distribution of High-mobility group
proteins I/Y by means of immunofluorescent staining employing a variety of cell
lines. Confocal scanning laser microscopy analysis revealed that High-mobility
group proteins I/Y are present in an intranuclear fibrogranular network and
mitotic chromosomes. In Caski, C4I, Flow 2002, and K562 cell lines, High-mobility
group proteins I/Y were absent from nucleoli, whereas in HeLa cells they were
present in this nuclear domain. Double immunolabeling studies showed that
High-mobility group proteins I/Y co-localize with other key nuclear components
such as NuMA, SC-35, and TAF(II)70. Nuclear reactivity for High-mobility group
proteins I/Y dramatically decreased in apoptotic nuclei of HL-60 human leukemia
cells. Our morphological data correlate well with previous biochemical and
functional findings obtained by other investigators, who have demonstrated
multiple roles for this class of polypeptides. However, they point to the
likelihood that High-mobility group proteins I/Y are involved in as yet
unidentified functions, most likely in the speckle domains of the nucleus. They
also show that conceivably these proteins are also involved in apoptosis.

PMID: 11767201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Transgenic Res. 2001 Oct;10(5):465-70.

The role of cell differentiation state and HMG-I/Y in the expression of
transgenes flanked by matrix attachment regions.

Ascenzi R(1), Ingram JL, Massel M, Thompson WF, Spiker S, Weissinger AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, North Carolina State University, Raleigh 27695-7612,
USA.

The tobacco nuclear matrix attachment region (MAR), RB7, has been shown to have a
much greater effect on transgene expression in cultured cells than in transgenic 
plants. This is comparable to work in mouse systems showing that MARs have a
positive effect on transgene expression in embryonic tissues but not adult
tissues. There are several possible explanations for these observations. One is
that cell differentiation state and proliferation rate can affect MAR function.
We tested this possibility by initiating suspension cell cultures from
well-characterized transgenic plants transformed with 35S::GUS with and without
flanking MARs and then comparing GUS specific activity in the cell lines to those
of the transgenic plants from which the cell lines were derived. If cell
differentiation state and proliferation rate do affect MAR function, we would
expect the ratio of transgene expression (cell suspensions : plants) to be
greater in MAR lines than in control lines. This turned out not to be the case.
Thus, it appears that MAR function is not enhanced simply because cells in
culture divide rapidly and are not differentiated. Because in animal systems the 
chromosomal protein HMG-I/Y has been shown to be upregulated in proliferating
cells and may have a role in MAR function, we have also examined the levels of
the tobacco HMG-I/Y homolog by immunoblotting. The level of this protein does not
differ between primary transformant cultured cells (NT-1) and Nicotiana tabacum
plants (SR-1). However, a higher molecular weight cross-reacting polypeptide was 
found in nuclei from the NT-1 cell suspensions but was not detected in SR-1 leaf 
nuclei or cell suspensions derived from the SR-1 plants.

PMID: 11708656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Ann Pathol. 2001 Aug;21(4):303-10.

[Spindle cell lipoma and 13q deletion: diagnostic utility of cytogenetic
analysis].

[Article in French]

Dumollard JM(1), Ranchère-Vince D, Burel F, Coindre JM, Tallini G, Ligon AH,
Mayaud R, Turc-Carel C, Martin C, Mosnier JF, Pedeutour F.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital Bellevue, 42055 Saint-Etienne Cedex
2, France.

AIM: Spindle cell lipomas are rare adipose tissues tumors. Histologically, these 
lesions are composed of mature adipocytes and spindle cells associated with
collagen bundles. Spindle cell lipomas are benign tumors that can be difficult to
distinguish from malignant tumors such as spindle cell liposarcomas, myxoid
liposarcomas or well-differentiated liposarcomas.
RESULTS: We report herein the description of two new cases. The first case was a 
deeply situated and infiltrating tumor located in the retromastoidian area. The
karyotype showed the presence of two chromosomal abnormalities, a partial
deletion of the long arm of chromosome 13, del(13)(q12) and a balanced reciprocal
translocation t(2;6)(p16~21;p21). The second case was a subcutaneous tumor of
posterior cervical localization. The karyotype showed a 13q deletion associated
with a complex rearrangement of chromosomes 5, 6 and 10. The presence of the 13q 
deletion allowed us to confirm the diagnosis of spindle cell lipoma in both
cases. This deletion has been previously described in six out the eleven
published karyotype reports. The 13q deletion is usually associated with partial 
monosomy 16. The present case confirms that it can occur independently. The 6p21 
rearrangement may also play a role in the pathobiology of this tumor, as
suggested by the positive HMGIY expression detected by immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSION: Our study further illustrates that spindle cell lipomas can
infiltrate the surrounding muscle and emphasizes the usefulness of cytogenetic
analysis in the differential diagnosis of soft tissue tumors.

PMID: 11685128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2001 Oct 1;130(1):51-6.

Significant correlation between the breakpoints of rare clonal aberrations in
benign solid tumors and the assignment of HMGIY retropseudogenes.

Rogalla P(1), Blank C, Helbig R, Wosniok W, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics, University of Bremen, Leobenerstrasse ZHG, D-28359, 
Bremen, Germany.

Recently, we described a mechanism by which a retropseudogene, during evolution, 
becomes an exon of a pre-existing active gene. Similar mechanisms may account for
the activation of processed genes by chromosomal rearrangements in neoplasms.
Because genes of the high-mobility group protein family HMGI(Y) are known to be
involved in the development of a variety of benign solid tumors, it was the aim
of the present study to analyze breakpoints of clonal chromosome abnormalities in
that group of benign tumors for a possible correlation with retropseudogenes of
the HMGIY gene. Whereas the HMGIYL1 retrospeudogene has recently been mapped to
Xp22.1, we assigned a further retropseudogene by FISH to 4q13, and database
research allowed us to assign a third retropseudogene to 12q24.1. Sequence
analyses of these retropseudogenes revealed high-identity indices to the HMGIY
gene and no frame-shift divergences. Breakpoint information was obtained from
cytogenetic aberrations in uterine leiomyomas, lipomas, pleomorphic adenomas, and
pulmonary chondroid hamartomas because, in all of these tumor entities,
cytogenetic subgroups involving genes of the HMGI(Y) family exist. Chromosomal
bands harboring HMGIY retropseudogenes were affected with a significantly higher 
frequency than expected under the assumption of purely randomly occurring
breakages. These results support our hypothesis that HMGIY-related
retropseudogenes can be affected by chromosomal rearrangements in benign human
tumors.

PMID: 11672774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Gene. 2001 Oct 17;277(1-2):63-81.

Molecular biology of HMGA proteins: hubs of nuclear function.

Reeves R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Molecular Biosciences,
Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA. reevesr@wsu.edu

Members of the HMGA (a.k.a. HMGI/Y) family of 'high mobility group' (HMG)
proteins participate in a wide variety of nuclear processes ranging from
chromosome and chromatin mechanics to acting as architectural transcription
factors that regulate the expression of numerous genes in vivo. As a consequence,
they function in the cell as highly connected 'nodes' of protein-DNA and
protein-protein interactions that influence a diverse array of normal biological 
processes including growth, proliferation, differentiation and death. The HMGA
proteins, likewise, participate in pathological processes by, for example, acting
as regulators of viral gene transcription and by serving as host-supplied
proteins that facilitate retroviral integration. HMGA genes are bona fide
proto-oncogenes that promote tumor progression and metastasis when overexpressed 
in cells. High constitutive HMGA protein levels are among the most consistent
feature observed in all types of cancers with increasing concentrations being
correlated with increasing malignancy. The intrinsic attributes that endow the
HMGA proteins with these remarkable abilities are a combination of structural,
biochemical and biological characteristics that are unique to these proteins.
HMGA proteins have little, if any, secondary structure while free in solution but
undergo disordered-to-ordered structural transitions when bound to substrates
such as DNA or other proteins. Each protein contains three copies of a conserved 
DNA-binding peptide motif called the 'AT-hook' that preferentially binds to the
minor groove of stretches of AT-rich sequence. In vivo HMGA proteins specifically
interact with a large number of other proteins, most of which are transcription
factors. They are also subject to many types of in vivo biochemical modifications
that markedly influence their ability to interact with DNA substrates, other
proteins and chromatin. And, most importantly, both the transcription of HMGA
genes and the biochemical modifications of HMGA proteins are direct downstream
targets of numerous signal transduction pathways making them exquisitely
responsive to various environmental influences. This review covers recent
advances that have contributed to our understanding of how this constellation of 
structural and biological features allows the HMGA proteins to serve as central
'hubs' of nuclear function.

PMID: 11602345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 27;20(43):6132-41.

High mobility group I (Y) proteins bind HIPK2, a serine-threonine kinase protein 
which inhibits cell growth.

Pierantoni GM(1), Fedele M, Pentimalli F, Benvenuto G, Pero R, Viglietto G,
Santoro M, Chiariotti L, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, c/o Centro di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.

The HMGI proteins (HMGI, HMGY and HMGI-C) have an important role in the chromatin
organization and interact with different transcriptional factors. The HMGI genes 
are expressed at very low levels in normal adult tissues, whereas they are very
abundant during embryonic development and in several experimental and human
tumours. In order to isolate proteins interacting with the HMGI(Y) proteins, a
yeast two-hybrid screening was performed using the HMGI(Y) protein as bait. This 
analysis led to the isolation of homeodomain-interacting protein kinase-2
(HIPK2), a serine/threonine nuclear kinase. HIPK2 co-immunoprecipitates with the 
HMGI(Y) protein in 293T cells. The interaction between HIPK2 and HMGI(Y) occurs
through the PEST domain of HIPK2 and it is direct because in vitro translated
HIPK2 binds HMGI(Y). We also show that HIPK2 is able to phosphorylate the HMGI(Y)
protein by an in vitro kinase assay. In order to understand a possible role of
HIPK2 gene in cell growth we performed a colony assay which showed an impressive 
HIPK2 inhibitory effect on normal thyroid cells. Flow cytometric analysis would
indicate the block of cell growth at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Since
normal thyroid cells do not express detectable HMGI(Y) protein levels, we assume 
that the HIPK2 inhibitory effect is independent from the interaction with the
HMGI(Y) protein.

PMID: 11593421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Cell. 2001 Sep;8(3):531-43.

Dual functions of largest NURF subunit NURF301 in nucleosome sliding and
transcription factor interactions.

Xiao H(1), Sandaltzopoulos R, Wang HM, Hamiche A, Ranallo R, Lee KM, Fu D, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, Building 37, 
Room 6068, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

NURF is an ISWI complex of four proteins that uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis
to catalyze nucleosome sliding. Three NURF components have been identified
previously. We have cloned cDNA encoding the largest NURF subunit, revealing a
301 kDa polypeptide (NURF301) that shares structural motifs with ACF1. We have
reconstituted full and partial NURF complexes from recombinant proteins and show 
that NURF301 and the ISWI ATPase are necessary and sufficient for accurate and
efficient nucleosome sliding. An HMGA/HMGI(Y)-like domain of NURF301 that
facilitates nucleosome sliding indicates the importance of DNA conformational
changes in the sliding mechanism. NURF301 also shows interactions with
sequence-specific transcription factors, providing a basis for targeted
recruitment of the NURF complex to specific genes.

PMID: 11583616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cancer Lett. 2001 Nov 8;173(1):93-9.

Elevated levels of high-mobility-group chromosomal proteins, HMGA1, in murine
skin carcinoma.

Rajeswari MR(1), Singh D, Jain A, Ray R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India. mrraji@hotmail.com

The high-mobility-group, HMGA1 (formerly HMGI(Y)) chromosomal proteins are known 
to be involved in gene regulation and their high expression is associated with
neoplastic transformation of cells and metastatic tumor progression. Here, we
present our results on the expression of HMGA1 in murine skin carcinoma as
detected by acid-urea electrophoresis, reverse-phase high-performance liquid
chromatography and Western blot. The enhanced expression of HMGA1 proteins
directly correlates with the extent of cellular atypia and neoplastic changes
noticed in the histopathology of tumor and suggest a potential use of these
proteins as marker for determining the grade of skin tumor.

PMID: 11578814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Carcinogenesis. 2001 Oct;22(10):1583-91.

Role of the high mobility group A proteins in human lipomas.

Fedele M(1), Battista S, Manfioletti G, Croce CM, Giancotti V, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di
Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Via Pansini, 5, I-80131
Naples, Italy.

The HMGA family is comprised of four proteins: HMGA1a, HMGA1b, HMGA1c and HMGA2. 
The first three proteins are products of the same gene, HMGA1, generated through 
an alternative splicing mechanism. The HMGA proteins are involved in the
regulation of chromatin structure and HMGA DNA-binding sites have been identified
in functional regions of many gene promoters. Rearrangements of the HMGA2 gene
have been frequently detected in human benign tumors of mesenchymal origin
including lipomas. 12q13-15 chromosomal translocations involving the HMGA2 gene
locus, account for these rearrangements. The HMGA proteins have three AT-hook
domains and an acidic C-terminal tail. The HMGA2 modifications consist in the
loss of the C-terminal tail and fusion with ectopic sequences. A pivotal role of 
the HMGA2 rearrangements in the process of lipomagenesis is suggested by
experiments showing that transgenic mice carrying a truncated HMGA2 gene showed a
giant phenotype together with abdominal/pelvic lipomatosis. As HMGA2 null mice
showed a great reduction in fat tissue, a positive role of the HMGA2 gene in
adipocytic cell proliferation is proposed. More recently, similar alterations of 
the HMGA1 gene have been described. As the block of the HMGA1 protein synthesis
induces an increase in growth rate of the pre-adipocytic cell line 3T3-L1, we
suggest a negative role of the HMGA1 proteins in adipocytic cell growth and,
therefore, we propose that adipocytic cell growth derives from the balance of the
HMGA1 and HMGA2 protein functions.

PMID: 11576996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Sep 1;10(18):1995-2011.

Large-scale identification of mammalian proteins localized to nuclear
sub-compartments.

Sutherland HG(1), Mumford GK, Newton K, Ford LV, Farrall R, Dellaire G, Cáceres
JF, Bickmore WA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.

Many nuclear components participating in related pathways appear concentrated in 
specific areas of the mammalian nucleus. The importance of this organization is
attested to by the dysfunction that correlates with mis-localization of nuclear
proteins in human disease and cancer. Determining the sub-nuclear localization of
proteins is therefore important for understanding genome regulation and function,
and it also provides clues to function for novel proteins. However, the
complexity of proteins in the mammalian nucleus is too large to tackle this on a 
protein by protein basis. Large-scale approaches to determining protein function 
and sub-cellular localization are required. We have used a visual gene trap
screen to identify more than 100 proteins, many of which are normal, located
within compartments of the mouse nucleus. The most common discrete localizations 
detected are at the nucleolus and the splicing speckles and on chromosomes.
Proteins at the nuclear periphery, or in other nuclear foci, have also been
identified. Several of the proteins have been implicated in human disease or
cancer, e.g. ATRX, HMGI-C, NBS1 and EWS, and the gene-trapped proteins provide a 
route into further understanding their function. We find that sequence motifs are
often shared amongst proteins co-localized within the same sub-nuclear
compartment. Conversely, some generally abundant motifs are lacking from the
proteins concentrated in specific areas of the nucleus. This suggests that we may
be able to predict sub-nuclear localization for proteins in databases based on
their sequence.

PMID: 11555636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2001 Oct;32(2):172-6.

Chromosomal translocation t(8;12) induces aberrant HMGIC expression in aggressive
angiomyxoma of the vulva.

Nucci MR(1), Weremowicz S, Neskey DM, Sornberger K, Tallini G, Morton CC, Quade
BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Women's and Perinatal Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Benign mesenchymal neoplasms associated with rearrangements of the DNA
architectural factor gene HMGIC on chromosome 12 include lipomas, uterine
leiomyomata, pulmonary chondroid hamartomas, endometrial polyps, salivary gland
pleomorphic adenomas, and breast fibroadenomas. Although HMGIC also has been
implicated in the pathobiology of aggressive angiomyxoma of the vulva, the
molecular mechanisms pertaining to this neoplasm are unclear. Tissue from a
recurrent aggressive angiomyxoma was investigated by cytogenetic and expression
analysis for HMGIC and HMGIY. The trypsin-Giemsa-banded karyotype showed a clonal
translocation between chromosomes 8 and 12 [46,XX,t(8;12)(p12;q15)]. Fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis with whole chromosome paint probes for
chromosomes 8 and 12 excluded cryptic involvement of other chromosomes. The
chromosome 12 breakpoint was mapped with two-color FISH analysis using cosmid
probes at the 5' and 3' termini of HMGIC. Both cosmid probes showed hybridization
to the normal chromosome 12 and the der(12) chromosome, indicating that the
breakpoint was 3' (telomeric) to the gene. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis revealed HMGIC expression in the tumor, and
immunohistochemistry localized HMGIC expression to the tumor's spindle cells.
Like numerous benign mesenchymal tumors, this locally aggressive tumor is
associated with rearrangements near or within HMGIC, but chimeric gene formation 
was not required for tumorigenesis. Inappropriate expression of this DNA binding 
protein, however, may be important in the pathobiology of this tumor.
Understanding the pathogenetic mechanism may also be helpful in developing new
diagnostic tools for identifying residual disease.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11550285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Science. 2001 Aug 10;293(5532):1133-6.

Coordination of a transcriptional switch by HMGI(Y) acetylation.

Munshi N(1), Agalioti T, Lomvardas S, Merika M, Chen G, Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, 630 
West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2001 Aug 10;293(5532):1054-5.

Dynamic control of interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene expression requires the
regulated assembly and disassembly of the enhanceosome, a higher-order
nucleoprotein complex formed in response to virus infection. The enhanceosome
activates transcription by recruiting the histone acetyltransferase proteins CREB
binding protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factors (PCAF)/GCN5, which, in
addition to modifying histones, acetylate HMGI(Y), the architectural component
required for enhanceosome assembly. We show that the accurate execution of the
IFN-beta transcriptional switch depends on the ordered acetylation of the
high-mobility group I protein HMGI(Y) by PCAF/GCN5 and CBP, which acetylate
HMGI(Y) at distinct lysine residues on endogenous promoters. Whereas acetylation 
of HMGI(Y) by CBP at lysine-65 destabilizes the enhanceosome, acetylation of
HMGI(Y) by PCAF/GCN5 at lysine-71 potentiates transcription by stabilizing the
enhanceosome and preventing acetylation by CBP.

PMID: 11498590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Science. 2001 Aug 10;293(5532):1054-5.

Gene regulation. A paradigm for precision.

Struhl K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. kevin@hms.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2001 Aug 10;293(5532):1133-6.

PMID: 11498564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Oncogene. 2001 Jul 27;20(33):4537-41.

The expression of HMGA genes is regulated by their 3'UTR.

Borrmann L(1), Wilkening S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Bremen, Leobenerstr. ZHG, 28359
Bremen, Germany.

Many benign mesenchymal tumors are characterized by chromosomal abnormalities of 
the regions 12q15 or 6p21.3 leading to aberrant expression of either HMGA2
(formerly HMGIC) or HMGA1 (formerly HMGIY). The proteins of both genes belong to 
the HMGA (formerly HMGI(Y)) family of architectural transcription factors. As a
rule, aberrant HMGA transcripts found in a variety of benign tumors have intact
coding regions at least for the DNA binding domains with a truncation of their 3'
untranslated regions. Adding this to the finding that an altered HMGA protein
level is not always correlated with an increased amount of corresponding mRNA
indicates a posttranscriptional expression control mediated by regulatory
elements within the 3'UTR. To check if HMGA expression is under control of such
elements we performed luciferase assays with several HMGA2 and HMGA1 3'UTRs of
different length. Experiments showed that an up to 12-fold increase in luciferase
activity is obtained by the truncation of the 3'UTRs suggesting that the
expression of HMGA2 and HMGA1 is controlled by negatively acting regulatory
elements within their 3'UTR. Chromosomal aberrations affecting the HMGA genes may
therefore influence their expression by an altered stability of the truncated
transcripts as a result of the cytogenetic aberrations.

PMID: 11494149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Immunity. 2001 Jul;15(1):159-72.

The basis for IL-2-induced IL-2 receptor alpha chain gene regulation: importance 
of two widely separated IL-2 response elements.

Kim HP(1), Kelly J, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The interleukin-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha) chain is an essential component of 
high-affinity IL-2 receptors. Accordingly, IL-2Ralpha expression helps to
regulate T cell growth and other lymphoid functions. Lineage-restricted and
activation-dependent IL-2Ralpha transcription is controlled by three upstream
positive regulatory regions (PRRs). We now describe an additional IL-2 response
element, PRRIV, within intron 1, in humans and mice. PRRIV activity requires GAS 
motifs that bind Stat5 proteins and additional upstream HMG-I(Y) binding sites.
Moreover, IL-2 induces the binding of HMG-I(Y), Stat5a, and Stat5b in vivo to
PRRIV and PRRIII, which also functions as an IL-2 response element. Thus, the
IL-2 inducibility of the IL-2Ralpha gene is unexpectedly mediated by two widely
separated regulatory Stat5-dependent elements, located both upstream and
downstream of the transcription initiation sites.

PMID: 11485747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Immunol Res. 2001;24(1):13-29.

The HMG I proteins: dynamic roles in gene activation, development, and
tumorigenesis.

Liu F(1), Chau KY, Arlotta P, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)University College London, Institute of Ophthalmology, UK.

The high mobility group I, Y, and I-C proteins are low-molecular-weight,
nonhistone chromosomal proteins that play a general role modulating gene
expression during development and the immune response. Consistent with their role
in early development, all three proteins are expressed at high levels during
embryogenesis, and their expression is markedly diminished in differentiated
cells. Exceptions to the general repression of these genes in adult tissues
involve (1) A burst of synthesis of the HMG I protein during the immune response 
(during lymphocyte activation and preceding cytokine/adhesion molecule gene
expression), (2) A constitutive expression of the HMG I and Y proteins in
photoreceptor cells, and (3) Derepression of HMG I, Y, and often I-C expression
in neoplastic cells. Work from several laboratories has now uncovered how these
proteins participate in gene activation: (1) By altering the chromatin structure 
around an inducible gene-and thus influencing accessibility of the locus to
regulatory proteins-(2) By facilitating the loading of transcription factors onto
the promoters, and (3) By bridging adjacent transcription factors on a promoter
via protein/protein interactions. Despite the similar structures and biochemical 
properties of the three proteins, the work has also provided clues to a division 
of labor between these proteins. HMG I and Y have demonstrable roles in
enhanceosome formation, whereas HMG I-C has a specific role in adipogenesis.
C-terminal truncations of HMG I-C and wild-type HMG Y appear to function in a
manner analogous to oncogenes, as assessed by cellular transforation assays and
transgenic mice. Future work should clearly define the similarities and
differences in the biological roles of the three proteins, and should evolve to
include attempts at pharmaceutical intervention in disease, based upon structural
information concerning HMG I interactions with DNA and with regulatory proteins.

PMID: 11485207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cancer Res Treat. 2001 Aug;33(4):281-5. doi: 10.4143/crt.2001.33.4.281.

Expression of High Mobility Group Protein Family [HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C] in Human
Breast Cancer.

Ryu JW, Kim DH, Shin HS, Nam ES, Kim HJ.

PURPOSE: Breast cancer results from the progressive accumulation of a series of
genetic alterations leading to neoplastic transformation. Recent studies have
shown that a) HMGI proteins play an important role in the regulation of chromatin
structure and function and b) the expression of aberrant HMGI [HMGI(Y) and
HMGI-C] proteins is generally correlated with malignant tumors. We tried to
define the function of HMGI in carcinogenesis and we compare the expression of
HMGI with known clinicopathologic parameters.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), we determined the expression of HMGI mRNA in 60 primary malignant
tumors, 20 normal tissue, 13 benign tumors, and four ductal carcinoma in situ.
Immunohistochemical staining of p53, ER, PR, and clinicopathological parameters
were evaluated.
RESULTS: The expression of the HMGI(Y) mRNA increased more in malignant tissue
(90%, 54 of 60) than in benign (76.9%) and normal (65%) tissues (p=0.031). The
expression of HMGI-C mRNA was visible only in malignant (48.4%, 29 of 60) and
benign (23.1%, 3 of 13) tumors. The expression of HMGI-C mRNA increased more in
malignant tumors than in benign tumors (p<0.001). In invasive ductal tumors
(n=50), the expression of HMGI-C mRNA was observed more in high grade tumors
(grade 3~81.3%, grade 1, 2~32.4%) (p=0.005). Among the prognostic parameters,
only the number of mitotic figures was related to the expression of HMGI-C mRNA
(p=0.046).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that a) HMGI-C gene may be correlated with the 
formation of breast tumors and b) the expression of HMGI-C gene may be of
pathogenetic and prognostic importance in human breast cancer.

PMID: 26680797  [PubMed]


8. Genes Cells. 2001 Jul;6(7):641-52.

Terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase directly interacts with a novel nuclear
protein that is homologous to p65.

Yamashita N(1), Shimazaki N, Ibe S, Kaneko R, Tanabe A, Toyomoto T, Fujita K,
Hasegawa T, Toji S, Tamai K, Yamamoto H, Koiwai O.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science & Technology, Department of Applied Biological Science,
Science University of Tokyo, Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase (TdT) is a DNA polymerase that
enhances Ig and TcR gene diversity in the N region in B- and T-cells. TdT is
found as a member of a large protein complex in the lysate of the thymocytes. To 
elucidate the molecular mechanism of the synthesis of the N region, we first
attempted to isolate the genes with products that are interacting directly with
TdT.
RESULTS: Using a yeast two-hybrid system, we isolated a cDNA clone encoding a
novel nuclear protein that interacts with TdT. This protein was designated as TdT
interacting factor 1 (TdIF1). TdIF1 has a high degree of homology to the
transcription factor p65, which belongs to the nuclear receptor superfamily.
TdIF1 contains HMG-I and HMG-Y DNA binding domains (AT-hooks) and can bind to
single- and double-stranded DNA. TdT and TdIF1 were co-eluted at position 232 kDa
by gel filtration of MOLT4 lysate. TdIF1 can enhance TdT activity fourfold in
vitro assay system using oligo(dT)16 as primers.
CONCLUSIONS: TdIF1 binds directly to TdT, both in vitro and in vivo. TdIF1 and
TdT exist as the members of a 232 kDa protein complex. TdIF1 can enhance TdT
activity maximum fourfold in vitro assay system, suggesting that it positively
regulates the synthesis of the N region during V(D)J recombination in the Ig and 
TcR genes.

PMID: 11473582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Peptides. 2001 Jul;22(7):1119-28.

GRP-receptor-mediated signal transduction, gene expression and DNA synthesis in
the human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line HPAF.

Burghardt B(1), Wenger C, Barabás K, Rácz G, Oláh A, Flautner L, Coy DH, Gress
TM, Varga G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hung. Acad. Sci. H-1450, Budapest,
Hungary.

Bombesin-like peptides have been implicated as growth factors in various human
cancers. Human adenocarcinoma cell lines (Capan-1, Capan-2, MiaPaCa-2 and HPAF)
were tested to determine whether they express the gastrin-releasing
peptide-preferring bombesin receptor (GRPR) and neuromedin B-preferring bombesin 
receptor (NMBR). Using RT-PCR the highest level of GRP receptor mRNA was found in
HPAF cells. NMB receptor mRNA expression moderate in all cell lines investigated.
We therefore selected the HPAF cell line to investigate whether bombesin
treatment affects intracellular Ca(2+) ([Ca(2+)](i)), cAMP level, DNA synthesis
as a measure of cell proliferation, and expression of three transcription
factors: c-fos, c-myc and high mobility group protein IY (HMG-I(Y)).Bombesin
administration led to an immediate increase in free intracellular Ca(2+)
concentration ([Ca(2+)](i)) but did not change cAMP levels. The peptide also
enhanced [(3)H]thymidine incorporation in HPAF cells (but not in the other cell
lines), an effect that was concentration dependent, reaching 36 +/- 5%
stimulation over control values at 24 h with an EC(50) of 2.27 x 10(-12) M.
Furthermore, bombesin stimulated c-fos, c-myc and HMG-I(Y) expression in a
time-dependent manner: the c-fos mRNA level increased dramatically in the first
30 min of exposure, then returned to basal level within 2 h, while the c-myc and 
HMG-I(Y) mRNA levels peaked at 2 h and 4h, respectively. All actions of bombesin 
were blocked by BME (D-Phe(6)-bombesin-(6-13)-methylester), a selective GRP
receptor antagonist, but not by the NMB receptor antagonist BIM-23127
(D-Nal-cyclo[Cys-Tyr-D-Trp-Orn-Val-Cys]-Nal-NH(2)). We conclude that HPAF cells
express mRNA for GRP receptors and that functional receptors are present in the
cell membrane. The occupation of these receptors leads to a sequence of
intracellular events involving rapid mobilization of intracellular Ca(2+),
expression of c-fos, c-myc and HMG-I(Y) mRNA, and stimulation of cell
proliferation. Conversely, although NMB receptor mRNA can be detected, its actual
translation to functional receptors does not reach a detectable level.

PMID: 11445243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Plant Mol Biol. 2001 May;46(2):193-204.

DNA binding mediated by the wheat HMGa protein: a novel instance of selectivity
against alternating GC sequence.

Chua YL(1), Pwee KH, Kini RM.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Molecular Biology Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Republic
of Singapore.

Erratum in
    Plant Mol Biol 2001 Nov;47(4):569. Leng, CY [corrected to Chua, YL]; Hock, PK
[corrected to Pwee, KH].

The high-mobility-group (HMG) chromosomal protein wheat HMGa was purified to
homogeneity and tested for its binding characteristics to double-stranded DNA.
Wheat HMGa was able to bind to P268, an A/T-rich fragment derived from the pea
plastocyanin gene promoter, producing a small mobility shift in gel retardation
assays where the bound complex was sensitive to addition of proteinase K but
resistant to heat treatment of the protein, consistent with the identity of wheat
HMGa as a putative HMG-I/Y protein. Gel retardation assays and southwestern
hybridization analysis revealed that wheat HMGa could selectively interact with
the DNA polynucleotides poly(dA).poly(dT), poly(dAdT).poly(dAdT), and
poly(dG).poly(dC), but not with poly(dGdC).poly(dGdC). Surface plasmon resonance 
analysis determined the kinetic and affinity constants of sensor chip-immobilized
wheat HMGa for double-stranded DNA 10-mers, revealing a good affinity of the
protein for various dinucleotide combinations, except that of alternating GC
sequence. Thus contrary to prior reports of a selectivity of wheat HMGa for
A/T-rich DNA, the protein appears to be able to interact with sequences
containing guanine and cytosine residues as well, except where G/C residues
alternate directly in the primary sequence.

PMID: 11442059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 3;98(14):7970-5. Epub 2001 Jun 26.

Onset of natural killer cell lymphomas in transgenic mice carrying a truncated
HMGI-C gene by the chronic stimulation of the IL-2 and IL-15 pathway.

Baldassarre G(1), Fedele M, Battista S, Vecchione A, Klein-Szanto AJ, Santoro M, 
Waldmann TA, Azimi N, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Rearrangements of the high mobility group protein I-C (HMGI-C) gene, consisting
in the loss of the carboxyl-terminal tail, have been frequently detected in
benign human tumors of mesenchymal origin. We have previously demonstrated that
transgenic (TG) mice carrying a truncated HMGI-C construct (HMGI-C/T) exhibit a
giant phenotype together with a predominantly abdominal/pelvic lipomatosis. Here,
we report that HMGI-C/T TG mice develop natural killer (NK)-T/NK cell lymphomas
starting from 12 months of age. We found an increased expression of IL-2 and
IL-15 proteins and their receptors in these lymphomas, and we demonstrate that
HMGI-C/T protein positively regulates their expression in vitro. Therefore, the
HMGI-C/T-mediated chronic stimulation of the IL-2/IL-15 pathway could be
responsible for the onset of NK-T/NK cell lymphomas in HMGI-C/T TG mice.

PMCID: PMC35452
PMID: 11427729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Curr Biol. 2001 Apr 3;11(7):R250-2.

Cooperativity in transcriptional control.

Courey AJ.

PMID: 11413011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Gene. 2001 Jun 13;271(1):51-8.

Sequence and analysis of the murine Hmgiy (Hmga1) gene locus.

Pedulla ML(1), Treff NR, Resar LM, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Pittsburgh Bacteriophage Institute, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

The HMGIY non-histone proteins play important roles as architectural
transcription factors that regulate gene transcription in mammalian cells and
also act as host-supplied cofactors necessary for retroviral integration. The
genes coding for the HMGIY proteins are proto-oncogenes, and their aberrant or
over-expression is correlated with both neoplastic transformation and metastatic 
progression in a wide variety of tumors. Here, we report the first complete
sequence of the murine Hmgiy (a.k.a. Hmga1) gene and provide a detailed
comparison of this with the sequence and organization of the human HMGIY gene,
including an analysis of its promoter region with the previously unreported 5'
upstream region of the human gene. These analyses reveal a remarkable degree of
overall sequence conservation in both the protein coding and promoter regions of 
the murine and human genes, including conservation of the c-Myc binding site that
has been demonstrated to regulate murine Hmgiy transcription (Wood et al., 2000. 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 5490-5502). The promoters of both genes contain other
conserved transcription factor binding sites that may also represent important
cis-regulatory elements. Two exons present in the 5' untranslated region of the
human gene, however, are missing from the murine gene, suggesting that these two 
closely related mammalian species regulate transcription of their Hmgiy genes in 
an individualistic manner.

PMID: 11410365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 May 28;1519(1-2):13-29.

HMGI/Y proteins: flexible regulators of transcription and chromatin structure.

Reeves R(1), Beckerbauer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, School of Molecular Biosciences,
Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA. reevesr@mail.wsu.edu

The mammalian HMGI/Y (HMGA) non-histone proteins participate in a wide variety of
cellular processes including regulation of inducible gene transcription,
integration of retroviruses into chromosomes and the induction of neoplastic
transformation and promotion of metastatic progression of cancer cells. Recent
advances have contributed greatly to our understanding of how the HMGI/Y proteins
participate in the molecular mechanisms underlying these biological events. All
members of the HMGI/Y family of 'high mobility group' proteins are characterized 
by the presence of multiple copies of a conserved DNA-binding peptide motif
called the 'AT hook' that preferentially binds to the narrow minor groove of
stretches of AT-rich sequence. The mammalian HMGI/Y proteins have little, if any,
secondary structure in solution but assume distinct conformations when bound to
substrates such as DNA or other proteins. Their intrinsic flexibility allows the 
HMGI/Y proteins to participate in specific protein-DNA and protein-protein
interactions that induce both structural changes in chromatin substrates and the 
formation of stereospecific complexes called 'enhanceosomes' on the
promoter/enhancer regions of genes whose transcription they regulate. The
formation of such regulatory complexes is characterized by reciprocal inductions 
of conformational changes in both the HMGI/Y proteins themselves and in their
interacting substrates. It may well be that the inherent flexibility of the
HMGI/Y proteins, combined with their ability to undergo reversible
disordered-to-ordered structural transitions, has been a significant factor in
the evolutionary selection of these proteins for their functional role(s) in
cells.

PMID: 11406267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):29805-14. Epub 2001 Jun 4.

Requirement for high mobility group protein HMGI-C interaction with STAT3
inhibitor PIAS3 in repression of alpha-subunit of epithelial Na+ channel
(alpha-ENaC) transcription by Ras activation in salivary epithelial cells.

Zentner MD(1), Lin HH, Deng HT, Kim KJ, Shih HM, Ann DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, Will Rogers Institute,
Pulmonary Research Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90033, USA.

Previously, we have demonstrated that oxidative stress or Ras/ERK activation
leads to the transcriptional repression of alpha-subunit of epithelial Na(+)
channel (ENaC) in lung and salivary epithelial cells. Here, we further
investigated the coordinated molecular mechanisms by which alpha-ENaC expression 
is regulated. Using both stable and transient transfection assays, we demonstrate
that the overexpression of high mobility group protein I-C (HMGI-C), a
Ras/ERK-inducible HMG-I family member, represses glucocorticoid receptor
(GR)/dexamethasone (Dex)-stimulated alpha-ENaC/reporter activity in salivary
epithelial cells. Northern analyses further confirm that the expression of
endogenous alpha-ENaC gene in salivary Pa-4 cells is suppressed by an ectopic
HMGI-C overexpression. Through yeast two-hybrid screening and
co-immunoprecipitation assays from eukaryotic cells, we also discovered the
interaction between HMGI-C and PIAS3 (protein inhibitor of activated STAT3
(signal transducer and activator of transcription 3)). A low level of ectopically
expressed PIAS3 cooperatively inhibits GR/Dex-dependent alpha-ENaC transcription 
in the presence of HMGI-C. Reciprocally, HMGI-C expression also coordinately
enhances PIAS3-mediated repression of STAT3-dependent transactivation. Moreover, 
overexpression of antisense HMGI-C construct is capable of reversing the
repression mediated by Ras V12 on GR- and STAT3-dependent transcriptional
activation. Together, our results demonstrate that Ras/ERK-mediated induction of 
HMGI-C is required to effectively repress GR/Dex-stimulated transcription of
alpha-ENaC gene and STAT3-mediated transactivation. These findings delineate a
network of inhibitory signaling pathways that converge on HMGI-C.PIAS3 complex,
causally associating Ras/ERK activation with the repression of both GR and STAT3 
signaling pathways in salivary epithelial cells.

PMID: 11390395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Jun;268(11):3154-62.

HMG-1 enhances HMG-I/Y binding to an A/T-rich enhancer element from the pea
plastocyanin gene.

Webster CI(1), Packman LC, Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Plant Sciences,
University of Cambridge, UK.

High-mobility-group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y bind at overlapping sites within
the A/T-rich enhancer element of the pea plastocyanin gene. Competition binding
experiments revealed that HMG-1 enhanced the binding of HMG-I/Y to a 31-bp region
(P31) of the enhancer. Circularization assays showed that HMG-1, but not HMG-I/Y,
was able to bend a linear 100-bp DNA containing P31 so that the ends could be
ligated. HMG-1, but not HMG-I/Y, showed preferential binding to the circular
100-bp DNA compared with the equivalent linear DNA, indicating that alteration of
the conformation of the DNA by HMG-1 was not responsible for enhanced binding of 
HMG-I/Y. Direct interaction of HMG-I/Y and HMG-1 in the absence of DNA was
demonstrated by binding of 35S-labeled proteins to immobilized histidine-tagged
proteins, and this was due to an interaction of the N-terminal HMG-box-containing
region of HMG-1 and the C-terminal AT-hook region of HMG-I/Y. Kinetic analysis
using the IAsys biosensor revealed that HMG-1 had an affinity for immobilized
HMG-I/Y (Kd = 28 nM) similar to that for immobilized P31 DNA. HMG-1-enhanced
binding of HMG-I/Y to the enhancer element appears to be mediated by the
formation of an HMG-1-HMG-I/Y complex, which binds to DNA with the rapid loss of 
HMG-1.

PMID: 11389716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Cell Biochem Suppl. 2000;Suppl 35:36-45.

Linking chromatin architecture to cellular phenotype: BUR-binding proteins in
cancer.

Galande S(1), Kohwi-Shigematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

PMID: 11389530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cancer Res. 2001 Jun 1;61(11):4583-90.

Overexpression of proteins HMGA1 induces cell cycle deregulation and apoptosis in
normal rat thyroid cells.

Fedele M(1), Pierantoni GM, Berlingieri MT, Battista S, Baldassarre G, Munshi N, 
Dentice M, Thanos D, Santoro M, Viglietto G, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Dipartimento di Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università
degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.

The high mobility group (HMG) proteins (HMGA1a, HMGA1b, and HMGA2) bind to DNA
and interact with various transcriptional factors. Therefore, they play an
important role in chromatin organization. HMGA protein expression is low in
normal adult tissues, but abundant during embryonic development and in several
experimental and human tumors. Blockage of HMGA expression inhibits the
transformation of rat thyroid PC Cl 3 cells treated with oncogene-carrying
retroviruses, thus implicating HMGA in rat thyroid transformation. To better
understand the role of HMGA and to establish whether its up-regulated expression 
is sufficient to induce the transformed phenotype, we generated PC Cl 3 cells
that overexpress the protein. We demonstrate that HMGA1b protein overexpression
does not transform normal rat thyroid PC Cl 3 cells, but it deregulates their
cell cycle: cells enter S-phase earlier and the G(2)-M transition is delayed.
HMGA1-overexpressing cells undergo apoptosis through a pathway involving
caspase-3 activation, probably consequent to the conflict between mitogenic
pressure and the inability to proceed through the cell cycle. Using various
HMGA1b gene mutations, we found that the third AT-hook domain and the acetylation
site K60 are the protein regions required for induction of apoptosis in PC Cl 3
cells. In conclusion, although HMGA1 protein overexpression is associated with
the malignant phenotype of rat and human thyroid cells, it does not transform
normal thyroid cells in culture but leads them to programmed cell death.

PMID: 11389094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Apr;268(8):2430-40.

Molecular cloning of a mammalian nuclear phosphoprotein NUCKS, which serves as a 
substrate for Cdk1 in vivo.

Ostvold AC(1), Norum JH, Mathiesen S, Wanvik B, Sefland I, Grundt K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Oslo, Norway.
annecari@basalmed.uio.no

We have isolated and characterized a cDNA encoding a mammalian nuclear
phosphoprotein NUCKS, previously designated P1. Molecular analyses of several
overlapping and full-length cDNAs from HeLa cells and rat brain revealed a
protein with an apparent molecular mass of 27 kDa in both species. The deduced
amino-acid sequences are highly conserved between human and rodents, but show no 
homology with primary structures in protein databases or with translated
sequences of cDNAs in cDNA databanks. Although the protein has some features in
common with the high mobility group proteins HMGI/Y, attempts to find a putative 
protein family by database query using both sequence alignment methods and
amino-acid composition have failed. Northern blot analyses revealed that human
and rat tissues contain three NUCKS transcripts varying in size from 1.5 to 6.5
kb. All human and rat tissues express the gene, but the level of transcripts
varies among different tissues. Circular dichroism analysis and secondary
structure predictions based on the amino-acid sequence indicate a low level of
alpha helical content and substantial amounts of beta turn structures. The
protein is phosphorylated in all phases of the cell cycle and exhibits
mitosis-specific phosphorylation of threonine residues. Phosphopeptide mapping
and back-phosphorylation experiments employing NUCKS from HeLa interphase and
metaphase cells show that the protein is phosphorylated by Cdk1 during mitosis of
the cell cycle.

PMID: 11298763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):16731-8. Epub 2001 Jan 24.

Nickel resistance and chromatin condensation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
expressing a maize high mobility group I/Y protein.

Forzani C(1), Loulergue C, Lobréaux S, Briat JF, Lebrun M.

Author information: 
(1)Biochimie et Physiologie Moléculaire des Plantes, CNRS Unité Mixte de
Recherche 5004, Université Montpellier 2, Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, Ecole Nationale Supérieure d'Agronomie, 2 place Viala, F-34060
Montpellier Cedex 1, France.

Expression of a maize cDNA encoding a high mobility group (HMG) I/Y protein
enables growth of transformed yeast on a medium containing toxic nickel
concentrations. No difference in the nickel content was measured between yeast
cells expressing either the empty vector or the ZmHMG I/Y2 cDNA. The ZmHMG I/Y2
protein contains four AT hook motifs known to be involved in binding to the minor
groove of AT-rich DNA regions. HMG I/Y proteins may act as architectural elements
modifying chromatin structure. Indeed, a ZmHMG I/Y2-green fluorescent protein
fusion protein was observed in yeast nuclei. Nickel toxicity has been suggested
to occur through an epigenetic mechanism related to chromatin condensation and
DNA methylation, leading to the silencing of neighboring genes. Therefore, the
ZmHMG I/Y2 protein could prevent nickel toxicity by interfering with chromatin
structure. Yeast cell growth in the presence of nickel and yeast cells expressing
the ZmHMG I/Y2 cDNA increased telomeric URA3 gene silencing. Furthermore, ZmHMG
I/Y2 restored a wild-type level of nickel sensitivity to the yeast (Delta)rpd3
mutant. Therefore, nickel resistance of yeast cells expressing the ZmHMG I/Y2
cDNA is likely achieved by chromatin structure modification, restricting nickel
accessibility to DNA.

PMID: 11278346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(7):2485-95.

Critical role of the HMGI(Y) proteins in adipocytic cell growth and
differentiation.

Melillo RM(1), Pierantoni GM, Scala S, Battista S, Fedele M, Stella A, De Biasio 
MC, Chiappetta G, Fidanza V, Condorelli G, Santoro M, Croce CM, Viglietto G,
Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Dipartimento di Biologiae Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare,
Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Italy.

The high-mobility group I (HMGI) nonhistone chromosomal proteins HMGI(Y) and
HMGI-C have been implicated in defining chromatin structure and in regulating the
transcription of several genes. These proteins have been implicated in adipocyte 
homeostasis: a severe deficiency of fat tissue is found in mice with targeted
disruption of the HMGI-C locus, and lipomagenesis in humans is frequently
associated with somatic mutations of HMGI genes. The aim of this study was to
examine the role of HMGI(Y) proteins in adipocytic cell growth and
differentiation. First, we found that differentiation of the preadipocytic 3T3-L1
cell line caused early induction of HMGI(Y) gene expression. Suppression of
HMGI(Y) expression by antisense technology dramatically increased the growth rate
and impaired adipocytic differentiation in these cells. The process of adipogenic
differentiation involves the interplay of several transcription factors, among
which is the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family of proteins. These
factors are required for the transcriptional activation of adipocyte-specific
genes. We also tested the hypothesis that HMGI(Y) might participate in
transcriptional control of adipocyte-specific promoters. We found that HMGI(Y)
proteins bind C/EBPbeta in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, we show that HMGI(Y)
strongly potentiates the capacity of C/EBPbeta to transactivate the leptin
promoter, an adipose-specific promoter. Taken together, these results indicate
that the HMGI(Y) proteins play a critical role in adipocytic cell growth and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC86881
PMID: 11259597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. EMBO Rep. 2000 Nov;1(5):422-7.

An enhanceosome containing the Jun B/Fra-2 heterodimer and the HMG-I(Y)
architectural protein controls HPV 18 transcription.

Bouallaga I(1), Massicard S, Yaniv M, Thierry F.

Author information: 
(1)Département des biotechnologies, URA 1644 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Recent studies have reported new mechanisms that mediate the transcriptional
synergy of strong tissue-specific enhancers, involving the cooperative assembly
of higher-order nucleoprotein complexes called enhanceosomes. Here we show that
the HPV18 enhancer, which controls the epithelial-specific transcription of the
E6 and E7 transforming genes, exhibits characteristic features of these
structures. We used deletion experiments to show that a core enhancer element
cooperates, in a specific helical phasing, with distant essential factors binding
to the ends of the enhancer. This core sequence, binding a Jun B/Fra-2
heterodimer, cooperatively recruits the architectural protein HMG-I(Y) in a
nucleoprotein complex, where they interact with each other. Therefore, in HeLa
cells, HPV18 transcription seems to depend upon the assembly of an enhanceosome
containing multiple cellular factors recruited by a core sequence interacting
with AP1 and HMG-I(Y).

PMCID: PMC1083764
PMID: 11258482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2001 Feb;92(2):135-9.

Fusion of a sequence from HEI10 (14q11) to the HMGIC gene at 12q15 in a uterine
leiomyoma.

Mine N(1), Kurose K, Konishi H, Araki T, Nagai H, Emi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical
School, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki 211-8533, Japan.

Uterine leiomyoma, a benign smooth-muscle tumor of the myometrium, is the most
commonly encountered neoplasm in women of reproductive age. Band q15 of
chromosome 12 is often rearranged in benign mesenchymal tumors such as uterine
leiomyomas, and the HMGIC gene, encoding a protein of the high-mobility-group
(HMG), is present in that region. Using 3' rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(3'RACE) experiments, we isolated an ectopic sequence that was fused to HMGIC in 
a uterine leiomyoma. Cloning of the fusion cDNA identified a gene termed rising
dbl quote, left (low)homo sapiens enhancer of invasion 10" (HEI10) as the fusion 
partner. Radiation hybrid mapping revealed that the normal location of HEI10 is
at 14q11. In the fusion transcript the first two exons of the HMGIC gene, which
encode DNA-binding domains, were fused to the 3' portion of the HEI10 gene. This 
rearrangement implicates HMGIC in the tumorigenesis of uterine leiomyoma, and
suggests that its fusion HMGIC product may play a role in mesenchymal
differentiation.

PMID: 11223542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Hum Reprod Update. 2001 Jan-Feb;7(1):8-14.

Leiomyomata: heritability and cytogenetic studies.

Ligon AH(1), Morton CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Leiomyomata represent the most common gynaecological tumour in women of
reproductive age, and are the primary indication for hysterectomy in the USA.
Cytogenetic and genetic studies have, in recent years, advanced our understanding
of the aetiology of these tumours. Cytogenetic aberrations involving chromosomes 
6, 7, 12 and 14 constitute the major chromosomal abnormalities seen in
leiomyomata, and suggest the possibility that disruption or dysregulation of the 
genes HMGIC and HMGIY may contribute to the development of these tumours. Based
on the finding of a variety of chromosomal aberrations detected in fibroids,
other genes with fundamental roles in the pathobiology of uterine leiomyomata
await identification. Furthermore, the incidence of fibroids has been shown to be
greater in African-American women than in Caucasian women. The existence of a
heritability component of uterine leiomyomata has been further implicated by
twin-pair studies and the existence of familial forms of leiomyomata, both of
which suggest an inherited diathesis for leiomyomata formation. This paper will
review the cytogenetic aberrations and gene expression, with respect to their
contributions to the pathogenesis of leiomyomata, and also summarize the current 
understanding of heritability of these tumours.

PMID: 11212080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Carcinogenesis. 2001 Feb;22(2):251-6.

HMGI-C gene expression is not required for in vivo thyroid cell transformation.

Scala S(1), Portella G, Vitagliano D, Ledent C, Chiappetta G, Giancotti V, Dumont
J, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare c/o Centro di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli 'Federico II', via Pansini, 5, 80131 
Naples, Italy.

We have previously demonstrated that HMGI proteins are required for the
transformation of rat thyroid cells by v-mos and v-ras-Ki oncogenes. To determine
whether HMGI proteins are also required for in vivo thyroid carcinogenesis, mice 
carrying a disrupted HMGI-C gene (pygmy mice) were either treated with
radioactive iodine or crossed with transgenic mice carrying the E7 papilloma
virus oncogene under the transcriptional control of thyroglobulin gene promoter. 
The pygmy mice developed thyroid carcinomas with the same frequency as occurred
in wild-type mice without significant macroscopic and microscopic differences.
Therefore, these results indicate that HMGI-C gene expression is not required in 
in vivo thyroid cell malignant transformation.

PMID: 11181445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1865-70. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

Maintenance of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) oriP-based episomes requires EBV-encoded 
nuclear antigen-1 chromosome-binding domains, which can be replaced by
high-mobility group-I or histone H1.

Hung SC(1), Kang MS, Kieff E.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Virology, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

EBV-encoded nuclear antigen-1 (EBNA-1) binding to a cis-acting viral DNA element,
oriP, enables plasmids to persist in dividing human cells as multicopy episomes
that attach to chromosomes during mitosis. In investigating the significance of
EBNA-1 binding to mitotic chromosomes, we identified the basic domains of EBNA-1 
within amino acids 1-89 and 323-386 as critical for chromosome binding. In
contrast, the EBNA-1 C terminus (amino acids 379-641), which includes the nuclear
localization signal and DNA-binding domain, does not associate with mitotic
chromosomes or retain oriP plasmid DNA in dividing cell nuclei, but does enable
the accumulation of replicated oriP-containing plasmid DNA in transient
replication assays. The importance of chromosome association in episome
maintenance was evaluated by replacing EBNA-1 amino acids 1-378 with cell
proteins that have similar chromosome binding characteristics. High-mobility
group-I amino acids 1-90 or histone H1-2 could substitute for EBNA-1 amino acids 
1-378 in mediating more efficient accumulation of replicated oriP plasmid,
association with mitotic chromosomes, nuclear retention, and long-term episome
persistence. These data strongly support the hypothesis that mitotic chromosome
association is a critical factor for episome maintenance. The replacement of 60% 
of EBNA-1 with cell protein is a significant step toward eliminating the need for
noncellular protein sequences in the maintenance of episomal DNA in human cells.

PMCID: PMC29348
PMID: 11172042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2001 Mar;30(3):302-4.

Chromosomal rearrangements leading to abnormal splicing within intron 4 of HMGIC?

Hauke S(1), Rippe V, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Bremen, Germany.

Fusion of the high-mobility group protein gene HMGIC to other genes due to
chromosomal rearrangements occurs in a variety of human benign tumors. In
contrast to genes clearly derived from other chromosomes, some of the ectopic
sequences fused to HMGIC have been assigned to chromosome 12 by CASH (chromosome 
assignment using somatic cell hybrids) analyses and thus can be assumed either to
result from alternative splicing or to represent true ectopic sequences derived
from other genes on chromosome 12. In an attempt to identify the ectopic
sequences fused to this exon, we have sequenced the entire intron 4. Four of
seven ectopic sequences previously described to be fused to exon 4 of HMGIC in
different tumors were found to be located within intron 4 of the gene and thus
are due to abnormal splicing. As for a mechanism explaining this observation, it 
can be suggested that breakpoints of chromosomal aberrations not directly
disrupting HMGIC may induce small genomic alterations in their vicinity and thus 
facilitate abnormal splicing. The latter mechanism may underlie the development
of part of the neoplasms characterized by 12q14--15 rearrangements.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11170289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. FASEB J. 2001 Feb;15(2):492-500.

Transcriptional regulation of human insulin receptor gene by the high-mobility
group protein HMGI(Y).

Brunetti A(1), Manfioletti G, Chiefari E, Goldfine ID, Foti D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G. Salvatore, Cattedra di
Endocrinologia, Università degli Studi di Catanzaro Magna Graecia, Catanzaro,
Italy.

Erratum in
    FASEB J 2001 Apr;15(6):1115.

We have previously identified two closely related nuclear binding proteins that
specifically interact with two unique functional AT-rich sequences of the 5'
regulatory region of the human insulin receptor gene. Expression of these nuclear
binding proteins increases during myocyte and adipocyte differentiation, and in
other tissues appears to correlate with insulin receptor content. We have
hypothesized, therefore, that insulin receptor expression in the insulin target
tissues is regulated at least in part by these nuclear proteins. Here we show
data on purification and biochemical characterization of these DNA binding
proteins. Using a conventional chromatographic purification procedure combined
with electrophoresis mobility shift assay and immunoblot analyses, a unique
approximately 15 kDa protein, either identical to or highly related to the
architectural transcription factor HMGI(Y), has now been identified, suggesting
an essential role for HMGI(Y) in regulating insulin receptor gene transcription. 
Direct evidence of HMGI(Y) insulin receptor promoter interactions is provided by 
functional analysis with the CAT reporter gene and by hormone binding studies in 
cells expressing HMGI(Y) antisense RNA. In these experiments, antisense HMGI(Y)
specifically inhibits insulin receptor promoter function and insulin receptor
protein expression, indicating that HMGI(Y) is required for proper transcription 
of insulin receptor gene. Moreover, our data consistently support the hypothesis 
that a putative defect in this nuclear binding protein may cause insulin receptor
dysfunction with subsequent impairment of insulin signaling and action.

PMID: 11156965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 6;276(14):11354-61. Epub 2001 Jan 5.

A link between apoptosis and degree of phosphorylation of high mobility group A1a
protein in leukemic cells.

Diana F(1), Sgarra R, Manfioletti G, Rustighi A, Poletto D, Sciortino MT, Mastino
A, Giancotti V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, 34127 Trieste, Italy.

Nuclear phosphoprotein HMGA1a, high mobility group A1a, (previously HMGI) has
been investigated during apoptosis. A change in the degree of phosphorylation of 
HMGA1a has been observed during apoptosis induced in four leukemic cell lines
(HL60, K562, NB4, and U937) by drugs (etoposide, camptothecin) or herpes simplex 
virus type-1. Both hyper-phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation of HMGA1a have
been ascertained by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Hyper-phosphorylation (at least five phosphate groups/HMGA1a molecule) occurs at 
the early apoptotic stages and is probably related to HMGA1a displacement from
DNA and chromatin release from the nuclear scaffold. De-phosphorylation (one
phosphate or no phosphate groups/HMGA1a molecule) accompanies the later formation
of highly condensed chromatin in the apoptotic bodies. We report for the first
time a direct link between the degree of phosphorylation of HMGA1a protein and
apoptosis according to a process that involves the entire amount of HMGA1a
present in the cells and, consequently, whole chromatin. At the same time we
report that variously phosphorylated forms of HMGA1a protein are also
mono-methylated.

PMID: 11145960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Virol. 2001 Feb;75(3):1132-41.

Base-pair substitutions in avian sarcoma virus U5 and U3 long terminal repeat
sequences alter the process of DNA integration in vitro.

Hindmarsh P(1), Johnson M, Reeves R, Leis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

We have described a reconstituted avian sarcoma virus (ASV) concerted DNA
integration system with specially designed mini-donor DNA containing a supF
transcription unit, a supercoiled plasmid acceptor, purified bacterially
expressed ASV integrase (IN), and human high-mobility-group protein I(Y).
Integration in this system is dependent upon the mini-donor DNA having IN
recognition sequences at both ends and upon both ends of the same donor
integrating into the acceptor DNA. The integrated DNA product exhibits all of the
features associated with integration of viral DNA in vivo (P. Hindmarsh et al.,
J. Virol., 73:2994-3003, 1999). Individual integrants are isolated from bacteria 
containing drug-resistant markers with amber mutations. This system was used to
evaluate the importance of sequences in the terminal U5 and U3 long terminal
repeats at positions 5 and/or 6, adjacent to the conserved CA dinucleotide.
Base-pair substitutions introduced at these positions in U5 result in significant
reductions in recovered integrants from bacteria, due to increases in one-ended
insertion events. Among the recovered integrants from reactions with mutated U5
but not U3 IN recognition sequences were products that contain large deletions in
the acceptor DNA. Base-pair substitutions at positions 5 and 6 in U3 mostly
reduce the efficiency of integration of the modified donor. Together, these
results indicate that sequences directly 5' to the conserved CA dinucleotide are 
very important for the process of concerted DNA integration. Furthermore, IN
interacts with U3 and U5 termini differently, and aberrant end-processing events 
leading to nonconcerted DNA integration are more common in U5 than in U3.

PMCID: PMC114019
PMID: 11152486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Cancer. 2001 Jan 15;91(2):147-51.

High mobility group HMGI(Y) protein expression in human colorectal hyperplastic
and neoplastic diseases.

Chiappetta G(1), Manfioletti G, Pentimalli F, Abe N, Di Bonito M, Vento MT,
Giuliano A, Fedele M, Viglietto G, Santoro M, Watanabe T, Giancotti V, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Napoli, Naples, Italy.

HMGI(Y) proteins are overexpressed in experimental and human malignancies,
including colon, prostate and thyroid carcinomas. To determine at which step of
the carcinogenic process HMGI(Y) induction occurs, we analysed the expression of 
the HMGI(Y) proteins in hyperplastic, preneoplastic and neoplastic tissues of
colorectal origin by immunohistochemistry. All the colorectal carcinomas were
HMGI(Y)-positive, whereas no expression was detected in normal colon mucosa
tissue. HMGI(Y) expression in adenomas was closely correlated with the degree of 
cellular atypia. Only 2 of the 18 non-neoplastic polyps tested were
HMGI(Y)-positive. These data indicate that HMGI(Y) protein induction is
associated with the early stages of neoplastic transformation of colon cells and 
only rarely with colon cell hyperproliferation.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11146437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(2):575-94.

Architectural transcription factor HMGI(Y) promotes tumor progression and
mesenchymal transition of human epithelial cells.

Reeves R(1), Edberg DD, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State 
University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4660, USA. reevesr@mailwsu.edu

Numerous studies have demonstrated that overexpression or aberrant expression of 
the HMGI(Y) family of architectural transcription factors is frequently
associated with both neoplastic transformation of cells and metastatic tumor
progression. Little is known, however, about the molecular roles played by the
HMGI(Y) proteins in these events. Here we report that human breast epithelial
cells harboring tetracycline-regulated HMGI(Y) transgenes acquire the ability to 
form both primary and metastatic tumors in nude mice only when the transgenes are
actively expressed. Unexpectedly, the HMG-Y, rather than the HMG-I, isoform of
these proteins is the most effective elicitor of both neoplastic transformation
and metastatic progression in vivo. Furthermore, expression of either antisense
or dominant-negative HMGI(Y) constructs inhibits both the rate of proliferation
of tumor cells and their ability to grow anchorage independently in soft agar.
Array analysis of transcription profiles demonstrates that the HMG-I and HMG-Y
isoform proteins each modulate the expression of distinctive constellations of
genes known to be involved in signal transduction, cell proliferation, tumor
initiation, invasion, migration, induction of angiogenesis, and colonization.
Immunohistochemical analyses of tumors formed in nude mice indicate that many
have undergone an epithelial-mesenchymal transition in vivo. Together, these
findings demonstrate that overexpression of the HMGI(Y) proteins, more
specifically, the HMG-Y isoform protein, is causally associated with both
neoplastic transformation and metastatic progression and suggest that induction
of integrins and their signaling pathways may play significant molecular roles in
these biological events.

PMCID: PMC86623
PMID: 11134344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 23;276(12):9550-7. Epub 2000 Dec 20.

PU.1-mediated transcription is enhanced by HMG-I(Y)-dependent structural
mechanisms.

Lewis RT(1), Andreucci A, Nikolajczyk BS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Microbiology, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The ets transcription factor PU.1 is an important regulator of the immunoglobulin
heavy chain gene intronic enhancer, or mu enhancer. However, PU.1 is only one
component of the large multiprotein complex required for B cell-specific enhancer
activation. The transcriptional coactivator HMG-I(Y), a protein demonstrated to
physically interact with PU.1, increases PU.1 affinity for the mu enhancer muB
element, indicating that HMG-I(Y) may play a role in the transcriptionally active
mu enhanceosome. Increased PU.1 affinity is not mediated by HMG-I(Y)-induced
changes in DNA structure. Investigation of alternative mechanisms to explain the 
HMG-I(Y)-mediated increase in PU.1/mu enhancer binding demonstrated, by trypsin
and chymotrypsin mapping, that interaction between PU.1 and HMG-I(Y) in solution 
induces a structural change in PU.1. In the presence of HMG-I(Y) and wild-type mu
enhancer DNA, PU.1 becomes more chymotrypsin resistant, suggesting an additional 
change in PU.1 structure upon HMG-I(Y)-induced PU.1/DNA binding. From these
results, we suggest that increased DNA affinity under limiting PU.1
concentrations is mediated by an HMG-I(Y)-induced structural change in PU.1. In
functional assays, HMG-I(Y) further augments transcriptional synergy between PU.1
and another member of the ets family, Ets-1, indicating that HMG-I(Y) is a
functional component of the active enhancer complex. These studies suggest a new 
mechanism for HMG-I(Y)-mediated coactivation; HMG-I(Y) forms protein-protein
interactions with a transcription factor, which alters the three-dimensional
structure of the factor, resulting in enhanced DNA binding and transcriptional
activation. This mechanism may be important for transcriptional activation under 
conditions of limiting transcription factor concentration, such as at the low
levels of PU.1 expressed in B cells.

PMID: 11124259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Indian J Clin Biochem. 2001 Jan;16(1):72-6. doi: 10.1007/BF02867571.

Enhanced expression of HMG-Y proteins in proliferating tissues.

Singh D(1), Rajeswari MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 110029
New Delhi, India.

The high mobility group (HMG) proteins I and Y are well characterised non-histone
chromosomal proteins which bind to A-T rich regions of DNA and regulate gene
expression and/or DNA replication. A correlation has been demonstrated between
the increased expression of HMG-Y proteins and malignancy. However, it is not
known whether the expression of HMGs particularly, the Y group, is a function of 
proliferation rate. In the present study, we have used normal tissues of calf
testes, thymus and liver. The results show distinctly high expression of HMG-Y
proteins in testes than in thymus and the expression was practically undetectable
in liver. The results suggest that even in normal tissues there is a direct
correlation between the proliferation rate and the expression of the HMG-Y
proteins, which can partly explain its increased expression in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3453602
PMID: 23105295  [PubMed]


35. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 23;276(12):9366-74. Epub 2000 Dec 8.

A role for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in the transcriptional regulation of the
melanoma growth stimulatory activity (CXCL1) gene expression.

Nirodi C(1), NagDas S, Gygi SP, Olson G, Aebersold R, Richmond A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The melanoma growth stimulatory activity/growth-regulated protein, CXCL1, is
constitutively expressed at high levels during inflammation and progression of
melanocytes into malignant melanoma. It has been shown previously that CXCL1
overexpression in melanoma cells is due to increased transcription as well as
stability of the CXCL1 message. The transcription of CXCL1 is regulated through
several cis-acting elements including Sp1, NF-kappaB, HMGI(Y), and the immediate 
upstream region (IUR) element (nucleotides -94 to -78), which lies immediately
upstream to the nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) element. Previously, it has
been shown that the IUR is necessary for basal and cytokine-induced transcription
of the CXCL1 gene. UV cross-linking and Southwestern blot analyses indicate that 
the IUR oligonucleotide probe selectively binds a 115-kDa protein. In this study,
the IUR element has been further characterized. We show here that proximity of
the IUR element to the adjacent NF-kappaB element is critical to its function as 
a positive regulatory element. Using binding site oligonucleotide affinity
chromatography, we have selectively purified the 115-kDa IUR-F. Mass
spectrometry/mass spectrometry/matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/time
of flight spectroscopy and amino acid analysis as well as microcapillary reverse 
phase chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry identified 
this protein as the 114-kDa poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP1). Furthermore,
3-aminobenzamide, an inhibitor of PARP-specific ADP-ribosylation, inhibits CXCL1 
promoter activity and reduces levels of CXCL1 mRNA. The data point to the
possibility that PARP may be a coactivator of CXCL1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC3369623
PMID: 11112786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Nov;6(11):4300-6.

FRA-1 expression in hyperplastic and neoplastic thyroid diseases.

Chiappetta G(1), Tallini G, De Biasio MC, Pentimalli F, de Nigris F, Losito S,
Fedele M, Battista S, Verde P, Santoro M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Napoli, Fondazione Senatore Pascale, Naples, 
Italy.

fra-1 gene overexpression has been shown to represent a general event in thyroid 
cell transformation in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, inhibition of FRA-1 protein
synthesis by stable transfection with a fra-1 antisense construct significantly
reduces the malignant phenotype of the transformed thyroid cells, indicating a
pivotal role of the fra-1 gene product in the process of cellular transformation.
In the attempt to define the potential use of FRA-1 protein detection in the
diagnosis of thyroid diseases, we analyzed Fra-1 expression by a combination of
immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) assay in 174 samples 
of thyroid nodules (22 nodular hyperplasias, 102 follicular adenomas, 34
papillary carcinomas, 12 follicular carcinomas, and 4 anaplastic carcinomas)
representative of the spectrum of thyroid tumor pathology. FRA-1 protein was
abundant in all of the carcinoma samples (50/50, 100%), with an intense staining 
in the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Positive staining was also found in most of the
adenomas (90 of 102; 88%), but in this case, the staining was restricted to the
nucleus. Similar results were obtained from the analysis of thyroid goiters;
however, the number of positive cases is lower than adenomas (8 of 22; 36%);
moreover, the staining was not observed in all of the cells. Conversely, no FRA-1
protein was detectable in 12 normal thyroid tissue samples used as controls.
RT-PCR analysis confirmed a higher fra-1 expression in papillary and follicular
carcinomas compared with goiters and adenomas. fra-1 expression was also analyzed
on 10 fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) samples by RT-PCR. fra-1-specific mRNA
was detected in seven of the eight FNABs corresponding to thyroid nodules that
were eventually diagnosed as adenomas (three of four) and carcinomas (four of
four) after surgery. Conversely, no fra-1 gene expression was observed in two
FNABs derived from normal thyroid. Further studies are required before suggesting
FRA-1 protein detection as a useful tool for the diagnosis of hyperplastic and
neoplastic disorders of the thyroid gland.

PMID: 11106247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochemistry. 2000 Nov 28;39(47):14419-25.

Point mutations within AT-hook domains of the HMGI homologue HMGIYL1 affect
binding to gene promoter but not to four-way junction DNA.

Schwanbeck R(1), Gerharz M, Drung A, Rogalla P, Piekielko A, Blank C, Bullerdiek 
J, Wisniewski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Zoologisches Institut-Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität Göttingen, D-37073
Göttingen, Germany.

High-mobility group I/Y (HMGI/Y) proteins are chromosomal proteins involved in
gene and chromatin regulation. Elevated levels of HMGI/Y proteins were reported
in diverse malignant tumors, and rearrangements of their genes are casually
involved in the development of benign tumors. In humans, the chromosomal locus
Xp22 has been often found to be affected in diverse benign mesenchymal tumors.
Recent studies revealed that this region contains a retropseudogene HMGIYL1 which
potentially can be activated in a way of "exonization" upon aberrations involving
this region. The coding sequence of the HMGIY-L1 is highly homologous to the
HMGI(Y) gene. On the protein level, both HMGIYL1 and HMGI differ at few amino
acid residues, including their putative DNA-binding domains (DBDs). Here we have 
approached the question of whether the HMGIYL1 product would be able to adopt a
role of HMGI in the context of binding to gene promoters and chromatin.
Comparative binding studies, employing protein footprinting technique, revealed
that HMGIYL1 has lost the ability to bind to the promoter of the interferon beta 
gene, but retained its high affinity for the four-way junction DNA. Our results
stress the importance of particular residues within the DBDs for DNA binding and 
demonstrate that tight binding of HMGI/Y proteins to the four-way junction DNA
can be achieved in alternative ways. The binding of HMGIYL1 to four-way junction 
DNA suggests that activation of the HMGIYL1 gene would yield a protein sharing
some binding properties with HMG1-box proteins and histone H1. Thus, the HMGIYL1 
could interplay together with these components in chromatin regulation.

PMID: 11087394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Br J Cancer. 2000 Dec;83(11):1503-9.

Expression of the HMGI(Y) gene products in human neuroblastic tumours correlates 
with differentiation status.

Giannini G(1), Kim CJ, Di Marcotullio L, Manfioletti G, Cardinali B, Cerignoli F,
Ristori E, Zani M, Frati L, Screpanti I, Guilino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza,
Rome 00161, Italy.

HMGI and HMGY are splicing variants of the HMGI(Y) gene and together with HMGI-C,
belong to a family of DNA binding proteins involved in maintaining active
chromatin conformation and in the regulation of gene transcription. The
expression of the HMGI(Y) gene is maximal during embryonic development, declines 
in adult differentiated tissues and is reactivated in most transformed cells in
vitro and in many human cancers in vivo. The HMGI(Y) genomic locus is frequently 
rearranged in mesenchymal tumours, suggesting a biological role for HMGI(Y) gene 
products in tumour biology. HMGIs are both target and modulators of retinoic acid
activity. In fact, HMGI(Y) gene expression is differentially regulated by
retinoic acid in retinoid-sensitive and -resistant neuroblastoma cells, while
HMGI-C participates in conferring retinoic acid resistance in some neuroblastoma 
cells. In this paper we show that HMGI and HMGY isoforms are equally regulated by
retinoic acid in neuroblastoma cell lines at both RNA and protein levels. More
importantly our immunohistochemical analysis shows that, although HMGI(Y) is
expressed in all neuroblastic tumours, consistently higher levels are observed in
less differentiated neuroblastomas compared to more differentiated
ganglioneuromas, indicating that HMGI(Y) expression should be evaluated as a
potential diagnostic and prognostic marker in neuroblastic tumours.

Copyright 2000 Cancer Research Campaign.

PMCID: PMC2363413
PMID: 11076660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Plant Sci. 2000 Nov 6;159(2):197-204.

Isolation of a Brassica napus L. cDNA encoding a putative high-mobility-group HMG
I/Y protein.

Masek T(1), Smykal P, Janotova I I, Honys D, Capkova V V, Pechan PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Physiology, Faculty of Science, Charles University,
Vinicna 5, CZ 128 44, Prague, Czech Republic

A cDNA encoding a high-mobility-group protein has been isolated from a
microspore-specific library of Brassica napus. The 930 bp cDNA contains a 612 bp 
open reading frame encoding a protein of 203 amino acids residues exhibiting
significant homology to HMG-I/Y protein from Arabidopsis thaliana (62%). The
predicted protein contains four copies of the 'AT-hook' motif which is involved
in binding A/T-rich DNA. Southern blotting indicates that the HMG-I/Y gene is a
single-copy gene in B. napus. Transcription of the HMG-I/Y gene was detected in
all tissues examined, with the highest expression in pollen-derived embryos. In
situ localization studies of flower organs indicate the transcript to be
preferentially located in petals and sepals. Subcellular localization analysis
performed during pollen development showed that the transcript of the HMG-I/Y
gene is predominantly associated with polysomes.

PMID: 11074272  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. J Virol. 2000 Dec;74(23):10965-74.

Retroviral cDNA integration: stimulation by HMG I family proteins.

Li L(1), Yoder K, Hansen MS, Olvera J, Miller MD, Bushman FD.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California 92037,
USA.

To replicate, a retrovirus must synthesize a cDNA copy of the viral RNA genome
and integrate that cDNA into a chromosome of the host. We have investigated the
role of a host cell cofactor, HMG I(Y) protein, in integration of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and Moloney murine leukemia virus (MoMLV)
cDNA. Previously we reported that HMG I(Y) cofractionates with HIV-1
preintegration complexes (PICs) isolated from freshly infected cells. PICs
depleted of required components by treatment with high concentrations of salt
could be reconstituted by addition of purified HMG I(Y) in vitro. Here we report 
studies using immunoprecipitation that indicate that HMG I(Y) is associated with 
MoMLV preintegration complexes. In mechanistic studies, we show for both HIV-1
and MoMLV that each HMG I(Y) monomer must contain multiple DNA binding domains to
stimulate integration by HMG I(Y)-depleted PICs. We also find that HMG I(Y) can
condense model HIV-1 or MoMLV cDNA in vitro as measured by stimulation of
intermolecular ligation. This reaction, like reconstitution of integration,
depends on the presence of multiple DNA binding domains in each HMG I(Y) monomer.
These data suggest that binding of multivalent HMG I(Y) monomers to multiple cDNA
sites compacts retroviral cDNA, thereby promoting formation of active
integrase-cDNA complexes.

PMCID: PMC113176
PMID: 11069991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2000 Sep;121(2):172-80.

A novel high mobility group protein gene is a candidate for Xp22 abnormalities in
uterine leiomyomas and other benign tumors.

Blank C(1), Rogalla P, Tran KH, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen, Bremen,
Germany.

Because genes of the high mobility group protein family HMGI(Y) are known to take
part in the development of a variety of benign solid tumors, the aim of the
present study was to search for further members of that family in the human
genome. Analysis for HMGI(Y)-related sequences by the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) with the use of cDNA-specific primers offered evidence for HMGIY-like
sequences, whereas HMGIC-related sequences were apparently absent. By chromosomal
assignment of somatic cell hybrids PCR, HMGIY cDNA-related sequences were
detected on seven chromosomes. Positive clones were obtained by screening of a
P1-derived artificial chromosome library and mapped by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. One of these clones assigned to Xp22.1 was chosen for further
analysis because Xp22 is a target region for clonal aberrations in benign solid
tumors. Sequence analysis of a DNA fragment of this clone, designated as HMGIYL1,
revealed a 94.4% homology to the coding region of HMGIY. Within the HMGIYL1
sequence, no nucleotide sequence divergences leading to a frame shift or a new
termination codon compared to HMGIY were found, and a TATA-box-like motif 5' of
it was detected. By reverse transcriptase PCR experiments with the use of HeLa
cells and human fetal tissue, HMGIYL1 expression was not detectable.
Nevertheless, if not active by itself, it is possible that HMGIYL1 may become
activated by chromosomal rearrangements of Xp22 observed in benign solid tumors.

PMID: 11063803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 12;276(2):1653-9.

Down-regulation of high mobility group-I(Y) protein contributes to the inhibition
of nitric-oxide synthase 2 by transforming growth factor-beta1.

Pellacani A(1), Wiesel P, Razavi S, Vasilj V, Feinberg MW, Chin MT, Reeves R,
Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular and Pulmonary and Critical Care Divisions, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The inducible isoform of nitric-oxide synthase (NOS2) catalyzes the production of
nitric oxide (NO), which participates in the pathophysiology of systemic
inflammatory diseases such as sepsis. NOS2 is transcriptionally up-regulated by
endotoxin and inflammatory cytokines, and down-regulated by transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta1. Recently we have shown that high mobility group (HMG)-I(Y)
protein, an architectural transcription factor, contributes to NOS2 gene
transactivation by inflammatory mediators. The aim of the present study was to
determine whether regulation of HMG-I(Y) by TGF-beta1 contributes to the
TGF-beta1-mediated suppression of NOS2. By Northern blot analysis, we show that
TGF-beta1 decreased cytokine-induced HMG-I(Y) mRNA levels in vascular smooth
muscle cells and macrophages in vitro and in vivo. Western analysis confirmed the
down-regulation of HMG-I(Y) protein by TGF-beta1. To determine whether the
down-regulation of HMG-I(Y) contributed to a decrease in NOS2 gene
transactivation by TGF-beta1, we performed cotransfection experiments.
Overexpression of HMG-I(Y) was able to restore cytokine inducibility of the NOS2 
promoter that was suppressed by TGF-beta1. The effect of TGF-beta1 on NOS2 gene
transactivation was not related to a decrease in binding of HMG-I(Y) to the
promoter of the NOS2 gene, but due to a decrease in endogenous HMG-I(Y) protein. 
These data provide the first evidence that cytokine-induced HMG-I(Y) can be
down-regulated by TGF-beta1. This down-regulation of HMG-I(Y) contributes to the 
TGF-beta1-mediated decrease in NOS2 gene transactivation by proinflammatory
stimuli.

PMID: 11056164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 26;276(4):2742-51. Epub 2000 Oct 30.

Human p8 is a HMG-I/Y-like protein with DNA binding activity enhanced by
phosphorylation.

Encinar JA(1), Mallo GV, Mizyrycki C, Giono L, Gonzalez-Ros JM, Rico M, Cánepa E,
Moreno S, Neira JL, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular y Celular, Universidad Miguel Hernández, 03202,
Elche, Alicante, Spain.

We have studied the biochemical features, the conformational preferences in
solution, and the DNA binding properties of human p8 (hp8), a nucleoprotein whose
expression is affected during acute pancreatitis. Biochemical studies show that
hp8 has properties of the high mobility group proteins, HMG-I/Y. Structural
studies have been carried out by using circular dichroism (near- and
far-ultraviolet), Fourier transform infrared, and NMR spectroscopies. All the
biophysical probes indicate that hp8 is monomeric (up to 1 mm concentration) and 
partially unfolded in solution. The protein seems to bind DNA weakly, as shown by
electrophoretic gel shift studies. On the other hand, hp8 is a substrate for
protein kinase A (PKA). The phosphorylated hp8 (PKAhp8) has a higher content of
secondary structure than the nonphosphorylated protein, as concluded by Fourier
transform infrared studies. PKAhp8 binds DNA strongly, as shown by the changes in
circular dichroism spectra, and gel shift analysis. Thus, although there is not a
high sequence homology with HMG-I/Y proteins, hp8 can be considered as a
HMG-I/Y-like protein.

PMID: 11056169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Virol. 2000 Nov;74(22):10523-34.

High-mobility-group protein I can modulate binding of transcription factors to
the U5 region of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 proviral promoter.

Henderson A(1), Bunce M, Siddon N, Reeves R, Tremethick DJ.

Author information: 
(1)The John Curtin School of Medical Research, the Australian National
University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory 2601, Australia.

HMG I/Y appears to be a multifunctional protein that relies on in its ability to 
interact with DNA in a structure-specific manner and with DNA, binding
transcriptional activators via distinct protein-protein interaction surfaces. To 
investigate the hypothesis that HMG I/Y may have a role in human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) expression, we have analyzed whether HMG I/Y interacts with 
the 5' long terminal repeat and whether this interaction can modulate
transcription factor binding. Using purified recombinant HMG I, we have
identified several high-affinity binding sites which overlap important
transcription factor binding sites. One of these HMG I binding sites coincides
with an important binding site for AP-1 located downstream of the transcriptional
start site, in the 5' untranslated region at the boundary of a positioned
nucleosome. HMG I binding to this composite site inhibits the binding of
recombinant AP-1. Consistent with this observation, using nuclear extracts
prepared from Jurkat T cells, we show that HMG I (but not HMG Y) is strongly
induced upon phorbol myristate acetate stimulation and this induced HMG I appears
to both selectively inhibit the binding of basal DNA-binding proteins and enhance
the binding of an inducible AP-1 transcription factor to this AP-1 binding site. 
We also report the novel finding that a component present in this inducible AP-1 
complex is ATF-3. Taken together, these results argue that HMG I may play a
fundamental role in HIV-1 expression by determining the nature of transcription
factor-promoter interactions.

PMCID: PMC110927
PMID: 11044097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Oct;108 Suppl 5:803-9.

Structure and function of the HMGI(Y) family of architectural transcription
factors.

Reeves R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry/Biophysics, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4660, USA. reevesr@mail.wsu.edu

The three known members of the HMGI(Y) family of high-mobility group (HMG)
mammalian nonhistone nuclear proteins (HMG-I, HMG-Y, and HMGI-C) are thought to
participate in numerous biological processes (transcription, replication,
retroviral integration, genetic recombination, etc.) by virtue of their ability
to recognize and alter the structure of both DNA and chromatin substrates. In
vitro and in vivo the HMGI(Y) proteins preferentially bind to the narrow minor
groove of stretches of AT-rich DNA by means of highly conserved peptide motifs
called AT hooks. In vitro the HMGI(Y) proteins also have the ability to
selectively bind to distorted DNA structures and to bend, unwind, and supercoil
DNA substrates. Additionally, the HMGI(Y) proteins have the ability to interact
with various protein transcription factors both in vitro and in vivo. Specific
protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions permit the HMGI(Y) proteins to
function as architectural transcription factors that regulate gene expression in 
vivo by controlling the formation of stereospecific multiprotein complexes on the
AT-rich regions of certain gene promoters. Transcriptional overexpression of the 
HMGI(Y) genes is highly correlated with both cancerous transformation and
increased metastatic potential of a number of different cancers, and chromosomal 
rearrangements involving AT-hook motifs have been associated with various types
of benign human mesenchymal tumors. The levels of HMGI(Y) proteins in human cells
have been proposed to be sensitive diagnostic indicators of both neoplastic
transformation and metastatic progression. Drugs based on the AT-hook motif offer
the potential for development of new tumor therapeutic reagents.

PMID: 11035986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Chem Biol. 2000 Oct;7(10):805-12.

FR900482 class of anti-tumor drugs cross-links oncoprotein HMG I/Y to DNA in
vivo.

Beckerbauer L(1), Tepe JJ, Cullison J, Reeves R, Williams RM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of the high-mobility group, HMG I/Y, family of
chromatin oncoproteins has been implicated as a clinical diagnostic marker for
both neoplastic cellular transformation and increased metastatic potential of
several human cancers. These minor groove DNA-binding oncoproteins are thus an
attractive target for anti-tumor chemotherapy. FR900482 represents a new class of
anti-tumor agents that bind to the minor groove of DNA and exhibit greatly
reduced host toxicity compared to the structurally related mitomycin C class of
anti-tumor drugs. We report covalent cross-linking of DNA to HMG I/Y by FR900482 
in vivo which represents the first example of a covalent DNA-drug-protein
cross-link with a minor groove-binding oncoprotein and a potential novel
mechanism through which these compounds exert their anti-tumor activity.
RESULTS: Using a modified chromatin immunoprecipitation procedure, fragments of
DNA that have been covalently cross-linked by FR900482 to HMG I/Y proteins in
vivo were polymerase chain reaction-amplified, isolated and characterized. The
nuclear samples from control cells were devoid of DNA fragments whereas the
nuclear samples from cells treated with FR900482 contained DNA fragments which
were cross-linked by the drug to the minor groove-binding HMG I/Y proteins in
vivo. Additional control experiments established that the drug also cross-linked 
other non-oncogenic minor groove-binding proteins (HMG-1 and HMG-2) but did not
cross-link major groove-binding proteins (Elf-1 and NFkappaB) in vivo. Our
results are the first demonstration that FR900482 cross-links a number of minor
groove-binding proteins in vivo and suggests that the cross-linking of the HMG
I/Y oncoproteins may participate in the mode of efficacy as a chemotherapeutic
agent.
CONCLUSIONS: We have illustrated that the FR class of anti-tumor antibiotics,
represented in this study by FR900482, is able to produce covalent cross-links
between the HMG I/Y oncoproteins and DNA in vivo. The ability of this class of
compounds to cross-link the HMG I/Y proteins in the minor groove of DNA
represents the first demonstration of drug-induced cross-linking of a specific
cancer-related protein to DNA in living cells. We have also demonstrated that
FR900482 cross-links other minor groove-binding proteins (HMG-1 and HMG-2 in the 
present study) in vivo; however, since HMG I/Y is the only minor groove-binding
oncoprotein presently known, it is possible that these non-histone chromatin
proteins are among the important in vivo targets of this family of drugs. These
compounds have already been assessed as representing a compelling clinical
replacement for mitomycin C due to their greatly reduced host toxicity and
superior DNA interstrand cross-linking efficacy. The capacity of FR900482 to
cross-link the HMG I/Y oncoprotein with nuclear DNA in vivo potentially
represents a significant elucidation of the anti-tumor efficacy of this family of
anticancer agents.

PMID: 11033083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):1984-92. Epub 2000 Oct 16.

Distinct organization of DNA complexes of various HMGI/Y family proteins and
their modulation upon mitotic phosphorylation.

Piekielko A(1), Drung A, Rogalla P, Schwanbeck R, Heyduk T, Gerharz M, Bullerdiek
J, Wisniewski JR.

Author information: 
(1)III. Zoologisches Institut-Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität Göttingen,
D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins HMGI, HMGY, HMGI-C, and Chironomus HMGI are
DNA-binding proteins thought to modulate the assembly and the function of
transcriptional complexes. Each of these proteins contains three DNA-binding
domains (DBD), properties of which appear to be regulated by phosphorylation.
High levels of these proteins are characteristic for rapidly dividing cells in
embryonic tissues and tumors. On the basis of their occurrence, specific
functions for each of these proteins have been postulated. In this study we
demonstrate differences in the nature of contacts of these proteins with promoter
region of the interferon-beta gene. We show that HMGI and HMGY interact with this
DNA via three DBDs, whereas HMGI-C and Chironomus HMGI bind to this DNA using
only two domains. Phosphorylation of HMGY protein by Cdc2 kinase leads to
impairing of contacts between the N-terminally located DBD and a single promoter 
element. The perturbations in the architecture of the protein.DNA complexes
involve changes in the degree of unbending of the intrinsically bent IFNbeta
promoter. Our results provide first insights into the molecular basis of
functional specificity of proteins of the HMGI/Y family and their regulation by
phosphorylation.

PMID: 11034995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Neurosci. 2000 Oct 1;20(19):7317-24.

The architectural transcription factor high mobility group I(Y) participates in
photoreceptor-specific gene expression.

Chau KY(1), Munshi N, Keane-Myers A, Cheung-Chau KW, Tai AK, Manfioletti G, Dorey
CK, Thanos D, Zack DJ, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Schepens Eye Research Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

The nonhistone chromosomal proteins high mobility group I(Y) [HMG I(Y)] have been
shown to function as architectural transcription factors facilitating
enhanceosome formation on a variety of mammalian promoters. Specifically, they
have been shown to act as a "molecular glue" mediating protein-protein and
protein-DNA contacts within the enhanceosome complex. HMG I(Y) proteins are
expressed at high levels in embryonic and transformed cells and have been
implicated in transcriptional regulation in these cells. Terminally
differentiated cells, however, have been reported to express only minimal, if
any, HMG I(Y). In contrast to these observations, we show here that adult mouse
retinal photoreceptors, which are terminally differentiated cells, express high
levels of these proteins. Using retinoblastoma cells as an approximate model, we 
further demonstrate in transiently transfected cells that inhibition of HMG I(Y) 
expression and mutation of HMG I(Y) binding sites significantly reduce rhodopsin 
promoter activity. DNase I footprint analysis indicates that HMG I protein
interacts with a discrete site within the rhodopsin proximal promoter. This site 
overlaps with the binding site for Crx, a paired-like homeodomain transcription
factor that is essential for photoreceptor functioning and that when mutated
causes several forms of human photoreceptor degeneration. Both biochemical and
functional experiments demonstrate that HMG I(Y) physically associate with Crx
and that their interaction with DNA is required for high-level transcription of
the rhodopsin gene. These data provide the first demonstration that HMG I(Y) can 
be important for gene activation in terminally differentiated cells.

PMID: 11007889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39287-95.

Modeling the late steps in HIV-1 retroviral integrase-catalyzed DNA integration.

Brin E(1), Yi J, Skalka AM, Leis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Model oligodeoxyribonucleotide substrates representing viral DNA integration
intermediates with a gap and a two-nucleotide 5' overhang were used to examine
late steps in human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) retroviral integrase
(IN)-catalyzed DNA integration in vitro. HIV-1 or avian myeloblastosis virus
reverse transcriptase (RT) were capable of quantitatively filling in the gap to
create a nicked substrate but did not remove the 5' overhang. HIV-1 IN also
failed to remove the 5' overhang with the gapped substrate. However, with a
nicked substrate formed by RT, HIV-1 IN removed the overhang and covalently
closed the nick in a disintegration-like reaction. The efficiency of this closure
reaction was very low. Such closure was not stimulated by the addition of
HMG-(I/Y), suggesting that this protein only acts during the early processing and
joining reactions. Addition of Flap endonuclease-1, a nuclease known to remove 5'
overhangs, abolished the closure reaction catalyzed by IN. A series of base pair 
inversions, introduced into the HIV-1 U5 long terminal repeat sequence adjacent
to and/or including the conserved CA dinucleotide, produced no or only a small
decrease in the HIV-1 IN-dependent strand closure reaction. These same mutations 
caused a significant decrease in the efficiency of concerted DNA integration by a
modified donor DNA in vitro, suggesting that recognition of the ends of the long 
terminal repeat sequence is required only in the early steps of DNA integration. 
Finally, a combination of HIV-1 RT, Flap endonuclease-1, and DNA ligase is
capable of quantitatively forming covalently closed DNA with these model
substrates. These results support the hypothesis that cellular enzyme(s) may
catalyze the late steps of retroviral DNA integration.

PMID: 11006285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Eur J Cancer. 2000 Oct;36(15):1944-8.

Detection of HMGI-C in the peripheral blood of breast cancer patients.

Sezer O(1), Langelotz C, Blohmer JU, Schmid P, Akrivakis K, Possinger K.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Charité, Department of Oncology and Haematology, Humboldt
Universität, 10098 Berlin, Germany. sezer@charite.de

The human high mobility group (HMG) protein (HMGI-C) belongs to the HMG family of
architectural transcription factors which are expressed only during embryonic
development, and not in normal adult tissues. Considerable interest has recently 
been shown in HMGI-C and its expression in a variety of neoplastic tissues,
whereas no expression could be found in normal tissue adjacent to the tumour. So 
far, no data is available on the expression of HMGI-C in the peripheral blood of 
patients with solid tumours. In this study we analysed the expression of HMGI-C
in peripheral blood samples of 61 patients with breast cancer and 35 healthy
donors using a haemi-nested reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) technique. No HMGI-C could be detected in any of the healthy donors'
samples. In the three prognostic groups according to the Nottingham Prognostic
Score, the proportion of patients expressing HMGI-C differed significantly
(P=0.001). The worse the prognosis was, the more patients expressed HMGI-C. This 
is the first report on the expression of HMGI-C in the peripheral blood of
patients with breast cancer and our data suggest that this expression is
correlated with a poor prognosis.

PMID: 11000575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Mol Med. 2000 Oct;6(4):409-19.

High mobility group I/Y: multifunctional chromosomal proteins causally involved
in tumor progression and malignant transformation (review).

Wisniewski JR(1), Schwanbeck R.

Author information: 
(1)III. Zoologisches Institut-Entwicklungsbiologie, Universitat Gottingen,
Humboldtallee 34A, D-37073 Gottingen, Germany. jwisnie@gwdg.de

The family of chromosomal high mobility group I/Y consists of proteins involved
in gene regulation and chromatin organization. A common feature of these proteins
is the presence of multiple copies of DNA binding domains (DBD), the so-called
AT-hooks. Bi- or tridendate interaction of two or three DBDs with appropriately
spaced AT-rich DNA tracts forms the basis of binding specificity of the HMGI/Y
proteins. Binding of HMGI/Y to structure-specific targets within the minor groove
affects the DNA conformation and facilitates binding of transcription factors.
Phosphorylation by casein kinase 2, Cdc2, and other kinases attenuates the
DNA-binding affinity of HMGI/Y and the extent of perturbation in DNA structure
induced by HMGI/Y-binding. In the human genome, two genes coding for HMGI/Y
proteins, HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C, have been found. Both are abundantly transcribed in
early embryonic and undifferentiated cells. An over-expression of the HMGI/Y
proteins is characteristic for malignant tumors, suggesting a relation between
high titers of the proteins and neoplastic phenotype. Defects in the HMGI-C gene 
have been found in a variety of benign tumors, such as uterine leiomyomas,
endometrial polyps, lipomas, and pulmonary chondroid hamartomas.

PMID: 10998430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Res. 2000 Aug 1;60(15):4256-61.

The oncogenic properties of the HMG-I gene family.

Wood LJ(1), Maher JF, Bunton TE, Resar LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The HMG-I gene family encodes high mobility group proteins originally identified 
as nonhistone chromosomal binding proteins. HMG-I and -Y proteins are
alternatively spliced products of the same mRNA; HMG-C is encoded by a separate
gene. The HMG-I proteins function as architectural chromatin-binding proteins
that bind to the narrow groove of AT-rich regions in double-stranded DNA. Recent 
studies indicate an important role for HMG-I proteins in regulating gene
expression. Moreover, increased expression of the HMG-I, -Y, and -C proteins
correlates with cellular proliferation and neoplastic transformation in several
cell types and human cancers. Previous work from our laboratory has shown that
HMG-I is a direct c-Myc target gene that is involved in Myc-mediated neoplastic
transformation. In this report, we show that increased expression of HMG-Y or -C 
leads to transformation with anchorage-independent cell growth in two
experimental cell lines in a manner similar to that of HMG-I or c-Myc. Moreover, 
Rat la cells overexpressing HMG-Y or -C form tumors in nude mice analogous to Rat
1a cells overexpressing HMG-I or c-Myc. Distant metastases developed in animals
injected with cells overexpressing HMG-I or -C. Our findings suggest that the
HMG-I gene family is involved in neoplastic transformation and may represent a
new family of oncogenes important in the pathogenesis of several human cancers.

PMID: 10945639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Bioorg Med Chem. 2000 Jun;8(6):1331-42.

Observations on the covalent cross-linking of the binding domain (BD) of the high
mobility group I/Y (HMG I/Y) proteins to DNA by FR66979.

Rajski SR(1), Williams RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80523, USA.

FR66979, a drug closely related to the mitomycin C class of antitumor
antibiotics, is shown to covalently cross-link DNA to the DNA-binding domain of
the High Mobility Group I/Y (HMG I/Y) DNA-binding proteins in the minor groove.

PMID: 10896111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(15):5490-502.

HMG-I/Y, a new c-Myc target gene and potential oncogene.

Wood LJ(1), Mukherjee M, Dolde CE, Xu Y, Maher JF, Bunton TE, Williams JB, Resar 
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The HMG-I/Y gene encodes the HMG-I and HMG-Y proteins, which function as
architectural chromatin binding proteins important in the transcriptional
regulation of several genes. Although increased expression of the HMG-I/Y
proteins is associated with cellular proliferation, neoplastic transformation,
and several human cancers, the role of these proteins in the pathogenesis of
malignancy remains unclear. To better understand the role of these proteins in
cell growth and transformation, we have been studying the regulation and function
of HMG-I/Y. The HMG-I/Y promoter was cloned, sequenced, and subjected to
mutagenesis analysis. A c-Myc-Max consensus DNA binding site was identified as an
element important in the serum stimulation of HMG-I/Y. The oncoprotein c-Myc and 
its protein partner Max bind to this site in vitro and activate transcription in 
transfection experiments. HMG-I/Y expression is stimulated by c-Myc in a
Myc-estradiol receptor cell line in the presence of the protein synthesis
inhibitor cycloheximide, indicating that HMG-I/Y is a direct c-Myc target gene.
HMG-I/Y induction is decreased in Myc-deficient fibroblasts. HMG-I/Y protein
expression is also increased in Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines, which are known to
have increased c-Myc protein. Like Myc, increased expression of HMG-I protein
leads to the neoplastic transformation of both Rat 1a fibroblasts and CB33 cells.
In addition, Rat 1a cells overexpressing HMG-I protein form tumors in nude mice. 
Decreasing HMG-I/Y proteins using an antisense construct abrogates transformation
in Burkitt's lymphoma cells. These findings indicate that HMG-I/Y is a c-Myc
target gene involved in neoplastic transformation and a member of a new class of 
potential oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC86000
PMID: 10891489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochemistry. 2000 Jul 18;39(28):8333-46.

Differential in vivo modifications of the HMGI(Y) nonhistone chromatin proteins
modulate nucleosome and DNA interactions.

Banks GC(1), Li Y, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4660, USA.

The HMGI(Y) family of "high mobility group" nonhistone proteins are architectural
transcription factors whose overexpression is highly correlated with both
cancerous transformation and increased malignancy and metastatic potential of
tumors in vivo. Here we report on the types of posttranslational modifications
found in vivo on the HMG-I and HMG-Y proteins isolated from two human breast
epithelial cell lines, MCF-7 and MCF-7/PKC-alpha, that represent different stages
of neoplastic progression. The MCF-7 cell line exhibits many characteristics of
normal breast epithelial cells and does not form tumors when injected into nude
mice, whereas the MCF-7/PKC-alpha cell line, a derivative of MCF-7 that expresses
a transgene coding for the enzyme protein kinase C-alpha (PKC-alpha), is both
malignant and highly metastatic. Using MALDI mass spectrometry, we show that the 
HMG-Y protein is more highly modified than the HMG-I protein in both the MCF-7
and the MCF-7/PKC-alpha cells. Significantly, the HMG-Y protein isolated from the
highly metastatic MCF-7/PKC-alpha cells possesses a unique constellation of
phosphorylations, methylations, and acetylations not found on the HMG-I protein
isolated from either the MCF-7 or MCF-7/PKC-alpha cells. We further demonstrate
that some of the same amino acid residues phosphorylated on recombinant HMGI(Y)
proteins by purified PKC in vitro are also phosphorylated on the HMG-I(Y)
proteins isolated from MCF-7/PKC-alpha cells, suggesting that PKC phosphorylates 
these proteins in vivo. Quantitative substrate binding analyses indicate that the
biochemical modifications present on the HMG-I and HMG-Y proteins differentially 
influence the ability of these proteins to interact with both A.T-rich DNA
substrates and nucleosome core particles in vitro, suggesting a similar
modulation of such binding affinities in vivo. To our knowledge, this is the
first demonstration of differences in the types of in vivo biochemical
modifications found on the HMG-I and HMG-Y proteins in cells and also the first
experimental evidence suggesting a possible linkage between such
posttranslational modifications and the neoplastic potential of cells.

PMID: 10889043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jul 1;28(13):2541-50.

HMG I/Y regulates long-range enhancer-dependent transcription on DNA and
chromatin by changes in DNA topology.

Bagga R(1), Michalowski S, Sabnis R, Griffith JD, Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The nature of nuclear structures that are required to confer transcriptional
regulation by distal enhancers is unknown. We show that long-range
enhancer-dependent beta-globin transcription is achieved in vitro upon addition
of the DNA architectural protein HMG I/Y to affinity-enriched holo RNA polymerase
II complexes. In this system, HMG I/Y represses promoter activity in the absence 
of an associated enhancer and strongly activates transcription in the presence of
a distal enhancer. Importantly, nucleosome formation is neither necessary for
long-range enhancer regulation in vitro nor sufficient without the addition of
HMG I/Y. Thus, the modulation of DNA structure by HMG I/Y is a critical regulator
of long-range enhancer function on both DNA and chromatin-assembled genes.
Electron microscopic analysis reveals that HMG I/Y binds cooperatively to
preferred DNA sites to generate distinct looped structures in the presence or
absence of the beta-globin enhancer. The formation of DNA topologies that enable 
distal enhancers to strongly regulate gene expression is an intrinsic property of
HMG I/Y and naked DNA.

PMCID: PMC102711
PMID: 10871404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cancer Res. 2000 Jun 15;60(12):3117-22.

Pancreatic duct cell carcinomas express high levels of high mobility group I(Y)
proteins.

Abe N(1), Watanabe T, Masaki T, Mori T, Sugiyama M, Uchimura H, Fujioka Y,
Chiappetta G, Fusco A, Atomi Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

The high mobility group I (HMGI) family of proteins in mammals belongs to a group
of nonhistone nuclear proteins known as architectural transcriptional factors.
They function in vivo as both structural components of chromatin and auxiliary
gene transcription factors. In an earlier study (N. Abe et al, Cancer Res., 59:
1169-1174, 1999), we demonstrated that the expression level of the HMGI(Y)
gene/proteins was significantly increased in colorectal adenocarcinoma and
colorectal adenoma with severe cellular atypia. In the current study, we analyzed
HMGI(Y) expression in several human pancreatic lesions to investigate (a) whether
HMGI(Y) overexpression is also observed in pancreatic carcinoma, and (b) the role
of HMGI(Y) in the diagnosis of pancreatic neoplasms. To this end, HMGI(Y)
expression was determined at the protein level by immunohistochemistry using a
HMGI(Y)-specific antibody in 6 surgically resected specimens of nonneoplastic
tissue (4 specimens of normal pancreatic tissue and 2 specimens of chronic
pancreatitis tissue), 8 pancreatic cystic neoplasms (5 intraductal papillary
mucinous adenomas, 1 serous cystadenoma, and 2 solid pseudopapillary tumors), and
15 duct cell carcinomas of the pancreas. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed
intense nuclear staining in the pancreatic carcinoma cells, whereas only very
faint nuclear staining was seen in the nonneoplastic cells. There was a strong
correlation between HMGI(Y) protein overexpression and a diagnosis of carcinoma
(P = 0.000018). Thus, an increased expression level of the HMGI(Y) proteins was
clearly associated with the malignant phenotype in pancreatic tissue. In
addition, a low level of protein expression was also apparent in two of the
cystic neoplasms that exhibited cellular atypia, but not in those that did not
exhibit cellular atypia. Based on these findings, we propose that the HMGI(Y)
proteins could be closely associated with tumorigenesis in the pancreas and that 
HMGI(Y) could serve as a potential diagnostic molecular marker for distinguishing
pancreatic malignancies unambiguously from normal tissue or benign lesions.

PMID: 10866296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 1;275(35):27494-9.

The high mobility group I/Y protein is hypophosphorylated in endoreduplicating
maize endosperm cells and is involved in alleviating histone H1-mediated
transcriptional repression.

Zhao J(1), Grafi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

During maize endosperm development, cells shift from a mitotic cycle to
endoreduplication, driving the massive synthesis of storage proteins (zeins) and 
starch. In this developmental context, we studied changes in expression levels of
histone H1 and high mobility group I/Y (HMG-I/Y), two chromatin architectural
proteins that are known to affect gene transcription. Almost no change was found 
in the level of histone H1 during endosperm development, despite a dramatic
increase in DNA content (endoreduplication); hence, the histone H1/DNA ratio
decreased substantially. Concurrently with a reduction in the Cdc2 kinase
activity at the shift to endoreduplication, significant changes were found in the
level and mobility of the HMG-I/Y protein; the faster migrating forms were, at
least partly, hypophosphorylated. Purified maize HMG-I/Y protein was found to be 
phophorylated in vitro by the Cdc2 kinase and bound efficiently to the gamma-zein
promoter AT-rich tract (gammaZ-AT). Using an in vitro transcription assay, we
demonstrated the capability of the maize HMG-I/Y protein to relieve the
inhibitory effect exerted by histone H1 on templates containing the gammaZ-AT
sequence. These data suggest that during maize endosperm development
transcription and perhaps replication are controlled, at least partly, by the
activity of the Cdc2 kinase and the interplay between histone H1 and HMG-I/Y
proteins.

PMID: 10864924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Jul;28(3):235-45.

Genetics of uterine leiomyomata.

Ligon AH(1), Morton CC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Leiomyomata represent the most common gynecologic tumors in women of reproductive
age and are the primary indication for hysterectomy in the United States.
Cytogenetic and genetic studies have in recent years advanced our understanding
of the etiology of these tumors. Cytogenetic aberrations involving chromosomes 6,
7, 12, and 14 constitute the major chromosomal abnormalities seen in leiomyomata 
and have led to the discovery that disruptions or dysregulations of HMGIC and
HMGIY contribute to the development of these tumors. Based on the finding of a
variety of other consistent chromosomal aberrations detected in these tumors,
other genes with fundamental roles in the pathobiology of uterine leiomyomata
await identification. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 28:235-245, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10862029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(13):4666-79.

Binding of HMG-I(Y) imparts architectural specificity to a positioned nucleosome 
on the promoter of the human interleukin-2 receptor alpha gene.

Reeves R(1), Leonard WJ, Nissen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry/Biophysics, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State
University, Pullman 99164, USA. reevesr@mailwsu.edu

Transcriptional induction of the interleukin-2 receptor alpha-chain (IL-2Ralpha) 
gene is a key event regulating T-cell-mediated immunity in mammals. In vivo, the 
T-cell-restricted protein Elf-1 and the general architectural transcription
factor HMG-I(Y) cooperate in transcriptional regulation of the human IL-2Ralpha
gene by binding to a specific positive regulatory region (PRRII) in its proximal 
promoter. Employing chromatin reconstitution analyses, we demonstrate that the
binding sites for both HMG-I(Y) and Elf-1 in the PRRII element are incorporated
into a strongly positioned nucleosome in vitro. A variety of analytical
techniques was used to determine that a stable core particle is positioned over
most of the PRRII element and that this nucleosome exhibits only a limited amount
of lateral translational mobility. Regardless of its translational setting, the
in vitro position of the nucleosome is such that DNA recognition sequences for
both HMG-I(Y) and Elf-1 are located on the surface of the core particle.
Restriction nuclease accessibility analyses indicate that a similarly positioned 
nucleosome also exists on the PRRII element in unstimulated lymphocytes when the 
IL-2Ralpha gene is silent and suggest that this core particle is remodeled
following transcriptional activation of the gene in vivo. In vitro experiments
employing the chemical cleavage reagent 1,10-phenanthroline copper (II)
covalently attached to its C-terminal end demonstrate that HMG-I(Y) protein binds
to the positioned PRRII nucleosome in a direction-specific manner, thus imparting
a distinct architectural configuration to the core particle. Together, these
findings suggest a role for the HMG-I(Y) protein in assisting the remodeling of a
critically positioned nucleosome on the PRRII promoter element during IL-2Ralpha 
transcriptional activation in lymphocytes in vivo.

PMCID: PMC85880
PMID: 10848593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2000 May;119(1):70-3.

A 12q13 translocation involving the HMGI-C gene in richter transformation of a
chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Santulli B(1), Kazmierczak B, Napolitano R, Caliendo I, Chiappetta G, Rippe V,
Bullerdiek J, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)A. O. San Giuseppe Moscati, Avellino, Italy.

We report a case of Richter transformation of a chronic lymphocytic leukemia with
a 12q13 translocation involving the HMGI-C gene. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis with the use of two different cosmid pools spanning the
entire HMGI-C region showed that the breakpoint on chromosome 12 was located in
the HMGI-C gene, presumably within intron 3. In fact, the 3' region of HMGI-C had
been translocated to a derivative chromosome 6. This translocation was not
visible at the cytogenetic level. Immunohistochemical analysis performed on the
bone marrow smear demonstrated the expression of the HMGI-C protein specifically 
in the blasts, suggesting that the aberrant expression of the HMGI-C gene might
have an important role in the process of leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10812175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Life Sci. 2000 Mar 24;66(18):1725-31.

Morphine treatment affects the regulation of high mobility group I-type
chromosomal phosphoproteins in C6 glioma cells.

Chakarov S(1), Chakalova L, Tencheva Z, Ganev V, Angelova A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry, University of Sofia St. Kliment Ohridsky, Bulgaria.

High mobility group (HMG) I-type chromosomal phosphoproteins HMG I/Y and HMG I-C 
were investigated following morphine treatment of C6BU-1 glioma. Cells were
labelled with [32P]-orthophosphoric acid. Electrophoretic profiles and
autoradiograms of the control cells revealed the presence of HMG I and HMG I-C
proteins. HMG Y was not detected. Northern blot analysis showed a single HMG I/Y 
transcript. Treatment with morphine lowered the [32P]-incorporation in HMG I and 
HMGI-C proteins and the level of the HMG I/Y transcript. However, it did not
change the protein ratios on the Coomassie stained gels. These results suggest
that morphine may trigger independent reaction pathways affecting either
transcription regulation and/or postsynthetic phosphorylation of the preexisting 
HMG I-type proteins. In addition, opposing changes in the postsynthetic
phosphorylation of HMG 14 and histones H1AB were also noticed.

PMID: 10809169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Dev Biol. 2000 May 15;221(2):337-54.

Induction of early transcription in one-cell mouse embryos by microinjection of
the nonhistone chromosomal protein HMG-I.

Beaujean N(1), Bouniol-Baly C, Monod C, Kissa K, Jullien D, Aulner N, Amirand C, 
Debey P, Käs E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, INRA 806/EA 2703, IFR 63, Muséum
National d'Histoire Naturelle, 13 Rue Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, 75005,
France.

In the mouse embryo, the onset of zygotic transcription occurs at the end of the 
first cell cycle, upon completion of DNA replication. We show that the nonhistone
chromosomal protein HMG-I, whose translocation into the pronuclei of one-cell
embryos is linked to this first round of DNA synthesis, plays a critical role in 
the activation of zygotic transcription. Indeed, microinjection of purified HMG-I
results in a higher nuclear accumulation of the protein and triggers an earlier
activation of zygotic transcription, an effect which is abolished by the
preincubation of the protein with a specific antibody directed against its
AT-hook DNA-binding motifs. Significantly, microinjection of this antibody also
prevents the normal onset of transcription in the embryo, suggesting that
endogenous HMG-I is similarly involved in this process. Finally, microinjection
of the exogenous protein modifies chromatin structure as measured by in situ
accessibility to DNase I. We propose that general chromosomal architectural
factors such as HMG-I can modulate the accessibility of chromatin to specialized 
regulatory factors, thereby promoting a transcriptionally competent state.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10790330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Genome Res. 2000 Apr;10(4):454-72.

Construction of a high-resolution 2.5-Mb transcript map of the human
6p21.2-6p21.3 region immediately centromeric of the major histocompatibility
complex.

Tripodis N(1), Palmer S, Phillips S, Milne S, Beck S, Ragoussis J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Laboratory, Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Guy's Campus,
GKT School of Medicine, King's College London SE1 9RT, UK.

We have constructed a 2.5-Mb physical and transcription map that spans the human 
6p21.2-6p21.3 region and includes the centromeric end of the MHC, using a
combination of techniques. In total 88 transcription units including exons,
cDNAs, and cDNA contigs were characterized and 60 were confidently positioned on 
the physical map. These include a number of genes encoding nuclear and splicing
factors (Ndr kinase, HSU09564, HSRP20); cell cycle, DNA packaging, and apoptosis 
related [p21, HMGI(Y), BAK]; immune response (CSBP, SAPK4); transcription
activators and zinc finger-containing genes (TEF-5, ZNF76); embryogenesis related
(Csa-19); cell signaling (DIPP); structural (HSET), and other genes (TULP1,
HSPRARD, DEF-6, EO6811, cyclophilin), as well as a number of RP genes and
pseudogenes (RPS10, RPS12-like, RPL12-like, RPL35-like). Furthermore, several
novel genes (a Br140-like, a G2S-like, a FBN2-like, a ZNF-like, and B1/KIAA0229) 
have been identified, as well as cDNAs and cDNA contigs. The detailed map of the 
gene content of this chromosomal segment provides a number of candidate genes,
which may be involved in several biological processes that have been associated
with this region, such as spermatogenesis, development, embryogenesis, and
neoplasia. The data provide useful tools for synteny studies between mice and
humans, for genome structure analysis, gene density comparisons, and studies of
nucleotide composition, of different isochores and Giemsa light and Giemsa dark
bands.

PMCID: PMC310888
PMID: 10779486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biophys J. 2000 May;78(5):2543-59.

Structural changes induced by binding of the high-mobility group I protein to a
mouse satellite DNA sequence.

Slama-Schwok A(1), Zakrzewska K, Léger G, Leroux Y, Takahashi M, Käs E, Debey P.

Author information: 
(1)INRA 806/EA2703 Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Institut de Biologie
Physico-Chimique, Paris, France. schwok@enstay.ensta.fr

Using spectroscopic methods, we have studied the structural changes induced in
both protein and DNA upon binding of the High-Mobility Group I (HMG-I) protein to
a 21-bp sequence derived from mouse satellite DNA. We show that these structural 
changes depend on the stoichiometry of the protein/DNA complexes formed, as
determined by Job plots derived from experiments using pyrene-labeled duplexes.
Circular dichroism and melting temperature experiments extended in the far
ultraviolet range show that while native HMG-I is mainly random coiled in
solution, it adopts a beta-turn conformation upon forming a 1:1 complex in which 
the protein first binds to one of two dA.dT stretches present in the duplex.
HMG-I structure in the 1:1 complex is dependent on the sequence of its DNA
target. A 3:1 HMG-I/DNA complex can also form and is characterized by a small
increase in the DNA natural bend and/or compaction coupled to a change in the
protein conformation, as determined from fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) experiments. In addition, a peptide corresponding to an extended
DNA-binding domain of HMG-I induces an ordered condensation of DNA duplexes.
Based on the constraints derived from pyrene excimer measurements, we present a
model of these nucleated structures. Our results illustrate an extreme case of
protein structure induced by DNA conformation that may bear on the evolutionary
conservation of the DNA-binding motifs of HMG-I. We discuss the functional
relevance of the structural flexibility of HMG-I associated with the nature of
its DNA targets and the implications of the binding stoichiometry for several
aspects of chromatin structure and gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC1300844
PMID: 10777751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Gene. 2000 Apr 4;246(1-2):197-207.

Genomic structure and expression of the murine Hmgi(y) gene.

Liu J(1), Schiltz JF, Shah PC, Benson KF, Chada KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Mammalian HMGI proteins belong to the high mobility group (HMG) of small
non-histone nuclear proteins, and function as architectural factors to mediate
structural changes in DNA. The HMGI family consists of three members: HMGI, HMGY 
and HMGI-C. As pseudogenes have complicated the genomic analysis of murine
Hmgi(y), a mouse lambda FIX II genomic library was screened with an
intron-specific probe to identify and characterize the authentic Hmgi(y) gene.
The murine Hmgi(y) gene is 7.2kb long and contains four protein coding exons and 
two additional exons encoding part of the 5' untranslated region. Sequencing
confirms that an alternative splicing site within exon 3 results in the two
protein isoforms: Hmgi and Hmgy. Primer extension experiments revealed that at
least three transcription start sites exist in the 5' end of the gene. It has
been well established that the expression of both Hmgi-c and Hmgi(y) is readily
detectable throughout embryogenesis. Unlike Hmgi-c, whose expression is
restricted to embryogenesis, a Northern hybridization analysis showed low-level
expression of Hmgi(y) in adult mouse tissues. Similarly, when tissues from
newborn animals were examined, Hmgi(y) expression was readily detected at a level
of intensity intermediate between that found in embryos and adults. Understanding
the gene structure and expression pattern will provide important insights into
the in-vivo function of Hmgi(y).

PMID: 10767541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Apr 11;97(8):4256-61.

Adenovirus-mediated suppression of HMGI(Y) protein synthesis as potential therapy
of human malignant neoplasias.

Scala S(1), Portella G, Fedele M, Chiappetta G, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche c/o Dipartimento di Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di
Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli, 80131 Naples, Italy.

High mobility group I (HMGI) proteins are overexpressed in several human
malignant tumors. We previously demonstrated that inhibition of HMGI synthesis
prevents thyroid cell transformation. Here, we report that an adenovirus carrying
the HMGI(Y) gene in an antisense orientation (Ad-Yas) induced programmed cell
death of two human thyroid anaplastic carcinoma cell lines (ARO and FB-1), but
not normal thyroid cells. The Ad-Yas virus led to death of lung, colon, and
breast carcinoma cells. A control adenovirus carrying the lacZ gene did not
inhibit the growth of either normal or neoplastic cells. Ad-Yas treatment of
tumors induced in athymic mice by ARO cells caused a drastic reduction in tumor
size. Therefore, suppression of HMGI(Y) protein synthesis by an HMGI(Y) antisense
adenoviral vector may be a useful treatment strategy in a variety of human
malignant neoplasias, in which HMGI(Y) gene overexpression is a general event.

PMCID: PMC18219
PMID: 10759549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 12;275(19):14394-400.

Transgenic mice expressing a truncated form of the high mobility group I-C
protein develop adiposity and an abnormally high prevalence of lipomas.

Arlotta P(1), Tai AK, Manfioletti G, Clifford C, Jay G, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology &
Allergy, Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital, and Committee on
Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Chromosomal translocations in human lipomas frequently create fusion transcripts 
encoding high mobility group (HMG) I-C DNA-binding domains and C-terminal
sequences from different presumed transcription factors, suggesting a potential
role for HMG I-C in the development of lipomas. To evaluate the role of the HMG
I-C component, the three DNA-binding domains of HMG I-C have now been expressed
in transgenic mice. Despite the ubiquitous expression of the truncated HMG I-C
protein, the transgenic mice develop a selective abundance of fat tissue early in
life, show marked adipose tissue inflammation, and have an abnormally high
incidence of lipomas. These findings demonstrate that the DNA-binding domains of 
HMG I-C, in the absence of a C-terminal fusion partner, are sufficient to perturb
adipogenesis and predispose to lipomas. We provide data supporting the central
utility of this animal model as a tool to understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying the development of one of the most common kind of human benign tumors.

PMID: 10747931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Lab Invest. 2000 Mar;80(3):359-69.

HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) immunoreactivity correlates with cytogenetic abnormalities in 
lipomas, pulmonary chondroid hamartomas, endometrial polyps, and uterine
leiomyomas and is compatible with rearrangement of the HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) genes.

Tallini G(1), Vanni R, Manfioletti G, Kazmierczak B, Faa G, Pauwels P, Bullerdiek
J, Giancotti V, Van Den Berghe H, Dal Cin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA. tallini@yale.edu

High-mobility group (HMG) proteins are nonhistone nuclear proteins that play an
important role in the regulation of chromatin structure and function. HMGI-C and 
HMGI(Y) are members of the HMGI family of HMG proteins, and their expression in
adult tissues generally correlates with malignant tumor phenotypes. However,
HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) dysregulation as a result of specific rearrangements involving
12q15 and 6p21, the respective chromosomal sites in which the HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) 
genes are located, is also identified in a variety of common benign mesenchymal
tumors, such as lipomas and uterine leiomyomata. The general prevalence of HMGI-C
and HMGI(Y) protein expression and its correlation with chromosomal alterations
in these benign tumors are unknown. We analyzed 95 human tumors (20 lipomas, 21
pulmonary chondroid hamartomas, 26 uterine leiomyomata, and 28 endometrial
polyps) representing a selection of the benign lesions in which karyotypic
alterations involving the chromosomal regions 12q15 and 6p21 are frequently
detected. All cases were successfully karyotyped and some of them analyzed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization with probes spanning the HMGI-C and HMGI(Y)
genes. The results of this study demonstrate that expression of HMGI-C or HMGI(Y)
is a common occurrence in lipomas, pulmonary chondroid hamartomas, leiomyomata,
and endometrial polyps; that it correlates with 12q15 and 6p21 chromosomal
alterations (p < 0.001); and that it is compatible with rearrangement of the
HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) genes. The expression pattern and cellular localization of the
immunoreactivity support the view that in biphasic lesions composed of a mixture 
of both stromal and epithelial cells, such as pulmonary chondroid hamartoma and
endometrial polyps, the mesenchymal component is the site of the HMGI genetic
alterations.

PMID: 10744071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nat Genet. 2000 Apr;24(4):377-80.

In vivo modulation of Hmgic reduces obesity.

Anand A(1), Chada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2000 Sep;26(1):13.

The HMGI family of proteins consists of three members, HMGIC, HMGI and HMGI(Y),
that function as architectural factors and are essential components of the
enhancesome. HMGIC is predominantly expressed in proliferating, undifferentiated 
mesenchymal cells and is not detected in adult tissues. It is disrupted and
misexpressed in a number of mesenchymal tumour cell types, including fat-cell
tumours (lipomas). In addition Hmgic-/- mice have a deficiency in fat tissue. To 
study its role in adipogenesis and obesity, we examined Hmgic expression in the
adipose tissue of adult, obese mice. Mice with a partial or complete deficiency
of Hmgic resisted diet-induced obesity. Disruption of Hmgic caused a reduction in
the obesity induced by leptin deficiency (Lepob/Lepob) in a gene-dose-dependent
manner. Our studies implicate a role for HMGIC in fat-cell proliferation,
indicating that it may be an adipose-specific target for the treatment of
obesity.

PMID: 10742101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Pathol. 2000 Apr;190(5):531-6.

Coordinated expression and amplification of the MDM2, CDK4, and HMGI-C genes in
atypical lipomatous tumours.

Dei Tos AP(1), Doglioni C, Piccinin S, Sciot R, Furlanetto A, Boiocchi M, Dal Cin
P, Maestro R, Fletcher CD, Tallini G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Regional Hospitals, Treviso, Italy.

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2000 Apr;190(5):523-5.

Atypical lipomatous tumours (ALTs) represent a distinctive subset of mesenchymal 
neoplasms featuring mature adipocytic differentiation. Most ALTs are
characterized cytogenetically by the presence of supernumerary ring and/or long
marker chromosomes derived from the chromosomal region 12q13-15. The 12q13-15
chromosome region contains several genes which may play an important role in
human tumorigenesis. A series of ALTs was analysed by investigating the MDM2,
CDK4, and HMGI-C genes and their proteins. The study was extended to a series of 
ordinary lipomas, to determine whether the immunohistochemical investigation of
these gene products might play any diagnostic role. Cytogenetic analysis revealed
the presence of various cytogenetic aberrations involving the 12q13-15 region in 
11/18 (61%) lipomas and of ring chromosomes in all ALTs. Overexpression of mdm2
protein was observed in 6/12 (50%) atypical lipomatous tumours. All lipomas were 
mdm2-negative. cdk4 overexpression was present in 100% of ALTs. Weak cdk4
immunopositivity was detected in 2/18 (11%) ordinary lipomas in a minority of
cells. HMGI-C immunopositivity was observed in 10/12 (83%) ALTs. Positive
immunoreactivity was also observed in 8/18 (44%) lipomas. Southern blot analysis 
revealed amplification of the CDK4 and MDM2 genes in 3/5 ALTs analysed. HMGI-C
was amplified in 3/5 cases and was deleted in one case. Mutation analysis of the 
CDK4 gene did not demonstrate any mutation. These data support the hypothesis
that ordinary lipomas may form a molecular genetic and morphological continuum
with ALT. At one end of the spectrum are lipomas characterized by 12q13-15
rearrangements and HMGI-C activation and at the other end are ALTs with ring
chromosomes, 12q13-15 amplification with overrepresentation of the HMGI-C, CDK4
or MDM2 genes, and aberrant cdk4, mdm2, and HMGI-C protein expression. These
findings not only provide insights into the molecular pathogenesis of lipomatous 
tumours, but also indicate that the immunohistochemical analysis of mdm2 and cdk4
may help to increase diagnostic accuracy.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 10727978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 17;275(11):7894-901.

A novel member of the BTB/POZ family, PATZ, associates with the RNF4 RING finger 
protein and acts as a transcriptional repressor.

Fedele M(1), Benvenuto G, Pero R, Majello B, Battista S, Lembo F, Vollono E, Day 
PM, Santoro M, Lania L, Bruni CB, Fusco A, Chiariotti L.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR "G. Salvatore"
Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare "L. Califano"
Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II" via S. Pansini, 5, 80131 Napoli,
Italy.

We have identified a novel human gene encoding a 59-kDa POZ-AT hook-zinc finger
protein (PATZ) that interacts with RNF4, a mediator of androgen receptor
activity, and acts as a transcriptional repressor. PATZ cDNA was isolated through
a two-hybrid interaction screening using the RING finger protein RNF4 as a bait. 
In vitro and in vivo interaction between RNF4 and PATZ was demonstrated by
protein-protein affinity chromatography and coimmunoprecipitation experiments.
Such interaction occurred through a small region of PATZ containing an AT-hook
DNA binding domain. Immunofluorescence staining and confocal microscopy showed
that PATZ localizes in distinct punctate nuclear regions and colocalizes with
RNF4. Functional analysis was performed by cotransfection assays: PATZ acted as a
transcriptional repressor, whereas its partner RNF4 behaved as a transcriptional 
activator. When both proteins were overexpressed a strong repression of the basal
transcription was observed, indicating that the association of PATZ with RNF4
switches activation to repression. In addition, RNF4 was also found to associate 
with HMGI(Y), a chromatin-modeling factor containing AT-hook domains.

PMID: 10713105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Korean J Intern Med. 2000 Jan;15(1):71-5.

The expression of the high mobility group I(Y) mRNA in thyroid cancers: useful
tool of differential diagnosis of thyroid nodules.

Kim SJ(1), Ryu JW, Choi DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Thyroid nodule is frequent and occurs in about 5% of the general
population. In contrast, thyroid cancer is much less frequent and occurs in about
5-10% of thyroid nodules. Distinguishing between benign and malignant lesions is 
an important task that is best accomplished by fine needle aspiration. Recently, 
Chiappetta et al. reported that the expression of the high mobility group (HMG)
I(Y) proteins correlates with the malignant phenotype of human thyroid neoplasia,
and suggested that the detection of the HMG I(Y) proteins might be a valid tool
for an easy and sensitive discrimination assay between benign and malignant
neoplastic thyroid disease.
METHODS: We evaluated the expression of the HMG I(Y) mRNA in 39 frozen thyroid
tissues from patients with thyroid nodule by semiquantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The expression of the HMG I(Y) mRNA was low in all of 10 normal thyroid 
tissues. In all of 3 adenomatous goiters, 6 follicular adenomas and 2 Hürthle
cell adenomas, the HMG I(Y) mRNA expression level was low. In 11 of 13 papillary 
carcinomas and all of 5 follicular carcinomas, the HMG I(Y) mRNA expression level
was high.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that there is a correlation between the
expression of HMG I(Y) and the malignant phenotype of thyroid cancer, suggesting 
that these proteins may be useful as a marker in thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC4531744
PMID: 10714095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Apr 1;28(7):1618-24.

Kinetic analysis of high-mobility-group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y binding to
cholesterol-tagged DNA on a supported lipid monolayer.

Webster CI(1), Cooper MA, Packman LC, Williams DH, Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition, University of Cambridge, UK.

High-mobility-group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y bind to multiple sites within a
268 bp A/T-rich enhancer element of the pea plastocyanin gene ( PetE ). Within a 
31 bp region of the enhancer, the binding site for HMG-1 overlaps with the
binding site for HMG-I/Y. The kinetics of binding and the affinities of HMG-1 and
HMG-I/Y for the 31 bp DNA were determined using surface plasmon resonance. Due to
very high non-specific interactions of the HMG proteins with a
carboxymethyl-dextran matrix, a novel method using a cholesterol tag to anchor
the DNA in a supported lipid monolayer on a thin gold film was devised. The
phosphatidylcholine monolayer produced a surface that reduced background
interactions to a minimum and permitted the measurement of highly reproducible
protein-DNA interactions. The association rate constant ( k (a)) of HMG-I/Y with 
the 31 bp DNA was approximately 5-fold higher than the rate constant for HMG-1,
whereas the dissociation constant ( K (D)) for HMG-I/Y (3.1 nM) was approximately
7-fold lower than that for HMG-1 (20.1 nM). This suggests that HMG-I/Y should
bind preferentially at the overlapping binding site within this region of the
PetE enhancer.

PMCID: PMC102798
PMID: 10710428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Immunol. 2000 Mar 15;164(6):3157-68.

The role of high-mobility group I(Y) proteins in expression of IL-2 and T cell
proliferation.

Himes SR(1), Reeves R, Attema J, Nissen M, Li Y, Shannon MF.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Center for Cancer Research, Adelaide, South Australia.

The high-mobility group I(Y) (HMGI(Y)) family of proteins plays an important
architectural role in chromatin and have been implicated in the control of
inducible gene expression. We have previously shown that expression of HMGI
antisense RNA in Jurkat T cells inhibits the activity of the IL-2 promoter. Here 
we have investigated the role of HMGI(Y) in controlling IL-2 promoter-reporter
constructs as well as the endogenous IL-2 gene in both Jurkat T cells and human
PBL. We found that the IL-2 promoter has numerous binding sites for HMGI(Y),
which overlap or are adjacent to the known transcription factor binding sites.
HMGI(Y) modulates binding to the IL-2 promoter of at least three transcription
factor families, AP-1, NF-AT and NF-kappaB. By using a mutant HMGI that cannot
bind to DNA but can still interact with the transcription factors, we found that 
DNA binding by HMGI was not essential for the promotion of transcription factor
binding. However, the non-DNA binding mutant acts as a dominant negative protein 
in transfection assays, suggesting that the formation of functional
HMGI(Y)-containing complexes requires DNA binding as well as protein:protein
interactions. The alteration of HMGI(Y) levels affects IL-2 promoter activity not
only in Jurkat T cells but also in PBL. Importantly, we also show here that
expression of the endogenous IL-2 gene as well as proliferation of PBL are
affected by changes in HMGI(Y) levels. These results demonstrate a major role for
HMGI(Y) in IL-2 expression and hence T cell proliferation.

PMID: 10706706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. FASEB J. 2000 Feb;14(2):368-78.

Role of activating protein-1 and high mobility group-I(Y) protein in the
induction of CD44 gene expression by interleukin-1beta in vascular smooth muscle 
cells.

Foster LC(1), Wiesel P, Huggins GS, Pañares R, Chin MT, Pellacani A, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

CD44 is a multifunctional cell adhesion molecule that participates in
pathological states such as inflammation and tumorigenesis. CD44 is induced on
vascular smooth muscle cells after arterial wall injury and may mediate their
proliferation and migration into the neointima during arteriosclerosis. We have
demonstrated elsewhere that the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-1beta
up-regulates CD44 mRNA and protein expression in cultured rat aortic smooth
muscle cells (RASMC) by increasing gene transcription. By transient transfection 
of 5'-deletion constructs into RASMC, we show in the present study that a
conserved AP-1 site 110 base pairs from the transcription start site of the mouse
CD44 promoter is important for basal activity. Mutation of the AP-1 site
significantly reduced induction of promoter activity by IL-1beta, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that Fos and c-Jun were
present in the CD44 AP-1 binding complex after IL-1beta stimulation. In addition,
cotransfection of the architectural transcription factor high mobility group
(HMG)-I(Y) protein with c-Fos and c-Jun markedly increased trans-activation of
the CD44 promoter. Taken together, our studies demonstrate that AP-1 proteins are
a central regulatory component used by IL-1beta to modulate expression of CD44
during an inflammatory response in vascular smooth muscle cells and that
transcription of CD44 by AP-1 proteins is enhanced by HMG-I(Y). -Foster, L. C.,
Wiesel, P., Huggins, G. S, Pañares, R., Chin, M. T., Pellacani, A., Perrella, M. 
A. Role of activating protein-1 and high mobility group-I(Y) protein in the
induction of CD44 gene expression by interleukin-1beta in vascular smooth muscle 
cells.

PMID: 10657993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1999 Dec;31(12):2199-205.

Induction of high mobility group I architectural transcription factors in
proliferating vascular smooth muscle in vivo and in vitro.

Chin MT(1), Pellacani A, Hsieh CM, Lin SS, Jain MK, Patel A, Huggins GS, Reeves
R, Perrella MA, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is a hallmark of
arteriosclerosis. Architectural transcription factors of the high mobility group 
(HMG)-I family have been implicated in the control of cell proliferation and gene
expression. We studied the pattern of HMG-I mRNA and protein expression in
proliferating VSMCs. HMG-I(Y) and HMGI-C mRNAs were barely detectable by Northern
analysis in samples prepared from uninjured rat carotid arteries. In contrast,
these mRNAs were induced dramatically in carotid arteries 2 and 5-6 days after
balloon injury. By in situ hybridization at 6 days after injury, the induced
mRNAs localized to smooth muscle cells of the developing neointima, and
immunocytochemical analysis showed that HMG-I(Y) protein was expressed in the
nuclei of these cells. To confirm this association between HMG-I protein
induction and cell growth, we assessed HMG-I(Y) and HMGI-C mRNA expression in rat
aortic smooth muscle cells (RASMCs) in primary culture. The HMG-I mRNAs were
barely detectable in quiescent RASMCs but were induced markedly by serum
stimulation. This induction of mRNA by serum was time dependent and peaked at 9
h. Western blot analysis confirmed that HMG-I(Y) protein induction also occurred 
in vitro. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of induction of HMG-I
protein expression in proliferating RASMCs in vivo and in vitro. This
demonstration suggests that the HMG-I proteins may play an important role in
smooth muscle cell proliferation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10640447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):1793-801.

Architecture of high mobility group protein I-C.DNA complex and its perturbation 
upon phosphorylation by Cdc2 kinase.

Schwanbeck R(1), Manfioletti G, Wisniewski JR.

Author information: 
(1)III Zoologisches Institut, Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität Göttingen,
Humboldtallee 34A, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

The high mobility group I-C (HMGI-C) protein is an abundant component of rapidly 
proliferating undifferentiated cells. High level expression of this protein is
characteristic for early embryonic tissue and diverse tumors. HMGI-C can function
as an architectural factor enhancing the activity of transcription factor
NF-kappaB on the beta-interferon promoter. The protein has three minor groove
DNA-binding domains (AT-hooks). Here, we describe the complex of HMGI-C with a
fragment of the beta-interferon promoter. We show that the protein binds to NRDI 
and PRDII elements of the promoter with its first and second AT-hook,
respectively. Phosphorylation by Cdc2 kinase leads to a partial derailing of the 
AT-hooks from the minor groove, affecting mainly the second binding domain. In
contrast, binding to long AT stretches of DNA involves contacts with all three
AT-hooks and is marginally sensitive to phosphorylation. Our data stress the
importance of conformation of the DNA binding site and protein phosphorylation
for its function.

PMID: 10636877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Neurochem. 2000 Jan;74(1):392-9.

Phosphorylation of HMG-I by protein kinase C attenuates its binding affinity to
the promoter regions of protein kinase C gamma and neurogranin/RC3 genes.

Xiao DM(1), Pak JH, Wang X, Sato T, Huang FL, Chen HC, Huang KP.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Reproduction Research Branch, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-4510, USA.

A 20-kDa DNA-binding protein that binds the AT-rich sequences within the
promoters of the brain-specific protein kinase C (PKC) gamma and neurogranin/RC3 
genes has been characterized as chromosomal nonhistone high-mobility-group
protein (HMG)-I. This protein is a substrate of PKC alpha, beta, gamma, and delta
but is poorly phosphorylated by PKC epsilon and zeta. Two major (Ser44 and Ser64)
and four minor phosphorylation sites have been identified. The extents of
phosphorylation of Ser44 and Ser64 were 1:1, whereas those of the four minor
sites all together were <30% of the major one. These PKC phosphorylation sites
are distinct from those phosphorylated by cdc2 kinase, which phosphorylates Thr53
and Thr78. Phosphorylation of HMG-I by PKC resulted in a reduction of DNA-binding
affinity by 28-fold as compared with 12-fold caused by the phosphorylation with
cdc2 kinase. HMG-I could be additively phosphorylated by cdc2 kinase and PKC, and
the resulting doubly phosphorylated protein exhibited a >100-fold reduction in
binding affinity. The two cdc2 kinase phosphorylation sites of HMG-I are adjacent
to the N terminus of two of the three predicted DNA-binding domains. In
comparison, one of the major PKC phosphorylation sites, Ser64, is adjacent to the
C terminus of the second DNA-binding domain, whereas Ser44 is located within the 
spanning region between the first and second DNA-binding domains. The current
results suggest that phosphorylation of the mammalian HMG-I by PKC alone or in
combination with cdc2 kinase provides an effective mechanism for the regulation
of HMG-I function.

PMID: 10617144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Feb;27(2):209-15.

Dysregulation of HMGIC in a uterine lipoleiomyoma with a complex rearrangement
including chromosomes 7, 12, and 14.

Pedeutour F(1), Quade BJ, Sornberger K, Tallini G, Ligon AH, Weremowicz S, Morton
CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Uterine lipoleiomyomas are extremely rare tumors consisting of a mixture of
mature adipocytes and smooth muscle cells. Using G-banding and FISH, we
characterized a complex rearrangement involving chromosomes 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, and
14 in one of these tumors. The region 14q23-24 was inserted into the long arm of 
the derivative chromosome 12, between the 3' end of HMGIC and 7q21-22, another
region often rearranged in uterine leiomyomas. Other portions of chromosomes 12
and 14 were involved in derivative chromosomes 7, 11, 12, and 14. A chromosome 8 
was involved in a three-way rearrangement including the derivative 7, a ring
chromosome 10, and a small derivative chromosome 8 bearing segments of
chromosomes 10 and 11. No abnormality of chromosome 5 was detected, in contrast
to two previously reported cytogenetic analyses of uterine lipoleiomyoma. The
consistent finding of chromosomes 12 and 14 on different derivatives indicates
that the t(12;14) was a primary event. In addition, immunohistochemical studies
showed that HMGI-C was aberrantly expressed in this tumor. These observations
suggest that uterine lipoleiomyomas have a pathogenetic origin similar to that of
typical leiomyomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 27:209-215, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10612811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int Immunol. 1999 Dec;11(12):1945-56.

Nuclear factor of activated T cells contributes to the function of the CD28
response region of the granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor promoter.

Shang C(1), Attema J, Cakouros D, Cockerill PN, Shannon MF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Immunology, Hanson Centre for Cancer Research, Institute of 
Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide, South Australia 5001, Australia.

The granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) promoter contains a
10 bp element known as CK-1 or CD28RE that specifically responds to the
co-stimulatory signal delivered to T cells via the CD28 surface receptor. This
element is a variant NFkappaB site that does not function alone but requires an
adjacent promoter region that includes a classical NFkappaB element, an Sp-1 site
and a putative activator protein-1 (AP-1)-like binding site. The entire region is
referred to as the CD28 response region (CD28RR). The GM-CSF CK-1 element has
been shown to bind NFkappaB proteins, in particular c-Rel, whose binding and
function is dependent on the architectural transcription factor HMGI(Y). It has
been previously suggested that the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)
family of proteins also plays a role in the activity of this region. We show here
that recombinant NFATp but not AP-1 can bind to the GM-CSF CD28RR. NFATp present 
in activated Jurkat T cell extracts can also interact with the CD28RR. The
binding of NFATp and Rel proteins requires the same core CK-1 sequences, and
appears to be mutually exclusive. We investigated the functional significance of 
NFATp binding to CK-1 by overexpressing the protein in Jurkat T cells and found
that NFATp cannot activate the CD28RR alone but can cooperate with signals
generated by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate/calcium ionophore. The CD28RR is
therefore a complex region that can bind and respond to a combination of
transcription factors and signals.

PMID: 10590260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Bull Cancer. 1999 Nov;86(11):920-8.

[Genetics of uterine leiomyomata].

[Article in French]

Pedeutour F(1), Ligon AH, Morton CC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique, Hôpital de l'Archet, 151, route de
Saint-Antoine-de-Ginestière, BP 3079, 06202 Nice Cedex 3.

Uterine leiomyomata, or fibroids, represent the most common tumor in women of
reproductive age. Although benign, leiomyomata constitute a major health problem,
and are the most frequent indication for hysterectomy. The pathobiology of these 
tumors is still poorly understood. Cytogenetic and genetic studies have, in
recent years, advanced our understanding of the etiology of these tumors.
Specifically, cytogenetic aberrations involving chromosomes 6, 7, 12 and 14 have 
been shown to constitute the major chromosomal abnormalities seen in leiomyomata 
and have led to the discovery that HMGIC and HMGIY, two members of the
non-histone high mobility group of genes, are involved in fibroid development.
HMGIC and HMGIY map to 12q15 and 6p21, and their disruption or dysregulation has 
been shown to contribute to leiomyomata formation. Given the observation of
several additional, but consistent, chromosomal aberrations, it is likely that
other genes with fundamental roles in the pathobiology of uterine leiomyomata
await identification. Furthermore, twin studies and the discovery of both ethnic 
and familial predispositions have suggested a genetic liability to develop
uterine leiomyomata.

PMID: 10586108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 1999 Dec;63(4):836-43, table of contents.

Retroviral DNA integration.

Hindmarsh P(1), Leis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

DNA integration is a unique enzymatic process shared by all retroviruses and
retrotransposons. During integration, double-stranded linear viral DNA is
inserted into the host genome in a process catalyzed by the virus-encoded
integrase (IN). The mechanism involves a series of nucleophilic attacks, the
first of which removes the terminal 2 bases from the 3' ends of the long terminal
repeats and of the second which inserts the viral DNA into the host genome. IN
specifically recognizes the DNA sequences at the termini of the viral DNA,
juxtaposing both ends in an enzyme complex that inserts the viral DNA into a
single site in a concerted manner. Small duplications of the host DNA,
characteristic of the viral IN, are found at the sites of insertion. At least two
host proteins, HMG-I(Y) and BAF, have been shown to increase the efficiency of
the integration reaction.

PMCID: PMC98978
PMID: 10585967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Res. 1999 Nov 15;59(22):5695-703.

HMG-I(Y) recognizes base-unpairing regions of matrix attachment sequences and its
increased expression is directly linked to metastatic breast cancer phenotype.

Liu WM(1), Guerra-Vladusic FK, Kurakata S, Lupu R, Kohwi-Shigematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley
94720, USA.

Base-unpairing regions (BURs) contain a specialized DNA context with an
exceptionally high unwinding propensity, and are typically identified within
various matrix attachment regions. A BUR affinity column was used to purify a
doublet of Mr 20,000 proteins from human breast carcinoma cells. These proteins
were identified as the high-mobility group (HMG) protein, HMG-I, and its splicing
variant, HMG-Y. We show that HMG-I(Y) specifically binds BURs. Mutating BURs so
as to abrogate their unwinding property greatly reduced their binding affinity to
HMG-I(Y). Numerous studies have indicated that elevated HMG-I(Y) expression is
correlated with more advanced cancers and with increased metastatic potential. We
studied whether the expression of HMG-I(Y) responds to signaling through the
heregulin (HRG)-erbB pathway and the extracellular matrix. HMG-I(Y) expression
was increased in MCF-7 cells after stable transfection with an HRG expression
construct that led cells to acquire estrogen independence and metastasizing
ability. A high level of HMG-I(Y) expression was detected in metastatic
MDA-MB-231 cells, but the expression was virtually diminished, and the
metastasizing ability was lost after cells were stably transfected with an
antisense HRG cDNA construct. HMG-I(Y) was also decreased in MDA-MB-231 cells
when treated with a chemical inhibitor for matrix metalloproteinase-9 that led to
a reduction of invasive capability in vitro. The level of HMG-I(Y) expression,
therefore, is dynamically regulated in human breast cancer cells in response to
varying types of signaling that affect metastatic ability, including the HRG-erbB
pathway and those from the extracellular matrix.

PMID: 10582687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov 19;265(2):439-47.

Sp1 and CTF/NF-1 transcription factors are involved in the basal expression of
the Hmgi-c proximal promoter.

Rustighi A(1), Mantovani F, Fusco A, Giancotti V, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

HMGI-C is a nuclear architectural factor which is expressed during embryogenesis 
but not in adult tissues while it becomes re-expressed following neoplastic
transformation. In this paper we identify the promoter region of the mouse Hmgi-c
gene and by stepwise deletion of the 5' sequences we map the promoter activity of
the most abundant transcript to a very short fragment containing a long
polypyrimidine/polypurine (ppyr/ppur) tract. We demonstrate that this tract is a 
multiple binding site for the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 and that in
Drosophila SL2 cells, Sp1 activates the Hmgi-c promoter. In addition, another
transcription factor, CTF/NF-1, binds the proximal promoter immediately
downstream of this region and its mutation decreases transcription in NIH-3T3
cells. This study identifies factors responsible for the basal activity of Hmgi-c
gene and provides a foundation for further analysis of the mechanism of its
regulation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10558886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Pathol. 1999 Nov;155(5):1535-42.

Misexpression of wild-type and truncated isoforms of the high-mobility group I
proteins HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) in uterine leiomyomas.

Klotzbücher M(1), Wasserfall A, Fuhrmann U.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories of Schering AG, Berlin, Germany.

High-mobility group I (HMGI) proteins are architectural transcription factors
expressed predominantly during embryonic development. Their genetic loci are the 
most frequent targets of chromosomal rearrangements in uterine leiomyomas and
other benign tumors. It was therefore suggested that both HMGI genes are involved
in the neoplastic transformation of benign tumors. By Western analysis we found
that 16 of 33 uterine leiomyomas expressed high levels of HMGI-C or HMGI(Y)
proteins, whereas they were not detected in the corresponding myometrium.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that the expression of HMGI-C is restricted to 
leiomyoma smooth muscle cells but is not expressed in vascular smooth muscle
cells or the connective tissue of the tumor. Northern blotting confirmed the
protein expression data for HMGI-C, whereas HMGI(Y) mRNA and protein levels did
not correlate, suggesting that posttranscriptional mechanisms are involved in the
regulation of HMGI(Y) expression. Three of the uterine leiomyomas analyzed
expressed HMGI-C gene products with altered molecular weight. Two of them were
proved to consist of the entire DNA-binding domain but lacked sequences of the
C-terminal acidic tail. Conversely, other tumors expressed HMGI-C or HMGI(Y)
genes that were not affected by mutations of the coding region. Thus we
identified uterine leiomyomas that expressed mutated HMGI-C, whereas other
uterine leiomyomas expressed wild-type HMGI-C or HMGI(Y). On the basis of our
data we assume that the enhanced expression of functionally active HMGI proteins,
whether they are wild-type or not, is important for the pathogenesis of uterine
leiomyomas.

PMCID: PMC1866973
PMID: 10550310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 5;274(45):31847-52.

Nucleosome structural features and intrinsic properties of the TATAAACGCC repeat 
sequence.

Widlund HR(1), Kuduvalli PN, Bengtsson M, Cao H, Tullius TD, Kubista M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Lundberg Institute, Chalmers University of
Technology, SE 413 90 Göteborg, Sweden. Hans_Widlund@dfci.harvard.edu

Nucleosomes, the fundamental building blocks of chromatin, play an architectural 
role in ensuring the integrity of the genome and act as a regulator of
transcription. Intrinsic properties of the underlying DNA sequence, such as
flexibility and intrinsic bending, direct the formation of nucleosomes. We have
earlier identified genomic nucleosome-positioning sequences with increased in
vitro ability for nucleosome formation. One group of sequences bearing a 10-base 
pair consensus repeat sequence of TATAAACGCC had the highest reported nucleosome 
affinity from genomic material. Here, we report the intrinsic physical properties
of this sequence and the structural details of the nucleosome it forms, as
analyzed by footprinting techniques. The minor groove is buried toward the
histone octamer at the AA steps and facing outwards at the CC steps. By
cyclization kinetics, the overall helical repeat of the free DNA sequence was
found to be 10.5 base pairs/turn. Our experiments also showed that this sequence 
is highly flexible, having a J-factor 25-fold higher than that of random sequence
DNA. In addition, the data suggest that twist flexibility is an important
determinant for translational nucleosome positioning, particularly over the dyad 
region.

PMID: 10542209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Oct 1;114(1):9-16.

Expression of HMGIY in three uterine leiomyomata with complex rearrangements of
chromosome 6.

Sornberger KS(1), Weremowicz S, Williams AJ, Quade BJ, Ligon AH, Pedeutour F,
Vanni R, Morton CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Uterine leiomyomata (UL) are a major public health problem, yet little is known
about their etiology. Genetic factors likely influence UL development and growth;
for example, approximately 40% of UL have chromosomal abnormalities detectable by
conventional cytogenetic analysis, including t(12;14)(q15;q23-24), rearrangements
involving the short arm of chromosome 6 and interstitial deletions of the long
arm of chromosome 7. Two high-mobility group (HMG) protein genes, HMGIC and
HMGIY, located at 12q15 and 6p21.3, respectively, are involved in rearrangements 
in various mesenchymal tumors including UL. In this study, we investigated HMGIY 
expression in three UL with complex cytogenetic rearrangements of 6p21.3 by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and electrophoretic
shift assay (EMSA). Our findings suggest that there are multiple mechanisms for
HMGIY dysregulation, which may include post-translational modification of the
hmgiy protein and dysregulation due to different translocation partners.
Furthermore, the mechanism dysregulating HMGIY in UL with 6p21.3 and 14q23-24
rearrangements may be similar to the mechanism dysregulating HMGIC in UL
characterized as t(12;14)(q15;q23-24), because of the common involvement of an
HMG gene and a gene at 14q23-24.

PMID: 10526529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cancer Res. 1999 Oct 1;59(19):4793-7.

The expression of a truncated HMGI-C gene induces gigantism associated with
lipomatosis.

Battista S(1), Fidanza V, Fedele M, Klein-Szanto AJ, Outwater E, Brunner H,
Santoro M, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19107, USA.

Rearrangements of the HMGI-C gene have frequently been detected in human benign
tumors of mesenchymal origin, including lipomas. The HMGI-C protein has three
AT-hook domains and an acidic COOH-terminal tail. The HMGI-C modifications
consist in the loss of the C-tail and the fusion with ectopic sequences. Recent
results show that the loss of the COOH-terminal region, rather than the
acquisition of new sequences, is sufficient to confer to HMGI-C the ability to
transform NIH3T3 cells. Therefore, transgenic mice carrying a HMGI-C construct
(HMGI-C/T), containing only the three AT-hook domains, were generated. The
HMGI-C/T mice showed a giant phenotype, together with a predominantly
abdominal/pelvic lipomatosis, suggesting a pivotal role of the HMGI-C truncation 
in the generation of human lipomas.

PMID: 10519386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Adv Anat Pathol. 1999 Sep;6(5):237-46.

HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C dysregulation: a common occurrence in human tumors.

Tallini G(1), Dal Cin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C are members of a distinct family of "high mobility group"
(HMG) proteins that are nonhistone chromatin-associated proteins initially
characterized by high electrophoretic mobility in polyacrylamide gels (hence the 
acronym HMG). Recent studies have shown that HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C are important
elements with a role in the regulation of chromatin structure and function. Like 
other HMG proteins they are responsible for the correct three-dimensional
configuration of protein-DNA complexes and therefore play a key role in important
cellular processes such as DNA transcription. Aberrant HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C
expression generally correlates with a malignant tumor phenotype. However,
HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C dysregulation, as a result of specific chromosomal
rearrangements, is also being identified in a variety of common benign
mesenchymal tumors such as lipomas and uterine leiomyomas making HMGI(Y) and
HMGI-C genes probably the most commonly rearranged genes in human neoplasms.
While a precise definition of the HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C role in tumor initiation and
progression is still missing, it is likely that future investigations will
contribute valuable insights to the understanding of human neoplasia.

PMID: 10472377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. FEBS Lett. 1999 Sep 3;457(3):429-36.

A novel downstream positive regulatory element mediating transcription of the
human high mobility group (HMG) I-C gene.

Chau K(1), Arlotta P, Patel UA, Crane-Robinson C, Manfioletti G, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Schepens Eye Research Institute, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and
Committee on Immunology, Harvard University, 20 Staniford St., Boston, MA 02114, 
USA.

The high mobility group (HMG) I proteins are small, non-histone chromosomal
proteins that promote gene activation during development and within rapidly
dividing cells. They do so by facilitating enhanceosome formation on inducible
genes, via both protein/DNA and protein/protein interactions. The HMG I-C gene is
tightly regulated, normally being expressed exclusively during embryonic
development. However, HMG I-C expression is also observed frequently in a number 
of tumor types, and this expression has been shown to contribute to the malignant
transformation process. With the aim of dissecting pathways that lead to aberrant
expression of HMG I-C in tumor cells, we have analyzed HMG I-C gene regulation in
the human hepatoma cell line PLC/PRF/5. One of the two HMG I-C transcripts
detected in this cell line originates from a novel downstream initiation site at 
nucleotide -161 relative to the first methionine. Transcription from the
downstream initiation site is mediated by a PRE located between nt -222 and -217.
We show here that the Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors interact with the PRE and
transactivate the HMG I-C promoter in a cooperative fashion. This study provides 
the first characterization of this downstream HMG I-C promoter.

PMID: 10471823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Oct;26(2):125-33.

A high frequency of tumors with rearrangements of genes of the HMGI(Y) family in 
a series of 191 pulmonary chondroid hamartomas.

Kazmierczak B(1), Meyer-Bolte K, Tran KH, Wöckel W, Breightman I, Rosigkeit J,
Bartnitzke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Bremen, Germany.

Pulmonary chondroid hamartomas (PCHs) are benign mesenchymal tumors that often
are characterized by specific chromosomal aberrations. Herein we report our
cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic (FISH) studies on 191 PCHs, including 48
previously published cases. In this series, 134/191 PCHs (70.2%) showed either
abnormalities of chromosomal bands 6p21 (21 tumors), 12q14-15 (95 tumors), or had
other abnormalities (18 tumors). Two tumors had a 6p21 aberration together with a
12q14-15 aberration. The most frequent translocations were t(12;14)(q15;q24) (19 
cases) and t(6;14)(p21. 3;q24) (18 cases), both in either simple or complex form.
By FISH with cosmids spanning the gene encoding the high-mobility-group protein
HMGIC, we were able to show a rearrangement within or close to HMGIC in all
tumors with 12q14-15 abnormalities tested, in 11 tumors with an apparently normal
karyotype, and in 4 tumors with complex abnormalities without cytogenetically
visible alterations of chromosomes 12. Rearrangements of HMGIY or its immediate
surroundings were shown for 21 cases with 6p21 aberrations and three cases with
other chromosomal abnormalities but without cytogenetically visible alterations
of chromosomes 6. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 26:125-133, 1999.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10469450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jul 29;1424(1):R21-36.

Transcriptional deregulation in hereditary disorders and cancer: the 12th annual 
CABM symposium, October 21-22, 1998, Piscataway, NJ.

Rabson AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Cancer Institute of New
Jersey, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway 08854, USA.
rabson@mbcl.rutgers.edu

As can be seen from the above descriptions, the presentations at the CABM
symposium provided an extraordinarily rich and diverse panorama of some of the
most exciting science in current molecular biology. The presentations provided
both a general overview and a detailed analysis of multiple biological systems,
which despite their specific differences, also generated insights into important 
common themes. The success of any meeting is most appropriately measured by the
kinds of questions that are provoked for future study, not merely by the
recitation of past discoveries. In fact, the different presentations often raised
highly similar questions for future study. At the most fundamental levels of
transcriptional regulation, what are the signals that provide specificity of gene
expression? What is the structural basis of specific protein-protein
interactions, such as those between homeodomain proteins and beta-catenin-Lef1
interactions, and how are these determinants altered in transcriptional
regulation in oncogenesis and in genetic diseases? How is specificity achieved in
transcriptional repression, given that the fundamental biochemical reactions
often involve modifications of relatively ubiquitous components such as histones?
To what extent do changes in specificity of gene activation and repression or in 
chromosomal architecture mediate the kinds of developmental and oncogenic signals
mediated through transcriptional regulators such as Myc, BCL6 and other basic
helix-loop-helix proteins and the HMGI proteins? How do altered signaling
pathways affect diseases of development and differentiation such as
cardiovascular disorders and aging itself? What are the pathways that integrate
extracellular signals and transcription during the process of organogenesis? How 
do fundamental cellular structures such as adhesion junctions, and the
interactions of a cell with other cells and extracellular matrix impact on normal
and abnormal development and on malignancy, and how do these levels of structure 
and function alter nuclear regulation of transcription and cell division? These
are some of the recurrent questions raised in talk after talk at this symposium, 
questions that undoubtedly will provide the impetus for important discoveries
that will be presented at future CABM symposia.

PMID: 10456033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Mar;24(3):290-2.

HMG1 is not rearranged by 13q12 aberrations in lipomas.

Kazmierczak B(1), Dal Cin P, Meyer-Bolte K, Van den Berghe H, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Several cytogenetic subgroups with characteristic lesions involving chromosomal
regions 12q14-15, 6p21.3, or 13q12 can be distinguished in lipomas.
Rearrangements of the HMGIC gene have been described in cases with 12q14-15
abnormalities, whereas HMGIY has been shown to be the target gene of 6p21.3
aberrations. Recently, HMG1, another member of the HMG family, was mapped to
13q12. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible role of HMG1
aberrations in lipomas with 13q12 abnormalities. Two PAC clones containing HMG1
were isolated. By molecular cytogenetic investigations using these PAC clones and
by Southern blot analysis of eight lipomas with 13q12 abnormalities, we were able
to show that these chromosomal rearrangements did not result in intragenic
rearrangements of HMG1 or breakpoints close to it.

PMID: 10451712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Mar;24(3):286-9.

Involvement of the HMGI(Y) gene in a microfollicular adenoma of the thyroid.

Dal Cin P(1), Fusco A, Belge G, Chiappetta G, Fedele M, Pauwels P, Bullerdiek J, 
Van den Berghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Follicular thyroid adenomas are epithelial tumors characterized by subgroups with
specific chromosomal aberrations. Here we present a case with translocation
t(1;6)(p35;p21). In 1p35 and 6p21, two genes of the high-mobility group of
proteins are located. With P1-derived Artificial Chromosome (PACs) derived from
the HMG17 gene located at 1p35 and HMGI(Y) located at 6p21, fluorescence in situ 
hybridization was performed. The breakpoints were located distal to HMG17 and
proximal to HMGI(Y), but no rearrangement of the genes was shown by FISH.
However, an overexpression of the HMGI(Y) gene was detected by RT-PCR as well as 
by immunohistochemistry techniques. This suggests a breakpoint in the proximity
of the HMGI(Y) deregulating HMGI(Y) gene expression, a situation found in a
variety of human benign mesenchymal tumors with involvement of chromosome band
6p21.

PMID: 10451711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Semin Cancer Biol. 1999 Aug;9(4):303-18.

Fusion genes in solid tumors.

Aman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Göteborg
University, Gula Stråket 8, Gothenburg, 41345, Sweden.

Tumor development in different cell types and tissue locations involves many
pathways, distinct genes and exogenous factors. Tumor type-specific chromosome
rearrangements resulting in fusion genes or promoter swapping are believed to be 
involved in the early development of many tumor types. They are present in almost
all cases of a particular tumor type and cases have been described that carry
only tumor type-specific translocations without any signs of other cytogenetic
changes. The mechanisms behind chromosome rearrangements in solid tumors are
largely unknown. Radiation is an important factor in thyroid carcinomas but no
com-$bmon sequence motifs are made out in the break points of solid tumors. The
fusion genes found in sarcomas are dominated by the transcription factor type of 
genes with the TLS/FUS and EWS series of fusion genes as the largest group. More 
than 50% of papillary thyroid carcinomas carry fusion proteins with tyrosine
kinase activity. Rearrangements involving HMGIC, HMGIY, and PLAG1 are common in
benign mesenchymal tumors and salivary gland adenomas. Many recurrent tumor
translocations show a strict specificity for tumor type. This specificity can
most likely be explained by the specific sets of target genes that are
deregulated by the fusion gene products. Identification of the downstream target 
genes is currently the object of intense research and may provide us with
information that will help design better diagnostic tools and eventually find a
cure for these diseases.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10448117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Aug;264(1):55-66.

Characterization of a novel cdk1-related kinase.

Détivaud L(1), Pettit GR, Meijer L.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Station Biologique, Roscoff, France.

The p13suc1/p9CKShs proteins bind tightly to the cyclin-dependent kinases cdk1
and cdk2. The distantly related protein, p15cdk-BP, binds cdk4/6, cdk5 and cdk8. 
We now show that immobilized p15cdk-BP binds both an HMG-I kinase and a 35-kDa
protein that cross-reacts with anti-PSTAIRE antibodies (PSTAIRE is a totally
conserved motif located in subdomain III of cdk). This 'cdkX' and the HMG-I
kinase also bind to an immobilized inhibitor of cdks (HD). Several properties
clearly distinguish cdkX, and its associated HMG-I kinase, from known
anti-PSTAIRE cross-reactive cdks: (a) cdkX migrates, in SDS/PAGE, in a position
intermediate between prophase phosphorylated cdk1 and metaphase dephosphorylated 
cdk1; (b) in contrast with cdk1, cdkX and associated HMG-I kinase activity do not
decrease following successive depletions on p9CKShs1-sepharose; (c) cdkX and
associated HMG-I kinase activity, but not cdk1, decrease following depletions on 
immobilized inhibitor; (d) cdkX is expressed during the early development of sea 
urchin embryos; in contrast with cdk1/cyclin B kinase, the p15cdk-BP-bound HMG-I 
kinase is active throughout the cell cycle; compared with cdk1 it is active later
in development; (e) p15cdk-BP-bound HMG-I kinase is essentially insensitive to
powerful inhibitors of cdk such as purvalanol, roscovitine, olomoucine, p21cip1
and p16INK4A; HD is only moderately inhibitory. Altogether these results suggest 
the existence of a new cdk1-related kinase, possibly involved in the regulation
of early development. The presence of this kinase in all organisms investigated
so far, from plants to mammals, calls for its definitive identification.

PMID: 10447673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 6;274(32):22563-8.

Retinoid-dependent recruitment of a histone H1 displacement activity by retinoic 
acid receptor.

Nagpal S(1), Ghosn C, DiSepio D, Molina Y, Sutter M, Klein ES, Chandraratna RA.

Author information: 
(1)Retinoid Research, Allergan Inc., Irvine, California 92713, USA.
nagpal_sunil@allergan.com

Targeted recruitment of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activities by
sequence-specific transcription factors, including the retinoic acid receptors
(RARs) and retinoid X receptors (RXRs), has been proposed to lead to
destabilization of nucleosomal cores by acetylation of core histones. However,
biochemical evidence indicates that destabilization and depletion of linker H1
histones must also occur at the promoter regions of actively transcribing genes. 
Mechanisms by which nuclear receptors and other transcription factors affect the 
removal of histone H1 from transcriptionally silent chromatin have not been
previously described. In this report, we show that RARs interact in a
ligand-dependent manner with HMG-I, which is known to displace histone H1 from
chromatin. We further show that HMG-I and a novel related protein, HMG-R, also
interact with other transcription factors. Using sense and antisense constructs
of HMG-I/R in transient transfection assays with a retinoid responsive reporter, 
we also demonstrate that HMG-I/R is important for retinoid dependent
transcriptional activity of RAR. These findings suggest a step wise mechanism by 
which RARs and other transcription factors can cause a targeted unfolding of
compact chromatin as a first step in transcriptional activation, which would then
be followed by recruitment of HAT activity and subsequent events.

PMID: 10428834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Cancer. 1999 Aug 20;84(4):376-80.

Expression of the HMGI(Y) gene in human colorectal cancer.

Kim DH(1), Park YS, Park CJ, Son KC, Nam ES, Shin HS, Ryu JW, Kim DS, Park CK,
Park YE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University, Seoul, Korea. dhk@www.hallym.or.kr

Expression of HMGI(Y), a nucleoprotein that binds to A/T rich sequences in the
minor groove of the DNA helix, is observable in neoplastically transformed cells 
but not in normal cells. We have analyzed HMGI(Y) expression in colorectal cancer
and evaluated its clinicopathologic significance. HMGI(Y) mRNA was measured by
CRT-PCR (competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction).
Immunohistochemical staining for HMGI(Y), p53 and Ki-67 was performed in the same
colon cancer tissues, and the results in colorectal tissues were similar to those
of RT-PCR. HMGI(Y) expression evidenced by RT-PCR was observed in 63 of 64
(98.4%) colorectal cancer samples, and 2 of 5 (40%) adenomatous polyps, whereas
21 normal colon samples were negative (p<0.001). High HMGI(Y) expression using
CRT-PCR was found in colon cancers with a high Ki-67 labeling index (p<0.001).
There was no significant correlation between the levels of HMGI(Y) expression and
stage, tumor size, lymph node metastasis, histologic grade and
immunohistochemical status of p53. Our results indicate that the HMGI(Y)
expression may occur at an early stage of carcinogenesis and correlate with cell 
proliferation. Int. J. Cancer (Pred. Oncol.), 84:376-380, 1999.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10404089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 16;274(29):20235-43.

A small region in HMG I(Y) is critical for cooperation with NF-kappaB on DNA.

Zhang XM(1), Verdine GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

The high mobility group HMG I(Y) protein has been reported to promote the
expression of several NF-kappaB-dependent genes by enhancing the binding of
NF-kappaB to DNA. The molecular origins of cooperativity in the binding of
NF-kappaB and HMG I(Y) to DNA are not well understood. Here we have examined the 
determinants of specificity in the binding of HMG I(Y), both alone and in
cooperation with NF-kappaB, to two different DNA elements, PRDII from the
interferon-beta enhancer and IgkappaB from the immunoglobulin kappa light chain
enhancer. Of particular interest was the influence of a flanking AT-rich sequence
on binding by HMG I(Y). Utilizing yeast one-hybrid screening assays together with
alanine-scanning mutagenesis, we have identified mutations of residues in HMG
I(Y) that decrease cooperative binding of NF-kappaB to PRDII and IgkappaB sites. 
These same mutations similarly decreased the binding of HMG I(Y) alone to DNA,
and paradoxically, decreased the strength of protein-protein interactions between
HMG I(Y) and NF-kappaB. Of the three tandemly repeated basic regions that
represent putative DNA-binding motifs in HMG I(Y), the residues within the second
repeat are most important for recognition of core NF-kappaB sites, whereas the
second and third repeats both appear to be involved in binding to sites that are 
flanked by AT-rich sequences. Overall, the second repeat of HMG I(Y) is primarily
responsible for the stimulatory effect of this protein on the binding of
NF-kappaB to PRDII and IgkappaB elements.

PMID: 10400641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Immunol. 1999 Jul 15;163(2):811-9.

Complex regulation of Ly-6E gene transcription in T cells by IFNs.

Khodadoust MM(1), Khan KD, Bothwell AL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

The complexity of IFN-mediated regulation of the murine Ly-6E gene in T cell
lines is highlighted by the following observations: 1) multiple regulatory
regions are present within different parts of the Ly-6E promoter and are
necessary for IFN inducibility of the Ly-6E gene, 2) multiple transcription
factors including Oct-1 and Oct-2 and the high mobility group (HMG) protein
HMGI(Y) bind to regulatory elements present within the G region required for both
IFN-alphabeta and IFN-gamma responses, 3) mutational analysis of the G region
reveals that a complex interaction exists between the factors binding to this
region as shown by their mutual interdependence for detection in DMSA, and 4)
inhibition of expression of HMG proteins by antisense HMGI-C RNA in EL4 cells
causes the loss of IFN-alphabeta and IFN-gamma inducibility of the endogenous
Ly-6 gene. These findings taken together suggest that, in response to IFN
treatment, an HMG protein-dependent complex involving multiple regulatory factors
is assembled and is required for IFN inducibility of the Ly-6E gene.

PMID: 10395674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Methods Enzymol. 1999;304:155-88.

Purification and assays for high mobility group HMG-I(Y) protein function.

Reeves R(1), Nissen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman
99164-4660, USA.

PMID: 10372360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Cancer. 1999 Jun 11;81(6):956-62.

Potentiation of the malignant phenotype of the undifferentiated ARO thyroid cell 
line by insertion of the bcl-2 gene.

Basolo F(1), Fiore L, Fusco A, Giannini R, Albini A, Merlo GR, Fontanini G,
Conaldi PG, Toniolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Pisa, Italy.

We have reported that bcl-2 is expressed in normal human thyroid epithelium and
that its expression is down-regulated in undifferentiated thyroid tumors.
Production of IL-6 was concomitantly down-regulated in these forms. Based on
these observations, we analyzed whether insertion of bcl-2 would reverse the
highly malignant phenotype of a thyroid cell line (ARO) derived from an
undifferentiated carcinoma. This cell line fails to produce Bcl-2 and IL-6. By
infection with a bcl-2 retroviral vector, ARO cells expressing bcl-2 (ARObcl-2)
were obtained. Compared with parental cells, expression of bcl-2 was associated
with enhancement of growth potential (DNA synthesis, in vitro proliferation rate,
anchorage-independent growth in semi-solid media). Chemotaxis and invasive
potential in Boyden chambers were also increased. bcl-2-expressing cells showed a
reduced response to apoptotic stimuli (low-serum conditions or anti-neoplastic
drugs). Large branched colonies were formed in Matrigel from ARObcl-2 cells but
not from parental cells. Finally, ARObcl-2 cells showed a decreased latency of
tumor appearance when injected into immunodeficient mice. Potentiation of the
malignant phenotype of ARO cells by bcl-2 was not ascribed to altered expression 
of (i) cytokine/growth factors (IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, TGF-alpha,
TGF-beta), (ii) thyroid-specific transcripts (TG, TPO, TSH-R, PIGF, PAX-8) or
(iii) genes influencing tumor aggressiveness [VEGF, HMGI (Y), HMGI-C]. Our data
indicate that bcl-2 potentiates the malignant phenotype of ARO cells not only by 
limiting the response to apoptotic stimuli but also by enhancing proliferation
and tumor aggressiveness.

PMID: 10362145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Plant J. 1999 Apr;18(2):173-83.

The HMG-I/Y protein PF1 stimulates binding of the transcriptional activator GT-2 
to the PHYA gene promoter.

Martínez-García JF(1), Quail PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley 
94720, USA.

The DNA-binding proteins PF1 and GT-2 are factors that bind to different
functionally defined, positively acting cis-elements in the PHYA genes of oat and
rice, respectively. PF1 is an HMG-I/Y protein, with its cognate cis-element being
an AT-rich sequence, designated PE1, whereas GT-2 is a transcriptional activator 
with twin DNA binding domains that recognize a triplet of GT-boxes in a complex
motif designated GTE. To further define the DNA-binding activity of PF1 and to
explore potential inter-relationships between the two factors, we have performed 
a series of in vitro DNA-binding experiments with both PE1 and GTE target sites. 
The data show that, consistent with its membership of the HMG-I/Y protein family,
PF1 can bend DNA when bound to PE1. In addition, PF1 can bind promiscuously, with
varying affinity, to other AT-containing motifs, including GTE. When co-incubated
with GT-2, PF1 enhances the specific DNA-binding activity of GT-2 toward GTE, the
first report of such activity for a plant HMG-I/Y protein. This enhancement takes
place without demonstrable physical contact between the two proteins, suggesting 
the possibility of a novel, indirect mechanism of recruitment involving DNA
target-site pre-conditioning. The evidence indicates therefore that PF1 and GT-2 
do not perform functionally equivalent roles in positively regulating oat and
rice PHYA gene expression. However, the data suggest the possibility that PF1 may
act as an architectural factor, promiscuously recognizing a spectrum of
AT-containing elements in plant promoters, with the general function of
catalyzing enhanced binding of conventional cognate transcriptional regulators to
these elements via DNA bending.

PMID: 10363369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. EMBO J. 1999 Jun 1;18(11):3074-89.

The role of HMG I(Y) in the assembly and function of the IFN-beta enhanceosome.

Yie J(1), Merika M, Munshi N, Chen G, Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, 630 
West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the virus inducible enhancer of the human
interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene in response to virus infection requires the
assembly of an enhanceosome, consisting of the transcriptional activators
NF-kappaB, ATF-2/c-Jun, IRFs and the architectural protein of the mammalian high 
mobility group I(Y) [HMG I(Y)]. Here, we demonstrate that the first step in
enhanceosome assembly, i.e. HMG I(Y)-dependent recruitment of NF-kappaB and
ATF-2/c-Jun to the enhancer, is facilitated by discrete regions of HMG I and is
mediated by allosteric changes induced in the DNA by HMG I(Y) and not by
protein-protein interactions between HMG I(Y) and these proteins. However, we
show that completion of the enhanceosome assembly process requires
protein-protein interactions between HMG I(Y) and the activators. Finally, we
demonstrate that once assembled, the IFN-beta enhanceosome is an unusually stable
nucleoprotein structure that can activate transcription at high levels by
promoting multiple rounds of reinitiation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC1171389
PMID: 10357819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Jun;111(2):178-81.

Pleomorphic adenomas of the salivary glands: absence of HMGIY rearrangements.

Rohen C(1), Rogalla P, Meyer-Bolte K, Bartnitzke S, Chilla R, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Rearrangements of chromosome region 12q14-15 affecting the HMGIC gene are a
frequent finding in benign solid tumors. Another non-random chromosomal
alteration observed in subgroups of several of the tumor entities with 12q14-15
changes are rearrangements of 6p21 resulting in alterations of the HMGIY gene,
which have so far not been documented in pleomorphic adenomas of the salivary
glands. In our series of 335 pleomorphic adenomas, karyotypic changes affecting
chromosomal region 6p21-23 were observed in five tumors all showing either a
simple or complex t(6;8)(p21-p23;q12). Molecular cytogenetic studies of two of
these tumors revealed that the 6p-breakpoint of this translocation maps distal to
HMGIY, not affecting the gene or its closer vicinity. The results strongly
suggest that pleomorphic adenomas are the only exception to the rule that
entities of benign tumors with HMGIC rearrangements also have subtypes with HMGIY
rearrangements. The difference from the other tumors is discussed in terms of
tissue specificity of both HMG protein genes.

PMID: 10347561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16536-44.

The HMG-I(Y) A.T-hook peptide motif confers DNA-binding specificity to a
structured chimeric protein.

Banks GC(1), Mohr B, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4660, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving genes coding for members of the HMG-I(Y)
family of "high mobility group" non-histone chromatin proteins (HMG-I, HMG-Y, and
HMG-IC) have been observed in numerous types of human tumors. Many of these gene 
rearrangements result in the creation of chimeric proteins in which the
DNA-binding domains of the HMG-I(Y) proteins, the so-called A.T-hook motifs, have
been fused to heterologous peptide sequences. Although little is known about
either the structure or biophysical properties of these naturally occurring
fusion proteins, the suggestion has been made that such chimeras have probably
assumed an altered in vivo DNA-binding specificity due to the presence of the
A.T-hook motifs. To investigate this possibility, we performed in vitro
"domain-swap" experiments using a model protein fusion system in which a single
A. T-hook peptide was exchanged for a corresponding length peptide in the well
characterized "B-box" DNA-binding domain of the HMG-1 non-histone chromatin
protein. Here we report that chimeric A. T-hook/B-box hybrids exhibit in vitro
DNA-binding characteristics resembling those of wild type HMG-I(Y) protein,
rather than the HMG-1 protein. These results strongly suggest that the chimeric
fusion proteins produced in human tumors as a result of HMG-I(Y) gene chromosomal
translocations also retain A.T-hook-imparted DNA-binding properties in vivo.

PMID: 10347218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer Res. 1999 May 15;59(10):2484-92.

HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C genes are expressed in neuroblastoma cell lines and tumors and
affect retinoic acid responsiveness.

Giannini G(1), Di Marcotullio L, Ristori E, Zani M, Crescenzi M, Scarpa S,
Piaggio G, Vacca A, Peverali FA, Diana F, Screpanti I, Frati L, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza,
Rome, Italy. g.giannini@caspur.it

HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) are architectural DNA-binding proteins that participate in the
conformational regulation of active chromatin. Their pattern of expression in
embryonal and adult tissues, the analysis of the "pygmy" phenotype induced by the
inactivation of the HMGI-C gene, and their frequent qualitative or quantitative
alteration in experimental and human tumors indicate their pivotal role in the
control of cell growth, differentiation, and tumorigenesis in several tissues
representative of the epithelial, mesenchymal, and hematopoietic lineages. In
contrast, very little information is available on their expression and function
in neural cells. Here, we investigated the expression of the HMGI(Y) and HMGI-C
genes in neuroblastoma (NB), a tumor arising from an alteration of the normal
differentiation of neural crest-derived cells and in embryonal and adult adrenal 
tissue. Although HMGI(Y) is constitutively expressed in the embryonal and adult
adrenal gland and in all of the NB cell lines and ex vivo tumors examined, its
regulation appears to be associated to growth inhibition and differentiation
because we observed that HMGI(Y) expression is reduced by retinoic acid (RA) in
several NB cell lines that are induced to differentiate into postmitotic neurons,
whereas it is up-regulated by RA in cells that fail to differentiate.
Furthermore, the decrease of HMGI(Y) expression observed in RA-induced growth
arrest and differentiation is abrogated in cells that have been made insensitive 
to this drug by NMYC overexpression. In contrast, HMGI-C expression is
down-regulated during the development of the adrenal gland, completely absent in 
the adult individual, and only detectable in a subset of ex vivo NB tumors and in
RA-resistant NB cell lines. We provide evidence of a causal link between HMGI-C
expression and resistance to the growth arrest induced by RA in NB cell lines
because exogenous HMGI-C expression in HMGI-C-negative and RA-sensitive cells is 
sufficient to convert them into RA-resistant cells. Therefore, we suggest that
HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) may participate in growth- and differentiation-related tumor
progression events of neuroectodermal derivatives.

PMID: 10344762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. DNA Res. 1999 Feb 26;6(1):51-5.

Characterization of a single-copy Arabidopsis gene encoding a protein showing
limited similarity to the N-terminus of the mammalian clathrin-assembly protein
AP180.

Gupta R(1), Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences and Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition,
University of Cambridge, UK.

The Arabidopsis 194 gene encoding a protein containing sequence similarity to an 
N-terminal region of the clathrin-assembly protein AP180 has been identified in a
4.9-kb region of genomic DNA upstream of the gene encoding the high mobility
group protein HMG-I/Y. The gene consists of 12 exons and 11 introns, identified
by comparison with partial cDNAs and using the NetPlantGene programme, and
encodes a protein of 584 amino acid residues. The C-terminal region of the
protein contains 8 tandem repeats of a 17-amino-acid-residue sequence. Southern
blot analysis of genomic DNA from Columbia and Landsberg ecotypes of Arabidopsis 
indicates the presence of a single copy of the 194 gene. The 194 gene is
expressed in all organs of Arabidopsis including roots, stems, leaves, flowers,
and developing siliques, as determined by northern blot analysis.

PMID: 10231030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 May 15;27(10):2135-44.

Directional binding of HMG-I(Y) on four-way junction DNA and the molecular basis 
for competitive binding with HMG-1 and histone H1.

Hill DA(1), Pedulla ML, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Department of Genetics and Cell 
Biology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

Histone H1, HMG-1 and HMG-I(Y) are mammalian nuclear proteins possessing
distinctive DNA-binding domain structures that share the common property of
preferentially binding to four-way junction (4H) DNA, an in vitro mimic of the in
vivo genetic recombination intermediate known as the Holliday junction.
Nevertheless, these three proteins bind to 4H DNA in vitro with very different
affinities and in a mutually exclusive manner. To investigate the molecular basis
for these distinctive binding characteristics, we employed base pair resolution
hydroxyl radical footprinting to determine the precise sites of nucleotide
interactions of both HMG-1 and histone H1 on 4H DNA and compared these contacts
with those previously described for HMG-I(Y) on the same substrate. Each of these
proteins had a unique binding pattern on 4H DNA and yet shared certain common
nucleotide contacts on the arms of the 4H DNA molecule near the branch point.
Both the HMG-I(Y) and HMG-1 proteins made specific contacts across the 4H DNA
branch point, as well as interacting at discrete sites on the arms, whereas the
globular domain of histone H1 bound exclusively to the arms of the 4H DNA
substrate without contacting nucleotides at the crossover region. Experiments
employing the chemical cleavage reagent 1, 10-orthophenanthroline copper(II)
attached to the C-terminal end of a site-specifically mutagenized HMG-I(Y)
protein molecule demonstrated that this protein binds to 4H DNA in a distinctly
polar, direction-specific manner. Together these results provide an attractive
molecular explanation for the observed mutually exclusive 4H DNA-binding
characteristics of these proteins and also allow for critical assessment of
proposed models for their interaction with 4H DNA substrates. The results also
have important implications concerning the possible in vivo roles of HMG-I(Y),
histone H1 and HMG-1 in biological processes such as genetic recombination and
retroviral integration.

PMCID: PMC148433
PMID: 10219086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Gene. 1999 Apr 1;230(1):1-5.

Plant chromosomal HMGI/Y proteins and histone H1 exhibit a protein domain of
common origin.

Krech AB(1), Wulff D, Grasser KD, Feix G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie III, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Schänzlestr.
1, D-79104, Freiburg, Germany.

The chromosomal high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins of the HMGI/Y family interact 
with A/T-rich stretches in duplex DNA, and are considered assistant factors in
transcriptional regulation. A cDNA encoding an HMGI/Y protein of 190 amino acid
residues was isolated from maize and characterized. Like other plant HMGI/Y
proteins, the maize HMGI/Y protein contains four copies of the AT-hook
DNA-binding motif and an amino-terminal 'histone H1-like region' with a
similarity to the globular domain of H1. The maize hmgi/y gene that was isolated 
from a genomic DNA library contains a single intron that is localized in the
region of sequence similarity to histone H1. Interestingly, the genes encoding
plant H1 contain an intron at exactly the same relative position, indicating an
evolutionary relationship of the plant genes encoding HMGI/Y and H1 proteins.

PMID: 10196467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cancer Res. 1999 Mar 15;59(6):1169-74.

Determination of high mobility group I(Y) expression level in colorectal
neoplasias: a potential diagnostic marker.

Abe N(1), Watanabe T, Sugiyama M, Uchimura H, Chiappetta G, Fusco A, Atomi Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Mitaka
City, Tokyo, Japan.

High mobility group I(Y) [HMGI(Y)] proteins are architectural factors abundantly 
expressed during embryogenesis, and their overexpression is known to be closely
associated with neoplastic transformation of cells. This study was performed to
investigate whether determination of HMGI(Y) expression level could assist in (a)
differential diagnosis between colorectal carcinoma, adenoma, and normal tissue
and (b) determination of the prognosis of patients with colorectal cancer. To
this end, HMGI(Y) expression was determined at both the protein and mRNA levels
in 30 colorectal carcinomas, 26 adenomas, and 23 normal mucosa samples, and
further correlations between the protein expression levels and various
clinicopathological parameters, such as depth of tumor invasion, lymphatic and/or
venous involvement, regional lymph node metastasis, and Dukes' stage, were
determined in 30 carcinoma cases. The expression of HMGI(Y) proteins was
significantly increased in carcinoma and adenoma with severe atypia compared with
that in adenoma with less atypia and normal colorectal mucosa. This increase in
HMGI(Y) protein expression was found to be because of an increase in its mRNA
expression by RNA in situ hybridization analysis. Clinicopathological analysis
revealed that the level of HMGI(Y) protein expression was significantly
correlated with parameters known to be indicative of a poor prognosis in
colorectal cancer patients. These findings indicate that the determination of the
HMGI(Y) protein expression level could be a potential marker for the diagnosis of
colorectal neoplasias and can be of great value in predicting the prognosis of
patients with colorectal cancer.

PMID: 10096541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Surg Res. 1999 Apr;82(2):194-200.

Transcriptional arrest of the human E-selectin gene.

Boyle EM Jr(1), Sato TT, Noel RF Jr, Verrier ED, Pohlman TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
98104-9796, USA.

BACKGROUND: E-selectin transcription requires binding of transcription factors,
NF-kappaB, ATF-2, and HMG-I(Y). Here we characterize the mechanism responsible
for the transcriptional downregulation of E-selectin expression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were
treated with TNF-alpha for 24 h. HUVEC E-selectin expression was measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Northern blotting, and nuclear run-on assays, 
and NF-kappa B was assessed by electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays (EMSAs).
RESULTS: (1) E-selectin surface expression peaked at 4 h and then diminished over
the next 20 h. (2) Transcription of E-selectin began within 1 h of TNF-alpha
exposure and ceased by 8 h, despite continuous stimulation of HUVECs with
TNF-alpha. (3) EMSAs revealed persistent binding activity of NF-kappa B proteins 
to two NF-kappa B-binding sites during 24 h of continuous stimulation with
TNF-alpha. However, binding activity of proteins that recognize a third NF-kappa 
B element, -126 to -116 bp from the transcription start site, was lost after 4 h 
during 24 h of continuous stimulation with TNF-alpha; ATF-2 binding was unchanged
over 24 h stimulation with TNF-alpha.
CONCLUSION: The termination of E-selectin expression is controlled at the level
of transcription, with loss of protein-DNA interactions at only one of three
NF-kappa B-binding sites in the E-selectin promoter.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10090829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Virology. 1999 Mar 30;256(1):64-74.

The host-cell architectural protein HMG I(Y) modulates binding of herpes simplex 
virus type 1 ICP4 to its cognate promoter.

Panagiotidis CA(1), Silverstein SJ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York
10032, USA.

The productive infection cycle of herpes simplex virus is controlled in part by
the action of ICP4, an immediate-early gene product that acts as both an
activator and repressor of transcription. ICP4 is autoregulatory, and IE-3, the
gene that encodes it, contains a high-affinity binding site for the protein at
its cap site. Previously, we had demonstrated that this site could be occupied by
proteins found in nuclear extracts from uninfected cells. A HeLa cell cDNA
expression library was screened with a DNA probe containing the IE-3 gene cap
site, and clones expressing the architectural chromatin proteins HMG I and HMG Y 
were identified by this technique. HMG I is shown to augment binding of ICP4 to
its cognate site in in vitro assays and to enhance the activity of this protein
in short-term transient expression assays.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10087227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 26;274(13):9045-52.

High mobility group-I(Y) protein facilitates nuclear factor-kappaB binding and
transactivation of the inducible nitric-oxide synthase promoter/enhancer.

Perrella MA(1), Pellacani A, Wiesel P, Chin MT, Foster LC, Ibanez M, Hsieh CM,
Reeves R, Yet SF, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. perella@cvlab.harvard.edu

Nitric oxide (NO), a free radical gas whose production is catalyzed by the enzyme
NO synthase, participates in the regulation of multiple organ systems. The
inducible isoform of NO synthase (iNOS) is transcriptionally up-regulated by
inflammatory stimuli; a critical mediator of this process is nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB. Our objective was to determine which regulatory elements other than 
NF-kappaB binding sites are important for activation of the iNOS
promoter/enhancer. We also wanted to identify transcription factors that may be
functioning in conjunction with NF-kappaB (subunits p50 and p65) to drive iNOS
transcription. Deletion analysis of the iNOS promoter/enhancer revealed that an
AT-rich sequence (-61 to -54) downstream of the NF-kappaB site (-85 to -76) in
the 5'-flanking sequence was important for iNOS induction by interleukin-1beta
and endotoxin in vascular smooth muscle cells. This AT-rich sequence,
corresponding to an octamer (Oct) binding site, bound the architectural
transcription factor high mobility group (HMG)-I(Y) protein. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays showed that HMG-I(Y) and NF-kappaB subunit p50 bound to the
iNOS promoter/enhancer to form a ternary complex. The formation of this complex
required HMG-I(Y) binding at the Oct site. The location of an HMG-I(Y) binding
site typically overlaps that of a recruited transcription factor. In the iNOS
promoter/enhancer, however, HMG-I(Y) formed a complex with p50 while binding
downstream of the NF-kappaB site. Furthermore, overexpression of HMG-I(Y)
potentiated iNOS promoter/enhancer activity by p50 and p65 in transfection
experiments, suggesting that HMG-I(Y) contributes to the transactivation of iNOS 
by NF-kappaB.

PMID: 10085153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):2803-16.

Specific binding of high-mobility-group I (HMGI) protein and histone H1 to the
upstream AT-rich region of the murine beta interferon promoter: HMGI protein acts
as a potential antirepressor of the promoter.

Bonnefoy E(1), Bandu MT, Doly J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Régulation de l'Expression des Gènes Eucaryotes, CNRS, UPR37,
UFR Biomédicale, Université René Descartes, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.
bonnefoy@biomedicale.univ-paris5.fr

The high-mobility-group I (HMGI) protein is a nonhistone component of active
chromatin. In this work, we demonstrate that HMGI protein specifically binds to
the AT-rich region of the murine beta interferon (IFN-beta) promoter localized
upstream of the murine virus-responsive element (VRE). Contrary to what has been 
described for the human promoter, HMGI protein did not specifically bind to the
VRE of the murine IFN-beta promoter. Stably transfected promoters carrying
mutations on this HMGI binding site displayed delayed virus-induced kinetics of
transcription. When integrated into chromatin, the mutated promoter remained
repressed and never reached normal transcriptional activity. Such a phenomenon
was not observed with transiently transfected promoters upon which chromatin was 
only partially reconstituted. Using UV footprinting, we show that the upstream
AT-rich sequences of the murine IFN-beta promoter constitute a preferential
binding region for histone H1. Transfection with a plasmid carrying scaffold
attachment regions as well as incubation with distamycin led to the derepression 
of the IFN-beta promoter stably integrated into chromatin. In vitro, HMGI protein
was able to displace histone H1 from the upstream AT-rich region of the wild-type
promoter but not from the promoter carrying mutations on the upstream
high-affinity HMGI binding site. Our results suggest that the binding of histone 
H1 to the upstream AT-rich region of the promoter might be partly responsible for
the constitutive repression of the promoter. The displacement by HMGI protein of 
histone H1 could help to convert the IFN-beta promoter from a repressed to an
active state.

PMCID: PMC84073
PMID: 10082546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 16;96(6):2656-61.

The fission yeast homologue of Orc4p binds to replication origin DNA via multiple
AT-hooks.

Chuang RY(1), Kelly TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21210, USA.

The origin recognition complex (ORC) was originally identified in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a protein that specifically binds to origins of DNA
replication. Although ORC appears to play an essential role in the initiation of 
DNA replication in the cells of all eukaryotes, its interactions with DNA have
not been defined in species other than budding yeast. We have characterized a
Schizosaccharomyces pombe homologue of the ORC subunit, Orc4p. The homologue
(Orp4p) consists of two distinct functional domains. The C-terminal domain shows 
strong sequence similarity to human, frog, and yeast Orc4 proteins, including
conserved ATP-binding motifs. The N-terminal domain contains nine copies of the
AT-hook motif found in a number of DNA-binding proteins, including the members of
the HMG-I(Y) family of chromatin proteins. AT-hook motifs are known from
biochemical and structural studies to mediate binding to the minor groove of
AT-tracts in DNA. Orp4p is essential for viability of Sc. pombe and is expressed 
throughout the cell cycle. The Orp4 protein (and its isolated N-terminal domain) 
binds to the Sc. pombe replication origin, ars1. The DNA binding properties of
Orp4p provide a plausible explanation for the characteristic features of Sc.
pombe origins of replication, which differ significantly from those of Sa.
cerevisiae.

PMCID: PMC15824
PMID: 10077566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Virol. 1999 Apr;73(4):2994-3003.

HMG protein family members stimulate human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and
avian sarcoma virus concerted DNA integration in vitro.

Hindmarsh P(1), Ridky T, Reeves R, Andrake M, Skalka AM, Leis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

We have reconstituted concerted human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
integration in vitro with specially designed mini-donor HIV-1 DNA, a supercoiled 
plasmid acceptor, purified bacterium-derived HIV-1 integrase (IN), and host HMG
protein family members. This system is comparable to one previously described for
avian sarcoma virus (ASV) (A. Aiyar et al., J. Virol. 70:3571-3580, 1996) that
was stimulated by the presence of HMG-1. Sequence analyses of individual HIV-1
integrants showed loss of 2 bp from the ends of the donor DNA and almost
exclusive 5-bp duplications of the acceptor DNA at the site of integration. All
of the integrants sequenced were inserted into different sites in the acceptor.
These are the features associated with integration of viral DNA in vivo. We have 
used the ASV and HIV-1 reconstituted systems to compare the mechanism of
concerted DNA integration and examine the role of different HMG proteins in the
reaction. Of the three HMG proteins examined, HMG-1, HMG-2, and HMG-I(Y), the
products formed in the presence of HMG-I(Y) for both systems most closely match
those observed in vivo. Further analysis of HMG-I(Y) mutants demonstrates that
the stimulation of integration requires an HMG-I(Y) domain involved in DNA
binding. While complexes containing HMG-I(Y), ASV IN, and donor DNA can be
detected in gel shift experiments, coprecipitation experiments failed to
demonstrate stable interactions between HMG-I(Y) and ASV IN or between HMG-I(Y)
and HIV-1 IN.

PMCID: PMC104059
PMID: 10074149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Genomics. 1999 Feb 15;56(1):136-7.

Assignment of a new gene (LBH).

Kazmierczak B(1), Borrmann L, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Leobenerstrasse ZHG, Bremen, D-28359, Germany.

PMID: 10036196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell. 1999 Jan;3(1):125-9.

Virus infection leads to localized hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 at the 
IFN-beta promoter.

Parekh BS(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the human interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene by virus 
infection requires the assembly of a higher order nucleoprotein complex, the
enhanceosome, which consists of the transcriptional activators NF-kappa B
(p50/p65), ATF-2/c-jun, IRF-3 and IRF-7, architectural protein HMGI(Y), and the
coactivators p300 and CBP. In this report, we show that virus infection of cells 
results in a dramatic hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 that is localized to
the IFN-beta promoter. Furthermore, expressing a truncated version of IRF-3,
which lacks a p300/CBP interaction domain, suppresses both histone
hyperacetylation and activation of the IFN-beta gene. Thus, coactivator-mediated 
localized hyperacetylation of histones may play a crucial role in inducible gene 
expression.

PMID: 10024886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1998 Dec;81(2):289-93.

Genetic basis of uterine leiomyoma: involvement of high mobility group protein
genes.

Van de Ven WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Oncology, Center for Human Genetics, University of
Leuven, and Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, Belgium.
vandeven%molonc%cme@cc3.kuleuven.ac.be

Uterine leiomyoma is a common benign smooth muscle tumor occurring in 20 to 30%
of women over 30 years of age. Cytogenetic analysis of such tumors has revealed
that over 60% of them have a normal karyotype but also that they sometimes carry 
recurrent chromosome aberrations, e.g., aberrations involving the short arm of
chromosome 6 or the long arm of chromosome 12. Precise mapping of chromosome
breakpoints of such recurrent chromosome translocations and molecular
characterization of DNA regions immediately flanking such breakpoints have proven
to be a successful approach to identify and isolate genes involved in tumor
development. Recently, application of such a research strategy on translocations 
in uterine leiomyoma involving either chromosome 12q13-15 or 6p21 has led to the 
discovery that two members of the high-mobility group (HMG) protein gene family, 
HMGIC and HMGIY, are frequently rearranged in such tumors. The developmentally
regulated HMGIC and HMGIY genes encode closely related, low-molecular-mass
proteins, which are assumed to function as architectural factors in the nuclear
scaffold and to be critical in the assembly of stereospecific transcriptional
complexes. The frequent rearrangement of the HMGIC and HMGIY genes in uterine
leiomyomas suggests that these genes are directly involved in the aberrant growth
control observed in these tumors. Studies of a number of other benign solid
tumors - most of them in tissues of mesenchymal origin - indicated that
involvement of HMGIC is not restricted to uterine leiomyomas, suggesting that
benign solid tumor formation might have a common genetic denominator. The
possible role of HMG genes in growth control is further supported by results from
gene targeting experiments in mice, which indicate that HMGI-C plays an important
role in mammalian growth and development, as inactivation of the murine HMGIC
gene resulted in the pygmy phenotype. The discovery that high mobility group
protein genes might be crucial factors in the formation of uterine leiomyoma
provides a new opportunity for developing alternative therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 9989879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Jan 15;108(2):107-9.

Deletion of HMG17 in uterine leiomyomas with ring chromosome 1.

Polito P(1), Dal Cin P, Kazmierczak B, Rogalla P, Bullerdiek J, Van den Berghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Uterine leiomyomas are characterized by several subgroups with characteristic
chromosomal aberrations, mainly 12q14-15, 6p21, or interstitial deletions of
chromosomes 3 and 7. For the first two subgroups, aberrations of the HMGIC and
HMGIY genes have been described and are held responsible for tumor initiation.
For other subgroups no molecular findings have been described as of yet. We focus
here on a smaller subgroup of uterine leiomyomas with a ring chromosome 1 either 
as the only karyotypic deviation or occurring along with other abnormalities. In 
the p-arm of chromosome 1 HMG17, another member of the high-mobility group of
proteins has been localized to the short arm of chromosome 1 (1p35) with two PAC 
clones on metaphase spreads of a uterine leiomyoma ring(1). Hybridization signals
for these probes were not detected within the ring chromosome consistent with
loss or deletion of HMG17. These findings suggest that HMG17 does not play a
mechanistic role in leiomyoma similar to that observed with other high-mobility
proteins.

PMID: 9973936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Int J Cancer. 1999 Jan 18;80(2):199-204.

CDK4 gene amplification in osteosarcoma: reciprocal relationship with INK4A gene 
alterations and mapping of 12q13 amplicons.

Wei G(1), Lonardo F, Ueda T, Kim T, Huvos AG, Healey JH, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.

The INK4A gene, localized to human chromosome 9p21, encodes p16INK4A, a tumor
suppressor that functions at least in part through the inhibition of CDK4, a
cyclin-dependent kinase encoded by a gene at 12q13. To examine INK4A gene
alterations in uncultured samples of osteosarcoma and the relationship between
INK4A and CDK4 alterations, we analyzed the INK4A and CDK4 genes in 87 specimens 
from 79 patients. INK4A deletion and CDK4 gene amplification were determined by
quantitative Southern blot analysis. INK4A exon 2 was screened for mutation by
polymerase chain reaction and single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis.
Methylation at the CpG island in INK4A, associated with loss of p16INK4A
expression, was assessed by Southern blot analysis using methylation-sensitive
restriction enzymes. INK4A deletion (4/55) or rearrangement (1/55) was found in 5
of 55 cases. No INK4A exon 2 point mutations and methylation were detected. CDK4 
gene amplification was found in 6 of 67 samples, but not in tumors with INK4A
alteration. Amplification analysis of other genes at 12q13 (GLI, CHOP, HMGI-C and
MDM2) in these 6 cases supports the view that CDK4 and MDM2 are independent
targets for amplification, with variable amplification of the intervening region 
containing HMGI-C. Of 46 patients studied for both INK4A alterations and CDK4
amplification, the tumors in 22% contained one or the other. The prevalence of
these alterations, in conjunction with the reported inactivation of RB in up to
80% of cases, suggests that genetic lesions deregulating the G1 to S cell cycle
checkpoint may be an almost constant feature in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma.

PMID: 9935200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Feb;8(2):217-27.

Sequence analysis of an 80 kb human neocentromere.

Barry AE(1), Howman EV, Cancilla MR, Saffery R, Choo KH.

Author information: 
(1)The Murdoch Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Flemington Road, Parkville
3052, Australia.

We previously described the cloning of an 80 kb DNA corresponding to the core
protein-binding domain of a human chromosome 10-derived neocentromere. Here we
report the complete sequence of this DNA (designated NC DNA) and its detailed
structural analysis. The sequence is devoid of human centromeric alpha-satellite 
DNA and the pericentric beta- and gamma-satellites, the ATRS and 48 bp repeat
DNA. One copy of a sequence that is related to the CENPB box motif is present,
and a number of copies of other pericentric sequences including pJalpha and
classical satellites I and III are present but both their relative sparsity and
non-tandem organization suggest that each sequence, on its own, is unlikely to
mimic any role the sequence may have in the normal centromere. The DNA-binding
motifs of the architectural and regulatory proteins HMGI and topoII have a normal
abundance and random distribution, implying that these sequences are not key
functional elements. The total A + T content of the sequence is not notably
different from that of the human genome, but an abundance of AT-rich islands and 
a biased distribution of these islands within the NC sequence are
clearlydiscernible and may be functionally significant. Substantial amounts of
transposable elements and low copy number tandem repeats, including several that 
are highly AT- and purine-rich, are also present and may act as functional
elements. One of the AT-rich tandemrepeats (AT28) may form interesting structures
and is described in detail. The defined features show only a loose resemblance to
the structures of known centromeres, highlighting the possibility that, rather
than a conserved primary sequence, it is the overallcomposition and distribution 
patterns of various unknown functional elements, or any 'ordinary' DNA under
appropriate epigenetic influences, that determine centromere formation and
function. This is the firstdetailed analysis of a neocentromere DNA and provides 
a basis for comparison against future sequences.

PMID: 9931329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Jan;24(1):78-82.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of breakpoints in pleomorphic adenomas
with 8q12-13 abnormalities identifies a subgroup of tumors without PLAG1
involvement.

Röijer E(1), Kas K, Behrendt M, Van de Ven W, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Göteborg University, Sweden.

Recently, we identified the PLAG1 gene as the target gene in pleomorphic adenomas
with chromosome abnormalities involving 8q12. The majority of breakpoints were
shown to reside within the 5' noncoding region of the gene. We now report three
pleomorphic adenomas with breakpoints located distal to PLAG1 in band 8q13. These
tumors had the following chromosome 8 abnormalities: ins(8;12)(q12-13;q14q15),
t(8;12)(q13;q15), and t(6;8)(p21.3-22;q13). Fluorescence in situ hybridization
mapping of the chromosome 8 breakpoints revealed a yeast artificial chromosome
clone spanning the breakpoints in two tumors. In none of the cases was PLAG1
activated and/or disrupted. Three candidate genes, N8, HMGIC, and HMGIY, were
analyzed for rearrangements and/or abnormal expression by using reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, rapid amplification of 3' cDNA ends, and
Northern blot analyses.

PMID: 9892112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Hematol. 1999 Jan;60(1):27-35.

Binding of HMG-I(Y) elicits structural changes in a silencer of the human
beta-globin gene.

Chase MB(1), Haga SB, Hankins WD, Williams DM, Bi Z, Strovel JW, Obriecht C, Berg
PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Proteins involved in repression of the human beta-globin gene may be useful in
the treatment of sickle cell anemia, in conjunction with therapy to reactivate
fetal globin genes. If there is a reciprocal elevation of gamma-globin expression
upon repression, this approach could be useful in additional hemoglobinopathies. 
We previously showed that repression of the beta-globin gene appears to be
mediated through two DNA sequences, silencers I and II, and identified a protein 
termed BP1 which binds to both silencer sequences. In this study, we cloned two
cDNAs encoding proteins which bind to an oligonucleotide in silencer I containing
a BP1 binding site. These cDNAs correspond to HMG-I and HMG-Y, isoforms regarded 
as architectural proteins. We demonstrate that binding of HMG-I(Y) to this
oligonucleotide causes bending/flexure of the DNA. HMG-I(Y) also binds to a
second oligonucleotide containing a BP1 binding site located in a negative
control region upstream of the delta-globin gene, suggesting a role for HMG-I(Y) 
in repression of adult globin genes. Expression studies revealed that HMG-I(Y) is
ubiquitously expressed in human tissues that do not express beta-globin, being
present in 48 of 50 tissues and six hematopoietic cell lines examined.
Furthermore, HMG-I(Y) expression is down-regulated during differentiation of
primary erythroid cells. We present a model in which HMG-I(Y) alters DNA
conformation to allow binding of repressor proteins, and in which the relative
amount of HMG-I(Y) helps to determine the repressive state of the beta-globin
gene.

PMID: 9883803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1525-32.

Induction of high mobility group-I(Y) protein by endotoxin and interleukin-1beta 
in vascular smooth muscle cells. Role in activation of inducible nitric oxide
synthase.

Pellacani A(1), Chin MT, Wiesel P, Ibanez M, Patel A, Yet SF, Hsieh CM,
Paulauskis JD, Reeves R, Lee ME, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Nonhistone chromosomal proteins of the high mobility group (HMG) affect the
transcriptional regulation of certain mammalian genes. For example, HMG-I(Y)
controls cytokine-mediated promoters that require transcription factors, such as 
nuclear factor-kappaB, for maximal expression. Even though a great deal is known 
about how HMG-I(Y) facilitates expression of other genes, less is known about the
regulation of HMG-I(Y) itself, especially in cells in primary culture. Therefore 
we investigated the effect of endotoxin and the cytokine interleukin-1beta on
HMG-I(Y) expression in vascular smooth muscle cells. Induction of HMG-I(Y) peaked
after 48 h of interleukin-1beta stimulation (6.2-fold) in cells in primary
culture, and this increase in mRNA corresponded to an increase in HMG-I(Y)
protein. Moreover, immunohistochemical staining revealed a dramatic increase in
HMG-I(Y) protein expression in vascular smooth muscle cells after endotoxin
stimulation in vivo. This increase in HMG-I(Y) expression (both in vitro and in
vivo) mirrored an up-regulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase, a
cytokine-responsive gene. The functional significance of this coinduction is
underscored by our finding that HMG-I(Y) potentiated the response of inducible
nitric oxide synthase to nuclear factor-kappaB transactivation. Taken together,
these studies suggest that induction of HMG-I(Y), and subsequent transactivation 
of iNOS, may contribute to a reduction in vascular tone during endotoxemia and
other systemic inflammatory processes.

PMID: 9880529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochimie. 1998 Aug-Sep;80(8-9):665-71.

Non-B-DNA structures on the interferon-beta promoter?

Robbe K(1), Bonnefoy E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Régulation de l'Expression des Gènes Eucaryotes, CNRS, UPR37,
UFR Biomédicale, Université René-Descartes, Paris, France.

The high mobility group (HMG) I protein intervenes as an essential factor during 
the virus induced expression of the interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene. It is a
non-histone chromatine associated protein that has the dual capacity of binding
to a non-B-DNA structure such as cruciform-DNA as well as to AT rich B-DNA
sequences. In this work we compare the binding affinity of HMGI for a synthetic
cruciform-DNA to its binding affinity for the HMGI-binding-site present in the
positive regulatory domain II (PRDII) of the IFN-beta promoter. Using gel
retardation experiments, we show that HMGI protein binds with at least ten times 
more affinity to the synthetic cruciform-DNA structure than to the PRDII B-DNA
sequence. DNA hairpin sequences are present in both the human and the murine
PRDII-DNAs. We discuss in this work the presence of, yet putative, non-B-DNA
structures in the IFN-beta promoter.

PMID: 9865489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Dec 22;95(26):15270-4.

The barrier-to-autointegration protein is a host factor for HIV type 1
integration.

Chen H(1), Engelman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and
Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

In vivo, retroviral integration is mediated by a large nucleoprotein complex,
termed the preintegration complex (PIC). PICs isolated from infected cells
display in vitro integration activity. Here, we analyze the roles of different
host cell factors in the structure and function of HIV type 1 (HIV-1) PICs. PICs 
purified by size exclusion after treatment with high salt lost their integration 
activity, and adding back an extract from uninfected cells restored this
activity. In parallel, the native protein-DNA intasome structure detected at the 
ends of HIV-1 by Mu-mediated PCR footprinting was abolished by high salt and
restored by the crude cell extract. Various purified proteins previously
implicated in retroviral PIC function then were analyzed for their effects on the
structure and function of salt-treated HIV-1 PICs. Whereas relatively low amounts
(5-20 nM) of human barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF) protein restored
integration activity, substantially more (5-10 microM) human host factor HMG I(Y)
was required. Similarly high levels (3-8 microM) of bovine RNase A, a DNA-binding
protein used as a nonspecific control, also restored activity. Mu-mediated PCR
footprinting revealed that of these three purified proteins, only BAF restored
the native structure of the HIV-1 protein-DNA intasome. We suggest that BAF is a 
natural host cofactor for HIV-1 integration.

PMCID: PMC28032
PMID: 9860958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Dec;23(4):361-6.

Localization and expression of the human estrogen receptor beta gene in uterine
leiomyomata.

Pedeutour F(1), Quade BJ, Weremowicz S, Dal Cin P, Ali S, Morton CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Estrogens have an important function in the natural history of uterine
leiomyomata. The human estrogen receptor beta gene (ESR2) has been identified
recently and mapped to 14q22-24, a region frequently rearranged in uterine
leiomyomata and other benign tumors, including pulmonary chondroid hamartomas and
endometrial polyps. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization and radiation hybrid
mapping, we map ESR2 within 14q23-24.1, to a region approximately 2 Mb
centromeric to the t(12;14) breakpoint in uterine leiomyomata, between markers
D14S63 and WI-7536. Two YAC clones, 948B6 and 741H4, contain ESR2. Using RT-PCR, 
we show that ESR2 is expressed in uterine leiomyomata and pulmonary chondroid
hamartomas as well as in normal myometrium. Lack of a direct relationship between
rearrangement of 14q23-24 and ESR2 expression suggests that ESR2 is not involved 
with HMGIC or HMGIY in t(12;14) or t(6;14). However, because of its relatively
close physical distance from the characteristic site of rearrangements in
14q23-24, a role for ESR2 in the pathobiology of these tumors warrants future
consideration.

PMID: 9824210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Dec;23(4):350-7.

The expression pattern of the Hmgic gene during development.

Hirning-Folz U(1), Wilda M, Rippe V, Bullerdiek J, Hameister H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany.

The technique of RNA in situ hybridization to mouse embryo sections from
different developmental stages was used to perform a detailed analysis of the
expression pattern of the gene for the architectural chromatin factor Hmgic. At
early stages of fetal development (day 9.5 post conceptionem), Hmgic is expressed
at a high rate throughout the whole embryo. In the second half of development,
the pattern of expression becomes more restricted. Expression is found in
mesenchymal derivatives, which differentiate into cartilage or muscle, in
epithelial cell layers of the lung, pancreas, submandibular gland, and vibrissae,
and in some special parts of the central nervous system. The expression pattern
of Hmgic was compared with the previously reported studies of Hmgiy gene
expression, another member of the Hmgic protein family, and with the expression
of histone H4, Hist4, which is representative of cellular proliferation stages.
In some tissues the pattern of expression for both factors coincides, but in
others the expression is different. Hmgic expression correlates throughout fetal 
development with high proliferative activity. In contrast, Hmgiy is expressed
also in tissues with no proliferative activity, such as the cortical plate of the
telencephalon and the spinal cord at late gestational stages.

PMID: 9824208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Dec;23(4):279-85.

HMGIY is the target of 6p21.3 rearrangements in various benign mesenchymal
tumors.

Kazmierczak B(1), Dal Cin P, Wanschura S, Borrmann L, Fusco A, Van den Berghe H, 
Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Specific chromosomal abnormalities of chromosomal region 6p21.3 have been
described in subsets of many benign mesenchymal tumors. In the presented study,
we investigated a series of 36 such cases by FISH, and Southern blot analyses for
HMGIY rearrangements. FISH results revealed that the chromosomal breakpoints of
11 pulmonary chondroid hamartomas (PCHs), 12 endometrial polyps (EPs), one
lipoma, and two uterine leiomyomas (ULs) were located within a 80 kb region
surrounding the HMGIY gene. In 11 PCHs and one UL the breakpoints were located 3'
of HMGIY, and one PCH showed a breakpoint 5' of HMGIY. Southern blot analyses
with intra- and extragenic probes were performed of primary tumor material or
cell lines from one UL, three PCHs, and five EPs. In none of these cases was an
intragenic rearrangement found. Finally, we were able to detect expression of
truncated HMGIY transcripts by 3'-RACE PCR. Our data clearly show the role of a
further member of the HMGI family in the development of benign mesenchymal
tumors. Although most of the breakpoints of the chromosomal translocations
involving HMGIY are located outside the gene, aberrant transcripts resembling the
structure of those observed in the case of HMGIC have been found. Our molecular
investigations thus led to the identification of the molecular mechanism by which
rearrangements of either of two closely related genes lead to the development of 
frequent benign mesenchymal tumors in humans.

PMID: 9824199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Leukoc Biol. 1998 Nov;64(5):681-91.

High mobility group I/Y protein functions as a specific cofactor for Oct-2A:
mapping of interaction domains.

Abdulkadir SA(1), Casolaro V, Tai AK, Thanos D, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, The Schepens Eye Research Institute &
Committee on Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114,
USA.

The octamer motif (ATTTGCAT) present in several eukaryotic promoters and
enhancers is now known to influence the transcription of several genes by
interacting with members of a broad family of homeodomain proteins. The promoter 
of the human class II MHC gene HLA-DRA contains a conserved octamer element that 
can bind (among other proteins) the transcription factor Oct-2A and the high
mobility group proteins (HMG) I/Y. We have previously determined that HMG I(Y)
and Oct-2A cooperatively activate HLA-DRA gene expression, most likely due to the
ability of HMG I(Y) to selectively recruit Oct-2A to the octamer motif. In this
report, we present results of our investigations of the mechanisms of cooperative
transactivation of HLA-DRA transcription by Oct-2A and HMG I(Y). We show that
both the amino- and the carboxy-terminal domains of Oct-2A are required for
HLA-DRA transactivation. Experiments using domain-swap chimeras of the Oct-1 and 
Oct-2A polypeptides indicate that cooperative activation of the DRA gene by HMG
I(Y) and Oct-2A requires the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of Oct-2A. However,
HMG I(Y) physically interacts with the conserved POU domains of both Oct-1 and
Oct-2A. We therefore postulate that the nature of the CTD attached to the POU
homeodomain influences the outcome of interaction with HMG I(Y). These studies
support the view that HMG I(Y) is an important cofactor for HLA-DRA gene
activation by Oct-2A and provide insights into its mechanism of action.

PMID: 9823775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Cell Sci. 1998 Dec;111 ( Pt 23):3551-61.

Three distinct sub-nuclear populations of HMG-I protein of different properties
revealed by co-localization image analysis.

Amirand C(1), Viari A, Ballini JP, Rezaei H, Beaujean N, Jullien D, Käs E, Debey 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physicochimie Biomoléculaire et Cellulaire, ESA 7033 CNRS,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.

We have studied the nuclear distribution of the non-histone HMG-I protein by
indirect immunofluorescence in several human and murine somatic cell lines and in
growing mouse oocytes. We show that HMG-I, a high mobility-group protein which
interacts in vitro with the minor groove of AT-rich B-DNA, is found exclusively
in the nucleus and that this localization corresponds to a complex distribution. 
By comparing the HMG-I-dependent fluorescence signal with the chromatin density
determined by Hoechst 33342 or propidium iodide staining, we present evidence for
the existence of three HMG-I sub-populations whose contribution to the total
fluorescence can be determined using a newly developed quantitative
co-localization image analysis program: foci that correspond to regions of
heterochromatin, intense dots located within decondensed chromatin, and a more
diffuse component extending throughout the nucleoplasm. In addition, we show that
these sub-populations differ in their sensitivity to nuclease digestion and in
vivo displacement by the minor-groove binder Hoechst 33342. Finally, double
immunolabeling of RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription and HMG-I shows that 
the intense dots are not correlated with sites of high transcriptional activity. 
We discuss the possibility that these three sub-populations reflect distinct and 
separable biological functions of the HMG-I protein.

PMID: 9811569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell. 1998 Oct;2(4):457-67.

Acetylation of HMG I(Y) by CBP turns off IFN beta expression by disrupting the
enhanceosome.

Munshi N(1), Merika M, Yie J, Senger K, Chen G, Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New
York, New York 10032, USA.

The transcriptional coactivators CBP and P/CAF are required for activation of
transcription from the IFN beta enhanceosome. We show that CBP and P/CAF
acetylate HMG I(Y), the essential architectural component required for
enhanceosome assembly, at distinct lysine residues, causing distinct effects on
transcription. Thus, in the context of the enhanceosome, acetylation of HMG I by 
CBP, but not by P/CAF, leads to enhanceosome destabilization and disassembly. We 
demonstrate that acetylation of HMG I(Y) by CBP is essential for turning off IFN 
beta gene expression. Finally, we show that the acetyltransferase activities of
CBP and P/CAF modulate both the strength of the transcriptional response and the 
kinetics of virus-dependent activation of the IFN beta gene.

PMID: 9809067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Immunol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;76(5):461-6.

A role for the architectural transcription factors HMGI(Y) in cytokine gene
transcription in T cells.

Shannon MF(1), Himes SR, Attema J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Immunology, Hanson Centre for Cancer Research, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia. frances.shannon@anu.edu.au

The ability of CD4- T helper (Th) cells to differentiate into two phenotypes
distinguished by their cytokine profile is a major determinant of the type of
immune response elicited by bacterial, viral or parasitic infections. The
development of Th1 cells is associated with delayed-type hypersensitivity and
cell-mediated immune responses while Th2 responses are associated with humoral
immunity and allergic inflammation. While these phenotypes exist at the extremes 
of the immune response and are associated with pathological conditions, there is 
an enormous plasticity that allows reversibility and the development of a wide
array of cytokine profiles. There has been considerable interest in determining
the signals and transcription factors that govern the differential production of 
the Th1 and Th2 cytokines. There are now several candidate transcription factors 
that may play a role in skewing the cytokine profile in a distinct direction.
Because of the plasticity of the system, these transcription factors must be able
to respond to environmental signals in a very subtle manner and not simply be
on/off switches for expression of the cytokine genes. The architectural
transcription factor high mobility group (HMG) I(Y) is a modulator of the
function of many of the transcription factors that control cytokine gene
transcription. HMGI(Y) appears to play either a positive or negative role
depending on the cytokine promoter and its ratio to other transcription factors. 
It is proposed that HMGI(Y) may have a role in regulating the production of
cytokines in favour of a given immune response.

PMID: 9797468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 13;95(21):12191-6.

Efficient recruitment of TFIIB and CBP-RNA polymerase II holoenzyme by an
interferon-beta enhanceosome in vitro.

Kim TK(1), Kim TH, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 7 Divinity
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The transcriptional activity of an in vitro assembled human interferon-beta gene 
enhanceosome is highly synergistic. This synergy requires five distinct
transcriptional activator proteins (ATF2/c-JUN, interferon regulatory factor 1,
and p50/p65 of NF-kappaB), the high mobility group protein HMG I(Y), and the
correct alignment of protein-binding sites on the face of the DNA double helix.
Here, we investigate the mechanisms of enhanceosome-dependent transcriptional
synergy during preinitiation complex assembly in vitro. We show that the
stereospecific assembly of the enhanceosome is critical for the efficient
recruitment of TFIIB into a template-committed TFIID-TFIIA-USA (upstream
stimulatory activity complex) and for the subsequent recruitment of the RNA
polymerase II holoenzyme complex. In addition, we provide evidence that
recruitment of the holoenzyme by the enhanceosome is due, at least in part, to
interactions between the enhanceosome and the transcriptional coactivator CREB,
cAMP responsive element binding protein (CBP). These studies reveal a unique role
of enhanceosomes in the cooperative assembly of the transcription machinery on
the human interferon-beta promoter.

PMCID: PMC22807
PMID: 9770462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Obstet Gynecol. 1998 Oct;92(4 Pt 1):624-7.

New concepts in the treatment of uterine leiomyomas.

Stewart EA(1), Nowak RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
eastewart@bics.bwh.harvard.edu

Uterine leiomyomas are a common clinical occurrence for gynecologists. The
current approach to treating these neoplasms is shaped by classic surgical
principles and the knowledge that these tumors are responsive to the gonadal
steroids estrogen and progesterone. As knowledge of leiomyomas advances through
the techniques of molecular biology and molecular genetics, new concepts are
developed that go beyond just myomas as steroid-responsive tumors. Understanding 
the molecular events involved in the transformation of a normal myometrial cell
into a neoplastic cell and the subsequent growth of these leiomyoma cells will be
important in determining the pathogenesis of these tumors and providing new
targets for treatment. Knowing the role of peptide growth factors, including
basic fibroblast growth factor and transforming growth factor-beta, in the
pathogenesis of leiomyoma-related symptoms might lead to new treatments targeting
these molecules or their receptors. As the effects of genes, including HMGIC and 
HMGI(Y), are determined; new treatments to prevent leiomyoma formation or growth 
may be developed. As we gain understanding of the molecular events that cause
benign gynecologic conditions such as leiomyomas, safer and more effective
treatments might be found as we enter the 21st century.

PMID: 9764641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cancer Res. 1998 Sep 15;58(18):4193-8.

Detection of high mobility group I HMGI(Y) protein in the diagnosis of thyroid
tumors: HMGI(Y) expression represents a potential diagnostic indicator of
carcinoma.

Chiappetta G(1), Tallini G, De Biasio MC, Manfioletti G, Martinez-Tello FJ,
Pentimalli F, de Nigris F, Mastro A, Botti G, Fedele M, Berger N, Santoro M,
Giancotti V, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Napoli, Fondazione Senatore Pascale,
Università di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Hyperplastic or neoplastic proliferative lesions of thyroid follicular epithelium
consist of a spectrum, ranging from nodular hyperplasia to undifferentiated
(anaplastic) carcinoma, and usually present as palpable thyroid nodules. Thyroid 
nodules are a common occurrence in the general population, but only a small
proportion of them are eventually diagnosed as carcinoma. The difficulty in
objectively identifying those thyroid nodules that are malignant to avoid
unnecessary surgery, combined with the range and effectiveness of the available
therapeutic options in those patients who do, indeed, have thyroid carcinoma, has
prompted the search for tumor markers and prognostic indicators. The high
mobility group I (HMGI) proteins represent a class of nuclear proteins involved
in the regulation of chromatin structure and function. HMGI(Y), one of the
members of this class, is expressed at high levels during embryogenesis and in
malignant tumors but at generally low levels in normal adult human tissues.
Previous work on a limited number of thyroid samples suggested that the detection
of the HMGI(Y) proteins may provide a clinically useful diagnostic tool. To
verify this assumption, we analyzed HMGI(Y) expression by a combination of
immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription-PCR in 358 thyroid tissue samples 
that were representative of the spectrum of thyroid tumor pathology. HMGI(Y) was 
detectable in 18 of 19 follicular carcinomas, 92 of 96 papillary carcinomas, and 
11 of 11 undifferentiated (anaplastic) carcinomas but in only 1 of 20
hyperplastic nodules, 44 of 200 follicular adenomas, and 0 of 12 normal tissue
samples. The correlation between HMGI(Y) expression and a diagnosis of carcinoma 
was highly significant (P < 0.0001). We also prospectively collected and analyzed
for HMGI(Y) expression by immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription-PCR in
12 fine needle aspiration biopsies from 10 patients who subsequently underwent
surgical removal of a solitary thyroid nodule. HMGI(Y) was detectable only in the
four fine needle aspiration biopsies, corresponding to the thyroid nodules that
were definitively diagnosed as carcinomas after surgery (two follicular
carcinomas and two papillary carcinomas). The remaining eight samples (six
follicular adenomas and two samples consisting of normal follicular cells) were
negative. The findings of this study confirm the differential expression of
HMGI(Y) in thyroid neoplasia and indicate the HMGI(Y) protein as a potential
marker for thyroid carcinoma.

PMID: 9751634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Blood. 1998 Oct 1;92(7):2399-409.

Distinct regulatory mechanisms for interferon-alpha/beta (IFN-alpha/beta)- and
IFN-gamma-mediated induction of Ly-6E gene in B cells.

Khodadoust MM(1), Khan KD, Park EH, Bothwell AL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8011, USA.

The murine Ly6-E gene is transcriptionally induced by interferon-alpha/beta
(IFN-alpha/beta) and IFN-gamma in a variety of distinct cell types. The mechanism
of IFN inducibility in B-cell lines was investigated by deletion analysis of the 
promoter and by identifying DNA binding proteins in mobility shift assays. A
region located in the distal part of the promoter at -2.3 kb contributed to
inducibility by both types of IFNs. This region contains a novel element in
addition to the previously well-characterized IFN-stimulated response element
(ISRE). The probes containing ISRE detected IFN-inducible complexes in mobility
shift assays and the signal transducer and activator of transcripition-1 was
found to be in these complexes from cells treated with either type of IFN. An
additional element present in the proximal part of the promoter at position -109 
is also required for IFN-alpha/beta-mediated induction. These data suggested a
cooperative interaction between these physically disparate regulatory regions. A 
crucial role for HMGI(Y) protein in this cooperative multiprotein complex is
supported by the evidence that inhibition of HMGI(Y) expression via antisense RNA
results in the loss of IFN-alpha/beta-mediated induction of the Ly6-E gene. These
results show the complexity involved in achieving cell-type specificity in
IFN-mediated gene regulation.

PMID: 9746780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Oct 1;26(19):4413-21.

AT-hook motifs identified in a wide variety of DNA-binding proteins.

Aravind L(1), Landsman D.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, NIH, Building 38A, Room 8N807, 8600 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20894, USA.

The AT-hook is a small DNA-binding protein motif which was first described in the
high mobility group non-histone chromosomal protein HMG-I(Y). Since its
discovery, this motif has been observed in other DNA-binding proteins from a wide
range of organisms. Using pattern searches and position-dependent matrices, we
have extracted the AT-hook motifs present in a non-redundant protein sequence
database. We have classified these motifs into three types according to their
sequence similarity and have found that they are prevalent in many eukaryotic
nuclear proteins in single or multiple copies. Furthermore, AT-hook motifs are
frequently associated with known functional domains seen in chromatin proteins
and in DNA-binding proteins (e.g. histone folds, homeodomains and zinc fingers). 
In general, it appears that the AT-hook motif is an auxiliary protein motif
cooperating with other DNA-binding activities and facilitating changes in the
structure of the DNA either as a polypeptide on its own [e.g. HMG-I(Y)] or as
part of a multidomain protein [e.g. Swi2p in Saccharomyces cerevisiae or HRX
(ALL-1) in Homo sapiens]. It is most interesting that this motif seems to be
quite specific to known or predicted chromosomal/DNA-binding proteins, suggesting
that it may act as a versatile minor groove tether.

PMCID: PMC147871
PMID: 9742243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. FEBS Lett. 1998 Aug 14;433(1-2):174-8.

DNA binding of NF-Y: the effect of HMGI proteins depends upon the CCAAT box.

Liberati C(1), Sgarra R, Manfioletti G, Mantovani R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento de Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Università di
Milano, Milan, Italy.

NF-Y is a conserved sequence-specific transcription factor binding to CCAAT
boxes. The chromatin-associated HMGI proteins influence promoter activities
through positive and negative effects on binding of transcription factors. It was
previously shown that HMGI(Y) synergizes the binding of NF-Y to the
alpha2-collagen CCAAT box [Currie, R.A. (1997) J. Biol Chem. 272, 30880-30888].
Using recombinant proteins, we confirm that at low concentrations of NF-Y,
HMGI(Y) acts synergistically on the alpha2-collagen CCAAT and we extend this
observation to HMGI and HMGI-C. However, enhancement of DNA binding to
gamma-globin, alpha-globin and MHC class II Ea CCAAT boxes was not observed. At
high concentrations, HMGI proteins inhibit binding to alpha2-collagen and to
gamma-globin, but not to high affinity Ea or a-globin CCAAT. In none of our
experiments did we see a ternary complex between NF-Y, HMGI(Y) and DNA. In
protein competition experiments, NF-Y affinity was at least two orders of
magnitude higher, even in the context of the suboptimal gamma-globin CCAAT. Our
data prove that HMGI proteins have complex positive and negative effects on NF
binding to some, but not to all CCAAT boxes, suggesting that this phenomenon is
dictated by the sequences flanking the pentanucleotide rather than direct
protein-protein interactions.

PMID: 9738956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;30(7):761-6.

The high mobility group protein, HMGI-C.

Goodwin G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Institute of Cancer Research, Haddow
Laboratories, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

HMGI-C is a nuclear phosphoprotein that contains three short DNA-binding domains 
(AT-hooks) and a highly acidic C-terminus. Interest in the protein has recently
been stimulated by three observations: the expression of the gene is cell-cycle
regulated, the gene is rearranged in a number of tumours of mesenchymal origin
and mice that have both HMGI-C alleles disrupted exhibit the pygmy phenotype.
These observations suggest a role for HMGI-C in cell growth, more specifically,
during foetal growth since the protein is normally only expressed in embryonic
tissues. It is likely that the HMGI-C protein acts as an architectural
transcription factor, regulating the expression of one or more genes that control
embryonic cell growth. Since HMGI-C binds to the minor groove of AT-rich DNA this
interaction could be a target for minor groove chemotherapeutic agents in the
treatment of sarcomas expressing the rearranged gene.

PMID: 9722980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Circ Res. 1998 Aug 10;83(3):295-304.

Hypoxia induces high-mobility-group protein I(Y) and transcription of the
cyclooxygenase-2 gene in human vascular endothelium.

Ji YS(1), Xu Q, Schmedtje JF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Molecular Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The University 
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, USA.

Cyclooxygenases catalyze a rate-limiting step in the synthesis of vascular
endothelial prostaglandins. Expression of the inducible cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
gene is increased by hypoxia in human vascular endothelial cells via the nuclear 
factor (NF)-kappaB p65 transcription factor, which is necessary but not
sufficient to fully induce COX-2 transcription in response to hypoxia. After
finding that cytoplasmic NF-kappaB p65 and IkappaBalpha (an inhibitory protein
that binds NF-kappaB p65 precursors) levels are not changed by hypoxia, we
hypothesized that other factors might play a role in regulating the COX-2
promoter, like the high-mobility-group (HMG) I(Y) family of proteins, which
features multiple A.T hooks and is associated with NF-kappaB-mediated
transactivation. Nuclear protein obtained from human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) was supplemented with HMG I(Y) during electrophoretic mobility
shift assays using an NF-kappaB-3' element probe. These data suggested that HMG
I(Y) proteins interact with NF-kappaB p65 to induce COX-2 promoter activity. We
also found that TATA-box DNA demonstrated increased electrophoretic shifting
indicative of DNA binding after incubation with either hypoxic HUVEC nuclear
protein or normoxic nuclear protein supplemented with HMG I(Y). Transfection of
HUVECs with an expression vector containing the COX-2 promoter ligated to HMG
I(Y) cDNA demonstrated positive feedback on COX-2 promoter activity in hypoxia.
We confirmed that COX-2 is transcriptionally regulated by hypoxia using a nuclear
runoff assay. Hypoxia increased steady-state cellular levels of HMG I(Y) mRNA as 
an early event, corresponding with increases in HMG I(Y) protein. Overexpression 
of HMG I(Y) was associated in a dose-response relationship with increasing
prevalence of the COX-2 protein in hypoxic HUVECs. Furthermore, sense (and
antisense) HMG I(Y) overexpression caused stimulation (or inhibition) of COX-2
promoter activity as measured by luciferase reporter gene expression. The
physiological significance of these findings was demonstrated by
cyclooxygenase-dependent release of prostaglandin E2 by HUVECs in hypoxia. We
concluded that hypoxia increases expression of HMG I(Y) proteins while
facilitating transactivation of the COX-2 promoter. The HMG I(Y) family of
proteins may therefore function as part of a hypoxia-induced enhanceosome that
helps to promote transcription of COX-2.

PMID: 9710122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Jul 30;1399(1):83-7.

Nucleotide sequence of the chicken HMGI-C cDNA and expression of the HMGI-C and
IGF1 genes in autosomal dwarf chicken embryos.

Ruyter-Spira CP(1), Herbergs J, Limpens E, Marsh JA, van der Poel JJ, Ayoubi TA, 
Groenen MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding, Wageningen Institute of Animal Sciences (WIAS),
Wageningen Agricultural University, The Netherlands. carolien.spira@alg.vf.wau.nl

Mutations in the genes for high mobility group protein I-C (HMGI-C) and
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) are known to be responsible for dwarf
phenotypes in the mouse. Because the locus for autosomal dwarfism (adw) in the
chicken maps to a region which is syntenic to a region in the human and mouse in 
which the HMGI-C and IGF1 genes are located, HMGI-C and IGF1 are likely candidate
genes for adw in the chicken. In this study their possible role in the
establishment of this phenotype has been investigated. We have cloned and
sequenced the complete coding region of the chicken HMGI-C cDNA. Comparison with 
its human counterpart revealed a nucleotide sequence conservation of 84%. Only
nine amino acids are present principally in the N-terminal segment before the
first DNA-binding domain. Northern blot analysis showed no difference in the
expression of the HMGI-C gene between adw and wild-type chicken embryos. Also no 
mutations in either the HMGI-C or the IGF1 RNA nucleotide sequence were detected 
in adw chicken embryos.

PMID: 9714752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Hered. 1998 Jul-Aug;89(4):295-300.

The HMGI-C gene is a likely candidate for the autosomal dwarf locus in the
chicken.

Ruyter-Spira CP(1), de Groof AJ, van der Poel JJ, Herbergs J, Masabanda J, Fries 
R, Groenen MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Wageningen Institute of Animal
Sciences (WIAS), Wageningen Agricultural University, The Netherlands.
carolien.spira@alg.vf.wau.nl

In order to map the autosomal dwarf (adw) locus in the chicken, 11 segregating
families were created. Initially five of these families were used for a linkage
experiment in which the genome was scanned with microsatellites using a technique
called bulked segregant analysis. Subsequently animals from 11 families were
typed individually for microsatellites that appeared to be linked. We were able
to detect genetic linkage of the adw locus to five different microsatellite
markers on chromosome 1, the closest showing a recombination fraction of only
0.03 (LOD score 32.12). In mice the phenotype pygmy shows a striking similarity
to the autosomal dwarf phenotype in chickens, both having a disproportionately
large head. The pygmy locus has been mapped on mouse chromosome 10 and found to
represent a mutation in the gene coding for high-mobility group protein I-C
(HMGI-C). Considering the synteny between regions of chicken chromosome 1, mouse 
chromosome 10 and human chromosome 12, and taking into account both the
phenotypic characteristics and the mode of inheritance of the chicken adw and the
mouse pygmy loci, the HMGI-C gene is a major candidate gene for the adw locus in 
the chicken. Fluorescence in situ hybridization of metaphase chromosomes with the
chicken HMGI-C gene as a probe, showed that the chicken HMGI-C gene is indeed
closely linked to marker LEI146 on chromosome 1.

PMID: 9703685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Oncogene. 1998 Jul 30;17(4):413-8.

Truncated and chimeric HMGI-C genes induce neoplastic transformation of NIH3T3
murine fibroblasts.

Fedele M(1), Berlingieri MT, Scala S, Chiariotti L, Viglietto G, Rippel V,
Bullerdiek J, Santoro M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Napoli, Fondazione Senatore Pascale, Naples, 
Italy.

Overexpression of the high mobility group I (HMGI) proteins is often associated
with the malignant phenotype. Moreover, many benign human tumors, mainly of
mesenchymal origin, are characterized by rearrangements of the HMGI-C gene. In
most cases, HMGI-C alterations involve breaks within the third intron of the gene
resulting in aberrant transcripts carrying exons from 1-3, which encode the three
DNA binding domains, fused to ectopic sequences. Here, we show that the
expression of a truncated form of HMGI-C protein carrying only the three
DNA-binding domains, or of a fusion protein carrying the three DNA-binding
domains of HMGI-C and the LIM domains of the lipoma preferred partner gene (LPP) 
protein, causes malignant transformation of NIH3T3 cells. The unrearranged
wild-type HMGI-C cDNA did not exert any transforming activity. These findings
indicate that rearranged forms of HMGI-C play a role in cell transformation.

PMID: 9696033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Oncogene. 1998 Jul 2;16(26):3387-96.

Tumor promoter induces high mobility group HMG-Y protein expression in
transformation-sensitive but not -resistant cells.

Cmarik JL(1), Li Y, Ogram SA, Min H, Reeves R, Colburn NH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Physiology, Frederick Cancer Research and
Development Center, National Cancer Institute, Maryland 21702, USA.

Elevated levels of high mobility group (HMG) nonhistone chromosomal proteins I
and Y, alternatively spliced members of the HMG-I(Y) family of architectural
transcription factors, have been linked with human cancer and with neo-plastic
and metastatic phenotypes in model systems. To investigate whether HMG-I(Y)
proteins may influence susceptibility to neoplastic transformation, HMG-I(Y) mRNA
and protein levels were compared in the JB6 murine model of neoplastic
progression. HMG-I(Y) mRNAs were expressed at very low levels in preneoplastic,
transformation-resistant (P-) cell lines and were constitutively expressed at
much higher levels in both transformation-sensitive (P +) and transformed (Tx)
tumorigenic cell lines. HMG-I(Y) mRNAs were induced to higher levels by the tumor
promoter 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol acetate (TPA) and were sustained longer in P+ 
than in P- cells. Nevertheless, in both P- and P+ cells, primer extension
analysis revealed that the same four major HMG-I(Y) gene transcription start
sites were utilized with or without TPA treatment. RT-PCR revealed that there was
always slightly more Y than I form mRNA present in all of the variant JB6 cell
lines. Immunoblotting indicated that both HMG-I and -Y proteins increased in P + 
cells in response to TPA treatment. Remarkably, in P- cells treated with TPA,
only HMG-I (and not HMG-Y) protein levels increased. This unique differential
TPA-induction of the HMG-Y protein in JB6 variants suggests a role for HMG-Y in
mediating tumor promoter-induced neoplastic transformation. Furthermore, these
results demonstrate that HMG-I and Y protein translation and/or stability is
differently regulated in JB6 P- cells and provide the first indication that I and
Y proteins may have different functions.

PMID: 9692546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Oncogene. 1998 Jul 23;17(3):377-85.

Increase in AP-1 activity is a general event in thyroid cell transformation in
vitro and in vivo.

Battista S(1), de Nigris F, Fedele M, Chiappetta G, Scala S, Vallone D,
Pierantoni GM, Mega T, Santoro M, Viglietto G, Verde P, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Napoli, Fondazione Senatore Pascale,
Oncologia Sperimentale D ed E, Italia.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 1999 Feb 25;18(8):1649. Megar T [corrected to Mega T].

We have recently reported that neoplastic transformation of two rat thyroid
epithelial cell lines by retroviruses carrying the v-mos and v-ras Ki oncogenes
is associated with a drastic increase of AP-1 activity. The most important
effects were represented by the dramatic junB and fra-1 gene induction, which was
abolished by the block of the transformation-induced HMGI-C protein synthesis.
Here, we have further characterized the transformation-dependent AP-1 activity,
by analysing the expression of different jun- and fos-related components, in rat 
thyroid cell lines transformed by several oncogenes, in human thyroid carcinoma
cell lines, and in naturally occurring human thyroid tumours. A significant
increase of Fra-1 and JunB protein levels was detected in all oncogene
transformed rat thyroid cell lines. Fra-1 gene induction was demonstrated to
occur also in human thyroid carcinoma cell lines and tissues. Conversely, c-Jun
and JunD proteins, rather than JunB, accumulated in human thyroid carcinoma cell 
lines. An induction of AP-1 target genes was also detected both in rat and human 
thyroid transformed cell lines. Therefore, in vivo and in vitro thyroid cell
transformation is associated with important compositional changes in the AP-1
complex and an increased transcriptional activity.

PMID: 9690519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 7;273(32):20015-20.

Protein footprinting reveals specific binding modes of a high mobility group
protein I to DNAs of different conformation.

Frank O(1), Schwanbeck R, Wisniewski JR.

Author information: 
(1)III. Zoologisches Institut-Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität Göttingen,
Humboldtallee 34A, 37073 Göttingen, Germany.

The high mobility group proteins I and Y (HMGI/Y) are abundant components of
chromatin. They are thought to derepress chromatin, affect the assembly and
activity of the transcriptional machinery, and associate with constitutive
heterochromatin during mitosis. HMGI/Y protein molecules contain three potential 
DNA-binding motifs (AT-hooks), but the extent of contacts between DNA and the
entire protein has not been determined. We have used a protein-footprinting
procedure to map regions of the Chironomus HMGI protein molecule that are
involved in contacts with DNA. We find that in the presence of double-stranded
DNA all AT-hook motifs are protected against hydroxyl radical proteolysis. In
contrast, only two motifs were protected in the presence of four-way junction
DNA. Large regions that flank the AT-hook motifs were found to be strongly
protected against proteolysis in complexes with interferon-beta promoter DNA,
suggesting amino acid residues outside the AT-hooks considerably contribute to
DNA binding.

PMID: 9685339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 Jul;37(5):885-96.

A/T-rich sequences act as quantitative enhancers of gene expression in transgenic
tobacco and potato plants.

Sandhu JS(1), Webster CI, Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences and Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition,
University of Cambridge, UK.

The role of an A/T-rich positive regulatory region (P268, -444 to -177 from the
translation start site) of the pea plastocyanin gene (PetE) promoter has been
investigated in transgenic plants containing chimeric promoters fused to the
beta-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene. This region enhanced GUS expression in
leaves of transgenic tobacco plants when fused in either orientation to a minimal
pea PetE promoter (-176 to +4) and in roots when fused in either orientation
upstream or downstream of a minimal cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter (-90 to
+5). The region was also able to enhance GUS expression in microtubers of
transgenic potato plants when placed in either orientation upstream of a minimal 
class I patatin promoter (-332 to +14). Dissection of P268 revealed that cis
elements responsible for enhancing GUS expression from the minimal PetE promoter 
were distributed throughout P268. Multiple copies of a 31 bp A/T-rich sequence
from within P268 and of a 26 bp random A/T sequence were able to enhance GUS
expression from the minimal PetE promoter, indicating that A/T-rich sequences are
able to act as quantitative, non-tissue-specific enhancer elements in higher
plants.

PMID: 9678583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cell. 1998 Jan;1(2):277-87.

Recruitment of CBP/p300 by the IFN beta enhanceosome is required for synergistic 
activation of transcription.

Merika M(1), Williams AJ, Chen G, Collins T, Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York 10032, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the IFN beta gene in response to virus infection
requires the assembly of an enhanceosome, consisting of the transcriptional
activators NF-kappa B, IRF1, ATF2/c-Jun, and the architectural protein HMG I(Y). 
The level of transcription generated by all of these activators is greater than
the sum of the levels generated by individual factors, a phenomenon designated
transcriptional synergy. We demonstrate that this synergy, in the context of the 
enhanceosome, requires a new protein-protein interaction domain in the p65
subunit of NF-kappa B. Transcriptional synergy requires recruitment of the
CBP/p300 coactivator to the enhanceosome, via a new activating surface assembled 
from the novel p65 domain and the activation domains of all of the activators.
Deletion, substitution, or rearrangement of any one of the activation domains in 
the context of the enhanceosome decreases both recruitment of CBP and
transcriptional synergy.

PMID: 9659924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Cell. 1997 Dec;1(1):119-29.

The mechanism of transcriptional synergy of an in vitro assembled interferon-beta
enhanceosome.

Kim TK(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

A functional interferon-beta gene enhanceosome was assembled in vitro using the
purified recombinant transcriptional activator proteins ATF2/c-JUN, IRF1, and
p50/p65 of NF-kappa B. Maximal levels of transcriptional synergy between these
activators required the specific interactions with the architectural protein HMG 
I(Y) and the correct helical phasing of the binding sites of these proteins on
the DNA helix. Analyses of the in vitro assembled enhanceosome revealed that the 
transcriptional synergy is due, at least in part, to the cooperative assembly and
stability of the complex. Reconstitution experiments showed that the formation of
a stable enhanceosome-dependent preinitiation complex require cooperative
interactions between the enhanceosome; the general transcription factors TFID,
TFIIA, and TFIIB; and the cofactor USA. These studies provide a direct
biochemical demonstration of the importance of the structure and function of
natural multicomponent transcriptional enhancer complexes in gene regulation.

PMID: 9659909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Keio J Med. 1998 Jun;47(2):73-7.

HMGI family proteins: architectural transcription factors in mammalian
development and cancer.

Zhou X(1), Chada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
08854-5635, USA.

The HMGI proteins, a subfamily of the high mobility group (HMG) proteins, play an
important role in the regulation of gene expression. They bind to AT-rich DNA
sequences and alter DNA conformation to modulate the binding affinity of
transcription factors to their cognate sites. They are expressed almost
exclusively during embryogenesis and Hmgi-c null mice have the mouse pygmy
phenotype. Studies have revealed the disruption of HMGI family genes in a variety
of mesenchymal-derived benign tumors. Therefore, the HMGI genes function in the
coordination of cell proliferation and differentiation during mammalian
development.

PMID: 9659816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genome Res. 1998 Jun;8(6):631-43.

Physical map of human 6p21.2-6p21.3: region flanking the centromeric end of the
major histocompatibility complex.

Tripodis N(1), Mason R, Humphray SJ, Davies AF, Herberg JA, Trowsdale J, Nizetic 
D, Senger G, Ragoussis J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, United Medical and Dental School
of Guy's and St. Thomas', Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

We have physically mapped and cloned a 2.5-Mb chromosomal segment flanking the
centromeric end of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). We characterized
in detail 27 YACs, 144 cosmids, 51 PACs, and 5 BACs, which will facilitate the
complete genomic sequencing of this region of chromosome 6. The contig contains
the genes encoding CSBP, p21, HSU09564 serine kinase, ZNF76, TCP-11, RPS10,
HMGI(Y), BAK, and the human homolog of Tctex-7 (HSET). The GLO1 gene was mapped
further centromeric in the 6p21.2-6p21.1 region toward TCTE-1. The gene order of 
the GLO1-HMGI(Y) segment in respect to the centromere is similar to the gene
order in the mouse t-chromosome distal inversion, indicating that there is
conservation in gene content but not gene order between humans and mice in this
region. The close linkage of the BAK and CSBP genes to the MHC is of interest
because of their possible involvement in autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC310739
PMID: 9647638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 1998;27:105-31.

Minor groove-binding architectural proteins: structure, function, and DNA
recognition.

Bewley CA(1), Gronenborn AM, Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-520, USA.

To date, high-resolution structures have been solved for five different
architectural proteins complexed to their DNA target sites. These include
TATA-box-binding protein, integration host factor (IHF), high mobility group
I(Y)[HMG I(Y)], and the HMG-box-containing proteins SRY and LEF-1. Each of these 
proteins interacts with DNA exclusively through minor groove contacts and alters 
DNA conformation. This paper reviews the structural features of these complexes
and the roles they play in facilitating assembly of higher-order protein-DNA
complexes and discusses elements that contribute to sequence-specific recognition
and conformational changes.

PMCID: PMC4781445
PMID: 9646864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Histochem Cytochem. 1998 Jul;46(7):863-4.

Intranuclear distribution of HMGI/Y proteins. An immunocytochemical study.

Martelli AM(1), Riccio M, Bareggi R, Manfioletti G, Tabellini G, Baldini G,
Narducci P, Giancotti V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Morfologia Umana, Università di Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

The intranuclear distribution of HMGI/Y proteins was analyzed by
immunofluorescent staining in several cell lines using a polyclonal antibody that
stained a fibrogranular network. In actively growing 3T3 fibroblasts, HMGI/Y
proteins were mainly localized to heterochromatin masses, whereas in quiescent
cells they were more diffusely distributed. Double labeling experiments showed a 
co-localization of HMGI/Y with DNA topoisomerase IIalpha. These results are in
agreement with previously published biochemical data and indicate a possible
involvement of HMGI/Y proteins in several nuclear functions, including chromatin 
organization and gene expression.

PMID: 9632746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cancer Res. 1998 Jun 1;58(11):2278-81.

Genomic changes in endometrial polyps associated with tamoxifen show no evidence 
for its action as an external carcinogen.

Dal Cin P(1), Timmerman D, Van den Berghe I, Wanschura S, Kazmierczak B, Vergote 
I, Deprest J, Neven P, Moerman P, Bullerdiek J, Van den Berghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Eighty-eight endometrial specimens from 36 postmenopausal breast cancer patients 
treated with tamoxifen were investigated cytogenetically and molecularly using
fluorescence in situ hybridization with appropriate probes for the HMGIC and
HMGIY genes. Twenty control specimens, 10 endometrial polyps, and 10 endometrial 
biopsy specimens were investigated in the same way. Of the 88 specimens, 44 were 
from endometrial polyps; 3 were from endocervical polyps; 7 were from cystic
endometrium; 30 were from normal or atrophic endometrium, normal endocervix, or
myometrium; and 4 were from endometrial carcinomas. Chromosome investigation of
the endometrial polyps showed the nature of the chromosome changes in
tamoxifen-induced polyps to be the same as that in the controls and in sporadic
endometrial polyps described in the literature. HMGIC and HMGIY gene
rearrangements in both groups were identical as shown by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, which also allowed for the detection of seven hidden paracentric
inversions involving 12q15, one of which occurred in a cystic endometrium. The
carcinomas did not exhibit any of these changes. Because abnormal expression of
HMGIC or HMGIY as a consequence of structural chromosome changes in 12q15 or
6p21, respectively, is invariably associated with benign neoplasia,
tamoxifen-associated endometrial polyps are unlikely to undergo further malignant
transformation, and a mode of action of tamoxifen as an external carcinogen is
unlikely.

PMID: 9622058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 17;273(16):9755-60.

Enhancement of serum-response factor-dependent transcription and DNA binding by
the architectural transcription factor HMG-I(Y).

Chin MT(1), Pellacani A, Wang H, Lin SS, Jain MK, Perrella MA, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The mechanisms by which HMG-I proteins regulate cell growth are unknown, and
their effects on gene expression have only been partially elucidated. We explored
the potential interaction between HMG-I proteins and serum-response factor (SRF),
a member of the MADS-box family of transcription factors. In cotransfection
experiments, HMG-I(Y) potentiated SRF-dependent activation (by more than 5-fold) 
of two distinct SRF-responsive promoters, c-fos and the smooth muscle-specific
gene SM22alpha. This effect was also observed with a heterologous promoter
containing multiple copies of the CC(A/T)6GG (CArG) box. HMG-I proteins bound
specifically to the CArG boxes of c-fos and SM22alpha in gel mobility shift
analysis and enhanced binding of SRF to these CArG boxes. By chelating
peptide-immobilized metal affinity chromatography, we mapped the domain of
HMG-I(Y) that interacts with SRF to amino acids 50-81, a region that does not
bind specifically to DNA in electrophoretic mobility shift assays even though it 
includes the third AT-hook DNA-binding domain. Surprisingly, HMG-I(Y) mutants
that failed to bind DNA still enhanced SRF binding to DNA and SRF-dependent
transcription. In contrast, deletion of the HMG-I(Y) 50-81 domain that bound SRF 
prevented enhancement of transcription. To our knowledge, this is the first
report of an HMG-I protein interacting with a MADS-box transcription factor. Our 
observations suggest that members of the HMG-I family play an important role in
SRF-dependent transcription and that their effect is mediated primarily by a
protein-protein interaction.

PMID: 9545312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Proc Assoc Am Physicians. 1998 Mar-Apr;110(2):140-9.

An HMG-I protein from human endothelial cells apparently is secreted and impairs 
activation of Hageman factor (factor XII).

Donaldson VH(1), Wagner CJ, Mitchell BH, Mandle R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH,
USA.

A highly purified protein from lysates of human umbilical vein endothelial cells 
(HUVECs) inhibited the activation of factor XII [Hageman factor (HF)] and removed
factor XIIa from an activating surface, thus impairing HF-dependent coagulation
and kinin-releasing activities. Two tryptic peptides from this protein had 100%
identity with amino acids 31-44 and 89-101 of a nonhistone DNA-binding protein
known as high-mobility group protein (HMG-I). In specific antibody experiments,
the clot-inhibiting property in purified lysate protein from HUVECs was
associated with HMG-I. The molecular weight of the protein that inhibited
clotting was consistent with that predicted for HMG-I. Protein that inhibited
contact activation and had antigenic properties of HMG-I and HUVEC lysate protein
also was found in conditioned media from unchallenged cultured HUVECs. After
HUVECs were incubated with 14C lysine, conditioned media contained
immunoprecipitable radiolabeled protein with the same molecular weight as that
recovered from cell lysates, suggesting that this high-mobility group protein
(HMG-I) may be secreted. Purified factor XII antigens were displaced from a glass
surface by HMG-I from lysates in proportion to the amount of HMG-I protein that
was added. This HMG-I probably inhibits factor XII functions because its high
positive charge favors competitive binding to an activating substance.

PMID: 9542770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cancer Lett. 1998 Apr 24;126(2):119-26.

Cloning of a breakpoint cluster region on chromosome 14 in uterine leiomyoma.

Bhugra B(1), Smolarek TA, Lynch RA, Meloni AM, Sandberg AA, Deaven L, Menon AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH 45267-0524, USA.

A recurrent reciprocal chromosomal translocation, t(12;14)(q15;q24) is frequently
observed in uterine leiomyoma. Chromosome 12 breakpoints have been shown to occur
in a region of approximately 150 kb that contains the gene for a high mobility
group protein (HMGI-C). The breakpoint region on chromosome 14 has not been
precisely defined. We have generated a contig of overlapping yeast artificial
chromosome (YAC) clones approximately 3 Mb in size. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis showed that this contig spanned the t(12;14)
breakpoints in three uterine leiomyomas and that the breakpoints in these tumors 
occurred within a 1 Mb region. A 30 kb cosmid spanning one of the breakpoints was
isolated to set the stage for identifying regions on chromosome 14 that may cause
this region to be a preferential site for chromosomal translocation.

PMID: 9585056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Rheumatol. 1998 Apr;25(4):703-9.

Prevalence and characterization of novel pANCA, antibodies to the high mobility
group non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2, in systemic rheumatic
diseases.

Uesugi H(1), Ozaki S, Sobajima J, Osakada F, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the immunodiagnostic value of antibodies to the high
mobility group non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2, which have been
identified as novel target antigens of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (pANCA), in sera from patients with systemic rheumatic diseases.
METHODS: Anti-HMG1 or HMG2 antibody was assayed by ELISA and Western blotting in 
sera from patients with systemic rheumatic diseases. These antibodies were
analyzed for the relationship with pANCA detected by indirect immunofluorescence 
in these diseases, and with clinical features in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
RESULTS: Anti-HMG1 or HMG2 antibody was frequently detected in sera from patients
with RA (48%), SLE (45%), Sjögren's syndrome (SS) (44%), and systemic sclerosis
(SSc) (41%). In these diseases, anti-HMG1 antibody was detected more frequently
than anti-HMG2 antibody. In sera from patients with RA, the positivity for
anti-HMG1 and HMG2 antibodies was significantly correlated with the positivity
for pANCA (p < 0.0001). Anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies were associated with some
disease activity variables, e.g., erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive
protein, rheumatoid factor, joint score and hand grip strength in RA, and CH50,
C3, C4, and IgG in SLE.
CONCLUSION: Anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies are detected commonly in systemic rheumatic
diseases, particularly in RA, SLE, SS, and SSc. HMGI and HMG2 seem to be the
significant target antigens of pANCA in RA. These antibodies are significantly
associated with disease activity indices in RA and SLE.

PMID: 9558172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Mar 15;26(6):1433-9.

NF-kappaB mediated transcriptional activation is enhanced by the architectural
factor HMGI-C.

Mantovani F(1), Covaceuszach S, Rustighi A, Sgarra R, Heath C, Goodwin GH,
Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, via Giorgieri, 134127 Trieste, Italy.

High mobility group I proteins (HMGI, HMGY and HMGI-C) are a family of low
molecular mass non-histone nuclear proteins which constitute an important
component of the active chromatin structure. Two members of this family, HMGI and
HMGY, have been demonstrated to contribute to the transcriptional regulation of
several promoters by interacting with the DNA and with different transcription
factors. On the contrary, very little is known about the third member, HMGI-C,
which plays an important role during embryonic growth and in the process of cell 
transformation, its gene being rearranged in a large number of mesenchimal
tumors. In this paper we show for the first time that HMGI-C is also able to
function as architectural factor, enhancing the activity of a transcription
factor, NF-kappaB, through the PRDII element of the beta-interferon enhancer.
Moreover we show that this enhancement is absolutely dependent on the binding of 
HMGI-C to its target sequence. The demonstration that HMGI-C is able to modulate 
transcription is thus an important initial step in the identification of genes
regulated by this factor.

PMCID: PMC147413
PMID: 9490789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. FASEB J. 1998 Apr;12(6):421-31.

Binding to four-way junction DNA: a common property of architectural proteins?

Zlatanova J(1), van Holde K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Oregon State University, Corvallis 
97331-7305, USA. zlatanoj@ucs.orst.edu

Proteins that can be shown to strongly bind in vitro to the four-way (Holliday)
junction DNA include not only the obvious candidates such as enzymes involved in 
recombination, but also a remarkably diverse group of seemingly unrelated
proteins. These include the HMG1 box proteins, members of the HMGI-Y family,
winged helix proteins (including linker histones), the SWI/SNF complex, and some 
totally unrelated prokaryotic proteins. What these proteins seem to share is a
propensity to bind to bent DNA, to bend DNA upon binding, and/or to
preferentially interact with DNA crossings. Thus, they appear to be, in the main,
architectural proteins, although some (like the SWI/SNF complex) have very
specific functional roles as well. Perhaps because they bind to or promote the
formation of particular DNA structures, the four-way junction binding proteins
are frequently interchangeable in cellular function. Furthermore, since a given
kind of structure can be recognized by many different protein motifs, it is not
surprising that apparently unrelated proteins can fall into such a single
functional class.

PMID: 9535214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 Apr;36(6):897-907.

Characterisation and promoter analysis of the Arabidopsis gene encoding
high-mobility-group protein HMG-I/Y.

Gupta R(1), Webster CI, Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences and Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition,
University of Cambridge, UK.

The single-copy gene encoding the Arabidopsis HMG-I/Y protein was isolated and
characterised. The gene encodes a protein of 204 amino acid residues and contains
a single intron of 73 bp. Primer extension analysis indicates that transcription 
starts 115 bp upstream of the translation start and the leader sequence contains 
a short open reading frame of 13 amino acid residues. The 5'-upstream region of
2117 bp and several 5' deletions were fused to the beta-glucuronidase (GUS)
reporter gene and transferred to tobacco by Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation. Analysis of transgenic tobacco plants containing HMG-I/Y promoter
regions of -2117, -1468 and -707 from the translation start detected GUS activity
in all organs examined, including roots, stems, leaves and floral organs.
Deletion from -707 to -185 resulted in a 20-30-fold reduction in GUS activity in 
roots and stems, indicating the presence of important quantitative regulatory
elements in this region.

PMID: 9520280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Virol. 1998 Mar;72(3):2125-31.

Modulation of activity of Moloney murine leukemia virus preintegration complexes 
by host factors in vitro.

Li L(1), Farnet CM, Anderson WF, Bushman FD.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Laboratories, Norris Cancer Center, University of Southern
California School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90033, USA.

We have explored the requirements for host proteins in the integration of Moloney
murine leukemia virus (MoMuLV) cDNA in vitro. Following infection, it is possible
to lyse cells and obtain preintegration complexes (PICs) capable of integrating
the MoMuLV cDNA into an added target DNA in vitro (intermolecular integration).
PICs can be stripped of required proteins by gel filtration in high-salt buffers 
(600 mM KCI), allowing the nature of the removed factors to be investigated by in
vitro reconstitution. In a previous study of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 
(HIV-1) PICs, the host protein HMG I(Y) was found to be able to restore activity 
to salt-stripped PICs. In contrast, salt stripping and reconstitution of MoMuLV
PICs led to the proposal that a host factor is important for a different
activity, blocking integration into the cDNA itself (autointegration). In this
report, we investigated reconstitution of salt-stripped MoMuLV PICs and found
that addition of cellular extract from uninfected NIH 3T3 cells could block
autointegration and also restore intermolecular integration. Isolation of the
intermolecular integration-complementing activity yielded HMG I(Y), as in the
HIV-1 case. However, HMG I(Y) could not block autointegration, implicating a
different host factor in this process. Additionally, when MoMuLV PICs were
partially purified but not salt stripped, the intermolecular integration activity
was reduced but could be stimulated by the addition of any of several purified
DNA binding proteins. In summary, three activities were detected: (i) the
intermolecular integration cofactor HMG I(Y), (ii) an autointegration barrier
protein, and (iii) stimulatory DNA binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC109507
PMID: 9499068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Am J Clin Pathol. 1998 Mar;109(3):251-61.

Chromosomal translocations in benign tumors: the HMGI proteins.

Hess JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
Missouri, USA.

The high-mobility group (HMG) proteins are a family of nonhistone
chromatin-associated proteins that have an important role in regulating chromatin
architecture, as well as in regulating gene expression. The gene encoding one HMG
protein, HMGI-C, is frequently rearranged or overexpressed by chromosomal
translocations in common benign mesenchymal tumors including lipomas, leiomyomas,
fibroadenomas, pleomorphic adenomas, aggressive angiomyxomas, and pulmonary
hamartomas. The HMGI-C translocations involve many different translocation
partners and are remarkable for their low risk of progression to malignancy.
Recently, another member of this subfamily, HMGI(Y), has also been shown to be
rearranged in lipomas and pulmonary chondroid hamartomas. Given the high
frequency of these benign mesenchymal tumors, it is likely that translocations
involving the HMGI subfamily are one of the most common chromosomal
rearrangements in human neoplasia. The HMG proteins are reviewed with an emphasis
on the HMGI subfamily, and the potential role of these proteins in human
tumorigenesis is discussed.

PMID: 9495195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cancer Res. 1998 Feb 1;58(3):426-31.

Expression of HMGI(Y) proteins in squamous intraepithelial and invasive lesions
of the uterine cervix.

Bandiera A(1), Bonifacio D, Manfioletti G, Mantovani F, Rustighi A, Zanconati F, 
Fusco A, Di Bonito L, Giancotti V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Universitá degli Studi di Trieste, Italy.

The expression of nuclear proteins high mobility group (HMG) I and HMGY was
investigated in intraepithelial and invasive lesions of the uterine cervix. Human
carcinoma cell lines C-41, ME-180, and CaSki were used for testing protein
expression in neoplastic cells from the cervix. Morphological grading of the
dysplasias (CIN 1, CIN 2, and CIN 3) and invasive carcinomas from formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded samples parallels the degree of nuclear immunostaining obtained
using a polyclonal antibody raised against the amino-terminal region of HMGI(Y)
proteins. The immunostaining obtained with HMGI(Y) antibody was compared with
that observed using the antibody Ki-67, and the results were similar. We suggest 
the use of HMGI(Y) antibody in clinical oncology as a useful marker of
intraepithelial lesions and invasive carcinomas.

PMID: 9458084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jan 14;242(2):452-6.

Preferential expression of HMGI-C isoforms lacking the acidic carboxy terminal in
human leukemia.

Kottickal LV(1), Sarada B, Ashar H, Chada K, Nagarajan L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Hematology and Therapy, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The high mobility group HMGI chromosomal proteins are an important component of
chromatin. The HMGI-C protein consists of three amino terminal DNA binding
domains ("AT hooks"), a linker region and an acidic carboxy domain. In
mesenchymal tumors, chromosomal translocations of 12q13-15 result in fusion
proteins containing the AT hooks and novel carboxy terminals. We have
investigated the status of the HMGI-C gene in two cases of leukemia with
anomalies of chromosome 12q and identified three novel isoforms (designated
alpha, beta and gamma) derived from alternate splicing. One of the patients
expressed all three isoforms, whereas the second patient expressed only the gamma
isoform; preferential expression of the HMGI-C gamma isoform was also detected in
the leukemic cell lines ML3 and BV173. The results are consistent with a crucial 
role for truncation of the acidic carboxy domain of HMGI-C in abnormal growth.

PMID: 9446816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Plant Mol Biol. 1997 Dec;35(6):987-92.

The single-copy gene encoding high-mobility-group protein HMG-I/Y from pea
contains a single intron and is expressed in all organs.

Gupta R(1), Webster CI, Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, UK.

The coding and 3'-downstream regions of the gene encoding the high mobility group
protein HMG-I/Y from pea have been isolated, sequenced and characterised. A 795
bp pea genomic fragment containing the coding region of the pea HMG-I/Y gene with
a single intron of 201 bp was isolated by PCR. The gene encodes a protein of 197 
amino acid residues with four copies of the AT-hook DNA-binding motif encoded by 
exon 2. Southern blot analysis on genomic DNA revealed the presence of a single
copy of the HMG-I/Y gene in the haploid genome. The pea HMG-I/Y gene is expressed
in all organs of pea including roots, stems, leaves, flowers, tendrils and
developing seeds, as determined by northern blot analysis.

PMID: 9426619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 5;272(49):30880-8.

Functional interaction between the DNA binding subunit trimerization domain of
NF-Y and the high mobility group protein HMG-I(Y).

Currie RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, The Picower Institute for Medical Research,
Manhasset, New York 11030, USA. racurrie@picower.edu

The mammalian transcription factor, NF-Y(CBF), contains three known subunit
components, NF-YA (CBF-B), NF-YB(CBF-A), and NF-YC(CBF-C), which are all required
to reconstitute specific CCAAT box DNA binding activity. In this study, the high 
mobility group chromosomal protein, HMG-I(Y), has been shown to activate NF-Y in 
transient transfections in vivo using the natural murine alpha2(I) collagen
promoter and a multimerized version of the proximal NF-Y(CBF) CCAAT box element. 
In vitro analysis of the alpha2(I) collagen promoter region inclusive of the
NF-Y(CBF) binding site (-106 to -65 base pairs) failed to identify any high
affinity HMG-I(Y) DNA-binding sites. However, the heterotrimeric NF-Y complex, as
well as the NF-YA subunit alone, was shown to stably interact in vitro with both 
HMG-I(Y) and phosphorylated HMG-I, as modified by casein kinase II, using far
Western and protein-protein interaction solution assays in the absence of CCAAT
box DNA. Furthermore, the interaction between HMG-I(Y) and NF-Y was mapped to the
highly conserved DNA binding-subunit interaction domain (DBD) of the NF-YA
subunit and to a single AT-hook motif in HMG-I(Y). Recombinant HMG-I was also
found to stabilize the CCAAT box DNA binding activity of recombinant NF-Y, as
well as the native NF-Y complex, in vitro. Together, these results suggest a
functional HMG-I(Y) protein binding site has been identified in the NF-Y complex 
and mapped to the conserved DBD and AT-hook regions of NF-YA and HMG-I(Y),
respectively. This protein-protein interaction site may function to modulate NF-Y
activity through stabilization of NF-Y binding to its CCAAT box DNA-binding site.

PMID: 9388234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 21;272(47):29904-10.

High mobility group I proteins interfere with the homeodomains binding to DNA.

Arlotta P(1), Rustighi A, Mantovani F, Manfioletti G, Giancotti V, Tell G,
Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, 34100 Trieste, Italy.

Homeodomains (HDs) constitute the DNA binding domain of several transcription
factors that control cell differentiation and development in a wide variety of
organisms. Most HDs recognize sequences that contain a 5'-TAAT-3' core motif.
However, the DNA binding specificity of HD-containing proteins does not solely
determine their biological effects, and other molecular mechanisms should be
responsible for their ultimate functional activity. Interference by other factors
in the HD/DNA interaction could be one of the processes by which HD-containing
proteins achieve the functional complexity required for their effects on the
expression of target genes. Using gel-retardation assay, we demonstrate that two 
members of the high mobility group I (HMGI) family of nuclear proteins (HMGI-C
and HMGY) can bind to a subset of HD target sequences and inhibit HDs from
binding to the same sequences. The inhibition of the HD/DNA interaction occurs
while incubating HMGI-C with DNA either before or after the addition of the HD.
The reduced half-life of the HD.DNA complex in the presence of HMGI-C, and the
shift observed in the CD spectra recorded upon HMGI-C binding to DNA, strongly
suggest that structural modifications of the DNA are responsible for the
inhibition of the HD.DNA complex formation. Moreover, by co-transfection
experiments we provide evidence that this inhibition can occur also in vivo. The 
data reported here would suggest that HMGI proteins may be potential regulators
of the function of HD-containing proteins and that they are able to interfere
with the access of the HD to their target genes.

PMID: 9368066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Nov;16(11):1299-309.

Effects of epidermal growth factor and estrogen on the regulation of the HMG-I/Y 
gene in human mammary epithelial cell lines.

Holth LT(1), Thorlacius AE, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Washington State University, Pullman 
99164-4660, USA.

Members of the HMG-I/Y family of high-mobility-group chromatin proteins have been
demonstrated to regulate gene expression in human cells in vivo. They are thought
to function as gene regulatory molecules by acting as architectural transcription
factors that modulate DNA and/or chromatin structure. Numerous studies have
indicated that elevated HMG-I/Y gene expression is directly correlated with more 
advanced cancers and with increased metastatic potential. The inducible
expression of the HMG-I/Y gene was studied in two human mammary epithelial cell
lines, MCF7 and Hs578T, in the presence, or absence, of either 17 beta-estradiol 
or epidermal growth factor (EGF). Northern blot analysis indicated that there was
no increase in HMG-I/Y mRNA in the nonmetastatic MCF7 cells when they were
treated with either 17 beta-estradiol or EGF. In contrast, in the highly
metastatic Hs578T cell line, there is a dramatic induction of HMG-I/Y mRNA
expression of up to 23-fold when the cells are treated with EGF. mRNA primer
extension analysis indicated that only two (of the possible four different)
transcription initiation start sites in the HMG-I/Y gene are induced by EGF
treatment of the Hs578T cells. Additional experiments demonstrated that in both
epithelial cell types HMG-I/Y mRNAs are very stable (tl/2 of approximately 30 hr)
and that in the Hs578T cells treated with EGF the cellular concentrations of the 
HMG-I/Y proteins increase concurrently with the induced mRNA levels. Given that
HMG-I/Y proteins are regulators of gene activity whose elevated in vivo
concentrations are known to be correlated with increased metastatic potential,
these data demonstrating an EGF-induced over-expression of HMG-I/Y in the highly 
metastatic Hs578T, but not in the nonmetastatic MCF7cells, may have important
implications concerning the cellular mechanisms involved in the progression of
mammary epithelial tumors.

PMID: 9407002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Leukoc Biol. 1997 Nov;62(5):588-97.

Mechanism and biological significance of constitutive expression of MGSA/GRO
chemokines in malignant melanoma tumor progression.

Luan J(1), Shattuck-Brandt R, Haghnegahdar H, Owen JD, Strieter R, Burdick M,
Nirodi C, Beauchamp D, Johnson KN, Richmond A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

By reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay, and immunohistochemistry, MGSA-alpha, -beta, -gamma, and CXCR2 mRNA
expression and proteins are detected in 7 out of 10 human melanoma lesions. The
biological consequence of constitutive expression of the MGSA/GRO chemokine in
immortalized melanocytes was tested in SCID and nude mouse models. Continuous
expression of MGSA/GRO-alpha, -beta, or -gamma in immortalized melan-a mouse
melanocytes results in nearly 100% tumor formation for each of the clones tested,
whereas clones expressing only the neomycin resistance vector form tumors <10% of
the time. Moreover, antibodies to the MGSA/GRO proteins slow or inhibit the
formation of tumors in the SCID mouse model and block the angiogenic response to 
conditioned medium from the tumor-producing clones. Transcription of the MGSA/GRO
chemokines is regulated by an enhancesome-like complex comprised of the nuclear
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), HMG(I)Y, IUR, and Sp1 elements. In Hs294T melanoma
cells the half life of the IKB protein is shortened in comparison to normal
retinal epithelial cells, facilitating the endogenous nuclear localization of
NF-kappaB. We propose that this endogenous nuclear NF-kappaB, working in concert 
with the 115-kDa IUR-binding factor, promotes constitutive expression of MGSA/GRO
genes.

PMID: 9365113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 24;272(43):27476-83.

Cdc2 and mitogen-activated protein kinases modulate DNA binding properties of the
putative transcriptional regulator Chironomus high mobility group protein I.

Schwanbeck R(1), Wisniewski JR.

Author information: 
(1)III. Zoologisches Institut-Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität Göttingen,
Humboldtallee 34A, 37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Cells of the dipteran insect Chironomus contain a high mobility group protein
that is homologous to the mammalian high mobility group proteins I/Y (HMGI/Y).
These proteins facilitate the assembly of higher order nucleoprotein complexes.
In proliferating cells, >30% of Chironomus HMGI was found to be phosphorylated.
The phosphorylation sites were mapped to Ser3, Ser22, and Ser72 and were found to
be substrates for the kinases Cdc2 (and mitogen-activated protein (MAP)), MAP,
and Ca2+/phospholipid-dependent protein kinase, respectively. In mitotically
arrested cells, the extent of phosphorylation at Ser3 increased, whereas
phosphorylation at Ser22 remained unchanged. In nondividing cells,
phosphorylation at Ser3 and Ser22 was strongly reduced. The DNA binding affinity 
of Chironomus HMGI was not influenced by single phosphorylation at Ser3 or Ser22.
In contrast, phosphorylation at both of these sites resulted in a 10-fold
weakening of the binding activity and altered the mode of protein-DNA
interaction. Since both human and murine HMGI/Y proteins, similarly to the insect
HMGI protein, possess phosphorylation sites for Cdc2 and MAP kinases that
intersperse the AT-hook DNA-binding motifs, our results may reflect a general
mechanism that regulates the properties and function of this class of putative
transcriptional regulators.

PMID: 9341202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Immunol. 1997 Oct 15;159(8):3899-909.

Formation of a regulatory factor X/X2 box-binding protein/nuclear factor-Y
multiprotein complex on the conserved regulatory regions of HLA class II genes.

Louis-Plence P(1), Moreno CS, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Coordinate regulation of MHC class II genes occurs in a tissue-specific and
cytokine-inducible manner. While the upstream regulatory sequences are conserved 
among all MHC class II genes, multiple base pair changes are found, even within
the essential X box region. Analysis of all class II X boxes reveals differential
binding between two transcription factors known to interact with the X box
region, regulatory factor X and X2 box-binding protein (RFX and X2BP) of the
HLA-DRA gene. These data presented a paradox with regard to the coordinate
regulation of the class II genes if the factors though to regulate the HLA-DRA
gene do not bind to the homologous sequence of all class II genes. Previous
results suggested that cooperative interactions between the DNA binding proteins 
may be the key to understanding this paradox. Here RFX/X2BP/DNA complexes were
formed on all class II isotypes regardless of the ability of the X box region to 
bind either factor individually. To further determine the role of the
interactions between the X and Y factors, multiprotein/DNA complexes containing
RFX, X2BP, NF-Y, and X-Y box DNA of the DRA and DRB genes were formed. This
quaternary complex was extremely stable to competitor DNA, with a half-life > 4
h. These results suggest that the conserved X and Y boxes of class II genes
function similarly and define a single multiprotein regulatory complex for class 
II expression in B cells.

PMID: 9378978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Endocrinology. 1997 Oct;138(10):4291-300.

Hepatic nuclear factor 3 and high mobility group I/Y proteins bind the insulin
response element of the insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-1 promoter.

Allander SV(1), Durham SK, Scheimann AO, Wasserman RM, Suwanichkul A, Powell DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

The insulin response element (IRE) of the human insulin-like growth
factor-binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) promoter contains a palindrome of the
T(A/G)TTT sequence crucial to hormonal regulation of many genes. In initial
studies of how this IRE participates in hormonal regulation, the electromobility 
shift assay was used under a variety of conditions to identify IRE-binding
proteins. An exhaustive search identified five proteins that specifically bind
this IRE; purified proteins were used to show that all five are related to either
the high mobility group I/Y (HMGI/Y) or hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) protein
families. Further studies used purified HNF3 and HMGI proteins to show: 1) eah
protects the IGFBP-1 IRE from deoxyribonuclease I (DNaseI) digestion; and 2) HNF3
but not HMGI/Y binds to the related phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and Apo
CIII IREs. A series of IRE mutants with variable responsiveness to insulin were
used to show that the presence of a TGTTT sequence in the mutants did parallel,
but HMGI/Y and HNF3 binding to the mutants did not parallel, the ability of the
mutants to confer the inhibitory effect of insulin. In contrast, HNF3 binding to 
these IRE mutants roughly correlates with response of the mutants to
glucocorticoids. The way by which HNF3 and/or other as yet unidentified
IRE-binding proteins confer insulin inhibition to IGFBP-1 transcription and the
role of HMGI/Y in IRE function have yet to be established.

PMID: 9322942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 3;272(40):25083-90.

HMG-I(Y) phosphorylation status as a nuclear target regulated through insulin
receptor substrate-1 and the I4R motif of the interleukin-4 receptor.

Wang D(1), Zamorano J, Keegan AD, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical School,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2363, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-4 is a cytokine that regulates both the growth and
differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Its ligand binding specificity and
important signal transduction mechanisms are conferred by the IL-4 receptor alpha
chain (IL-4Ralpha). The I4R is a tyrosine-containing motif within IL-4Ralpha that
is critical for proliferative responses to IL-4. Although the I4R also
contributes to gene regulation, nuclear targets directly regulated by this motif 
have not been described. It is shown here that the tyrosine at position 497 in
the I4R is critical for regulation of the phosphorylation status of a set of
nuclear proteins that includes HMG-I(Y), small non-histone chromosomal proteins
involved in the control of gene expression in hematopoietic cell lines. Moreover,
IL-4 is unable to induce HMG-I(Y) phosphorylation in insulin receptor
substrate-1-deficient cells, and the inhibitor wortmannin completely blocks IL-4 
regulation of HMG-I(Y) phosphorylation status but not activation of an IL-4 Stat 
protein. Taken together, these data indicate that HMG-I(Y) is a nuclear target
whose phosphorylation status is regulated through the I4R motif via insulin
receptor substrate proteins, independent of activation of the Stat pathway.

PMID: 9312117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 3;272(40):25062-70.

Oncogenic raf-1 induces the expression of non-histone chromosomal architectural
protein HMGI-C via a p44/p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent pathway
in salivary epithelial cells.

Li D(1), Lin HH, McMahon M, Ma H, Ann DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The enzyme activity of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) increases in
response to agents acting on a variety of cell surface receptors, including
receptors linked to heterotrimeric G proteins. In this report, we demonstrated
that Raf-1 protein kinase activity in the mouse parotid glands was induced by
chronic isoproterenol administration in whole animals. To investigate the
molecular nature underlying cellular responses to Raf-1 activation, we have
stably transfected rat salivary epithelial Pa-4 cells with human Raf-1-estrogen
receptor fusion gene (DeltaRaf-1:ER) and used mRNA differential display in search
of messages induced by DeltaRaf-1:ER activation. Through this approach, the gene 
encoding non-histone chromosomal protein HMGI-C was identified as one of the
target genes activated by oncogenic Raf-1 kinase. Activation of Raf-1 kinase
resulted in a delayed and sustained increase of HMGI-C expression in the Pa-4
cells. The induction of HMGI-C mRNA level is sensitive to both the protein
synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide and transcription inhibitor actinomycin D. The 
role of the extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) signaling pathway in the
HMGI-C induction was highlighted by the result that the MAP kinase kinase (MEK)
inhibitor, PD 98059, blocked DeltaRaf-1:ER- and
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-stimulated HMGI-C induction. Altogether,
these findings support the notion that the Raf/MEK/ERK signaling module, at least
in part, regulates transcriptional activation of the chromosomal architectural
protein HMGI-C.

PMID: 9312114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. EMBO J. 1997 Sep 1;16(17):5310-21.

Neoplastic transformation of rat thyroid cells requires the junB and fra-1 gene
induction which is dependent on the HMGI-C gene product.

Vallone D(1), Battista S, Pierantoni GM, Fedele M, Casalino L, Santoro M,
Viglietto G, Fusco A, Verde P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Internazionale di Genetica e Biofisica, CNR, via Guglielmo Marconi
12, I-80125 Naples, Italy.

The expression of the high mobility group I (HMGI)-C chromatin component was
shown previously to be essential for the establishment of the neoplastic
phenotype in retrovirally transformed thyroid cell lines. To identify possible
targets of the HMGI-C gene product, we have analyzed the AP-1 complex in normal, 
fully transformed and antisense HMGI-C-expressing rat thyroid cells. We show that
neoplastic transformation is associated with a drastic increase in AP-1 activity,
which reflects multiple compositional changes. The strongest effect is
represented by the dramatic junB and fra-1 gene induction, which is prevented in 
cell lines expressing the antisense HMGI-C. These results indicate that the
HMGI-C gene product is essential for the junB and fra-1 transcriptional induction
associated with neoplastic transformation. The inhibition of Fra-1 protein
synthesis by stable transfection with a fra-1 antisense RNA vector significantly 
reduces the malignant phenotype of the transformed thyroid cells, indicating a
pivotal role for the fra-1 gene product in the process of cellular
transformation.

PMCID: PMC1170163
PMID: 9311991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Sep;20(1):90-2.

Hamartoma of the breast with involvement of 6p21 and rearrangement of HMGIY.

Dal Cin P(1), Wanschura S, Christiaens MR, Van den Berghe I, Moerman P, Polito P,
Kazmierczak B, Bullerdiek J, Van den Berghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

The first description of involvement of 6p21 and rearrangement of HMGIY in a
hamartoma of the breast is in keeping with the emerging role of HMG genes in
benign mesenchymal tumors.

PMID: 9290959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5386-99.

Distinct functional properties of IkappaB alpha and IkappaB beta.

Tran K(1), Merika M, Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York 10032, USA.

The biological activity of the transcription factor NF-kappaB is controlled
mainly by the IkappaB alpha and IkappaB beta proteins, which restrict NF-kappaB
to the cytoplasm and inhibit its DNA binding activity. Here, we carried out
experiments to determine and compare the mechanisms by which IkappaB alpha and
IkappaB beta inhibit NF-kappaB-dependent transcriptional activation. First, we
found that in vivo IkappaB alpha is a stronger inhibitor of NF-kappaB than is
IkappaB beta. This difference is directly correlated with their abilities to
inhibit NF-kappaB binding to DNA in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, IkappaB alpha,
but not IkappaB beta, can remove NF-kappaB from functional preinitiation
complexes in in vitro transcription experiments. Second, we showed that both
IkappaBs function in vivo not only in the cytoplasm but also in the nucleus,
where they inhibit NF-kappaB binding to DNA. Third, the inhibitory activity of
IkappaB beta, but not that of IkappaB alpha, is facilitated by phosphorylation of
the C-terminal PEST sequence by casein kinase II and/or by the interaction of
NF-kappaB with high-mobility group protein I (HMG I) on selected promoters. The
unphosphorylated form of IkappaB beta forms stable ternary complexes with
NF-kappaB on the DNA either in vitro or in vivo. These experiments suggest that
IkappaB alpha works as a postinduction repressor of NF-kappaB independently of
HMG I, whereas IkappaB beta functions preferentially in promoters regulated by
the NF-kappaB/HMG I complexes.

PMCID: PMC232389
PMID: 9271416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Sep 1;25(17):3523-31.

Competition between HMG-I(Y), HMG-1 and histone H1 on four-way junction DNA.

Hill DA(1), Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman,
WA 99164-4660, USA.

High mobility group proteins HMG-I(Y) and HMG-1, as well as histone H1, all share
the common property of binding to four-way junction DNA (4H), a synthetic
substrate commonly used to study proteins involved in recognizing and resolving
Holliday-type junctions formed during in vivo genetic recombination events. The
structure of 4H has also been hypothesized to mimic the DNA crossovers occurring 
at, or near, the entrance and exit sites on the nucleosome. Furthermore, upon
binding to either duplex DNA or chromatin, all three of these nuclear proteins
share the ability to significantly alter the structure of bound substrates. In
order to further elucidate their substrate binding abilities, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays were employed to investigate the relative binding
capabilities of HMG-I(Y), HMG-1 and H1 to 4H in vitro. Data indicate a definite
hierarchy of binding preference by these proteins for 4H, with HMG-I(Y) having
the highest affinity (Kd approximately 6.5 nM) when compared with either H1 (Kd
approximately 16 nM) or HMG-1 (Kd approximately 80 nM). Competition/titration
assays demonstrated that all three proteins bind most tightly to the same site on
4H. Hydroxyl radical footprinting identified the strongest site for binding of
HMG-I(Y), and presumably for the other proteins as well, to be at the center of
4H. Together these in vitro results demonstrate that HMG-I(Y) and H1 are
co-dominant over HMG-1 for binding to the central crossover region of 4H and
suggest that in vivo both of these proteins may exert a dominant effect over
HMG-1 in recognizing and binding to altered DNA structures, such as Holliday
junctions, that have conformations similar to 4H.

PMCID: PMC146912
PMID: 9254714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19763-70.

Conformational changes of DNA induced by binding of Chironomus high mobility
group protein 1a (cHMG1a). Regions flanking an HMG1 box domain do not influence
the bend angle of the DNA.

Heyduk E(1), Heyduk T, Claus P, Wisniewski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, St. Louis
University Medical School, St. Louis, Missouri 63104, USA.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins are thought to facilitate assembly of higher
order chromatin structure through modulation of DNA conformation. In this work we
investigate the bending of a 30-base pair DNA fragment induced by Chironomus HMG1
(cHMG1a), and HMGI (cHMGI) proteins. The DNA bending was measured in solution by 
monitoring the end-to-end distance between fluorescence probes attached to
opposite ends of the DNA fragment. The distance was measured by fluorescence
energy transfer using a novel europium chelate as a fluorescence donor. These
measurements revealed that the end-to-end distance in the 30-base pair DNA was
decreased from approximately 100 A in free DNA to approximately 50.5 A in cHMG1a.
DNA complex. The most probable DNA bending angle consistent with these distance
measurements is about 150 degrees. The deletion of the charged regulatory domains
located close to the C terminus of the HMG1 box domain of cHMG1a protein had no
effect on the induced bend angle. The ability to induce a large DNA bend
distinguishes the cHMG1 from the cHMGI protein. Only small perturbation of the
DNA conformation was observed upon binding of the cHMGI protein. A strong DNA
bending activity of cHMG1a and its relative abundance in the cell suggests that
this protein plays a very important role in modulation of chromatin structure.

PMID: 9242635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Leuk Lymphoma. 1997 Aug;26(5-6):603-7.

HMGI-C, a member of the high mobility group family of proteins, is expressed in
hematopoietic stem cells and in leukemic cells.

Rommel B(1), Rogalla P, Jox A, Kalle CV, Kazmierczak B, Wolf J, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

The human HMGI-C gene encoding a member of the high mobility group protein family
normally is expressed only during embryonic/fetal development but in none of the 
adult tissues tested so far. Recently, the HMGI-C gene has attracted a lot of
interest since its rearrangements seem to underlie the development of frequent
benign mesenchymal tumors. We have therefore checked CD34 positive hematopoietic 
stem cells and their normal and malignant descendants for HMGI-C expression. CD34
positive stem cells from healthy donors and the leukemia samples tested were
positive while all peripheral blood samples from healthy volunteers were
negative. We have concluded that the expression of the HMGI-C gene in leukemia
seems to be a secondary effect due to abnormal stem cell proliferation and might 
be a sensitive tumor marker for particular types of leukemia.

PMID: 9389367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Nat Struct Biol. 1997 Aug;4(8):657-65.

The solution structure of an HMG-I(Y)-DNA complex defines a new architectural
minor groove binding motif.

Huth JR(1), Bewley CA, Nissen MS, Evans JN, Reeves R, Gronenborn AM, Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-520,
USA.

The solution structure of a complex between a truncated form of HMG-I(Y),
consisting of the second and third DNA binding domains (residues 51-90), and a
DNA dodecamer containing the PRDII site of the interferon-beta promoter has been 
solved by multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The
stoichiometry of the complex is one molecule of HMG-I(Y) to two molecules of DNA.
The structure reveals a new architectural minor groove binding motif which
stabilizes B-DNA, thereby facilitating the binding of other transcription factors
in the opposing major groove. The interactions involve a central Arg-Gly-Arg
motif together with two other modules that participate in extensive hydrophobic
and polar contracts. The absence of one of these modules in the third DNA binding
domain accounts for its-100 fold reduced affinity relative to the second one.

PMID: 9253416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Carcinog. 1997 Jul;19(3):153-6.

Expression of HMGI-C, a member of the high mobility group protein family, in a
subset of breast cancers: relationship to histologic grade.

Rogalla P(1), Drechsler K, Kazmierczak B, Rippe V, Bonk U, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

The high-mobility-group (HMG) protein gene HMGI-C is apparently involved in the
genesis of a variety of benign human solid tumors with rearrangements of
chromosomal region 12q14-15 affecting the HMGI-C gene. So far, no expression of
HMGI-C has been found in adult tissues, and no data are available on the
expression of HMGI-C in primary human malignant tumors of epithelial origin.
Therefore, we analysed the HMGI-C expression patterns in 44 breast cancer samples
and 13 samples of nonmalignant adjacent tissue by hemi-nested reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction for HMGI-C expression. There was no
detectable expression of HMGI-C in any nonmalignant adjacent breast tissues
analyzed. In contrast, we found expression in 20 of 44 breast cancer samples
investigated. In invasive ductal tumors, expression was noted predominantly in
tumors with high histologic grade: 17 of 21 breast cancer samples with histologic
grade 3 but only three of 16 samples with histologic grades 1 or 2 showed
expression of HMGI-C. In addition, all seven lobular breast cancer samples tested
did not express HMGI-C. From these results, we concluded that HMGI-C expression
may be of pathogenetic or prognostic importance in breast cancer.

PMID: 9254881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Am J Pathol. 1997 Jul;151(1):37-43.

Expression of HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) in ordinary lipoma and atypical lipomatous
tumors: immunohistochemical reactivity correlates with karyotypic alterations.

Tallini G(1), Dal Cin P, Rhoden KJ, Chiapetta G, Manfioletti G, Giancotti V,
Fusco A, Van den Berghe H, Sciot R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8070, USA.

The high mobility group proteins (HMGs) are a class of low molecular weight,
nonhistone, nuclear proteins that bind DNA and function as transcription
cofactors. This class includes the HMGI family members HMGI-C and HMGI(Y). Both
are not significantly expressed in differentiated adult tissues, including fat,
but their expression is induced in proliferating and transformed cells. Their
involvement in the development of lipomatous tumors has been recently
demonstrated for HMGI-C, which is encoded by a gene located at 12q15, the
chromosomal segment often rearranged in ordinary lipomas. The same chromosomal
segment is consistently amplified in the ring and giant marker chromosomes of
atypical lipomatous tumors (ALTs), a term used to designate tumors previously
labeled as well differentiated liposarcomas or atypical lipomas. The involvement 
of HMGI(Y) is strongly suspected as the gene coding for HMGI(Y) is located at
6p21, a chromosomal segment rearranged in a subset of ordinary lipomas. HMGI-C or
HMGI(Y) protein expression was analyzed immunohistochemically in a group of 39
well differentiated adipose neoplasms (19 lipomas and 20 ALTs) of known karyotype
using polyclonal antibodies raised against a recombinant protein (HMGI-C) and
against a synthetic peptide (HMGI(Y)). The results of this study demonstrate that
HMGI proteins are commonly expressed in well differentiated adipose neoplasms.
Seventeen of twenty ALTS (85.0%), all of which had ring or giant marker
chromosomes with amplification of 12q13-15, strongly expressed HMGI-C. HMGI-C
expression was detected in 7 of 11 ordinary lipomas (63.6%) with alterations at
12q14-15 and in one case with an abnormal karyotype that included double minute
chromosomes. HMGI-C immunoreactivity correlates with 12q13-15 chromosomal
alterations (P = 0.001). HMGI(Y) reactivity was demonstrated in only two ordinary
lipomas: one with 6p21 rearrangement and one with normal karyotype. No
significant HMGI(Y) expression was found in the ALT group. The finding of
aberrant expression of HMGI proteins in well differentiated adipose neoplasms in 
association with 12q13-15 and 6p21 chromosomal changes supports the proposed
pathogenetic role of this group of proteins in the development of adipose tissue 
tumors.

PMCID: PMC1857930
PMID: 9212729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3649-62.

Intra- and intermolecular cooperative binding of high-mobility-group protein I(Y)
to the beta-interferon promoter.

Yie J(1), Liang S, Merika M, Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York 10032, USA.

The mammalian high-mobility-group protein I(Y) [HMG I(Y)], while not a typical
transcriptional activator, is required for the expression of many eukaryotic
genes. HMG I(Y) appears to recruit and stabilize complexes of transcriptional
activators through protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. The protein
binds to the minor groove of DNA via three short basic repeats, preferring tracts
of adenines and thymines arranged on the same face of the DNA helix. However, the
mode by which these three basic repeats function together to recognize HMG I(Y)
binding sites has remained unclear. Here, using deletion mutants of HMG I(Y),
DNase I footprinting, methylation interference, and in vivo transcriptional
assays, we have characterized the binding of HMG I(Y) to the model
beta-interferon enhancer. We show that two molecules of HMG I(Y) bind to the
enhancer in a highly cooperative fashion, each molecule using a distinct pair of 
basic repeats to recognize the tandem AT-rich regions of the binding sites. We
have also characterized the function of each basic repeat, showing that only the 
central repeat accounts for specific DNA binding and that the presence of a
second repeat bound to an adjacent AT-rich region results in intramolecular
cooperativity in binding. Surprisingly, the carboxyl-terminal acidic tail of HMG 
I(Y) is also important for specific binding in the context of the full-length
protein. Our results present a detailed examination of HMG I(Y) binding in an
important biological context, which can be extended not only to HMG I(Y) binding 
in other systems but also to the binding mode of many other proteins containing
homologous basic repeats, which have been conserved from bacteria to humans.

PMCID: PMC232217
PMID: 9199299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Virol. 1997 Jul;71(7):5382-90.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 preintegration complexes: studies of
organization and composition.

Miller MD(1), Farnet CM, Bushman FD.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

We have investigated the organization and function of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) preintegration complexes (PICs), the large nucleoprotein
particles that carry out cDNA integration in vivo. PICs can be isolated from
HIV-1-infected cells, and such particles are capable of carrying out integration 
reactions in vitro. We find that although the PICs are large, the cDNA must be
condensed to fit into the measured volume. The ends of the cDNA are probably
linked by a protein bridge, since coordinated joining of the two ends is not
disrupted by cleaving the cDNA internally with a restriction enzyme. cDNA ends in
PICs were protected from digestion by added exonucleases, probably due to binding
of proteins. The intervening cDNA, in contrast, was susceptible to attack by
endonucleases. Previous work has established that the virus-encoded integrase
protein is present in PICs, and we have reported recently that the host protein
HMG I(Y) is also present. Here we report that the viral matrix and reverse
transcriptase (RT) proteins also cofractionated with PICs through several steps
whereas capsid and nucleocapsid proteins dissociated. These data support a model 
of PIC organization in which the cDNA is condensed in a partially disassembled
remnant of the viral core, with proteins tightly associated at the apposed cDNA
ends but loosely associated with the intervening cDNA. In characterizing the
structure of the cDNA ends, we found that the U5 DNA ends created by RT were
ragged, probably due to the terminal transferase activity of RT. Only molecules
correctly cleaved by integrase protein at the 3' ends were competent to
integrate, suggesting that one role for terminal cleavage by integrase may be to 
create a defined end at otherwise heterogeneous cDNA termini.

PMCID: PMC191777
PMID: 9188609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Int J Cancer. 1997 Jun 11;71(6):1035-44.

Identification of highly expressed genes in metastasis-suppressed chromosome
6/human malignant melanoma hybrid cells using subtractive hybridization and
differential display.

Lee JH(1), Welch DR.

Author information: 
(1)The Jake Gittlen Cancer Research Institute, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey 17033-0850, USA.

Microcell-mediated transfer of chromosome 6 into human melanoma cell lines C8161 
and MelJuSo suppresses metastasis by at least 95% without affecting
tumorigenicity. Subtractive hybridization and differential display were used to
identify the molecule(s) responsible for suppressing metastasis in neo6/melanoma 
(neo6/C8161 and neo6/MelJuSo) hybrids. Seven cDNA clones exhibiting
quantitatively or qualitatively higher expression in neo6/melanoma hybrids were
obtained. These genes fell into 2 categories: 1) transcription-related genes
(AP-2A, HMG-I(Y) and a novel isoform of nucleophosmin B23), which have previously
been shown to regulate metastasis-associated genes; and 2) novel genes. One of
the novel genes, designated KiSS-1, significantly suppressed metastasis of the
human malignant melanoma cell lines MelJuSo and a highly metastatic subclone of
C8161, C8161cl.9, following transfection and constitutive expression. Our results
illustrate the power of subtractive hybridization and differential display to
identify functional metastasis-controlling genes in human melanoma.

PMID: 9185708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Plant Mol Biol. 1997 Jun;34(3):529-36.

Chromosomal location and expression of the single-copy gene encoding
high-mobility-group protein HMG-I/Y in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Gupta R(1), Webster CI, Walker AR, Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, UK.

A cDNA encoding the HMG-I/Y protein from Arabidopsis thaliana has been isolated
and characterised by nucleotide sequencing. The 903 bp cDNA contains a 612 bp
open reading frame encoding a protein of 204 amino acid residues showing homology
to HMG-I/Y proteins from other plant species. The protein contains four copies of
the 'AT-hook' motif which is involved in binding A/T-rich DNA. Southern blotting 
showed that the HMG-I/Y gene was present in a single copy in the Arabidopsis
genome. The gene was localised to the top of chromosome 1 by RFLP analysis of F8 
recombinant inbred lines. Northern blotting showed that the gene was expressed in
all organs examined, with the highest expression in flowers and developing
siliques.

PMID: 9225863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Carcinog. 1997 Jun;19(2):114-21.

Complex genomic rearrangement within the 12q15 multiple aberration region induced
by integrated human papillomavirus 18 in a cervical carcinoma cell line.

Gallego MI(1), Schoenmakers EF, Van de Ven WJ, Lazo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genética y Medicina Molecular (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Spain.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA is integrated into the host genome in cervical
cancer. The cervical carcinoma cell line SW756 has integrated HPV-18 DNA in
chromosome region 12q15, in the papillomavirus-associated locus-2 (PAL2). By
polymerase chain reaction and hybridization of an arrayed cosmid library with
oligonucleotides from the rearranged allele, we determined the pre-integration
germline structure of the region. PAL2 was located approximately 10 kb from
sequence-tagged site marker U27131, which was the marker most proximal to the 3' 
flank of the integrated viral DNA. HPV-18 DNA integration induced a complex
genomic rearrangement resulting in inversion and deletion of cellular sequences. 
PAL2 is within the multiple aberration region, which has been shown to be
affected in several types of benign tumors of mesenchymal origin. The integrated 
viral DNA was located 50 kb from a CpG island and 150 kb upstream of the
high-mobility group I-C (HMGI-C) gene. The HMGI-C gene and the integrated HPV-18 
DNA had opposite transcriptional orientations. No overexpression or altered
message of the HMGI-C gene was detected in three cervical carcinoma cell lines.
The integrated viral DNA did not affect any other known gene in the region and
may be a marker for an unknown gene associated with malignant tumor phenotypes.

PMID: 9210958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cancer Res. 1997 Jun 1;57(11):2276-80.

Misexpression of disrupted HMGI architectural factors activates alternative
pathways of tumorigenesis.

Tkachenko A(1), Ashar HR, Meloni AM, Sandberg AA, Chada KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-5635, USA.

Cancer arises from aberrations in the genetic mechanisms that control growth and 
differentiation. HMGI-C and HMGI(Y) are members of the HMGI family of
architectural factors expressed in embryonic or undifferentiated cells and highly
associated with transformation. Translocations of 12q13-15 in lipomas (fat cell
tumors) disrupt HMGI-C and fuse its DNA-binding domains to novel transcriptional 
regulatory domains. This study shows that in a rare, karyotypically distinct
group of human lipomas, rearrangements of 6p21-23 produce internal deletions
within HMGI(Y). Activation of the rearranged alleles leads to expression of
aberrant HMGI(Y) transcripts in differentiated adipocytes. A molecular analysis
of these transcripts demonstrates that fusion of HMGI DNA-binding domains to
putative transcriptional regulatory domains was not necessary for lipoma
formation. However, such fusions may facilitate tumor development because
activation of the wild-type HMGI allele, normally required for tumorigenesis, is 
bypassed in lipomas which express chimeric HMGI proteins. We hypothesize that
HMGI misexpression in a differentiated cell is a pivotal event in benign
tumorigenesis, and the molecular pathway of tumor development depends upon the
precise nature of HMGI disruption.

PMID: 9187132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Plant J. 1997 Apr;11(4):703-15.

High mobility group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y bind to a positive regulatory
region of the pea plastocyanin gene promoter.

Webster CI(1), Packman LC, Pwee KH, Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition, University of Cambridge, UK.

A 268 bp region (P268) of the pea plastocyanin gene promoter responsible for
high-level expression has been shown to interact with the high mobility group
proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y isolated from pea shoot chromatin. cDNAs encoding an
HMG-1 protein of 154 amino acid residues containing a single HMG-box and a
C-terminal acidic tail and an HMG-I/Y-like protein of 197 amino acid residues
containing four AT-hooks have been isolated and expressed in Escherichia coli to 
provide large amounts of full-length proteins. DNase I footprinting identified
eight binding sites for HMG-I/Y and six binding sites for HMG-1 in P268.
Inhibition of binding by the antibiotic distamycin, which binds in the minor
groove of A/T-rich DNA, revealed that HMG-I/Y binding was 400-fold more sensitive
than HMG-1 binding. Binding-site selection from a pool of random oligonucleotides
indicated that HMG-I/Y binds to oligonucleotides containing stretches of five or 
more A/T bp and HMG-1 binds preferentially to oligonucleotides enriched in
dinucleotides such as TpT and TpG.

PMID: 9161031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Apr;18(4):322-3.

Hidden paracentric inversions of chromosome arm 12q affecting the HMGIC gene.

Wanschura S(1), Dal Cin P, Kazmierczak B, Bartnitzke S, Van den Berghe H,
Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

PMID: 9087575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 17;232(2):422-6.

Stimulation of haemolytic activity of sea anemone cytolysins by
8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulphonate.

Khoo HE(1), Fong CL, Yuen R, Chen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore. bchkhe@nus.sg

This study reports for the first time stimulation of protein activity by the
hydrophobic probe, 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulphonate (ANS). Magnificalysin (HMg) 
I and II and equinatoxin (EqTx) II and III are cytolysins isolated from the sea
anemone Heteractis magnifica and Actinia equina, respectively. The haemolytic
activity of these cytolysins could be stimulated by treatment with ANS. Their
activation involved conformational changes following ANS treatment as shown by
fluorescence spectra. ANS-induced conformational changes were reversible upon
removal of ANS. ANS-stimulated activity of HMg I was inhibited by sphingomyelin
and antiserum but not affected by bromosuccinimide (NBS) which oxidises
tryptophan residues. However, toxin pre-treated with NBS could no longer be
stimulated by addition of ANS. Energy transfer from tryptophan to ANS was
observed by a fluorescence scan. Hence the tryptophan residues appear to be
involved, at least partially, in ANS-binding. ANS-induced conformational change
may be responsible for the activation of the cytolytic activity of these
cytolysins.

PMID: 9125194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Pathologe. 1997 Mar;18(2):160-6.

[Genetic studies of differential fatty tissue tumor diagnosis].

[Article in German]

Belge G(1), Caselitz J, Bonk U, Bartnitzke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Humangenetik und Genetische Beratung der Universität Bremen,
Bremen.

Adipose tissue tumors are often characterized by typical or even specific
chromosomal alterations. In some of the cases the molecular background of these
microscopically visible alterations was already elucidated. In myxoid
liposarcomas the translocation t(12;16) creates a fusion gene between the CHOP
gene and the FUS gene and in lipomas the HMGI-C gene becomes rearranged by
structural aberrations involving chromosomal region 12q14-15. Based on examples
of a lipoma, a well-differentiated liposarcoma, a myxoid liposarcoma, and an
aggressive angiomyxoma it is demonstrated in the present paper how cytogenetic
investigation can be used as an additional tool for an improved diagnosis of
adipose tissue tumors. Furthermore, the detection of molecular mechanisms
underlying the visible cytogenetic alterations will certainly significantly
increase our knowledge about the pathogenesis of these diseases.

PMID: 9244875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Genes Dev. 1997 Mar 1;11(5):629-39.

An HMG I/Y-containing repressor complex and supercoiled DNA topology are critical
for long-range enhancer-dependent transcription in vitro.

Bagga R(1), Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The 3' enhancer of the T cell receptor alpha-chain (TCR alpha) gene directs the
tissue- and stage-specific expression and V(D)J recombination of this gene locus.
Using an in vitro system that reproduces TCR alpha enhancer activity efficiently,
we show that long-range promoter-enhancer regulation requires a T cell-specific
repressor complex and is sensitive to DNA topology. In this system, the enhancer 
functions to derepress the promoter on supercoiled, but not relaxed, templates.
We find that the TCR alpha promoter is inactivated by a repressor complex that
contains the architectural protein HMG I/Y. In the absence of this repressor
complex, expression of the TCR alpha gene is completely independent of the 3'
enhancer and DNA topology. The interaction of the T cell-restricted protein LEF-1
with the TCR alpha enhancer is required for promoter derepression. In this
system, the TCR alpha enhancer increases the number of active promoters rather
than the rate of transcription. Thus, long-range enhancers function in a distinct
manner from promoters and provide the regulatory link between repressors, DNA
topology, and gene activity.

PMID: 9119227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Am J Pathol. 1997 Mar;150(3):911-8.

HMGI(Y) expression in human uterine leiomyomata. Involvement of another
high-mobility group architectural factor in a benign neoplasm.

Williams AJ(1), Powell WL, Collins T, Morton CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 1997 Mar;150(3):901-10.

Chromosomal rearrangements involving 6p21 have been observed in uterine
leiomyomata and a variety of other benign tumors. The gene for HMGI(Y), a member 
of the high-mobility group (HMG) family of proteins, has been localized to 6p21. 
To determine whether rearrangements observed in this area alter HMGI(Y)
expression, we analyzed HMGI(Y) DNA-binding activity in protein extracts from
uterine leiomyoma and normal myometrium tissues. This report describes a uterine 
leiomyoma specimen with an inv(6)(p21q15). A genomic P1 clone that contains the
HMGI(Y) region of chromosome 6 is found to span the inversion breakpoint by
fluorescent in situ hybridization of metaphase chromosomes. Expression of HMGI(Y)
protein in this leiomyoma specimen is increased dramatically as compared with the
matching normal myometrial tissue. Elevated HMGI(Y) expression was also found in 
8 of 16 leiomyomas without cytogenetically detectable chromosome 6p21 aberrations
but not in any of the 9 matching myometrial tissues. Analysis of the genetic
events involved in the pathobiology of these benign tumors will provide a basis
for understanding the process of improper cellular growth and might be important 
in deciphering the multistep pathway of tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC1857869
PMID: 9060829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Am J Pathol. 1997 Mar;150(3):901-10.

HMGI(Y) activation by chromosome 6p21 rearrangements in multilineage mesenchymal 
cells from pulmonary hamartoma.

Xiao S(1), Lux ML, Reeves R, Hudson TJ, Fletcher JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Comment on
    Am J Pathol. 1997 Mar;150(3):911-8.

The chromosome band 6p21 high-mobility group gene, HMGI(Y), encodes DNA-binding
proteins with both chromatin structural and gene regulatory roles. Although
HMGI(Y) expression is associated with neoplastic transformation, no oncogenic
HMGI(Y) mutations have been identified. We report pulmonary chondroid hamartoma
chromosome 6p21 aberrations targeting HMGI(Y). Several pulmonary chondroid
hamartomas had chromosome rearrangements mapping within 100 kb of HMGI(Y), and
one pulmonary chondroid hamartoma contained an intragenic fusion juxtaposing
HMGI(Y) A.T book DNA-binding domains with a laminin alpha 4 chain
epidermal-growth-factor-like/ zinc-finger-like motif. These findings demonstrate 
an oncogenic role for HMGI(Y) and for laminin chain transcriptional regulatory
motifs.

PMCID: PMC1857887
PMID: 9060828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cell. 1997 Feb 21;88(4):483-92.

HIV-1 cDNA integration: requirement of HMG I(Y) protein for function of
preintegration complexes in vitro.

Farnet CM(1), Bushman FD.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92024, USA.

We present data indicating that a host protein is important for function of HIV-1
preintegration complexes (PICs) in vitro. PICs partially purified from infected
cells were subjected to gel filtration in 600 mM KCl, which removed a factor
required for integration without fully disrupting PICs. Addition of an extract
from uninfected cells restored activity. Fractionation of the complementing
activity yielded HMG I(Y), a nonhistone chromosomal protein important for
transcriptional control and chromosomal architecture. Complementing activity
could be isolated from PICs, and activity could be depleted from such fractions
with an antibody against HMG I(Y). Recombinant HMG I(Y) also complemented
salt-stripped complexes. The finding that a host protein is required for
integration by HIV PICs parallels findings in several well-studied transposition 
and site-specific recombination systems.

PMID: 9038339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Plant Mol Biol. 1997 Feb;33(3):537-44.

Two genes for the high mobility group protein HMG-Y are present in the genome of 
Canavalia gladiata D.C.

Yamamoto S(1), Minamikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Japan.

Two cDNAs encoding high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins that correspond to animal
HMG-Y proteins were isolated from maturing seeds of Canavalia gladiata D.C. The
deduced amino acid sequences of these cDNAs showed similarity to other plant
HMG-I/Y proteins reported to date. The mRNAs for the HMG-Y proteins were detected
in leaves, stems, roots, pods and seeds of C. gladiata. The level of the mRNA was
high in the maturing seeds of 30 days after flowering and 2-day germinated seeds.
Two genomic clones were isolated from DNA of C. gladiata and both were shown to
represent single-copy genes consisting of two exons and one intron. This is the
first report of the genomic sequences for HMG-I/Y protein in plants.

PMID: 9049273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;17(2):873-86.

Constitutive activation of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 1 gene
transcription by IRF1 and IRF2 during restricted EBV latency.

Schaefer BC(1), Paulson E, Strominger JL, Speck SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) EBNA1 gene promoter active in the type I program of 
restricted viral latency was recently identified and shown to reside in the viral
BamHI Q fragment. This promoter, Qp, is active in a wide variety of cell lines
and has an architecture reminiscent of eukaryotic housekeeping gene promoters (B.
C. Schaefer, J. L. Strominger, and S. H. Speck, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
92:10565-10569, 1995; B. C. Schaefer, J. L. Strominger, and S. H. Speck, Mol.
Cell. Biol. 17:364-377, 1997). Here we demonstrate by deletion analysis that the 
important cis-acting elements regulating Qp are clustered in a relatively small
region (ca. 80 bp) surrounding the site of transcription initiation. Immediately 
upstream of the site of initiation is a region which is protected from DNase I
digestion by crude nuclear extracts. Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses
(EMSA) employing probes spanning this region demonstrated the presence of two
major protein complexes. Deletion analysis of Qp demonstrated that at least one
of these complexes plays an important role in Qp activity. Evidence that
interferon response factor 2 (IRF2) is a major constituent of the most prominent 
EMSA complex and that IRF1 may be a minor component of this complex is presented.
Transfections into IRF1-/-, IRF2-/-, and IRF1,2-/- fibroblasts demonstrated that 
absence of both IRF1 and IRF2 reduced Qp activity to approximately the same
extent as mutation of the IRF-binding site in Qp, strongly implicating IRF2, and 
perhaps IRF1, in the regulation of Qp activity. Notably, transcription from Qp
was not inducible by either alpha or gamma interferon in EBV-negative B cells but
rather was shown to be constitutively activated by IRF1 and IRF2. This
observation suggests that IRF1 and IRF2 have a previously unrecognized role as
constitutive activators of specific genes. Additionally, data presented indicate 
that a protein complex containing the nonhistone architectural protein HMG-I(Y)
binds to the region identified as the major transcription initiation site for Qp.
This observation raises the possibility that HMG-I(Y)-induced DNA bending plays a
role in the initiation of transcription from Qp.

PMCID: PMC231814
PMID: 9001242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jan 15;25(2):339-46.

Distamycin prolongs E-selectin expression by interacting with a specific
NF-kappaB-HMG-I(Y) binding site in the promoter.

Ghersa P(1), Whelan J, Cambet Y, DeLamarter JF, Hooft van Huijsduijnen R.

Author information: 
(1)Geneva Biomedical Research Institute, 14, Chemin des Aulx, Case Postale 674,
1228 Plan-les-Ouates, Geneva, Switzerland. pfg8091@ggr.co.uk

The E-selectin cell adhesion protein plays a critical role in mediating adherence
of leukocytes to endothelium at sites of inflammation. Cytokine-induced
E-selectin expression on the surface of endothelial cells is transient; mRNA
expression peaks at 3-4 h after induction and returns to basal levels within 24
h. The mechanism for this transcriptional down-modulation is not known. Promoter 
binding factors responsible for induced gene expression include NF-kappaB, which 
binds at three sites within the E-selectin promoter, and HMG-I(Y), which binds to
the A/T-rich core found at the centre of these binding sites. Distamycin is an
antibiotic that also binds A/T-rich DNA and inhibits HMG-I(Y) DNA binding. To
study the role of HMG-I(Y) in E-selectin expression, we have examined the effect 
of distamycin on the cytokine-induced E-selectin expression cycle. We found that 
distamycin prolonged E-selectin expression, both by sustaining mRNA transcription
and by extending the transcript's half-life. The distamycin effect on
transcription was mediated through one of the three NF-kappaB-HMG-I(Y) binding
sites (NF-kappaBII) within the promoter. This suggests that the
NF-kappaB-HMG-I(Y) complex interacting at the NF-kappaBII site plays a role not
only in cytokine induction of E-selectin expression, but also in its
down-modulation.

PMCID: PMC146425
PMID: 9016563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. FEBS Lett. 1997 Jan 3;400(2):193-6.

Preferential condensation of SAR-DNA by histone H1 and its SPKK containing
octapeptide repeat motif.

Khadake JR(1), Rao MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.

Linker histone H1 binds preferentially the scaffold associated region (SAR) DNA
elements that contain characteristic oligo dA x dT tracts. In the present study, 
we have compared the condensation brought about by histone H1 of a SAR DNA
fragment in the histone spacer region of Drosophila melanogaster with that of a
random DNA (pBR322 EcoRI-SalI) fragment by circular dichroism spectroscopy. The
condensation of the SAR DNA fragment by histone H1 is 3-4-fold higher than that
of the random DNA fragment. A 16-mer peptide, ATPKKSTKKTPKKAKK, the sequence that
is present in the C-terminus of histone Hld, which has recently been shown to
possess DNA and chromatin condensing properties, also condenses the SAR DNA
fragment preferentially in a highly cooperative manner. We have proposed a model 
for the dynamics of chromatin structure involving histone H1-SAR DNA interaction 
through SPKK containing peptide motifs and its competition by AT-hook peptides
present in the nonhistone chromosomal proteins like HMG-I and HMG-Y.

PMID: 9001396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 1997;81:318-26.

Soft tissue tumours: the impact of cytogenetics and molecular genetics.

Fletcher CD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Cytogenetic and molecular analysis of soft tissue tumours has yielded a wealth of
new information over the past 10-15 years. Many soft tissue neoplasms show
specific karyotypic aberrations which have proved to be diagnostically valuable, 
and have also assisted in the understanding of pathogenetic mechanisms and
rationalisation of classification systems (e.g. lipomatous tumours and Ewing's
sarcoma/PNET). In certain clinical subsets, especially round cell sarcomas and
fatty neoplasms, determination of karyotype (whether by conventional analysis,
FISH or RT-PCR) has proved often to be useful in the diagnostic setting.
Additionally the recognition of clonal abnormalities in both benign neoplasms as 
well as lesions formerly thought to be non-neoplastic (e.g. inflammatory
"pseudotumour") has prompted reassessment of biologic concepts with regard to
growth control. Inherited molecular genetic defects which predispose to soft
tissue neoplasia (e.g. NF-1, Li-Fraumeni syndrome) have been characterised,
leading to a greater understanding of tumour suppressor genes. Mesenchymal
differentiation genes, the modes of action of which may help to expunge concepts 
of histogenesis, are being characterised. It is becoming clear that there exist
growth control genes (such as the HMGI family) which, irrespective of
differentiation, play an important role in a wide range of different mesenchymal 
tumours. Additionally it is evident that different histologic types of sarcoma
(e.g. variants of liposarcoma) show quite different abnormalities of cell cycle
control (notably at the G1-S checkpoint) and it seems increasingly likely that
certain genetic aberrations, identifiable either at the chromosomal or individual
gene level, may prove to be of prognostic relevance in sarcomas and may also open
novel therapeutic avenues. While the validity of all molecular genetic data
depends totally on skilled histological diagnosis and grading, there has never
been a better time for close collaboration between pathologists and basic
scientists in the study of soft tissue neoplasia.

PMID: 9474886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Clin Exp Immunol. 1997 Jan;107(1):135-40.

Novel autoantigens of perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA)
in ulcerative colitis: non-histone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2.

Sobajima J(1), Ozaki S, Osakada F, Uesugi H, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Japan.

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) in sera from ulcerative colitis
(UC) patients have been described as reacting with proteins in the granules of
human neutrophils such as cathepsin G and lactoferrin and with yet unidentified
antigens. Here we report the existence of a new member of perinuclear ANCA
(P-ANCA) in UC patients. In the previous study, we found that UC patients had a
novel P-ANCA against neutrophil 28-kD protein. In this study, we purified the
same antigens from HL-60 lysates by using reversed phase high-performance liquid 
chromatography, and revealed that the 28-kD antigen consisted of two different
proteins. The N-terminus amino acids of these proteins are identical with those
of high mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2.
Immunoblotting analysis of human neutrophil lysates using rabbit anti-HMG1/2
antisera revealed a single band of 28 kD, and the 28-kD band detected by
immunoblotting analysis using patient's serum IgG completely disappeared after
preincubation with a mixture of HMG1 and HMG2. Furthermore, rabbit anti-HMG1/2
antisera showed a perinuclear staining pattern in indirect immunofluorescence
studies using ethanol-fixed neutrophils. These data demonstrate that HMG1 and
HMG2 are novel target antigens of P-ANCA. HMGI and HMG2 are distributed in the
nuclei and cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells and act as transcription factors. Their 
intracellular localization and functions are distinct from those of the
previously reported granular antigens of P-ANCA.

PMCID: PMC1904558
PMID: 9010268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Hum Genet. 1997 Jan;99(1):103-5.

The high mobility group I-C gene (HMGI-C): polymorphism and genetic localization.

Ishwad CS(1), Shriver MD, Lassige DM, Ferrell RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

We have identified a highly informative dinucleotide repeat in the 5'-flanking
region of the human high mobility group I-C (HMGI-C) gene. This polymorphism
consists of 18-37 copies of a (CT) repeat with an observed heterozygosity of
82-83% in African Americans and Caucasians. Linkage analysis in CEPH pedigrees
localized the HMGI-C gene to chromosome region 12q13-15 with no recombination
observed between HMCI-C and markers D12S102 and D12S8.

PMID: 9003504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Dec 24;93(26):15311-6.

HMG I(Y) interferes with the DNA binding of NF-AT factors and the induction of
the interleukin 4 promoter in T cells.

Klein-Hessling S(1), Schneider G, Heinfling A, Chuvpilo S, Serfling E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Würzburg, Germany.

HMG I(Y) proteins bind to double-stranded A + T oligonucleotides longer than
three base pairs. Such motifs form part of numerous NF-AT-binding sites of
lymphokine promoters, including the interleukin 4 (IL-4) promoter. NF-AT factors 
share short homologous peptide sequences in their DNA-binding domain with
NF-kappa B factors and bind to certain NF-kappa B sites. It has been shown that
HMG I(Y) proteins enhance NF-kappa B binding to the interferon beta promoter and 
virus-mediated interferon beta promoter induction. We show that HMG I(Y) proteins
exert an opposite effect on the DNA binding of NF-AT factors and the induction of
the IL-4 promoter in T lymphocytes. Introduction of mutations into a
high-affinity HMG I(Y)-binding site of the IL-4 promoter, which decreased HMG
I(Y)-binding to a NF-AT-binding sequence, the Pu-bB (or P) site, distinctly
increased the induction of the IL-4 promoter in Jurkat T leukemia cells. High
concentrations of HMG I(Y) proteins are able to displace NF-ATp from its binding 
to the Pu-bB site. High HMG I(Y) concentrations are typical for Jurkat cells and 
peripheral blood T lymphocytes, whereas E14 T lymphoma cells and certain T helper
type 2 cell clones contain relatively low HMG I(Y) concentrations. Our results
indicate that HMG I(Y) proteins do not cooperate, but instead compete with NF-AT 
factors for the binding to DNA even though NF-AT factors share some DNA-binding
to DNA even though NF-AT factors share some DNA-binding properties with NF-kB
factors. This competition between HMG I(Y) and NF-AT proteins for DNA binding
might be due to common contacts with minor groove nucleotides of DNA and may be
one mechanism contributing to the selective IL-4 expression in certain T
lymphocyte populations, such as T helper type 2 cells.

PMCID: PMC26401
PMID: 8986808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 5;13(11):2439-46.

High level expression of the HMGI (Y) gene during embryonic development.

Chiappetta G(1), Avantaggiato V, Visconti R, Fedele M, Battista S, Trapasso F,
Merciai BM, Fidanza V, Giancotti V, Santoro M, Simeone A, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Napoli, Fondazione Senatore Pascale, Italia.

The HMGI protein family includes three proteins, named HMG-I, HMG-Y and HMGI-C.
The first two proteins are coded for by the same gene, HMGI (Y), through an
alternative splicing mechanism. Their expression is elevated in neoplastic
tissues and cells and this overexpression has a causal role in the process of
cellular neoplastic transformation. We demonstrate that the HMGI (Y) gene is
expressed at very low levels in normal adult tissues, whereas in embryonic
tissues it is expressed at high levels comparable to those detected in neoplastic
tissues. Specifically, a very high expression of the HMGI (Y) gene was detected
in all embryonic tissues at 8.5 dpc. Then in the following days, even though the 
gene is expressed essentially in all tissues, an abundant gene expression was
restricted to some tissues. These results indicate an important role of the HMGI 
(Y) gene in development.

PMID: 8957086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Genomics. 1996 Dec 1;38(2):223-6.

Fusion transcripts between the HMGIC gene and RTVL-H-related sequences in
mesenchymal tumors without cytogenetic aberrations.

Kazmierczak B(1), Pohnke Y, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Chromosomal abnormalities of the region 12q13-q15 are very frequent among human
benign tumors mainly of mesenchymal origin such as uterine leiomyomas,
pleomorphic adenomas, lipomas, or pulmonary chondroid hamartomas. Because of
these cytogenetic aberrations the HMGI-C gene (HGMW-approved symbol HMGIC)
becomes rearranged, with most of the breakpoints located in the large intron 3.
In two pulmonary chondroid hamartomas from different patients and one uterine
leiomyoma with apparently normal karyotypes, we found identical RTVL-H 3' LTRs
fused as ectopic sequences to exon 3 of HMGI-C. Screening of genomic cosmid and
plasmid clones derived from intron 3 of the HMGI-C gene for the presence of these
RTVL-H sequences showed a cluster of these retrotransposon-like sequences in this
region of HMGI-C. Comparing the RTVL-H sequence found in these tumors to known
sequences from the literature revealed high homology to known RTVL-H elements.

PMID: 8954805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):6829-40.

Elf-1 and Stat5 bind to a critical element in a new enhancer of the human
interleukin-2 receptor alpha gene.

Lécine P(1), Algarté M, Rameil P, Beadling C, Bucher P, Nabholz M, Imbert J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U119, Marseille, France.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):2351.

The interleukin 2 receptor alpha-chain (IL-2R alpha) gene is a key regulator of
lymphocyte proliferation. IL-2R alpha is rapidly and potently induced in T cells 
in response to mitogenic stimuli. Interleukin 2 (IL-2) stimulates IL-2R alpha.
transcription, thereby amplifying expression of its own high-affinity receptor.
IL-2R alpha transcription is at least in part controlled by two positive
regulatory regions, PRRI and PRRII. PRRI is an inducible proximal enhancer,
located between nucleotides -276 and -244, which contains NF-kappaB and SRE/CArG 
motifs. PRRII is a T-cell-specific enhancer, located between nucleotides -137 and
-64, which binds the T-cell-specific Ets protein Elf-1 and HMG-I(Y) proteins.
However, none of these proximal regions account for the induction of IL-2R alpha 
transcription by IL-2. To find new regulatory regions of the IL-2R alpha gene,
8.5 kb of the 5' end noncoding sequence of the IL-2R alpha gene have been
sequenced. We identified an 86-nucleotide fragment that is 90% identical to the
recently characterized murine IL-2-responsive element (mIL-2rE). This putative
human IL-2rE, designated PRRIII, confers IL-2 responsiveness on a heterologous
promoter. PRRIII contains a Stat protein binding site that overlaps with an EBS
motif (GASd/EBSd). These are essential for IL-2 inducibility of PRRIII/CAT
reporter constructs. IL-2 induced the binding of Stat5a and b proteins to the
human GASd element. To confirm the physiological relevance of these findings, we 
carried out in vivo footprinting experiments which showed that stimulation of
IL-2R alpha expression correlated with occupancy of the GASd element. Our data
demonstrate a major role of the GASd/EBSd element in IL-2R alpha regulation and
suggest that the T-cell-specific Elf-1 factor can serve as a transcriptional
repressor.

PMCID: PMC231686
PMID: 8943338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1996 Nov;17(3):191-3.

PAC clone containing the HMGI(Y) gene spans the breakpoint of a 6p21
translocation in a uterine leiomyoma cell line.

Kazmierczak B(1), Bol S, Wanschura S, Bartnitzke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Akin to the HMGI-C rearrangements observed in benign solid tumors with 12q14-15
abnormalities, the HMGI(Y) gene has been assumed to play a crucial role in tumors
with 6p21 abnormalities. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies using 
a PAC clone containing the HMGI(Y) gene as a molecular probe have been performed 
on a cell line from a uterine leiomyoma with a complex translocation involving
chromosomal band 6p21.3. The results revealed that the breakpoint mapped within
the PAC clone as reflected by signals on the normal chromosome 6 and both
derivative chromosomes 1 and 14. Thus, the breakpoint was located within the
HMGI(Y) gene or its close vicinity. These findings support the idea that HMGI(Y) 
rearrangements are causally related to the origin of uterine leiomyomas with 6p21
abnormalities.

PMID: 8946199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Immunity. 1996 Nov;5(5):479-89.

High mobility group protein I(Y) is required for function and for c-Rel binding
to CD28 response elements within the GM-CSF and IL-2 promoters.

Himes SR(1), Coles LS, Reeves R, Shannon MF.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Centre for Cancer Research, Institute of Medical and Veterinary
Science, Adelaide, South Australia.

CD28 response elements (CD28REs) within cytokine promoters are variant
NF-kappaB-binding sites and are essential for transcription in response to CD28
receptor activation in T cells. We show that the CK-1 element (CD28RE) within the
GM-CSF promoter binds the RelA and c-Rel transcription factors in response to
CD28 activation. We further show that the high mobility group protein HMG I(Y)
can bind to the CD28REs of both GM-CSF and IL-2 and that this binding is critical
for c-Rel, but not RelA, binding. A second NF-kappaB site in the GM-CSF promoter 
that binds p50 and RelA, but neither c-Rel nor HMG I(Y), failed to respond to
CD28 activation. Expression of HMG I or c-Rel antisense RNA inhibited CD28
activation of the IL-2 and GM-CSF promoters, implying that HMG I(Y) enhancement
of c-Rel binding plays an important role in the activity of the CD28REs.

PMID: 8934574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Oct 15;24(20):4071-7.

Genomic structure and expression of the murine Hmgi-c gene.

Zhou X(1), Benson KF, Przybysz K, Liu J, Hou Y, Cherath L, Chada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway 08854, USA.

The murine Hmgi-c gene, a member of the Hmgi gene family, contains five exons
encompassing >110 kb of genomic DNA at the pygmy locus on mouse chromosome 10.
Northern analysis identified a 4.1 kb transcript which contains a 324 bp open
reading frame encoding a 12 kDa HMGI-C protein. Further analysis defined both the
5' and 3' untranslated regions of the Hmgi-c mRNA species as 658 and 2967 bp
respectively. The HMGI-C protein has three consecutive AT hook DNA binding
domains and an acidic domain, each of which are encoded by individual exons; such
an organization is conserved among the HMGI gene family members from insects to
mammals. Similar to the HMGI/Y proteins, the HMGI-C protein does not function as 
a typical transcriptional activator. Developmental studies revealed that the
Hmgi-c gene is expressed predominantly during mouse embryogenesis. Since the
human homolog is disrupted in a number of tumors, HMGI-C could play an important 
role in cell proliferation and differentiation during mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC146186
PMID: 8918814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. EMBO J. 1996 Oct 15;15(20):5627-35.

An IL-2 response element in the human IL-2 receptor alpha chain promoter is a
composite element that binds Stat5, Elf-1, HMG-I(Y) and a GATA family protein.

John S(1), Robbins CM, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
Bethesda MD, USA.

Expression of the human interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor alpha chain gene is
potently upregulated by its own ligand, IL-2. In this study, we characterize an
essential upstream IL-2 response element that contains both consensus and
non-consensus GAS motifs, two putative Ets binding sites (EBS), one of which
overlaps the consensus GAS motif, and a GATA motif, which overlaps the
non-consensus GAS motif. We demonstrate that although the individual components
of this element do not respond to IL-2, together they form a composite element
capable of conferring IL-2 responsiveness to a heterologous promoter. Multiple
factors including Stat5, Elf-1, HMG-I(Y) and GATA family proteins bind to the
IL-2 response element and mutation of any one of these binding sites diminishes
the activity of this element. An unidentified Ets family protein binds to the EBS
overlapping the consensus GAS motif and appears to negatively regulate the human 
IL-2R alpha promoter. Thus, IL-2-induced IL-2R alpha promoter activity requires a
complex upstream element, which appears to contain binding sites for both
positive and negative regulatory factors.

PMCID: PMC452307
PMID: 8896456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5393-9.

Involvement of a high-mobility-group protein in the transcriptional activity of
herpes simplex virus latency-active promoter 2.

French SW(1), Schmidt MC, Glorioso JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Latency-active promoter 2 (LAP 2) is a TATA-less promoter in herpes simplex virus
type 1 (HSV-1) that can express genes during viral latency. Four regions of LAP2 
are protected from DNase I digestion in vitro by either HeLa cell nuclear
extracts or purified Sp1. Transient gene expression assays of LAP2 substitution
mutants demonstrate that two of the regions protected by Sp1 and three other
regions protected by nuclear extract are important for promoter function. The
mutation causing the most significant reduction in expression alters a stretch of
23 thymidine residues (T23) that binds a protein with several properties common
to high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins. The T23 binding activity is heat stable,
can be inhibited by poly(dA-dT).poly(dA-dT), and is inhibited by
minor-groove-binding drugs. Antiserum directed against HMG I(Y) blocked the
formation of one of the DNA-protein complexes on the T23 oligonucleotide,
suggesting that a protein antigenically related to HMG I(Y) binds to LAP2 in
vitro. Direct evidence of HMG I(Y) involvement in LAP2 function is provided by
the findings that recombinant HMG I(Y) protein facilitates Sp1 binding to LAP2 in
mobility shift assays and that antisense HMG I(Y) RNA specifically inhibits LAP2 
function in vivo. These results suggest that DNA structure may be an important
determinant of the activity of a promoter that is capable of escaping the global 
shutoff of transcription that occurs during viral latency.

PMCID: PMC231538
PMID: 8816451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1996 Sep 4;88(17):1234-6.

Ten pulmonary chondroid hamartomas with chromosome 6p21 breakpoints within the
HMG-I(Y) gene or its immediate surroundings.

Kazmierczak B(1), Wanschura S, Rommel B, Bartnitzke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Federal Republic of Germany.

PMID: 8780634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Am J Pathol. 1996 Sep;149(3):775-9.

HMGI-C expression patterns in human tissues. Implications for the genesis of
frequent mesenchymal tumors.

Rogalla P(1), Drechsler K, Frey G, Hennig Y, Helmke B, Bonk U, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Cytogenetically visible aberrations of chromosomal region 12q14-15 in a variety
of frequent benign human tumors reflect rearrangements of the HMGI-C gene. The
mechanisms by which the HMGI-C gene contributes to tumorigenesis are mostly
unknown, although frequently aberrant transcripts containing exons 1 to 3 of
HMGI-C and ectopic sequences from other genes due to breaks within the third
intron of HMGI-C are detectable. This is the first report analyzing human tissue 
samples mainly of mesenchymal origin by a highly sensitive
polymerase-chain-reaction-based approach detecting HMGI-C expression. We found
HMGI-C expression in embryonic tissue but no expression in any of several adult
tissues tested except for two myometrial tissues. These data suggest that HMGI-C 
is mainly expressed in human tissues during embryonal and fetal development.
Thus, its particular role for tumor development may be due to the expression of
at least exons 1 to 3 rather than to the formation of fusion transcripts.

PMCID: PMC1865134
PMID: 8780382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Genomics. 1996 Aug 15;36(1):118-29.

LPP, the preferred fusion partner gene of HMGIC in lipomas, is a novel member of 
the LIM protein gene family.

Petit MM(1), Mols R, Schoenmakers EF, Mandahl N, Van de Ven WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Oncology, Center for Human Genetics, University of
Leuven and Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, Herestraat 49,
Leuven, B-3000, Belgium.

A major cytogenetic subgroup of lipomas is characterized by recurrent chromosome 
aberrations, mainly translocations, that involve chromosome segment 12q13-q15.
Multiple chromosomes have been found as the translocation partners of chromosome 
12 but 3q27-q28 is preferentially involved. In previous studies, it has been
shown that the high mobility group (HMG) protein gene HMGIC at 12q15 is
consistently rearranged as a consequence of these translocations. Here, we report
the identification and characterization of the chromosome 3-derived translocation
partner gene, which we have designated LPP (lipoma preferred partner gene). Using
3'-RACE analysis of HMGIC fusion transcripts in lipoma cell line Li-501/SV40,
ectopic genetic sequences were obtained, which by CASH (chromosome assignment
using somatic cell hybrids) and FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization)
analysis were found to originate from chromosome segment 3q27-q28. In Northern
blot analysis, an mRNA of over 10 kb was detected by these ectopic sequences in a
variety of human tissues but not in brain and peripheral blood leukocytes. Upon
partial cDNA cloning, features of the genetic organization of LPP were
established. The gene was found to span a genomic region of over 400 kb.
Nucleotide sequence analysis of a composite cDNA of LPP revealed an open reading 
frame of 1836 nucleotides encoding a proline-rich protein containing a
leucine-zipper motif in its amino-terminal region and three LIM domains in its
carboxy-terminal region. The LPP-encoded protein should be classified as a novel 
member of the group 3 proteins of the LIM protein gene family. Using reverse
transcriptase combined with polymerase chain reactions in the analysis of a
number of lipoma cell lines and primary lipomas, it appeared that LPP is
frequently rearranged also in cases without a cytogenetically detectable
involvement of 3q27-q28. Two alternative HMGIC/LPP hybrid transcripts have been
detected; the difference between them is mainly the presence of either two or
three LIM domains in the predicted HMGI-C/LPP fusion proteins.

PMID: 8812423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1996 Aug;16(8):595-600.

Repression of interleukin-2 and interleukin-4 promoters by tumor suppressor
protein p53.

Pesch J(1), Brehm U, Staib C, Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Würzburg, Germany.

Interleukin 2 (IL-2) and interleukin 4 (IL-4) secreted by activated but not by
resting mature T cells are pleiotropic cytokines affecting growth and
differentiation of diverse cell types, such as T cells, B cells, and mast cells. 
There is little information about the molecular basis for the constitutive
repression of IL-2 and IL-4 gene expression in unstimulated T cells. We
investigated the possibility that wild-type (wt) p53, a nuclear tumor suppressor 
protein, might serve to repress IL-2 and IL-4 gene expression in murine E14 T
lymphoma and in human Jurkat cells. We transiently cotransfected these cells with
constitutive simian virus 40 (SV 40) early promoter expression plasmids
overproducing wt or mutant murine p53 and with appropriate luciferase (luc)
reporter plasmids containing the promoter elements of murine IL-2 and IL-4 genes 
to evaluate the effect of various p53 species on these promoters. Murine wt p53
derived from pSG5p53cD strongly repressed the IL-2 and IL-4 promoters in both
cell lines induced by the phorbol ester TPA and the Ca2+ ionophore ionomycin but 
not, however, in uninduced cells. In similar transient transfection experiments
with lymphoma cells, overexpression of deletion mutant species of murine p53
revealed that the N-terminal and C-terminal domains are crucial for inhibition of
both IL-2 and IL-4 gene expression. These parts of p53 comprise the
transactivation domain at the amino terminal side, which has previously also been
shown to interact with the TATA-box binding-protein TBP and the carboxy-terminal 
oligomerization domain. Additionally, it was shown that a previously described
inhibitory protein, the high-mobility-group protein HMG-I/Y, does not
functionally interact with p53. Cotransfection of expression plasmids for both
p53 and HMG-I/Y did not alter the extent of inhibition by the individual
proteins. These data suggest that p53 can downmodulate both IL-2 and IL-4 gene
expression and that both the transactivation and oligomerization domains of the
tumor suppressor protein are essential for this transcriptional repression.

PMID: 8877730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1996 Aug;90(1):88-90.

An endometrial polyp with a rearrangement of HMGI-C underlying a complex
cytogenetic rearrangement involving chromosomes 2 and 12.

Bol S(1), Wanschura S, Thode B, Deichert U, Van de Ven WJ, Bartnitzke S,
Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Cytogenetic studies of an endometrial polyp of an 82-year-old patient revealed a 
karyotype 46,XX,der(2)inv(2)(p25q21)ins(2;12)(p25;q13q14)t(2;12)(q21;
q15),der(12)del(12)(q13q14)del(12)(q15). By fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) we found the chromosome 12 translocation breakpoint to be mapping within
the third intron of the HMGI-C gene also harboring the breakpoints of
translocations involving 12q15 seen in uterine leiomyomas, lipomas, pleomorphic
adenomas, and pulmonary chondroid hamartomas.

PMID: 8780755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Br J Cancer. 1996 Aug;74(4):573-8.

A retrospective study of high mobility group protein I(Y) as progression marker
for prostate cancer determined by in situ hybridization.

Tamimi Y(1), van der Poel HG, Karthaus HF, Debruyne FM, Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology/Urological Research Laboratory, University Hospital
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In a previous study using RNA in situ hybridisation (RISH), we found a
significant correlation between high mobility group protein I/Y, [HMG-I(Y)] mRNA 
expression and tumour stage and grade in prostate cancer patients, suggesting
that HMG-I(Y) might be a potential prognostic marker in prostate cancer. However,
our clinical follow-up was limited because cryopreserved material was used.
Assessing the potential prognostic value of this molecule is of importance
because the clinical course of prostate cancer patients remains unpredictable.
Here we describe our results on paraffin-embedded archival material from a group 
of 102 patients undergoing radical prostatectomy. These were evaluated for the
presence of HMG-I(Y) using RISH, and a follow-up of 12-92 months (average 53
months) was available. In 2 of 14 prostate cancers in which the predominant
histological pattern was of Gleason grade 1-2, a high HMG-I(Y) expression was
observed, whereas in 19 of 23 Gleason grade 3, and 34 of 35 Gleason grade 4-5
tumours, high HMG-I(Y) mRNA levels were detected (chi-square = 38.78, P <
0.0001). Moreover, of tumours that expressed high HMG-I(Y) levels, 25% were organ
confined (T1-2), in contrast to 74.5% of the invading tumours (T3, chi-square =
15.8, P < 0.001). Furthermore, 87% of recurrent tumours showed high HMG-I(Y)
expression. However, a multivariate regression analysis including Gleason grade, 
clinical tumour stage, HMG-I(Y) expression and prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
levels showed Gleason grade as the most accurate predictor of progression. High
HMG-I(Y) levels measured by RISH were indicative of a worse prognosis, albeit
that additional value over the more subjective grading methods was not evident.

PMCID: PMC2074681
PMID: 8761372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochem J. 1996 Aug 1;317 ( Pt 3):865-70.

Calcium-dependent ADP-ribosylation of high-mobility-group I (HMGI) proteins.

Giancotti V(1), Bandiera A, Sindici C, Perissin L, Crane-Robinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, Italy.

Micrococcal nuclease digestion of nuclei from mouse Lewis lung carcinoma cells
releases a protein mixture into the supernatant that lacks histone H1 and
contains a full complement of high-mobility-group I (HMGI) proteins (i.e. I, Y
and I-C). This implies that all three HMGI proteins are localized at the
nuclease-sensitive regions of active chromatin. It is also shown that if Ca2+
ions are present in the nuclear incubation buffer (with or without exogenous
nuclease), all three HMGI proteins become ADP-ribosylated. We propose that this
modification of HMGI family proteins is part of the general
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation that accompanies DNA damage in apoptosis and other
processes.

PMCID: PMC1217565
PMID: 8760375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Mol Med (Berl). 1996 Jul;74(7):347-52.

Transcription, adipocyte differentiation, and obesity.

Auwerx J(1), Martin G, Guerre-Millo M, Staels B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 325, Département d'Athérosclérose, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

Differentiation of adipogenic precursor cells into mature adipocytes is a complex
phenomenon, characterized by an ordered expression of adipocyte-specific genes,
triggered by a set of interacting transcription factors. The most important
transcription factors involved in this process are the gamma form of peroxisome
proliferator activated receptors (PPAR gamma) and the various members of the
CCAAT enhancer binding proteins (alpha, beta, and delta). In addition to PPAR
gamma and these enhancer binding proteins, several other transcription factors,
including ADD-1 (SRE-BP), HMGI-C, are involved in regulating this process.
Altered activity and/or expression of these transcription factors, will induce
the expression of target genes in the differentiating cells, ultimately resulting
in the phenotypical characteristics of the adipocytes. It is speculated that
modulation of these transcription factors by either pharmacological or dietary
manipulations might influence adipocyte differentiation and prove beneficial in
the prevention and treatment of obesity.

PMID: 8841947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Int Immunol. 1996 Jul;8(7):977-89.

Independent pathways for de-repression of the mouse Ig heavy chain germ-line
epsilon promoter: an IL-4 NAF/NF-IL-4 site as a context-dependent negative
element.

Wang DZ(1), Cherrington A, Famakin-Mosuro B, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37332-2363, USA.

The activation of germ-line promoters in the Ig heavy chain loci is regulated by 
cytokines as part of the regulation of B cell commitment to production of new
antibody isotypes. Activation of the germ-line promoter of the epsilon heavy
chain locus (Gepsilon) and production of IgE are induced by IL-4 and each is
virtually undetectable in the absence of IL-4 or the homologous cytokine IL-13.
Basal expression of the Gepsilon promoter is repressed by the non-histone
chromosomal protein HMG-I(Y), which also contributes to promoter inducibility,
and IL-4 stimulates phosphorylation of the C-terminus of HMG-I(Y) through a
rapamycin-sensitive pathway. IL-4 treatment of mouse B cells also induces a
Gepsilon DNA binding activity with the properties of IL-4 NAF, which is rapidly
induced and requires phosphotyrosine for DNA binding activity. This protein binds
to a different site from HMG-I(Y), but the IL-4 NAF/NF-IL-4 binding site also is 
a negative element more active in repression of basal transcription of the
Gepsilon promoter. This site acts as a negative element when transferred to the
thymidine kinase promoter, but does not confer inducibility. In contrast to
HMG-I(Y), IL-4 NAF/NF-IL-4 activation is refractory to rapamycin but sensitive to
genistein. These findings indicate that two independent signal transduction
pathways diverge from the IL-4 receptor and suggest that normal expression of
Gepsilon RNA or IgE is low in part because the germ-line promoter is kept in a
state of repression which requires de-repression through several cooperative
pathways. These pathways target conserved nucleotide sequence motifs whose
precise function depends on the promoter context in which they are situated.

PMID: 8757943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jun 25;93(13):6716-20.

Multivalent DNA-binding properties of the HMG-1 proteins.

Maher JF(1), Nathans D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

HMG-I proteins are DNA-binding proteins thought to affect the formation and
function of transcription complexes. Each protein contains three DNA-binding
motifs, known as AT-hooks, that bind in the minor groove of AT tracts in DNA.
Multiple AT-hooks within a polypeptide chain should contact multiple AT tracts,
but the rules governing these interactions have not been defined. In this study, 
we demonstrate that high-affinity binding uses two or three appropriately spaced 
AT tracts as a single multivalent binding site. These principles have
implications for binding to regulatory elements such as the interferon beta
enhancer, TATA boxes, and serum response elements.

PMCID: PMC39092
PMID: 8692884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 7;271(23):13731-8.

Mechanisms of murine RANTES chemokine gene induction by Newcastle disease virus.

Lokuta MA(1), Maher J, Noe KH, Pitha PM, Shin ML, Shin HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

We have previously defined the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-responsive element (LRE) 
in the promoters of murine RANTES (regulated on activation normal T-cell
expressed) (MuRantes) and murine IP-10/crg-2, chemokines which have potent
chemotactic properties for inflammatory cells including monocytes and T
lymphocytes. In the present work, we studied the transcriptional mechanism of
MuRantes gene induction by virus and compared it with that of LPS in an effort to
understand the host responses to virus and bacterial toxins at the molecular
level. MuRantes mRNA expression is induced by Newcastle disease virus (NDV) and
LPS in the RAW 264.7 macrophage cell line and peritoneal macrophages of
LPS-responsive C3HeB/FeJ mice. In LPS-hyporesponsive C3H/HeJ mice, only NDV
induces this chemokine gene, indicating that the pathways of transcriptional
activation by NDV and LPS are not identical. Using a transient transfection
assay, the minimal virus-responsive element (VRE) was localized between nt -175
and -116. The VRE contains previously defined LRE motif 1 (TCAYRCTT) and motif 3 
((T/A)GRTTTCA(G/C)TTT), which were shown to also be important for initiation of
transcription by virus. NDV-stimulated nuclear extracts were tested for
trans-activating factors able to bind the VRE. The chromosomal protein HMG-I(C)
was shown to bind the 3'-A.T-rich domains of the VRE, and the presence of
HMG-I(C) was demonstrated in the VRE-protein complex formed with nuclear extracts
from NDV-stimulated, but not unstimulated cells. These findings demonstrate the
role of HMG-I(C) in activation of MuRantes promoter by NDV.

PMID: 8662857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Virus Res. 1996 Jun;42(1-2):119-25.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E6 protein up-regulates the expression of the high
mobility group protein HMG-I(Y) gene in mouse 10T1/2 cells.

Kinoshita T(1), Shirasawa H, Shino Y, Shimizu K, Moriya H, Simizu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Chiba University School of Medicine, Japan.

Using a differential hybridization technique, we have identified a mouse cellular
gene, high mobility group protein HMG-I(Y), whose expression is up-regulated by
the E6 protein of human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16. This gene was overexpressed
in E6-expressing mouse 10T1/2 cells, but not in G418-resistant 10T1/2 cells. The 
expression of the HMG-I(Y) gene was up-regulated by the transient expression of
E6 from a zinc-inducible human metallothionein-IIA gene promoter. Expression was 
found to be more efficient at a confluent cell density than at a subconfluent
cell density. The up-regulation of HMG-I(Y) gene expression by E6, in particular 
at a confluent cell density, may be part of an altered genetic program in host
cells infected with HPV-16.

PMID: 8806179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cancer Lett. 1996 Apr 19;102(1-2):17-21.

Transcriptional activation of HMGI-C in three pulmonary hamartomas each with a
der(14)t(12;14) as the sole cytogenetic abnormality.

Wanschura S(1), Kazmierczak B, Pohnke Y, Meyer-Bolte K, Bartnitzke S, Van de Ven 
WJ, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Aberrations involving the chromosomal region 12q14-15 are non-random cytogenetic 
abnormalities in many benign tumors, e.g. pulmonary chondroid hamartomas (PCH).
Recently, we identified rearrangements of the HMGI-C gene within the third or
fourth intron as the molecular mechanism underlying most of these chromosomal
aberrations. Herein we report our FISH and RACE studies on three PCHs each
showing a rare variant type of the translocation t(12;14)(q14-15;q24) with
presence of two normal chromosomes 12 and a der(14) but missing the der(12). The 
results revealed that in all three cases the breakpoint is located 5' to HMGI-C, 
suggesting that besides intragenic rearrangements also transcriptional activation
of the gene can initiate tumor growth.

PMID: 8603366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biochemistry. 1996 Apr 16;35(15):5063-74.

Substrate structure influences binding of the non-histone protein HMG-I(Y) to
free nucleosomal DNA.

Reeves R(1), Wolffe AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman
99164-4660,USA.

High mobility group protein HMG-I(Y) selectively binds to stretches of A.T-rich
B-form DNA in vitro by recognition of substrate structure rather nucleotide
sequence. Recognition of altered DNA structures has also been proposed to explain
the preferential binding of this non-histone protein to four-way junction DNA as 
well as to restricted regions of DNA on random-sequence nucleosome core
particles. Here we describe experiments that examine the influence of intrinsic
DNA structure, and of structure imposed by folding of DNA around histone cores,
on the binding of HMG-I(Y). As substrates for binding, we chose defined-sequence 
DNA molecules containing A.T-rich segments demonstrated previously to have very
different structures in solution. These segments are either intrinsically bent
(phase A.T tracts), flexible (oligo[d(A-T)]), or straight and rigid
[oligo(dA).oligo(dT)]. DNase-I and hydroxyl radical footprinting techniques were 
employed to analyze protein binding to these DNAs either free in solution or when
they were reconstituted into monomer or dinucleosomes in vitro. Results indicate 
that the DNA structure exerts a significant influence on HMG-I(Y) binding both
when substrates are free in solution and when they are wrapped into nucleosomal
structures. For example, when DNA is free in solution, HMG-I(Y) prefers to bind
to the narrow minor groove of A.T sequences but sometimes also binds to certain
GpC residues having narrowed major grooves that are embedded in such sequences.
On the other hand, depending on the structure and/or orientation assumed by
particular A.T-rich segments on the surface of reconstituted histone octamers,
HMG-I(Y) binding site selection on individual nucleosomes differs considerably.
Two observations are of particular importance: (i) HMG-I(Y) can preferentially
bind to certain types of A.T-DNA located on the surface of nucleosomes; and (ii) 
HMG-I(Y) binding can induce localized alterations in the helical periodicity
and/or rotational setting of DNA on the surface of some nucleosomes. The
abilities of HMG-I(Y) suggests that in vivo the protein may play an important
role in recognizing and altering the structure of localized regions of chromatin.

PMID: 8664299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cancer Res. 1996 Apr 15;56(8):1896-901.

Human colorectal carcinomas express high levels of high mobility group HMGI(Y)
proteins.

Fedele M(1), Bandiera A, Chiappetta G, Battista S, Viglietto G, Manfioletti G,
Casamassimi A, Santoro M, Giancotti V, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Napoli, Fondazione Senatore Pascale, Itlay.

A correlation has previously been demonstrated between the presence of the three 
HMGI proteins (HMGI, HMGY, and HMGI-C) and the expression of a highly malignant
phenotype in epithelial and fibroblastic rat thyroid cells; this being
subsequently extended to experimental thyroid, lung, prostate, mammary, and skin 
carcinomas. Recently, we have demonstrated that expression of HMGI and HMGY
proteins, coded for by the HMGI(Y) gene, is associated with the malignant
phenotype of human thyroid neoplasias. Here, we show that HMGI(Y) gene expression
is present both at the RNA and protein level in human colorectal carcinoma cell
lines and tissues examined in this study. Conversely, no HMGI(Y) proteins were
detected in normal intestinal mucosa. Therefore, these results suggest an
involvement of HMGI and HMGY proteins overexpression in colorectal tumorigenesis.

PMID: 8620511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Hum Reprod. 1996 Apr;2(4):277-83.

Rearrangements of the high mobility group protein family genes and the molecular 
genetic origin of uterine leiomyomas and endometrial polyps.

Hennig Y(1), Wanschura S, Deichert U, Bartnitzke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

The results of cytogenetic studies of uterine leiomyomas have revealed that
approximately 50% of these tumours are characterized by clonal chromosomal
alterations. These karyotypic deviations are dominated by rearrangements
involving a particular part of chromosome 12, i.e. region 12q13-15. We recently
showed that the multiple aberration region on chromosome 12q15 harbours recurrent
breakpoints frequently found in a variety of benign solid tumours. Within this
region a gene encoding for a member of the so called high mobility group family
proteins (HMG) was mapped. Further investigation revealed that this gene i.e.
HMGI-C is often truncated by the chromosomal aberrations and fused to ectopic DNA
sequences leading to fusion genes. Therefore, the results suggest a causal
relationship between mutations of the HMGI-C gene and the development of uterine 
leiomyomas. Apparently identical mutations have been found also in endometrial
polyps. Furthermore, there is an obvious coincidence between the chromosomal
assignment of other members of the HMG family and the breakpoints of other
non-random chromosome abnormalities seen in uterine leiomyomas.

PMID: 9238692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1996 Apr;18(2):79-83.

[Effect of phosphorylation by protein kinase C on the DNA binding activity of
high mobility group protein I].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiao D(1), Huang K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing.

High mobility group protein I (HMG-I) is a nonhistone chromosomal protein. The
present study aims to examine phosphorylation of HMG-I by protein kinase C (PKC) 
and its effect on HMG-I's DNA binding activity. HMG-I, extracted and purified
from rat brain was phosphorylated in vitro equally well by PKC alpha, beta, gamma
and delta. Phosphoamino acid analysis indicated that both serine and threonine
residues were phosphorylated. The nonphosphorylated HMG-I was shown to bind
specifically to the fragment of DNA containing bp -708 to -458 of RC3 genomic
DNA, which is abundant in A-T sequences. In contrast, phosphorylation of HMG-I by
PKC resulted in an attenuation of binding to the DNA fragment. It is suggested
that phosphorylation of HMG-I by PKC may regulate DNA binding activity of HMG-I, 
thereby possibly altering its biological functions.

PMID: 9208593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Hypertension. 1996 Apr;27(4):1025-9.

Mechanisms of transcriptional synergism of eukaryotic genes. The interferon-beta 
paradigm.

Thanos D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York 10032, USA.

The virus-inducible enhancer of the human interferon-beta gene has served as an
excellent example for the mechanisms controlling the activation and repression of
transcription. This enhancer is activated by three different transcription
factors that, with the help of the high mobility group protein HMG I(Y), assemble
in a unique nucleoprotein complex that interacts as a unit with the basal
transcriptional machinery. The assembly of unique enhancer complexes from similar
sets of transcription factors may provide the specificity required for regulation
of complex patterns of gene expression in higher eukaryotes.

PMID: 8613258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1996 Feb;6(1):71-5.

Translocations in solid tumours.

Cooper CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Haddow Laboratories, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

Specific chromosomal translocations have now been identified in a variety of
solid tumour types. Recent developments in this field include the identification 
of novel genes involved in the t(X;18) synovial sarcoma translocation and the
discovery that the high-mobility group protein gene, HMGI-C, is involved in the
chromosome 12 rearrangements found in lipomas and uterine leiomyomas. These
discoveries may have important implications for the strategies used in tumour
diagnosis and treatment.

PMID: 8791483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Int J Dev Biol. 1996 Feb;40(1):177-87.

Structural and functional properties of linker histones and high mobility group
proteins in polytene chromosomes.

Wisniewski JR(1), Grossbach U.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Zoology Developmental Biology, University of Göttingen,
Germany. jwisnie@gwdg.de

Variants of histone H1 and high mobility group (HMG) proteins and their genes in 
Dipteran insects are being studied in our laboratory and have revealed different 
properties of DNA binding and intrachromosomal distribution. One of the H1
variants of Chironomus is found only in a minority of polytene chromosome bands
and differs from the other H1 proteins of the same organism by genomic
organization and by an inserted structural motif, the KAPKAP repeat, that is
present also in single H1 variants of other, evolutionarily remote organisms.
NH2-terminal peptides containing the KAPKAP repeat were found in vitro to
interact with DNA, whereas no DNA interaction was observed with the homologous
peptide of another H1 variant that does not contain the inserted KAPKAP repeat.
We assume that H1 variants containing the KAP motif may interact with a stretch
of linker DNA and package chromatin more tightly than other H1 variants. A large 
series of antibodies directed against different sites in all regions of the H1
molecule is being applied in studying the sites of interaction of the H1 molecule
with other molecules in interphase chromatin in terms of antibody epitope
accessibility. A search for insect proteins that share properties of the
mammalian HMG proteins resulted in isolation and sequencing of two different HMG1
proteins and an HMGI protein. The HMG1 protein of the midge, Chironomus tentans, 
show a differential distribution in chromosomes. The more abundant cHMG1a protein
appears uniformly distributed, whereas the less abundant cHMG1b protein could be 
localized only in chromosomal puffs. This strongly indicates that these highly
similar proteins have different functions in chromatin. The Chironomus HMGI
protein and the intron/exon organization of its gene were found to be very
similar to human HMGI/Y proteins that are highly abundant in rapidly
proliferating cells. Common properties of HMG1 and HMGI proteins include high
affinity interaction with AT-rich DNA, irregular DNA structures, and the capacity
to bend DNA. These properties suggest that the HMG proteins may have an
architectural role in assembling different types of chromatin.

PMID: 8735927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Oncogene. 1996 Feb 1;12(3):515-21.

HMGI-C rearrangements as the molecular basis for the majority of pulmonary
chondroid hamartomas: a survey of 30 tumors.

Kazmierczak B(1), Rosigkeit J, Wanschura S, Meyer-Bolte K, Van de Ven WJ, Kayser 
K, Krieghoff B, Kastendiek H, Bartnitzke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Pulmonary chondroid hamartomas (PCH) are benign tumors of the lung characterized 
by a more or less high degree of mesenchymal metaplasia. In our series we
investigated 30 PCH by a combination of cytogenetic and molecular methods. 18
tumors (60%) had cytogenetically detectable aberrations involving either 12q14-15
or 6p21 with a clear predominance of chromosomal abnormalities involving 12q14-15
(15 tumors). As in subgroups of pleomorphic adenomas of the salivary glands,
leiomyomas of the uterus, and lipomas with 12q14-15 abnormalities the HMGI-C gene
is frequently rearranged we tested PCH with either 12q14-15 abnormalities or
normal karyotype by FISH and 3' RACE experiments for rearrangements of HMGI-C.
Rearrangements were found in all cases with chromosomal 12q14-15 abnormalities
and further six cases with an apparently normal karyotype. By the combination of 
cytogenetics with molecular techniques the percentage of cases with intragenic
rearrangements of HMGI-C or rearrangements of its immediate surrounding was thus 
increased to 70% (21/30 cases). Considering all types of aberrations within this 
series 80% (24/30) of all PCH were aberrant. This is the first report on a
combined molecular and cytogenetic analysis of a large series of pulmonary
chondroid hamartomas indicating that rearrangements of HMGI-C, a member of the
high mobility group protein gene family, are the leading molecular events in the 
genesis of PCH.

PMID: 8637707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Genomics. 1996 Jan 15;31(2):207-14.

Genomic characterization of human HMGIC, a member of the accessory transcription 
factor family found at translocation breakpoints in lipomas.

Ashar HR(1), Cherath L, Przybysz KM, Chada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, Piscataway 08854, USA.

HMGIC, a member of the HMGI family of high mobility group proteins, is disrupted 
in 3/3 lipomas characterized by 12q14-q15 rearrangements. To define the genomic
structure of the HMGIC gene, YACs from the HMGIC locus were identified and
subcloned in lambda FIXII, and genomic lambda clones containing the HMGIC exons
were isolated. The HMGIC gene consists of five exons that span at least 60 kb and
encodes a 4.1-kb transcript. The coding region is 330 bp, the 5'UTR is 854 bp,
and the 3'UTR is 2966 bp. Intron 3, which separates the DNA-binding domains from 
the acidic domain, is unusually large ( > 25 kb) and is the site of disruption in
lipomas with 12q14-q15 translocations. The genomic organization of HMGIC should
further our understanding of the 12q14-q15 region, where other neoplasms of
mesenchymal origin are also mapped.

PMID: 8824803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Methods Enzymol. 1996;274:162-73.

In vitro assembly of enhancer complexes.

Thanos D(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York 10032, USA.

PMID: 8902803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1996;38(3):299-303.

A fibroadenoma with a t(4;12) (q27;q15) affecting the HMGI-C gene, a member of
the high mobility group protein gene family.

Staats B(1), Bonk U, Wanschura S, Hanisch P, Schoenmakers EF, Van de Ven WJ,
Bartnitzke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

An intracanalicular fibroadenoma of the breast showing a clonal chromosomal
aberration t(4;12) (q27;q15) as the sole cytogenetic abnormality is described. In
order to narrow down the breakpoint region on chromosome 12 on the molecular
level we performed fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis with a
cosmid pool originating from a YAC-contig overspanning part of the region
12q14-15. We were able to narrow down the breakpoint to an approximately 230kb
fragment belonging to the HMGI-C gene which maps within an area recently
designated as MAR (Multiple Aberration Region). The chromosomal breakpoints of
other frequent benign solid tumors, i.e. lipomas, uterine leiomyomas, and
pleomorphic adenomas are clustered within the third intron of that gene.

PMID: 8739083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Gene. 1995 Dec 29;167(1-2):249-53.

Isolation and characterization of the gene coding for murine high-mobility-group 
protein HMGI-C.

Manfioletti G(1), Rustighi A, Mantovani F, Goodwin GH, Giancotti V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, Italy.

The HMGI-C protein is a nuclear factor expressed in human and rodent neoplastic
cells which has been shown to be involved in the process of cell transformation. 
We have previously isolated the cDNA encoding murine HMGI-C and now we report the
cloning and analysis of the mouse Hmgi-c gene. The gene is at least 50 kb long,
contains five exons, and each of the three DNA-binding domains is encoded by a
different exon. The location of exon-intron junctions was determined and shown to
follow the GT-AG rule. The sequence revealed that the overall organization is
similar to the gene encoding human HMGI(Y), the other member of the HMGI family, 
suggesting that HMGI genes probably evolved through gene duplication and exon
shuffling events from an ancestral gene. A highly homologous pseudogene is also
present in the mouse genome. Our results on Hmgi-c structure provide basic
information to carry out further studies on the regulation of its expression.

PMID: 8566786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cell. 1995 Dec 29;83(7):1101-11.

Reversal of intrinsic DNA bends in the IFN beta gene enhancer by transcription
factors and the architectural protein HMG I(Y).

Falvo JV(1), Thanos D, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

In this paper, we investigate DNA bending induced by proteins required for virus 
induction of the human interferon-beta (IFN beta) gene. We show that NF-kappa
B-DNA complexes that are functionally distinct in the context of the IFN beta
enhancer are also conformationally distinct and that two sites in the enhancer
contain in-phase bends that are counteracted or reversed by the binding of
NF-kappa B, ATF-2/c-Jun, and HMG I(Y). Strikingly, this modulation of intrinsic
enhancer architecture results in an orientation that favors predicted
protein-protein interactions in a functional nucleoprotein complex, the
enhanceosome. Furthermore, the subtle modulation of DNA structure by HMG I(Y) in 
this process distinguishes it from other architectural factors.

PMID: 8548798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cell. 1995 Dec 29;83(7):1091-100.

Virus induction of human IFN beta gene expression requires the assembly of an
enhanceosome.

Thanos D(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

We present evidence that transcriptional activation of the human interferon-beta 
(IFN beta) gene requires the assembly of a higher order transcription enhancer
complex (enhanceosome). This multicomponent complex includes at least three
distinct transcription factors and the high mobility group protein HMG I(Y). Both
the in vitro assembly and in vivo transcriptional activity of this complex
require a precise helical relationship between individual transcription
factor-binding sites. In addition, HMG I(Y), which binds specifically to three
sites within the enhancer, promotes cooperative binding of transcriptional
factors in vitro and is required for transcriptional synergy between these
factors in vivo. Thus, HMG I(Y) plays an essential role in the assembly and
function of the IFN beta gene enhanceosome.

PMID: 8548797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cancer Res. 1995 Dec 15;55(24):6038-9.

Description of a novel fusion transcript between HMGI-C, a gene encoding for a
member of the high mobility group proteins, and the mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase gene.

Kazmierczak B(1), Hennig Y, Wanschura S, Rogalla P, Bartnitzke S, Van de Ven W,
Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

Aberrations involving the chromosomal region 12q24 are a nonrandom cytogenetic
abnormality in frequent benign tumors mainly of mesenchymal origin, e.g., uterine
leiomyomas, pleomorphic adenomas of the salivary gland, lipomas, or hamartomas of
the lung. Mostly, these 12q24 abnormalities occur as a result of inversions also 
affecting chromosomal region 12q14-15. In addition to the frequent tumors
mentioned above, these abnormalities have also been found in rare mesenchymal
tumors, e.g., hemangiopericytomas. Although recently the molecular basis of the
aberrations of chromosomal region 12q14-15, i.e., a rearrangement of the HMGI-C
gene has been identified, the molecular roots of the 12q24 changes still remain
to be elucidated. Herein we report on 3' rapid amplification of cDNA ends PCR
results on cDNA from a primary uterine leiomyoma. As an ectopic sequence fused to
exon 3 of the HMGI-C gene, we have identified a cDNA sequence that revealed 100% 
homology to exon 13 of the human mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase gene (ALDH 
2). Because ALDH 2 maps to 12q24.1, this fusion transcript is a good candidate
underlying the chromosomal rearrangements involving 12q24.

PMID: 8521389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Nov 11;23(21):4262-6.

The gene for the human architectural transcription factor HMGI-C consists of five
exons each coding for a distinct functional element.

Chau KY(1), Patel UA, Lee KL, Lam HY, Crane-Robinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Laboratories, University of Portsmouth, UK.

The gene on chromosome 12 coding for the human protein HMGI-C has been cloned and
partially sequenced. It consists of five exons, the first and last of which
include long untranslated regions. The 5' UTR includes a (CA/T)n tract and a
polymorphic (CT)n tract. Exons II, III and IV (87, 51 and 33 bp) are dispersed
over > 30 kb. Exons I-III separately encode the three basic DNA binding domains
('A-T hooks'), exon IV encodes an 11 amino acid sequence characteristic of HMGI-C
and absent from the human HMGI(Y) gene [Friedmann, M., Holth, L. T., Zoghbi, H.
Y. and Reeves, R. (1993) Nucleic Acids Res., 21, 4259-4267], whilst exon V
encodes the acidic C-terminal domain, which is subject to multiple
phosphorylation. The HMGI-C gene is thus a striking example of the separation of 
functional protein elements into different coding exons.

PMCID: PMC307378
PMID: 7501444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Immunol. 1995 Nov 1;155(9):4330-8.

Multiple proteins physically interact with PU.1. Transcriptional synergy with
NF-IL6 beta (C/EBP delta, CRP3).

Nagulapalli S(1), Pongubala JM, Atchison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

PU.1 is a transcription factor that belongs to the ets family of DNA binding
proteins. In this study, we show by Far Western blot analyses that multiple
nuclear proteins are capable of physically interacting with PU.1. Using
radiolabeled PU.1 protein as a probe, we screened a B cell cDNA expression
library and isolated a number of clones encoding PU.1 interacting proteins. Three
of these clones encode DNA binding proteins (NF-IL6 beta, HMG I/Y, and SSRP), one
clone encodes a chaperone protein, and another clone encodes a multifunctional
phosphatase. We have characterized the physical and functional interactions
between PU.1 and NF-IL6 beta, a leucine zipper transcription factor implicated in
inflammatory responses. We found that deletion of the carboxyl-terminal 28 amino 
acids of PU.1 disrupted PU.1-NF-IL6 beta physical interaction. This deletion
disrupts the PU.1 Ets domain. Deletion of the NF-IL6 beta leucine zipper domain
also greatly diminished the interaction between these two proteins. In transient 
expression assays, we found that PU.1 and NF-IL6 beta can functionally cooperate 
to synergistically activate transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
showed that PU.1 and NF-IL6 beta can simultaneously bind to adjacent DNA binding 
sites, but apparently do not influence the kinetics or affinity of each other's
DNA binding. These results suggest that transcriptional synergy is due to each
protein independently influencing the basal transcription complex.

PMID: 7594592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Oct 25;23(20):4210-9.

HMGI(Y) and Sp1 in addition to NF-kappa B regulate transcription of the MGSA/GRO 
alpha gene.

Wood LD(1), Farmer AA, Richmond A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232-2175, USA.

Expression of the chemokine MGSA/GRO is upregulated as melanocytes progress to
melanoma cells. We demonstrate that constitutive and cytokine induced MGSA/GRO
alpha expression requires multiple DNA regulatory regions between positions -143 
to -62. We have previously shown that the NF-kappa B element at -83 to -65 is
essential for basal and cytokine induced MGSA/GRO alpha promoter activity in the 
Hs294T melanoma and normal retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells, respectively. 
Here, we have determined that the Sp1 binding element located approximately 42
base pairs upstream from the NF-kappa B element binds Sp1 and Sp3 constitutively 
and this element is necessary for basal MGSA/GRO alpha promoter activity. We
demonstrate that the high mobility group proteins HMGI(Y) recognize the AT-rich
motif nested within the NF-kappa B element in the MGSA/GRO alpha promoter. Loss
of either NF-kappa B or HMGI(Y) complex binding by selected point mutations in
the NF-kappa B element results in decreased basal and cytokine induced MGSA/GRO
alpha promoter activity. Thus, these results indicate that transcriptional
regulation of the chemokine MGSA/GRO alpha requires at least three transcription 
factors: Sp1, NF-kappa B and HMGI(Y).

PMCID: PMC307364
PMID: 7479086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Toxicon. 1995 Oct;33(10):1365-71.

Effects of sea anemone (Heteractis magnifica and Actinia equina) cytolysins on
synaptosomal uptake of GABA and choline.

Khoo HE(1), Lim JP, Tan CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore.

Magnificalysin I and II (HMg I and II) and equinatoxin II (EqTx II) are cytolytic
toxins extracted from sea anemones Heteractis magnifica and Actinia equina,
respectively. They induced haemolysis in rat red blood cells and inhibited gamma 
amino butyric acid (GABA) and choline uptake into rat brain synaptosomes. These
effects were concentration dependent. The inhibition of GABA and choline uptake
could be overcome by the addition of exogenous sphingomyelin, suggesting that
there might be interaction between these cytolysins and the phospholipid.
Although the precise mechanisms involved in haemolysis and inhibition of GABA and
choline uptake are unknown, they appeared to be different.

PMID: 8599187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Development. 1995 Oct;121(10):3425-37.

Progressive maturation of chromatin structure regulates HSP70.1 gene expression
in the preimplantation mouse embryo.

Thompson EM(1), Legouy E, Christians E, Renard JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie du Développement, Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

In the widely studied model organisms, Drosophila and Xenopus, early
embryogenesis involves an extended series of nuclear divisions prior to
activation of the zygotic genome. The mammalian embryo differs in that the early 
cleavage phase is already characterized by regulated cell cycles with specific
zygotic gene expression. In the mouse, where major activation of the zygotic
genome occurs at the 2-cell stage, the HSP70.1 gene is among the earliest genes
to be expressed. We investigated the developmentally regulated expression of this
gene during the preimplantation period, using a luciferase transgene, with or
without flanking scaffold attachment regions (SARs). Cleavage stage-specific
modifications in expression profiles were examined in terms of histone H4
acetylation status, topoisomerase II activity, and the localisation of HMG-I/Y, a
nuclear protein with known affinity for the AT-tracts of SARs. We demonstrate
that HSP70.1-associated transcription factors are not limiting, and that instead,
there is a progressive maturation of chromatin structure that is directly
involved in HSP70.1 regulation during early mouse development.

PMID: 7588075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 29;270(39):22924-32.

Interleukin 4-inducible phosphorylation of HMG-I(Y) is inhibited by rapamycin.

Wang DZ(1), Ray P, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2363, USA.

The non-histone chromosomal protein HMG-I(Y) participates in repression of
transcription directed by a promoter which confers interleukin 4 (IL-4)-inducible
activation in transfected B cell lines. Metabolic labeling, phosphoamino acid
analyses, and in vitro phosphorylation studies demonstrate that IL-4 induces
serine phosphorylation of HMG-I(Y) in B lymphocytes. Phosphopeptide mapping shows
that the predominant site of phosphorylation contains a casein kinase II
consensus motif. The immunosuppressive agent rapamycin has been shown
preferentially to inhibit IgE production by IL-4-treated human B cells. It is
shown here that rapamycin inhibits both activation of the human germ line epsilon
promoter by IL-4 and IL-4-inducible phosphorylation of HMG-I(Y). These findings
demonstrate a rapamycin-sensitive pathway that transduces signals from the IL-4
receptor to nuclear factors that regulate inducible transcription. The affinity
of normal nuclear HMG-I(Y) for DNA is increased by dephosphorylation in vitro,
whereas in vitro kinase reactions using casein kinase II decrease recombinant
HMG-I(Y) binding to DNA. These data further suggest a novel mechanism in which
phosphorylation triggered by IL-4 or other cytokines could regulate the effects
of HMG-I(Y) on gene transcription.

PMID: 7559428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Sep 25;214(3):927-33.

HMG-I binds to GATA motifs: implications for an HPFH syndrome.

Magis W(1), Martin DI.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, USA.

We have examined binding of the nuclear protein HMG-I to the human gamma-globin
promoter. We find that HMG-I binds preferentially to the more 3' of a pair of
GATA motifs in the gamma-globin promoter; this paired motif is bound by the
erythroid factor GATA-1. A naturally occurring mutation (-175 T-C) in the area
bound by HMG-I results in overexpression of gamma-globin in adult red blood cells
(HPFH) and up-regulation of the gamma-globin promoter in in vitro expression
assays; HMG-I does not bind to this mutant sequence. A survey of GATA motifs from
other globin cis-elements demonstrates HMG-I binding to most of them. These
findings implicate HMG-I in the HPFH phenotype; we speculate that it may
participate in the formation of multiprotein complexes that regulate globin gene 
expression.

PMID: 7575565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nature. 1995 Aug 31;376(6543):771-4.

Mutation responsible for the mouse pygmy phenotype in the developmentally
regulated factor HMGI-C.

Zhou X(1), Benson KF, Ashar HR, Chada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway 08854-5635, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1995 Aug 31;376(6543):725-6.

Growth is one of the fundamental aspects in the development of an organism.
Classical genetic studies have isolated four viable, spontaneous mouse mutants
disrupted in growth, leading to dwarfism. Pygmy is unique among these mutants
because its phenotype cannot be explained by aberrations in the growth
hormone-insulin-like growth factor endocrine pathway. Here we show that the pygmy
phenotype arises from the inactivation of Hmgi-c (ref. 6), a member of the Hmgi
family which function as architectural factors in the nuclear scaffold and are
critical in the assembly of stereospecific transcriptional complexes. Hmgi-c and 
another Hmgi family member, Hmgi(gamma) (ref. 10), were found to be expressed
predominantly during embryogenesis. The HMGI proteins are known to be regulated
by cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation which alters their DNA binding affinity. 
These results demonstrate the important role of HMGI proteins in mammalian growth
and development.

PMID: 7651535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Nat Genet. 1995 Aug;10(4):436-44.

Recurrent rearrangements in the high mobility group protein gene, HMGI-C, in
benign mesenchymal tumours.

Schoenmakers EF(1), Wanschura S, Mols R, Bullerdiek J, Van den Berghe H, Van de
Ven WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Oncology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

We recently showed that the 1.7 megabase multiple aberration region (MAR) on
human chromosome 12q15 harbours recurrent breakpoints frequently found in a
variety of benign solid tumours. We now report a candidate gene within MAR
suspected to be of pathogenetical relevance. Using positional cloning, we have
identified the high mobility group protein gene HMGI-C within a 175 kilobase
segment of MAR and characterized its genomic organization. By FISH analysis, we
show the majority of the breakpoints of eight different benign solid tumour types
fall within this gene. By Southern blot and 3'-RACE analysis, we demonstrate
consistent rearrangements in HMGI-C and/or expression of altered HMGI-C
transcripts. These results suggest a link between a member of the HMG gene family
and benign solid tumour development.

PMID: 7670494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Exp Med. 1995 Aug 1;182(2):487-500.

Functional roles of the transcription factor Oct-2A and the high mobility group
protein I/Y in HLA-DRA gene expression.

Abdulkadir SA(1), Krishna S, Thanos D, Maniatis T, Strominger JL, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lucille P. Markey Graduate Program in Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore 21224,
USA.

The class II major histocompatibility complex gene HLA-DRA is expressed in B
cells, activated T lymphocytes, and in antigen-presenting cells. In addition,
HLA-DRA gene expression is inducible in a variety of cell types by
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). Here we show that the lymphoid-specific
transcription factor Oct-2A plays a critical role in HLA-DRA gene expression in
class II-positive B cell lines, and that the high mobility group protein (HMG)
I/Y binds to multiple sites within the DRA promoter, including the Oct-2A binding
site. Coexpression of HMG I/Y and Oct-2 in cell lines lacking Oct-2 results in
high levels of HLA-DRA gene expression, and in vitro DNA-binding studies reveal
that HMG I/Y stimulates Oct-2A binding to the HLA-DRA promoter. Thus, Oct-2A and 
HMG I/Y may synergize to activate HLA-DRA expression in B cells. By contrast,
Oct-2A is not involved in the IFN-gamma induction of the HLA-DRA gene in HeLa
cells, but antisense HMG I/Y dramatically decreases the level of induction. We
conclude that distinct sets of transcription factors are involved in the two
modes of HLA-DRA expression, and that HMG I/Y may be important for B
cell-specific expression, and is essential for IFN-gamma induction.

PMCID: PMC2192141
PMID: 7629508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cell. 1995 Jul 14;82(1):57-65.

Disruption of the architectural factor HMGI-C: DNA-binding AT hook motifs fused
in lipomas to distinct transcriptional regulatory domains.

Ashar HR(1), Fejzo MS, Tkachenko A, Zhou X, Fletcher JA, Weremowicz S, Morton CC,
Chada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway 08854, USA.

Lipomas are one of the most common mesenchymal neoplasms in humans. They are
characterized by consistent cytogenetic aberrations involving chromosome 12 in
bands q14-15. Interestingly, this region is also the site of rearrangement for
other mesenchymally derived tumors. This study demonstrates that HMGI-C, an
architectural factor that functions in transcriptional regulation, has been
disrupted by rearrangement at the 12q14-15 chromosomal breakpoint in lipomas.
Chimeric transcripts were isolated from two lipomas in which HMGI-C DNA-binding
domains (AT hook motifs) are fused to either a LIM or an acidic transactivation
domain. These results, identifying a gene rearranged in a benign neoplastic
process that does not proceed to a malignancy, suggest a role for HMGI-C in
adipogenesis and mesenchyme differentiation.

PMID: 7606786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Gene. 1995 Jul 4;160(1):111-6.

Sequence similarities between the yeast chromosome segregation protein Mif2 and
the mammalian centromere protein CENP-C.

Brown MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98104, USA.

A short stretch of strong homology between the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
chromosome segregation protein Mif2 and the DNA-binding motifs of the Drosophila 
D1 and mammalian HMGI(Y) chromosomal proteins suggested that Mif2 may act
directly on chromosomes. Because this conserved motif is involved in binding A.T 
DNA, it was proposed that Mif2 may interact with chromosomes at the highly A +
T-rich DNA element found in yeast centromeres. Comparison of the Mif2 amino-acid 
sequence with sequence databases showed that Mif2 shares at least two regions of 
similarity with the mammalian centromere protein CENP-C, suggesting an
evolutionary conservation of centromere protein function from yeast to mammals.
The order, spacing and location of these regions are also similar in the two
proteins. Sequence analysis of several conditional lethal alleles of MIF2
generated by random mutagenesis revealed mutations in regions homologous to
CENP-C, as well as in the highly conserved A.T DNA-binding motif. A potential
phosphorylation site for p34cdc2 kinase located adjacent to the A.T DNA-binding
motif was also found to be mutated in one of the mutants, suggesting that
phosphorylation at this site may be important for Mif2 function and possibly for 
DNA binding.

PMID: 7628703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3738-47.

Functional interaction between the POU domain protein Tst-1/Oct-6 and the
high-mobility-group protein HMG-I/Y.

Leger H(1), Sock E, Renner K, Grummt F, Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Universität Hamburg, Germany.

The POU domain protein Tst-1/Oct-6 is a transcriptional activator of human
papovavirus JC virus in transient transfections. Because of its endogenous
expression in myelinating glia, Tst-1/Oct-6 might also be an important
determinant for the glia specificity of JC virus in vivo. Activation of viral
early and late genes depends on the ability of Tst-1/Oct-6 to interact with an
AT-rich element within the viral regulatory region. Here, we show that this
element not only is bound by Tst-1/Oct-6 but, in addition, serves as a binding
site for the high-mobility-group protein HMG-I/Y. In the presence of HMG-I/Y,
Tst-1/Oct-6 exhibited an increased affinity for this AT-rich element. The
specificity of this effect was evident from the fact that no stimulation of
Tst-1/Oct-6 binding was observed on a site that did not allow binding of HMG-I/Y.
In addition, both proteins interacted with each other in solution. Direct
contacts were identified between the POU domain of Tst-1/Oct-6 and a short
stretch of 10 amino acids in the central portion of HMG-I/Y. These results point 
to an accessory role for HMG-I/Y in the activation of JC viral gene expression by
the POU domain protein Tst-1/Oct-6. In agreement with such a role, HMG-Y
synergistically supported the function of Tst-1/Oct-6 in transient transfections,
measured on the early promoter of JC virus or on an artificial promoter
consisting of only a TATA box and the common binding element for Tst-1 and
HMG-I/Y.

PMCID: PMC230612
PMID: 7791781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 9;270(23):14235-42.

Differential regulation of a multipromoter gene. Selective
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate induction of a single transcription start
site in the HMG-I/Y gene.

Ogram SA(1), Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman
99164-4660, USA.

The human HMG-I/Y gene, encoding the non-histone "high mobility group" proteins
HMG-I and HMG-Y, is transcriptionally activated in human K562 erythroleukemia
cells by treatment with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). TPA treatment
induces differentiation of K562 cells within 2-4 days after treatment. In this
report, we show that transcriptional activation of the HMG-I/Y gene is dependent 
on protein synthesis and is an early event (2 h after induction) in the
TPA-mediated differentiation process. Of the four functional transcription start 
sites present in the gene, only one (start site 2) is preferentially induced upon
TPA treatment. This is the first report, to our knowledge, of the preferential
utilization of a specific transcription start site in response to a particular
stimulus in a gene that contains multiple promoters. This indicates that each
start site in the gene has the potential to be independently regulated instead of
being coordinately controlled as shown in a number of other genes. In addition,
sequences upstream of the inducible start site, which contains a TPA-responsive
element, mediates TPA inducibility through AP1 (or an AP1-like) transcription
factor. The HMG-I/Y proteins function as key regulators of gene expression and
play a significant role in chromatin structural changes as well. The cloning and 
sequence analyses previously reported indicated the structure of the HMG-I/Y gene
to be highly complex and predicted its expression to be tightly regulated. The
results presented here confirm and extend these earlier findings.

PMID: 7775485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Oncol. 1995 Jun;6(6):1313-8.

How enhancers work - juxtapositioning of DNA control elements by synergistic
interaction of Mars - (review-hypothesis).

Boulikas T.

The sites of attachment of chromatin loops to the nuclear matrix (MARs) seem to
harbor transcriptional enhancers, promoters and origins of replication (ORIs).
According to the model proposed, the cooperative interactions among classical
nuclear matrix proteins which are abundant (topoisomerase II, histone H1,
HMG-I(Y), lamins A, B1, SAF-A, ARBP and others) bring together distant AT-rich
classical MAR sequences causing looping of DNA. This process juxtaposes
enhancers, ORIs, promoters, and other control elements that cohabit with MARs
loaded with the less abundant transcription factors (TFs) facilitating productive
interactions between enhancers and promoters or enhancers and core ORIs. The
implications of the model in the interactions of oncoproteins with regulatory DNA
elements and their integration into a chromatin and nuclear matrix environment
are discussed.

PMID: 21556674  [PubMed]


262. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1995 Jun;36(2):439-49.

The effect of chlorambucil on the biosynthesis of the HMG and histone H1
chromosomal proteins of HEp-2 cells.

Aleporou-Marinou V(1), Photopoulou A, Sourlingas TG, Ostvold AC, Pataryas TA,
Sekeri-Pataryas KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Athens, Greece.

The effect of chlorambucil, a bisalkylating agent, on the biosynthesis of the 5% 
PCA extractable protein fraction of the cancer cell line, HEp-2, has been
analyzed. It was found that the synthesis of all the high mobility group proteins
as well as that of the H1 and H1o histone proteins are inhibited by this agent.
HMG 14 and the H1, H1o proteins are inhibited to the same extent as that reported
for the core histones of the same cell line [7], while slightly higher levels of 
inhibition were found for the HMG 1, 2 and 17 proteins. The proteins, P1 and HMG 
I exhibited the highest level of inhibition of the entire fraction. These
findings extend previous findings regarding the histone proteins and may be
correlated to a dysfunction in the normal process of chromatin condensation and a
potential cytotoxic effect of this agent during the G2 phase.

PMID: 7663448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1995 Jun;45(6):554-60.

1H and 13C NMR assignments and molecular modelling of a minor groove DNA-binding 
peptide from the HMG-I protein.

Evans JN(1), Zajicek J, Nissen MS, Munske G, Smith V, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Washington State University,
Pullman, USA.

The HMG-I subfamily of high mobility group (HMG) chromatin proteins consists of
DNA-binding proteins that preferentially bind to stretches of A.T-rich sequence
both in vitro and in vivo. Recently, members of the HMG-I family have been
suggested to bind in vitro to the narrow minor groove of A.T-DNA by means of an
11 amino acid peptide binding domain (BD) which, because of its predicted
structure, is called the 'A.T-hook motif' [Reeves, R. & Nissen, M. (1990) J.
Biol. Chem. 265, 8573-8582], and would appear to be crescent-shaped. A BD peptide
with 13 amino-acid residues was synthesized and examined by proton and carbon-13 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The peptide contains four proline 
residues, and on the basis of NOEs and 13C chemical shifts was found to exist in 
an all-trans conformation. Molecular modelling based on this result provides
evidence for a dynamic equilibrium between turn-like conformations in solution,
the most populated of which is likely to be an S-shaped conformer, on the basis
of amide exchange data.

PMID: 7558586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Oncogene. 1995 Apr 6;10(7):1307-14.

The expression of the high mobility group HMGI (Y) proteins correlates with the
malignant phenotype of human thyroid neoplasias.

Chiappetta G(1), Bandiera A, Berlingieri MT, Visconti R, Manfioletti G, Battista 
S, Martinez-Tello FJ, Santoro M, Giancotti V, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Napoli, Fondazione Senatore Pascale, Italia.

High Mobility Group I (HMGI) proteins are nuclear proteins involved in the
regulation of chromatin structure and function. Elevated expression of the HMGI
proteins (HMGI, HMGY and HMGI-C) has been correlated with the presence of a
highly malignant phenotype in epithelial and fibroblastic rat thyroid cells, and 
in several experimental carcinomas. Here, we demonstrate that HMGI and HMGY
proteins are expressed in human thyroid carcinomas and thyroid carcinoma cell
lines, but not in adenomas, goiters, normal thyroid tissues and cells. These
results indicate a correlation between HMGI and HMGY expression and the malignant
phenotype of thyroid neoplasias, suggesting that these proteins may be used as
markers in thyroid cancer.

PMID: 7731681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 3;270(9):4355-60.

Changes in superhelicity are introduced into closed circular DNA by binding of
high mobility group protein I/Y.

Nissen MS(1), Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Washington State University,
Pullman 99164-4660.

Mammalian high mobility group HMG-I/Y chromatin proteins bind to the minor groove
of A.T-rich DNA sequences with high affinity both in vivo and in vitro.
Topoisomerase I-mediated relaxation assays, analyzed by one- and two-dimensional 
agarose gel electrophoresis, indicate that binding of recombinant human HMG-I/Y
to closed circular DNA introduces positive supercoils at low protein to
nucleotide molar ratios and negative supercoils at higher ratios. This is
interpreted to mean that HMG-I/Y binding initially causes bending of the DNA
helix followed by unwinding of the helix. In contrast, binding of another minor
groove binding ligand, netropsin, introduces positive supercoils only. An in
vitro produced mutant HMG-I/Y protein lacking the negatively charged
carboxyl-terminal domain binds A.T-rich DNA approximately 1.4-fold better than
the native protein, yet it is estimated to be 8-10-fold more effective at
introducing negative supercoils. This finding suggests that the highly acidic
C-terminal region of the HMG-I/Y protein may function as a regulatory domain
influencing the amount of topological change induced in DNA substrates by binding
of the protein. Footprinting of HMG-I/Y on negatively supercoiled A.T-rich DNA
using diethylpyrocarbonate suggests that the protein is able to recognize, bind
to, and alter the conformation of non-B-form DNA.

PMID: 7876198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1786-96.

Regulation of cell-type-specific interleukin-2 receptor alpha-chain gene
expression: potential role of physical interactions between Elf-1, HMG-I(Y), and 
NF-kappa B family proteins.

John S(1), Reeves RB, Lin JX, Child R, Leiden JM, Thompson CB, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The interleukin 2 receptor alpha-chain (IL-2R alpha) gene is rapidly and potently
induced in T cells in response to mitogenic stimuli. Previously, an inducible
enhancer between nucleotides -299 and -228 that contains NF-kappa B and CArG
motifs was identified. We now report the characterization of a second essential
positive regulatory element located between nucleotides -137 and -64 that binds
Elf-1 and HMG-I(Y). This element had maximal activity in lymphoid cells,
paralleling the cell type specificity of Elf-1 expression. Transcription from the
IL-2R alpha promoter was inhibited when either the Elf-1 or the HMG-I(Y) binding 
site was mutated. Coexpression of both proteins activated transcription of the
-137 to -64 element in COS-7 cells. Elf-1 physically associated with HMG-I and
with NF-kappa B p50 and c-Rel in vitro, suggesting that protein-protein
interactions might functionally coordinate the actions of the upstream and
downstream positive regulatory elements. This is the first report of a physical
interaction between an Ets family member and NF-kappa B family proteins. These
findings provide significant new insights into the protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions that regulate cell-type-specific and inducible IL-2R
alpha gene expression and also have implications for other genes regulated by
Elf-1 and NF-kappa B family proteins.

PMCID: PMC230403
PMID: 7862168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1545-53.

Inhibition of HMGI-C protein synthesis suppresses retrovirally induced neoplastic
transformation of rat thyroid cells.

Berlingieri MT(1), Manfioletti G, Santoro M, Bandiera A, Visconti R, Giancotti V,
Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli,
Italy.

Elevated expression of the three high-mobility group I (HMGI) proteins (HMGI,
HMGY, and HMGI-C) has previously been correlated with the presence of a highly
malignant phenotype in epithelial and fibroblastic rat thyroid cells and in
experimental thyroid, lung, mammary, and skin carcinomas. Northern (RNA) blot and
run-on analyses demonstrated that the induction of HMGI genes in transformed
thyroid cells occurs at the transcriptional level. An antisense methodology to
block HMGI-C protein synthesis was then used to analyze the role of this protein 
in the process of thyroid cell transformation. Transfection of an antisense
construct for the HMGI-C cDNA into normal thyroid cells, followed by infection
with transforming myeloproliferative sarcoma virus or Kirsten murine sarcoma
virus, generated cell lines that expressed significant levels of the retroviral
transforming oncogenes v-mos or v-ras-Ki and removed the dependency on
thyroid-stimulating hormones. However, in contrast with untransfected cells or
cells transfected with the sense construct, those containing the antisense
construct did not demonstrate the appearance of any malignant phenotypic markers 
(growth in soft agar and tumorigenicity in athymic mice). A great reduction of
the HMGI-C protein levels and the absence of the HMGI(Y) proteins was observed in
the HMGI-C antisense-transfected, virally infected cells. Therefore, the HMGI-C
protein seems to play a key role in the transformation of these thyroid cells.

PMCID: PMC230378
PMID: 7862147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Eur J Immunol. 1995 Mar;25(3):798-808.

The non-histone chromosomal protein HMG-I(Y) contributes to repression of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain germ-line epsilon RNA promoter.

Kim J(1), Reeves R, Rothman P, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston.

The rate of germ-line RNA transcription correlates with the rate of
immunoglobulin heavy chain isotype switching. A promoter element for the
transcription of RNA from the germ-line mouse immunoglobulin epsilon heavy chain 
constant region gene is induced by interleukin(IL)-4 and lipopolysaccharide, and 
is bound at its transcription initiation sites by an IL-4-inducible nuclear
protein, NF-BRE. To examine the function of the binding site for this
IL-4-inducible complex, substitution mutations were introduced in the promoter.
These binding site mutations increased promoter activity and decreased binding of
NF-BRE. To investigate the paradox of an IL-4-inducible protein binding to a
repressor site in an IL-4-inducible promoter, we determined that the non-histone 
chromosomal protein HMG-I(Y) binds at the transcription initiation sites of the
germ-line epsilon promoter. Assays with antisera against HMG-I(Y) revealed
monomeric HMG-I(Y) in nuclear extracts. Cotransfection of an expression construct
directing the synthesis of anti-sense HMG-I(Y) RNA also increased promoter
activity, consistent with a repressor function of HMG-I(Y). Thus, the data are
most consistent with a model in which HMG-I(Y) participates in repression of
promoter activity. The effects of IL-4 may include derepression at this site.

PMID: 7705411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Feb 15;207(2):497-507.

Replacement of conserved threonines by alanine residues in high mobility group
protein HMG-I(Y): effect on DNA binding affinity.

Siino JS(1), Nissen MS, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Washington State University,
Pullman 99164-4660.

A threonine residue at the beginning of each DNA-binding domain of HMG-I (residue
numbers 21, 53, and 78) is conserved among mammalian species and proposed to help
stabilize the A.T-hook DNA-binding motif. Phosphorylation of threonines number 53
and 78 of human HMG-I(Y) both in vivo and in vitro leads to a 20 fold reduction
in the proteins DNA binding affinity. Recombinant human HMG-I proteins were
engineered to contain alanine instead of the conserved threonine in each
DNA-binding domain. The DNA dissociation constant of each protein was assayed at 
various salt concentrations by competition with the fluorescent dye Hoechst 33258
for an AT-rich DNA substrate. Replacement of these threonines did not affect the 
equilibrium binding of these proteins to DNA as compared with wild-type HMG-I and
HMG-Y. Molecular modelling of analogous peptides supported this finding. We
conclude that these threonines are not directly important for A.T-hook
DNA-binding and are conserved phosphorylation sites for down regulation of DNA
binding by the A.T-hook motif in the HMG-I(Y) proteins.

PMID: 7532403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Prog Cell Cycle Res. 1995;1:339-49.

Cell cycle regulation and functions of HMG-I(Y).

Reeves R(1), Nissen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman
99164-4660, USA.

Members of the HMG-I(Y) family of "high mobility group" (HMG) proteins are
distinguished from other nonhistone chromatin proteins by their ability to
preferentially recognize the structure of the narrow minor groove of
A.T-sequences of B-form DNA. In vivo the HMG-I(Y) proteins are localized in the
A.T-rich G/Q bands and in the "scaffold-associated regions" (SARs) of metaphase
chromosomes. These proteins also share with some of the other "HMG box" proteins 
the ability to recognize non-B-form structures, such as cruciforms (four-way
junctions), as well as the possessing the capacity to introduce both bends and
supercoils in substrate DNAs. These characteristics, along with their ability to 
specifically interact with a number of known transcription factors, enable the
HMG-I(Y) proteins to function in vivo as structural transcription factors for a
number mammalian genes. The HMG-I(Y) proteins are also in vivo substrates for the
cell cycle regulated Cdc2 kinase which phosphorylates the DNA-binding domain(s)
of the protein and, as a result, decreases their substrate binding affinity. This
reversible in vivo pattern of Cdc2 kinase phosphorylations during the cell cycle 
is likely to play a major role in mediating the biological function(s) of the
HMG-I(Y) proteins.

PMID: 9552376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Prog Growth Factor Res. 1995;6(2-4):93-101.

Multiple proteins bind the insulin response element in the human IGFBP-1
promoter.

Powell DR(1), Allander SV, Scheimann AO, Wasserman RM, Durham SK, Suwanichkul A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

An insulin response element (IRE) has been identified approximately 100 base
pairs (bp) 5' to the transcription start site of the human insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-1 (hIGFBP-1) gene. This cis element appears crucial to the
multihormonal regulation of hIGFBP-1 expression in liver, since (i) an intact IRE
is required for maximal stimulation of hIGFBP-1 promoter activity by
dexamethasone, and (ii) the IRE confers insulin inhibition of both basal and
dexamethasone-stimulated hIGFBP-1 promoter activity. Further progress in
understanding how the IRE confers insulin and glucocorticoid effects requires
identification of transcription factors confering effects of these hormones.
D-site binding protein (DBP), and members of the hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF 3)
and high mobility group I/Y (HMG I/Y) protein families, each known to bind DNA
elements similar in sequence to the IRE, were tested for IRE binding. DBP, HMGI
and HNF 3 beta each protected the hIGFBP-1 IRE from DNAseI digestion. Additional 
studies are required to establish whether binding of any of these proteins to the
IRE is important to the regulation of hIGFBP-1 expression by insulin and/or
glucocorticoids.

PMID: 8817651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jan;15(1):152-64.

Identification of the rel family members required for virus induction of the
human beta interferon gene.

Thanos D(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138.

We have carried out experiments to determine which members of the rel family of
transcription factors are involved in virus induction of the beta interferon
(IFN-beta) gene. First, we examined the inducibility of artificial DNA binding
sites that preferentially interact with different homo- or heterodimeric
combinations of rel proteins in vitro. We found that only those sites capable of 
binding the p50/p65 heterodimer are virus inducible. Second, we analyzed a series
of mutant rel DNA-binding sites in the context of the intact IFN-beta promoter.
We found a correlation between (i) sites capable of binding both the p50/p65
heterodimer and the high-mobility-group protein HMG I(Y) and (ii) virus
inducibility. Third, cotransfection of the IFN-beta gene enhancer/promoter with
plasmids capable of expressing several different rel proteins revealed that only 
the combination of p50 and p65 efficiently activated transcription. Finally, we
have used antibodies directed against different rel proteins to show that
virus-inducible protein-DNA complexes assembled on the IFN-beta enhancer in vitro
contain both p50 and p65. We conclude that the p50/p65 heterodimer is responsible
for the NF-kappa B-dependent activation of the IFN-beta gene promoter in response
to virus infection.

PMCID: PMC231925
PMID: 7799921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 30;269(52):33042-8.

Insect proteins homologous to mammalian high mobility group proteins I/Y (HMG
I/Y). Characterization and binding to linear and four-way junction DNA.

Claus P(1), Schulze E, Wisniewski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Zoology-Developmental Biology, University of Göttingen,
Germany.

A chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) protein from an epithelial cell line of
Chironomus tentans (Diptera) was purified to homogeneity and chemically
characterized. cDNA clones encoding this protein were isolated and sequenced. The
deduced amino acid sequence revealed a high similarity to HMG protein I of
mammalia. This insect protein has therefore been designated cHMGI. It has a
deduced molecular mass of 10,371 kDa and appears to be a product of a single gene
copy. Similarly to mammalian HMGI/Y proteins the insect cHMGI protein has three
putative DNA-binding motifs with a sequence K/RXRGRP that are each encoded by one
exon of the gene. Using synthetic peptides we have shown that the first and the
second motif are necessary for high-affinity binding of the protein to DNA.
Protein cHMGI binds preferentially to AT-rich DNA with a half-saturation value of
1.1 nM. Both cHMGI and human HMGI proteins recognize specifically a four-way
junction DNA. We have also purified a related protein with similar
physico-chemical properties from Drosophila melanogaster Kc cells. The
identification and characterization of HMGI proteins in insects with polytene
chromosomes and with the cytologic and genetic potential of Chironomus and
Drosophila opens new possibilities for studying function(s) of this group of
chromosomal proteins.

PMID: 7806532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Plant Mol Biol. 1994 Dec;26(6):1907-20.

HMG protein binding to an A/T-rich positive regulatory region of the pea
plastocyanin gene promoter.

Pwee KH(1), Webster CI, Gray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, UK.

Gel retardation assays using pea nuclear extracts have detected specific binding 
to regions of the promoter of the pea plastocyanin gene (petE). Several complexes
which differ in sensitivity to competition with unlabelled promoter fragments and
various DNA alternating copolymers, to heat treatment and to digestion with
proteinase K have been detected. A protein factor, PCF1, forming one of these
complexes was heat-stable and most sensitive to competition with
poly(dAdT).poly(dAdT) compared to other alternating copolymers. DNase I
footprinting assays showed that tracts of A/T-rich sequence within the -444 to
-177 positive regulatory region of the petE promoter were protected in the
presence of the pea nuclear extract. The factor PCF1 copurified with a
high-mobility-group (HMG) protein preparation from pea chromatin. DNase I
footprinting with the HMG protein preparation demonstrated that similar tracts of
A/T-rich sequences within the promoter were protected. Southwestern-blot analysis
of pea HMG proteins purified by gel filtration through Superose 12 detected a
single DNA-binding species of 21 kDa. The properties of the factor PCF1 suggest
that it is likely to be an HMG I protein.

PMID: 7858226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Nov 22;91(24):11318-22.

The high mobility group protein HMG I(Y) can stimulate or inhibit DNA binding of 
distinct transcription factor ATF-2 isoforms.

Du W(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138.

The high mobility group protein HMG I(Y) stimulates the binding of a specific
isoform of the activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2(195)) to the interferon
beta (IFN-beta) gene promoter. HMG I(Y) specifically interacts with the
basic-leucine zipper region of ATF-2(195), and HMG I(Y) binds to two sites
immediately flanking the ATF-2 binding site of the IFN-beta promoter. Here, we
show that HMG I(Y) can stimulate the binding of ATF-2(195), at least in part, by 
promoting ATF-2 dimerization. In addition, we report the characterization of a
naturally occurring isoform of ATF-2 (ATF-2(192)) that binds specifically to the 
IFN-beta promoter but is unable to interact with HMG I(Y). Remarkably, HMG I(Y)
inhibits the binding of ATF-2(192) to the IFN-beta promoter. Thus, the ability of
HMG I(Y) to specifically interact with ATF-2 correlates with its ability to
stimulate ATF-2 binding to the IFN-beta promoter. Comparisons of the amino acid
sequences of the basic-leucine zipper domains of ATF-2(195) and ATF-2(192)
suggest that HMG I(Y) interacts with a short stretch of basic amino acids near
the amino terminus of the basic-leucine zipper domain of ATF-2(195).

PMCID: PMC45222
PMID: 7972056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Pigment Cell Res. 1994 Oct;7(5):279-84.

Identification of nuclear factors that bind to the mouse tyrosinase gene
regulatory region.

Sato S(1), Miura H, Yamamoto H, Takeuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Institute, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Several nuclear factors that interact with sequences in the 5' flanking region of
the mouse tyrosinase gene were identified using band shift and methylation
interference assays. One of these factors bind to an AT-rich sequence,
TATCAATTAG, located at -183 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site. 
To isolate cDNA clone encoding this DNA binding protein, we have screened a
lambda gt11 cDNA expression library prepared from mouse melanocyte cell line with
a labeled oligonucleotide probe containing its binding site. Complementary DNA
clones encoding mouse high mobility group protein HMG-I and its isoform HMG-Y
were obtained. HMG-I(Y) is a low molecular size, basic nuclear protein that binds
specifically to AT-rich region of double-stranded DNA in vitro. In Northern blot 
analysis the level of HMG-I(Y) mRNA expression did not correlate with that of
tyrosinase or TRP-1. Although the amount of HMG-I(Y) transcripts has no apparent 
influence on the mouse tyrosinase gene expression, it is possible that HMG-I(Y)
binds to the 5' flanking sequence of the tyrosinase gene as an auxiliary factor, 
and facilitates the binding and activity of other transcription factors.

PMID: 7885999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;14(10):6464-75.

A striking similarity in the organization of the E-selectin and beta interferon
gene promoters.

Whitley MZ(1), Thanos D, Read MA, Maniatis T, Collins T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115.

Transcription of the endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule 1 (E-selectin or
ELAM-1) gene is induced by the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1 beta and
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). In this report, we identify four
positive regulatory domains (PDI to PDIV) in the E-selectin promoter that are
required for maximal levels of TNF-alpha induction in endothelial cells. In vitro
DNA binding studies reveal that two of the domains contain novel adjacent binding
sites for the transcription factor NF-kappa B (PDIII and PDIV), a third
corresponds to a recently described CRE/ATF site (PDII), and a fourth is a
consensus NF-kappa B site (PDI). Mutations that decrease the binding of NF-kappa 
B to any one of the NF-kappa B binding sites in vitro abolished cytokine-induced 
E-selectin gene expression in vivo. Previous studies demonstrated a similar
correlation between ATF binding to PDII and E-selectin gene expression. Here we
show that the high-mobility-group protein I(Y) [HMG I(Y)] also binds specifically
to the E-selectin promoter and thereby enhances the binding of both ATF-2 and
NF-kappa B to the E-selectin promoter in vitro. Moreover, mutations that
interfere with HMG I(Y) binding decrease the level of cytokine-induced E-selectin
expression. The organization of the TNF-alpha-inducible element of the E-selectin
promoter is remarkably similar to that of the virus-inducible promoter of the
human beta interferon gene in that both promoters require NF-kappa B, ATF-2, and 
HMG I(Y). We propose that HMG I(Y) functions as a key architectural component in 
the assembly of inducible transcription activation complexes on both promoters.

PMCID: PMC359176
PMID: 7523851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Nature. 1994 Sep 8;371(6493):175-9.

An HMG-like protein that can switch a transcriptional activator to a repressor.

Lehming N(1), Thanos D, Brickman JM, Ma J, Maniatis T, Ptashne M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

One protein can activate some genes and repress others in the same cell. The
Drosophila protein Dorsal (which, like the human protein NF-kappa B3, is a member
of the Rel family of transcriptional activators) activates the twist gene and
represses the zen gene in the ventral region of early embryos. Here we describe a
Drosophila HMG1 protein, called DSP1 (dorsal switch protein), that converts
Dorsal and NF-kappa B from transcriptional activators to repressors. This effect 
requires a sequence termed a negative regulatory element (NRE), found adjacent to
Dorsal-binding sites in the zen promoter and adjacent to the NF-kappa B-binding
site in the human interferon-beta (IFN-beta) enhancer. Previous studies have
shown that another type of HMG protein, HMG I(Y), can stimulate NF-kappa B
activity. Thus, the HMG-like proteins DSP1 and HMG I(Y) can determine whether a
specific regulator functions as an activator or a repressor of transcription.

PMID: 8072548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Sep;14(9):5701-9.

Cooperativity between two NF-kappa B complexes, mediated by high-mobility-group
protein I(Y), is essential for cytokine-induced expression of the E-selectin
promoter.

Lewis H(1), Kaszubska W, DeLamarter JF, Whelan J.

Author information: 
(1)Glaxo Institute for Molecular Biology, Geneva, Switzerland.

Cytokine-induced expression of the E-selectin gene requires the promoter binding 
and interaction of the transcription factors NF-kappa B and ATF. Here we have
further analyzed the E-selectin promoter and revealed an additional region
(nucleotides -140 to -105 [-140/-105]) which is essential in controlling promoter
activation by cytokines. We identified high-mobility-group protein I(Y)
[HMG-I(Y)] interacting specifically at two sites within this region. We noted
that one of the HMG-I(Y)-binding sites overlaps a sequence element (-127/-118)
diverging at only one position from the NF-kappa B consensus binding sequence.
This led us to ask whether the -127/-118 element represents a second functional
NF-kappa B-binding site within the E-selectin promoter. Using specific antisera, 
we show that p50, p65, and, interestingly, RelB are components of the complex
interacting at this site. Mutational analysis of the -127/-118 NF-kappa B site
indicates that both NF-kappa B and HMG-I(Y) binding at this site are essential
for interleukin-1 induction of the promoter. We demonstrate that the binding
affinity of the p50 subunit of NF-kappa B to both NF-kappa B sites within the
E-selectin promoter is significantly enhanced by HMG-I(Y). In addition, an
essential role for cooperative interaction between the two NF-kappa B complexes
is shown by the requirement for both NF-kappa B sites to mediate E-selectin
promoter activation by interleukin-1 and p50/p65 expression. We conclude that
HMG-I(Y) mediates binding of a distinct NF-kappa B complex at two sites within
the E-selectin promoter. Furthermore, a unique cooperativity between these
NF-kappa B complexes is essential for induced E-selectin expression. These
results suggest mechanisms by which NF-kappa B complexes are involved in specific
gene activation.

PMCID: PMC359095
PMID: 7520524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 May 30;201(1):63-70.

Expression and cDNA cloning of human HMGI-C phosphoprotein.

Patel UA(1), Bandiera A, Manfioletti G, Giancotti V, Chau KY, Crane-Robinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Laboratories, University of Portsmouth, UK.

The HMGI family contains three members: I, Y and I-C. HMGI and HMGY are
alternative splicings of the same gene and are essential transcription factors at
several genetic loci. HMGI-C is transcribed from a different gene and is observed
only in highly transformed cells. This work shows that human I-C is present in a 
more restricted range of cell types than I/Y and is absent from hemopoietic
cells, as noted for mouse I-C. However, high expression in a human hepatoma line 
allowed the cloning of the cDNA and 812 bp of 5'-untranslated, 330 bp of coding
and 58 bp of 3'-untranslated DNA were sequenced. The open reading frame showed 4 
amino acid substitutions and one additional amino acid when compared to mouse
I-C, none of them in the basic DNA binding motifs.

PMID: 8198613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biol Chem. 1994 May 6;269(18):13279-88.

Purification of a 15-kDa cdk4- and cdk5-binding protein.

Azzi L(1), Meijer L, Ostvold AC, Lew J, Wang JH.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Station Biologique, Roscoff, France.

Yeasts p13suc1/p18CKS and their human homologues, p9CKShs1/p9CKShs2, strongly
interact with p34cdc2 and p34cdk2. While attempting to purify the starfish oocyte
p13suc1 homologue, we discovered a 15-kDa protein cross-reactive with
anti-p9CKShs2/anti-p13suc1 antibodies. p15cdk-BP-Sepharose binds an anti-PSTAIRE 
cross-reactive protein of 33 kDa when loaded with starfish oocyte extracts. The
p15cdk-BP-bound "PSTAIRE signal" is part of a 250-kDa complex distinct from
p34cdc2/cyclin B. p15cdk-BP-Sepharose beads retain a kinase phosphorylating HMG
I/Y, P1, and myelin basic protein (among 24 substrates tested). Major cdc2 kinase
substrates are not phosphorylated by the p15cdk-BP-bound kinase. Phosphopeptide
maps of P1 phosphorylated by the p15cdk-BP-bound kinase, p34cdc2/cyclin B, p
33cdk5/p25, and casein kinase 2 showed that these kinases phosphorylate P1 on
different sites. Phosphopeptide maps of P1 phosphorylated by the p15cdk-BP-bound 
starfish kinase and p15cdk-BP-bound human p34cdk4/cyclin D are largely
coincident. To investigate the nature of the p15cdk-BP-bound kinase, extracts of 
mammalian tissues and cells were loaded on p9CKShs1- and p15cdk-BP-Sepharose and 
the bound proteins were analyzed using specific anti-cdk antibodies. cdc2 and
cdk2 bind to p9CKShs1-Sepharose, but not to p15cdk-BP. cdk4 and cdk5 bind to
p15cdk-BP-Sepharose, but not to p9CKShs1-Sepharose. We conclude that p15cdk-BP
specifically binds the cdk4/cyclin D and cdk5 kinases and, along with p13suc1 and
p9CKShs, may be part of a larger family of cdk-binding proteins.

PMID: 8175758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Biochemistry. 1994 May 3;33(17):5347-55.

Short peptide fragments derived from HMG-I/Y proteins bind specifically to the
minor groove of DNA.

Geierstanger BH(1), Volkman BF, Kremer W, Wemmer DE.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Group in Biophysics, University of California, Berkeley 94720.

Short peptides derived from chromosomal proteins have previously been proposed to
bind specifically to the minor groove of A,T-rich DNA [for a review, see M. E. A.
Churchill and A. A. Travers (1991) Trends Biochem. Sci. 16, 92-97]. Using NMR
spectroscopy, we investigated the DNA binding of SPRKSPRK, which is one such
A,T-specific motif. Under the conditions studied SPRKSPRK interacts only
nonspecifically with d(CGCAAAAAAGGC).d(GCCTTTTTTGCG). The peptides TPKRPRGRPKK,
PRGRPKK, and PRGRP derived from the non-histone chromosomal protein HMG-I/Y,
however, bind specifically to the central A,T sites of d(CGCAAATTTGCG)2 and
d(CGCGAATTCGCG)2. 2D NOE measurements show that the RGR segment of each peptide
is in contact with the minor groove. The arginine side chains and the peptide
backbone are buried deep in the minor groove, in a fashion generally similar to
the antibiotic netropsin. Under the same conditions the peptide PKGKP does not
interact with the same oligonucleotide duplexes, indicating that the arginine
guanidinium groups are major determinants of the A,T specificity.

PMID: 8172908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Mar 25;22(6):1115-6.

Positive Factor 1 (PF1) from oat is an HMGY- and H1 histone-like protein that
binds a functionally defined AT-rich DNA element in the oat phytochrome A gene
(PHYA3) promoter.

Nieto-Sotelo J(1), Ichida A, Quail PH.

Author information: 
(1)University of California at Berkeley/US Department of Agriculture, Plant Gene 
Expression Center, Albany 94710.

PMCID: PMC307938
PMID: 8152915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cell. 1994 Feb 25;76(4):609-22.

Metaphase chromosome structure: bands arise from a differential folding path of
the highly AT-rich scaffold.

Saitoh Y(1), Laemmli UK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

Using the highly AT-specific fluorochrome daunomycin, a longitudinal optical
signal called AT queue, thought to arise from a line-up of the highly AT-rich
scaffold-associated regions (SARs) by the scaffolding, was identified in native
chromosomes. Fluorescence banding is proposed to result from a differential
folding path of the AT queue during its progression from telomere to telomere.
The AT queue is tightly coiled or folded in a Q band, the resulting transverse
striations across the chromatid, which also represent Giemsa subbands, generating
a bright AT-rich signal over the Q region. The R bands, in contrast, contain a
more central (unfolded) AT queue, yielding an AT-dull signal over the R regions. 
The AT queue is identified by immunofluorescence against topoisomerase II (topo
II) and HMG-I/Y as the scaffold of native chromosomes; the fluorescence signal
from both proteins is akin to a detailed Q-type banding pattern. Native
chromosomes appear assembled according to the loop-scaffold model.

PMID: 7510215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Plant Cell. 1994 Feb;6(2):287-301.

PF1: an A-T hook-containing DNA binding protein from rice that interacts with a
functionally defined d(AT)-rich element in the oat phytochrome A3 gene promoter.

Nieto-Sotelo J(1), Ichida A, Quail PH.

Author information: 
(1)University of California-Berkeley/United States Department of Agriculture,
Plant Gene Expression Center, Albany 94710.

Phytochrome-imposed down-regulation of the expression of its own phytochrome A
gene (PHYA) is one of the fastest light-induced effects on transcription reported
in plants to date. Functional analysis of the oat PHYA3 promoter in a
transfection assay has revealed two positive elements, PE1 and PE3, that function
synergistically to support high levels of transcription in the absence of light. 
We have isolated a rice cDNA clone (pR4) encoding a DNA binding protein that
binds to the AT-rich PE1 element. We tested the selectivity of the pR4-encoded
DNA binding activity using linker substitution mutations of PE1 that are known to
disrupt positive expression supported by the PHYA3 promoter in vivo. Binding to
these linker substitution mutants was one to two orders of magnitude less than to
the native PE1 element. Because this is the behavior expected of positive factor 
1 (PF1), the presumptive nuclear transcription factor that acts in trans at the
PE1 element in vivo, the data support the conclusion that the protein encoded by 
pR4 is in fact rice PF1. The PF1 polypeptide encoded by pR4 is 213 amino acids
long and contains four repeats of the A-T hook DNA binding motif found in
high-mobility group I-Y (HMGI-Y) proteins. In addition, PF1 contains an 11-amino 
acid-long hydrophobic region characteristic of HMG I proteins, its N-terminal
region shows strong similarities to a pea H1 histone sequence and a short peptide
sequence from wheat HMGa, and it shows a high degree of similarity along its
entire length to the HMG Y-like protein encoded by a soybean cDNA, SB16. In vitro
footprinting and quantitative gel shift analyses showed that PF1 binds
preferentially to the PE1 element but also at lower affinity to two other AT-rich
regions upstream of PE1. This feature is consistent with the binding
characteristics of HMG I-Y proteins that are known to bind to most runs of six or
more AT base pairs. Taken together, the properties of PF1 suggest that it belongs
to a newly described family of nuclear proteins containing both histone H1
domains and A-T hook DNA binding domains.

PMCID: PMC160434
PMID: 8148649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Plant Cell. 1994 Jan;6(1):107-18.

A novel AT-rich DNA binding protein that combines an HMG I-like DNA binding
domain with a putative transcription domain.

Tjaden G(1), Coruzzi GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York 10003.

There is growing evidence that AT-rich promoter elements play a role in
transcription of plant genes. For the promoter of the nuclear gene for
chloroplast glutamine synthetase from pea (GS2), the deletion of a 33-bp AT-rich 
sequence (box 1 native) from the 5' end of a GS2 promoter-beta-glucuronidase
(GUS) fusion resulted in a 10-fold reduction in GUS activity. The box 1 native
element was used in gel shift analysis and two distinct complexes were detected. 
One complex is related to the low-mobility complex reported previously for
AT-rich elements from several other plant promoters. A multimer of the box 1
sequence was used to isolate a cDNA encoding an AT-rich DNA binding protein
(ATBP-1). ATBP-1 is not a high-mobility group protein, but it is a novel protein 
that combines a high-mobility group I/Y-like DNA binding domain with a
glutamine-rich putative transcriptional domain.

PMCID: PMC160420
PMID: 7907505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Biochem Soc Symp. 1994;60:265-75.

Cloning and characterization of cDNAs encoding oat PF1: a protein that binds to
the PE1 region in the oat phytochrome A3 gene promoter.

Nieto-Sotelo J(1), Quail PH.

Author information: 
(1)University of California at Berkeley/USDA, Plant Gene Expression Center,
Albany 94710, USA.

In monocotyledons, the expression of the oat phytochrome A gene (PHYA) is
down-regulated by phytochrome itself. This autoregulatory repression is the most 
rapid light-induced effect on gene expression reported in plants to date. A
functional analysis of the oat PHYA3 gene minimal promoter in a rice transient
expression assay has identified two promoter elements, PE1 and PE3, that interact
synergistically in positive regulation. We have isolated an oat cDNA clone (pO2) 
that encodes a DNA-binding protein that binds to the PE1 region of the oat PHYA3 
gene promoter. The in vitro binding properties of the pO2-encoded protein,
towards DNA probes containing either the PE1 sequence or linker-substitution
mutations in PE1, correlate with the activity of these DNA elements in the rice
transient expression assay. These mutations are known to abolish expression of a 
reporter gene in vivo. Binding of these linker-substitution mutants to the
pO2-encoded protein in vitro was lower by one to two orders of magnitude than the
binding of the native PE1 region. We suggest, therefore, that the pO2 clone may
encode the putative nuclear factor, oat PF1, that is involved in positive
regulation of PHYA3 by binding to PE1 in vivo. pO2 encodes a 170-amino-acid-long 
protein that contains three repeats of the 'AT-hook' DNA-binding motif found in
high mobility group I-Y (HMGI-Y) proteins. Oat PF1 is highly similar to rice PF1 
and to the protein encoded by soybean cDNA SB16. They all have a strong
similarity in their N-terminus to the pea H1 histone, and the presence of several
AT-hook DNA-binding motifs in their C-terminal halves.

PMID: 7639786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Dec 11;21(24):5694-704.

Multiple closely-linked NFAT/octamer and HMG I(Y) binding sites are part of the
interleukin-4 promoter.

Chuvpilo S(1), Schomberg C, Gerwig R, Heinfling A, Reeves R, Grummt F, Serfling
E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Biozentrum, Am Hubland, University of Würzburg,
Germany.

We show here that the immediate upstream region (from position -12 to -270) of
the murine interleukin 4 (Il-4) gene harbors a strong cell-type specific
transcriptional enhancer. In T lymphoma cells, the activity of the Il-4
promoter/enhancer is stimulated by phorbol esters, Ca++ ionophores and agonists
of protein kinase A and inhibited by low doses of the immunosuppressant
cyclosporin A. The Il-4 promoter/enhancer is transcriptionally inactive in B
lymphoma cells and HeLa cells. DNase I footprint protection experiments revealed 
six sites of the Il-4 promoter/enhancer to be bound by nuclear proteins from
lymphoid and myeloid cells. Among them are four purine boxes which have been
described to be important sequence motifs of the Il-2 promoter. They contain the 
motif GGAAA and are recognized by the inducible and cyclosporin A-sensitive
transcription factor NFAT-1. Three of the Il-4 NFAT-1 sites are closely linked to
weak binding sites of Octamer factors. Several purine boxes and an AT-rich
protein-binding site of the Il-4 promoter are also recognized by the high
mobility group protein HMG I(Y). Whereas the binding of NFAT-1 and Octamer
factors enhance the activity of the Il-4 promoter, the binding of HMG I(Y)
suppresses its activity and, therefore, appears to be involved in the suppression
of Il-4 transcription in resting T lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC310537
PMID: 8284217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cancer Res. 1993 Nov 15;53(22):5512-6.

Increased expression of high mobility group protein I(Y) in high grade prostatic 
cancer determined by in situ hybridization.

Tamimi Y(1), van der Poel HG, Denyn MM, Umbas R, Karthaus HF, Debruyne FM,
Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology/Urological Research Laboratory, University Hospital
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In a previous study using the Dunning rat prostate cancer model, we found high
mobility group protein I-(Y) [HMG-I(Y)] to be overexpressed in metastatic tumor
lines when compared to nonmetastatic lines. Hence, overexpression of this 12-kDa 
non-histone chromosomal protein may be associated with tumor progression.
Firstly, by Northern analysis we showed that HMG-I(Y) expression increases in
high grade prostate tumors. These studies, however, required fresh material, and 
clinical follow-up was limited. To overcome this problem paraffin-embedded
material must be made amenable for determination of HMG-I(Y) expression in
retrospective studies. RNA in situ hybridization enables the evaluation of mRNA
levels in such material. We studied tumors from 71 patients with prostate cancer.
The microscopic analysis of each sample included: (a) hybridization on sections
with sense HMG-I(Y) and (b) 28S rRNA probes (nonspecific signal); (c)
hybridization with antisense 28S rRNA (RNA preservation); (d) hybridization with 
an antisense HMG-I(Y) probe [quantification of HMG-I(Y) mRNA in the expressing
areas]. Data were quantified using an image analysis system. High expression of
HMG-I(Y) was observed in regions with high Gleason grade (4 and 5); whereas in
lesions of Gleason grade 3, both weak and no expression was observed. In areas of
grade 1 and 2, as well as in normal glands, low or no expression was found. We
conclude that HMG-I(Y) expression assessed by RNA in situ hybridization is
related to tumor differentiation in prostate cancer. These findings indicate that
HMG-I(Y) expression may be a marker in prostate cancer diagnosis, and the
possible clinical implication of expression of this gene in malignancy is
discussed in this report.

PMID: 8221692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 1993 Oct 5;268(28):21137-46.

Interaction of high mobility group-I (Y) nonhistone proteins with nucleosome core
particles.

Reeves R(1), Nissen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Washington State University,
Pullman 99164-4660.

Mammalian high mobility group (HMG)-I(Y) chromosomal proteins bind with high
affinity to the minor groove of A. T-rich sequences of DNA both in vitro and in
vivo. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrate that in vitro both native
and recombinant human HMG-I proteins also bind, but with lower affinity, to
preferred regions on isolated avian nucleosome core particles containing
approximately 146 base pairs of random sequence DNA. Up to four discrete HMG-I
core particle complexes can be detected by electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
when increasing molar ratios of protein are associated with cores. Both
protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions are involved in HMG-I binding to
cores. The interaction of HMG-I with core DNA is demonstrated by both thermal
denaturation and DNase I footprinting experiments. Chemical cross-linking studies
employing reversible photoactivatable cross-linkers, combined with one- and
two-dimensional electrophoretic analyses, indicate that in vitro HMG-I binds to
cores in close proximity to histones H2A and H2B and H3. In situ cross-linking of
K562 human erythroleukemia cell nuclei demonstrate that native HMG-I(Y) binds in 
a similar manner to nucleosomal histones in vivo. Proteolytic removal of the
positively charged amino-terminal tails of the octamer histones abolishes binding
of HMG-I to core particles. However, core binding is not mediated by the
negatively charged carboxyl-terminal tail of the HMG-I protein since an in vitro 
produced mutant protein lacking this region binds to core particles in a manner
similar to full-length HMG-I. Together these results demonstrate that HMG-I, both
in vitro and in vivo, binds to preferred regions on the front face of core
nucleosomes.

PMID: 8407950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;123(2):387-403.

MIF2 is required for mitotic spindle integrity during anaphase spindle elongation
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Brown MT(1), Goetsch L, Hartwell LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

The function of the essential MIF2 gene in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell
cycle was examined by overepressing or creating a deficit of MIF2 gene product.
When MIF2 was overexpressed, chromosomes missegregated during mitosis and cells
accumulated in the G2 and M phases of the cell cycle. Temperature sensitive
mutants isolated by in vitro mutagenesis delayed cell cycle progression when
grown at the restrictive temperature, accumulated as large budded cells that had 
completed DNA replication but not chromosome segregation, and lost viability as
they passed through mitosis. Mutant cells also showed increased levels of mitotic
chromosome loss, supersensitivity to the microtubule destabilizing drug MBC, and 
morphologically aberrant spindles. mif2 mutant spindles arrested development
immediately before anaphase spindle elongation, and then frequently broke apart
into two disconnected short half spindles with misoriented spindle pole bodies.
These findings indicate that MIF2 is required for structural integrity of the
spindle during anaphase spindle elongation. The deduced Mif2 protein sequence
shared no extensive homologies with previously identified proteins but did
contain a short region of homology to a motif involved in binding AT rich DNA by 
the Drosophila D1 and mammalian HMGI chromosomal proteins.

PMCID: PMC2119841
PMID: 8408221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Sep 11;21(18):4259-67.

Organization, inducible-expression and chromosome localization of the human
HMG-I(Y) nonhistone protein gene.

Friedmann M(1), Holth LT, Zoghbi HY, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman
99164-4660.

Members of the HMG-I(Y) family of mammalian nonhistone proteins are of importance
because they have been demonstrated to bind specifically to the minor groove of
A.T-rich sequences both in vitro and in vivo and to function as gene
transcriptional regulatory proteins in vivo. Here we report the cloning,
sequencing, characterization and chromosomal localization of the human HMG-I(Y)
gene. The gene has several potential promoter/enhancer regions, a number of
different transcription start sites and numerous alternatively spliced exons
making it one of the most complex nonhistone chromatin protein-encoding genes so 
far reported. The putative promoter/enhancer regions each contain a number of
conserved nucleotide sequences for potential binding of inducible regulatory
transcription factors. Consistent with the presence of these conserved sequences,
we found that transcription of the HMG-I(Y) gene is inducible in human lymphoid
cells by factors such as phorbol esters and calcium ionophores. Detailed sequence
analysis confirms our earlier suggestion that alternative splicing of precursor
mRNAs gives rise to the major HMG-I and HMG-Y isoform proteins found in human
cells. Furthermore, the gene's exon-intron arrangement fully accounts for all of 
the previously cloned human HMG-I(Y) cDNAs (1,2). Also of considerable interest
is the fact that each of the three different DNA-binding domain peptides present 
in an individual HMG-I(Y) protein is coded for by sequences present on separate
exons thus potentially allowing for exon 'shuffling' of these functional domains 
during evolution. And, finally, we localized the gene to the short arm of
chromosome 6 (6p) in a region that is known to be involved in rearrangements,
translocations and other abnormalities correlated with a number of human cancers.

PMCID: PMC310059
PMID: 8414980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cell. 1993 Sep 10;74(5):887-98.

Mechanisms of transcriptional synergism between distinct virus-inducible enhancer
elements.

Du W(1), Thanos D, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

The high mobility group protein HMG I(Y) and the transcription factor NF-kappa B 
are required for the activity of positive regulatory domain II (PRDII), a
virus-inducible regulatory element of the human interferon-beta gene promoter. In
this paper we provide evidence that HMG I(Y) is also required for the activity of
PRDIV, a regulatory element that synergizes with PRDII. In this case, HMG I(Y)
stimulates binding of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and the assembly 
of inducible complexes containing ATF-2 and c-Jun. Remarkably, HMG I(Y) also
specifically interacts with the leucine zipper/basic region of ATF-2, and ATF-2
in turn interacts with NF-kappa B. We therefore propose that the HMG I(Y) plays a
critical structural role in establishing transcriptional synergy between PRDII
and PRDIV by promoting the activities and/or binding of NF-kappa B and ATF-2 and 
by facilitating their interaction.

PMID: 8374955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. EMBO J. 1993 Aug;12(8):3237-47.

SAR-dependent mobilization of histone H1 by HMG-I/Y in vitro: HMG-I/Y is enriched
in H1-depleted chromatin.

Zhao K(1), Käs E, Gonzalez E, Laemmli UK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of Geneva,
Switzerland.

An experimental assay was developed to search for proteins capable of
antagonizing histone H1-mediated general repression of transcription. T7 RNA
polymerase templates containing an upstream scaffold-associated region (SAR) were
highly selectively repressed by H1 relative to non-SAR control templates. This is
due to the nucleation of H1 assembly into flanking DNA brought about by the
numerous A-tracts (AT-rich sequences containing short homopolymeric runs of dA.dT
base pairs) of the SAR. Partial, selective titration of these A-tracts by the
high mobility group (HMG) protein HMG-I/Y led to the complete derepression of
transcription from the SAR template by inducing the redistribution of H1 on to
non-SAR templates. SARs are associated with many highly transcribed regulated
genes where they may serve to facilitate the HMG-I/Y-mediated displacement of
histone H1 in chromatin. Indeed, HMG-I/Y was found to be strongly enriched in the
H1-depleted subfraction which can be isolated from chromatin.

PMCID: PMC413591
PMID: 8344261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cancer Res. 1993 Jun 1;53(11):2655-60.

Elevated high mobility group-I(Y) gene expression is associated with progressive 
transformation of mouse mammary epithelial cells.

Ram TG(1), Reeves R, Hosick HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Washington State University, Pullman 99164-4236.

The high mobility group (HMG) proteins I and Y are well characterized nonhistone 
chromosomal proteins which bind to A.T-rich regions of DNA, and may regulate gene
expression and/or DNA replication. We utilized a series of mouse mammary
epithelial preneoplastic and tumor cell lines to explore the relationship between
neoplastic transformation and HMG-I(Y) gene expression. The cell lines used in
this study were originally derived from a single hyperplastic outgrowth, and
exhibit a distinct gradient of preneoplastic to highly metastatic transformation 
states. We measured the levels of HMG-I(Y) gene expression in these cell lines
during the different phases of cell growth in culture. At both subconfluent and
confluent cell densities, elevated levels of HMG-I(Y) mRNA were directly
correlated with the relative degree of neoplastic transformation and metastatic
progression of these cells. HMG-I(Y) mRNA levels were always highest in
proliferating cells. However, the differences in HMG-I(Y) gene expression between
the cell lines were greatest at confluent cell density, when the cells were not
actively proliferating. HMG-I(Y) mRNA was detectable in normal primary mouse
mammary epithelium proliferating in culture. However, the amount was much less
than that measured in the cell lines, indicating that elevated HMG-I(Y) gene
expression was also directly correlated with the conversion of normal mammary
epithelium to the preneoplastic immortalized state. Southern blot analysis showed
that alterations in HMG-I(Y) loci are also associated with the preneoplastic to
neoplastic conversion of these cell lines, and this change may involve a gene
conversion event between two different HMG-I(Y) loci. These results indicate that
there is a strong correlation between elevated HMG-I(Y) gene expression and the
progressive transformation of mouse mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 8495429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Apr 15;213(2):825-32.

High-mobility-group (HMG) proteins and histone H1 subtypes expression in normal
and tumor tissues of mouse.

Giancotti V(1), Bandiera A, Ciani L, Santoro D, Crane-Robinson C, Goodwin GH,
Boiocchi M, Dolcetti R, Casetta B.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, Italy.

Exhaustive extraction of mouse tissues with perchloric acid has been used
together with reverse-phase HPLC and electrophoresis to quantify the amounts of
chromosomal proteins HMG17, HMG14 and HMGI, relative to histone H1. Normal lung
and thymus contain approximately 3% HMG17/HMG14 but only approximately 2% HMGI.
In tumor tissues (Lewis lung carcinoma and lymphoma NQ35), the amount of
HMG17/HMG14 is not greatly altered but HMGI levels rise considerably, reaching
10% in Lewis lung carcinoma. HMGI synthesis does not replace HMG17/HMG14
proteins, suggesting that HMGI proteins contribute to the structure of chromatin 
regions in a manner distinct from those of HMG17/HMG14. Ion-spray mass
spectrometry has been used to determine the molecular masses of H1 subtypes from 
the same four mouse tissues. In addition to the six known species H1 zero, H1a,
H1b, H1c, H1d and H1e, a newly defined subtype of mass 21,756 Da from Lewis lung 
carcinoma, named H1L was identified. Several phosphorylated H1 subtypes have also
been defined by mass spectrometry. The combined use of reverse-phase HPLC and
electrophoresis permitted quantification of these seven histone H1 subtypes in
the four mouse tissues. Increased phosphorylation of H1 subtypes in tumors
parallels the phosphorylation of HMGI proteins which are present in great
amounts, showing that both are involved as post-translational-modified forms in
the structure of the chromatin of neoplastic systems.

PMID: 8477752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Jan 15;190(1):308-9.

Sequence-specific binding of HMG-I (Y) to the proximal promoter of the gp91-phox 
gene.

Skalnik DG, Neufeld EJ.

Erratum for
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Sep 16;187(2):563-9.

PMID: 8422257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1993;58:73-81.

The high mobility group protein HMG I(Y) is an essential structural component of 
a virus-inducible enhancer complex.

Thanos D(1), Du W, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

PMID: 7956090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Cell. 1992 Nov 27;71(5):777-89.

The high mobility group protein HMG I(Y) is required for NF-kappa B-dependent
virus induction of the human IFN-beta gene.

Thanos D(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

In this paper, we show that both NF-kappa B and the high mobility group protein
I(Y) (HMG I(Y)) are required for virus induction of the human interferon-beta
(IFN-beta) gene. NF-kappa B binds to the terminal regions of a 10 bp regulatory
sequence through contacts in the major groove. while HMG I(Y) recognizes the
central region of the same sequence through contacts in the minor groove.
Mutations that interfere with binding of either protein decrease the level of
virus induction, and activation of the gene can be blocked by either NF-kappa B
or HMG I(Y) antisense RNA. HMG I(Y) stimulates the binding of NF-kappa B to the
IFN-beta promoter, and it may also function as a promoter-specific accessory
factor for NF-kappa B transcriptional activity.

PMID: 1330326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 1992 Nov 5;267(31):22486-9.

Mass spectrometric analysis of the HMGY protein from Lewis lung carcinoma.
Identification of phosphorylation sites.

Ferranti P(1), Malorni A, Marino G, Pucci P, Goodwin GH, Manfioletti G, Giancotti
V.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Spettrometria di Massa, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
Naples, Italy.

The primary structure of the Lewis lung carcinoma protein HMGY belonging to the
nuclear group of proteins HMGI (high mobility group I) was determined using
electrospray and fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry. It was demonstrated
that the sequence of the tumor protein corresponds to the amino acid sequence
derived from the cDNA from cultured cells and that the N-terminal serine residue 
is N-acetylated. Moreover, the two high performance liquid
chromatography-purified forms Y1 and Y2 of the protein HMGY were shown to differ 
at the level of serine phosphorylation, since they contain three phosphate and
two phosphate groups, respectively, in the C-terminal region. No other
modification was detected in the remaining part of the molecule.

PMID: 1429598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Chromosoma. 1992 Oct;101(10):602-8.

Hoechst 33258, distamycin A, and high mobility group protein I (HMG-I) compete
for binding to mouse satellite DNA.

Radic MZ(1), Saghbini M, Elton TS, Reeves R, Hamkalo BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecualr Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine 92717.

The experiments described were designed to test the hypothesis that the
(A+T)-specific DNA binding ligands Hoechst 33258 and distamycin A affect the
condensation of mouse centromeric heterochromatin by competing for binding to
satellite DNA with one or more chromosomal proteins. The studies focused on the
nonhistone chromosomal protein HMG-I since its binding properties predict it
would be a target for competition. Gel mobility shift assays show that HMG-I
forms specific complexes with satellite DNA and that the formation of these
complexes is competed for by both Hoechst and distamycin. In addition, methidium 
propyl EDTA Fe(II) [MPE Fe(II)] footprints of ligand-satellite DNA complexes
showed essentially the same protection pattern for both drugs and a similar, but 
not identical, HMG-I footprint. If these in vitro results reflect the in vivo
situation then the incomplete condensation of centromeric heterochromatin
observed when mouse cells are grown in the presence of either chemical ligand
could be a consequence of competition for binding of HMG-I (and possibly other
proteins) to satellite DNA.

PMID: 1385053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Sep 16;187(2):563-9.

Sequence-specific binding of HMG-I(Y) to the proximal promoter of the gp91-phox
gene.

Skalnik DG(1), Neufeld EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Jan 15;190(1):308-9.

Screening of a cDNA expression library with a CCAAT-box element derived from the 
myelomonocyte-specific gp91-phox promoter resulted in the isolation of three
independent HMG-I(Y) cDNA clones. Filter binding competition studies reveal that 
HMG-Y binds to this promoter element in a sequence-specific manner and exhibits a
gradient of binding affinities for various A/T-rich sequences. Two adjacent
A/T-rich regions within the gp91-phox promoter CCAAT-box element are required for
maximal binding. In addition, competition experiments demonstrate that the
binding affinity of HMG-Y is influenced by sequences that flank A/T-rich core
binding sites.

PMID: 1530615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Sep;12(9):3919-29.

Growth factor-induced delayed early response genes.

Lanahan A(1), Williams JB, Sanders LK, Nathans D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baltimore, Maryland.

Growth factors induce the sequential expression of cellular genes whose products 
are thought to mediate long-term responses to the growth factors. In mouse 3T3
fibroblastic cells, the first genes to be expressed (immediate-early genes) are
activated within minutes after the addition of platelet-derived growth factor,
fibroblast growth factor, or serum. By cDNA cloning, we have identified genes
that are activated after a delay of a few hours and several hours prior to
serum-induced DNA replication. Activation of these delayed early response genes
requires new protein synthesis, presumably the synthesis of immediate-early
transcription factors described previously. Partial or complete sequencing of 13 
different delayed early cDNAs, representing about 40% of the 650 primary cDNA
isolates, revealed that 8 were related to known gene sequences and 5 were not.
Among the former are cDNAs encoding nonhistone chromosomal proteins [HMGI(Y) and 
HMGI-C], adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT), a protein related to human
macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), a protein of the major intrinsic
protein (MIP) family homologous to the integral membrane protein of human
erythrocytes, and cyclin CYL1. In 3T3 cells, the delayed early gene response to
growth factors appears to be at least as complex as the immediate-early gene
response previously described.

PMCID: PMC360271
PMID: 1508193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Genomics. 1992 Mar;12(3):503-9.

Chromosomal localization of the murine gene and two related sequences encoding
high-mobility-group I and Y proteins.

Johnson KR(1), Cook SA, Davisson MT.

Author information: 
(1)Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609.

HMG-I and its isoform HMG-Y are members of the abundant high-mobility-group of
nonhistone chromatin proteins; they bind to A + T-rich regions of chromosomal DNA
and are expressed at high levels in rapidly dividing, undifferentiated mammalian 
cells. HMG-I and HMG-Y are alternatively spliced products of a single functional 
gene, designated Hmgi in the mouse. Here, we report the occurrence of at least
three distinct Hmgi-related loci in the mouse. Only one of these loci was present
in all of the 10 mouse strains examined; therefore, this locus most likely
represents the transcriptionally active, functional gene, Hmgi. Genetic linkage
analysis of interspecific and intersubspecific backcrosses showed that Hmgi is
located in the t-complex region of mouse Chromosome 17. Two additional
Hmgi-related sequences, Hmgi-rs1 and Hmgi-rs2, were found only in certain mouse
strains and probably represent pseudogenes. Hmgi-rs1 is located on Chromosome 11;
it was present in all of the standard laboratory inbred mouse strains examined
but was absent in wild-derived inbred strains of Mus spretus, M. musculus
castaneus, and M. m. molossinus. Hmgi-rs2 was found only in M. m. castaneus and
is located on Chromosome 6. Hmgi genes have not been previously mapped in any
species, but the location of the probable functional gene on murine Chromosome 17
suggests that the homologous gene in humans is located on Chromosome 6.

PMID: 1559701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Feb;12(2):894-903.

A poly(dA-dT) upstream activating sequence binds high-mobility group I protein
and contributes to lymphotoxin (tumor necrosis factor-beta) gene regulation.

Fashena SJ(1), Reeves R, Ruddle NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511.

Lymphotoxin (LT; also known as tumor necrosis factor-beta) is a pleiotropic
cytokine whose expression is tightly regulated in most cells and is repressed
prior to activation signals. In some early B cells and Abelson murine leukemia
virus-transformed pre-B-cell lines, LT mRNA is constitutively expressed. To
examine the molecular regulation of the LT gene in a constitutively expressing
cell line, we studied the Abelson murine leukemia virus-transformed lines PD and 
PD31. As demonstrated by primer extension analysis, constitutively expressed
pre-B-cell-derived and inducibly expressed T-cell-derived LT mRNA were initiated 
at the same cap sites and predominant cap site utilization was conserved.
Furthermore, we delineated an upstream activating sequence that was an important 
functional component of lymphotoxin transcriptional activation in PD and PD31
cells. The upstream activating sequence was localized to an essentially
homopolymeric A + T-rich region (LT-612/-580), which was bound specifically by
recombinant human high-mobility group I protein (HMG-I) and a PD/PD31 nuclear
extract HMG-I (HMG-I-like) protein. The nuclear extract-derived HMG-I-like
protein was recognized by anti-HMG-I antibody and bound to LT DNA to effect an
electrophoretic mobility shift identical to that of bound recombinant human
HMG-I. These findings implicate HMG-I in the regulation of constitutive
lymphotoxin gene expression in PD and PD31 cells. HMG-I and HMG-I-like proteins
could facilitate the formation of active initiation complexes by altering
chromatin structure and/or by creating recognition sites for other activator
DNA-binding proteins, some of which may be unique to or uniquely modified in
these constitutive LT mRNA producers.

PMCID: PMC364323
PMID: 1732752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 25;19(24):6793-7.

cDNA cloning of the HMGI-C phosphoprotein, a nuclear protein associated with
neoplastic and undifferentiated phenotypes.

Manfioletti G(1), Giancotti V, Bandiera A, Buratti E, Sautière P, Cary P,
Crane-Robinson C, Coles B, Goodwin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Trieste, Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle
Macromolecole, Italy.

The HMGI-C protein is a nuclear phosphoprotein expressed at high levels in
transformed cells. The cDNA encoding the mouse protein has been isolated and the 
sequence of the encoded protein shows that it is related to the HMGY and I
proteins, proteins which bind in the minor groove of DNA containing stretches of 
A and T. The HMGI-C protein has three short highly basic domains, an acidic
C-terminal domain, and potential CDC2/p34 and casein kinase II phosphorylation
sites. Analysis of mRNA levels demonstrate that the HMGI-C gene is not expressed 
in a variety of mouse tissues but is expressed in Lewis lung carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC329311
PMID: 1762909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 1991 Oct 25;266(30):19945-52.

Phosphorylation by cdc2 kinase modulates DNA binding activity of high mobility
group I nonhistone chromatin protein.

Nissen MS(1), Langan TA, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman
99164-4660.

Chromatin high mobility group protein I (HMG-I) is a mammalian nonhistone protein
that has been demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo to preferentially bind to
A.T-rich sequences of DNA. Recently the DNA-binding domain peptide that
specifically mediates the in vitro interaction of high mobility group protein
(HMG)-I with the narrow minor groove of A.T-DNA has been experimentally
determined. Because of its predicted secondary structure, the binding domain
peptide has been called "the A.T hook" motif. Previously we demonstrated that the
A.T hook of murine HMG-I protein is specifically phosphorylated by purified
mammalian cdc2 kinase in vitro and that the same site(s) are also phosphorylated 
in vivo in metaphase-arrested cells. We also found that the DNA binding affinity 
of short synthetic binding domain peptides phosphorylated in vitro by cdc2 kinase
was significantly reduced compared with unphosphorylated peptides. Here we extend
these findings to intact natural and recombinant HMG-I proteins. We report that
the affinity of binding of full-length HMG-I proteins to A.T-rich sequences is
highly dependent on ionic conditions and that phosphorylation of intact proteins 
by cdc2 kinase reduces their affinity of in vitro binding to A.T-DNA by about
20-fold when assayed near normal mammalian physiological salt concentrations.
Furthermore, in cell synchronization studies, we demonstrated that murine HMG-I
proteins are phosphorylated in vivo in a cell cycle-dependent manner on the same 
amino acid residues modified by purified cdc2 kinase in vitro. Together these
results strongly support the assertion that HMG-I proteins are natural substrates
for mammalian cdc2 kinase in vivo and that their cell cycle-dependent
phosphorylation by this enzyme(s) significantly modulates their DNA binding
affinity, thereby possibly altering their biological function(s).

PMID: 1939057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Eur J Biochem. 1991 May 23;198(1):211-6.

Comparison of multiple forms of the high mobility group I proteins in rodent and 
human cells. Identification of the human high mobility group I-C protein.

Giancotti V(1), Bandiera A, Buratti E, Fusco A, Marzari R, Coles B, Goodwin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Trieste, Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle
Macromolecole, Italy.

The class I of the high mobility group (HMG) proteins is formed by
phosphoproteins which are associated with AT-rich DNA sequences in the nucleus.
Three HMGI proteins have previously been described in proliferating rodent cells 
(HMG Y, HMG I and HMGI-C). All three proteins exhibit microheterogeneity. The
microheterogeneity of mouse HMG Y has been investigated in detail and shown to be
due to phosphorylation of the protein which is sensitive to alkaline-phosphatase 
treatment. HMG I is similarly modified. Human cells have up to now only been
found to contain HMG Y and HMG I. A search for the third protein, HMGI-C, in
human cells was carried out and the protein was found in a hepatoma cell line,
but not in normal or transformed T-cells. This HMGI-C protein was found to be
modified by phosphorylation, part of which was found to be phosphatase
insensitive. An unexpected additional finding in this study was that human cells 
contain two HMG17 proteins which differ in their N-terminal primary sequences.

PMID: 2040281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Biochem Int. 1991 May;24(2):217-23.

On the expression of HMG I protein in quiescent and proliferating human T
lymphocytes.

Jyranoja BD(1), Lund T, Lea T, Laland SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oslo, Norway.

The results demonstrate that the HMG I protein is expressed in human quiescent T 
lymphocytes and hence is not dependent upon proliferation or neoplastic
transformation. Furthermore it has been found that the HMG I/histone H1 ratio
increase about two-fold after activation with phytohemagglutinin and was about
the same as in a number of proliferating human leukemia lymphoma T-cell lines.

PMID: 1930245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Eur J Biochem. 1991 Mar 28;196(3):557-67.

High-mobility-group proteins P1, I and Y as substrates of the M-phase-specific
p34cdc2/cyclincdc13 kinase.

Meijer L(1), Ostvold AC, Walass SI, Lund T, Laland SG.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Station Biologique, Roscoff, France.

All dividing cells entering the M phase of the cell cycle undergo the transient
activation of an M-phase-specific histone H1 kinase which was recently shown to
be constituted of at least two subunits, p34cdc2 and cyclincdc13. The DNA-binding
high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins 1, 2, 14, 17, I, Y and an HMG-like protein,
P1, were investigated as potential substrates of H1 kinase. Among these HMG
proteins, P1 and HMG I and Y are excellent substrates of the M-phase-specific
kinase obtained from both meiotic starfish oocytes and mitotic sea urchin eggs.
Anticyclin immunoprecipitates, extracts purified on specific p34cdc2-binding
p13suc1-Sepharose and affinity-purified H1 kinase display strong HMG I, Y and P1 
phosphorylating activities, demonstrating that the p34cdc2/cyclincdc13 complex is
the active kinase phosphorylating these HMG proteins. HMG I and P1
phosphorylation is competitively inhibited by a peptide mimicking the consensus
phosphorylation sequence of H1 kinase. HMG I, Y and P1 all possess the consensus 
sequence for phosphorylation by the p34cdc2/cyclincdc13 kinase
(Ser/Thr-Pro-Xaa-Lys/Arg). HMG I is phosphorylated in vivo at M phase on the same
sites phosphorylated in vitro by H1 kinase. P1 is phosphorylated by H1 kinase on 
sites different from the sites of phosphorylation by casein kinase II. The three 
thermolytic phosphopeptides of P1 phosphorylated in vitro by purified H1 kinase
are all present in thermolytic peptide maps of P1 phosphorylated in vivo in
proliferating HeLa cells. These phosphopeptides are absent in nonproliferating
cells. These results demonstrate that the DNA-binding proteins HMG I, Y and P1
are natural substrates for the M-phase-specific protein kinase. The
phosphorylation of these proteins by p34cdc2/cyclincdc13 may represent a crucial 
event in the intense chromatin condensation occurring as cells transit from the
G2 to the M phase of the cell cycle.

PMID: 2013279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Mar 1;88(5):1671-5.

Phosphorylation of the DNA-binding domain of nonhistone high-mobility group I
protein by cdc2 kinase: reduction of binding affinity.

Reeves R(1), Langan TA, Nissen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman
99164.

Mammalian high-mobility group I nonhistone protein (HMG-I) is a DNA-binding
chromatin protein that has been demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo to be
localized to the A + T-rich sequences of DNA. Recently an unusual binding domain 
peptide, "the A.T-hook" motif, that mediates specific interaction of HMG-I with
the minor groove of DNA in vitro has been described. Inspection of the A.T-hook
region of the binding domain showed that it matches the consensus sequence for
phosphorylation by cdc2 kinase. Here we demonstrate that HMG-I is a substrate for
phosphorylation by purified mammalian cdc2 kinase in vitro. The site of
phosphorylation by this enzyme is a threonine residue at the amino-terminal end
of the principal binding-domain region of the protein. Labeling of mitotically
blocked mouse cells with [32P]phosphate demonstrates that this same threonine
residue in HMG-I is also preferentially phosphorylated in vivo. Competition
binding studies show that cdc2 phosphorylation of a synthetic binding-domain
peptide significantly weakens its interaction with A + T-rich DNA in vitro, and a
similar weakening of DNA binding has been observed for intact murine HMG-I
protein phosphorylated by the kinase in vitro. These findings indicate that cdc2 
phosphorylation may significantly alter the DNA-binding properties of the HMG-I
proteins. Because many cdc2 substrates are DNA-binding proteins, these results
further suggest that alteration of the DNA-binding affinity of a variety of
proteins is an important general component of the mechanism by which cdc2 kinase 
regulates cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC51086
PMID: 2000376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Ann Cardiol Angeiol (Paris). 1990 Dec;39(10):591-5.

[Which hypocholesteremic agents for which hypercholesterolemias?].

[Article in French]

Dairou F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris.

Three groups of drugs can be used in hypercholesterolemia: 1) Drugs chelating
bile acids (resins) which stimulate LDL receptors. 2) HMG R inhibitors which
competitively inhibit the enzyme and increase the synthesis of LDL receptors. 3) 
Fibrate derivatives which are second line drugs in pure hypercholesterolemia.
They should be used in case of intolerance of resins and may be preferred to
inhibitors in moderate forms for economic reasons of lower cost. However fibrates
are the treatment of choice in hypertriglyceridemia and mixed hyperlipidemias.
All fibrates increase HDL cholesterol. 4) Probucol, neomycin and nicotinic acid
are adjuvant hypolipidemic agents. The following steps must precede the
prescription of a hypolipidemic drug: 1) Classification of the disorder. 2)
Elimination of secondary dyslipidemias. 3) Family assessment. 4) An absolutely
essential dietary phase. 5) This is permanent treatment without gaps. 6) No other
atherogenic risk factor should be allowed to persist. 7) Iatrogenic effects must 
be avoided.

PMID: 2291611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1990 Aug 31;171(1):342-7.

The metaphase specific phosphorylation of HMG I.

Lund T(1), Laland SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oslo, Norway.

In vivo labelling of HeLa cells arrested in metaphase with [32P]-phosphate and in
vitro phosphorylation of HMG I with the partially purified growth associated H1
kinase was used to study metaphase specific phosphorylation of HMG I. It was
found that threonine 53 and 78 became phosphorylated. These amino acids are
embedded in respectively the sequence PTPKR and TPGRK which are similar to the
sequences phosphorylated by the growth associated H1 kinase.

PMID: 2168176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 1990 Aug 15;265(23):13925-32.

Interaction of a protein with a palindromic sequence from murine rDNA increases
the occurrence of amplification-dependent transformation in mouse cells.

Wegner M(1), Schwender S, Dinkl E, Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Würzburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

muNTS1, an element isolated from the nontranscribed spacer of murine rDNA,
increases the occurrence of amplification-dependent transformation in mouse cells
when integrated into plasmid DNA containing a selectable marker (Wegner, M.,
Zastrow, G., Klavinius, A., Schwender, S., Müller, F., Luksza, H., Hoppe, J.,
Wienberg, J., and Grummt, F. (1989) Nucleic Acids Res. 17, 9909-9932). In an
initial attempt to dissect muNTS1 into its structural components we localized
part of the transformation increasing activity to a long AT-rich stretch from the
5' region which interacts with HMG-I. Here we identify a second element on muNTS1
which also stimulates the rate of amplification-coupled transformation in cis. It
is found in the 3' region of muNTS1 and contains the 11-base pair palindrome
ATGGCTGCCAT. It is conserved in the otherwise strongly divergent ribosomal NTS
regions from mouse, rat, and man and is also found in the origin/enhancer region 
of human papovavirus JC. The palindromic sequence interacts specifically with
proteins from mouse cell extracts. Protein-DNA interaction was dependent on the
presence of zinc ions in the extract. Point-specific mutations within the
palindrome reduced protein-DNA complex formation substantially and concomitantly 
abolished the ability to stimulate the frequency of transformation. The binding
activity was purified and shown to consist of two polypeptides with molecular
masses of 70 and 73 kDa.

PMID: 2380195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 1990 Jul 15;265(20):11936-41.

Expression and synthesis of high mobility group chromosomal proteins in different
rat skeletal cell lines during myogenesis.

Begum N(1), Pash JM, Bhorjee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, School of Graduate Studies, Meharry Medical
College, Nashville, Tennessee 37208.

The synthesis, turnover, and expression of all the major high mobility group
(HMG) chromosomal proteins was studied in different rat skeletal myogenic cell
lines. Whereas pulse-chase experiments revealed a similar half-life (greater than
2 cell generations) for all the HMG proteins in both L8 myoblasts and myotubes,
[3H]lysine incorporation data indicated a 2- to 4-fold greater incorporation of
the label in the HMG proteins in proliferating myoblasts relative to the
nondividing myotubes. Analysis of the HMG-1, -14, and -17 mRNAs during myogenesis
showed a significant down-regulation in L6 and L8 myotubes compared to the
myoblasts. However, the timing of the shift and the extent of down-regulation was
cell type-dependent, being more pronounced in L6 myotubes at fusion compared to 4
days postfusion in L8 myotubes. By contrast, L8-derived fusion-defective fu-1
cells over the same period of growth showed no change in HMG-14/17 mRNA levels.
HMG-I(Y) protein isoforms, noted for the first time in rat myoblasts, like their 
counterparts, seemed to be stable and showed a precipitous reduction in their
mRNAs during myogenesis. The results suggest a cell type-specific correlation
between HMG expression and cell proliferation; they also argue for their role in 
maintenance of the cell's state of differentiation.

PMID: 1694850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 1990 May 25;265(15):8573-82.

The A.T-DNA-binding domain of mammalian high mobility group I chromosomal
proteins. A novel peptide motif for recognizing DNA structure.

Reeves R(1), Nissen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, Pullman
99164.

We have determined the domains of the mammalian high mobility group (HMG)I
chromosomal proteins necessary and sufficient for binding to the narrow minor
groove of stretches of A.T-rich DNA. Three highly conserved regions within each
of the known HMG-I proteins is closely related to the consensus sequence
T-P-K-R-P-R-G-R-P-K-K. A synthetic oligopeptide corresponding to this consensus
"binding domain" (BD) sequence specifically binds to substrate DNA in a manner
similar to the intact HMG-I proteins. Molecular Corey-Pauling-Koltun model
building and computer simulations employing energy minimization programs to
predict structure suggest that the consensus BD peptide has a secondary structure
similar to the antitumor and antiviral drugs netropsin and distamycin and to the 
dye Hoechst 33258. In vitro these ligands, which also preferentially bind to
A.T-rich DNA, have been demonstrated to effectively compete with both the BD
peptide and the HMG-I proteins for DNA binding. The BD peptide also contains
novel structural features such as a predicted Asx bend or "hook" at its
amino-terminal end and laterally projecting cationic Arg/Lys side chains or
"bristles" which may contribute to the binding properties of the HMG-I proteins. 
The predicted BD peptide structure, which we refer to as the "A.T-hook,"
represents a previously undescribed DNA-binding motif capable of binding to the
minor groove of stretches of A.T base pairs.

PMID: 1692833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Exp Cell Res. 1990 Mar;187(1):69-76.

Expression of mRNAs encoding mammalian chromosomal proteins HMG-I and HMG-Y
during cellular proliferation.

Johnson KR(1), Disney JE, Wyatt CR, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Cell Biology, Washington State University, Pullman
99164.

The high mobility group chromosomal proteins HMG-I and HMG-Y are closely related 
isoforms that are expressed at high levels in rapidly dividing, undifferentiated 
mammalian cells. We analyzed HMG-I/Y mRNA levels at various cell cycle stages in 
murine NIH/3T3 fibroblasts partially synchronized by seeding from quiescent,
contact-inhibited cultures. Flow microfluorometric analysis of DNA content
demonstrated a comparable degree of synchronization in such seeded NIH/3T3 cell
populations as is obtained by serum deprivation or other means and has the added 
advantage of avoiding the use of possibly detrimental inhibitors or metabolic
starvation to induce such synchrony. We show that HMG-I/Y mRNA levels gradually
increase in NIH/3T3 cells during the first 16 h after seeding (G0/G1 to late S
phase), but thereafter remain constant, in contrast to the cell cycle-regulated
expression of the histone H3 gene. Although there is a 6-fold increase in HMG-I/Y
expression during the transition from quiescent to proliferating NIH/3T3 cells,
there is a much greater difference in expression (15- to 50-fold) among different
cell types, possibly related to their state of differentiation. The HMG-I/Y mRNAs
appear to be very stable; there was no decrease in their levels 6 h after
actinomycin D transcription termination. The proportion of HMG-I to HMG-Y mRNAs
was greater in the human than in the murine cells examined, appeared to be
greater in proliferating than in quiescent cells, and did not always correspond
with the HMG-I to HMG-Y protein ratio.

PMID: 2404776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1990 Feb 14;166(3):1110-7.

Netropsin, distamycin and berenil interact differentially with a high-affinity
binding site for the high mobility group protein HMG-I.

Wegner M(1), Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Würzburg, Germany.

Netropsin, distamycin, berenil and the chromosomal protein HMG-I share the
ability to bind preferentially to AT-rich regions of DNA. We studied the binding 
behaviour of the chemical agents towards a high-affinity binding site for HMG-I
by DNase I and MPE footprinting and analyzed their ability to challenge HMG-I-DNA
complexes by competition experiments. Significant differences in the binding
affinities and in the efficiencies to abolish HMG-I-DNA complexes were observed
for the three drugs. Netropsin proved to be the most avidly binding compound and 
the most efficient competitor raising the interesting possibility that netropsin 
affects cell growth by interfering with HMG-I-DNA interaction.

PMID: 2154972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Plant Cell. 1990 Jan;2(1):85-94.

HMG I-like proteins from leaf and nodule nuclei interact with different AT motifs
in soybean nodulin promoters.

Jacobsen K(1), Laursen NB, Jensen EO, Marcker A, Poulsen C, Marcker KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Plant Physiology, University of Aarhus,
Denmark.

Three different nuclear factors recognizing short AT-rich DNA sequences were
identified in different organs of soybean. One factor (NAT2) was found to be
present in mature nodules, another factor (NAT1) was detected in roots and
nodules, and a third one (LAT1) was only observed in leaves. All three factors
recognized several DNA sequences in the promoter region of the soybean nodulin
N23 gene. Footprinting, deletion, and point mutation analyses revealed different 
binding properties for all three factors and further showed that even single base
pair substitutions had a dramatic effect on binding affinity. The LAT1 and NAT1
factors were released from chromatin by extraction with a low-salt buffer and
were soluble in 2% trichloroacetic acid, implying a relationship to high-mobility
group (HMG) proteins. DNA binding studies further indicated a functional
relationship of these factors to the human HMG I protein. Purification of the
LAT1 factor from leaf nuclei revealed the presence of two polypeptides with
molecular masses of 21 kilodaltons and 23 kilodaltons, respectively, binding the 
same DNA sequence with equal affinity.

PMCID: PMC159866
PMID: 2152106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1989 Dec 22;1009(3):277-9.

On the presence of the chromosomal proteins HMG I and HMG Y in rat organs.

Lundberg K(1), Karlson JR, Ingebrigtsen K, Holtlund J, Lund T, Laland SG.

Author information: 
(1)Biokjemisk Institut, Universitetet i Oslo, Blindern, Norway.

Using antiserum raised against HMG I, we have shown that HMG I and HMG Y are
present in perchloric acid extracts of kidney, lung, heart, brain, liver and
intestine in the rat, suggesting that the expression of these proteins may not be
dependent upon proliferative activity. The results also show that the ratio
between HMG I and HMG Y varies between different organs.

PMID: 2557078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Dec 11;17(23):9909-32.

Cis-acting sequences from mouse rDNA promote plasmid DNA amplification and
persistence in mouse cells: implication of HMG-I in their function.

Wegner M(1), Zastrow G, Klavinius A, Schwender S, Müller F, Luksza H, Hoppe J,
Wienberg J, Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Würzburg, FRG.

Searching for amplification promoting sequences within the murine rDNA cistrons, 
we isolated two elements from the nontranscribed spacer region. These 370 bp and 
423 bp long cis-acting elements, referred to as muNTS1 and muNTS2, are localized 
4.1 kb and 4.6 kb upstream the RNA polymerase I transcriptional start site. They 
contain ca. 50 bp long AT-rich sequences that strongly interact with a protein
from nuclear extracts. The protein could be purified and identified as HMG-I. A
synthetic oligonucleotide encompassing the AT-rich stretch from muNTS1 is able to
substitute for the muNTS elements. A similar sequence from the nontranscribed
spacer of rat has previously been reported to be important for the function of
the RNA polymerase I enhancer (1). Therefore the interaction of HMG I with the
muNTS elements may play a role both in the stimulation of DNA amplification and
transcription.

PMCID: PMC335222
PMID: 2602145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Nov 11;17(21):8783-802.

Identification of an amplification promoting DNA sequence from the hypotrichous
ciliate Stylonychia lemnae.

Wegner M(1), Helftenbein E, Müller F, Meinecke M, Müller S, Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Würzburg, FRG.

The macronucleus of the hypotrichous ciliate Stylonychia lemnae contains a 1218
bp long DNA molecule which becomes highly amplified during vegetative growth due 
to a continuous overreplication over a long time range. The region which is
located upstream the open reading frame of the overamplified 1.2kbp Stylonychia
DNA molecule enabled plasmids containing an inefficiently transcribed thymidine
kinase gene to persist and amplify upon transfection into mouse L fibroblasts
under selective conditions. This region contains long AT-rich stretches. The
AT-rich sequences interact with a previously characterized HMG-I like protein
from mouse Ehrlich ascites tumour cells. A binding activity for AT-rich stretches
could also be identified in macronuclear extracts from Stylonychia lemnae. We
suggest a common mechanism for overamplification in Stylonychia macronuclei
during vegetative growth and amplification of plasmid DNA in heterologous mouse
cells under the influence of a common element.

PMCID: PMC335043
PMID: 2479911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Cell Biol. 1989 Nov;109(5):1975-82.

High-mobility group protein HMG-I localizes to G/Q- and C-bands of human and
mouse chromosomes.

Disney JE(1), Johnson KR, Magnuson NS, Sylvester SR, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Cell Biology, Washington State University, Pullman
99164-4660.

Mammalian metaphase chromosomes can be identified by their characteristic banding
pattern when stained with Giemsa dye after brief proteolytic digestion. The
resulting G-bands are known to contain regions of DNA enriched in A/T residues
and to be the principal location for the L1 (or Kpn 1) family of long
interspersed repetitive sequences in human chromosomes. Here we report that
antibodies raised against a highly purified and biochemically well characterized 
nonhistone "High-Mobility Group" protein, HMG-I, specifically localize this
protein to the G-bands in mammalian metaphase chromosomes. In some preparations
in which chromosomes are highly condensed, HMG-I appears to be located at the
centromere and/or telomere regions of mammalian chromosomes as well. To our
knowledge, this is the first well-characterized mammalian protein that localizes 
primarily to G-band regions of chromosomes.

PMCID: PMC2115878
PMID: 2808516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Hum Reprod. 1989 Nov;4(8 Suppl):53-8.

Experience with a new fixed-stimulation protocol without hormone determinations
for programmed oocyte retrieval for in-vitro fertilization.

Kemeter P(1), Feichtinger W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive Endocrinology and In Vitro Fertilization, Vienna,
Austria.

A new fixed schedule of ovarian stimulation for in-vitro fertilization (IVF) was 
developed that is not only simpler and easier to handle for the patients but also
gives a better fertilization and pregnancy rate. The period and the start of
stimulation is shifted by means of a contraceptive pill in such a way that
stimulation is generally started on a Sunday. The patient takes clomiphene, (100 
mg) for 5 days and prednisolone (7.5 mg) for 30 days to suppress possible
exaggerated adrenal androgens, and receives 150 IU human menopausal gonadotrophin
(HMG) i.m. every other day from her doctor at home. From the 8th day of
stimulation onwards follicular growth is registered by daily ultrasound at the
IVF centre. A dose of 5000 IU human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) is given when
the dominant follicle exceeds 18 mm diameter. Blood sampling for hormone
estimations is not necessary and only one sample of urine is needed for the
luteinizing hormone (LH) estimation before HCG. In comparison to clomiphene only,
clomiphene plus HMG/follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and HMG/FSH only, this
protocol resulted in a significantly higher fertilization and pregnancy rate per 
follicular puncture. The rate of abortions and extrauterine pregnancies, on the
other hand, was decreased. When comparing repetitive IVF cycles with the first
IVF cycle, a significant reduction of oocytes in repetitions was found, while
there was no difference found in the number of fertilized eggs. The pregnancy
rate, on the other hand, was increased in the repeat-cycles.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED
AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2515212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. FEBS Lett. 1989 Oct 23;257(1):101-4.

Identification of sites on chromosomal protein HMG-I phosphorylated by casein
kinase II.

Palvimo J(1), Linnala-Kankkunen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kuopio, Finland.

The amino acid sequence of a region on chromosomal protein HMG-I from human cells
that is phosphorylated by casein kinase II has been determined. The sequence is: 
Leu-Glu-Lys-Glu-Glu-Glu-Glu-Gly-Ile-Ser-Gln-Glu-Ser(P)-Ser(P)-Glu-Glu-Gl u-Gln.
It corresponds to the C-terminal residues 90-107 of HMG-I [(1989) Mol. Cell.
Biol. 9, 2114-2123]. Sequence analysis of the native peptide (90-107) after
treatment, which specifically converts phosphoserine residues to S-ethylcysteine,
revealed that 70-80% of serine residues 102 and 103 were phosphorylated in vivo. 
Both residues were fully phosphorylated in vitro by incubation with casein kinase
II. These results suggest that casein kinase II is involved in the regulation of 
HMG-I function in the cells.

PMID: 2806554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Exp Cell Res. 1989 Oct;184(2):538-45.

Analysis of the HMGI nuclear proteins in mouse neoplastic cells induced by
different procedures.

Giancotti V(1), Buratti E, Perissin L, Zorzet S, Balmain A, Portella G, Fusco A, 
Goodwin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Università di Trieste, Italy.

Four malignant tumors induced in mouse by different experimental procedures were 
compared as regards their high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins. All tumors showed
the complete set of three HMG proteins which we call HMGI-C, I-D, and I-E. The
presence of the three HMGI proteins is a characteristic of the transformed
phenotype regardless of whether the tumor was chemically, virally, or
spontaneously derived. However, the level of expression of the HMGI proteins is
not constant in the four tumors. Using reverse-phase HPLC, the individual HMGI
proteins were isolated from the spontaneously derived tumor (Lewis lung
carcinoma) and shown by amino acid analysis to be similar to those previously
obtained from a tumor grown in nude mice by inoculation of in vitro-transformed
cells.

PMID: 2806403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Aug 11;17(15):5947-59.

Cloning of cDNAs coding for human HMG I and HMG Y proteins: both are capable of
binding to the octamer sequence motif.

Eckner R(1), Birnstiel ML.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

In human B lymphocytes and placenta HMG I and its smaller isoform HMG Y are
encoded by two distinct but structurally highly similar mRNAs which arise most
likely by alternative splicing of a single primary transcript. Both have been
cloned as cDNAs. On Northern blots an abundant mRNA species 2000 nucleotides in
length was detected in all cell lines examined. Exclusively in erythroid cells an
additional rare 3800 nucleotides long mRNA species was noted. In quiescent cells 
the mRNA levels of HMG I/Y were not significantly down-regulated. Southern blot
analysis indicated that at least four genes are present per haploid human genome.
Both proteins when expressed in bacteria bind specifically to A-T rich stretches 
of DNA suggesting that no posttranslational modifications are necessary for
specific DNA binding. Interestingly, HMG I as well as HMG Y are capable of
binding to the octamer transcriptional regulatory sequence motif.

PMCID: PMC318252
PMID: 2505228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 May;9(5):2114-23.

Alternative processing of mRNAs encoding mammalian chromosomal
high-mobility-group proteins HMG-I and HMG-Y.

Johnson KR(1), Lehn DA, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Cell Biology Washington State University, Pullman
99164.

The high-mobility-group protein HMG-I is a well-characterized nonhistone
chromosomal protein that is preferentially expressed in rapidly dividing cells,
binds to A. T-rich regions of DNA in vitro, and has been localized to particular 
regions of mammalian metaphase chromosomes. We isolated eight cDNA clones
encoding HMG-I and its isoform HMG-Y from a human Raji cell cDNA library and
detected blocks of nucleotide sequence rearrangements in the 5'-untranslated
regions of these clones. In addition to this leader sequence variation, five of
the eight cDNA clones had either a 33- or 36-base-pair in-frame deletion in their
open reading frame (ORF); we found that this shortened ORF encodes the HMG-Y
protein isoform. We present evidence that the 5'-untranslated-region and ORF
heterogeneity of the cDNA clones is the result of alternative processing of RNA
transcripts from a single functional gene. Several additional but probably
nonfunctional HMG-I or HMG-Y gene copies exist in the human genome; we isolated
and partially sequenced one of these pseudogenes and found that it is a processed
HMG-Y retropseudogene.

PMCID: PMC363005
PMID: 2701943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Acta Eur Fertil. 1989 Mar-Apr;20(2):63-70.

A fixed stimulation protocol for in vitro fertilization (IVF) without
determinations of hormones in blood.

Kemeter P(1), Feichtinger W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sterility Treatment, Vienna, Trauttmansdorffg.

A new fixed schedule of ovarian stimulation for IVF was developed, which is not
only simpler and easier to handle for the patients but also yields better
fertilization and pregnancy rates. The period and beginning of stimulation are
shifted by means of a contraceptive pill, so that stimulation can generally be
started on a Sunday. The patient takes 100 mg clomiphene for 5 days and 7.5 mg
prednisolone for 30 days to suppress possible exaggerated adrenal androgens; she 
also receives 150 IU of human menopausal gonadotropin (HMG) i.m. every other day 
from her family physician. From the 8th day of stimulation onwards, follicular
growth is registered by daily ultrasound at the IVF center. When the dominant
follicle exceeds 18 mm in diameter, 5000 IU human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
is given. Blood sampling for hormone estimations is not necessary, and only one
sample of urine is needed for the LH estimation before hCG. In comparison to
clomiphene citrate (Clomid) alone, Clomid plus HMG/FSH and HMG/FSH alone, this
protocol resulted in significantly higher fertilization and pregnancy rates per
follicular puncture. The rate of abortions and extrauterine pregnancies, on the
other hand decreased. When comparing repetitive IVF cycles with the first IVF
cycle, a significant reduction of oocytes in repetitions was found, but no
difference was found in the number of fertilized eggs. The pregnancy rate, on the
other hand, increased in the repeat cycles.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2508391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Feb 15;158(3):646-51.

The amino acid sequence of the chromosomal protein HMG-Y, its relation to HMG-I
and possible domains for the preferential binding of the proteins to stretches of
A-T base pairs.

Karlson JR(1), Mørk E, Holtlund J, Laland SG, Lund T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oslo, Norway.

The primary structure of the human high mobility group (HMG) protein HMG-Y has
been established except for a few amino acids in the N-terminal and the
C-terminal part of the protein. It was found that the sequence was identical to
that of HMG-I except for a run of eleven amino acids. Like HMG-I the protein was 
N-terminally blocked and the palindromic sequence Pro-Arg-Gly-Arg-Pro occurred
twice as in HMG-I. The binding of peptides derived from HMG-I (after thermolysin 
cleavage) to poly (dA-dT).poly(dA-dT) suggested that there are at least two
different binding domains in the protein and that binding is not dependent upon
an intact protein.

PMID: 2920035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Exp Cell Res. 1989 Feb;180(2):557-62.

HMG proteins released from the chromatin following incubation of mammalian nuclei
with ethidium bromide.

Pani B(1), Plossi P, Russo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Macromolecular Chemistry,
University of Trieste, Italy.

The low-molecular-mass high-mobility group (HMG) chromosomal proteins, namely
HMG-14, HMG-17, and HMG-I, which have been found in several proliferating
tissues, are released following incubation of nuclei isolated from young rat
thymus and from human placenta in a low ionic strength medium containing the
intercalating agent ethidium bromide. The amount of HMG proteins released is drug
concentration-dependent, but at very high concentrations (20-40 mM) other low-
and high-molecular-mass proteins, and even histones, are released. These results 
suggest a very weak interaction of the HMG proteins with DNA, so that they can be
easily detached from the chromatin as a consequence of the interaction of DNA
with the intercalating agent.

PMID: 2914585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biol Chem. 1988 Dec 5;263(34):18338-42.

Complete murine cDNA sequence, genomic structure, and tissue expression of the
high mobility group protein HMG-I(Y).

Johnson KR(1), Lehn DA, Elton TS, Barr PJ, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Cell Biology, Washington State University, Pullman
99164.

A cDNA coding for the non-histone chromosomal protein HMG-I, or its isoform
HMG-Y, was isolated from a murine Friend cell library using synthetic
oligonucleotide hybridization probes. Sequence analysis showed that the 1670-base
pair full length cDNA insert consists of a 201-base pair, G/C-rich (74%),
5'-untranslated region, a 288-base pair amino acid coding sequence, and an
unusually long 1182-base pair 3'-untranslated region. The deduced 96-residue
amino acid coding sequence of the murine HMG-I(Y) cDNA is very similar to the
reported amino acid sequence of human HMG-I, except that it lacks 11 internal
amino acids reported in the human protein. Based on Southern blot hybridization
analysis of genomic DNA, there appear to be fewer than five copies of HMG-I(Y)
genes in the haploid murine genome. These murine HMG-I(Y) genes contain a large
(at least 890 base pairs) exon that includes most, or all, of the 3'-untranslated
region; whereas the much shorter 5'-untranslated region and amino acid coding
sequences are interrupted by at least one intron. A single size class
(approximately 1700 nucleotides in murine cells and 2000 nucleotides in human
cells) of HMG-I(Y) mRNAs was detected at high levels in total RNA extracts from
rapidly dividing, transformed cells, but to a lesser extent, or not at all, in
extracts from slowly or non-dividing cells.

PMID: 3192537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Cell Biol. 1988 Aug;8(8):3406-14.

Purification and characterization of a high-mobility-group-like DNA-binding
protein that stimulates rRNA synthesis in vitro.

Yang-Yen HF(1), Rothblum LI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

A 16,000-dalton, high-mobility-group-like (HMG-like) DNA-binding protein,
referred to as p16, has been purified to homogeneity from Novikoff hepatoma
ascites cells. p16 binds specifically to a portion of the 5' flanking region of
the rat rRNA gene (-620 to -417), which is part of the upstream activator
sequence identified previously (B. G. Cassidy, H.-F. Yang-Yen, and L. I.
Rothblum, Mol. Cell. Biol. 6:2766-2773, 1986). p16 also binds to a segment of the
external transcribed spacer (+352 to +545). In vitro reconstituted transcription 
experiments demonstrated that the addition of p16 stimulated rRNA synthesis up to
ca. fourfold. The stimulation was dose dependent and saturable. The effect of p16
on ribosomal gene transcription was also dependent on the presence of either the 
upstream or the downstream DNA-binding site, or both. The amino acid composition 
of p16 is very similar to that of HMG-I, suggesting that p16 may be a member of
the HMG-I family of proteins. In this case, our results suggest that HMG proteins
may play an important role in the regulation of the rRNA gene expression.

PMCID: PMC363577
PMID: 3211145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Biol Chem. 1988 May 5;263(13):6392-9.

Interaction of the mouse chromosomal protein HMG-I with the 3' ends of genes in
vitro.

Russnak RH(1), Candido EP, Astell CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

High affinity mouse HMG-I binding sites have been distinguished from other
(A+T)-rich sequences using band competition assays. These sites have been found
3' to the coding regions of a variety of genes. For the herpes simplex virus
thymidine kinase and minute virus of mice genes, high affinity HMG-1 binding
sites were further localized to the functional polyadenylation signal by DNase I 
footprinting. These results suggest that HMG-I may function at the 3' ends of
genes in vivo.

PMID: 2834377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biochem Int. 1988 May;16(5):963-71.

A conformational study of the sequence specific binding of HMG-I (Y) with the
bovine interleukin-2 cDNA.

Lehn DA(1), Elton TS, Johnson KR, Reeves R.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry/Biophysics Program, Washington State University, Pullman
99164-4350.

The DNA sequence specific interaction of the high mobility group non-histone
protein HMG-I (Y) with the 3' untranslated region of the bovine interleukin-2
cDNA has been studied. Circular dichroism and thermal denaturation studies
suggest that HMG-I (Y) alters the conformational state and increases the thermal 
stability of the DNA. Additionally, amino acid sequence analysis suggests that
the previously identified non-histone protein HMG-Y is an isoform of HMG-I.

PMID: 3262346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Chromatogr. 1988 Apr 8;426(1):65-73.

Separation and quantification of histone H1 subtypes and high-mobility-group
proteins by reversed-phase liquid chromatography: protein levels in rat tissues
during postnatal development.

Karhu I(1), Mahonen A, Palvimo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kuopio, Finland.

The rapid separation and quantification of histone H1 subtypes and
high-mobility-group (HMG) chromatin proteins by reversed-phase liquid
chromatography on a butylsilica-based column is described. The proteins were
fractionated by means of a multi-step acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1%
trifluoroacetic acid. This system is capable of resolving the four main HMG
proteins (1, 2, 14 and 17), HMG I, protein P1 with HMG 18 and HMG 19 (in one
peak) and five histone H1 subtypes in a single 33-min analysis. This method was
used to study levels of these chromosomal proteins in nuclei of rat liver,
spleen, testis and thymus during postnatal development from 1 to 20 weeks of age.
Although no clear tissue specificity of the HMG proteins was apparent, there were
significant differences in the relative amounts of these proteins in different
tissues. The relative amount of HMG 1 increased from 1 to 12 weeks of age and
decreased thereafter, whereas those of HMG 14 and HMG 17 remained almost
unchanged. Marked quantitative differences were observed in the five histone H1
subtypes in different tissues. The largest changes in their levels during
development were found in the liver and the smallest changes in the thymus. The
changes in the spleen and testis were intermediate. These results suggest that
the changes in the relative amounts of histone H1 subtypes and HMG proteins
observed during postnatal development of the rat may result from differences in
the structure of chromatin in these tissues and thus reflect the activity of
molecular mechanisms involved in replication and differentiation of the cells.

PMID: 3384881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. FEBS Lett. 1988 Feb 8;228(1):45-8.

Selective decrease in low-Mr HMG proteins HMG I and HMG Y during differentiation 
of mouse teratocarcinoma cells.

Vartiainen E(1), Palvimo J, Mahonen A, Linnala-Kankkunen A, Mäenpää PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kuopio, Finland.

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett 1989 Jul 17;251(1-2):283.

We have studied the presence of high-mobility-group (HMG) chromatin proteins in
undifferentiated F9 mouse teratocarcinoma cells and F9 cells, which were induced 
to differentiate by treatment with retinoic acid and dibutyryl-cAMP for 5 days.
Acetic acid/urea-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and reversed-phase HPLC
revealed that the induced F9 cells contained 77 and 62% less HMG I and HMG Y,
respectively, than their untreated counterparts. The relative amounts of two
other low-Mr HMG proteins HMG 14 and HMG 17 remained essentially unchanged and
only a minor decrease was observed in the content of one of the high-Mr HMG
proteins, HMG 2. The identity of the low-Mr HMG proteins was verified by amino
acid analysis or partial sequencing. These results suggest that HMG I and HMG Y
are HMG proteins specific for undifferentiated cells.

PMID: 3342876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Sep;84(18):6531-5.

Posttranscriptional gene regulation and specific binding of the nonhistone
protein HMG-I by the 3' untranslated region of bovine interleukin 2 cDNA.

Reeves R, Elton TS, Nissen MS, Lehn D, Johnson KR.

The 3' untranslated tail region (3'-UTR) of the cDNA of bovine interleukin 2
(bIL-2) acts as a lymphoid cell-specific gene regulatory element in vivo when
ligated to the 3' end of the "marker" bacterial gene coding for chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) and the hybrid fusion gene is introduced into bovine
lymphoid cells by transfection. Evidence is also presented that the 3'-UTR with
its conserved (TATT)n motif probably has multiple functions in lymphoid cells
operating both at the chromosomal level, where the sequence may be involved in
the specific binding of the nonhistone chromatin high mobility group protein
HMG-I, and at the RNA level, where the conserved sequence is involved in
selective posttranscriptional mRNA degradation by a lymphocyte-specific
nuclease(s). These results suggest a complex in vivo role for the 3'-UTR of bIL-2
cDNA and the conserved (TATT)n sequences found within it. They also offer a
plausible explanation for the high degree of conservation of similar A + T-rich
sequences in the 3'-UTRs of many of the other immune-response and
growth-regulatory genes of mammals.

PMCID: PMC299111
PMID: 3498164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1987 Jul 31;146(2):725-30.

The human chromosomal protein HMG I contains two identical palindrome amino acid 
sequences.

Lund T, Dahl KH, Mørk E, Holtlund J, Laland SG.

The sequence of 105 amino acids of the human high mobility group chromosomal
protein HMG I has been determined. The most striking feature of this sequence is 
two identical palindrome sequences: pro-arg-gly-arg-pro, which together with a
third related sequence: gly-arg-pro-arg, may represent the binding sites of HMG I
to clusters of A-T base pairs in DNA.

PMID: 3619901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Eur J Biochem. 1987 Jul 1;166(1):21-6.

Fractionation and identification of metaphase-specific phosphorylated forms of
high-mobility-group proteins.

Lund T, Skålhegg BS, Holtlund J, Blomhoff HK, Laland SG.

In the present work chromatography on phosphocellulose and blue Sepharose have
been used to fractionate the different phosphorylated forms of the
low-molecular-mass high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins from metaphase arrested
HeLa cells. The proteins in the different fractions from the blue Sepharose
column were analysed by acetic acid/urea gel electrophoresis. Aliquots from the
same fractions were also treated with alkaline phosphatase and the
dephosphorylated and phosphorylated proteins were then compared by
electrophoresis to identify the phosphorylated proteins. It was found that HMG 14
consisted of a mixture of an unphosphorylated and two phosphorylated forms, while
HMG Y existed as one homogeneous superphosphorylated form. These findings remove 
previous uncertainty about phosphorylation of HMG Y and HMG 14. The presence of
HMG M and phosphorylated forms of HMG 17 was confirmed. Peptide mapping of HMG I 
and HMG M gave further evidence that HMG M is a superphosphorylated form of HMG
I, and it is suggested that the term HMG Im be used instead of HMG M. The results
suggested that HMG I and Y from HeLa cells contained at least three and two
metaphase-specific phosphate groups respectively, while HMG 14 and 17 both
consisted of an unphosphorylated form and two phosphorylated forms. A protein
corresponding to HMG Im from HeLa cells was also found to be present in
metaphase-arrested human lymphocytes, while HMG I and from two different rodent
species seemed to be less phosphorylated then their counterparts from HeLa
metaphase cells.

PMID: 3595612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. EMBO J. 1987 Jul;6(7):1981-7.

Elevated levels of a specific class of nuclear phosphoproteins in cells
transformed with v-ras and v-mos oncogenes and by cotransfection with c-myc and
polyoma middle T genes.

Giancotti V(1), Pani B, D'Andrea P, Berlingieri MT, Di Fiore PP, Fusco A, Vecchio
G, Philp R, Crane-Robinson C, Nicolas RH, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Universita di Trieste, Italy.

Transformation of a rat thyroid epithelial cell line (FRTL5-C12) with Kirsten and
Harvey murine sarcoma viruses (carrying the ras oncogenes) results in elevated
levels of three perchloric acid-soluble nuclear phosphoproteins. These three
proteins are also induced to high levels in the PC-C13 thyroid epithelial cell
line when transformed by the myeloproliferative sarcoma virus (carrying the v-mos
oncogene) and when transformed by transfection with the c-myc proto-oncogene
followed by infection with the polyoma leukaemia virus (PyMuLV) carry the polyoma
middle T antigen gene. Neither c-myc or PyMuLV alone induced high levels of the
three nuclear proteins. Untransformed thyroid fibroblasts have high levels of two
of the three proteins and can be transformed by PyMuLV alone resulting in the
appearance of the third protein. Transformation with Harvey sarcoma virus also
results in the induction of the third protein. The three phosphoproteins have
been purified by h.p.l.c. and shown to be related to the HeLa protein HMGI
already described. The results of these studies indicate that elevated levels of 
these HMGI-like proteins are associated with neoplastic transformation and/or
with an undifferentiated phenotype.

PMCID: PMC553586
PMID: 2820715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1987 Feb 27;143(1):260-5.

Specific A . T DNA sequence binding of RP-HPLC purified HMG-I.

Elton TS, Nissen MS, Reeves R.

HMG-I (alpha-protein) is a high mobility group protein which recognizes and binds
specifically to A . T rich double stranded DNA. We have investigated, by
electrophoretic shift assays and DNase I footprinting, the ability of
reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography purified HMG-I to bind to
specific A . T rich duplex DNA sequences. We show here that when HMG-I is
isolated and purified under denaturing conditions it retains its specific A . T
DNA binding activity. These results suggest that reverse-phase high performance
liquid chromatography to be the method of choice for the preparation of HMG-I.

PMID: 3470007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Chromatogr. 1986 Nov 21;369(2):341-8.

Method for complete separation of the high mobility group (HMG) proteins HMG I
and HMG Y from HMG 14 and HMG 17 and a procedure for purification of HMG I and
HMG Y.

Lund T, Holtlund J, Skålhegg B, Laland SG.

A purification procedure which separates the four low-molecular-weight high
mobility group (HMG) proteins, HMG 14, 17, I and Y, is described. The procedure
includes chromatography on phosphocellulose and Blue Sepharose combined with
reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography. The blue Sepharose column 
separates HMG I and Y completely from HMG 14 and 17, and should therefore be an
useful tool for the identification of these proteins which in several reports
have been confused with HMG 14 and 17. HMG I and Y on the one hand and HMG 14 and
17 on the other exhibited considerable differences in their affinities for Blue
Sepharose, probably reflecting fundamental differences in biological function.

PMID: 3805203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Anal Biochem. 1986 Aug 15;157(1):53-62.

Purification and postsynthetic modifications of Friend erythroleukemic cell high 
mobility group protein HMG-I.

Elton TS, Reeves R.

We have previously detected and purified a Friend erythroleukemic mouse cell
nonhistone chromatin protein having extraction and acid-solubility properties
like the low molecular weight "high mobility group" (HMG) nuclear proteins. We
show here that the electrophoretic properties and the amino acid composition of
this mouse cell "HMG-like" protein is comparable to those of the HMG-I proteins
isolated from human HeLa S3 cells, African green monkey cells, Ehrlich ascites
mouse cells, and rat fibroblast cells. Therefore, we have also designated the
Friend erythroleukemic mouse cell protein as HMG-I. In common with the other HMG 
proteins the Friend cell HMG-I protein can undergo a variety of
post-translational biochemical modifications including acetylation,
ADP-ribosylation, glycosylation, and phosphorylation. Surprisingly, in the course
of these studies we found that in vivo radiolabeling experiments revealed that
only two minor HMG-14 subspecies (and/or possibly a minor HMG-I subspecies) are
phosphorylated whereas HMG-1, -2, -17, and the major HMG-14 are not heavily
phosphorylated.

PMID: 3464222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Theriogenology. 1985 Aug;24(2):173-84.

Superovulation of beef heifers with Pergonal (HMG): A dose response trial.

McGowan MR(1), Braithwaite M, Jochle W, Maplecoft RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Herd Medicine and Theriogenology, W.C.V.M. University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Sask. S7N OWO Canada.

A study was designed to establish a dose-response curve for Pergonal (Human
Menopausal Gonadotrophin) and to compare its efficacy in inducing superovulation 
with commercial FSH-P. A recognized treatment schedule for HMG of two ampoules at
0, 12, 24 and 36 hours and one ampoule at 48, 60, 72, 84, 96 and 108 hours was
considered to be our 100% effective dose level. Fifty mature cycling cross-bred
beef heifers were superovulated on day 10 +/- 1 of their cycle. Treatment groups 
were HMG I (200% dose), HMG II (100% dose), HMG III )50% dose), HMG IV (25% dose)
and FSH-P (total dose 32 mg). All groups received 500 ug of cloprostenol 72 hours
after initiation of treatments. The heifers were observed for onset of estrus and
inseminated at 12, 24 and 36 hours. All heifers were slaughtered on day 7
post-estrus and their reproductive tracts removed for processing. All heifers
were bled once daily for progesterone estimation and four times daily for two
days beginning 24 hours after cloprostenol injection, for luteinizing hormone and
estradiol-17beta estimations. A dose response to HMG was demonstrated for number 
of corpora lutea and all classes of ova/embryos. HMG II (100% dose) closely
approximated the optimum dose for superovulation. There was no significant
difference between the HMG II group and the FSH-P group for mean number of
transferable embryos. The 200% HMG dose did not increase the numbers of
ovulations or ova recovered but did decrease the numbers of fertilized and
transferable ova.

PMID: 16726070  [PubMed]


346. Eur J Biochem. 1985 May 15;149(1):47-51.

Fractionation by high-performance liquid chromatography of the low-molecular-mass
high-mobility-group (HMG) chromosomal proteins present in proliferating rat cells
and an investigation of the HMG proteins present in virus transformed cells.

Goodwin GH, Cockerill PN, Kellam S, Wright CA.

The low-molecular-mass high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins from young rat thymus
nuclei were fractionated by high-performance liquid chromatography. Two proteins 
analogous to calf HMG14 and HMG17 were found together with a third major
component HMGI similar to that found in HeLa cells [Lund et al. (1983) FEBS Lett.
152, 163-167]. HMGI has as amino acid composition similar to but distinct from
HMG14 and HMG17. The three proteins form a family of proteins with HMG14 having
an amino acid composition intermediate between HMG17 and HMGI. HMGI is present in
proliferating fibroblasts and embryos but is present in very low levels in rat
liver, a non-dividing tissue, supporting the notion that HMGI is required for
proliferating cells. Fibroblasts transformed with avian sarcoma virus have high
levels of HMGI and an additional band HMGI' but the presence of HMGI and HMGI' is
not dependent on a functional src gene product.

PMID: 2986970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. FEBS Lett. 1985 Jan 28;180(2):275-9.

On the phosphorylation of low molecular mass HMG (high mobility group) proteins
in Ehrlich ascites cells.

Lund T, Holtlund J, Laland SG.

This paper shows that the low molecular mass HMG proteins 14 and 17 do not seem
to be phosphorylated in Ehrlich ascites cells whereas two other small HMG
proteins designated HMG I and Y are. Amino acid analysis and peptide mapping of
all four proteins demonstrated that HMG I and Y were not phosphorylated
modifications of HMG 14 or 17.

PMID: 3881281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Nucleic Acids Res. 1982 Aug 25;10(16):5059-72.

Influence of nonhistone chromatin protein HMG-1 on the enzymatic digestion of
purified DNA.

Shastri K, Isackson PJ, Fishback JL, Land MD, Reeck GR.

The effect of chicken erythrocyte High Mobility Group protein 1 (HMG-1) on the
enzymatic hydrolysis of purified double-stranded and single-stranded
bacteriophage lambda DNA was studied. HMG-1 was found to inhibit the digestion of
single- and double-stranded DNA by S1 nuclease and DNase I, respectively. HMG-I
increased the rate of hydrolysis of double-stranded DNA by micrococcal nuclease, 
particularly at low HMG-1/DNA ratios, and had little effect on the hydrolysis of 
single-stranded DNA by micrococcal nucleases, even at high HMG-1 DNA ratios. We
also present a semi-quantitative estimate that HMG-1 and HMG-2 occur in chromatin
from rapidly dividing, cultured rat hepatoma cells at about 8 times the level
that they occur in adult rat liver chromatin.

PMCID: PMC320851
PMID: 6291002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nucleic Acids Res. 1981 Jun 25;9(12):2761-75.

The characterisation of 1SF monomer nucleosomes from hen oviduct and the partial 
characterisation of a third HMG14/17-like in such nucleosomes.

Goodwin GH, Wright CA, Johns EW.

Nucleosomes released from oviduct nuclei during brief micrococcal nuclease
digestions are enriched in transcribed sequences (bloom K.S. and Anderson, J.N.
(1978) Cell, 15, 141-150). Such nucleosomes released into this 1Sf supernatant
fraction are enriched in proteins HMG14, 17 and a third lower molecular weight
protein which we show in this paper to be related to HMG14 and 17. This protein, 
which we call HMGY, runs as a doublet on polyacrylamide gels. A similar doublet
is present in smaller quantities in chicken erythrocyte nuclei. Monomer
nucleosomes in the 1SF supernatant have been separated by polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis into two main bands. The slower moving band contains the three
HMG proteins HMG14, 17 and Y but lacks histone H1.

PMCID: PMC326891
PMID: 6456450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Eur J Biochem. 1977 Sep;78(2):497-502.

Interaction of non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 with DNA.

Yu SS, Li HJ, Goodwin GH, Johns EW.

Interaction between non-histone protein HMG1 or HMG2 and DNA has been studied by 
using thermal denaturation and circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. We have made
the following observations. 1. The binding of each of these two proteins to DNA
stabilizes the latter, as shown by an increase in melting temperature of 20
degrees C (from 45 degrees C to about 65 degrees C). 2. There are 6.0 amino
acids/nucleotide in HMG1-bound DNA and 5.0 in HMGI-bound DNA which suggests that 
each HMB1 moleculae would cover about 20 base pairs of DNA and each HMG2 molecule
would cover about 25 base pairs. 3. The alpha-helical content of these two
non-histone proteins in the complexes, estimated from the CD value at 220 nm, is 
about one third to one half that of total proteins in calf thymus chromatin. 4.
DNA conformation is distorted only slightly by the binding of protein HMG1 or
HMG2. 5. Neither the melting nor the CD properties of HMG1-DNA or HMG2-DNA
complexes differ substantially whether they are prepared by NaCl-gradient
dialysis in urea or by direct mixing of protein and DNA at 0.15 M NaCl, followed 
by dialysis against the same buffer i.e. 0.25 mM EDTA (pH 8.0).

PMID: 913411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Arzneimittelforschung. 1975 Aug;25(8):1284-6.

Preliminary toxicological investigations of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acid
(HMG). I: Study of acute toxicity and of teratogenic activity in rats and mice.

Savoie LL, Lupien PJ.

The acute toxicity of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acid (HMG) was studied in mice. 
The LD50 was shown to be 7.33 g/kg p.o. and 3.23 g/kg i.p. Subtoxic and
pharmacological doses applied to mice and rats during gestation did not induce
malformation of the foetuses and offspring and did not affect the reproductive
performances of the dams. This compound is being investigated for its
hypolipidemic activity.

PMID: 1242359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh). 1966 Jun;52(2):169-85.

Purification and separation of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing
hormone (LH) from human postmenopausal gonadotrophin (HMG). I. Separation of FSH 
and LH by electrophoresis, chromatography and gel filtration procedures.

Donini P, Puzzuoli D, D'Alessio I, Lunenfeld B, Eshkol A, Parlow AF.

PMID: 5952703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


