
61. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Jul;62(7):2004-12. doi: 10.1002/art.27475.

Chondrocyte innate immune myeloid differentiation factor 88-dependent signaling
drives procatabolic effects of the endogenous Toll-like receptor 2/Toll-like
receptor 4 ligands low molecular weight hyaluronan and high mobility group box
chromosomal protein 1 in mice.

Liu-Bryan R(1), Terkeltaub R.

Author information: 
(1)VA Medical Center, San Diego, California 92161, USA. rliu@vapop.ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVE: Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR-2)/TLR-4-mediated innate immunity serves as 
a frontline antimicrobial host defense, but also modulates tissue remodeling and 
repair responses to endogenous ligands released during low-grade inflammation. We
undertook the present study to assess whether the endogenous TLR-2/TLR-4 ligands 
low molecular weight hyaluronan (LMW-HA) and high mobility group box chromosomal 
protein 1 (HMGB-1), which are increased in osteoarthritic (OA) joints, drive
procatabolic chondrocyte responses dependent on TLR-2 and TLR-4 signaling through
the cytosolic adaptor myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88).
METHODS: We studied mature femoral head cap cartilage explants and immature
primary knee articular chondrocytes from TLR-2/TLR-4-double-knockout,
MyD88-knockout, and congenic wild-type mice. Generation of nitric oxide (NO),
degradation of hyaluronan, release of HMGB-1, matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP-3),
and MMP-13, and protein expression of type X collagen were assessed by Griess
reaction and Western blotting analyses. Expression of messenger RNA for type II
and type X collagen, MMP-13, and RUNX-2 was examined by real-time quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Interleukin-1beta and TLR-2 and TLR-4 ligands induced both HMGB-1
release from chondrocytes and extracellular LMW-HA generation in normal
chondrocytes. TLR-2/TLR-4(-/-) and MyD88(-/-) mouse cartilage explants and
chondrocytes lost the capacity to mount procatabolic responses to both LMW-HA and
HMGB-1, demonstrated by >95% suppression of NO production (P < 0.01), and
attenuated induction of MMP-3 and MMP-13. Combined deficiency of TLR-2/TLR-4, or 
of MyD88 alone, also attenuated release of NO and blunted induction of MMP-3 and 
MMP-13 release. MyD88 was necessary for HMGB-1 and hyaluronidase 2 (which
generates LMW-HA) to induce chondrocyte hypertrophy, which is implicated in OA
progression.
CONCLUSION: MyD88-dependent TLR-2/TLR-4 signaling is essential for procatabolic
responses to LMW-HA and HMGB-1, and MyD88 drives chondrocyte hypertrophy.
Therefore, LMW-HA and HMGB-1 act as innate immune cytokine-like signals with the 
potential to modulate chondrocyte differentiation and function in OA progression.

PMCID: PMC2902571
PMID: 20506365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Inflammation. 2010 Aug;33(4):235-43. doi: 10.1007/s10753-009-9177-4.

Bacterial LPS-mediated acute inflammation-induced spermatogenic failure in rats: 
role of stress response proteins and mitochondrial dysfunction.

Metukuri MR(1), Reddy CM, Reddy PR, Reddanna P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad, AP, India.

Bacterial Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced inflammation is implicated in the
infection associated testicular tissue damage. Earlier, using a LPS induced acute
endotoxemic rat model, we have shown the involvement of inflammation-induced
oxidative stress in the impaired steroidogenesis and spermatogenesis. In the
present study, we report a significant induction (more than 2-fold) of stress
response proteins HSP-60, HMGB-1 and 2 in the testes, as early as 6 h after LPS
injection with a later decrease. This induction of acute stress is closely
followed by a significant reduction (74%) in Bcl2/Bax ratio along with leakage of
cytochrome c (3 fold increase, p < 0.05) from mitochondria and increased
caspase-3 activity levels (2.9 fold, p < 0.05) at 12 h and 24 h post LPS
injection respectively. Further studies on PARP cleavage revealed a pattern
similar to necrotic death during early periods (3 h to 24 h) and apoptosis at
later periods (24 h to 72 h) after LPS treatment. In conclusion, the present
study shows the involvement of stress response proteins and mitochondrial
dysfunction in LPS-induced germ cell death in male rats.

PMID: 20087639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Mar;31(3):521-31. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp333. Epub 2009 Dec 
30.

Expression of human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein alters keratinocytes
expression profile in response to tumor necrosis factor-alpha.

Boccardo E(1), Manzini Baldi CV, Carvalho AF, Rabachini T, Torres C, Barreta LA, 
Brentani H, Villa LL.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, São Paulo 01323-903,
Brazil. eboccardo@ludwig.org.br

Acute expression of E7 oncogene from human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 or HPV18 is
sufficient to overcome tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha cytostatic effect on
primary human keratinocytes. In the present study, we investigated the molecular 
basis of E7-induced TNF resistance through a comparative analysis of the effect
of this cytokine on the proliferation and global gene expression of normal and
E7-expressing keratinocytes. Using E7 functional mutants, we show that E7-induced
TNF resistance correlates with its ability to mediate pRb degradation and cell
transformation. On the other hand, this effect does not depend on E7 sequences
required to override DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest or extend keratinocyte 
life span. Furthermore, we identified a group of 66 genes whose expression
pattern differs between normal and E7-expressing cells upon cytokine treatment.
These genes are mainly involved in cell cycle regulation suggesting that their
altered expression may contribute to sustained cell proliferation even in the
presence of a cytostatic stimulus. Differential expression of TCN1
(transcobalamin I), IFI44 (Interferon-induced protein 44), HMGB2 (high-mobility
group box 2) and FUS [Fusion (involved in t(12;16) in malignant liposarcoma)]
among other genes were further confirmed by western-blot and/or real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Moreover, FUS upregulation was detected in
HPV-positive cervical high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions when compared
with normal cervical tissue. Further evaluation of the role of such genes in TNF 
resistance and HPV-associated disease development is warranted.

PMID: 20042637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Genetics. 2010 Mar;184(3):695-706. doi: 10.1534/genetics.109.111419. Epub 2009
Dec 28.

Ssz1 restores endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation in cells
expressing defective cdc48-ufd1-npl4 complex by upregulating cdc48.

Bosis E(1), Salomon D, Ohayon O, Sivan G, Bar-Nun S, Rabinovich E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated protein degradation (ERAD) pathway
eliminates aberrant proteins from the ER. The key role of Cdc48p-Ufd1p-Npl4p is
indicated by impaired ERAD in Saccharomyces cerevisiae with mutations in any of
this complex's genes. We identified SSZ1 in genetic screens for cdc48-10
suppressors and show that it upregulates Cdc48p via the pleiotropic drug
resistance (PDR) network. A pSSZ1 plasmid restored impaired ERAD-M of 6myc-Hmg2
in cdc48-10, ufd1-2, and npl4-1, while SSZ1 deletion had no effect. Ssz1p
activates Pdr1p, the PDR master regulator. Indeed, plasmids of PDR1 or its target
gene RPN4 increased cdc48-10p levels and restored ERAD-M in cdc48-10. Rpn4p
regulates transcription of proteasome subunits and CDC48, thus RPN4 deletion
abolished ERAD. However, the diminished proteasome level in Deltarpn4 was
sufficient for degrading a cytosolic substrate, whereas the impaired ERAD-M was
the result of diminished Cdc48p and was restored by expression of pCDC48. The
corrected ERAD-M in the hypomorphic strains of the Cdc48 partners ufd1-2 and
npl4-1 by the pCDC48 plasmid, and in cdc48-10 cells by the pcdc48-10 plasmid,
combined with the finding that neither pSSZ1 nor pcdc48-10 restored ERAD-L of
CPY*-HA, support our conclusion that Ssz1p suppressing effects is brought about
by upregulating Cdc48p.

PMCID: PMC2845338
PMID: 20038635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Lett. 2010 Jun 1;292(1):125-32. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.11.015. Epub
2009 Dec 24.

HMGB2 stabilizes p53 by interfering with E6/E6AP-mediated p53 degradation in
human papillomavirus-positive HeLa cells.

Lee D(1), Kwon JH, Kim EH, Kim ES, Choi KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, Pohang
University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Republic of Korea.

We investigated the effect of HMGB2 on the stability of p53 protein in HeLa
cells. Overexpression of HMGB2 led to accumulation of the p53 protein, whereas
HMGB2 knockdown with siRNA resulted in a substantial decrease in the p53 protein 
level. The HMGB2-dependent increase of p53 stability was specific for
HPV-positive HeLa cells as HCT116 and MCF7 cell lines did not demonstrate this
response. Co-expression of HMGB2 and HPV E6 prevented HPV E6 protein-mediated
ubiquitination and degradation of p53. FACS analysis exhibited that HeLa cells
transfected with HMGB2 displayed decreased cell proliferation, with a concomitant
increase of the p53 protein and arrest of the cell cycle, predominantly in G1
phase. Our findings collectively suggest that HMGB2 could stabilize p53 by
interfering with E6/E6AP-mediated p53 degradation in HPV-positive HeLa cells.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20036050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Blood. 2010 Jan 21;115(3):687-95. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-230094. Epub 2009
Nov 24.

High-mobility group protein HMGB2 regulates human erythroid differentiation
through trans-activation of GFI1B transcription.

Laurent B(1), Randrianarison-Huetz V, Maréchal V, Mayeux P, Dusanter-Fourt I,
Duménil D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS; Unité Mixte de Recherche [UMR] 8104), Paris, France.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2010 Sep 2;116(9):1627. Marchal, Vincent [corrected to Maréchal, Vincent].

Gfi-1B is a transcriptional repressor that is crucial for erythroid
differentiation: inactivation of the GFI1B gene in mice leads to embryonic death 
due to failure to produce differentiated red cells. Accordingly, GFI1B expression
is tightly regulated during erythropoiesis, but the mechanisms involved in such
regulation remain partially understood. We here identify HMGB2, a high-mobility
group HMG protein, as a key regulator of GFI1B transcription. HMGB2 binds to the 
GFI1B promoter in vivo and up-regulates its trans-activation most likely by
enhancing the binding of Oct-1 and, to a lesser extent, of GATA-1 and NF-Y to the
GFI1B promoter. HMGB2 expression increases during erythroid differentiation
concomitantly to the increase of GfI1B transcription. Importantly, knockdown of
HMGB2 in immature hematopoietic progenitor cells leads to decreased Gfi-1B
expression and impairs their erythroid differentiation. We propose that HMGB2
potentiates GATA-1-dependent transcription of GFI1B by Oct-1 and thereby controls
erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 19965638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 29;4(10):e7632. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007632.

Increasing the number of thyroid lesions classes in microarray analysis improves 
the relevance of diagnostic markers.

Fontaine JF(1), Mirebeau-Prunier D, Raharijaona M, Franc B, Triau S, Rodien P,
Goëau-Brissonniére O, Karayan-Tapon L, Mello M, Houlgatte R, Malthiery Y,
Savagner F.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Genetic markers for thyroid cancers identified by microarray analysis
have offered limited predictive accuracy so far because of the few classes of
thyroid lesions usually taken into account. To improve diagnostic relevance, we
have simultaneously analyzed microarray data from six public datasets covering a 
total of 347 thyroid tissue samples representing 12 histological classes of
follicular lesions and normal thyroid tissue. Our own dataset, containing about
half the thyroid tissue samples, included all categories of thyroid lesions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Classifier predictions were strongly affected by 
similarities between classes and by the number of classes in the training sets.
In each dataset, sample prediction was improved by separating the samples into
three groups according to class similarities. The cross-validation of
differential genes revealed four clusters with functional enrichments. The
analysis of six of these genes (APOD, APOE, CLGN, CRABP1, SDHA and TIMP1) in 49
new samples showed consistent gene and protein profiles with the class
similarities observed. Focusing on four subclasses of follicular tumor, we
explored the diagnostic potential of 12 selected markers (CASP10, CDH16, CLGN,
CRABP1, HMGB2, ALPL2, ADAMTS2, CABIN1, ALDH1A3, USP13, NR2F2, KRTHB5) by
real-time quantitative RT-PCR on 32 other new samples. The gene expression
profiles of follicular tumors were examined with reference to the mutational
status of the Pax8-PPARgamma, TSHR, GNAS and NRAS genes.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: We show that diagnostic tools defined on the basis of
microarray data are more relevant when a large number of samples and tissue
classes are used. Taking into account the relationships between the thyroid tumor
pathologies, together with the main biological functions and pathways involved,
improved the diagnostic accuracy of the samples. Our approach was particularly
relevant for the classification of microfollicular adenomas.

PMCID: PMC2764086
PMID: 19893615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nature. 2009 Nov 5;462(7269):99-103. doi: 10.1038/nature08512.

HMGB proteins function as universal sentinels for nucleic-acid-mediated innate
immune responses.

Yanai H(1), Ban T, Wang Z, Choi MK, Kawamura T, Negishi H, Nakasato M, Lu Y,
Hangai S, Koshiba R, Savitsky D, Ronfani L, Akira S, Bianchi ME, Honda K, Tamura 
T, Kodama T, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The activation of innate immune responses by nucleic acids is crucial to
protective and pathological immunities and is mediated by the transmembrane
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytosolic receptors. However, it remains unknown
whether a mechanism exists that integrates these nucleic-acid-sensing systems.
Here we show that high-mobility group box (HMGB) proteins 1, 2 and 3 function as 
universal sentinels for nucleic acids. HMGBs bind to all immunogenic nucleic
acids examined with a correlation between affinity and immunogenic potential.
Hmgb1(-/-) and Hmgb2(-/-) mouse cells are defective in type-I interferon and
inflammatory cytokine induction by DNA or RNA targeted to activate the cytosolic 
nucleic-acid-sensing receptors; cells in which the expression of all three HMGBs 
is suppressed show a more profound defect, accompanied by impaired activation of 
the transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear
factor (NF)-kappaB. The absence of HMGBs also severely impairs the activation of 
TLR3, TLR7 and TLR9 by their cognate nucleic acids. Our results therefore
indicate a hierarchy in the nucleic-acid-mediated activation of immune responses,
wherein the selective activation of nucleic-acid-sensing receptors is contingent 
on the more promiscuous sensing of nucleic acids by HMGBs. These findings may
have implications for understanding the evolution of the innate immune system and
for the treatment of immunological disorders.

PMID: 19890330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Autoimmunity. 2009 May;42(4):308-10.

High mobility group B2 is secreted by myeloid cells and has mitogenic and
chemoattractant activities similar to high mobility group B1.

Pusterla T(1), de Marchis F, Palumbo R, Bianchi ME.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Scientific Institute, via Olgettina 58, 20132, Milan, Italy.

High mobility group B box (HMGB) proteins are a family of chromatin proteins made
up of two basic DNA binding domains, HMG box A and B, and a C-terminal acidic
tail. HMGB have a highly conserved sequence, but different expression pattern:
HMGB1 is almost ubiquitous, whereas the others are highly expressed in only a few
tissues in adults. We previously demonstrated that HMGB1 is released by necrotic 
cells and has chemoattractant activity for inflammatory and stem cells, via
binding to receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE). HMGB1 can be
actively secreted by inflammatory cells. Here, we report that also HMGB2 can be
secreted by THP-1 cells, and promotes proliferation and migration of endothelial 
cells. These functions of HMGB2 are exerted via engagement of RAGE, whose
blockade completely abrogates cell responses. Since extracellular HMGB2 has been 
detected in the blood and other biological fluids, it might be necessary to
target HMGB2 at the same time as HMGB1 for therapeutical efficacy.

PMID: 19811285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 29;106(39):16817-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904414106. Epub 2009 Sep 10.

Chromatin protein HMGB2 regulates articular cartilage surface maintenance via
beta-catenin pathway.

Taniguchi N(1), Caramés B, Kawakami Y, Amendt BA, Komiya S, Lotz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Arthritis Research, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

The superficial zone (SZ) of articular cartilage is critical in maintaining
tissue function and homeostasis and represents the site of the earliest changes
in osteoarthritis. Mechanisms that regulate the unique phenotype of SZ
chondrocytes and maintain SZ integrity are unknown. We recently demonstrated that
expression of the chromatin protein high mobility group box (HMGB) protein 2 is
restricted to the SZ in articular cartilage suggesting a transcriptional
regulation involving HMGB2 in SZ. Here, we show that an interaction between HMGB2
and the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway regulates the maintenance of the SZ. We found
that the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is active specifically in the SZ in normal
mouse knee joints and colocalizes with HMGB2. Both Wnt signaling and HMGB2
expression decrease with aging in mouse joints. Our molecular studies show that
HMGB2 enhances the binding of Lef-1 to its target sequence and potentiates
transcriptional activation of the Lef-1-beta-catenin complex. The HMG domain
within HMGB2 is crucial for interaction with Lef-1, suggesting that both HMGB2
and HMGB1 may be involved in this function. Furthermore, conditional deletion of 
beta-catenin in cultured mouse chondrocytes induced apoptosis. These findings
define a pathway where protein interactions of HMGB2 and Lef-1 enhance Wnt
signaling and promote SZ chondrocyte survival. Loss of the HMGB2-Wnt signaling
interaction is a new mechanism in aging-related cartilage pathology.

PMCID: PMC2757822
PMID: 19805379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Nov;37(20):6765-83. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp750. Epub 2009
Sep 15.

Biophysical characterizations of human mitochondrial transcription factor A and
its binding to tumor suppressor p53.

Wong TS(1), Rajagopalan S, Freund SM, Rutherford TJ, Andreeva A, Townsley FM,
Petrovich M, Fersht AR.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Protein Engineering, Medical Research Council, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a multi-functional protein, 
involved in different aspects of maintaining mitochondrial genome integrity. In
this report, we characterized TFAM and its interaction with tumor suppressor p53 
using various biophysical methods. DNA-free TFAM is a thermally unstable protein 
that is in equilibrium between monomers and dimers. Self-association of TFAM is
modulated by its basic C-terminal tail. The DNA-binding ability of TFAM is mainly
contributed by its first HMG-box, while the second HMG-box has low-DNA-binding
capability. We also obtained backbone resonance assignments from the NMR spectra 
of both HMG-boxes of TFAM. TFAM binds primarily to the N-terminal transactivation
domain of p53, with a K(d) of 1.95 +/- 0.19 microM. The C-terminal regulatory
domain of p53 provides a secondary binding site for TFAM. The TFAM-p53-binding
interface involves both TAD1 and TAD2 sub-domains of p53. Helices alpha1 and
alpha2 of the HMG-box constitute the main p53-binding region. Since both TFAM and
p53 binds preferentially to distorted DNA, the TFAM-p53 interaction is implicated
in DNA damage and repair. In addition, the DNA-binding mechanism of TFAM and
biological relevance of the TFAM-p53 interaction are discussed.

PMCID: PMC2777442
PMID: 19755502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Toxicol In Vitro. 2010 Feb;24(1):310-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2009.08.008. Epub 2009
Aug 23.

A model to identify novel targets involved in oxidative stress-induced apoptosis 
in human lung epithelial cells by RNA interference.

Wixted WE(1), Kitson C, Colebrook JC, Roberts EJ, Fox SM, Kou JP, Li JU,
López-Boado YS.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Center for Excellence in Drug Discovery, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, King
of Prussia, PA 19406, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an increasing health problem
primarily associated with cigarette smoking, and one of the leading causes of
morbidity and mortality worldwide. Despite recent advances in understanding the
pathogenesis of the disease, overall patient outcome remains poor with limited
therapeutic intervention. Chronic inflammation, an imbalance between proteolytic 
and anti-proteolytic activities (leading to lung parenchyma destruction) and
excessive oxidative stress contribute to COPD pathophysiology. Oxidative
stress-triggered apoptosis of alveolar structural cells, including epithelial
cells, may be an important event in the development of COPD. In this study, we
developed a cell-based oxidative stress-induced apoptosis assay and performed a
high-throughput screen (HTS) using a human druggable genome siRNA library. Our
results have identified potential novel pathways (e.g. unfolded protein response,
proteosomal activity) and targets (e.g. MAP3K14, HMGB2) that regulate the
response of lung epithelial cells to oxidative stress. This assay has proven to
be a useful tool for the identification of potential new therapeutic targets for 
lung disease.

PMID: 19706323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochemistry. 2009 Jul 14;48(27):6502-7. doi: 10.1021/bi9004304.

Nucleosome binding properties and Co-remodeling activities of native and in vivo 
acetylated HMGB-1 and HMGB-2 proteins.

Ugrinova I(1), Pashev IG, Pasheva EA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 1113 Sofia,
Bulgaria.

The participation of HMGB-1 and -2 proteins in chromatin remodeling is
investigated. Here, the ability of these proteins and their posttranslationally
acetylated forms to affect SWI/SNF and RSC-dependent nucleosome mobilization was 
studied. Both proteins assisted nucleosome sliding induced by the two remodelers.
Following acetylation, these proteins acquire the ability to bind to core
particles, a property that has not yet been documented with parental proteins. We
further report that compared to the nonmodified proteins, acetylated HMGB-1 and
-2 exhibited both stronger binding to linker DNA-containing nucleosomes and a
higher co-remodeling activity. Acetylation of HMGB-1 and -2 proteins enhanced
binding of SWI/SNF to the nucleosome but did not affect its ATPase activity.

PMID: 19522541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. DNA Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;28(7):311-8. doi: 10.1089/dna.2009.0851.

Involvement of high mobility group B proteins in cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity
in squamous cell carcinoma of skin.

Sharma A(1), Ramanjaneyulu A, Ray R, Rajeswari MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

Cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (cisplatin) is a well-known anticancer drug
with high potency and efficacy against various types of human cancers. Although
it is widely accepted that the mechanism of cisplatin action is via apoptosis,
there is enough evidence to support that cisplatin-induced cell death also occurs
by other nonapoptotic pathways. Nonhistone, high mobility group (HMG) proteins
are known to bind cisplatin-damaged DNA, and we studied their expression during
cisplatin-induced cell death using immunohistochemistry, Western blot, and
RT-PCR. Results show that the cell death is primarily apoptotic during initial
stages of cisplatin treatment of skin tumors, and there is only marginal increase
in high mobility group B (HMGB) levels, indicating that HMGB are still bound to
nucleus. However, extended treatment of skin tumors with cisplatin caused
necrosis and showed significantly increased levels of HMGB, which suggests that
HMGB thus released from nuclei act as cytokine and trigger inflammatory response 
leading to necrosis. Present results clearly indicate a strong association
between HMGB proteins and cisplatin-induced cell death that is dominantly
apoptotic or necrotic depending on the duration of cisplatin exposure. Because of
their important implication in the outcome of cancer chemotherapy, HMGB proteins 
can be interesting therapeutic targets.

PMID: 19435426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. FEMS Yeast Res. 2009 May;9(3):381-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2009.00485.x.

The YTA7 gene is involved in the regulation of the isoprenoid pathway in the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Kuranda K(1), Grabinska K, Berges T, Karst F, Leberre V, Sokol S, François J,
Palamarczyk G.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, INSA, UPS, INP, Toulouse, France.

The isoprenoid pathway in yeasts is important not only for sterol biosynthesis
but also for the production of nonsterol molecules, deriving from farnesyl
diphosphate (FPP), implicated in N-glycosylation and biosynthesis of heme and
ubiquinones. FPP formed from mevalonate in a reaction catalyzed by FPP synthase
(Erg20p). In order to investigate the regulation of Erg20p in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, we searched for its protein partners using a two-hybrid screen, and
identified five interacting proteins, among them Yta7p. Subsequently, we showed
that Yta7p was a membrane-associated protein localized both to the nucleus and to
the endoplasmic reticulum. Deletion of YTA7 affected the enzymatic activity of
cis-prenyltransferase (the enzyme that utilizes FPP for dolichol biosynthesis)
and the cellular levels of isoprenoid compounds. Additionally, it rendered cells 
hypersensitive to lovastatin, an inhibitor of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme
A reductase (HMGR) that acts upstream of FPP synthase in the isoprenoid pathway. 
While HMGR is encoded by two genes, HMG1 and HMG2, only HMG2 overexpression was
able to restore growth of the yta7Delta cells in the presence of lovastatin.
Moreover, the expression level of the S. cerevisiae YTA7 gene was altered upon
impairment of the isoprenoid pathway not only by lovastatin but also by zaragozic
acid, an inhibitor of squalene synthase. Altogether, these results provide
substantial evidence of Yta7p involvement in the regulation of isoprenoid
biosynthesis.

PMID: 19416104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Apr;8(4):864-72. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0695.

Chromatin-associated proteins HMGB1/2 and PDIA3 trigger cellular response to
chemotherapy-induced DNA damage.

Krynetskaia NF(1), Phadke MS, Jadhav SH, Krynetskiy EY.

Author information: 
(1)Temple University School of Pharmacy, 3307 North Broad Street, Philadelphia,
PA 19140, USA.

The identification of new molecular components of the DNA damage signaling
cascade opens novel avenues to enhance the efficacy of chemotherapeutic drugs.
High-mobility group protein 1 (HMGB1) is a DNA damage sensor responsive to the
incorporation of nonnatural nucleosides into DNA; several nuclear and cytosolic
proteins are functionally integrated with HMGB1 in the context of DNA damage
response. The functional role of HMGB1 and HMGB1-associated proteins
(high-mobility group protein B2, HMGB2; glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase,
GAPDH; protein disulfide isomerase family A member 3, PDIA3; and heat shock 70
kDa protein 8, HSPA8) in DNA damage response was assessed in human carcinoma
cells A549 and UO31 by transient knockdown with short interfering RNAs. Using the
cell proliferation assay, we found that knockdown of HMGB1-associated proteins
resulted in 8-fold to 50-fold decreased chemosensitivity of A549 cells to
cytarabine. Western blot analysis and immunofluorescent microscopy were used to
evaluate genotoxic stress markers in knocked-down cancer cells after 24 to 72
hours of incubation with 1 micromol/L of cytarabine. Our results dissect the
roles of HMGB1-associated proteins in DNA damage response: HMGB1 and HMGB2
facilitate p53 phosphorylation after exposure to genotoxic stress, and PDIA3 has 
been found essential for H2AX phosphorylation (no gamma-H2AX accumulated after
24-72 hours of incubation with 1 micromol/L of cytarabine in PDIA3 knockdown
cells). We conclude that phosphorylation of p53 and phosphorylation of H2AX occur
in two distinct branches of the DNA damage response. These findings identify new 
molecular components of the DNA damage signaling cascade and provide novel
promising targets for chemotherapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC2684979
PMID: 19372559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Mar 24;10:24. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-24.

HMGB1/2 can target DNA for illegitimate cleavage by the RAG1/2 complex.

Zhang M(1), Swanson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. MingZhang@creighton.edu

BACKGROUND: V(D)J recombination is initiated in antigen receptor loci by the
pairwise cleavage of recombination signal sequences (RSSs) by the RAG1 and RAG2
proteins via a nick-hairpin mechanism. The RSS contains highly conserved heptamer
(consensus: 5'-CACAGTG) and nonamer (consensus: 5'-ACAAAAACC) motifs separated by
either 12- or 23-base pairs of poorly conserved sequence. The high mobility group
proteins HMGB1 and HMGB2 (HMGB1/2) are highly abundant architectural DNA binding 
proteins known to promote RAG-mediated synapsis and cleavage of consensus
recombination signals in vitro by facilitating RSS binding and bending by the
RAG1/2 complex. HMGB1/2 are known to recognize distorted DNA structures such as
four-way junctions, and damaged or modified DNA. Whether HMGB1/2 can promote
RAG-mediated DNA cleavage at sites lacking a canonical RSS by targeting or
stabilizing structural distortions is unclear, but is important for understanding
the etiology of chromosomal translocations involving antigen receptor genes and
proto-oncogene sequences that do not contain an obvious RSS-like element.
RESULTS: Here we identify a novel DNA breakpoint site in the plasmid V(D)J
recombination substrate pGG49 (bps6197) that is cleaved by the RAG proteins via a
nick-hairpin mechanism. The bps6197 sequence lacks a recognizable heptamer at the
breakpoint (5'-CCTGACG-3') but contains a nonamer-like element (5'-ACATTAACC-3') 
30 base pairs from the cleavage site. We find that RAG-mediated bps6197 cleavage 
is promoted by HMGB1/2, requiring both HMG-box domains to be intact to facilitate
RAG-mediated cleavage, and is stimulated by synapsis with a 12-RSS. A
dyad-symmetric inverted repeat sequence lying 5' to the breakpoint is implicated 
as a target for HMGB1/2 activity.
CONCLUSION: We have identified a novel DNA sequence, called bps6197, that
supports standard V(D)J-type cleavage despite the absence of an apparent heptamer
motif. Efficient RAG-mediated bps6197 cleavage requires the presence of HMGB1/2, 
is stimulated by synapsis with a 12-RSS partner, and is directed in part by an
inverted repeat sequence adjacent to the DNA cleavage site. These results have
important implications for understanding how the RAG proteins can introduce a DNA
double-strand break at DNA sequences that do not contain an obvious heptamer-like
motif.

PMCID: PMC2666730
PMID: 19317908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Ther. 2009 Jun;17(6):1003-11. doi: 10.1038/mt.2009.22. Epub 2009 Feb 24.

High mobility group box2 promoter-controlled suicide gene expression enables
targeted glioblastoma treatment.

Balani P(1), Boulaire J, Zhao Y, Zeng J, Lin J, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, Singapore.

Achievement of specific tumor cell targeting remains a challenge for glioma gene 
therapy. We observed that the human high mobility group box2 (HMGB2) gene had a
low level of expression in normal human brain tissues, but was significantly
upregulated in glioblastoma tissues. With progressive truncation of a 5'-upstream
sequence of the HMGB2 gene, we identified a 0.5-kb fragment displaying a high
transcriptional activity in glioblastoma cells, but a low activity in normal
brain cells. To test the feasibility of using the HMGB2 promoter sequence in
targeted cancer therapy, we constructed a baculoviral vector expressing the
herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSVtk) gene driven by the HMGB2 promoter. 
Transduction with the viral vector induced cell death in glioblastoma cell lines 
in the presence of ganciclovir (GCV), but did not affect the survival of human
astrocytes and neurons. In a mouse xenograft model, intratumor injection of the
baculoviral vector suppressed the growth of human glioblastoma cells and
prolonged the survival of tumor-bearing mice. Our results suggest that the novel 
5' sequence of HMGB2 gene has a potential to be used as an efficient,
tumor-selective promoter in targeted vectors for glioblastoma gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC2835195
PMID: 19240692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochemistry. 2009 Mar 17;48(10):2125-34. doi: 10.1021/bi802269f.

Enhancement of DNA flexibility in vitro and in vivo by HMGB box A proteins
carrying box B residues.

Sebastian NT(1), Bystry EM, Becker NA, Maher LJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Creighton University, 2500 California Place, Omaha,
Nebraska 68178, USA.

HMGB proteins are abundant non-histone components of eukaryotic chromatin. The
biological function of DNA sequence-nonspecific HMGB proteins is obscure. These
proteins are composed of one or two conserved HMG box domains, each forming three
alpha-helices that fold into a sequence-nonspecific DNA-binding module
recognizing the DNA minor groove. Box A and box B homology domains have subtle
sequence differences such that box B domains bend DNA strongly while DNA bending 
by isolated box A domains is weaker. Both box A and box B domains preferentially 
bind to distorted DNA structures. Here we show using DNA cyclization kinetics
assays in vitro and Escherichia coli DNA looping assays in vivo that an isolated 
HMG box A domain derived from human HMGB2 folds poorly and does not enhance
apparent DNA flexibility. Surprisingly, substitution of a small number of
cationic residues from the N-terminal leader of a functional yeast box B protein,
Nhp6Ap, confers the ability to enhance DNA flexibility. These results demonstrate
important roles for cationic leader amino acids in HMGB folding, DNA interaction,
and DNA bending.

PMCID: PMC2668924
PMID: 19236006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Apr;37(7):2070-86. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp067. Epub 2009 Feb
17.

HMGB1 and HMGB2 proteins up-regulate cellular expression of human topoisomerase
IIalpha.

Stros M(1), Polanská E, Struncová S, Pospísilová S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Analysis of Chromosomal Proteins, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Institute of Biophysics, Brno, Czech Republic. stros@ibp.cz

Topoisomerase IIalpha (topo IIalpha) is a nuclear enzyme involved in several
critical processes, including chromosome replication, segregation and
recombination. Previously we have shown that chromosomal protein HMGB1 interacts 
with topo IIalpha, and stimulates its catalytic activity. Here we show the effect
of HMGB1 on the activity of the human topo IIalpha gene promoter in different
cell lines. We demonstrate that HMGB1, but not a mutant of HMGB1 incapable of DNA
bending, up-regulates the activity of the topo IIalpha promoter in human cells
that lack functional retinoblastoma protein pRb. Transient over-expression of pRb
in pRb-negative Saos-2 cells inhibits the ability of HMGB1 to activate the topo
IIalpha promoter. The involvement of HMGB1 and its close relative, HMGB2, in
modulation of activity of the topo IIalpha gene is further supported by
knock-down of HMGB1/2, as evidenced by significantly decreased levels of topo
IIalpha mRNA and protein. Our experiments suggest a mechanism of up-regulation of
cellular expression of topo IIalpha by HMGB1/2 in pRb-negative cells by
modulation of binding of transcription factor NF-Y to the topo IIalpha promoter, 
and the results are discussed in the framework of previously observed
pRb-inactivation, and increased levels of HMGB1/2 and topo IIalpha in tumors.

PMCID: PMC2673423
PMID: 19223331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jan 27;106(4):1181-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806062106. Epub 2009 Jan 12.

Aging-related loss of the chromatin protein HMGB2 in articular cartilage is
linked to reduced cellularity and osteoarthritis.

Taniguchi N(1), Caramés B, Ronfani L, Ulmer U, Komiya S, Bianchi ME, Lotz M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Arthritis Research, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common joint disease and typically begins with an
aging-related disruption of the articular cartilage surface. Mechanisms leading
to the aging-related cartilage surface degeneration remain to be determined.
Here, we demonstrate that nonhistone chromatin protein high-mobility group box
(HMGB) protein 2 is uniquely expressed in the superficial zone (SZ) of human
articular cartilage. In human and murine cartilage, there is an aging-related
loss of HMGB2 expression, ultimately leading to its complete absence. Mice
genetically deficient in HMGB2 (Hmgb2(-/-)) show earlier onset of and more severe
OA. This is associated with a profound reduction in cartilage cellularity
attributable to increased cell death. These cellular changes precede
glycosaminoglycan depletion and progressive cartilage erosions. Chondrocytes from
Hmgb2(-/-) mice are more susceptible to apoptosis induction in vitro. In
conclusion, HMGB2 is a transcriptional regulator specifically expressed in the SZ
of human articular cartilage and supports chondrocyte survival. Aging is
associated with a loss of HMGB2 expression and reduced cellularity, and this
contributes to the development of OA.

PMCID: PMC2633567
PMID: 19139395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jan 20;106(3):761-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811739106.
Epub 2009 Jan 9.

PTMap--a sequence alignment software for unrestricted, accurate, and
full-spectrum identification of post-translational modification sites.

Chen Y(1), Chen W, Cobb MH, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

We present sequence alignment software, called PTMap, for the accurate
identification of full-spectrum protein post-translational modifications (PTMs)
and polymorphisms. The software incorporates several features to improve
searching speed and accuracy, including peak selection, adjustment of inaccurate 
mass shifts, and precise localization of PTM sites. PTMap also automates rules,
based mainly on unmatched peaks, for manual verification of identified peptides. 
To evaluate the quality of sequence alignment, we developed a scoring system that
takes into account both matched and unmatched peaks in the mass spectrum.
Incorporation of these features dramatically increased both accuracy and
sensitivity of the peptide- and PTM-identifications. To our knowledge, PTMap is
the first algorithm that emphasizes unmatched peaks to eliminate false positives.
The superior performance and reliability of PTMap were demonstrated by confident 
identification of PTMs on 156 peptides from four proteins and validated by MS/MS 
of the synthetic peptides. Our results demonstrate that PTMap is a powerful
algorithm capable of identification of all possible protein PTMs with high
confidence.

PMCID: PMC2630079
PMID: 19136633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Mar;37(4):1107-14. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn1011. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

Mechanism of DNA flexibility enhancement by HMGB proteins.

Zhang J(1), McCauley MJ, Maher LJ 3rd, Williams MC, Israeloff NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The mechanism by which sequence non-specific DNA-binding proteins enhance DNA
flexibility is studied by examining complexes of double-stranded DNA with the
high mobility group type B proteins HMGB2 (Box A) and HMGB1 (Box A+B) using
atomic force microscopy. DNA end-to-end distances and local DNA bend angle
distributions are analyzed for protein complexes deposited on a mica surface. For
HMGB2 (Box A) binding we find a mean induced DNA bend angle of 78 degrees, with a
standard error of 1.3 degrees and a SD of 23 degrees, while HMGB1 (Box A+B)
binding gives a mean bend angle of 67 degrees, with a standard error of 1.3
degrees and a SD of 21 degrees. These results are consistent with analysis of the
observed global persistence length changes derived from end-to-end distance
measurements, and with results of DNA-stretching experiments. The moderately
broad distributions of bend angles induced by both proteins are inconsistent with
either a static kink model, or a purely flexible hinge model for DNA distortion
by protein binding. Therefore, the mechanism by which HMGB proteins enhance the
flexibility of DNA must differ from that of the Escherichia coli HU protein,
which in previous studies showed a flat angle distribution consistent with a
flexible hinge model.

PMCID: PMC2651801
PMID: 19129233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochemistry. 2008 Dec 16;47(50):13207-14. doi: 10.1021/bi801772k.

A novel family of plant DNA-binding proteins containing both HMG-box and AT-rich 
interaction domains.

Hansen FT(1), Madsen CK, Nordland AM, Grasser M, Merkle T, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49,
DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark.

The A/T-rich interaction domain (ARID) and the HMG-box domain represent
DNA-interaction modules that are found in sequence-specific as well as
nonsequence-specific DNA-binding proteins. Both domains are found in a variety of
DNA-interacting proteins in a wide range of eukaryotic organisms. Proteins that
contain both an ARID and an HMG-box domain, here termed ARID-HMG proteins, appear
to be specific for plants. This protein family is conserved in higher plants
(both mono- and dicot plants) as well as lower plants such as the moss
Physcomitrella. Since ARID-HMG proteins have not been studied experimentally, we 
have examined here two family members from Arabidopsis. The genes encoding
ARID-HMG1 and ARID-HMG2 are widely expressed in Arabidopsis but at different
levels. Subcellular localization experiments studying ARID-HMG1 and ARID-HMG2
fused to GFP by fluorescence microscopy show that both proteins localize
primarily to cell nuclei. Analyses of the DNA-binding properties using
electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that mediated by the HMG-box
domain, ARID-HMG1 binds structure specifically to DNA minicircles. Mediated by
the ARID, the protein binds preferentially to A/T-rich DNA, when compared with
G/C-rich DNA. Therefore, both DNA-binding domains contribute to the DNA
interactions of ARID-HMG1. Accordingly, the protein combines DNA-binding
properties characteristic of ARID and HMG-box proteins.

PMID: 19053246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Chembiochem. 2009 Jan 5;10(1):141-57. doi: 10.1002/cbic.200800471.

Photoaffinity isolation and identification of proteins in cancer cell extracts
that bind to platinum-modified DNA.

Guggenheim ER(1), Xu D, Zhang CX, Chang PV, Lippard SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA.

Comment in
    Chembiochem. 2009 Jan 5;10(1):73-4.

The activity of the anticancer drug cisplatin is a consequence of its ability to 
bind DNA. Platinum adducts bend and unwind the DNA duplex, creating recognition
sites for nuclear proteins. Following DNA damage recognition, the lesions will
either be repaired, facilitating cell viability, or if repair is unsuccessful and
the Pt adduct interrupts vital cellular functions, apoptosis will follow. With
the use of the benzophenone-modified cisplatin analogue Pt-BP6, 25 bp DNA
duplexes containing either a 1,2-d(G*pG*) intrastrand or a 1,3-d(G*pTpG*)
intrastrand crosslink were synthesized, where the asterisks designate platinated 
nucleobases. Proteins having affinity for these platinated DNAs were
photocrosslinked and identified in cervical, testicular, pancreatic and bone
cancer-cell nuclear extracts. Proteins identified in this manner include the DNA 
repair factors RPA1, Ku70, Ku80, Msh2, DNA ligase III, PARP-1, and DNA-PKcs, as
well as HMG-domain proteins HMGB1, HMGB2, HMGB3, and UBF1. The latter strongly
associate with the 1,2-d(G*pG*) adduct and weakly or not at all with the
1,3-d(G*pTpG*) adduct. The nucleotide excision repair protein RPA1 was
photocrosslinked only by the probe containing a 1,3-d(G*pTpG*) intrastrand
crosslink. The affinity of PARP-1 for platinum-modified DNA was established using
this type of probe for the first time. To ensure that the proteins were not
photocrosslinked because of an affinity for DNA ends, a 90-base dumbbell probe
modified with Pt-BP6 was investigated. Photocrosslinking experiments with this
longer probe revealed the same proteins, as well as some additional proteins
involved in chromatin remodeling, transcription, or repair. These findings reveal
a more complete list of proteins involved in the early steps of the mechanism of 
action of the cisplatin and its close analogue carboplatin than previously was
available.

PMCID: PMC2710532
PMID: 19053130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cancer Invest. 2008 Oct;26(8):843-51. doi: 10.1080/07357900801954210.

Overexpression of high mobility group (HMG) B1 and B2 proteins directly
correlates with the progression of squamous cell carcinoma in skin.

Sharma A(1), Ray R, Rajeswari MR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Science, New
Delhi, India.

High mobility group B (HMGB) chromosomal proteins, which plays important role in 
cancer and inflammation, were followed at various stages of the squamous cell
carcinoma of skin. Present results were analyzed by histopathology, BrdU assay,
immunohistochemistry, western blot and RT-PCR, which indicate that at early
stages of tumorigenesis, expression of HMGB (B1, B2), raised only by about 20%.
However, the advanced (> or =12 weeks) tumors showed significant (> or =80%)
increase in HMG levels. Using skin cancer model, we demonstrated that high levels
of HMGB directly correlate with the extent of neoplastic changes, and it appears 
that HMGB is an effective stimulus for cell differentiation, tumor progression,
and metastatic invasion.

PMID: 18798064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Oct;19(10):4506-20. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E07-11-1188. Epub 2008
Jul 30.

Genetic and structural analysis of Hmg2p-induced endoplasmic reticulum remodeling
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Federovitch CM(1), Jones YZ, Tong AH, Boone C, Prinz WA, Hampton RY.

Author information: 
(1)UCSD Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0347, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is highly plastic, and increased expression of
distinct single ER-resident membrane proteins, such as HMG-CoA reductase (HMGR), 
can induce a dramatic restructuring of ER membranes into highly organized arrays.
Studies on the ER-remodeling behavior of the two yeast HMGR isozymes, Hmg1p and
Hmg2p, suggest that they could be mechanistically distinct. We examined the
features of Hmg2p required to generate its characteristic structures, and we
found that the molecular requirements are similar to those of Hmg1p. However, the
structures generated by Hmg1p and Hmg2p have distinct cell biological features
determined by the transmembrane regions of the proteins. In parallel, we
conducted a genetic screen to identify HER genes (required for Hmg2p-induced ER
Remodeling), further confirming that the mechanisms of membrane reorganization by
these two proteins are distinct because most of the HER genes were required for
Hmg2p but not Hmg1p-induced ER remodeling. One of the HER genes identified was
PSD1, which encodes the phospholipid biosynthetic enzyme phosphatidylserine
decarboxylase. This direct connection to phospholipid biosynthesis prompted a
more detailed examination of the effects of Hmg2p on phospholipid mutants and
composition. Our analysis revealed that overexpression of Hmg2p caused
significant and specific growth defects in nulls of the methylation pathway for
phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis that includes the Psd1p enzyme. Furthermore,
increased expression of Hmg2p altered the composition of cellular phospholipids
in a manner that implied a role for PSD1. These phospholipid effects, unlike
Hmg2p-induced ER remodeling, required the enzymatic activity of Hmg2p. Together, 
our results indicate that, although related, Hmg2p- and Hmg1p-induced ER
remodeling are mechanistically distinct.

PMCID: PMC2555956
PMID: 18667535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jul;36(12):4009-21. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn353. Epub 2008
May 31.

Eukaryotic HMGB proteins as replacements for HU in E. coli repression loop
formation.

Becker NA(1), Kahn JD, Maher LJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

DNA looping is important for gene repression and activation in Escherichia coli
and is necessary for some kinds of gene regulation and recombination in
eukaryotes. We are interested in sequence-nonspecific architectural DNA-binding
proteins that alter the apparent flexibility of DNA by producing transient bends 
or kinks in DNA. The bacterial heat unstable (HU) and eukaryotic high-mobility
group B (HMGB) proteins fall into this category. We have exploited a sensitive
genetic assay of DNA looping in living E. coli cells to explore the extent to
which HMGB proteins and derivatives can complement a DNA looping defect in E.
coli lacking HU protein. Here, we show that derivatives of the yeast HMGB protein
Nhp6A rescue DNA looping in E. coli lacking HU, in some cases facilitating
looping to a greater extent than is observed in E. coli expressing normal levels 
of HU protein. Nhp6A-induced changes in the DNA length-dependence of repression
efficiency suggest that Nhp6A alters DNA twist in vivo. In contrast, human
HMGB2-box A derivatives did not rescue looping.

PMCID: PMC2475640
PMID: 18515834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jun 20;371(1):79-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.024. Epub 2008 Apr 14.

Transient HMGB protein interactions with B-DNA duplexes and complexes.

Zimmerman J(1), Maher LJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

HMGB proteins are abundant, non-histone proteins in eukaryotic chromatin. HMGB
proteins contain one or two conserved "HMG boxes" and can be sequence-specific or
nonspecific in their DNA binding. HMGB proteins cause strong DNA bending and bind
preferentially to deformed DNAs. We wish to understand how HMGB proteins increase
the apparent flexibility of non-distorted B-form DNA. We test the hypothesis that
HMGB proteins bind transiently, creating an ensemble of distorted DNAs with
rapidly interconverting conformations. We show that binding of B-form DNA by HMGB
proteins is both weak and transient under conditions where DNA cyclization is
strongly enhanced. We also detect novel complexes in which HMGB proteins
simultaneously bind more than one DNA duplex.

PMCID: PMC2408743
PMID: 18413230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 20;283(25):17030-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801637200. Epub 2008 
Apr 8.

High mobility group protein HMGB2 is a critical regulator of plasmodium oocyst
development.

Gissot M(1), Ting LM, Daly TM, Bergman LW, Sinnis P, Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The sexual cycle of Plasmodium is required for transmission of malaria from
mosquitoes to mammals, but how parasites induce the expression of genes required 
for the sexual stages is not known. We disrupted the Plasmodium yoelii gene
encoding high mobility group nuclear factor hmgb2, which encodes a DNA-binding
protein potentially implicated in transcriptional regulation of malaria gene
expression. We investigated its function in vivo in the vertebrate and
invertebrate hosts. Deltapyhmgb2 parasites develop into gametocytes but have
drastic impairment of oocyst formation. A global transcriptome analysis of the
Deltapyhmgb2 parasites identified approximately 30 genes whose expression is
down-regulated in the Deltapyhmgb2 parasites. These genes are conserved in all
malaria species, and more than 90% of these genes show a peak of mRNA expression 
at the gametocyte stage. Surprisingly, the transcripts coding for the Plasmodium 
berghei orthologues of those genes are stored and translated in the ookinete
stage. Therefore, sexual stage protein expression appears to be both
transcriptionally and translationally regulated with Plasmodium HMGB2 acting as
an important regulator of malaria sexual stage gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2427331
PMID: 18400754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Apr 1;9:32. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-32.

HMG-box domain stimulation of RAG1/2 cleavage activity is metal ion dependent.

Kriatchko AN(1), Bergeron S, Swanson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University
Medical Center, 2500 California Plaza, Omaha, NE, USA.
AlekseiKriatchko@creighton.edu

BACKGROUND: RAG1 and RAG2 initiate V(D)J recombination by assembling a synaptic
complex with a pair of antigen receptor gene segments through interactions with
their flanking recombination signal sequence (RSS), and then introducing a DNA
double-strand break at each RSS, separating it from the adjacent coding segment. 
While the RAG proteins are sufficient to mediate RSS binding and cleavage in
vitro, these activities are stimulated by the architectural DNA binding and
bending factors HMGB1 and HMGB2. Two previous studies (Bergeron et al., 2005, and
Dai et al., 2005) came to different conclusions regarding whether only one of the
two DNA binding domains of HMGB1 is sufficient to stimulate RAG-mediated binding 
and cleavage of naked DNA in vitro. Here we test whether this apparent
discrepancy is attributed to the choice of divalent metal ion and the
concentration of HMGB1 used in the cleavage reaction.
RESULTS: We show here that single HMG-box domains of HMGB1 stimulate RAG-mediated
RSS cleavage in a concentration-dependent manner in the presence of Mn2+, but not
Mg2+. Interestingly, the inability of a single HMG-box domain to stimulate
RAG-mediated RSS cleavage in Mg2+ is overcome by the addition of partner RSS to
promote synapsis. Furthermore, we show that mutant forms of HMGB1 which otherwise
fail to stimulate RAG-mediated RSS cleavage in Mg2+ can be substantially rescued 
when Mg2+ is replaced with Mn2+.
CONCLUSION: The conflicting data published previously in two different
laboratories can be substantially explained by the choice of divalent metal ion
and abundance of HMGB1 in the cleavage reaction. The observation that single
HMG-box domains can promote RAG-mediated 23-RSS cleavage in Mg2+ in the presence,
but not absence, of partner RSS suggests that synaptic complex assembly in vitro 
is associated with conformational changes that alter how the RAG and/or HMGB1
proteins bind and bend DNA in a manner that functionally replaces the role of one
of the HMG-box domains in RAG-HMGB1 complexes assembled on a single RSS.

PMCID: PMC2324110
PMID: 18380906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2008 Apr;99(3):199-206.

[Analysis of cytogenetic abnormalities in squamous cell carcinoma by array
comparative genomic hybridization].

[Article in Spanish]

Salgado R(1), Toll A, Espinet B, González-Roca E, Barranco CL, Serrano S, Solé F,
Pujol RM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica. Laboratorio de Citogenética y Biología
Molecular. Hospital del Mar. Barcelona. España.

INTRODUCTION: Few conventional cytogenetic studies of squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) have been performed to date. The introduction of cytogenetic techniques
such as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) has resolved some of the problems
associated with conventional cytogenetics. The aim of this study was to analyze
the presence of genetic abnormalities in a series of patients with SCC using the 
technique of array CGH.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study included 8 patients (7 men and 1 woman; mean age,
75 years) diagnosed with primary SCC. DNA was extracted from frozen tissue and
analyzed by array CGH.
RESULTS: All cases had genetic alterations, with gains more frequent than losses.
The chromosomal regions with gains, in descending order of frequency, were as
follows: 5p15.2, 9q31.3-q33.2, 13q, 18q22, 1p21-p22, 1q24-q25, 3p13, 4q33-q34
(HMGB2, SAP30), 20p12.2 (JAG1), 21q21.1, and Xq21.33. The region 9p13.1-p13.3 was
the only one to display recurrent loss. No correlation was observed between the
presence of gains or losses and the clinical and pathological characteristics of 
the tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to use the technique of array CGH to analyze
genetic alterations in SCC. The finding of certain previously described
aberrations (gain of 5p) suggests the existence of recurrent abnormalities.
Likewise, the observation of alterations in small regions of chromosome 1
highlights the sensitivity of the technique to detect small changes. Application 
of the technique to a larger series of cases will provide greater insight into
the genetic abnormalities implicated in the process of tumorigenesis in SCC.

PMID: 18358195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Acta Biochim Pol. 2008;55(1):21-6. Epub 2008 Feb 1.

High mobility group proteins stimulate DNA cleavage by apoptotic endonuclease
DFF40/CAD due to HMG-box interactions with DNA.

Kalinowska-Herok M(1), Widlak P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Radiobiology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice, Poland.

The DFF40/CAD endonuclease is primarily responsible for internucleosomal DNA
cleavage during the terminal stages of apoptosis. It has been previously
demonstrated that the major HMG-box-containing chromatin proteins HMGB1 and HMGB2
stimulate naked DNA cleavage by DFF40/CAD. Here we investigate the mechanism of
this stimulation and show that HMGB1 neither binds to DFF40/CAD nor enhances its 
ability for stable binding to DNA. Comparison of the stimulatory activities of
different truncated forms of HMGB1 protein indicates that a structural array of
two HMG-boxes is required for such stimulation. HMG-boxes are known to confer
specific local distortions of DNA structure upon binding. Interestingly, the
presence of DNA strand cross-links formed by cisplatin or transplatin, which may 
somehow mimic distortions induced by HMG-boxes, also affects DNA cleavage by the 
nuclease. The data presented suggest that changes induced in DNA conformation
upon HMG-box binding makes the substrate more accessible to cleavage by DFF40/CAD
nuclease and thus may contribute to preferential linker DNA cleavage during
apoptosis.

PMID: 18239742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Parasitol Int. 2008 Jun;57(2):150-7. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2007.11.005. Epub 2007
Dec 8.

High mobility group box (HMGB) proteins of Plasmodium falciparum: DNA binding
proteins with pro-inflammatory activity.

Kumar K(1), Singal A, Rizvi MM, Chauhan VS.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali 
Marg, New Delhi-110067, India.

High mobility group box chromosomal protein 1 (HMGB1), known as an abundant,
non-histone architectural chromosomal protein, is highly conserved across
different species. Homologues of HMGB1 were identified and cloned from malaria
parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. Sequence analyses showed that the P. falciparum 
HMGB1 (PfHMGB1) exhibits 45, 23 and 18%, while PfHMGB2 shares 42, 21 and 17%
homology with Saccharomyces cerevisiae, human and mouse HMG box proteins
respectively. Parasite PfHMGB1and PfHMGB2 proteins contain one HMG Box domain
similar to B-Box of mammalian HMGB1. Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA) 
showed that recombinant PfHMGB1 and PfHMGB2 bind to DNA. Immunofluorescence Assay
using specific antibodies revealed that these proteins are expressed abundantly
in the ring stage nuclei. Significant levels of PfHMGB1 and PfHMGB2 were also
present in the parasite cytosol at trophozoite and schizont stages. Both, PfHMGB1
and PfHMGB2 were found to be potent inducers of pro-inflammatory cytokines such
as TNFalpha from mouse peritoneal macrophages as analyzed by both reverse
transcription PCR and by ELISA. These results suggest that secreted PfHMGB1 and
PfHMGB2 may be responsible for eliciting/ triggering host inflammatory immune
responses associated with malaria infection.

PMID: 18234548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 May;22(5):1141-53. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0460. Epub 2008 Jan 
24.

High-mobility group box proteins modulate tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression 
in osteoclastogenesis via a novel deoxyribonucleic acid sequence.

Yamoah K(1), Brebene A, Baliram R, Inagaki K, Dolios G, Arabi A, Majeed R, Amano 
H, Wang R, Yanagisawa R, Abe E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

We have previously shown that mice lacking the TSH receptor (TSHR) exhibit
osteoporosis due to enhanced osteoclast formation. The fact that this enhancement
is not observed in double-null mice of TSHR and TNFalpha suggests that TNFalpha
overexpression in osteoclast progenitors (macrophages) may be involved. It is
unknown how TNFalpha expression is regulated in osteoclastogenesis. Here, we
describe a receptor activator for nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL)-responsive
sequence (CCG AGA CAG AGG TGT AGG GCC), spanning from -157 to -137 bp of the
5'-flanking region of the TNFalpha gene, which functions as a cis-acting
regulatory element. We further show how RANKL treatment stimulates the
high-mobility group box proteins (HMGB) HMGB1 and HMGB2 to bind the
RANKL-responsive sequence and up-regulates TNFalpha transcription. Exogenous HMGB
elicits the expression of cytokines, including TNFalpha, as well as osteoclast
formation. Conversely, TSH inhibits the expression of HMGB and TNFalpha and the
formation of osteoclasts. These results suggest that HMGB play a pivotal role in 
osteoclastogenesis. We also show a direct correlation between the expression of
HMGB and TNFalpha and osteoclast formation in TSHR-null mice and TNFalpha-null
mice. Taken together, we conclude that HMGB and TNFalpha play critical roles in
the regulation of osteoclastogenesis and the remodeling of bone.

PMCID: PMC2366181
PMID: 18218727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 14;283(11):7166-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M705893200. Epub 2008 
Jan 3.

A proteasomal ATPase contributes to dislocation of endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) substrates.

Lipson C(1), Alalouf G, Bajorek M, Rabinovich E, Atir-Lande A, Glickman M,
Bar-Nun S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) eliminates aberrant
proteins from the ER by dislocating them to the cytoplasm where they are tagged
by ubiquitin and degraded by the proteasome. Six distinct AAA-ATPases (Rpt1-6) at
the base of the 19S regulatory particle of the 26S proteasome recognize, unfold, 
and translocate substrates into the 20S catalytic chamber. Here we show unique
contributions of individual Rpts to ERAD by employing equivalent conservative
substitutions of the invariant lysine in the ATP-binding motif of each Rpt
subunit. ERAD of two substrates, luminal CPY*-HA and membrane 6myc-Hmg2, is
inhibited only in rpt4R and rpt2RF mutants. Conversely, in vivo degradation of a 
cytosolic substrate, DeltassCPY*-GFP, as well as in vitro cleavage of
Suc-LLVY-AMC are hardly affected in rpt4R mutant yet are inhibited in rpt2RF
mutant. Together, we find that equivalent mutations in RPT4 and RPT2 result in
different phenotypes. The Rpt4 mutation is manifested in ERAD defects, whereas
the Rpt2 mutation is manifested downstream, in global proteasomal activity.
Accordingly, rpt4R strain is particularly sensitive to ER stress and exhibits an 
activated unfolded protein response, whereas rpt2RF strain is sensitive to
general stress. Further characterization of Rpt4 involvement in ERAD reveals that
it participates in CPY*-HA dislocation, a function previously attributed to
p97/Cdc48, another AAA-ATPase essential for ERAD of CPY*-HA but dispensable for
proteasomal degradation of DeltassCPY*-GFP. Pointing to Cdc48 and Rpt4
overlapping functions, excess Cdc48 partially restores impaired ERAD in rpt4R,
but not in rpt2RF. We discuss models for Cdc48 and Rpt4 cooperation in ERAD.

PMID: 18174173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Ther. 2008 Feb;16(2):359-69. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Transcriptional activities of the Sleeping Beauty transposon and shielding its
genetic cargo with insulators.

Walisko O(1), Schorn A, Rolfs F, Devaraj A, Miskey C, Izsvák Z, Ivics Z.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

The Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposable element shows efficient transposition in
human cells, and provides long-term transgene expression in preclinical animal
models. Random chromosomal insertion of SB vectors represents a safety issue in
human gene therapeutic applications, due to potential genotoxic effects
associated with transposon integration. We investigated the transcriptional
activities of SB in order to assess its potential to alter host gene expression
upon integration. The untranslated regions (UTRs) of the transposon direct
convergent, inward-directed transcription. Transcription from the 5'-UTR of SB is
upregulated by the host-encoded factor high-mobility group 2-like 1 (HMG2L1), and
requires a 65-base pair (bp) region not present in commonly used SB vectors. The 
SB transposase antagonizes the effect of HMG2L1, suggesting that natural
transposase expression is under a negative feedback regulation. SB transposon
vectors lacking the 65-bp region associated with HMG2L1-dependent upregulation
exhibit benign transcriptional activities, at a level up to 100-times lower than 
that of the murine leukemia virus (MLV) long terminal repeat (LTR). Incorporation
of chicken beta-globin HS4 insulator sequences in SB-based vectors reduces the
transactivation of model promoters by transposon-borne enhancers, and thus may
lower the risk of transcriptional activation of host genes situated close to a
transposon insertion site.

PMID: 18071335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. FEBS J. 2007 Dec;274(24):6488-99. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A possesses multiple subcellular
targeting signals.

Pastukh V(1), Shokolenko I, Wang B, Wilson G, Alexeyev M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of South Alabama,
Mobile, AL 36688, USA.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a member of a high-mobility
group (HMG) family represented mostly by nuclear proteins. Although nuclear
localization of TFAM has been demonstrated in some tumors and after treatment of 
tumor cells with anticancer drugs, the significance of these observations has not
been fully elucidated. Here we report that both TFAM overexpression and
impairment of its mitochondrial targeting can result in nuclear accumulation of
the protein. Both M1 and M7 methionines of human TFAM (hTFAM) can be used for
translation initiation with almost equal efficiency resulting in two
polypeptides. The shorter polypeptide, however, is not located in the nucleus,
despite truncation in the mitochondrial targeting sequence, and both isoforms are
targeted to mitochondria with similar efficiency. We further demonstrate that
nuclear TFAM confers significant cytoprotection against the chemotherapeutic
drugs etoposide, camptothecin, and cisplatin. Three regions of hTFAM [HMG-like
domain 1 (HMG1) and HMG-like domain 2 (HMG2), as well as the tail region] can
effect nuclear accumulation of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) fusions.
The HMG1 domain contains a bipartite nuclear localization sequence whose identity
is supported by site-directed mutagenesis. However, this bipartite nuclear
localization sequence is weak, and both N-terminal and C-terminal flanking
sequences enhance the nuclear targeting of EGFP. Finally, several mutations in
the HMG1 domain increased the mitochondrial targeting of the EGFP fusions,
suggesting that the mitochondrial targeting sequence of hTFAM may extend beyond
the cleavable presequence.

PMID: 18028422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Gene. 2008 Jan 15;407(1-2):86-97. Epub 2007 Oct 13.

Chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB-type occurring in the 
moss Physcomitrella patens.

Kiilerich B(1), Stemmer C, Merkle T, Launholt D, Gorr G, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49,
DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family are chromatin-associated
proteins that act as architectural factors in nucleoprotein structures, which
regulate DNA-dependent processes including transcription. Members of the HMGB
family have been characterised from various mono-and dicot plants, but not from
lower plant species. Here, we have identified three candidate HMGB proteins
encoded in the genome of the moss Physcomitrella patens. The structurally similar
HMGB2 and HMGB3 proteins display the typical overall structure of higher plant
HMGB proteins consisting of a central HMG-box DNA-binding domain that is flanked 
by a basic N-terminal and an acidic C-terminal domain. The HMGB1 protein differs 
from higher plant HMGB proteins by having a very extensive N-terminal domain and 
by lacking the acidic C-terminal domain. Like higher plant HMGB proteins, HMGB3
localises to the cell nucleus, but HMGB1 is targeted to plastids. Analysis of the
HMG-box domains of HMGB1 and HMGB3 by CD revealed that HMGB1box and the HMGB3box 
have an alpha-helical structure. While the HMGB3box interacts with DNA comparable
to typical higher plant counterparts, the HMGB1box has only a low affinity for
DNA. Cotransformation assays in Physcomitrella protoplasts demonstrated that
expression of HMGB3 resulted in repression of reporter gene expression. In
summary, our data show that functional HMGB-type proteins occur in Physcomitrella
and most likely in other lower plant species.

PMID: 17980517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2007 Oct 31;2(10):e1087.

Basonuclin-null mutation impairs homeostasis and wound repair in mouse corneal
epithelium.

Zhang X(1), Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

At least two cellular processes are required for corneal epithelium homeostasis
and wound repair: cell proliferation and cell-cell adhesion. These processes are 
delicately balanced to ensure the maintenance of normal epithelial function.
During wound healing, these processes must be reprogrammed in coordination to
achieve a rapid re-epithelialization. Basonuclin (Bnc1) is a cell-type-specific
transcription factor expressed mainly in the proliferative keratinocytes of
stratified epithelium (e.g., corneal epithelium, epidermis and esophageal
epithelium) and the gametogenic cells in testis and ovary. Our previous work
suggested that basonuclin could regulate transcription of ribosomal RNA genes
(rDNA) and genes involved in chromatin structure, transcription regulation,
cell-cell junction/communication, ion-channels and intracelllular transportation.
However, basonuclin's role in keratinocytes has not been demonstrated in vivo.
Here we show that basonuclin-null mutation disrupts corneal epithelium
homeostasis and delays wound healing by impairing cell proliferation. In
basonuclin-null cornea epithelium, RNA polymerase I (Pol I) transcription is
perturbed. This perturbation is unique because it affects transcripts from a
subset of rDNA. Basonuclin-null mutation also perturbs RNA polymerase II (Pol II)
transcripts from genes encoding chromatin structure proteins histone 3 and HMG2, 
transcription factor Gli2, gap-junction protein connexin 43 and adheren
E-cadherin. In most cases, a concerted change in mRNA and protein level is
observed. However, for E-cadherin, despite a notable increase in its mRNA level, 
its protein level was reduced. In conclusion, our study establishes basonuclin as
a regulator of corneal epithelium homeostasis and maintenance. Basonuclin likely 
coordinates functions of a subset of ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA) and a group of
protein coding genes in cellular processes critical for the regulation of cell
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2034529
PMID: 17971852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Mol Biol. 2007 Dec 7;374(4):993-1004. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

HMGB binding to DNA: single and double box motifs.

McCauley MJ(1), Zimmerman J, Maher LJ 3rd, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    J Mol Biol. 2009 Mar 27;387(2):520.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins are nuclear proteins believed to significantly
affect DNA interactions by altering nucleic acid flexibility. Group B (HMGB)
proteins contain HMG box domains known to bind to the DNA minor groove without
sequence specificity, slightly intercalating base pairs and inducing a strong
bend in the DNA helical axis. A dual-beam optical tweezers system is used to
extend double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) in the absence as well as presence of a single
box derivative of human HMGB2 [HMGB2(box A)] and a double box derivative of rat
HMGB1 [HMGB1(box A+box B)]. The single box domain is observed to reduce the
persistence length of the double helix, generating sharp DNA bends with an
average bending angle of 99+/-9 degrees and, at very high concentrations,
stabilizing dsDNA against denaturation. The double box protein contains two
consecutive HMG box domains joined by a flexible tether. This protein also
reduces the DNA persistence length, induces an average bending angle of 77+/-7
degrees , and stabilizes dsDNA at significantly lower concentrations. These
results suggest that single and double box proteins increase DNA flexibility and 
stability, albeit both effects are achieved at much lower protein concentrations 
for the double box. In addition, at low concentrations, the single box protein
can alter DNA flexibility without stabilizing dsDNA, whereas stabilization at
higher concentrations is likely achieved through a cooperative binding mode.

PMCID: PMC2117627
PMID: 17964600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Jan 5;147B(1):59-67.

Gene-based SNP mapping of a psychotic bipolar affective disorder linkage region
on 22q12.3: association with HMG2L1 and TOM1.

Potash JB(1), Buervenich S, Cox NJ, Zandi PP, Akula N, Steele J, Rathe JA,
Avramopoulos D, Detera-Wadleigh SD, Gershon ES, DePaulo JR Jr, Feinberg AP,
McMahon FJ; NIMH Genetics Initiative Bipolar Disorder Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
21287-7419, USA. jpotash@jhmi.edu

Genetic linkage studies in both bipolar affective disorder (BPAD) and
schizophrenia have implicated overlapping regions of chromosome 22q. We
previously reported that BPAD pedigrees containing multiple members with
psychotic symptoms showed suggestive linkage to chromosome 22q12.3. Now we have
tested 189 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning a 3 Mb region around
the linkage peak for association with BPAD in 305 families, unrelated cases, and 
controls. SNPs were selected in or near genes, resulting in coverage at a density
of 1 SNP per 6.7 kb across the 22 annotated genes in the region. The strongest
signal emerged from family-based association analysis of an 11-SNP, 54 kb
haplotype straddling the gene HMG2L1 and part of TOM1. A 3-marker haplotype of
SNPs within TOM1 was associated with BPAD (allele-wise P = 0.0011) and with
psychotic BPAD (allele-wise P = 0.00049). As hypothesized, the mean odds ratio
for the risk alleles across the region was 1.39 in the psychotic but only 0.96 in
the non-psychotic subset. Genotype-wise analyses yielded similar results, but the
psychotic/non-psychotic distinction was more pronounced with mean odds ratios of 
1.91 versus 0.8. Permutation of genotype-wise results for rs2413338 in HMG2L1
showed an empirical P = 0.037 for the difference between subsets. HMG2L1 is a
negative regulator of Wnt signaling, a pathway of interest in psychotic BPAD as
it is activated by both mood stabilizer and anti-psychotic medications. Further
work is needed to confirm these results and uncover the functional variation
underlying the association signal.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17671966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(13):4745-58. Epub 2007 Apr 30.

Fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis of recombination signal sequence 
configuration in the RAG1/2 synaptic complex.

Ciubotaru M(1), Kriatchko AN, Swanson PC, Bright FV, Schatz DG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Immunibiology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8011, USA.

A critical step in V(D)J recombination is the synapsis of complementary (12/23)
recombination signal sequences (RSSs) by the RAG1 and RAG2 proteins to generate
the paired complex (PC). Using a facilitated ligation assay and substrates that
vary the helical phasing of the RSSs, we provide evidence that one particular
geometric configuration of the RSSs is favored in the PC. To investigate this
configuration further, we used fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) to
detect the synapsis of fluorescently labeled RSS oligonucleotides. FRET requires 
an appropriate 12/23 RSS pair, a divalent metal ion, and high-mobility-group
protein HMGB1 or HMGB2. Energy transfer between the RSSs was detected with all
12/23 RSS end positions of the fluorescent probes but was not detected when
probes were placed on the two ends of the same RSS. Energy transfer was confirmed
to originate from the PC by using an in-gel FRET assay. The results argue against
a unique planar configuration of the RSSs in the PC and are most easily
accommodated by models in which synapsed 12- and 23-RSSs are bent and cross one
another, with implications for the organization of the RAG proteins and the DNA
substrates at the time of cleavage.

PMCID: PMC1951485
PMID: 17470556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;9(4):402-14. Epub 2007 Mar 25.

Proteome analysis of soluble nuclear proteins reveals that HMGB1/2 suppress
genotoxic stress in polyglutamine diseases.

Qi ML(1), Tagawa K, Enokido Y, Yoshimura N, Wada Y, Watase K, Ishiura S, Kanazawa
I, Botas J, Saitoe M, Wanker EE, Okazawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;9(4):359-61.

Nuclear dysfunction is a key feature of the pathology of polyglutamine (polyQ)
diseases. It has been suggested that mutant polyQ proteins impair functions of
nuclear factors by interacting with them directly in the nucleus. However, a
systematic analysis of quantitative changes in soluble nuclear proteins in
neurons expressing mutant polyQ proteins has not been performed. Here, we perform
a proteome analysis of soluble nuclear proteins prepared from neurons expressing 
huntingtin (Htt) or ataxin-1 (AT1) protein, and show that mutant AT1 and Htt
similarly reduce the concentration of soluble high mobility group B1/2 (HMGB1/2) 
proteins. Immunoprecipitation and pulldown assays indicate that HMGBs interact
with mutant AT1 and Htt. Immunohistochemistry showed that these proteins were
reduced in the nuclear region outside of inclusion bodies in affected neurons.
Compensatory expression of HMGBs ameliorated polyQ-induced pathology in primary
neurons and in Drosophila polyQ models. Furthermore, HMGBs repressed genotoxic
stress signals induced by mutant Htt or transcriptional repression. Thus, HMGBs
may be critical regulators of polyQ disease pathology and could be targets for
therapy development.

PMID: 17384639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Reprod Dev. 2007 Aug;74(8):972-7.

Temporal expression of transcripts related to embryo quality in bovine embryos
cultured from the two-cell to blastocyst stage in vitro or in vivo.

Corcoran D(1), Rizos D, Fair T, Evans AC, Lonergan P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Food Science and Veterinary Medicine, Conway Institute 
for Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, College of Life Sciences, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.

The post-fertilization embryo culture environment can have a dramatic effect on
the pattern of gene expression in the embryo and it is widely acknowledged that
bovine embryos derived from in vitro culture are of inferior quality to those
derived in vivo. The objective of this study was to examine temporal variation in
the mRNA abundance of several transcription and translation factors known to
differ between blastocysts produced following culture in vitro and in vivo.
Embryos were recovered from two in vitro culture systems SOF1 or SOF2 at five
developmental stages: 2- to 4-cell, 8-cell, 16-cell, morula, and blastocyst. In
vivo embryos were produced from superovulated and artificially inseminated
heifers and recovered at approximately 40 hr or 3, 4, 5, and 7 days
postinsemination. Blastocysts were also produced following in vitro maturation,
in vitro fertilization and culture in the ewe oviduct. Analysis of relative
transcript abundance for FOXO3A, EEF1G, HMG2, and REA was performed using
quantitative real-time PCR. Irrespective of culture environment each transcript
followed, approximately the same general pattern of expression where relative
abundance decreased dramatically from the 2- to 4-cell stage to 8-cell stage and 
increased from the morula to blastocyst stage (P < 0.05). Transcripts for GNBL2
were not observed between the 2- and 16-cell stage of development. Relatively
high expression at the 2- to 4-cell indicated that these transcripts are most
likely of maternal origin produced in the oocyte during growth and final
maturation. A culture-induced change in mRNA abundance of transcription and
translation factors was evident in embryos that were produced not only between in
vivo and in vitro culture environments but also between different in vitro
culture systems.

PMID: 17219429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Plant Cell Physiol. 2007 Feb;48(2):221-31. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Characterization of transgenic Arabidopsis plants overexpressing high mobility
group B proteins under high salinity, drought or cold stress.

Kwak KJ(1), Kim JY, Kim YO, Kang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biotechnology, Agricultural Plant Stress Research Center
and Biotechnology Research Institute, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Chonnam National University, Gwangju, 500-757 Korea.

High mobility group B (HMGB) proteins found in the nuclei of higher eukaryotes
play roles in various cellular processes such as replication, transcription and
nucleosome assembly. The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains eight genes
encoding HMGB proteins, the functions of which remain largely unknown in the
transcriptional regulation of plant stress responses. To understand better the
functions of HMGB proteins in the responses of plants to environmental stimuli,
we examined the effect of various abiotic stresses on germination and growth of
transgenic Arabidopsis plants that overexpress a single isoform of HMGB. The
expression of HMGB2, HMGB3 and HMGB4 was up-regulated by cold stress, whereas the
expression of HMGB2 and HMGB3 was markedly down-regulated by drought or salt
stress. Under salt or drought stress, the transgenic Arabidopsis plants that
overexpress HMGB2 displayed retarded germination and subsequent growth compared
with wild-type plants. Overexpression of HMGB4 had no impact on seed germination 
and seedling growth of the plants under the stress conditions tested. In contrast
to no significant stress-related phenotypes of HMGB5-overexpressing plants,
loss-of-function mutants of HMGB5 displayed retarded germination and subsequent
growth compared with wild-type plants under stress conditions. Although
transcript levels of various stress-responsive genes were not modulated by the
expression of HMGB2, expression of several germination-responsive genes was
modulated by HMGB2 under salt stress. Taken together, these results provide a
novel basis for understanding the biological functions of HMGB protein family
members that differently affect germination and seedling growth of Arabidopsis
plants under various stress conditions.

PMID: 17169924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006 Oct;15(10):1948-55.

Evaluation of the 4q32-34 locus in European familial pancreatic cancer.

Earl J(1), Yan L, Vitone LJ, Risk J, Kemp SJ, McFaul C, Neoptolemos JP, Greenhalf
W; European Registry of Hereditary Pancreatitis and Familial Pancreatic Cancer,
Kress R, Sina-Frey M, Hahn SA, Rieder H, Bartsch DK; German National Case
Collection for Familial Pancreatic Cancer.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgery and Oncology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Familial pancreatic cancer (FPC) describes a group of families where 
the inheritance of pancreatic cancer is consistent with an autosomal-dominant
mode of inheritance. The 4q32-34 region has been previously identified as a
potential locus for FPC in a large American family.
METHODS: The region was allelotyped in 231 individuals from 77 European families 
using nine microsatellite markers, and haplotyping was possible in 191
individuals from 41 families. Families were selected based on at least two
affected first-degree relatives with no other cancer syndromes.
RESULTS: Linkage to most of the locus was excluded based on LOD scores less than 
-2.0. Eight families were excluded from linkage to 4q32-34 based on haplotypes
not segregating with the disease compared with a predicted six to seven families.
Two groups of families were identified, which seem to share common alleles within
the minimal disease-associated region of 4q32-34, one group with an apparently
earlier age of cancer death than the other pancreatic cancer families. Four genes
were identified with potential tumor suppressor roles within the locus in regions
that could not be excluded based on the LOD score. These were HMGB2, PPID, MORF4,
and SPOCK3. DNA sequence analysis of exons of these genes in affected individuals
and in pancreatic cancer cell lines did not reveal any mutations.
CONCLUSION: This locus is unlikely to harbor a FPC gene in the majority of our
European families.

PMID: 17035404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Clin Chim Acta. 2007 Jan;375(1-2):36-42. Epub 2006 Jul 25.

HMGB1, a novel inflammatory cytokine.

Yamada S(1), Maruyama I.

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute, Shino-Test Corporation, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.
Shingo.Yamada@shino-test.co.jp

High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) exhibits unique biochemical functions as a
biologically intrinsic requisite factor and as a toxin. As such, it is imperative
to understand the mechanism by which these seemingly and diametrically opposed
functions are exerted. To effectively discriminate these actions is important to 
accurately and precisely determine the concentration of HMGB1 in biological
samples. Research in this fascinating field, however, has been lacking due to the
absence of a simple analytical system for HMGB1 that can be adapted for large
sample numbers. In this report, we review the physiological and pathological
significance of HMGB1 and describe the development of an assay method for this
pleiotropic protein.

PMID: 16979611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 17;281(46):35048-56. Epub 2006 Sep 12.

Gonadotropin-regulated testicular RNA helicase (GRTH/Ddx25) is a transport
protein involved in gene-specific mRNA export and protein translation during
spermatogenesis.

Sheng Y(1), Tsai-Morris CH, Gutti R, Maeda Y, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4510, USA.

Gonadotropin-regulated testicular RNA helicase (GRTH/Ddx25), a member of the
DEAD-box protein family, is essential for completion of spermatogenesis. GRTH is 
present in the cytoplasm and nucleus of meiotic spermatocytes and round
spermatids and functions as a component of mRNP particles, implicating its
post-transcriptional regulatory roles in germ cells. In this study, GRTH
antibodies specific to N- or C-terminal sequences showed differential subcellular
expression of GRTH 56- and 61-kDa species in nucleus and cytoplasm, respectively,
of rodent testis and transfected COS1 cells. The 56-kDa nuclear species
interacted with CRM1 and participated in mRNA transport. The phosphorylated
cytoplasmic 61-kDa species was associated with polyribosomes. Confocal studies on
COS-1 cells showed that GRTH-GFP was retained in the nucleus by treatment with a 
RNA polymerase inhibitor or the nuclear protein export inhibitor. This indicated 
that GRTH is a shuttling protein associated with RNA export. The N-terminal
leucine-rich region (61-74 amino acids) was identified as the nuclear export
signal that participated in CRM1-dependent nuclear export pathway. Deletion
analysis identified a 14-amino acid GRTH sequence (100-114 amino acids) as a
nuclear localization signal. GRTH selectively regulated the translation of
specific genes including histone 4 and HMG2 in germ cells. In addition, GRTH
participated in the nuclear export of RNA messages (PGK2, tACE, and TP2) in a
gene-specific manner. These studies strongly indicate that the mammalian
GRTH/Ddx25 gene is a multifunctional RNA helicase that is an essential regulator 
of sperm maturation.

PMID: 16968703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Int J Cancer. 2006 Nov 1;119(9):2119-26.

SET complex in serous epithelial ovarian cancer.

Ouellet V(1), Le Page C, Guyot MC, Lussier C, Tonin PN, Provencher DM, Mes-Masson
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), 
Institut du cancer de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.

With low cure rates but increasing diverse treatment options that provide
variable remission times, ovarian cancer is increasingly being recognized as a
chronic disease. This reality indicates the need for a better understanding of
factors influencing disease progression. In a previous global analysis of gene
expression, we identified genes differentially expressed when comparing serous
epithelial ovarian tumors of low and high malignant potential (grade 0 vs grade
3). In this analysis, 4 out of 5 members of the SET complex, SET, APE1, NM23 and 
HMGB2, were highly expressed in invasive grade 3 tumors. To further investigate
the expression of these genes and the fifth member of the SET complex (pp32), we 
performed immunohistochemistry, on a tissue array composed of 235 serous tumors
of different grades and disease stages. A significant correlation between
expression of all SET complex proteins and the tumor differentiation was observed
(p < 0.05). When combining all tumors, overexpression of Nm23 (p = 0.04), Set (p 
= 0.004) and Ape1 (p = 0.004) was associated with the clinical stage of the
disease. No marker by itself was associated with prognosis. The combination of a 
high level of Nm23 in the context of a low level of Set compared to all other
combinations of these markers did confer a better prognosis (p = 0.03). When
combined, high expression of Hmgb2 and low expression of Ape1 was also associated
with patient prognosis (p = 0.05). These findings suggest that a strategy that
sums the activities of different partners within a pathway may be more
appropriate in designing nomograms for patient stratification.

PMID: 16823850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Chim Acta. 2006 Oct;372(1-2):173-8. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

New high mobility group box 1 assay system.

Yamada S(1), Yakabe K, Ishii J, Imaizumi H, Maruyama I.

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute, Shino-Test Corporation, Japan. Shingo.Yamada@shino-test.co

BACKGROUND: High-sensitivity sandwich ELISA methods have been developed using
chemiluminescent substrates. HMGB1 (high mobility group box 1) protein has been
shown to play a critical role in several inflammatory diseases and it may be
involved in the development of atherosclerosis.
METHODS: Anti-human HMGB1 monoclonal antibodies and anti-peptide polyclonal
antibodies against the peptide sequence (KPDAAKKGVVKAEK) with high antigenicity
and different from the sequence of HMGB2 were developed, and the antibodies were 
used to construct sandwich ELISA methods with a chromogenic substrate (TMBZ) and 
a chemiluminescent substrate (PS-atto). Highly purified human HMGB1 was used as a
standard material and high-sensitivity CRP was measured to compare with HMGB1.
RESULTS: The analytical characteristics of the ELISA method we developed were
validated inter-assay and intra-assay CVs were <10%, and the detection limit was 
0.3 microg/l by the chemiluminescent method and 1 microg/l with the chromogenic
substrates. HMGB1 was detected in the serum of patients with acute coronary
syndrome (ACS). When a cut-off of 0.6 microg/l HMGB1 upon admission to the
intensive care unit (ICU) was used, the risk of developing an acute cardiac event
within 1 month after discharge of ACS patients with an abnormal HMGB1 was
significantly higher than for the patients with normal values (P<0.0001). The
usefulness of HMGB1 as an acute prognostic marker was suggested.
CONCLUSIONS: The assay is easy to perform and suitable for use in the hospital
laboratory and for screening large populations. HMGB1 is detectable in the serum 
of ACS patients and that the serum concentration of HMGB1 may be a prognostic
indicator in ACS patients.

PMID: 16797518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Aug 1;98(5):1106-22.

SP100B, a repressor of gene expression preferentially binds to DNA with
unmethylated CpGs.

Isaac A(1), Wilcox KW, Taylor JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

SP100A and SP100B are mammalian nuclear proteins encoded by alternatively-spliced
transcripts from the SP100 gene. The N-terminal portion of SP100B (aa 1-476) is
identical to SP100A and contains an HP1 interaction domain. The C-terminal
portion of SP100B (aa 477-688) contains an HMG2 interaction domain and a SAND
domain. The SAND domain is a DNA-binding domain identified in several nuclear
proteins involved in transcriptional regulation. We have previously reported that
SP100B represses expression of genes present on transfected DNA in a SAND
domain-dependent manner. The goal of the present study was to characterize the
DNA binding properties of full-length SP100B expressed in mammalian cells. SP100B
associated with DNA whereas SP100A did not. The SP100B SAND domain was essential 
for DNA binding. Deletion of the HP1- or HMG2-binding domain had no effect on DNA
binding. SP100B preferentially associated with sequences containing CpG
dinucleotides. Our results did not reveal any preference of SP100B for bases
flanking CpG dinucleotides. The number of CpGs in a DNA sequence and spacing
between CpGs influenced SP100B binding, suggesting that multimers of SP100B bind 
DNA in a cooperative manner. Binding of SP100B was abrogated by methylation of
the cytosine residue within the context of the CpG dinucleotide. We propose that 
the preference of SP100B for non-methylated CpGs provides a mechanism to target
SP100B to foreign DNA, including plasmid DNA or viral DNA genomes, most of which 
are hypomethylated.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16775843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Dev Biol. 2006 Aug 1;296(1):231-238.

Changes in intranuclear chromatin architecture induce bipolar nuclear
localization of histone variant H1T2 in male haploid spermatids.

Catena R(1), Ronfani L, Sassone-Corsi P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Molécularie et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

Spermiogenesis entails a major biochemical and morphological restructuring of the
germ cell packing the DNA into the condensed spermatid nucleus. H1T2 is a histone
H1 variant selectively and transiently expressed in male haploid germ cells
during spermiogenesis that specifically localizes to a chromatin domain at the
apical pole under the acrosome. We explored the mechanisms determining polar
localization of H1T2 in spermatids. In acrosome-deficient round spermatids of hrb
-/- and gopc -/- mice, H1T2 localization is not altered, indicating that proper
acrosome development is not required for specifying nuclear polarity. In
contrast, in late round spermatids from trf2 -/- or hmgb2 -/- mice, a bipolar
H1T2 localization was observed revealing that polarity is modified by loss of
proteins specifying chromatin architecture. Our results show that intranuclear
chromatin organization is critical for correct polar localization of H1T2 and
that H1T2 can be a useful molecular marker revealing chromatin disorganization in
spermatids.

PMID: 16765935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Immunol. 2007 Feb;44(5):889-99. Epub 2006 May 15.

RAG1/2 re-expression causes receptor revision in a model B cell line.

Da Sylva TR(1), Fong IC, Cunningham LA, Wu GE.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pure and Applied Science, York University, Room 136, Farquharson
Building, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, Ont., Canada M3J 1P3. dasylva@yorku.ca

The expression of RAG1 and RAG2 is essential for V(D)J rearrangement of the
immunoglobulin (Ig) locus in developing B cells. In mature B cells further V(D)J 
rearrangement is suppressed and RAG1/2 proteins decline to undetectable levels.
However, there is evidence that mature B cells in the periphery may re-express
RAG1/2. In humans evidence of RAG1/2 re-expression is often linked with an
autoimmune state, indicating that further understanding of re-expression may be
crucial to understanding immune disorders. We have investigated the molecular
consequences of RAG1/2 expression in mature lymphocytes using a cell culture
system (M12 and DR3). M12 (IgG+, Igkappa+ and RAG-) is a mouse B cell lymphoma.
DR3 is a RAG1+/RAG2+ line derived from M12 by introduction of stable plasmids
carrying RAG1 and RAG2 cDNAs. RAG1/2 mediated receptor revision occurs in the DR3
line, as evidenced by both the deletion of the endogenous rearranged Igkappa gene
segment (present in the parent M12 lines) and the presence of a new Iglambda
rearrangement. Gene expression profiles obtained through microarray analysis and 
RT-PCR found differences in expression levels between the two lines for:
fibronectin, lysyl oxidase, TAP2, B220, Igkappa, TIS11B, HMG2 and DNAPKcs. Thus, 
the expression of RAG1/2 in a previously RAG- cell line results in multiple
changes to the gene expression profile as well as receptor revision. The
significance of the changes found in this model of RAG re-expression is
discussed.

PMID: 16701898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Gene. 2006 Aug 1;377:33-45. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Cloning the genes and DNA binding properties of High Mobility Group B1 (HMGB1)
proteins from the human blood flukes Schistosoma mansoni and Schistosoma
japonicum.

de Oliveira FM(1), de Abreu da Silva IC, Rumjanek FD, Dias-Neto E, Guimarães PE, 
Verjovski-Almeida S, Stros M, Fantappié MR.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Ilha do Fundão, Brazil.

The parasitic helminth Schistosoma mansoni contains three HMGB proteins, HMGB1,
HMGB2 and HMGB3, of primary amino acid sequences highly similar to vertebrate
proteins. In this report we describe the characterization of the HMGB1 proteins
and their genes from S. mansoni and Schistosoma japonicum. The deduced amino acid
sequences of HMGB1 proteins from both schistosome species are identical, and
comprise 176 residues. The proteins contain the two evolutionarily highly
conserved HMG-box domains, A and B, exhibiting 60% similarity to mammalian HMGB1.
Unlike the human HMGB1 which contains an unbroken run of 30 glutamic or aspartic 
residues, the SmHMGB1 or SjHMGB1 proteins possess unusually short acidic
C-terminal tails (5 acidic residues interrupted by 2 serines). Southern
hybridization and DNA sequencing revealed a single copy HMGB1 gene, composed of 3
exons and two introns, in S. mansoni. The exon/intron boundaries are identical to
those of the human HMGB1 gene, with the exception that the second exon of the
SmHMGB1 gene which is not split into two exons as in the human HMGB1 gene. RNA
blot analysis revealed that the SmHMGB1 gene is constitutively expressed in
similar levels both in male and female worms. The single-sized mRNA for SmHMGB1
is consistent with the size derived from the cDNA. Although DNA binding
properties of SmHMGB1 (or SjHMGB1) protein seem to be similar to those previously
reported with human HMGB1, i.e., preferential binding to supercoiled DNA over
linear DNA, specific recognition of DNA four-way junctions, DNA-induced
supercoiling in the presence of topoisomerase I, and DNA bending, we have
observed two important differences relative to those observed with the human
HMGB1: (i) the inability of the isolated SmHMGB1 domain A to bend DNA (as
revealed by T4 ligase-mediated circularization assay), and (ii) higher DNA
supercoiling and bending potential of the SmHMGB1 protein as compared to its
human counterpart. The latter finding may indicate that the long acidic C-tail of
human HMGB1 has much stronger repressive role on DNA bending or DNA supercoiling 
by topoisomerase I at physiological ionic strength than the short C-tail of the
SmHMGB1 protein. Considering the important role of HMGB1 in DNA replication,
transcription, recombination, and in particularly, the mediation of inflammation 
responses in mammalian cells, further studies on schistosome HMGB proteins may
provide valuable information related to schistosomiasis, where inflammation plays
a critical role in this disease.

PMID: 16644144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cell. 2006 Apr 21;125(2):275-86.

Synergistic functions of SII and p300 in productive activator-dependent
transcription of chromatin templates.

Guermah M(1), Palhan VB, Tackett AJ, Chait BT, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA. guermam@mail.rockefeller.edu

We have reconstituted a highly purified RNA polymerase II transcription system
containing chromatin templates assembled with purified histones and assembly
factors, the histone acetyltransferase p300, and components of the general
transcription machinery that, by themselves, suffice for activated transcription 
(initiation and elongation) on DNA templates. We show that this system mediates
activator-dependent initiation, but not productive elongation, on chromatin
templates. We further report the purification of a chromatin
transcription-enabling activity (CTEA) that, in a manner dependent upon p300 and 
acetyl-CoA, strongly potentiates transcription elongation through several
contiguous nucleosomes as must occur in vivo. The transcription elongation factor
SII is a major component of CTEA and strongly synergizes with p300 (histone
acetylation) at a step subsequent to preinitiation complex formation. The
purification of CTEA also identified HMGB2 as a coactivator that, while inactive 
on its own, enhances SII and p300 functions.

PMID: 16630816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Hum Genet. 2006 Jun;119(5):558-70. Epub 2006 Apr 8.

Genome scans and gene expression microarrays converge to identify gene regulatory
loci relevant in schizophrenia.

Vawter MP(1), Atz ME, Rollins BL, Cooper-Casey KM, Shao L, Byerley WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Functional Genomics Laboratory,
College of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
mvawter@uci.edu

Multiple linkage regions have been reported in schizophrenia, and some appear to 
harbor susceptibility genes that are differentially expressed in postmortem brain
tissue derived from unrelated individuals. We combined traditional genome-wide
linkage analysis in a multiplex family with lymphocytic genome-wide expression
analysis. A genome scan suggested linkage to a chromosome 4q marker (D4S1530, LOD
2.17, theta = 0) using a dominant model. Haplotype analysis using flanking
microsatellite markers delineated a 14 Mb region that cosegregated with all those
affected. Subsequent genome-wide scan with SNP genotypes supported the evidence
of linkage to 4q33-35.1 (LOD = 2.39) using a dominant model. Genome-wide
microarray analysis of five affected and five unaffected family members
identified two differentially expressed genes within the haplotype AGA and GALNT7
(aspartylglucosaminidase and UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosamine: polypeptide
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 7) with nominal significance; however, these
genes did not remain significant following analysis of covariance. We carried out
genome-wide linkage analyses between the quantitative expression phenotype and
genetic markers. AGA expression levels showed suggestive linkage to multiple
markers in the haplotype (maximum LOD = 2.37) but to no other genomic region.
GALNT7 expression levels showed linkage to regulatory loci at 4q28.1 (maximum LOD
= 3.15) and in the haplotype region at 4q33-35.1 (maximum LOD = 2.37). ADH1B
(alcohol dehydrogenase IB) was linked to loci at 4q21-q23 (maximum LOD = 3.08)
and haplotype region at 4q33-35.1 (maximum LOD = 2.27). Seven differentially
expressed genes were validated with RT-PCR. Three genes in the 4q33-35.1
haplotype region were also differentially expressed in schizophrenia in
postmortem dorsolateral prefrontal cortex: AGA, HMGB2, and SCRG1. These results
indicate that combining differential gene expression with linkage analysis may
help in identifying candidate genes and potential regulatory sites. Moreover,
they also replicate recent findings of complex trans- and cis- regulation of
genes.

PMCID: PMC2077091
PMID: 16604350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Biochemistry. 2006 Mar 21;45(11):3626-34.

ERK modulates DNA bending and enhancesome structure by phosphorylating HMG1-boxes
1 and 2 of the RNA polymerase I transcription factor UBF.

Stefanovsky VY(1), Langlois F, Bazett-Jones D, Pelletier G, Moss T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Centre and Department of Medical Biology of Laval University, 
Centre de Recherche de l'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9 rue McMahon G1R 2J6 Québec, QC, 
Canada.

Transcription of the ribosomal RNA genes of mammals by RNA polymerase I is
rapidly activated by epidermal growth factor via the MAP-kinase (ERK) signaling
cascade. This activation is mediated by direct phosphorylation of the HMG box DNA
binding domains of the architectural transcription factor UBF. Mutation of the
ERK sites of UBF inhibits its normal function and blocks growth factor activation
of ribosomal transcription. UBF has little or no DNA sequence selectivity and
binds throughout the ribosomal genes, defining a specialized chromatin. Indeed,
the HMG boxes of UBF induce looping of the ribosomal DNA to create the
enhancesome, a structure somewhat reminiscent of the nucleosome. Here, we show
that both ERK phosphorylation and mutations that simulate this phosphorylation
decrease the affinity of the individual HMG boxes of UBF for linear ribosomal DNA
but have little or no effect on the capacity of these HMG boxes to bind to
pre-bent DNA and do not affect the overall binding constant of UBF for the DNA.
Electron spectroscopic imaging showed that ERK site UBF mutants do not induce the
characteristic DNA looping of the enhancesome and associate with no more than
half of the enhancesomal DNA. The data demonstrate that ERK phosphorylation of
UBF prevents DNA bending by its first two HMG boxes, leading to a cooperative
unfolding of the enhancesome.

PMID: 16533045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Neurochem Int. 2006 Jan;48(1):9-16. Epub 2005 Oct 3.

Exercise-induced changes in cardiac gene expression and its relation to spatial
maze performance.

Schweitzer NB(1), Alessio HM, Berry SD, Roeske K, Hagerman AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056, USA.

Cognitive performance is sensitive to both neural and non-neural changes induced 
by physical activity and inactivity. This study investigated whether access to
physical activity outside a standard laboratory animal cage affected cognitive
performance as measured by navigation of a spatial maze. It also examined gene
expression in heart tissue for genes associated with cardiovascular function
given recent reports of cognitive impairment associated with hyperlipidemia.
Furthermore, we measured expression of neural-regulatory genes typically
expressed in brain, but also found in cardiac tissue. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (n
= 72) were separated into three groups having different access to physical
activity: none outside a standard cage, twice-weekly physical activity, and every
other day exercise on a running wheel. Compared with a sedentary group, spatial
maze performance was enhanced in animals that had access to physical activity,
either twice-weekly in a large box or every other day on a running wheel. Both
the cardiovascular and neural-related genes expressed in the heart were
distinguished by access to physical activity. Several genes that are associated
with heart rate, cholesterol biosynthesis, blood pressure, and cell adhesion
regulation, including GJA1, FDFT1, EDN1, and CD36, differed in animals based on
access to physical activity. Neural-related genes expressed in cardiac tissue
associated with neurite outgrowth, neuroplasticity, and neurogenesis including
RTN4, HOMER2, ACTB, NCDN, KIF5B, and HMGB2, were expressed differently among the 
three groups. Significant shifts in ten cardiovascular and neural-related gene
expressions in cardiac tissue were associated with physical activity and may have
influenced learning and performance on a spatial maze.

PMID: 16202479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Transgenic Res. 2005 Jun;14(3):227-36.

A peptide from insects protects transgenic tobacco from a parasitic weed.

Hamamouch N(1), Westwood JH, Banner I, Cramer CL, Gepstein S, Aly R.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Tech, Department of Plant Pathology, Phlysiology, and Weed Science,
Blacksburg VA 24061, USA.

Parasitic plants present some of the most intractable weed problems for
agriculture in much of the world. Species of root parasites such as Orobanche can
cause enormous yield losses, yet few control measures are effective and
affordable. An ideal solution to this problem is the development of
parasite-resistant crops, but this goal has been elusive for most susceptible
crops. Here we report a mechanism for resistance to the parasitic angiosperm
Orobanche based on expression of sarcotoxin IA in transgenic tobacco. Sarcotoxin 
IA is a 40-residue peptide with antibiotic activity, originally isolated from the
fly, Sarcophaga peregrina. The sarcotoxin IA gene was fused to an
Orobanche-inducible promoter, HMG2, which is induced locally in the host root at 
the point of contact with the parasite, and used to transform tobacco. The
resulting transgenic plants accumulated more biomass than non-transformed plants 
in the presence of parasites. Furthermore, plants expressing sarcotoxin IA showed
enhanced resistance to O. aegyptiaca as evidenced by abnormal parasite
development and higher parasite mortality after attachment as compared to
non-transformed plants. The transgenic plants were similar in appearance to
non-transformed plants suggesting that sarcotoxin IA is not detrimental to the
host.

PMID: 16145831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Oncol Rep. 2005 Oct;14(4):925-32.

Gene expression profiling of a clonal isolate of oxaliplatin-resistant ovarian
carcinoma cell line A2780/C10.

Varma RR(1), Hector SM, Clark K, Greco WR, Hawthorn L, Pendyala L.

Author information: 
(1)Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

The efficacy of platinum drugs in the treatment of cancer is often restricted by 
the acquisition of tumor cell resistance subsequent to treatment. To better
understand mechanisms involved in this phenomenon, a clonal subline (A2780/C10B) 
isolated from an oxaliplatin-resistant human ovarian carcinoma cell line
(A2780/C10) was developed, as reported previously. This cell line is 18-fold
resistant to oxaliplatin and shows a 3-fold cross resistance to cisplatin. Here, 
we report on the gene expression analysis using Affymetrix HG-U95Av2
oligonucleotide arrays of cells in log phase growth from both the parental cell
line and drug-resistant variant. Probe level analysis was perfomed using the
model based expression index (dChip) and robust multichip average (RMA) methods. 
Genes that were differentially expressed between the two groups were identified
using the significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) method with a minimum false 
discovery rate <1%. We identified 43 genes that were overexpressed, and 39
underexpressed in the drug-resistant cell line. Collagen VI (COL6A3) was
overexpressed 62-fold and the most highly up-regulated gene. This finding is
consistent with other published data based on serial analysis of gene expression 
(SAGE) profiling of cisplatin-resistant and sensitive ovarian carcinoma cells.
Among the significant functional groups of overexpressed genes in our study were 
extracellular matrix genes (9 of 43) and those involved in signal transduction (7
of 43). Extracellular matrix genes included two matrix metalloproteinases (MMP3
and MMP12). Integrin alpha 1 (ITGA1) and WNT5A were also overexpressed. Genes
that encode for extracellular matrix proteins were also among those found
down-regulated in the resistant cell line. Several genes involved in the
regulation of cell cycle and growth were found to be underexpressed, including
the suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2), necdin (NDN), and glypicans (GPC3
and GPC4). The mRNA levels of six differentially expressed genes (COL6A3, MMP12, 
MMP3, WNT5A, NID, and HMGB2) were validated using real-time quantitative RT-PCR. 
The identification of these genes should aid in a better understanding of the
pathways resulting in platinum drug resistance.

PMID: 16142353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. FEBS J. 2005 Aug;272(16):4221-36.

Recombinant derivatives of the human high-mobility group protein HMGB2 mediate
efficient nonviral gene delivery.

Sloots A(1), Wels WS.

Author information: 
(1)Chemotherapeutisches Forschungsinstitut, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.

Certain natural peptides and proteins of mammalian origin are able to bind and
condense plasmid DNA, a prerequisite for the formation of transfection-competent 
complexes that facilitate nonviral gene delivery. Here we have generated
recombinant derivatives of the human high-mobility group (HMG) protein HMGB2 and 
investigated their potential as novel protein-based transfection reagents. A
truncated form of HMGB2 encompassing amino acids 1-186 of the molecule was
expressed in Escherichia coli at high yield. This HMGB2186 protein purified from 
bacterial lysates was able to condense plasmid DNA in a concentration-dependent
manner, and mediated gene delivery into different established tumor cell lines
more efficiently than poly(l-lysine). By attaching, via gene fusion, additional
functional domains such as the HIV-1 TAT protein transduction domain
(TAT(PTD)-HMGB2186), the nuclear localization sequence of the simian virus 40
(SV40) large T-antigen (SV40(NLS)-HMGB2186), or the importin-beta-binding domain 
(IBB) of human importin-alpha (IBB-HMGB2186), chimeric fusion proteins were
produced which displayed markedly improved transfection efficiency. Addition of
chloroquine strongly enhanced gene transfer by all four HMGB2186 derivatives
studied, indicating cellular uptake of protein-DNA complexes via endocytosis. The
IBB-HMGB2186 molecule in the presence of the endosomolytic reagent was the most
effective. Our results show that recombinant derivatives of human HMGB2
facilitate efficient nonviral gene delivery and may become useful reagents for
applications in gene therapy.

PMID: 16098203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Neoplasia. 2005 Jun;7(6):603-13.

High-resolution mapping of genomic imbalance and identification of gene
expression profiles associated with differential chemotherapy response in serous 
epithelial ovarian cancer.

Bernardini M(1), Lee CH, Beheshti B, Prasad M, Albert M, Marrano P, Begley H,
Shaw P, Covens A, Murphy J, Rosen B, Minkin S, Squire JA, Macgregor PF.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Hospital, University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and microarray expression
profiling were used to subclassify DNA and RNA alterations associated with
differential response to chemotherapy in ovarian cancer. Two to 4 Mb interval
arrays were used to map genomic imbalances in 26 sporadic serous ovarian tumors. 
Cytobands 1p36, 1q42-44, 6p22.1-p21.2, 7q32.1-q34 9q33.3-q34.3, 11p15.2,
13q12.2-q13.1, 13q21.31, 17q11.2, 17q24.2-q25.3, 18q12.2, and 21q21.2-q21.3 were 
found to be statistically associated with chemotherapy response, and novel
regions of loss at 15q11.2-q15.1 and 17q21.32-q21.33 were identified. Gene
expression profiles were obtained from a subset of these tumors and identified a 
group of genes whose differential expression was significantly associated with
drug resistance. Within this group, five genes (GAPD, HMGB2, HSC70, GRP58, and
HMGB1), previously shown to form a nuclear complex associated with resistance to 
DNA conformation-altering chemotherapeutic drugs in in vitro systems, may
represent a novel class of genes associated with in vivo drug response in ovarian
cancer patients. Although RNA expression change indicated only weak DNA copy
number dependence, these data illustrate the value of molecular profiling at both
the RNA and DNA levels to identify small genomic regions and gene subsets that
could be associated with differential chemotherapy response in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC1501280
PMID: 16036111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Life Sci. 2005 Sep 16;77(18):2246-61.

Access to exercise and its relation to cardiovascular health and gene expression 
in laboratory animals.

Schweitzer NB(1), Alessio HM, Hagerman AE, Roy S, Sen CK, Nagy S, Byrnes RN,
Philip BN, Woodward JL, Wiley RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056, USA.

The interaction between genes and environment can influence cardiovascular
disease (CVD). This 16 month study investigated if genes associated with
cardiovascular (CV) regulation were expressed differently in animals having: 1)
no access to physical activity or exercise (SED), 2) access to hour-long, twice
weekly activity (PA), and 3) access every-other-day to a running wheel (EX). Out 
of 31,000 genes, a CV subset comprising 44 genes was investigated. Ten genes from
this subset were expressed differently in EX compared with SED, and 34 genes were
expressed differently in PA compared with SED (p<0.05). Total cholesterol (70+/-8
vs. 101+/-9 mg dl(-1)), triglycerides (104+/-8 vs. 127+/-4 mg dl(-1)), resting
systolic blood pressure (130+/-3 vs. 141+/-3 mmHg), mean arterial pressure
(110+/-2 vs. 120+/-2 mmHg) and heart rate (380+/-6 vs. 405+/-9 beats min(-1))
were lower in EX compared with SED (p<0.05), but intracellular adhesion molecule 
levels did not differ among groups. Mean gene expressions for Gja1, Fdft1, Edn1, 
Cd36, and Hmgb2 differed in animals according to access to physical activity.
These genes play roles in heart rate, cholesterol biosynthesis, blood pressure,
cell adhesion, and transcription and neurogenesis regulation, respectively. In
conclusion, a total of 44 CV genes were expressed differently in SED compared to 
PA and EX; and SED showed more physiological evidence of CVD.

PMID: 16002099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;25(11):4413-25.

Determinants of HMGB proteins required to promote RAG1/2-recombination signal
sequence complex assembly and catalysis during V(D)J recombination.

Dai Y(1), Wong B, Yen YM, Oettinger MA, Kwon J, Johnson RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Efficient assembly of RAG1/2-recombination signal sequence (RSS) DNA complexes
that are competent for V(D)J cleavage requires the presence of the nonspecific
DNA binding and bending protein HMGB1 or HMGB2. We find that either of the two
minimal DNA binding domains of HMGB1 is effective in assembling RAG1/2-RSS
complexes on naked DNA and stimulating V(D)J cleavage but that both domains are
required for efficient activity when the RSS is incorporated into a nucleosome.
The single-domain HMGB protein from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Nhp6A, efficiently 
assembles RAG1/2 complexes on naked DNA; however, these complexes are minimally
competent for V(D)J cleavage. Nhp6A forms much more stable DNA complexes than
HMGB1, and a variety of mutations that destabilize Nhp6A binding to bent
microcircular DNA promote increased V(D)J cleavage. One of the two DNA bending
wedges on Nhp6A and the analogous phenylalanine wedge at the DNA exit site of
HMGB1 domain A were found to be essential for promoting RAG1/2-RSS complex
formation. Because the phenylalanine wedge is required for specific recognition
of DNA kinks, we propose that HMGB proteins facilitate RAG1/2-RSS interactions by
recognizing a distorted DNA structure induced by RAG1/2 binding. The resulting
complex must be sufficiently dynamic to enable the series of RAG1/2-mediated
chemical reactions on the DNA.

PMCID: PMC1140611
PMID: 15899848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biophys J. 2005 Jul;89(1):353-64. Epub 2005 Apr 15.

Dual binding modes for an HMG domain from human HMGB2 on DNA.

McCauley M(1), Hardwidge PR, Maher LJ 3rd, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Complex
Systems, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

High mobility group B (HMGB) proteins contain two HMG box domains known to bind
without sequence specificity into the DNA minor groove, slightly intercalating
between basepairs and producing a strong bend in the DNA backbone. We use optical
tweezers to measure the forces required to stretch single DNA molecules.
Parameters describing DNA flexibility, including contour length and persistence
length, are revealed. In the presence of nanomolar concentrations of isolated HMG
box A from HMGB2, DNA shows a decrease in its persistence length, where the
protein induces an average DNA bend angle of 114 +/- 21 degrees for 50 mM Na+,
and 87 +/- 9 degrees for 100 mM Na+. The DNA contour length increases from 0.341 
+/- 0.003 to 0.397 +/- 0.012 nm per basepair, independent of salt concentration. 
In 50 mM Na+, the protein does not unbind even at high DNA extension, whereas in 
100 mM Na+, the protein appears to unbind only below concentrations of 2 nM.
These observations support a flexible hinge model for noncooperative HMG binding 
at low protein concentrations. However, at higher protein concentrations, a
cooperative filament mode is observed instead of the hinge binding. This mode may
be uniquely characterized by this high-force optical tweezers experiment.

PMCID: PMC1366535
PMID: 15833996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Neuromuscul Disord. 2005 Apr;15(4):316-20. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

The genes encoding for D4Z4 binding proteins HMGB2, YY1, NCL, and MYOD1 are
excluded as candidate genes for FSHD1B.

Bastress KL(1), Stajich JM, Speer MC, Gilbert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, 595 LaSalle Street,
Box 3445, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy is a disease of skeletal muscle, with
symptoms including both facial and shoulder girdle weakness and progression to
involve the pelvic girdle and extremities in the majority of cases. For most
cases of FSHD, the molecular basis of the disease can be identified as a partial 
deletion of the D4Z4 repeat array on the end of the long arm of chromosome 4.
However, in up to 5% of FSHD families there is no linkage to 4q35. These cases
are designated as FSHD1B. Proteins have been identified that bind to the D4Z4
repeats of chromosome 4q35. The genes encoding D4Z4 binding proteins YY1, HMGB2, 
NCL, and MYOD1 were investigated as candidate genes for FSHD1B. Coding sequences 
and promoter region were analyzed for HMBG2 and no sequence variations were
detected. For YY1, all five exons were analyzed and a polymorphism was detected
in both the unaffected and affected populations. In nucleolin (NCL), several SNPs
were identified, including a SNP causing the non-synonymous change P515H;
however, all polymorphisms either occurred in control samples or were previously 
reported. A novel polymorphism was also detected in MYOD1, but did not represent 
a disease-specific variation. These results suggest that HMBG2, YY1, NCL, and
MYOD1 are unlikely to represent the genes responsible for FSHD in these families.

PMID: 15792872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nature. 2005 Mar 24;434(7032):533-8.

Recruitment of Drosophila Polycomb group proteins to chromatin by DSP1.

Déjardin J(1), Rappailles A, Cuvier O, Grimaud C, Decoville M, Locker D, Cavalli 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS, 141 rue de la Cardonille, F-34396
Montpellier Cedex 5, France.

Polycomb and trithorax group (PcG and trxG) proteins maintain silent and active
transcriptional states, respectively, throughout development. In Drosophila, PcG 
and trxG proteins associate with DNA regions named Polycomb and trithorax
response elements (PRE and TRE), but the mechanisms of recruitment are unknown.
We previously characterized a minimal element from the regulatory region of the
Abdominal-B gene, termed Ab-Fab. Ab-Fab contains a PRE and a TRE and is able to
maintain repressed or active chromatin states during development. Here we show
that the Dorsal switch protein 1 (DSP1), a Drosophila HMGB2 homologue, binds to a
sequence present within Ab-Fab and in other characterized PREs. Addition of this 
motif to an artificial sequence containing Pleiohomeotic and GAGA factor
consensus sites is sufficient for PcG protein recruitment in vivo. Mutations that
abolish DSP1 binding to Ab-Fab and to a PRE from the engrailed locus lead to loss
of PcG protein binding, loss of silencing, and switching of these PREs into
constitutive TREs. The binding of DSP1 to PREs is therefore important for the
recruitment of PcG proteins.

PMID: 15791260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biochemistry. 2005 Mar 22;44(11):4188-95.

Interplay between human high mobility group protein 1 and replication protein A
on psoralen-cross-linked DNA.

Reddy MC(1), Christensen J, Vasquez KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, 1808 Park Road 1-C, Smithville, Texas
78957, USA.

Human high mobility group box (HMGB) 1 and -2 proteins are highly conserved and
abundant chromosomal proteins that regulate chromatin structure and DNA
metabolism. HMGB proteins bind preferentially to DNA that is bent or underwound
and to DNA damaged by agents such as cisplatin, UVC radiation, and
benzo[a]pyrenediol epoxide (BPDE). Binding of HMGB1 to DNA adducts is thought to 
inhibit nucleotide excision repair (NER), leading to cell death, but the
biological roles of these proteins remain obscure. We have used psoralen-modified
triplex-forming oligonucleotides (TFOs) to direct a psoralen-DNA interstrand
cross-link (ICL) to a specific site to determine the effect of HMGB proteins on
recognition of these lesions. Our results reveal that human HMGB1 (but not HMGB2)
binds with high affinity and specificity to psoralen ICLs, and interacts with the
essential NER protein, replication protein A (RPA), at these lesions. RPA, shown 
previously to bind tightly to these lesions, also binds in the presence of HMGB1,
without displacing HMGB1. A discrete ternary complex is formed, containing HMGB1,
RPA, and psoralen-damaged DNA. Thus, HMGB1 has the ability to recognize ICLs, can
cooperate with RPA in doing so, and likely modulates their repair by the NER
machinery. The abundance of HMGB1 suggests that it may play an important role in 
determining the sensitivity of cells to DNA damage under physiological,
experimental, and therapeutic conditions.

PMID: 15766246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Neurobiol Dis. 2005 Apr;18(3):551-67.

PABPN1 overexpression leads to upregulation of genes encoding nuclear proteins
that are sequestered in oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy nuclear inclusions.

Corbeil-Girard LP(1), Klein AF, Sasseville AM, Lavoie H, Dicaire MJ, Saint-Denis 
A, Pagé M, Duranceau A, Codère F, Bouchard JP, Karpati G, Rouleau GA, Massie B,
Langelier Y, Brais B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurogénétique, Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2L 4M1.

Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an adult-onset disease caused by
expanded (GCN)12-17 stretches encoding the N-terminal polyalanine domain of the
poly(A) binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1). OPMD is characterized by intranuclear
inclusions (INIs) in skeletal muscle fibers, which contain PABPN1, molecular
chaperones, ubiquitin, proteasome subunits, and poly(A)-mRNA. We describe an
adenoviral model of PABPN1 expression that produces INIs in most cells.
Microarray analysis revealed that PABPN1 overexpression reproducibly changed the 
expression of 202 genes. Sixty percent of upregulated genes encode nuclear
proteins, including many RNA and DNA binding proteins. Immunofluorescence
microscopy revealed that all tested nuclear proteins encoded by eight upregulated
genes colocalize with PABPN1 within the INIs: CUGBP1, SFRS3, FKBP1A, HMG2,
HNRPA1, PRC1, S100P, and HSP70. In addition, CUGBP1, SFRS3, and FKBP1A were also 
found in OPMD muscle INIs. This study demonstrates that a large number of nuclear
proteins are sequestered in OPMD INIs, which may compromise cellular function.

PMID: 15755682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biochem. 2004 Aug;136(2):155-62.

Conformational difference in HMGB1 proteins of human neutrophils and lymphocytes 
revealed by epitope mapping of a monoclonal antibody.

Ito I(1), Mitsuoka N, Sobajima J, Uesugi H, Ozaki S, Ohya K, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
2641 Yamazaki, Noda 278-8510.

HMGB1 and HMGB2 are abundant nonhistone chromosomal proteins in eukaryotic
organisms. Their respective primary sequences are highly conserved. Our previous 
studies showed that these proteins are novel autoantigens of anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies in sera from patients with ulcerative colitis (UC),
rheumatic disease and autoimmune hepatitis (AIH). In the present paper, we showed
that anti-HMGB1 and HMGB2 antibodies in sera of patients with UC do not recognize
HMGB1 in neutrophils while they recognize the protein in lymphocytes. Anti-HMGB2 
monoclonal antibody FBH7, recognizing HMGB1 in lymphocytes, showed a similar
profile to the antibodies in the patients' sera. In order to elucidate the
difference in immunoreactivity to HMGB1 between neutrophils and lymphocytes, we
mapped the epitope for FBH7 by means of several methods. The results showed that 
FBH7 recognizes the intact conformation composed of 52-56 residues of HMGB1 in
lymphocytes. This suggested that HMGB1 in neutrophils is conformationally changed
in the epitope or the peripheral structure of the epitope from the protein in
lymphocytes. The apparent conformational change of HMGB1 between neutrophils and 
lymphocytes will be important for understanding the functional difference of
HMGB1 in these cells.

PMID: 15496585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Dec 15;170(12):1310-6. Epub 2004 Sep 16.

Contributions of high mobility group box protein in experimental and clinical
acute lung injury.

Ueno H(1), Matsuda T, Hashimoto S, Amaya F, Kitamura Y, Tanaka M, Kobayashi A,
Maruyama I, Yamada S, Hasegawa N, Soejima J, Koh H, Ishizaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care and Anesthesiology, Kyoto Prefectural University 
of Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

This study was performed to examine the putative role of high mobility group box 
(HMGB) protein in the pathogenesis of acute lung injury (ALI). Observations were 
made (1) in 21 patients who were septic with ALI and 15 patients with normal lung
function and (2) in a mouse model 24 hours after intratracheal instillation of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The concentrations of HMGB1 were increased in plasma
and lung epithelial lining fluid of patients with ALI and mice instilled with
LPS. LPS-induced ALI was mitigated by anti-HMGB1 antibody. Although this protein 
was not detected in the plasma of control humans or mice, the concentrations of
HMGB1 in lung epithelial lining fluid or in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were
unexpectedly high. The nuclear expression of HMGB1 was apparent in epithelial
cells surrounding terminal bronchioles in normal mice, whereas its nuclear and
cytoplasmic expression was observed in alveolar macrophages in LPS-instilled
mice. Lung instillation of HMGB2 did not cause as much inflammation as HMGB1.
Extracellular HMGB1 may play a key role in the pathogenesis of clinical and
experimental ALI. However, its expression in normal airways is noteworthy and
suggests that it also plays a physiologic role in the lung.

PMID: 15374839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(19):8727-44.

Synapsis of recombination signal sequences located in cis and DNA underwinding in
V(D)J recombination.

Ciubotaru M(1), Schatz DG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University
School of Medicine, 300 Cedar St., TAC S625, New Haven, CT 06510.
david.schatz@yale.edu

V(D)J recombination requires binding and synapsis of a complementary (12/23) pair
of recombination signal sequences (RSSs) by the RAG1 and RAG2 proteins, aided by 
a high-mobility group protein, HMG1 or HMG2. Double-strand DNA cleavage within
this synaptic, or paired, complex is thought to involve DNA distortion or melting
near the site of cleavage. Although V(D)J recombination normally occurs between
RSSs located on the same DNA molecule (in cis), all previous studies that
directly assessed RSS synapsis were performed with the two DNA substrates in
trans. To overcome this limitation, we have developed a facilitated
circularization assay using DNA substrates of reduced length to assess synapsis
of RSSs in cis. We show that a 12/23 pair of RSSs is the preferred substrate for 
synapsis of cis RSSs and that the efficiency of pairing is dependent upon
RAG1-RAG2 stoichiometry. Synapsis in cis occurs rapidly and is kinetically
favored over synapsis of RSSs located in trans. This experimental system also
allowed the generation of underwound DNA substrates containing pairs of RSSs in
cis. Importantly, we found that the RAG proteins cleave such substrates
substantially more efficiently than relaxed substrates and that underwinding may 
enhance RSS synapsis as well as RAG1/2-mediated catalysis. The energy stored in
such underwound substrates may be used in the generation of DNA distortion and/or
protein conformational changes needed for synapsis and cleavage. We propose that 
this unwinding is uniquely sensed during synapsis of an appropriate 12/23 pair of
RSSs.

PMCID: PMC516766
PMID: 15367690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Arch Androl. 2004 Jul-Aug;50(4):267-71.

Induction of spermatogenesis in idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with
gonadotropins in older men.

Samli MM(1), Demirbas M, Guler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Turkey. 
msamli@tr.net

We investigated the treatment results in 6 azoospermic idiopathic
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) cases that remained untreated 41-47 years of 
age. Medical history, physical examination, hormone profile measurements,
peripheral blood karyotype, skull X-ray and/or magnetic resonance imaging were
performed. Patients received 1,000 to 5,000 IU hCG, 2-3 times per week, and 75 to
150 IU hMG, 2-3 times per week for 24 months. Serum testosterone levels were
assessed every month for maximum 6 months to evaluate optimal dose of treatment
and then every 3 months thereafter. Sperm counts were assessed every 3 months.
Testosterone level increased from 2.7 +/- 0.9 mIU/L to 22 +/- 7.04 mIU/L with
treatment; testicular volume increased by 4.6 ml during the treatment. Sperm were
detected in the ejaculate in 3 out of 6 patients on the 22nd, 18th, and 15th
month of treatment. 3 patients underwent testicular biopsy; histopathology
revealed tubular hyalinization. Spermatogenesis in older men with IHH was
restored by exogenous gonadotropins.

PMID: 15277005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Aug;34(8):2179-90.

A conserved sequence in the mouse variable T cell receptor alpha recombination
signal sequence 23-bp spacer can affect recombination.

Probst J(1), Blumenthal SG, Tenzer S, Weinschenk T, Dittmer J, Schoor O, Six A,
Rammensee HG, Pascolo S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell Biology, Department of Immunology, Auf der Morgenstelle 15,
D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Although the V-gene segments coding for the TCR alpha and delta chains are mixed 
together in the alpha delta locus and are recombined by the same processes, some 
gene segments (TRAV) are rearranged only with TCR Jalpha gene segments, some
(TRDV) only with TCR Ddelta gene segments and some (TRADV) with both. To date, no
molecular signal is known that can characterize these three different types of
gene segments. Studying the recombination signal sequences (RSS) of all mouse TCR
V-gene segments we observed that 80% of the TRAV contain a palindrome sequence
(CTGCAG) or its related variant CTGTAG in their 23-bp spacer. Using gel-shift
assays we show that these sequences are specifically recognized by some nuclear
proteins that are expressed by fresh thymocytes, fresh lymphocytes and tumor
cells. Recombination assays on plasmid substrates in a pre-B cell line showed
that RSS containing the CTGCAG sequence can impair recombination. From the
protein fractions containing the CTGCAG-binding activity, three proteins were
identified: G3BP1 (a nucleic-acid-binding protein with a proposed helicase
activity) and two proteins from the high-mobility group (HMG) family--HMGB2 and
HMGB3. We hypothesize that these proteins can affect recombination at the TCR
alpha delta locus.

PMID: 15259015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Nov;18(11):2616-32. Epub 2004 Jul 15.

High mobility group B proteins facilitate strong estrogen receptor binding to
classical and half-site estrogen response elements and relax binding selectivity.

Das D(1), Peterson RC, Scovell WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bowling Green State University, Overman Hall, Bowling
Green, Ohio 43403, USA.

The estrogen receptor alpha (ER) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that 
regulates the expression of estrogen-responsive genes. A key step in the
activation process is the initial binding of the ER dimer to the estrogen
response element (ERE). We examined the effect of the coactivator proteins, HMGB1
and HMGB2, in enhancing ER binding affinity to single and tandem EREs. Using
EMSAs, both HMGB proteins are shown to enhance ER binding and induce cooperative 
ER binding on tandem ERE elements. We demonstrate that HMGB proteins facilitate
strong ER binding to ERE consensus half-sites, exhibiting binding affinities
comparable with ER binding to consensus ERE in the absence of HMGB proteins.
These findings reveal that although HMGB proteins enhance binding affinity, they 
also relax ER binding specificity. Deoxyribonuclease I footprinting demonstrates 
that ER binds very differently to consensus ERE and ERE consensus half-sites,
whereas both deoxyribonuclease I and exonuclease III digestions show that the
presence of HMGB1/2 does not alter the DNA protection in ER/ERE complexes.
Protease digestions of the complexes support this conclusion and show that a
global conformation change occurs in ER when bound to the different ER binding
sites. Models for these interactions are discussed, together with a hit-and-run
mechanism that HMGB proteins may utilize to produce these effects.

PMID: 15256536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Immunol Rev. 2004 Aug;200:90-114.

The bounty of RAGs: recombination signal complexes and reaction outcomes.

Swanson PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68178, USA. pswanson@creighton.edu

V(D)J recombination is a form of site-specific DNA rearrangement through which
antigen receptor genes are assembled. This process involves the breakage and
reunion of DNA mediated by two lymphoid cell-specific proteins, recombination
activating genes RAG-1 and RAG-2, and ubiquitously expressed architectural
DNA-binding proteins and DNA-repair factors. Here I review the progress toward
understanding the composition, assembly, organization, and activity of the
protein-DNA complexes that support the initiation of V(D)J recombination, as well
as the molecular basis for the sequence-specific recognition of recombination
signal sequences (RSSs) that are the targets of the RAG proteins. Parallels are
drawn between V(D)J recombination and Tn5/Tn10 transposition with respect to the 
reactions, the proteins, and the protein-DNA complexes involved in these
processes. I also consider the relative roles of the different sequence elements 
within the RSS in recognition, cleavage, and post-cleavage events. Finally, I
discuss alternative DNA transactions mediated by the V(D)J recombinase, the
protein-DNA complexes that support them, and factors and forces that control
them.

PMID: 15242399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2003 Oct;2(3):213-23.

Genomic analysis of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.

Clapp J(1), Bolland DJ, Hewitt JE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council.

The genomic basis of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is of
considerable interest because of the unique nature of the molecular mutation,
which is a deletion within a large, complex DNA tandem array (D4Z4). This repeat 
maps within 30 kb of the 4q telomere. Although D4Z4 repeat units each contain an 
open reading frame that could encode a homeodomain protein, there is no evidence 
that the repeat is transcribed, and the underlying disease mechanism probably
involves a position effect. A recent study has identified a protein complex bound
to D4Z4 that contains YY1 and HMGB2, implicating a role for D4Z4 as a repressor. 
The 4q telomere has two variants, 4qA and 4qB. Although these alleles are present
at almost equal frequencies in the general population, FSHD is associated only
with the 4qA allele and never with 4qB. This suggests a functional difference
between the telomere variants, either in predisposition to deletions within D4Z4 
or in the pathological consequence of the deletion. Comparative mapping studies
of the FSHD region in primates, mouse and Fugu rubripes have given insights into 
the evolutionary history of the D4Z4 repeat and of 4qter, although as yet they
have not provided any solutions to the FSHD puzzle.

PMID: 15239924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Jun 2;126(21):6536-7.

Identification of nuclear proteins that interact with platinum-modified DNA by
photoaffinity labeling.

Zhang CX(1), Chang PV, Lippard SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Interactions between cellular proteins and cisplatin-modified DNA are important
in determining the anticancer activity of the drug. To develop a general approach
for identifying proteins that mediate cellular responses to cisplatin,
photoreactive cisplatin analogues having a tethered benzophenone moiety were
prepared and used to form the major 1,2-intrastrand platinum-DNA cross-links.
Upon irradiation of the platinated DNA dissolved in a HeLa nuclear extract, the
appended photolabile benzophenone group generates a highly reactive species that 
binds irreversibly to cellular proteins that interact with the probe. Several
DNA-protein cross-linked adducts were identified that may function in the
cellular processing of cisplatin-DNA adducts. Of these, PARP-1 had not previously
been demonstrated directly to contact Pt-DNA cross-links in human cells.

PMID: 15161265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Feb 12;214(1-2):71-9.

The interaction of the estrogen receptor with mononucleosomes.

Ruh MF(1), Chrivia JC, Cox LK, Ruh TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Physiological Science, Saint Louis
University School of Medicine, 1402 S Grand Boulevard, St Louis, MO 63104, USA.
ruhmf@slu.edu

To directly activate specific gene expression, the estrogen receptor (ER) must
bind to estrogen receptor response elements (EREs) in the context of nucleosomes.
In order to investigate the interaction of the ER with mononucleosomes, we
developed a mononucleosome gel shift assay. A 164 bp high specific activity
[(32)P]probe DNA (32 bp consensus ERE with flanking regions separated by 23
nucleotides from an artificial nucleosome positioning sequence) was prepared.
Nuclear extracts from MCF-7 cells or recombinant human ERalpha were incubated
with the labeled ERE +/- excess ERE. A retarded band was seen which was
completely obliterated with excess ERE, confirming the specificity of binding.
This probe was then used to make reconstituted mononucleosomes by sequential
dilution of a high salt histone preparation. The nucleosomes were purified by
sucrose density gradients and footprinting analysis was performed to demonstrate 
that the mononucleosomes were rotationally phased as seen by a periodic digestion
pattern (10 bp) of the nucleosomes versus ERE. Nucleosomes were incubated with
nuclear extracts containing ER or recombinant ERalpha. Dose dependence in the
shift of the mononucleosomes with increasing concentrations of ER was observed.
Specificity was demonstrated in experiments with excess ERE and anti-ER antibody.
Footprinting analysis was also performed. We also determined that addition of
high mobility group protein-2 (HMGB-2, a protein closely related to HMGB-1) with 
the ER increased the interaction of ER with mononucleosomes. These studies will
allow us to address the interactions of ER with core histones containing a
multiplicity of variants and modifications in nucleosomal structure.

PMID: 15062546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Toxicol In Vitro. 2004 Jun;18(3):377-91.

Microarray analysis of the effect of diesel exhaust particles on in vitro
cultured macrophages.

Verheyen GR(1), Nuijten JM, Van Hummelen P, Schoeters GR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Expertise in Environmental Toxicology, Flemish Institute for
Technological Research (Vito), Boeretang 200, B-2400 Mol, Belgium.
geert.verheyen@vito.be

Diesel exhaust particles (DEP) have been reported to induce or aggravate
pulmonary diseases, including cancer and asthma. Alveolar macrophages are
important cellular targets for DEP and have important immunological and
inflammatory properties in the response to foreign substances in the lung. In
vitro cultures of human THP-1 cells were differentiated to macrophages and were
exposed to 1600 ng/ml DEP during 6 and 24 h. Global changes in gene expression
were evaluated using cDNA microarrays containing about 13,000 cDNAs. Each gene on
the microarray was present in duplicate. A colorflip experiment was also
performed, resulting in four ratio measurements for each gene, that were used to 
evaluate significance of the gene expression findings. Gene expression changes
were very modest (<3-fold induction/repression). Less than 1% of all genes were
significantly regulated by DEP. Considering the 6 h exposure data, 50 clones were
up- and 39 were downregulated. For the 24 h exposure data, there were 54
upregulated and 60 downregulated genes. Nine genes (CYP1B1, THBD, Il1b, ITGB7,
SEC6, TNFRSF1B, LPXN, LOC51093 and BTG2) are upregulated and seven (PRDX1, CD36, 
PRKACB, BBOX1, CLK1, STMN1, and HMGB2) are downregulated at both time-points. Our
data indicate the multitude of biological processes potentially influenced by
DEP.

PMID: 15046786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Biochemistry. 2004 Mar 16;43(10):2935-40.

In vitro acetylation of HMGB-1 and -2 proteins by CBP: the role of the acidic
tail.

Pasheva E(1), Sarov M, Bidjekov K, Ugrinova I, Sarg B, Lindner H, Pashev IG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 1113 Sofia,
Bulgaria.

Histone acetyltransferases CBP, PCAF, and Tip60 have been tested for their
ability to in vitro acetylate HMGB-1 and -2 proteins and their truncated forms
lacking the C-terminal tail. It was found that these proteins were substrates for
CBP only. Analyses of modified proteins by electrophoresis, amino acid
sequencing, and mass spectrometry showed that full-length HMGB-1 and -2 were
monoacetylated at Lys2. Removal of the C terminus resulted in (i) an increased
incorporation of radiolabeled acetate within the proteins to a level close to
that observed with histones H3/H4 and (ii) creation of a novel target site at
Lys81. Acetylated and nonmodified HMGB-1 and -2 protein lacking the acidic tail
were compared relative to their binding affinity to distorted DNA and the ability
to bend linear DNA. Both proteins showed similar affinities to cisplatin-damaged 
DNA; the acetylated protein, however, was 3-fold more effective in inducing
ligase-mediated circularization of a 111-bp DNA fragment. The alterations in the 
acetylation pattern of HMGB-1 and -2 upon removal of the C-terminal tail are
regarded as a means by which the acidic domain modulates some properties of these
proteins.

PMID: 15005629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Gut. 2004 Feb;53(2):235-40.

Molecular targets for tumour progression in gastrointestinal stromal tumours.

Koon N(1), Schneider-Stock R, Sarlomo-Rikala M, Lasota J, Smolkin M, Petroni G,
Zaika A, Boltze C, Meyer F, Andersson L, Knuutila S, Miettinen M, El-Rifai W.

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Health Center of Excellence, University of Virginia Health System,
PO Box 800708, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0708, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The distinction between benign and malignant
gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) is often unclear at the clinical and
histopathology levels. GISTs are believed to arise from the stem cells of Cajal. 
In order to define genetic biomarkers and identify target genes related to GIST
progression, we analysed and compared benign and malignant GISTs with verified
follow up data using cDNA expression arrays.
METHODS: Eight genes were frequently overexpressed in malignant GISTs and their
overexpression was confirmed using quantitative real time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. These genes included ezrin (villin 2
(VIL2)), collagen 8 alpha 1 subunit (COL8A1), G2/mitotic specific cyclin B1
(CCNB1), high mobility group protein (HMG2), TSG101 tumour susceptibility
protein, CENP-F kinetochore protein, protein tyrosine kinase 2 (FAK), and protein
kinase DYRK2. To test these genes in a clinical setting, we obtained diagnostic
samples of 16 additional GISTs that were classified at diagnosis as benign,
malignant, and uncertain malignant potential (UMP).
RESULTS: There was remarkable gene overexpression in all malignant GISTs.
Statistical analyses revealed significant correlations between overexpression of 
several gene pairs in malignant GISTs. We found the strongest correlations
(rho>0.70) among the significant correlations (p<0.01) between CCNB1-CENP-F (rho 
= 0.87) and CCNB1-FAK (rho = 0.73). Gene expression of the UMP GISTs suggested
two different groups. Three UMP GISTs had gene expression consistent with
malignant tumours and their follow up data revealed that indeed these patients
had recurrences later on. On the other hand, UMP GISTs that had low gene
expression levels continued free of disease for several years.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide insight into the oncogenesis of GISTs and
suggest that testing the expression profile of a number of genes may segregate
GISTs into groups of different tumour behaviour.

PMCID: PMC1774925
PMID: 14724156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2004 Jan;137(1):131-8.

Evolution and expression of the amphioxus AmphiHMGB gene encoding an HMG-box
protein.

Liu Z(1), Zhang S, Liu M, Wang Y, Chu J, Xu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, PR
China.

Amphioxus HMGB gene, AmphiHMGB, encoding a high mobility group (HMG) protein was 
identified from the gut cDNA library of Branchiostoma belcheri tsingtauense.
Primary structural examination indicates that it is a member of HMGB family.
Molecular phylogenetic analysis suggests that AmphiHMGB represents the archetype 
of chordate HMGB genes including HMGB1, HMGB2 and HMGB3 although it may have lost
its C-terminal domain during evolution. Northern blotting revealed that AmphiHMGB
expression was restricted mainly to guts in the adult, and AmphiHMGB transcripts 
were in greater abundance in gastrula and neurula though they were markedly low
in 1-day larva.

PMID: 14698919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cell Res. 2003 Oct;13(5):351-9.

The in vitro reconstitution of nucleosome and its binding patterns with HMG1/2
and HMG14/17 proteins.

Zhang SB(1), Huang J, Zhao H, Zhang Y, Hou CH, Cheng XD, Jiang C, Li MQ, Hu J,
Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Globin Gene Expression and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China.

Using atomic force microscopy (AFM), the dynamic process of the in vitro
nucleosome reconstitution followed by slow dilution from high salt to low salt
was visualized. Data showed that the histone octamers were dissociated from DNA
at 1M NaCl. When the salt concentration was slowly reduced to 650 mM and 300 mM, 
the core histones bound to the naked DNA gradually. Once the salt concentration
was reduced to 50 mM the classic "beads-on-a-string" structure was clearly
visualized. Furthermore, using the technique of the in vitro reconstitution of
nucleosome, the mono- and di- nucleosomes were assembled in vitro with both
HS2core (-10681 to -10970 bp) and NCR2 (-372 to -194 bp) DNA sequences in the 5
flanking sequence of human b-globin gene. Data revealed that HMG 1/2 and HMG14/17
proteins binding to both DNA sequences are changeable following the assembly and 
disassembly of nucleosomes. We suggest that the changeable binding patterns of
HMG 14/17 and HMG1/2 proteins with these regulatory elements may be critical in
the process of nucleosome assembly, recruitment of chromatin-modifying
activities, and the regulation of human b-globin gene expression.

PMID: 14672558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Curr Opin Immunol. 2003 Oct;15(5):553-9.

Nuclear war: the granzyme A-bomb.

Lieberman J(1), Fan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Blood Research and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School, 800 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
liberman@cbr.med.harvard.edu

Granzyme A, a serine protease in the cytotoxic granules of natural killer cells
and cytotoxic T lymphocytes, induces caspase-independent cell death when
introduced into target cells by perforin. Granzyme A induces single-stranded DNA 
damage as well as rapid loss of cell membrane integrity and mitochondrial
transmembrane potential through unknown mechanisms. Granzyme A destroys the
nuclear envelope by targeting lamins and opens up DNA for degradation by
targeting histones. A special target of the granzyme A cell death pathway is an
endoplasmic reticulum-associated complex, called the SET complex, which contains 
three granzyme A substrates, the nucleosome assembly protein SET, the DNA bending
protein HMG-2, and the base excision repair endonuclease Ape1. The SET complex
also contains the tumor suppressor protein pp32 and the granzyme A-activated
DNase NM23-H1, which is inhibited by SET. Granzyme A cleavage of SET releases the
inhibition and unleashes NM23-H1. Cleavage of Ape1 by granzyme A interferes with 
the ability of the target cell to repair itself. The novel cell death pathway
initiated by granzyme A provides a parallel pathway for apoptosis, important in
destroying targets that overexpress bcl-2 or are otherwise invulnerable to the
caspases.

PMID: 14499264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Clin Chem. 2003 Sep;49(9):1535-7.

High mobility group protein 1 (HMGB1) quantified by ELISA with a monoclonal
antibody that does not cross-react with HMGB2.

Yamada S(1), Inoue K, Yakabe K, Imaizumi H, Maruyama I.

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute, Shino-Test Corporation, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 229-0011,
Japan. Shingo.Yamada@shino-test.co.jp

PMID: 12928240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Biol Cell. 2003 Aug;14(8):3414-26. Epub 2003 Apr 17.

Association of chromatin proteins high mobility group box (HMGB) 1 and HMGB2 with
mitotic chromosomes.

Pallier C(1), Scaffidi P, Chopineau-Proust S, Agresti A, Nordmann P, Bianchi ME, 
Marechal V.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie, Service de Bactériologie-Virologie, Hôpital de Bicêtre,
Assistance Publique/Hôpitaux de Paris, 94275 Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

High mobility group box (HMGB) 1 and 2 are two abundant nonhistone nuclear
proteins that have been found in association with chromatin. Previous studies
based on immunofluorescence analysis indicated that HMGB1 dissociates from
chromosomes during mitosis. In the present work, HMGB1 and 2 subcellular
localization was reinvestigated in living cells by using enhanced green
fluorescent protein- and Discosome sp. red fluorescent protein-tagged proteins.
Contrary to previous reports, HMGB1 and 2 were shown to be present under two
forms in mitotic cells, i.e., free and associated with the condensed chromatin,
which rapidly exchange. A detailed analysis of HMGB2 interaction with mitotic
chromosomes indicated that two sites encompassing HMG-box A and B are responsible
for binding. Importantly, this interaction was rapidly inactivated when cells
were permeabilized or exposed to chemical fixatives that are widely used in
immunodetection techniques. A comparable behavior was also observed for two
proteins of the HMG-nucleosome binding (HMGN) group, namely, HMGN1 and HMGN2.

PMCID: PMC181577
PMID: 12925773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Dokl Biol Sci. 2001 May-Jun;378:227-9.

Immunological identification of endogenous peptides secreted by surviving slices 
of rat olfactory cortex.

Mokrushin AA(1), Plekhanov A.

Author information: 
(1)Pavlov Institute of Physiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, nab. Makarova 6, 
St. Petersburg, 199034 Russia.

PMID: 12918335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Reproduction. 2003 Aug;126(2):171-82.

Global gene profiling analysis of mouse uterus during the oestrous cycle.

Tan YF(1), Li FX, Piao YS, Sun XY, Wang YL.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.

Many genes related to the cyclic changes of the uterus during the oestrous cycle 
have been identified using a one-by-one approach. In the present study, cDNA
microarray technology was applied to investigate the global profile of gene
expression of mouse uterus at the oestrous and dioestrous stages. At a certain
stage of the oestrous cycle, the uteri of mature CD-1 mice (n=10) were removed,
pooled and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was extracted to synthesize 
cDNA probes for microarray assay. By screening 8192 mouse genes and expressed
sequence tags (ESTs), 51 upregulated and 51 downregulated genes were identified
in oestrous uterus, of which 62 are well characterized and 40 are ESTs. The known
genes were assigned to various gene categories according to their main function. 
The microarray was performed three times with three independent sets of uterine
tissue pools. The results of northern blot analysis for small proline-rich
protein 2 (Sprr2), 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (17betaHSD-2), high
mobility group 2 (Hmg2), mitotic checkpoint component 2 (Mad2) and an EST
AW555366 mRNA were consistent with that of microarray analysis. In situ
hybridization was performed to localize the transcript of the EST AW555366. Most 
of the upregulated genes encode secreted immune-related proteins, proteinases and
their inhibitors, indicating their potential involvement in sperm viability as
well as capacitation. The downregulated genes mainly encode cell cycle-related
factors, implying the active proliferation of uterus at dioestrus.

PMID: 12887274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Prescrire Int. 2003 Jun;12(65):91-2.

Lutropin alfa: new preparation. Combined with follitropin for follicular
development: no better than menotropin.

[No authors listed]

(1) The reference ovarian stimulant for women with severe FSH and LH deficiency
and pituitary dysfunction is menotropin (postmenopausal urinary human
gonadotrophin (hMG)). (2) A recombinant LH, lutropin alfa, has now been licensed 
for this use, in combination with recombinant FSH (follitropin alfa or
follitropin beta). The evaluation file contains no data from trials comparing the
follitropin-lutropin alfa combination with menotropin. (3) Two dose-finding
studies involving a total of 78 women, and a double-blind trial comparing
follitropin + placebo with follitropin + lutropin alfa, have shown that 75 IU/day
lutropin alfa yields satisfactory follicular development in two-thirds of women
whose plasma LH concentration is below 1.2 IU/I. Efficacy has not been
demonstrated in women with higher plasma concentrations of LH. Similar results
have been reported with menotropin. (4) The adverse effect profile of the
follitropin + lutropin alfa combination is similar to that of menotropin. The
main risk is an ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Monitoring of plasma estradiol
concentrations, pelvic ultrasound findings, and clinical state are required to
avoid severe ovarian hyperstimulation. There is no evidence that the risk differs
between menotropin and the follitropin + lutropin alfa combination at adjusted
doses. (5) In France, the combination of follitropin alfa + lutropin alfa costs
about five times more than menotropin. (6) Menotropin remains the first line
ovarian stimulant for women with severe deficiency of FSH and LH.

PMID: 12825571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nat Struct Biol. 2003 Jul;10(7):535-40.

Crystal structure of the apoptosis-inducing human granzyme A dimer.

Hink-Schauer C(1), Estébanez-Perpiñá E, Kurschus FC, Bode W, Jenne DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroimmunology, Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology, Am
Klopferspitz 18a, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.

Granzyme A (GzmA) belongs to a family of trypsin-like serine proteases localized 
in cytoplasmic granules of activated lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells.
In contrast to the related granzyme B (GzmB), GzmA forms a stable
disulfide-linked homodimer and triggers target-cell death in a
caspase-independent way. Limited proteolysis of a high-molecular-mass complex
containing SET (also named putative HLA-associated protein II or PHAPII), PHAPI
(pp32, leucine-rich acidic nuclear protein) and HMG2 by GzmA liberates NM23-H1, a
Mg2+-dependent DNase that causes single-stranded breaks in nuclear DNA. By
analyzing the dimeric GzmA structure at a resolution of 2.5 A, we determined the 
substrate-binding constraints and selective advantages of the two domains
arranged as a unique functional tandem. The active sites of the two subunits
point in opposite directions and the nearby noncatalytic surfaces can function as
exosites, presenting substrates to the active site region of the adjacent partner
in a manner analogous to staphylokinase or streptokinase, which present
plasminogen to the cofactor-plasmin and cofactor-plasminogen complexes.

PMID: 12819770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biochem. 2003 Apr;133(4):533-9.

Drosophila DSP1 and rat HMGB1 have equivalent DNA binding properties and share a 
similar secondary fold.

Janke C(1), Martin D, Giraud-Panis MJ, Decoville M, Locker D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS, conventionné avec l'Université
d'Orléans, rue Charles Sadron, 45071 Orléans cedex 2, France.

The protein DSP1 belongs to the group of HMG-box proteins, which share the common
structural feature of the HMG-box. This approximately 80 amino acid long motif
binds DNA via the minor groove. DSP1 was discovered as a transcriptional
co-repressor of Dorsal in Drosophila melanogaster and then was shown to
participate to the remodeling of chromatin. By means of sequence alignment and
gene organization, DSP1 was classified as the fly homologue of the vertebrate
proteins HMGB1/2. DSP1 contains two HMG boxes flanked by two glutamine-rich
domains at the N-terminus. In addition, the HMG domain of DSP1 displays two
differences in its primary sequence as compared to the vertebrate HMGB1: a
shorter acidic tail and a linker between the two boxes longer by 6 amino acids.
By comparing several functional parameters of DSP1 with those of HMGB1, the
present study establishes the functional equivalence of both proteins in terms of
DNA recognition. The major structural difference between the two proteins, the
glutamine-rich N-terminal tail of DSP1, which does not exist in HMGB1, did not
interfere with any of the studied DNA-binding properties of the proteins.

PMID: 12761302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Genome Res. 2003 May;13(5):800-12.

Retroposed copies of the HMG genes: a window to genome dynamics.

Strichman-Almashanu LZ(1), Bustin M, Landsman D.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20894, USA.

Retroposed copies (RPCs) of genes are functional (intronless paralogs) or
nonfunctional (processed pseudogenes) copies derived from mRNA through a process 
of retrotransposition. Previous studies found that gene families involved in mRNA
translation or nuclear function were more likely to have large numbers of RPCs.
Here we characterize RPCs of the few families coding for the abundant
high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins in humans. Using an algorithm we developed, we
identified and studied 219 HMG RPCs. For slightly more than 10% of these RPCs, we
found evidence indicating expression. Furthermore, eight of these are potentially
new members of the HMG families of proteins. For three RPCs, the evidence
indicated expression as part of other transcripts; in all of these, we found the 
presence of alternative splicing or multiple polyadenylation signals. RPC
distribution among the HMGs was not even, with 33-65 each for HMGB1, HMGB3,
HMGN1, and HMGN2, and 0-6 each for HMGA1, HMGA2, HMGB2, and HMGN3. Analysis of
the sequences flanking the RPCs revealed that the junction between the target
site duplications and the 5'-flanking sequences exhibited the same TT/AAAA
consensus found for the L1 endonuclease, supporting an L1-mediated
retrotransposition mechanism. Finally, because our algorithm included aligning
RPC flanking sequences with the corresponding HMG genomic sequence, we were able 
to identify transcribed regions of HMG genes that were not part of the published 
mRNA sequences.

PMCID: PMC430908
PMID: 12727900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 May 1;31(9):2313-22.

The DNA-bending protein HMGB1 is a cellular cofactor of Sleeping Beauty
transposition.

Zayed H(1), Izsvák Z, Khare D, Heinemann U, Ivics Z.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert Rössle Strasse 10, D-13092 
Berlin, Germany.

Sleeping Beauty (SB) is the most active Tc1/ mariner-type transposon in
vertebrates. SB contains two transposase-binding sites (DRs) at the end of each
terminal inverted repeat (IR), a feature termed the IR/DR structure. We
investigated the involvement of cellular proteins in the regulation of SB
transposition. Here, we establish that the DNA-bending, high-mobility group
protein, HMGB1 is a host-encoded cofactor of SB transposition. Transposition was 
severely reduced in mouse cells deficient in HMGB1. This effect was rescued by
transient over-expression of HMGB1, and was partially complemented by HMGB2, but 
not with the HMGA1 protein. Over-expression of HMGB1 in wild-type mouse cells
enhanced transposition, indicating that HMGB1 can be a limiting factor of
transposition. SB transposase was found to interact with HMGB1 in vivo,
suggesting that the transposase may recruit HMGB1 to transposon DNA. HMGB1
stimulated preferential binding of the transposase to the DR further from the
cleavage site, and promoted bending of DNA fragments containing the transposon
IR. We propose that the role of HMGB1 is to ensure that transposase-transposon
complexes are first formed at the internal DRs, and subsequently to promote
juxtaposition of functional sites in transposon DNA, thereby assisting the
formation of synaptic complexes.

PMCID: PMC154227
PMID: 12711676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biochemistry. 2003 Apr 1;42(12):3503-8.

Phosphorylation of maize and Arabidopsis HMGB proteins by protein kinase
CK2alpha.

Stemmer C(1), Leeming DJ, Franssen L, Grimm R, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

In plants, a variety of chromatin-associated high mobility group (HMG) proteins
belonging to the HMGB family have been identified. We have examined the
phosphorylation of the HMGB proteins from the monocotyledonous plant maize and
the dicotyledonous plant Arabidopsis by protein kinase CK2alpha. Maize CK2alpha
phosphorylates the maize HMGB1 and HMGB2/3 proteins and the Arabidopsis HMGB1,
HMGB2/3, and HMGB4 proteins. Maize HMGB4 and HMGB5 and Arabidopsis HMGB5 are not 
phosphorylated by CK2alpha. Depending on the HMGB protein up to five amino acid
residues are phosphorylated in the course of the phosphorylation reaction. The
HMGB1 proteins from both plants are markedly more slowly phosphorylated by
CK2alpha than the other HMGB substrate proteins, indicating that certain HMGB
proteins are clearly preferred substrates for CK2alpha. The rate of the
phosphorylation reaction appears to be related to the ease of interaction between
CK2alpha and the HMGB proteins, as indicated by chemical cross-linking
experiments. MALDI/TOF mass spectrometry analyses demonstrate that the HMGB1 and 
HMGB2/3 proteins occur in various phosphorylation states in immature maize
kernels. Thus, HMGB1 exists as monophosphorylated, double-phosphorylated,
triple-phosphorylated, and tetraphosphorylated protein in kernel tissue, and the 
tetraphosphorylated form is the most abundant version. The observed in vivo
phosphorylation states indicate that protein kinase(s) other than CK2alpha
contribute(s) to the modification of the plant HMGB proteins. The fact that the
HMGB proteins are phosphorylated to various extents reveals that the existence of
differentially modified forms increases the number of distinct HMGB protein
variants in plant chromatin that may be adapted to certain functions.

PMID: 12653554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cell. 2003 Mar 7;112(5):659-72.

Tumor suppressor NM23-H1 is a granzyme A-activated DNase during CTL-mediated
apoptosis, and the nucleosome assembly protein SET is its inhibitor.

Fan Z(1), Beresford PJ, Oh DY, Zhang D, Lieberman J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Blood Research and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2003 Oct 17;115(2):241.

Comment in
    Cell. 2003 Mar 7;112(5):589-91.

Granzyme A (GzmA) induces a caspase-independent cell death pathway characterized 
by single-stranded DNA nicks and other features of apoptosis. A GzmA-activated
DNase (GAAD) is in an ER associated complex containing pp32 and the GzmA
substrates SET, HMG-2, and Ape1. We show that GAAD is NM23-H1, a nucleoside
diphosphate kinase implicated in suppression of tumor metastasis, and its
specific inhibitor (IGAAD) is SET. NM23-H1 binds to SET and is released from
inhibition by GzmA cleavage of SET. After GzmA loading or CTL attack, SET and
NM23-H1 translocate to the nucleus and SET is degraded, allowing NM23-H1 to nick 
chromosomal DNA. GzmA-treated cells with silenced NM23-H1 expression are
resistant to GzmA-mediated DNA damage and cytolysis, while cells overexpressing
NM23-H1 are more sensitive.

PMID: 12628186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell. 2003 Mar 7;112(5):589-91.

SET-ting the stage for life and death.

Chakravarti D(1), Hong R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2003 Mar 7;112(5):659-72.

Cytotoxic T lymphocytes release granzymes (Gzm) A and B to induce apoptosis or
programmed cell death of virally infected or tumor cells. In this issue of Cell, 
Fan et al. identify the tumor metastasis suppressor NM23-H1 as a GzmA-activated, 
apoptosis-inducing DNase and the oncoprotein SET as its inhibitor. Work from the 
Lieberman and Wang groups indicates a surprising role for a group of acidic
nucleo-cytoplasmic proteins in regulating apoptosis.

PMID: 12628178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Exp Med. 2003 Mar 3;197(5):543-7.

VDJ recombination: Artemis and its in vivo role in hairpin opening.

Mansilla-Soto J(1), Cortes P.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Comment on
    J Exp Med. 2003 Mar 3;197(5):553-65.

PMCID: PMC2193822
PMID: 12615895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Biochem Cell Biol. 2002;80(6):765-70.

High-mobility group protein 2 may be involved in the locus control region
regulation of the beta-globin gene cluster.

Lv X(1), Xu DD, Liu DP, Li L, Hao DL, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, People's Republic of China.

Expression regulation of the beta-globin gene cluster is a result of synergistic 
interactions between cis-elements and trans-acting factors. Previous studies
usually concentrated on the core sequence of each hypersensitive site in the
locus control region of the beta-globin gene cluster. But more and more evidence 
illustrates that the flanking regions are indispensable also. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and solid-phase DNase I footprinting
methods, we identified a small nuclear protein from K562 cells that binds
specifically to the first AT-rich region flanking the hypersensitive site 2 core 
sequence of the human beta-globin gene locus control region. N-terminal
sequencing of the enriched protein proved that it is a member of the
high-mobility group protein 2 family. This indicates that the AT-rich region in
human hypersensitive site 2 may take part in the regulation of the beta-globin
gene cluster by facilitating DNA bending, which is a prerequisite for the looping
mechanism in this region.

PMID: 12555809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Immunity. 2003 Jan;18(1):65-74.

Extrachromosomal recombination substrates recapitulate beyond 12/23 restricted
VDJ recombination in nonlymphoid cells.

Jung D(1), Bassing CH, Fugmann SD, Cheng HL, Schatz DG, Alt FW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

V(D)J recombination occurs efficiently only between gene segments flanked by
recombination signals (RSs) containing 12 and 23 base pair spacers (the 12/23
rule). A further limitation "beyond the 12/23 rule" (B12/23) exists at the
TCRbeta locus and ensures Dbeta usage. Herein, we show that extrachromosomal
V(D)J recombination substrates recapitulate B12/23 restriction in nonlymphoid
cells. We further demonstrate that the Vbeta coding flank, the 12-RS
heptamer/nonamer, and the 23-RS spacer each can significantly influence B12/23
restriction. Finally, purified core RAG1 and RAG2 proteins (together with HMG2)
also reproduce B12/23 restriction in a cell-free system. Our findings indicate
that B12/23 restriction of V(D)J recombination is cemented at the level of
interactions between the RAG proteins and TCRbeta RS sequences.

PMID: 12530976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cancer Res. 2003 Jan 1;63(1):100-6.

A nuclear protein complex containing high mobility group proteins B1 and B2, heat
shock cognate protein 70, ERp60, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase is 
involved in the cytotoxic response to DNA modified by incorporation of anticancer
nucleoside analogues.

Krynetski EY(1), Krynetskaia NF, Bianchi ME, Evans WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Thiopurine treatment of human leukemia cells deficient in components of the
mismatch repair system (Nalm6) initiated apoptosis after incorporation into DNA, 
as revealed by caspase activation and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated nick end labeling assay. To elucidate the cellular sensor(s)
responsible for recognition of DNA damage in cells with an inactive mismatch
repair system, we isolated a multiprotein nuclear complex that preferentially
binds DNA with thioguanine incorporated. The components of this nuclear
multiprotein complex, as identified by protein mass spectroscopy, included high
mobility group proteins 1 and 2 (HMGB1, HMGB2), heat shock protein HSC70, protein
disulfide isomerase ERp60, and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. The same
complex was also shown to bind synthetic oligodeoxyribonucleotide duplexes
containing the nonnatural nucleosides 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine or
5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine. Fibroblast cell line derived from Hmgb1(-/-) murine
embryos had decreased sensitivity to thiopurines, with an IC(50) 10-fold greater 
than Hmgb1-proficient cells (P < 0.0001) and exhibited comparable sensitivity to 
vincristine, a cytotoxic drug that is not incorporated into DNA. These findings
indicate that the HMGB1-HMGB2-HSC70-ERp60-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase complex detects changes in DNA structure caused by incorporation of
nonnatural nucleosides and is a determinant of cell sensitivity to such DNA
modifying chemotherapy.

PMID: 12517784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Dec;34(12):1667-79.

A novel TCTG(G/C) direct repeat and an A/T-rich HMG2-binding site control the
expression of the rat cardiac troponin T gene.

Wang Q(1), Li-Chun Lin J, Jung-Ching Lin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242,
USA. Jim-Lim@Uiowa.Edu

We previously showed that the rat cardiac troponin T proximal promoter (-497bp
from the transcriptional start site) was sufficient to confer cardiac-specific
expression of a reporter gene in both cultured cardiomyocytes and transgenic
mice. This promoter consists of two cis-regulatory modules with high sequence
similarity. Nucleotides from -319 to -289 (termed D2) and nucleotides from -249
to -209 (termed F41) contain a TCTG(G/C) direct repeat and an A/T-rich sequence. 
Competition gel mobility shift assays revealed that the same protein factors were
bound to both D2 and F41. Deletion and religation studies of the promoter
suggested that D2 acted as an enhancer but could not totally substitute for the
F41 function. Mutational analyses demonstrated that the direct repeat was
required for the DNA-binding and promoter activity. Moreover, cardiac-specific
42kDa proteins and a ubiquitous high mobility group 2 (HMG2) protein were
identified to be responsible for the binding to the TCTG(G/C) direct repeat and
the A/T-rich sequence, respectively. Overexpression of HMG2 had differential
effects on the promoter in cardiomyocytes versus fibroblasts. Our results
provided the first evidence to support that HMG2 together with tissue-specific
factors could direct a stimulatory or inhibitory effect on thecardiac troponin T 
gene expression in heart or non-heart tissue, respectively.

PMID: 12505064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Autoimmun. 2002 Dec;19(4):251-7.

Autoantibodies to the transcriptional factor SOX13 in primary biliary cirrhosis
compared with other diseases.

Fida S(1), Myers MA, Whittingham S, Rowley MJ, Ozaki S, Mackay IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University,
Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

The molecule SOX13 was initially identified as an autoantigen (ICA12) in Type 1
diabetes. SOX13 is a member of the SOX family of transcriptional regulatory
proteins that contain a high mobility group (HMG) motif with structural
similarity to HMG proteins 1 and 2. Antibodies to HMG 1 and 2 occur in autoimmune
diseases of the liver and in ulcerative colitis. We measured the occurrence and
levels of anti-SOX13 by radioimmunoprecipitation in primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC) and other diseases, and compared frequencies with anti-HMG measured by
ELISA. Anti-SOX13 was detected in 18% of patients with PBC, 13% with autoimmune
hepatitis, 18% with Type 1 diabetes, at lower frequencies in other conditions
including the multisystem autoimmune diseases, systemic lupus erythematosus and
rheumatoid arthritis, and in 1% of normal sera. Anti-HMG1 and anti-HMG2 occurred 
at frequencies of 30% and 35% respectively in PBC. Serum levels of anti-SOX13 and
anti-HMG correlated significantly for PBC although not for Type 1 diabetes.
Anti-SOX13 in PBC may occur merely as an immune response to products of damage to
parenchymal tissue, or may be illustrative of a general proclivity of
transcriptional regulatory proteins to elicit autoimmune responses.

PMID: 12473246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Dec 16;1593(1):77-84.

Involvement of HMGB1 and HMGB2 proteins in exogenous DNA integration reaction
into the genome of HeLa S3 cells.

Ueda T(1), Shirakawa H, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
2641 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan.

High mobility group 1 and 2 proteins (HMGB1 and HMGB2) are abundant chromosomal
proteins in eukaryotic cells. We examined the involvement of HMGB1 and HMGB2 in
nonhomologous illegitimate recombination. The HMGB1 or HMGB2 expression plasmid, 
carrying the neo(r) gene as a selection marker, was introduced into HeLa S3 cells
to obtain stably-transfected cells. The number of G418-resistant colonies was
about 10 times the number of colonies of control cells transfected with plasmids 
not carrying the HMGB genes. The copy number of the stably-integrated neo(r) gene
was higher in the cells transfected with the HMGB expression plasmids than in
control cells. The exogenous DNA integration was suggested to have occurred by
nonhomologous illegitimate recombination. On the contrary, the introduction of
the HMGB antisense RNA expression plasmid with a reporter plasmid carrying the
neo(r) gene into HeLa S3 cells decreased the number of G418-resistant colonies.
These results indicate that HMGB1 and HMGB2 each have a novel function as
stimulators of stable integration of plasmid DNA into the host genome and that
they may be important for the process of spontaneous DNA integration in living
cells.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 12431786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell. 2002 Aug 9;110(3):339-48.

Inappropriate gene activation in FSHD: a repressor complex binds a chromosomal
repeat deleted in dystrophic muscle.

Gabellini D(1), Green MR, Tupler R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Program in Gene Function and Expression,
Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD), a common myopathy, is an autosomal
dominant disease of unknown molecular mechanism. Almost all FSHD patients carry
deletions of an integral number of tandem 3.3 kilobase repeats, termed D4Z4,
located on chromosome 4q35. Here, we find that in FSHD muscle, 4q35 genes located
upstream of D4Z4 are inappropriately overexpressed. We show that an element
within D4Z4 specifically binds a multiprotein complex consisting of YY1, a known 
transcriptional repressor, HMGB2, an architectural protein, and nucleolin. We
demonstrate that this multiprotein complex binds D4Z4 in vitro and in vivo and
mediates transcriptional repression of 4q35 genes. Based upon these results, we
propose that deletion of D4Z4 leads to the inappropriate transcriptional
derepression of 4q35 genes resulting in disease.

PMID: 12176321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. FEBS Lett. 2002 Apr 24;517(1-3):167-71.

Identification of casein kinase Ialpha interacting protein partners.

Dubois T(1), Howell S, Zemlickova E, Aitken A.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Edinburgh, Division of Biomedical and Clinical Laboratory
Sciences, Hugh Robson Building, George Square, Edinburgh, UK.
thierry.dubois@curie.fr

Casein kinase Ialpha (CKIalpha) belongs to a family of serine/threonine protein
kinases involved in membrane trafficking, RNA processing, mitotic spindle
formation and cell cycle progression. In this report, we identified several
CKIalpha interacting proteins including RCC1, high mobility group proteins 1 and 
2 (HMG1, HMG2), Erf, centaurin-alpha1, synaptotagmin IX and CPI-17 that were
isolated from brain as CKIalpha co-purifying proteins. Actin, importin-alpha(1), 
importin-beta, PP2Ac, centaurin-alpha1, and HMG1 were identified by affinity
chromatography using a peptide column comprising residues 214-233 of CKIalpha. We
have previously shown that centaurin-alpha1 represents a CKIalpha partner both in
vitro and in vivo. The nuclear protein regulator of chromosome condensation 1
(RCC1) is a guanosine nucleotide exchange factor for Ran which is involved in
nuclear transport and mitotic spindle formation. Here we show that CKIalpha and
RCC1 interact in brain and in cultured cells. However, the interaction does not
involve residues 217-233 of CKIalpha which are proposed from X-ray structures to 
represent an anchoring site for CKI partners. Formation of the RCC1/CKIalpha
complex is consistent with the association of the kinase with mitotic spindles.
In conclusion, we have identified a number of novel CKIalpha protein partners and
their relations to CKI are discussed.

PMID: 12062430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;21(3):199-212.

Dynamics of reporter gene stimulation by HMG box proteins.

Veilleux S(1), Boissonneault G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada J1H 5N4.

Overcoming local DNA rigidity is required to perform three-dimensional
DNA-protein configuration at promoter regions. The abundant architectural
nonhistone chromosomal HMG box proteins are nonsequence-specific; however, they
have been established to specifically recognize distorted DNA. Using transient
transfection to overexpress two different members of the HMGB-1/2 family of DNA
architectural factors, we demonstrate that these proteins provide a general
enhancement in reporter gene expression irrespective of the promoter being
considered. Evidences are also provided indicating that stimulation may not be
achieved by recruitment of the proteins by regulatory factors or as a consequence
of major chromatin unfolding as previously suggested. Interestingly, the
influence of the HMG box proteins under study was overridden when the promoters
were either induced or stimulated by Trichostatin A (TSA) but recovered upon
extended induction period. These results also support the concept that the
architectural role of these proteins can contribute to the preinitiation complex 
assembly required for basal transcription, but to a much lesser extent to the
poised promoter scaffolding characteristic of activated transcription.

PMID: 12015897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Immunol. 2002 May;38(12-13):911-9.

Immunomodulation by parasites: high mobility group 2 (HMG-2) protein is a
putative intracellular mediator for fucosylated sugars of Schistosoma mansoni.

Dissanayake S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, UAE
University, P.O. Box 17666, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates. sendiss@uaeu.ac.ae

Fucosylated sugars in Schistosoma mansoni possess immunomodulatory properties. In
order to gain insights to the mechanisms involved, attempts were made to identify
host immune cell molecules that specifically recognize these sugars. On Western
blots, specific binding of synthetic biotinylated fucose sugars to proteins of
approximately 25-27kDa was observed. Three proteins were isolated by affinity
chromatography and subjected to protein sequencing. The determined N-terminal
sequences and that of tryptic peptides of two proteins did not show homology to
known sequences in the NCBI database. The third was identified as a member of the
high mobility group 2 (HMG-2) proteins. In vitro stimulation of mouse spleen
cells with Lewis(x) sugars up-regulated the expression of HMG-2 mRNA. These data 
suggest that HMG-2 protein may function as a putative intracellular
receptor/mediator for fucosylated sugars of parasites.

PMID: 12009569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25115-24. Epub 2002 May 2.

The C-terminal extension (CTE) of the nuclear hormone receptor DNA binding domain
determines interactions and functional response to the HMGB-1/-2 co-regulatory
proteins.

Melvin VS(1), Roemer SC, Churchill ME, Edwards DP.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and the Department of Pharmacology, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

Previously, we and others reported that the high mobility group proteins,
HMGB-1/-2, enhance DNA binding in vitro and transactivation in situ by the
steroid hormone subgroup of nuclear receptors but did not influence these
functions of class II receptors. We show here that the DNA binding domain (DBD)
is sufficient to account for the selective influence of HMGB-1/-2 on the steroid 
class of receptors. Furthermore, the use of chimeric DBDs reveals that this
selectivity is dependent on the C-terminal extension (CTE), amino acid sequences 
adjacent to the zinc finger core DBD. HMGB-1/-2 interact directly with the DBDs
of steroid but not class II receptors, and this interaction requires the CTE.
This in vitro interaction correlates with a requirement of the CTE for maximal
HMGB-1/-2 enhancement of DNA binding in vitro and transcriptional activation in
cells. Finally, class II receptor DBDs have a much higher intrinsic affinity for 
DNA than steroid receptor DBDs, and this affinity difference is also dependent on
the CTE. These results reveal the importance of the steroid receptor CTE for DNA 
binding affinity and functional response to HMGB-1/-2.

PMID: 12006575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(8):2810-20.

HMG2 interacts with the nucleosome assembly protein SET and is a target of the
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte protease granzyme A.

Fan Z(1), Beresford PJ, Zhang D, Lieberman J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Blood Research and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The cytotoxic T-lymphocyte protease granzyme A induces caspase-independent cell
death in which DNA single-stranded nicking is observed instead of
oligonucleosomal fragmentation. A 270- to 420-kDa endoplasmic
reticulum-associated complex (SET complex) containing the nucleosome assembly
protein SET, the tumor suppressor pp32, and the base excision repair enzyme APE
can induce single-stranded DNA damage in isolated nuclei in a granzyme
A-dependent manner. The normal functions of the SET complex are unknown, but the 
functions of its components suggest that it is involved in activating
transcription and DNA repair. We now find that the SET complex contains DNA
binding and bending activities mediated by the chromatin-associated protein HMG2.
HMG2 facilitates assembly of nucleoprotein higher-order structures by bending and
looping DNA or by stabilizing underwound DNA. HMG2 is in the SET complex and
coprecipitates with SET. By confocal microscopy, it is observed that cytoplasmic 
HMG2 colocalizes with SET in association with the endoplasmic reticulum, but most
nuclear HMG2 is unassociated with SET. This physical association suggests that
HMG2 may facilitate the nucleosome assembly, transcriptional activation, and DNA 
repair functions of SET and/or APE. HMG2, like SET and APE, is a physiologically 
relevant granzyme A substrate in targeted cells. HMG1, however, is not a
substrate. Granzyme A cleavage after Lys65 in the midst of HMG box A destroys
HMG2-mediated DNA binding and bending functions. Granzyme A cleavage and
functional disruption of key nuclear substrates, including HMG2, SET, APE,
lamins, and histones, are likely to cripple the cellular repair response to
promote cell death in this novel caspase-independent death pathway.

PMCID: PMC133744
PMID: 11909973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(5):1340-51.

Fine structure and activity of discrete RAG-HMG complexes on V(D)J recombination 
signals.

Swanson PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University School
of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska 68178, USA. pswanson@creighton.edu

Two lymphoid cell-specific proteins, RAG-1 and RAG-2, initiate V(D)J
recombination by introducing DNA breaks at recombination signal sequences (RSSs).
Although the RAG proteins themselves bind and cleave DNA substrates containing
either a 12-RSS or a 23-RSS, DNA-bending proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2 are known to
promote these processes, particularly with 23-RSS substrates. Using in-gel
cleavage assays and DNA footprinting techniques, I analyzed the catalytic
activity and protein-DNA contacts in discrete 12-RSS and 23-RSS complexes
containing the RAG proteins and either HMG-1 or HMG-2. I found that both the
cleavage activity and the pattern of protein-DNA contacts in RAG-HMG complexes
assembled on 12-RSS substrates closely resembled those obtained from analogous
12-RSS complexes lacking HMG protein. In contrast, 23-RSS complexes containing
both RAG proteins and either HMG-1 or HMG-2 exhibited enhanced cleavage activity 
and displayed an altered distribution of cleavage products compared to 23-RSS
complexes containing only RAG-1 and RAG-2. Moreover, HMG-dependent heptamer
contacts in 23-RSS complexes were observed. The protein-DNA contacts in
RAG-RSS-HMG complexes assembled on 12-RSS or 23-RSS substrates were strikingly
similar at comparable positions, suggesting that the RAG proteins mediate
HMG-dependent heptamer contacts in 23-RSS complexes. Results of ethylation
interference experiments suggest that the HMG protein is positioned 5' of the
nonamer in 23-RSS complexes, interacting largely with the side of the duplex
opposite the one contacting the RAG proteins. Thus, HMG protein plays the dual
role of bringing critical elements of the 23-RSS heptamer into the same phase as 
the 12-RSS to promote RAG binding and assisting in the catalysis of 23-RSS
cleavage.

PMCID: PMC134695
PMID: 11839801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jan;22(2):626-34.

AAA-ATPase p97/Cdc48p, a cytosolic chaperone required for endoplasmic
reticulum-associated protein degradation.

Rabinovich E(1), Kerem A, Fröhlich KU, Diamant N, Bar-Nun S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) disposes of aberrant proteins
in the secretory pathway. Protein substrates of ERAD are dislocated via the
Sec61p translocon from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol, where they are
ubiquitinated and degraded by the proteasome. Since the Sec61p channel is also
responsible for import of nascent proteins, this bidirectional passage should be 
coordinated, probably by molecular chaperones. Here we implicate the cytosolic
chaperone AAA-ATPase p97/Cdc48p in ERAD. We show the association of mammalian p97
and its yeast homologue Cdc48p in complexes with two respective ERAD substrates, 
secretory immunoglobulin M in B lymphocytes and 6myc-Hmg2p in yeast. The membrane
6myc-Hmg2p as well as soluble lumenal CPY*, two short-lived ERAD substrates, are 
markedly stabilized in conditional cdc48 yeast mutants. The involvement of Cdc48p
in dislocation is underscored by the accumulation of ERAD substrates in the
endoplasmic reticulum when Cdc48p fails to function, as monitored by activation
of the unfolded protein response. We propose that the role of p97/Cdc48p in ERAD,
provided by its potential unfoldase activity and multiubiquitin binding capacity,
is to act at the cytosolic face of the endoplasmic reticulum and to chaperone
dislocation of ERAD substrates and present them to the proteasome.

PMCID: PMC139744
PMID: 11756557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biochem. 2002 Jan;131(1):153-60.

Distorted DNA structures induced by HMGB2 possess a high affinity for HMGB2.

Nakamura Y(1), Shimizu M, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo
Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan.

HMGB2 (HMG2) protein binds with DNA duplex in a sequence-nonspecific manner, then
bends and unwinds the DNA. In DNA cyclization analyses for the bending activity
of HMGB2, two unidentified bands, denoted alpha and beta, were observed in
addition to monomer circular DNA (1C) on the gel. Re-electrophoresis and
proteinase K digestion revealed that alpha and beta are complexes of circularized
probe DNA (seeming 1C) with HMGB2 (K(d) approximately 10(-10) M). The DNA
components of alpha and beta (alpha- and beta-DNA) showed higher affinities to
HMGB2 than did the linear probe DNA (K(d) approximately 10(-7) M). The DNAs have 
distorted structures containing partial single-stranded regions. Nicked circular 
molecules presumably due to severe DNA distortion by HMGB2 were observed in
alpha- and beta-DNA, in addition to closed circular double-stranded molecules.
The alpha and beta bands were not formed in the presence of sole DNA binding
regions which are necessary for DNA bending, indicating that the acidic C-tail in
the HMGB2 molecule is necessary for inducing the peculiar distorted structures of
higher affinity to HMGB2. HMGB2 binds with linker DNA and/or the entry and exit
of nucleosomes fixed at both ends likewise mini-circles similar to alpha-DNA and 
beta-DNA. Thus, the distorted structures present in alpha-DNA and beta-DNA should
be important in considering the functional mechanisms in which HMGB2
participates.

PMID: 11754747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 1;277(9):7157-64. Epub 2001 Dec 17.

HMGB1 and HMGB2 cell-specifically down-regulate the p53- and p73-dependent
sequence-specific transactivation from the human Bax gene promoter.

Stros M(1), Ozaki T, Bacikova A, Kageyama H, Nakagawara A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Kralovopolská 135, 612 65 Brno, Czech Republic. stros@ibp.cs

The recently cloned gene p73 is a close homologue of p53, which is a crucial
tumor suppressor gene for preventing the malignant transformation of cells by
inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Previous reports have shown that
architectural DNA-bending/looping chromosomal proteins HMGB1 and HMGB2 (formerly 
known as HMG1 and HMG2), which function in a number of biological processes
including transcription and DNA repair, interact in vitro with p53 and stimulate 
p53 binding to DNA containing p53 consensus sites. Here, we report that HMGB1
physically interacts with two splicing variants of p73, alpha and beta (pull-down
assay), and enhances binding of p73 to specific cognate DNA sites (gel-shift
assay). Both HMG box domains of HMGB1, A and B, interact with p73alpha.
Association of HMGB1 with p73, like the demonstrated ability of HMGB1 to
stimulate p73 binding to different p53-responsive elements, requires the
oligomerization region and/or region between DNA-binding domain and
oligomerization domain of p73 (residues 312-381). Transient transfections
revealed that ectopically expressed or endogenous HMGB1 and HMGB2 (antisense
strategy) significantly inhibit in vivo both p73alpha/beta- and p53-dependent
transactivation from the Bax gene promoter (and much less from Mdm2 and p21(waf1)
promoters) in p53-deficient SAOS-2 cells. In contrast, HMGB1 and HGMB2 stimulate 
p73- or p53-dependent transactivation in p53-deficient H1299 cells, irrespective 
of the promoter used. Our results suggest that ubiquitously expressed HMGB1 and
HMGB2 have potential to cell- and promoter-specifically down- or up-regulate in
vivo transcriptional activity of different members of the p53 family. A possible 
mechanism of HMGB1-mediated modulation of p73- and p53-dependent transactivation 
is discussed.

PMID: 11748232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 11;277(2):1092-8. Epub 2001 Nov 1.

Protein kinase CK2 differentially phosphorylates maize chromosomal high mobility 
group B (HMGB) proteins modulating their stability and DNA interactions.

Stemmer C(1), Schwander A, Bauw G, Fojan P, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

The high mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family are architectural
factors in eukaryotic chromatin, which are involved in the regulation of various 
DNA-dependent processes. We have examined the post-translational modifications of
five HMGB proteins from maize suspension cultured cells, revealing that HMGB1 and
HMGB2/3, but not HMGB4 and HMGB5, are phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2. The
phosphorylation sites have been mapped to the acidic C-terminal domains by
analysis of tryptic peptides derived from HMGB1 and HMGB2/3 using nanospray ion
trap mass spectrometry. In native HMGB1, Ser(149) is constitutively
phosphorylated, whereas Ser(133) and Ser(136) are differentially phosphorylated. 
The functional significance of the CK2-mediated phosphorylation of HMGB proteins 
was analyzed by circular dichroism measurements showing that the phosphorylation 
increases the thermal stability of the HMGB proteins. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays demonstrate that the phosphorylation reduces the affinity of the
HMGB proteins for linear DNA. The specific recognition of DNA minicircles is not 
affected by the phosphorylation, but a different pattern of protein-DNA complexes
is formed. Collectively, these findings show that phosphorylation of residues
within the acidic C-terminal domain of the HMGB proteins can modulate protein
stability and the DNA binding properties of the HMGB proteins.

PMID: 11694523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;21(19):6598-605.

HMG proteins and DNA flexibility in transcription activation.

Ross ED(1), Hardwidge PR, Maher LJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Foundation, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The relative stiffness of naked DNA is evident from measured values of
longitudinal persistence length (approximately 150 bp) and torsional persistence 
length (approximately 180 bp). These parameters predict that certain arrangements
of eukaryotic transcription activator proteins in gene promoters should be much
more effective than others in fostering protein-protein interactions with the
basal RNA polymerase II transcription apparatus. Thus, if such interactions
require some kind of DNA looping, DNA loop energies should depend sensitively on 
helical phasing of protein binding sites, loop size, and intrinsic DNA curvature 
within the loop. Using families of artificial transcription templates where these
parameters were varied, we were surprised to find that the degree of
transcription activation by arrays of Gal4-VP1 transcription activators in HeLa
cell nuclear extract was sensitive only to the linear distance separating a basal
promoter from an array of bound activators on DNA templates. We now examine the
hypothesis that this unexpected result is due to factors in the extract that act 
to enhance apparent DNA flexibility. We demonstrate that HeLa cell nuclear
extract is rich in a heat-resistant activity that dramatically enhances apparent 
DNA longitudinal and torsional flexibility. Recombinant mammalian high-mobility
group 2 (HMG-2) protein can substitute for this activity. We propose that the
abundance of HMG proteins in eukaryotic nuclei provides an environment in which
DNA is made sufficiently flexible to remove many constraints on protein binding
site arrangements that would otherwise limit efficient transcription activation
to certain promoter geometries.

PMCID: PMC99805
PMID: 11533247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochem Soc Trans. 2001 Aug;29(Pt 4):395-401.

HMG1 and 2: architectural DNA-binding proteins.

Thomas JO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Biochemistry, 80 
Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK. jot1@bioc.cam.ac.uk

HMG1 and 2 (high mobility group proteins 1 and 2; renamed HMGB1 and 2) contain
two DNA-binding HMG-box domains (A and B) and a long acidic C-terminal domain.
They bind DNA without sequence specificity, but have a high affinity for bent or 
distorted DNA, and bend linear DNA. The individual A and B boxes (which, although
broadly similar, show both structural and functional differences) exhibit many of
the structure-specific properties of the whole protein. The acidic tail modulates
the affinity of the tandem HMG boxes in HMG1 and 2 for a variety of DNA targets, 
including four-way junctions, but not distorted DNA minicircles, to which the
proteins bind with very high affinity. HMG1 and 2 appear to play important
architectural roles in the assembly of nucleoprotein complexes in a variety of
biological processes, for example V(D)J recombination, the initiation of
transcription, and DNA repair.

PMID: 11497996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Biochemistry. 2001 Jul 3;40(26):7860-7.

Differential chromatin association and nucleosome binding of the maize HMGA,
HMGB, and SSRP1 proteins.

Lichota J(1), Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000
Aalborg, Denmark.

In plants, chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins have been identified in
the HMGA family, containing A/T-hook DNA binding motifs, and in the HMGB family, 
containing an HMG-box DNA binding domain, that are considered architectural
factors in chromatin. We have characterized the association of the HMGA protein, 
five different HMGB proteins, and the structure-specific recognition protein 1
(SSRP1) with maize chromatin by extraction experiments using NaCl, ethidium
bromide, spermine, and distamycin A. The difference in the release of the
proteins from chromatin by these reagents indicates that they are differentially 
associated with chromatin. This was confirmed by treatment of chromatin with
micrococcal nuclease, demonstrating that the HMGA, HMGB2/3, and SSRP1 proteins
are enriched in the highly nuclease-sensitive fraction of chromatin, which is
likely to be transcriptionally competent. As examined by electrophoretic mobility
shift analyses, the HMGA protein and the proteins containing an HMG domain (HMGB 
proteins and SSRP1) bind specifically to purified maize mononucleosomes that
contain a histone octamer and approximately 165 bp of DNA. The mode of
interaction with the nucleosomes differs for HMGA and HMGB proteins. In the case 
of the HMGB1 protein, the full-length protein is required for specific nucleosome
binding, as the individual HMG-box DNA binding domain (which is sufficient for
DNA interactions) interacts nonspecifically with the nucleosomes. Collectively,
these findings indicate that HMGA, the various HMGB proteins, and SSPR1 are
differentially associated with plant chromatin and may act as architectural
factors in different nucleoprotein structures.

PMID: 11425313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Gene. 2001 May 30;270(1-2):161-9.

Molecular evolution of Sry and Sox gene.

Nagai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Medical University, Department of Biochemistry, 160-8402, Tokyo, Japan. 
kozo-nag@tokyo-med.ac.jp

The mammalian Sry on the short arm of the Y chromosome encodes a nuclear
factor-like protein harboring a DNA-binding domain known as the HMG box. The Sox 
genes encode similar factor like proteins, but the sequence similarity of the HMG
box to that of Sry is variable as being at least 60%. The functional relationship
of Sox to Sry genes with special reference to sex determination is unclear except
for a few items such as human autosomal Sox9. Thus, it is significant to know
more about the evolutionary in addition to the functional relationship between
Sry and Sox genes for deepening and broadening our understanding concerning
primary sex determination. Therefore, to clarify the ancestry and molecular
evolution of the mammalian sex determining gene Sry with its evolutionary
relationships to the Sox gene, a molecular phylogenetic tree for the HMG box
superfamily was constructed and analyzed, and the following conclusions were
reached: (1) The nuclear non histone HMG proteins are supposedly the oldest,
appearing at least more than one billion years ago, before the divergence of
animals and plants. They diverged into two subgroups: one contains HMG14 and
HMG17, and the other one contains HMG1 and HMG2 with various other genes.
Subsequent divergences include the nucleolar UBF, nuclear SSRP as well as fungal 
mating protein Mc, MAT and Ste11. (2) The Sox and Sry genes diverged following
the diversification of lymphoid transcription factors TCF and LEF. The Sry gene
might have definitely evolved from the Sox gene cluster a few hundred million
years ago. Additionally, the marsupial Sry, e.g. from Wallabie's and Dunnart's,
is distinguished by being distant from eutherian Sry, but being closely related
to the Sox gene cluster. (3) Molecular evolutionary rates estimated in mammalian 
Sry as the divergent rate per 100 million years are much higher than in Sox genes
or other genes from the HMG box superfamily. This rapid evolution of Sry might
agree with the fact that the Srys are present not on the pseudoautosomal region
but on the distal region with no recombination of the Y chromosomal short arm.

PMID: 11404013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Neurochem. 2001 Apr;77(1):120-31.

Identity of nuclear high-mobility-group protein, HMG-1, and sulfoglucuronyl
carbohydrate-binding protein, SBP-1, in brain.

Chou DK(1), Evans JE, Jungalwala FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, Center for Mental
Retardation, Waltham, Massachusetts 02452, USA.

High-mobility-group (HMG) proteins are a family of non-histone chromosomal
proteins which bind to DNA. They have been implicated in multiple aspects of gene
regulation and cellular differentiation. Sulfoglucuronyl carbohydrate binding
protein, SBP-1, which is also localized in the neuronal nuclei, was shown to be
required for neurite outgrowth and neuronal migration during development of the
nervous system. In order to establish relationship between SBP-1 and HMG family
proteins, two HMG proteins were isolated and purified from developing rat
cerebellum by heparin-sepharose and sulfatide-octyl-sepharose affinity column
chromatography and their biochemical and biological properties were compared with
those of SBP-1. Characterization by high performance liquid chromatography--mass 
spectrometry (HPLC-MS), partial peptide sequencing and western blot analysis
showed the isolated HMG proteins to be HMG-1 and HMG-2. Isoelectric focusing,
HPLC-MS and peptide sequencing data also suggested that HMG-1 and SBP-1 were
identical. Similar to SBP-1, both HMG proteins bound specifically to sulfated
glycolipids, sulfoglucuronylglycolipids (SGGLs), sulfatide and seminolipid in
HPTLC-immuno-overlay and solid-phase binding assays. The HMG proteins promoted
neurite outgrowth in dissociated cerebellar cells, which was inhibited by SGGLs, 
anti-Leu7 hybridoma (HNK-1) and anti-SBP-1 peptide antibodies, similar to SBP-1. 
The proteins also promoted neurite outgrowth in explant cultures of cerebellum.
The results showed that the cerebellar HMG-1 and -2 proteins have similar
biochemical and biological properties and HMG-1 is most likely identical to
SBP-1.

PMID: 11279268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Biochem. 2001 Apr;129(4):643-51.

HMG box A in HMG2 protein functions as a mediator of DNA structural alteration
together with box B.

Nakamura Y(1), Yoshioka K, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan.

Nonhistone protein HMG2, like HMG1, binds with B-DNA in a sequence-nonspecific
manner and causes structural alterations in DNA such as bending, kinking and
unwinding. Here, we studied the functions of HMG2 domains in the DNA structural
alteration and modulation by using various HMG2 peptides, and we demonstrated
several new findings. The HMG box itself as a DNA-binding motif may have the
basic function of inducing curvature, resulting in the apparent DNA bending in
the DNA cyclization assay, but not of abruptly kinking DNA. The DNA-binding
activity of HMG box B, which is enhanced by the presence of box A, together with 
the flanking regions of box B, causes DNA bending accompanying the kinking of the
DNA main chain. The DNA unwinding accompanied by DNA kinking diminishes cruciform
structures in supercoiled DNA. Analysis using mutant peptides for box A confirmed
that box A in HMG2 functions as a mediator of DNA structural alteration together 
with box B. The present studies on the functional properties of the respective
regions of HMG2 may help to elucidate the protein function.

PMID: 11275566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1265-73.

Reduced fertility and spermatogenesis defects in mice lacking chromosomal protein
Hmgb2.

Ronfani L(1), Ferraguti M, Croci L, Ovitt CE, Schöler HR, Consalez GG, Bianchi
ME.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, Istituto Scientifico San Raffaele, via Olgettina 58, Italy.

High mobility group 2 protein (Hmgb2) is a member of the HMGB protein family,
which includes the ubiquitous Hmgb1 and the embryo-specific Hmgb3. The three
proteins are more than 80% identical at the amino acid level and their
biochemical properties are indistinguishable. Hmgb1 is an abundant component of
all mammalian nuclei and acts as an architectural factor that bends DNA and
promotes protein assembly on specific DNA targets. Cells that lack Hmgb1 can
survive, although mutant mice die shortly after birth. As Hmgb2 is present in all
cultured cells and is abundant in thymus, the preferred source for HMGB proteins,
it was considered a ubiquitous variant of Hmgb1. We show that in adult mice Hmgb2
is restricted mainly to lymphoid organs and testes, although it is widely
expressed during embryogenesis. Mice that lack Hmgb2 are viable. However, male
Hmgb2(-/-) mice have reduced fertility, that correlates with Sertoli and germ
cell degeneration in seminiferous tubules and immotile spermatozoa.
Significantly, Hmgb2 is expressed at very high levels in primary spermatocytes,
while it is barely detectable in spermatogonia and elongated spermatids. This
peculiar pattern of expression and the phenotype of mutants indicate that Hmgb2
has a specialised role in germ cell differentiation.

PMID: 11262228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Autoimmunity. 2000 Dec;32(4):281-91.

Detection of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr mice and
analysis of their target antigens.

Ma W(1), Ozaki S, Sobajima J, Uesugi H, Murakami M, Tanaka M, Kozuki M, Hashimoto
H, Fujita Y, Kawabata D, Osakada F, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Hayami M, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Japan.

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) have been widely studied and
recognized to be clinically very important for some human diseases including
systemic rheumatic diseases. We analyzed ANCA response and their target antigens 
in MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr (MRL-lpr) mice, an animal model of systemic rheumatic disease. 
P-ANCA was detected in 57% of the mice. Antibodies to the known P-ANCA target
antigens at the same age were examined. Among these, antibodies to high mobility 
group (HMG) proteins HMG1 and HMG2 were detected in 57% of the mice, 75% of which
were also positive for P-ANCA. These anti-HMG1/HMG2 activities were absorbed by
preincubation with a mixture of HMG1 and HMG2. In contrast, antibodies to
myeloperoxidase and cathepsin G were detected in 14% and 7%, respectively, but
these activities were not inhibited by preincubation with corresponding antigens.
In addition, the titers of P-ANCA and anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies in MRL-lpr mice
were significantly correlated with each other. Thus, HMG1 and HMG2 were
considered to be significant target antigens of P-ANCA in MRL-lpr mice.

PMID: 11191287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Mol Biol. 2000 Dec 8;304(4):529-40.

Phage display screening reveals an association between germline-specific
transcription factor Oct-4 and multiple cellular proteins.

Butteroni C(1), De Felici M, Schöler HR, Pesce M.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg, D-69126, Germany.

Oct-4 is a transcription factor that is specifically expressed in mouse embryonic
stem cells and in cell lines derived thereof. In these cells, Oct-4 activates
transcription from remote binding sites due to as of yet unknown co-activators.
Expression of Oct-4 in differentiated cells is not sufficient to activate
transcription from a distance, rather it requires the co-expression of
co-activators such as the adenoviral oncoprotein E1A. In this paper, we used
phage display to identify Oct-4-interacting proteins. We first analyzed the
interaction between Oct-4 and E1A in order to optimize the biochemical conditions
that enable Oct-4-specific interactions with other interacting proteins. A
panning approach was used to enrich Oct-4 interacting phages from a pool of
excess unspecific phages. The biochemical conditions established in our
interaction assays were then used to screen a P19 EC cell cDNA expression library
in M13 filamentous phage. A number of phage clones displaying portions of unknown
and known transcription factors were obtained, from which the HMG-1 transcription
factor was identified. HMG-1, and the closely related factor HMG-2, interact with
Oct-4 when co-expressed in mammalian cells. In addition, HMG-1 was found to
cooperate with Oct-4 in P19 EC cells. These results provide the first evidence of
a non-viral factor that enhances Oct-4 distance-dependent transactivation in stem
cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11099378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Genomics. 2000 Nov 15;70(1):140-9.

Mouse scrapie responsive gene 1 (Scrg1): genomic organization, physical linkage
to sap30, genetic mapping on chromosome 8, and expression in neuronal primary
cell cultures.

Dron M(1), Tartare X, Guillo F, Haik S, Barbin G, Maury C, Tovey M, Dandoy-Dron
F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Oncology, CNRS UPR 9045, Villejuif Cedex, 94801, France.

We have previously reported a transcript of a novel mouse gene (Scrg1) with
increased expression in transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and the cloning
of the human mRNA analogue. In this paper, we present the genomic organization of
the mouse and human SCRG1 loci, which exhibit a high degree of conservation. The 
genes are composed of three exons; the two downstream exons contain the protein
coding region. The mouse gene is expressed in brain tissue essentially as a
0.7-kb message but also as a minor 2.6-kb mRNA. We have sequenced 20 kb of DNA at
the mouse Scrg1 locus and found that the longer transcript is the prolongation of
the 0.7-kb mRNA to a polyadenylation site located about 2 kb further downstream. 
Sequencing revealed that the mouse Scrg1 gene is physically linked to Sap30, a
gene that encodes a protein of the histone deacetylase complex, and genetic
linkage mapping assigned the localization of Scrg1 to chromosome 8 between Ant1
and Hmg2. Northern blot analysis showed that Scrg1 is under strict developmental 
control in mouse embryo and is expressed by cells of neuronal origin in vitro.
Comparison of the rat, mouse, and human SCRG1 proteins identified a box of 35
identical contiguous amino acids and a characteristic cysteine distribution
pattern defining a new protein signature.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Mol Biol. 2000 Nov 24;304(2):135-49.

The effect of the acidic tail on the DNA-binding properties of the HMG1,2 class
of proteins: insights from tail switching and tail removal.

Lee KB(1), Thomas JO.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK.

The high-mobility group (HMG) proteins HMG1, HMG2 and HMG2a are relatively
abundant vertebrate DNA-binding and bending proteins that bind with structure
specificity, rather than sequence specificity, and appear to play an
architectural role in the assembly of nucleoprotein complexes. They have two
homologous "HMG-box" DNA-binding domains (which show about 80 % homology)
connected by a short basic linker to an acidic carboxy-terminal tail that differs
in length between HMG1 and 2. To gain insights into the role of the acidic tail, 
we examined the DNA-binding properties of HMG1, HMG2b and HMG2a from chicken
erythrocytes (corresponding to HMG1, HMG2 and HMG2a in other vertebrates). HMG1, 
with the longest acidic tail, is less effective than HMG2a and 2b (at a given
molar input ratio) in supercoiling relaxed, closed circular DNA, in inducing
ligase-mediated circularisation of an 88 bp DNA fragment, and in binding to
four-way DNA junctions in a gel-shift assay. Removal of the acidic tail increases
the affinity of the HMG boxes for DNA and largely abolishes the differences
between the three species. Switching the acidic tail of HMG1 for that of HMG2a or
2b gives hybrid proteins with essentially the same DNA-binding properties as
HMG2a, 2b. The length (and possibly sequence) of the acidic tail thus appears to 
be the dominant factor in mediating the differences in properties between HMG1,
2a and 2b and finely tunes the rather similar DNA-binding properties of the
tandem HMG boxes, presumably to fulfill different cellular roles. The tail is
essential for structure-selective DNA-binding of the HMG boxes to DNA minicircles
in the presence of equimolar linear DNA, and has little effect on the affinity
for this already highly distorted DNA ligand, in contrast to binding to linear
and four-way junction DNA.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11080451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. BMC Mol Biol. 2000;1:1. Epub 2000 Oct 18.

High affinity binding of proteins HMG1 and HMG2 to semicatenated DNA loops.

Gaillard C(1), Strauss F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, 2 Place Jussieu, 75251 Paris 05, France.
gaillard@ijm.jussieu.fr

BACKGROUND: Proteins HMG1 and HMG2 are two of the most abundant non histone
proteins in the nucleus of mammalian cells, and contain a domain of homology with
many proteins implicated in the control of development, such as the
sex-determination factor Sry and the Sox family of proteins. In vitro studies of 
interactions of HMG1/2 with DNA have shown that these proteins can bind to many
unusual DNA structures, in particular to four-way junctions, with binding
affinities of 10(7) to 10(9) M(-1).
RESULTS: Here we show that HMG1 and HMG2 bind with a much higher affinity, at
least 4 orders of magnitude higher, to a new structure, Form X, which consists of
a DNA loop closed at its base by a semicatenated DNA junction, forming a DNA
hemicatenane. The binding constant of HMG1 to Form X is higher than 5 x 10(12)
M(-1), and the half-life of the complex is longer than one hour in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Of all DNA structures described so far with which HMG1 and HMG2
interact, we have found that Form X, a DNA loop with a semicatenated DNA junction
at its base, is the structure with the highest affinity by more than 4 orders of 
magnitude. This suggests that, if similar structures exist in the cell nucleus,
one of the functions of these proteins might be linked to the remarkable property
of DNA hemicatenanes to associate two distant regions of the genome in a stable
but reversible manner.

PMCID: PMC29088
PMID: 11041984  [PubMed]


189. J Rheumatol. 2000 Oct;27(10):2489-93.

Relationship between sex and antibodies to high mobility group proteins 1 and 2
in juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Rosenberg AM(1), Cordeiro DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.
rosenberg@sask.usask.ca

OBJECTIVE: To compare the frequencies of antibodies to high mobility group
proteins 1 and 2 (HMG-1, HMG-2) in boys and girls with juvenile idiopathic
arthritis (JIA).
METHODS: Sera of 60 children (44 girls, 16 boys) with JIA were screened for the
presence of anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and antichromatin antibodies by
indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) on eukaryotic cells and were assayed further
for the presence of antibodies to purified HMG-1 and HMG-2 by enzyme
immunoassays.
RESULTS: A positive test for ANA was significantly associated with the presence
of antibodies to both HMG-1 and HMG-2. There was a significant association
between antibodies targeting the chromosomal regions of metaphase cells and
antibodies to both HMG-1 and HMG-2. Females were significantly more likely than
males to have ANA, and specifically more likely to have antibodies to HMG-1.
There was a significant association between the presence of antibodies to HMG
proteins and chromosomal reactivity detected by IIF on HEp-2 cells.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that females with JIA are more likely to be ANA
positive than males and more likely than males to have antibodies to HMG-1.

PMID: 11036848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Chem Biol. 2000 Oct;7(10):805-12.

FR900482 class of anti-tumor drugs cross-links oncoprotein HMG I/Y to DNA in
vivo.

Beckerbauer L(1), Tepe JJ, Cullison J, Reeves R, Williams RM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of the high-mobility group, HMG I/Y, family of
chromatin oncoproteins has been implicated as a clinical diagnostic marker for
both neoplastic cellular transformation and increased metastatic potential of
several human cancers. These minor groove DNA-binding oncoproteins are thus an
attractive target for anti-tumor chemotherapy. FR900482 represents a new class of
anti-tumor agents that bind to the minor groove of DNA and exhibit greatly
reduced host toxicity compared to the structurally related mitomycin C class of
anti-tumor drugs. We report covalent cross-linking of DNA to HMG I/Y by FR900482 
in vivo which represents the first example of a covalent DNA-drug-protein
cross-link with a minor groove-binding oncoprotein and a potential novel
mechanism through which these compounds exert their anti-tumor activity.
RESULTS: Using a modified chromatin immunoprecipitation procedure, fragments of
DNA that have been covalently cross-linked by FR900482 to HMG I/Y proteins in
vivo were polymerase chain reaction-amplified, isolated and characterized. The
nuclear samples from control cells were devoid of DNA fragments whereas the
nuclear samples from cells treated with FR900482 contained DNA fragments which
were cross-linked by the drug to the minor groove-binding HMG I/Y proteins in
vivo. Additional control experiments established that the drug also cross-linked 
other non-oncogenic minor groove-binding proteins (HMG-1 and HMG-2) but did not
cross-link major groove-binding proteins (Elf-1 and NFkappaB) in vivo. Our
results are the first demonstration that FR900482 cross-links a number of minor
groove-binding proteins in vivo and suggests that the cross-linking of the HMG
I/Y oncoproteins may participate in the mode of efficacy as a chemotherapeutic
agent.
CONCLUSIONS: We have illustrated that the FR class of anti-tumor antibiotics,
represented in this study by FR900482, is able to produce covalent cross-links
between the HMG I/Y oncoproteins and DNA in vivo. The ability of this class of
compounds to cross-link the HMG I/Y proteins in the minor groove of DNA
represents the first demonstration of drug-induced cross-linking of a specific
cancer-related protein to DNA in living cells. We have also demonstrated that
FR900482 cross-links other minor groove-binding proteins (HMG-1 and HMG-2 in the 
present study) in vivo; however, since HMG I/Y is the only minor groove-binding
oncoprotein presently known, it is possible that these non-histone chromatin
proteins are among the important in vivo targets of this family of drugs. These
compounds have already been assessed as representing a compelling clinical
replacement for mitomycin C due to their greatly reduced host toxicity and
superior DNA interstrand cross-linking efficacy. The capacity of FR900482 to
cross-link the HMG I/Y oncoprotein with nuclear DNA in vivo potentially
represents a significant elucidation of the anti-tumor efficacy of this family of
anticancer agents.

PMID: 11033083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. BMC Biochem. 2000;1:1. Epub 2000 Jul 19.

DNA loops and semicatenated DNA junctions.

Gaillard C(1), Strauss F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, 2 Place Jussieu, 75251 Paris 05, France.

BACKGROUND: Alternative DNA conformations are of particular interest as potential
signals to mark important sites on the genome. The structural variability of CA
microsatellites is particularly pronounced; these are repetitive poly(CA).
poly(TG) DNA sequences spread in all eukaryotic genomes as tracts of up to 60
base pairs long. Many in vitro studies have shown that the structure of poly(CA).
poly(TG) can vary markedly from the classical right handed DNA double helix and
adopt diverse alternative conformations. Here we have studied the mechanism of
formation and the structure of an alternative DNA structure, named Form X, which 
was observed previously by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of DNA fragments
containing a tract of the CA microsatellite poly(CA). poly(TG) but had not yet
been characterized.
RESULTS: Formation of Form X was found to occur upon reassociation of the strands
of a DNA fragment containing a tract of poly(CA). poly(TG), in a process strongly
stimulated by the nuclear proteins HMG1 and HMG2. By inserting Form X into DNA
minicircles, we show that the DNA strands do not run fully side by side but
instead form a DNA knot. When present in a closed DNA molecule, Form X becomes
resistant to heating to 100 degrees C and to alkaline pH.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data strongly support a model of Form X consisting in a DNA loop
at the base of which the two DNA duplexes cross, with one of the strands of one
duplex passing between the strands of the other duplex, and reciprocally, to form
a semicatenated DNA junction also called a DNA hemicatenane.

PMCID: PMC29057
PMID: 11001588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Electrophoresis. 2000 May;21(9):1846-52.

Alteration of protein composition in mouse thymocytes by signals through T-cell
receptor.

Kawakami T(1), Nagata T, Muraguchi A, Nishimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Core Technology Department, Glaxo Wellcome K.K. Tsukuba Research Laboratories,
Ibaraki, Japan.

To avoid destructive autoimmunity, T-cell precursors (thymocytes) expressing
autoreactive T-cell receptor are deleted in the thymus via an apoptotic process
by the signals from the T-cell receptor-CD3 complexes. In order to analyze the
apoptotic mechanism, we established a cell-free system using the lysates from
mouse thymocytes treated in vivo with anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (mAb). The
soluble cytosolic high molecular mass protein fraction from the anti-CD3-treated 
thymocytes revealed an activity that directly induces nuclear apoptotic
morphological changes and DNA fragmentation. This fragmentation activity was not 
observed in the fraction from the thymocytes without anti-CD3 treatment. Proteins
in both fractions were separated by two-dimensional electrophoresis. The
silver-stained gels revealed differences in protein spots. These protein spots
were identified by database searching of mass spectrometric (MS) and tandem mass 
spectrometric (MS/MS) data obtained from in-gel tryptic digests of the spots,
using an integrated system of liquid chromatography/electrospray
ionization/ion-trap mass spectrometry. In this study, the high mobility group
protein HMG2 was identified as one of the cytosolic proteins that is increased by
the signals from the T-cell receptor, and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
A2/B1 and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase were found to be decreased by 
the signals.

PMID: 10870970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 1998 Sep;33(9):520-3.

[Development of human fetal preantral follicles in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu J(1), Zhang L, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Third Clinical Medical College, Beijing Medical University.

OBJECTIVE: To study oocyte maturation of human fetal preantral follicles in
vitro, the effects of different factors on oocyte maturation.
METHODS: Preantral follicles were obtained from fetal ovaries from termination of
20-28 weeks gestation. Factors involved in the development, maturation of fetal
preantral follicles were studied in tissue and cell culture by means of Northern 
blot, and RT-PCR (nested).
RESULTS: (1) Preantral follicles obtained from fetal ovary increased in size to
more than 120 microns in diameter without antrum formation and with increasing
time the preantral oocytes became mature with extrusion of 1st polar body,
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) had a more marked effect on oocyte
maturation, as compared with epidermal growth factor (EGF). (2) Expression of
alpha fetoprotein mRNA occurred in fetal follicles on day 5, 15, 25, 35 of
culture, and became negative on day 45 of culture. (3) Medium consisted of 1.
human menopasual gonadotropin (hMG), 2. follicular fluid, 3. IGF-1, 4. EGF
increased the expression of bcl-2 mRNA by 17.6%, 22.4%, 47.1% and 37.5%
respectively in fetal follicular cells, and down-regulated the expression of p53 
mRNA by 19.8%, 22.1%, 42.6% and 31.6% respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) The development and maturation of fetal preantral follicles in
vitro differed from those in vivo. (2) Expression of bcl-2 mRNA increased and
expression of wild-type p53 mRNA decreased during follicular development and
maturation.

PMID: 10806724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biopolymers. 1999 Dec;50(7):679-89.

Association of double-stranded DNA fragments into multistranded DNA structures.

Gaillard C(1), Flavin M, Woisard A, Strauss F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, 2 place Jussieu, 75251 Paris 05, France.

We have previously observed that double-stranded DNA fragments containing a tract
of the tandemly repeated sequence poly(CA). poly(TG) can associate in vitro to
form stable complexes of low electrophoretic mobility, which are recognized with 
high specificity by proteins HMG1 and HMG2. The formation of such complexes has
since been observed to depend on interactions of DNA with polypropylene surfaces,
with the suggestion that the formation of low mobility complexes might be the
result of strand dissociation followed by misaligned reassociation of the
repetitive sequences. The data presented here show that at high ionic strength
the interactions of DNA with polypropylene are sufficiently strong for DNA to
remain bound to the polypropylene surface, which suggests that DNA might also be 
involved in interactions with hydrophobic molecules in vivo. Under such
conditions, low-mobility complexes are found only in the material adsorbed to the
polypropylene surface, and all DNA fragments are able to form low-mobility
structures, whether or not they contain repetitive sequences. Preventing the
separation of strands by ligating hairpin loop oligonucleotides at both ends of
the fragments does not prevent the formation of low-mobility complexes. Our
results suggest two different pathways for the formation of complexes. In the
first, dissociation is followed by misaligned reassociation of repetitive
sequences, yielding duplexes with single-stranded end regions that associate to
form multimeric complexes. In the second, repetitive as well as nonrepetitive DNA
molecules bound to polypropylene adopt a conformation with locally unwound
regions, which allows interactions between neighboring duplexes adsorbed on the
surface, resulting in the formation of low-mobility complexes.

Copyright 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10547523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochemistry. 1999 Sep 14;38(37):12150-8.

DNA bending induced by high mobility group proteins studied by fluorescence
resonance energy transfer.

Lorenz M(1), Hillisch A, Payet D, Buttinelli M, Travers A, Diekmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, Jena, Germany.

The HMG domains of the chromosomal high mobility group proteins homologous to the
vertebrate HMG1 and HMG2 proteins preferentially recognize distorted DNA
structures. DNA binding also induces a substantial bend. Using fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET), we have determined the changes in the
end-to-end distance consequent on the binding of selected insect counterparts of 
HMG1 to two DNA fragments, one of 18 bp containing a single dA(2) bulge and a
second of 27 bp with two dA(2) bulges. The observed changes are consistent with
overall bend angles for the complex of the single HMG domain with one bulge and
of two domains with two bulges of approximately 90-100 degrees and approximately 
180-200 degrees, respectively. The former value contrasts with an inferred value 
of 150 degrees reported by Heyduk et al. (1) for the bend induced by a single
domain. We also observe that the induced bend angle is unaffected by the presence
of the C-terminal acidic region. The DNA bend of approximately 95 degrees
observed in the HMG domain complexes is similar in magnitude to that induced by
the TATA-binding protein (80 degrees), each monomeric unit of the integration
host factor (80 degrees), and the LEF-1 HMG domain (107 degrees). We suggest this
value may represent a steric limitation on the extent of DNA bending induced by a
single DNA-binding motif.

PMID: 10508419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;19(10):6532-42.

The RAG1 homeodomain recruits HMG1 and HMG2 to facilitate recombination signal
sequence binding and to enhance the intrinsic DNA-bending activity of RAG1-RAG2.

Aidinis V(1), Bonaldi T, Beltrame M, Santagata S, Bianchi ME, Spanopoulou E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

V(D)J recombination is initiated by the specific binding of the RAG1-RAG2
(RAG1/2) complex to the heptamer-nonamer recombination signal sequences (RSS).
Several steps of the V(D)J recombination reaction can be reconstituted in vitro
with only RAG1/2 plus the high-mobility-group protein HMG1 or HMG2. Here we show 
that the RAG1 homeodomain directly interacts with both HMG boxes of HMG1 and HMG2
(HMG1,2). This interaction facilitates the binding of RAG1/2 to the RSS, mainly
by promoting high-affinity binding to the nonamer motif. Using
circular-permutation assays, we found that the RAG1/2 complex bends the RSS DNA
between the heptamer and nonamer motifs. HMG1,2 significantly enhance the binding
and bending of the 23RSS but are not essential for the formation of a bent DNA
intermediate on the 12RSS. A transient increase of HMG1,2 concentration in
transfected cells increases the production of the final V(D)J recombinants in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC84623
PMID: 10490593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jul 15;27(14):2938-46.

A dimer of the lymphoid protein RAG1 recognizes the recombination signal sequence
and the complex stably incorporates the high mobility group protein HMG2.

Rodgers KK(1), Villey IJ, Ptaszek L, Corbett E, Schatz DG, Coleman JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Section of Immunobiology,
Howard Huges Medical Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8114, USA.

RAG1 and RAG2 are the two lymphoid-specific proteins required for the cleavage of
DNA sequences known as the recombination signal sequences (RSSs) flanking V, D or
J regions of the antigen-binding genes. Previous studies have shown that RAG1
alone is capable of binding to the RSS, whereas RAG2 only binds as a RAG1/RAG2
complex. We have expressed recombinant core RAG1 (amino acids 384-1008) in
Escherichia coli and demonstrated catalytic activity when combined with RAG2.
This protein was then used to determine its oligomeric forms and the dissociation
constant of binding to the RSS. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that
up to three oligomeric complexes of core RAG1 form with a single RSS. Core RAG1
was found to exist as a dimer both when free in solution and as the minimal
species bound to the RSS. Competition assays show that RAG1 recognizes both the
conserved nonamer and heptamer sequences of the RSS. Zinc analysis shows the core
to contain two zinc ions. The purified RAG1 protein overexpressed in E.coli
exhibited the expected cleavage activity when combined with RAG2 purified from
transfected 293T cells. The high mobility group protein HMG2 is stably
incorporated into the recombinant RAG1/RSS complex and can increase the affinity 
of RAG1 for the RSS in the absence of RAG2.

PMCID: PMC148510
PMID: 10390537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jun 15;1432(1):1-12.

Reexamination of the high mobility group-1 protein for self-association and
characterization of hydrodynamic properties.

Ranatunga W(1), Lebowitz J, Axe B, Pavlik P, Kar SR, Scovell WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, OH
43403, USA.

Previous studies of the 25 kDa high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein have
generated conflicting results regarding whether HMG-1 exists as a monomer or is
capable of oligomerizing to (functional) tetramers. To resolve this question,
sedimentation velocity analysis yielded a s20,w value of 2.59S, which is
consistent with a monomeric protein. Equilibrium sedimentation data were obtained
for three HMG-1 concentrations at two rotor speeds. The six sets of data were fit
to both an ideal single component and monomer-dimer equilibrium model, with
essentially identical fits produced for both models, with the latter indicating a
low extent (7%) of dimerization. Reaction of HMG-1 with glutaraldehyde produced a
small population of oligomers consistent with a low level of dimers. This
supported the monomer-dimer equilibrium model. Surprisingly, gel permeation
chromatography yielded an apparent molecular mass of approx. 55 kDa for both
HMG-1 and HMG-2. This finding is considered anomalous and presumably due to the
high negative charge density in the C terminus of HMG-1. The sedimentation data
also permit one to model HMG-1 as a hydrated prolate ellipsoid with a major
axis/minor axis ratio of 2. 79. The collective evidence from the sedimentation
and chemical cross-linking studies strongly supports a moderately asymmetric
monomer in solution and unequivocally eliminates the possibility of a highly
extended shape for HMG-1 or the existence of any extensive oligomerization.

PMID: 10366723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4159-66.

DNA hairpin opening mediated by the RAG1 and RAG2 proteins.

Shockett PE(1), Schatz DG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Section of Immunobiology, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8011, USA.

The lymphoid cell-specific proteins RAG1 and RAG2 initiate V(D)J recombination by
cleaving DNA adjacent to recombination signals, generating blunt signal ends and 
covalently sealed, hairpin coding ends. A critical next step in the reaction is
opening of the hairpins, but the factor(s) responsible has not been identified
and had been thought to be a ubiquitous component(s) of the DNA repair machinery.
Here we demonstrate that RAG1 and RAG2 possess an intrinsic single-stranded
nuclease activity capable of nicking hairpin coding ends at or near the hairpin
tip. In Mn2+, a synthetic hairpin is nicked 5 nucleotides (nt) 5' of the hairpin 
tip, with more distant sites of nicking suppressed by HMG2. In Mg2+, hairpins
generated by V(D)J cleavage are nicked whereas synthetic hairpins are not.
Cleavage-generated hairpins are nicked at the tip and predominantly 1 to 2 nt 5' 
of the tip. RAG1 and RAG2 may therefore be responsible for initiating the
processing of coding ends and for the generation of P nucleotides during V(D)J
recombination.

PMCID: PMC104375
PMID: 10330156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Gut. 1999 Jun;44(6):867-73.

High mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 are
significant target antigens of perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
in autoimmune hepatitis.

Sobajima J(1), Ozaki S, Uesugi H, Osakada F, Inoue M, Fukuda Y, Shirakawa H,
Yoshida M, Rokuhara A, Imai H, Kiyosawa K, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Comment in
    Gut. 1999 Jun;44(6):776-7.

BACKGROUND: High mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and
HMG2 have been identified as novel antigens of perinuclear anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCAs), and the existence of anti-HMG1 and anti-HMG2
antibodies in a population of patients with ulcerative colitis has been reported.
AIMS: To investigate whether HMG1 and HMG2 are target antigens for p-ANCAs in
autoimmune hepatitis (AIH).
PATIENTS: Serum samples from 28 patients with AIH, 44 patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis (PBC), 27 patients with chronic hepatitis C, and 23 patients
with chronic hepatitis B were tested.
METHODS: ANCAs were detected by routine indirect immunofluorescence (IIF).
Anti-HMG1 and anti-HMG2 antibodies were assayed by enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay.
RESULTS: p-ANCAs were detected in 89% (25/28) of patients with AIH, 36% (16/44)
of patients with PBC, 11% (3/27) of patients with chronic hepatitis C, and 13%
(3/23) of patients with chronic hepatitis B. Anti-HMG1 and/or anti-HMG2
antibodies were detected in 89% (25/28) of patients with AIH, 70% (31/44) with
PBC, 26% (7/27) with chronic hepatitis C, and 9% (2/23) with chronic hepatitis B.
In AIH, anti-HMG1 and/or anti-HMG2 antibodies were detected in 96% (24/25) of
p-ANCA positive patients. The p-ANCA staining pattern detected by IIF using sera 
from patients with AIH disappeared or decreased in titre after preincubation with
a mixture of HMG1/HMG2. The presence and titres of those antibodies in AIH
correlated significantly with those of p-ANCA, but not with those of anti-nuclear
antibody or anti-smooth muscle antibody.
CONCLUSIONS: HMG1 and HMG2 are significant target antigens of p-ANCA in AIH.

PMCID: PMC1727543
PMID: 10323891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12346-54.

Structural and kinetic studies of a cisplatin-modified DNA icosamer binding to
HMG1 domain B.

Jamieson ER(1), Jacobson MP, Barnes CM, Chow CS, Lippard SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

The high mobility group (HMG) domain is a DNA-binding motif found in the
non-histone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2, and some transcription factors. 
Experimental evidence has demonstrated that HMG-domain proteins can play a role
in sensitizing cells to the anticancer drug cisplatin. Fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET) experiments were performed in the present study to
investigate structural changes that accompany complex formation between the HMG
domain B of HMG1 and a cisplatin-modified, 20-base pair double-stranded DNA probe
containing fluorescein and rhodamine tethered at its two ends. The binding
affinity of HMG1 domain B for the cisplatin-modified DNA probe was investigated
in fluorescence titration experiments, and a value of 60 +/- 30 nM was determined
for the dissociation constant. Single photon counting methods were employed to
measure the fluorescence lifetime of the fluorescein donor in the presence and
absence of HMG1 domain B. These FRET experiments revealed a distance change that 
was used to estimate a bend angle of 80-95 degrees for the cisplatin-modified DNA
upon protein binding. Stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopic experiments
afforded kinetic parameters for HMG1 domain B binding to the cisplatin-modified
DNA probe, with kon = 1.1 +/- 0.1 x 10(9) M-1 s-1 and koff = 30 +/- 4 s-1.

PMID: 10212205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1999 Jan;90(1):108-15.

Enhancement of cisplatin sensitivity in high mobility group 2 cDNA-transfected
human lung cancer cells.

Arioka H(1), Nishio K, Ishida T, Fukumoto H, Fukuoka K, Nomoto T, Kurokawa H,
Yokote H, Abe S, Saijo N.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo.

To elucidate the role of high mobility group 2 protein (HMG2) in
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (cisplatin, CDDP) sensitivity, we constructed a
human HMG2-transfected human non-small cell lung cancer cell line, PC-14/HMG2.
The HMG2 mRNA expression level was approximately twice those of parental PC-14
and mock-transfected PC-14/CMV. Gel mobility shift assay revealed a CDDP-treated 
DNA-protein complex in the nuclear extract of PC-14/HMG2, which was not found in 
the extracts of PC-14 and PC-14/CMV. This complex formation was subject to
competition by CDDP-treated non-specific salmon sperm DNA, indicating that
ectopic HMG2 recognizes CDDP-damaged DNA. PC-14/HMG2 showed more than 3-fold
higher sensitivity to CDDP than PC-14 and PC-14/CMV. The intracellular platinum
content of PC-14/HMG2 after exposure to 300 microM CDDP was 1.1 and 1.5 times
that of PC-14 and PC-14/CMV, respectively. Cellular glutathione levels were not
different in these cell lines. Repair of DNA interstrand cross-links determined
by alkaline elution assay was decreased in PC-14/HMG2. These results suggest that
HMG2 may enhance the CDDP sensitivity of cells by inhibiting repair of the DNA
lesion induced by CDDP.

PMID: 10076573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Virol. 1999 Apr;73(4):2994-3003.

HMG protein family members stimulate human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and
avian sarcoma virus concerted DNA integration in vitro.

Hindmarsh P(1), Ridky T, Reeves R, Andrake M, Skalka AM, Leis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

We have reconstituted concerted human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
integration in vitro with specially designed mini-donor HIV-1 DNA, a supercoiled 
plasmid acceptor, purified bacterium-derived HIV-1 integrase (IN), and host HMG
protein family members. This system is comparable to one previously described for
avian sarcoma virus (ASV) (A. Aiyar et al., J. Virol. 70:3571-3580, 1996) that
was stimulated by the presence of HMG-1. Sequence analyses of individual HIV-1
integrants showed loss of 2 bp from the ends of the donor DNA and almost
exclusive 5-bp duplications of the acceptor DNA at the site of integration. All
of the integrants sequenced were inserted into different sites in the acceptor.
These are the features associated with integration of viral DNA in vivo. We have 
used the ASV and HIV-1 reconstituted systems to compare the mechanism of
concerted DNA integration and examine the role of different HMG proteins in the
reaction. Of the three HMG proteins examined, HMG-1, HMG-2, and HMG-I(Y), the
products formed in the presence of HMG-I(Y) for both systems most closely match
those observed in vivo. Further analysis of HMG-I(Y) mutants demonstrates that
the stimulation of integration requires an HMG-I(Y) domain involved in DNA
binding. While complexes containing HMG-I(Y), ASV IN, and donor DNA can be
detected in gel shift experiments, coprecipitation experiments failed to
demonstrate stable interactions between HMG-I(Y) and ASV IN or between HMG-I(Y)
and HIV-1 IN.

PMCID: PMC104059
PMID: 10074149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Gene. 1998 Dec 28;225(1-2):97-105.

Selection of a cDNA clone for chicken high-mobility-group 1 (HMG1) protein
through its unusually conserved 3'-untranslated region, and improved expression
of recombinant HMG1 in Escherichia coli.

Lee KB(1), Brooks DJ, Thomas JO.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK.

Screening of cDNA libraries for the homologous vertebrate proteins high mobility 
group (HMG) 1 and 2 using DNA probes based on the coding sequences is likely to
result in isolation of both HMG1 and HMG2 clones, as well as pseudogenes, which
may be transcribed at low levels. However, the 3'-untranslated regions (UTRs) of 
HMG1 and 2 are quite distinct, and unusually conserved across species. We have
used this property to select the true chicken HMG1 cDNA clone from a chicken
lymphocyte cDNA library in lambdagt11, using a probe based on the 3'-UTR of rat
HMG1 cDNA. The chicken HMG1 cDNA clone is very similar to all the complete HMG1
cDNA clones isolated so far. We suggest that the sequence designated chicken HMG1
in the GenBank Data Library (Accession number D14314) is, in fact, that of HMG2a 
[and moreover that the recently reported mouse clone (Accession number AF022465),
proposed to encode a new HMG protein, HMG4, is also likely to encode an HMG2a,
based on the translated amino-acid sequence and 3'-UTR]. We also report much
improved expression of intact recombinant HMG1 in Escherichia coli by the use of 
chloramphenicol rather than ampicillin selection and conditions that limit cell
growth. This should be general for all members of the HMG1 (and 2) family which
may be toxic to cells (possibly because of the long acidic tail), and may also
prove useful in the production of other such proteins.

PMID: 9931456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cancer Res. 1999 Jan 15;59(2):342-6.

Transcription factor Y-box binding protein 1 binds preferentially to
cisplatin-modified DNA and interacts with proliferating cell nuclear antigen.

Ise T(1), Nagatani G, Imamura T, Kato K, Takano H, Nomoto M, Izumi H, Ohmori H,
Okamoto T, Ohga T, Uchiumi T, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Japan School of Medicine, Kitakyushu Fukuoka.

The Y-box binding protein (YB-1) binds to inverted CCAAT box sequences that are
present in the promoter region of many genes. We previously showed that YB-1 is
overexpressed in human cancer cell lines that are resistant to cisplatin and that
the depletion of YB-1 by transfection of a vector expressing YB-1 antisense RNA
increases the sensitivity of human cancer cells to cisplatin. To determine
whether YB-1 can bind to cisplatin-modified DNA, we fused YB-1 cDNA to
glutathione S-transferase (GST) cDNA and purified the resulting GST fusion
protein. When we tested the fusion protein with unmodified or cisplatin-modified 
oligonucleotides, we found that GST-YB-1 bound more strongly to
cisplatin-modified oligonucleotides, as did GST fusion proteins of high mobility 
group 1 (HMG1), HMG2, and xeroderma pigmentosum group A protein. When we assayed 
the ability of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) to interact with the GST
fusion proteins, we observed binding to YB-1 but not to HMG1, HMG2, or xeroderma 
pigmentosum group A. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that YB-1 and PCNA
interact directly via the COOH-terminal region of YB-1. Using immunochemical
coprecipitation methods, we observed binding of YB-1 and PCNA in vivo. These
results suggest that YB-1 can function as a recognition protein for
cisplatin-damaged DNA and that it may be important in DNA repair or in directing 
the cellular response to DNA damage.

PMID: 9927044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):2113-7.

Activation of transcription in vitro by the BRCA1 carboxyl-terminal domain.

Haile DT(1), Parvin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

The breast and ovarian specific tumor suppressor protein, BRCA1, has been shown
to be a transcription factor because its carboxyl terminus, when fused to the
GAL4 DNA binding domain, activates gene expression in cells. In this study,
purified GAL4-BRCA1 protein functions in transcriptional activation assays using 
a minimal in vitro system. When compared with a standard activator, GAL4-VP16,
the levels of activation produced by the BRCA1 fusion protein were stronger when 
in the presence of certain coactivators. The transcriptional activation by BRCA1 
is maximal when in the presence of the PC4 (positive component 4) coactivator but
not HMG2 (high mobility group protein 2) and when the template is negatively
supercoiled. By contrast, transcriptional activation by VP16 was highest in the
presence of HMG2 as well as PC4 and when DNA templates had linear topology.
Activation by VP16 was largely unaffected by the concentration of TFIIH, whereas 
activation by BRCA1 was strongly affected by TFIIH concentrations. The differing 
cofactor and template requirements suggest that GAL4-BRCA1 and GAL4-VP16 regulate
different steps in the pathways that lead to transcriptional activation.

PMID: 9890972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biochemistry. 1999 Jan 12;38(2):589-95.

Differences in DNA recognition and conformational change activity between boxes A
and B in HMG2 protein.

Yoshioka Ki(1), Saito K, Tanabe T, Yamamoto A, Ando Y, Nakamura Y, Shirakawa H,
Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba, Japan.

High mobility group (HMG) 2 is a sequence-nonspecific DNA-binding protein
consisting of a repeat of DNA-binding domains called HMG1/2 boxes A and B and an 
acidic C-terminal. To understand the mode of HMG2 interaction with DNA, we
expressed various HMG2 peptides containing HMG1/2 box(es) in Escherichia coli
cells and purified them. Gel retardation and DNA supercoiling assay indicated
that the region essential for the preferential binding of HMG2 with negatively
supercoiled DNA and DNA unwinding activity is located in box B, but not
sufficient alone. The flanking C-terminal basic region or box A linked by a
linker region is necessary to express activities. The SPR measurements certified 
that the intrinsic DNA binding affinity of box B is weaker (Kd = 170 microM), and
these adjoining regions largely strengthen the affinity (Kd </= 1.2 microM). In
contrast, box A, even in the presence of the adjoining basic linker region,
showed no such activities, indicating that boxes A and B are different in their
DNA recognition mode. The computer modeling suggested that the side chain of
Phe-102 in box B is inserted into the base stack to cause DNA conformational
changes, while the side chain of Ala-16 in box A is too small to intercalate.
These represent that boxes A and B have similar tertiary structures but their
activities for DNA conformational changes obviously differ. Box B is the main
region for DNA recognition and conformational changes, and box A must play an
assistant to increase its DNA recognition.

PMID: 9888798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Plant Physiol. 1999 Jan;119(1):41-8.

Arachidonic acid alters tomato HMG expression and fruit growth and induces
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase-independent lycopene accumulation

Rodriguez-Concepcion M(1), Gruissem W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, 211 Koshland Hall, University of
California, Berkeley, California 94720-3102, USA.

Regulation of isoprenoid end-product synthesis required for normal growth and
development in plants is not well understood. To investigate the extent to which 
specific genes for the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase
(HMGR) are involved in end-product regulation, we manipulated expression of the
HMG1 and HMG2 genes in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) fruit using arachidonic
acid (AA). In developing young fruit AA blocked fruit growth, inhibited HMG1, and
activated HMG2 expression. These results are consistent with other reports
indicating that HMG1 expression is closely correlated with growth processes
requiring phytosterol production. In mature-green fruit AA strongly induced the
expression of HMG2, PSY1 (the gene for phytoene synthase), and lycopene
accumulation before the normal onset of carotenoid synthesis and ripening. The
induction of lycopene synthesis was not blocked by inhibition of HMGR activity
using mevinolin, suggesting that cytoplasmic HMGR is not required for carotenoid 
synthesis. Our results are consistent with the function of an alternative plastid
isoprenoid pathway (the Rohmer pathway) that appears to direct the production of 
carotenoids during tomato fruit ripening.

PMCID: PMC32240
PMID: 9880344  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


209. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 1998 Jun;21(3):95-107.

[High mobility group protein HMG1/HMG2: clinical significance of the
autoantibodies].

[Article in Japanese]

Ozaki S.

PMID: 9867410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Sep 29;250(3):598-601.

Identification of the nuclear factor HMG2 as an activator for DFF nuclease
activity.

Toh SY(1), Wang X, Li P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 30 Medical Drive, Singapore, 117609, 
Singapore.

DNA fragmentation during apoptosis is mediated by a heterodimeric protein
complex, DFF45/ICAD and DFF40/CAD/CPAN. Purified DFF40 alone possesses intrinsic 
nuclease activity that is inhibited by its association with DFF45. The
proteolytic cleavage of DFF45 by caspase-3 frees the DFF40 subunit to function as
a nuclease. In the course of identifying factors that stimulate DFF activity, we 
have isolated a nuclear factor and identified it as the high mobility group
protein 2 (HMG2). We found that bacterially expressed HMG2 is able to enhance the
nuclease activity of DFF. As HMG2 has DNA bending activity (6), our data suggest 
that HMG proteins may augment DNA fragmentation during apoptosis through changes 
in chromosome structure.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9784391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Virol. 1998 Nov;72(11):8477-84.

High-mobility group 1/2 proteins are essential for initiating rolling-circle-type
DNA replication at a parvovirus hairpin origin.

Cotmore SF(1), Tattersall P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

Rolling-circle replication is initiated by a replicon-encoded endonuclease which 
introduces a single-strand nick into specific origin sequences, becoming
covalently attached to the 5' end of the DNA at the nick and providing a 3'
hydroxyl to prime unidirectional, leading-strand synthesis. Parvoviruses, such as
minute virus of mice (MVM), have adapted this mechanism to amplify their linear
single-stranded genomes by using hairpin telomeres which sequentially unfold and 
refold to shuttle the replication fork back and forth along the genome, creating 
a continuous, multimeric DNA strand. The viral initiator protein, NS1, then
excises individual genomes from this continuum by nicking and reinitiating
synthesis at specific origins present within the hairpin sequences. Using in
vitro assays to study ATP-dependent initiation within the right-hand (5') MVM
hairpin, we have characterized a HeLa cell factor which is absolutely required to
allow NS1 to nick this origin. Unlike parvovirus initiation factor (PIF), the
cellular complex which activates NS1 endonuclease activity at the left-hand (3') 
viral origin, the host factor which activates the right-hand hairpin elutes from 
phosphocellulose in high salt, has a molecular mass of around 25 kDa, and appears
to bind preferentially to structured DNA, suggesting that it might be a member of
the high-mobility group 1/2 (HMG1/2) protein family. This prediction was
confirmed by showing that purified calf thymus HMG1 and recombinant human HMG1 or
murine HMG2 could each substitute for the HeLa factor, activating the NS1
endonuclease in an origin-specific nicking reaction.

PMCID: PMC110256
PMID: 9765384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biochem. 1998 Sep;124(3):519-27.

High mobility group proteins 1 and 2 can function as DNA-binding regulatory
components for DNA-dependent protein kinase in vitro.

Yumoto Y(1), Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Suwa A, Watanabe F, Teraoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathological Biochemistry, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

The DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) holoenzyme consists of a 470-kDa
catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), a DNA-binding regulatory component known as Ku
protein, and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) with ends. We previously reported that
the activity of DNA-PK in vitro is stimulated by non-histone chromosomal high
mobility group proteins (HMG) 1 and 2 comprising two similar repeats, termed
domains A and B, and an acidic C-terminal. Here we demonstrate that in vitro HMG1
and 2 can completely replace Ku protein as the DNA-binding regulatory component
of DNA-PK. DNA-PKcs and Ku protein were separately purified from Raji nuclear
extracts, and reconstituted into the DNA-PK holoenzyme in the presence of dsDNA. 
DNA-PKcs alone catalyzed DNA-dependent phosphorylation at a very low but
significant level, and HMG1 and 2 markedly stimulated the phosphorylation of
alpha-casein and a specific peptide substrate in a DNA-dependent manner. The
HMG2-domains (A+B) polypeptide devoid of the C-terminal acidic region was more
effective for DNA-PKcs stimulation than the full-length HMG2, and HMG2-domain A
and -domain B polypeptides. Anti(Ku protein) antibodies inhibited the
DNA-dependent phosphorylation activity of the DNA-PKcs:Ku protein complex, but
not that of DNA-PKcs alone or when it was complexed with HMG1 or 2. These results
demonstrate that HMG1 and 2 can function as the DNA-binding regulatory component 
for DNA-PKcs in vitro, and imply that a conformational change of dsDNA, which is 
elicited by regulatory components, is important for the stimulation of DNA-PK
activity of DNA-PKcs.

PMID: 9722660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4471-87.

High-mobility group chromatin proteins 1 and 2 functionally interact with steroid
hormone receptors to enhance their DNA binding in vitro and transcriptional
activity in mammalian cells.

Boonyaratanakornkit V(1), Melvin V, Prendergast P, Altmann M, Ronfani L, Bianchi 
ME, Taraseviciene L, Nordeen SK, Allegretto EA, Edwards DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

We previously reported that the chromatin high-mobility group protein 1 (HMG-1)
enhances the sequence-specific DNA binding activity of progesterone receptor (PR)
in vitro, thus providing the first evidence that HMG-1 may have a coregulatory
role in steroid receptor-mediated gene transcription. Here we show that HMG-1 and
the highly related HMG-2 stimulate DNA binding by other steroid receptors,
including estrogen, androgen, and glucocorticoid receptors, but have no effect on
DNA binding by several nonsteroid nuclear receptors, including retinoid acid
receptor (RAR), retinoic X receptor (RXR), and vitamin D receptor (VDR). As
highly purified recombinant full-length proteins, all steroid receptors tested
exhibited weak binding affinity for their optimal palindromic hormone response
elements (HREs), and the addition of purified HMG-1 or -2 substantially increased
their affinity for HREs. Purified RAR, RXR, and VDR also exhibited little to no
detectable binding to their cognate direct repeat HREs but, in contrast to
results with steroid receptors, the addition of HMG-1 or HMG-2 had no stimulatory
effect. Instead, the addition of purified RXR enhanced RAR and VDR DNA binding
through a heterodimerization mechanism and HMG-1 or HMG-2 had no further effect
on DNA binding by RXR-RAR or RXR-VDR heterodimers. HMG-1 and HMG-2 (HMG-1/-2)
themselves do not bind to progesterone response elements, but in the presence of 
PR they were detected as part of an HMG-PR-DNA ternary complex. HMG-1/-2 can also
interact transiently in vitro with PR in the absence of DNA; however, no direct
protein interaction was detected with VDR. These results, taken together with the
fact that PR can bend its target DNA and that HMG-1/-2 are non-sequence-specific 
DNA binding proteins that recognize DNA structure, suggest that HMG-1/-2 are
recruited to the PR-DNA complex by the combined effect of transient protein
interaction and DNA bending. In transient-transfection assays, coexpression of
HMG-1 or HMG-2 increased PR-mediated transcription in mammalian cells by as much 
as 7- to 10-fold without altering the basal promoter activity of target reporter 
genes. This increase in PR-mediated gene activation by coexpression of HMG-1/-2
was observed in different cell types and with different target promoters,
suggesting a generality to the functional interaction between HMG-1/-2 and PR in 
vivo. Cotransfection of HMG-1 also increased reporter gene activation mediated by
other steroid receptors, including glucocorticoid and androgen receptors, but it 
had a minimal influence on VDR-dependent transcription in vivo. These results
support the conclusion that HMG-1/-2 are coregulatory proteins that increase the 
DNA binding and transcriptional activity of the steroid hormone class of
receptors but that do not functionally interact with certain nonsteroid classes
of nuclear receptors.

PMCID: PMC109033
PMID: 9671457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 May;37(2):235-41.

Abundance of mRNAs encoding HMG1/HMG2 class high-mobility-group DNA-binding
proteins are differentially regulated in cotyledons of Pharbitis nil.

O'Neill SD(1), Zheng CC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at Davis, 95616,
USA.

The abundance of an mRNA encoding an HMG 1/2 protein from Pharbitis nil (HMG1)
has been previously shown to be regulated by light and an endogenous rhythm in
cotyledons. A second Pharbitis nil HMG cDNA (HMG2) was characterized. The
sequence of HMG2 was 82% and 86% identical to HMG1 at the nucleotide and amino
acid level, respectively. As with HMG1, HMG2 mRNA was detected in all vegetative 
tissues and was most abundant in roots. However, unlike HMG1, HMG2 mRNA abundance
did not increase upon transfer of cotyledons to darkness and did not exhibit
regulation by an endogenous circadian rhythm when maintained in continuous
darkness over a 68 h period. Similarly, while the abundance of HMG1 mRNA during a
dark period that induced photoperiodically controlled flowering was dramatically 
affected by brief light exposure (night break), this treatment had no effect on
HMG2 mRNA abundance. Collectively, these data are consistent with a role of HMG1 
in contributing to the circadian-regulated and/or dark-regulated gene expression 
with constitutive expression of HMG2 playing a housekeeping role in the general
regulation of gene expression in Pharbitis nil cotyledons.

PMID: 9617797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 May 8;246(1):137-41.

Non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and 2 enhance ligation reaction of DNA
double-strand breaks.

Nagaki S(1), Yamamoto M, Yumoto Y, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Teraoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathological Biochemistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Japan.

DNA ligase IV in a complex with XRCC4 is responsible for DNA end-joining in
repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) and V(D)J recombination. We found that
non-histone chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 enhanced the
ligation of linearized pUC119 DNA with DNA ligase IV from rat liver nuclear
extract. Intra-molecular and inter-molecular ligations of cohesive-ended and
blunt-ended DNA were markedly stimulated by HMG1 and 2. Recombinant HMG2-domain
A, B, and (A + B) polypeptides were similarly, but non-identically, effective for
the stimulation of DSB ligation reaction. Ligation of single-strand breaks
(nicks) was only slightly activated by the HMG proteins. The DNA end-binding Ku
protein singly or in combination with the catalytic component of DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK) as the DNA-PK holoenzyme was ineffective for the ligation
of linearized pUC119 DNA. Although the stimulatory effect of HMG1 and 2 on
ligation of DSB in vitro was not specific to DNA ligase IV, these results suggest
that HMG1 and 2 are involved in the final ligation step in DNA end-joining
processes of DSB repair and V(D)J recombination.

PMID: 9600082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Genomics. 1998 Apr 15;49(2):247-52.

Hmg4, a new member of the Hmg1/2 gene family.

Vaccari T(1), Beltrame M, Ferrari S, Bianchi ME.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins are abundant components of mammalian nuclei
and fall into three families. The members of one such family, HMG1 and HMG2, are 
ubiquitously expressed and facilitate the formation of nucleoprotein complexes
where the DNA is sharply bent. We have identified a mouse cDNA that codes for a
novel 200-amino-acid protein of the HMG1/2 family, which we called HMG4. The
mouse Hmg4 gene is highly expressed in the embryo; Hmg4 transcripts are barely
detectable in adult tissues. The human HMG4 gene, which is extremely similar to
its mouse homolog, has been sequenced as part of chromosome X, band q28. HMG4,
HMG1, and HMG2 proteins have been highly conserved during vertebrate evolution,
suggesting that each has at least some unique property. It is possible that HMG4 
is required during development.

PMID: 9598312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Rheumatol. 1998 Apr;25(4):703-9.

Prevalence and characterization of novel pANCA, antibodies to the high mobility
group non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2, in systemic rheumatic
diseases.

Uesugi H(1), Ozaki S, Sobajima J, Osakada F, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the immunodiagnostic value of antibodies to the high
mobility group non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2, which have been
identified as novel target antigens of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (pANCA), in sera from patients with systemic rheumatic diseases.
METHODS: Anti-HMG1 or HMG2 antibody was assayed by ELISA and Western blotting in 
sera from patients with systemic rheumatic diseases. These antibodies were
analyzed for the relationship with pANCA detected by indirect immunofluorescence 
in these diseases, and with clinical features in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
RESULTS: Anti-HMG1 or HMG2 antibody was frequently detected in sera from patients
with RA (48%), SLE (45%), Sjögren's syndrome (SS) (44%), and systemic sclerosis
(SSc) (41%). In these diseases, anti-HMG1 antibody was detected more frequently
than anti-HMG2 antibody. In sera from patients with RA, the positivity for
anti-HMG1 and HMG2 antibodies was significantly correlated with the positivity
for pANCA (p < 0.0001). Anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies were associated with some
disease activity variables, e.g., erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive
protein, rheumatoid factor, joint score and hand grip strength in RA, and CH50,
C3, C4, and IgG in SLE.
CONCLUSION: Anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies are detected commonly in systemic rheumatic
diseases, particularly in RA, SLE, SS, and SSc. HMGI and HMG2 seem to be the
significant target antigens of pANCA in RA. These antibodies are significantly
associated with disease activity indices in RA and SLE.

PMID: 9558172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 13;273(11):6582-90.

Assembly, remodeling, and histone binding capabilities of yeast nucleosome
assembly protein 1.

McQuibban GA(1), Commisso-Cappelli CN, Lewis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8,
Canada.

Recombinant yeast nucleosome assembly protein (yNAP-1) facilitates the formation 
of uniformly spaced nucleosomes from high molecular weight DNA and core histone
octamers. No additional factors or metabolites are required. The repeat length of
the chromatin produced is about 146 base pairs. To obtain the most distinct
nucleosomal ladders, the core histones must preexist as an octamer complex.
yNAP-1 forms complexes with core histones as judged by native gel
electrophoresis, chemical cross-linking, limited histone proteolysis, and
affinity blotting. A discrete complex was observed with a probable ratio of
yNAP-1 to histone octamer of 4:1. Chromatin produced by salt dialysis does not
contain uniformly spaced nucleosomes, but subsequent incubation with yNAP-1
creates uniform spacing. Trypsin-treated core octamers that lack amino termini,
although capable of forming core particles with core-length DNA by salt dialysis,
are not assembled by yNAP-1 into uniformly spaced nucleosomes on high molecular
weight DNA. Proteolytic removal of the amino termini of the core histones
precludes complex formation between a histone octamer and yNAP-1. Affinity
blotting also demonstrates that yNAP-1 binds linker histones and high mobility
group (HMG)-1/HMG-2 but not HMG-14. Competition experiments with poly-L-arginine,
poly-L-lysine, and protamine reveal that yNAP-1 binds to core and linker histones
more tightly despite the much higher positive charge densities of the former
molecules. Naturally occurring acetylated histone H4 species show no evidence for
differential yNAP-1 binding. yNAP-1 is not bound tightly to the resulting
chromatin after deposition and thus could act catalytically.

PMID: 9497395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Clin Exp Immunol. 1998 Feb;111(2):402-7.

Prevalence and characterization of perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (P-ANCA) directed against HMG1 and HMG2 in ulcerative colitis (UC).

Sobajima J(1), Ozaki S, Uesugi H, Osakada F, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Japan.

In a previous study, we reported that the high mobility group (HMG) non-histone
chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 were novel target antigens of P-ANCA. In this 
study, we determined the immunodiagnostic value of anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies in
patients with UC. Sixty sera from patients with UC were tested for reactivity
with HMG1 and HMG2 by means of ELISA. Anti-HMG1 antibody was detected in 32% of
patients (40% of P-ANCA+ patients). Anti-HMG2 antibody was detected in 33% (40%
of P-ANCA+ patients). Thirty-five percent of sera were positive for antibody to
either HMG1 or HMG2 (43% of P-ANCA+ patients). P-ANCA+ patients expressed
anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies with significantly greater frequency compared with
P-ANCA- patients. Furthermore, the anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies were significantly
related to disease activity in UC. Sixteen of the 18 UC patients, who had high
titres of anti-HMG1 or -HMG2 antibody during the active phase, showed lower
titres in the inactive phase. Anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies appear to be useful as a 
marker for disease activity in UC.

PMCID: PMC1904912
PMID: 9486411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biochem. 1997 Sep;122(3):586-94.

Difference in affinity for DNA between HMG proteins 1 and 2 determined by surface
plasmon resonance measurements.

Yamamoto A(1), Ando Y, Yoshioka K, Saito K, Tanabe T, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 contain two similar but non-identical 
repeats of DNA-binding domains and an acidic C-terminal. The proposed functions
of HMG proteins 1 and 2 imply a probable difference in their DNA-binding
abilities. The primary studies by gel retardation assay showed that HMG2 has
higher affinity than HMG1 for supercoiled and linear DNA. The DNA-binding of HMG2
appeared strong enough to allow exchange with HMG1 molecule already bound to DNA,
while the DNA-binding region of HMG1 showed higher affinity than that of HMG2. In
order to compare more quantitatively the affinities, surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) measurements using a BIAcore instrument were conducted. The kinetic data
indicated that the Kd for the complex of HMG2 with DNA is smaller than that of
HMG1, in contrast to the situation for the DNA-binding region of these proteins. 
The sequence between the second DNA-binding domain and the acidic C-terminal of
HMG proteins is required for tight DNA-binding. Also, the acidic C-terminal
strongly modulates the DNA-binding ability of each protein. The usefulness of SPR
measurement for quantitative analysis of affinity and regions involved in
DNA-binding under conditions nearly identical to those in solution is discussed.

PMID: 9348088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Arthritis Rheum. 1997 Oct;40(10):1803-9.

Antibodies against a peptide sequence located in the linker region of the HMG-1/2
box domains in sera from patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

Jung F(1), Neuer G, Bautz FA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Heidelberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To extend our work on the mapping of B cell epitopes on nucleosomal
high mobility group (HMG) proteins in the sera of patients with juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis (JRA).
METHODS: Seventy-seven pauciarticular-onset JRA serum samples from antinuclear
antibody (ANA)-positive patients and 42 polyarticular-onset JRA patient sera
found to react with HMG-2 by immunoblotting were used in this study. To identify 
B cell epitopes on HMG-2, recombinant HMG-2 protein fragments were used in
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and in competition ELISA experiments
with a set of overlapping synthetic peptides. Fine epitope mapping was achieved
by oligopeptide synthesis, followed by immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Pauciarticular, but not polyarticular, JRA patient sera were found to
recognize a lysine-rich major epitope (KKGKKKDP), which is located in the linker 
region of the HMG box domains of the HMG-2 nonhistone chromosomal protein. No
significant immunoreactions were observed in sera from ANA-negative JRA patients 
and in sera from children with nonrheumatic diseases, indicating that this
epitope seems to be specific for pauciarticular-onset JRA.
CONCLUSION: In addition to our previous finding that JRA sera will react with a
defined epitope on HMG-17, pauciarticular JRA patient sera were also found to
recognize a defined epitope on the HMG-2 protein, thus suggesting the importance 
of this epitope in the etiology of JRA.

PMID: 9336414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Oct;17(10):5843-55.

Alleviation of histone H1-mediated transcriptional repression and chromatin
compaction by the acidic activation region in chromosomal protein HMG-14.

Ding HF(1), Bustin M, Hansen U.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Department of Microbiology and Molecular
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Histone H1 promotes the generation of a condensed, transcriptionally inactive,
higher-order chromatin structure. Consequently, histone H1 activity must be
antagonized in order to convert chromatin to a transcriptionally competent, more 
extended structure. Using simian virus 40 minichromosomes as a model system, we
now demonstrate that the nonhistone chromosomal protein HMG-14, which is known to
preferentially associate with active chromatin, completely alleviates histone
H1-mediated inhibition of transcription by RNA polymerase II. HMG-14 also
partially disrupts histone H1-dependent compaction of chromatin. Both the
transcriptional enhancement and chromatin-unfolding activities of HMG-14 are
mediated through its acidic, C-terminal region. Strikingly, transcriptional and
structural activities of HMG-14 are maintained upon replacement of the C-terminal
fragment by acidic regions from either GAL4 or HMG-2. These data support the
model that the acidic C terminus of HMG-14 is involved in unfolding higher-order 
chromatin structure to facilitate transcriptional activation of mammalian genes.

PMCID: PMC232432
PMID: 9315642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biol Chem. 1997 Aug;378(8):815-9.

RAGged repair: what's new in V(D)J recombination.

Hagmann M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology II, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

Antigen-specific immunity is due to the generation of a multitude of both
immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors through a process designated V(D)J
recombination. In vitro reconstitution of this system has taught us a great deal 
about the molecular mechanism underlying this site-specific recombination
process. Hence, it became obvious that the initial steps of the reaction are
carried out by the lymphocyte-specific proteins RAG1 and RAG2
(recombination-activating genes), with the help of members of the high mobility
group protein family of DNA-binding proteins, HMG1 or HMG2. Structural
resemblance between RAG1 and a prokaryotic recombinase, the Salmonella Hin
Recombinase, together with mechanistic similarities between V(D)J recombination
and bacterial transposition reactions, make it likely that these different
processes have evolved from a common ancestral recombination system. The second
step in V(D)J recombination is catalysed by the ubiquitous DNA double-strand
break repair machinery. The link between V(D)J recombination and double-strand
break repair was established through some mutational complementation groups,
including the murine SCID mutation (severe combined immunodeficiency), which were
shown to be defective in both V(D)J recombination and double-strand break repair.
The multisubunit DNA-dependent protein kinase appears to be a key player in these
processes. Thus, from an evolutionary point of view, antigen-specific immunity in
mammals, e.g., humans and mice, appears to be the result of an evolutionary
combination of two unrelated systems involved in DNA metabolism.

PMID: 9377476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Exp Med. 1997 Jun 2;185(11):2025-32.

V(D)J recombination: modulation of RAG1 and RAG2 cleavage activity on 12/23
substrates by whole cell extract and DNA-bending proteins.

Sawchuk DJ(1), Weis-Garcia F, Malik S, Besmer E, Bustin M, Nussenzweig MC, Cortes
P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York
10021, USA.

Antigen receptor gene rearrangement is directed by DNA motifs consisting of a
conserved heptamer and nonamer separated by a nonconserved spacer of either 12 or
23 base pairs (12 or 23 recombination signal sequences [RSS]). V(D)J
recombination requires that the rearranging DNA segments be flanked by RSSs of
different spacer lengths, a phenomenon known as the 12/23 rule. Recent studies
have shown that this restriction operates at the level of DNA cleavage, which is 
mediated by the products of the recombination activating genes RAG1 and RAG2.
Here, we show that RAG1 and RAG2 are not sufficient for 12/23 dependent cleavage,
whereas RAG1 and RAG2 complemented with whole cell extract faithfully
recapitulates the 12/23 rule. In addition, HMG box containing proteins HMG1 and
HMG2 enhance RAG1- and RAG2-mediated cleavage of substrates containing 23 RSS but
not of substrates containing only 12 RSS. These results suggest the existence of 
a nucleoprotein complex at the cleavage site, consisting of architectural,
catalytic, and regulatory components.

PMCID: PMC2196333
PMID: 9166431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochemistry. 1997 May 20;36(20):5992-9.

Nuclear accumulation of HMG2 protein is mediated by basic regions interspaced
with a long DNA-binding sequence, and retention within the nucleus requires the
acidic carboxyl terminus.

Shirakawa H(1), Tanigawa T, Sugiyama S, Kobayashi M, Terashima T, Yoshida K, Arai
T, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Noda, Chiba, Japan.

High mobility group 2 (HMG2) protein is ubiquitously distributed in the nucleus
of higher eukaryotic cells. Accumulation of an HMG2-beta-galactosidase fusion
protein expressed in COS-7 cells suggested active transport of HMG2 protein into 
the nucleus after translation in the cytoplasm. Deletion analysis of the HMG2
sequence in the HMG2-beta-galactosidase fusion protein indicated that basic
regions interspaced with the long DNA-binding sequence in HMG2, called the HMG1/2
box, are necessary for the nuclear accumulation of HMG2. The close configuration 
of basic regions at both ends of the DNA-binding sequence in the tertiary
structure may function as the nuclear localization signal. This novel nuclear
localization signal structure is different from typical ones such as the single
or bipartite basic cluster in many nuclear proteins. A portion of the HMG2
molecule remained in the cytoplasm after translation. Interspecies heterokaryon
assay demonstrated that the acidic carboxyl terminus of HMG2 was necessary for
retention of the protein in the nucleus.

PMID: 9166769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. EMBO J. 1997 May 15;16(10):2665-70.

Stimulation of V(D)J cleavage by high mobility group proteins.

van Gent DC(1), Hiom K, Paull TT, Gellert M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA.

V(D)J recombination requires a pair of signal sequences with spacer lengths of 12
and 23 bp between the conserved heptamer and nonamer elements. The RAG1 and RAG2 
proteins initiate the reaction by making double-strand DNA breaks at both
signals, and must thus be able to operate on these two different spatial
arrangements. We show that the DNA-bending proteins HMG1 and HMG2 stimulate
cleavage and RAG protein binding at the 23 bp spacer signal. These findings
suggest that DNA bending is important for bridging the longer spacer, and explain
how a similar array of RAG proteins could accommodate a signal with either a 12
or a 23 bp spacer. An additional effect of HMG proteins is to stimulate coupled
cleavage greatly when both signal sequences are present, suggesting that these
proteins also aid the formation of a synaptic complex.

PMCID: PMC1169877
PMID: 9184213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cell. 1997 Apr 4;89(1):43-53.

RAG1 and RAG2 form a stable postcleavage synaptic complex with DNA containing
signal ends in V(D)J recombination.

Agrawal A(1), Schatz DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8011, USA.

During V(D)J recombination, RAG1 and RAG2 cleave DNA adjacent to highly conserved
recombination signals, but nothing is known about the protein-DNA complexes that 
exist after cleavage. Using a properly regulated in vitro V(D)J cleavage system, 
together with nuclease sensitivity, mobility shift, and immunoprecipitation
experiments, we provide evidence that a stable complex is formed postcleavage
between synapsed recombination signals. This complex includes the proteins RAG1, 
RAG2, HMG-1 or the closely related HMG-2 protein, and the components of the
DNA-dependent protein kinase. The existence of such a stable complex explains a
number of in vivo observations and suggests that remodeling of postcleavage
synaptic complexes is an important step in the resolution of signal ends in V(D)J
recombination.

PMID: 9094713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Yeast. 1997 Mar 30;13(4):357-63.

DNA sequence analysis of a 23,002 bp DNA fragment of the right arm of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromosome VII.

Arroyo J(1), García-Gonzalez M, García-Saez MI, Sanchez M, Nombela C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.

We report the sequence of a 23,002 bp fragment located on the right arm of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromosome VII. Analysis of this region revealed 14
complete open reading frames (ORFs) wit more than 300 base pairs. Six of them
correspond to previously known genes. G7164 is the QCR9 gene coding for subunit 9
of the cytochrome c reductase; G7168 is UBR1, encoding an ubiquitin protein
ligase; G7522 is the TYS1 gene, which encodes for the tyrosyl tRNA synthetase;
G7526 is TFG1, the gene coding for the RNA polymerase transcription initiation
factor TFIIF (factor G); G7538 is the gene HGH1 which encodes a protein related
to the mammalian HMG1 and HMG2 proteins. G7542 is the BUB1 gene which encodes a
ser/thr protein kinase involved in spindle assembly during the cell cycle. One of
the ORFs, G7553, shares significant homologies with the gene UTR2 from S.
cerevisiae. None of the seven remaining ORFs shows similarity to any of the
sequences within the public databases. Three ORFs are internal ORFs of the
above-described known genes, and two small ORFs are completely contained in
larger ORFs on the complementary strand, and therefore probably do not correspond
to real genes. This region also contains three genes specifying tRNAs for Leu,
Lys and Trp, and several LTR elements.

PMID: 9133739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Gene. 1997 Mar 18;187(2):159-64.

The cardiac-muscle specific enhancer-promoter of slow/cardiac troponin C binds
HMG-2.

Montgomery MO(1), Litvin J.

Author information: 
(1)Temple University Medical School, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. mike@sgi1.fels.temple.edu

The cardiac muscle-specific enhancer-promoter of the slow/cardiac troponin C
(cTnC) gene contains five protein binding regions, four of which bind
cardiac-myocyte specific proteins. We screened a stage 11 chick embryo expression
library with a double-stranded oligonucleotide probe consisting of one of these
regions, CEF-1. One of the clones obtained was the chicken high mobility group
protein, HMG-2. An electrophoretic gel mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed a
specific binding interaction between the HMG-2 protein and the dsDNA CEF-1 probe.
The cardiac-specific enhancer region of cTnC contains at least one possible HMG
binding region and it is in the CEF-1 sequence overlapping a known GATA-4 binding
site. Mutation of the nucleotide sequence of this HMG binding region diminishes
its protein binding ability and markedly decreases its cardiac specific
transcriptional activity. HMG-2 is a DNA bending protein that is predominantly
found in the nucleus in proliferating cells and in the cytoplasm of terminally
differentiated cells. It is an integral and stabilizing factor in the
transcription activation nucleoprotein complex and is often described as an
'architectural transcription factor'. It markedly stimulates the transcription of
many genes, often in association with tissue-specific transcription factors. We
believe that the presence of HMG-2 in the enhancer-promoter binding protein
complex of cTnC augments DNA bending and facilitates the DNA binding and
interaction of other tissue-specific factors (e.g. GATA-4, which also binds to
this region). This would result in increased transcription of the cTnC gene
during the proliferation phase of embryonic cardiac myocyte development.

PMID: 9099875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Carcinogenesis. 1997 Feb;18(2):371-5.

High mobility group proteins 1 and 2 recognize chromium-damaged DNA.

Wang JF(1), Bashir M, Engelsberg BN, Witmer C, Rozmiarek H, Billings PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6002, USA.

Chromium (Cr) is a human carcinogen and a potent DNA damaging agent. Incubation
of DNA with CrCl3 resulted in dose-dependent binding of Cr to DNA and, at
concentrations >20 microM, altered the electrophoretic mobility of a 100 bp
oligonucleotide. We also demonstrate that high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1
and 2 bind Cr-damaged DNA (Cr-DNA). Protein binding was lesion density-dependent,
with maximal binding to DNA treated with 100 microM CrCl3. HMG2 binds to Cr-DNA
with a calculated Kd of approximately 10(-9) M. These proteins also bound DNA
obtained from chromate-treated cells. These results suggest that the covalent
attachment of Cr to DNA induces alterations in DNA structure which are recognized
by HMG1 and HMG2. Therefore, these proteins may function as Cr-damaged DNA
recognition proteins in vivo and as a consequence of binding, may play a role in 
directing the cellular response to Cr-DNA adduct formation.

PMID: 9054631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Gene. 1997 Jan 3;184(1):99-105.

Cloning and analysis of an HMG gene from the lamprey Lampetra fluviatilis: gene
duplication in vertebrate evolution.

Sharman AC(1), Hay-Schmidt A, Holland PW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal and Microbial Sciences, The University of Reading,
Whiteknights, UK.

Evolution has shaped the organisation of vertebrate genomes, including the human 
genome. To shed further light on genome history, we have cloned and analysed an
HMG gene from lamprey, representing one of the earliest vertebrate lineages.
Genes of the HMG1/2 family encode chromosomal proteins that bind DNA in a
non-sequence-specific manner, and have been implicated in a variety of cellular
processes dependent on chromatin structure. They are characterised by two copies 
of a conserved motif, the HMG box, followed by an acidic C-terminal region. We
report here the cloning of a cDNA clone from the river lamprey Lampetra
fluviatilis containing a gene with two HMG boxes and an acidic tail; we designate
this gene LfHMG1. Molecular phylogenetic analysis shows that LfHMG1 is descended 
from a gene ancestral to mammalian HMG1 and HMG2. This implies that there was a
duplication event in the HMG1/2 gene family, that occurred after the divergence
of the jawed and jawless fishes, 450 million years ago. This conclusion supports 
and refines the hypothesis that there was a period of extensive gene duplication 
early in vertebrate evolution. We also show that the HMG1/2 family originated
before the protostomes and deuterostomes diverged, over 525 million years ago.

PMID: 9016958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Gen Mikrobiol Virusol. 1997;(4):32-6.

[Nonhistone chromosome proteins HMG1 and HMG2 stabilize one of the
sequence-specific complexes, formed on the promotor of human retroposons of the
ALU-family of other nuclear proteins].

[Article in Russian]

Kropotov AV, Yau P, Bradbury P, Tomilin NV.

Human retroposons of the Alu family have an internal promoter for RNA polymerase 
III also present in tRNA genes, but Alu are poorly transcribed by this polymerase
in somatic cells in vivo, which is probably due to an efficient system of
repression of the Alu transcription. The key control promoter element of the tRNA
genes, known as B-box, binds basal transcription factor TFIIIC2, which initiates 
assembly of the full transcription complex. Previously we identified several
human nuclear factors which bind to Alu Subregion covering B-box and the adjacent
sequences, which can be involved in repression of Alu transcription. In this
study we identified one factor, F1, as HMF1/2 and another factor, F2, as
TFIIIC2-like protein reacting with B-box. Both the factors are not alu-specific, 
whereas the third identified Alu-binding factor, F3, seems to be specific for the
Alu-specific subsequence located just downstream from B-box and can discriminate 
evolutionary "young" and "old" Alu subfamilies producing different numbers of
transcripts in vivo. Although HMG1/2 binds to Alu in a sequence-unspecific
manner, the proteins are capable of stabilizing the sequence-specific complex F3 
which can be functionally significant. We believe that the factors binding to Alu
B-box subregion interfere somehow with the functions of the basal factor TFIIIC2 
and, hence, can be co-repressors of Alu transcription by RNA polymerase III.

PMID: 9411219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Clin Exp Immunol. 1997 Jan;107(1):135-40.

Novel autoantigens of perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA)
in ulcerative colitis: non-histone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2.

Sobajima J(1), Ozaki S, Osakada F, Uesugi H, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Japan.

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) in sera from ulcerative colitis
(UC) patients have been described as reacting with proteins in the granules of
human neutrophils such as cathepsin G and lactoferrin and with yet unidentified
antigens. Here we report the existence of a new member of perinuclear ANCA
(P-ANCA) in UC patients. In the previous study, we found that UC patients had a
novel P-ANCA against neutrophil 28-kD protein. In this study, we purified the
same antigens from HL-60 lysates by using reversed phase high-performance liquid 
chromatography, and revealed that the 28-kD antigen consisted of two different
proteins. The N-terminus amino acids of these proteins are identical with those
of high mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2.
Immunoblotting analysis of human neutrophil lysates using rabbit anti-HMG1/2
antisera revealed a single band of 28 kD, and the 28-kD band detected by
immunoblotting analysis using patient's serum IgG completely disappeared after
preincubation with a mixture of HMG1 and HMG2. Furthermore, rabbit anti-HMG1/2
antisera showed a perinuclear staining pattern in indirect immunofluorescence
studies using ethanol-fixed neutrophils. These data demonstrate that HMG1 and
HMG2 are novel target antigens of P-ANCA. HMGI and HMG2 are distributed in the
nuclei and cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells and act as transcription factors. Their 
intracellular localization and functions are distinct from those of the
previously reported granular antigens of P-ANCA.

PMCID: PMC1904558
PMID: 9010268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996 Dec;141(2):532-9.

Differential binding of HMG1, HMG2, and a single HMG box to cisplatin-damaged
DNA.

Farid RS(1), Bianchi ME, Falciola L, Engelsberg BN, Billings PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

The HMG box domain is a DNA binding domain present in the nonhistone chromosomal 
proteins HMG1 and HMG2 and in other proteins involved in the regulation of gene
expression. Previous studies have demonstrated that HMG1 and HMG2 bind with high 
affinity to DNA modified with the cancer chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin (CDDP). 
In this report, we compare the binding of full-length HMG1 and HMG2 and the HMG
boxes present in these proteins to that of CDDP-DNA. Complexes between HMG1,
HMG2, or HMG Box A + B and CDDP-DNA were stable at > or = 500 mM salt, while
complexes between a single HMG box and CDDP-DNA exhibited decreased stability.
Analysis of a series of HMG1 Box A mutant constructs revealed different
affinities for CDDP-DNA. Two constructs containing a Phe to Ala substitution at
position 19 and a Tyr to Gly substitution at position 71, are noteworthy; these
peptides exhibited reduced affinity for CDDP-DNA. We have generated a structure
of HMG1 Box A and used it, along with the results of our binding studies, to
model its interaction with CDDP-DNA. HMG1 Box A binds in the minor groove of
CDDP-DNA, in agreement with earlier studies. Our model predicts that Tyr71
partially intercalates and forms an H bond with the sugar-phosphate backbone. The
model also suggests that Phe 19 does not directly interact with DNA, and hence an
Ala substitution at position 19 may alter protein structure. This model should
provide a framework for future studies examining HMG Box-DNA interactions.

PMID: 8975778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 1;24(23):4733-40.

A novel activity of HMG domains: promotion of the triple-stranded complex
formation between DNA containing (GGA/TCC)11 and d(GGA)11 oligonucleotides.

Suda T(1), Mishima Y, Takayanagi K, Asakura H, Odani S, Kominami R.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Biochemistry, Niigata University School of Medicine,
Japan.

The high mobility group protein (HMG)-box is a DNA-binding domain found in many
proteins that bind preferentially to DNA of irregular structures in a
sequence-independent manner and can bend the DNA. We show here that GST-fusion
proteins of HMG domains from HMG1 and HMG2 promote a triple-stranded complex
formation between DNA containing the (GGA/TCC)11 repeat and oligonucleotides of
d(GGA)11 probably due to G:G base pairing. The activity is to reduce association 
time and requirements of Mg2+ and oligonucleotide concentrations. The HMG box of 
SRY, the protein determining male-sex differentiation, also has the activity,
suggesting that it is not restricted to the HMG-box domains derived from HMG1/2
but is common to those from other members of the HMG-box family of proteins.
Interestingly, the box-AB and box-B of HMG1 bend DNA containing the repeat, but
SRY fails to bend in a circularization assay. The difference suggests that the
two activities of association-promotion and DNA bending are distinct. These
results suggest that the HMG-box domain has a novel activity of promoting the
association between GGA repeats which might be involved in higher-order
architecture of chromatin.

PMCID: PMC146295
PMID: 8972860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Hum Reprod. 1996 Nov;11(11):2400-4.

Pure and highly purified follicle-stimulating hormone alone or in combination
with human menopausal gonadotrophin for ovarian stimulation after pituitary
suppression in in-vitro fertilization.

Balasch J(1), Fábregues F, Creus M, Moreno V, Puerto B, Peñarrubia J, Carmona F, 
Vanrell JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Barcelona, Hospital Clínic i Provincial, Spain.

The use of pure follicle stimulating hormone (pFSH) and highly purified FSH
(FSH-HP) versus the combinations pFSH/human menopausal gonadotrophin (HMG) and
FSH HP/HMG, respectively, was compared for stimulating follicular development
after gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRHa) suppression in women
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF)-embryo transfer. Two consecutive
prospective, randomized studies were carried out at the Assisted Reproduction
Unit of the Hospital Clínic i Provincial in Barcelona, a tertiary care setting.
Two groups of 188 (study 1) and 252 (study 2) consecutive infertile patients
respectively, scheduled for IVF-embryo transfer were included. Pretreatment with 
leuprolide acetate (long protocol) was followed by gonadotrophin treatment in all
patients. In study 1, 92 patients received i.m. pFSH alone (group pFSH) and 96
were treated with the combination of i.m. pFSH and i.m. HMG (group HMG-1). In
study 2, 123 patients received s.c. FSH-HP alone (group FSH-HP) and 129 patients 
were given the combination of s.c. FSH-HP and i.m. HMG (group HMG-2). Main
outcome measures included follicular development, oocyte retrieval, fertilized
oocytes, duration and dose of gonadotrophin therapy, and clinical pregnancy.
There were no significant differences between pFSH and pFSH/HMG nor between
FSH-HP and FSH-HP/HMG cycles with regard to the number of ampoules of medication 
used, day of human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) administration, mean peak serum 
oestradiol concentrations, number of follicles punctured, and number of oocytes
aspirated, embryos transferred, or pregnancies. We conclude that urinary FSH
(either purified of highly purified) alone is as effective as the conventional
combination of urinary FSH/HMG for ovarian stimulation under pituitary
suppression in IVF cycles. Therefore, they can be used interchangeably in IVF
programmes.

PMID: 8981119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Clin Exp Immunol. 1996 Nov;106(2):389-95.

Primary pulmonary hypertension: immunogenetic response to high-mobility group
(HMG) proteins and histone.

Morse JH(1), Barst RJ, Fotino M, Zhang Y, Flaster E, Fritzler MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032,
USA.

HLA class II alleles (DNA typing) and antibodies to HMG-1,2,14,17 proteins and H1
histone were determined in three predominantly Caucasian groups of patients with 
pulmonary hypertension (PHT). Forty-four adults had primary pulmonary
hypertension (PPH), 42 children had PPH, and 41 children had PHT associated with 
anatomically large congenital pulmonary to systemic shunts (PHT + shunt). The HLA
class II alleles in the Caucasian patients were compared with those of 51 healthy
Caucasian controls. Eight (18%) of 44 sera from adults with PPH bound HMG-14 and 
23 (52%) bound H1. None of 42 sera from children with PPH bound either HMG-14/17 
or HMG-1/2, whereas four (10%) bound H1. In the PHT + shunt group of 41 children,
two (5%) bound HMG-14, one (3%) bound HMG-17, four (10%) bound HMG-1 and/or
HMG-2, and six (15%) bound H1. Among the 12 HMG antibody-positive patients,
HLA-DQ6 was present in nine of 10 HLA typed patients (six PPH adults and three
PHT + shunt children), seven of whom had antibodies to HMG-14 and one to HMG-17. 
The 100% frequency of HLA-DQ6 in seven Caucasian patients with antibodies to
HMG-14/17 was statistically significant when compared with the 41% frequency of
-DQ6 present in 51 healthy Caucasian controls (pc = 0.027, pc = Bonferroni
correction, OR = 21.3). In contrast, when compared with controls, 25 patients
with PPH and anti-H1 antibodies (21 adults and four children) had increased
frequencies of HLA-DQ7 and -DR5 (60% versus 29%, P = 0.010, OR = 3.6 and 48%
versus 22%, P = 0.018, OR = 3.4), which were not significant after correction. In
essence, antibodies to HMG-14 and to H1 proteins were present predominantly in
adults with PPH, suggesting that the pattern of response to HMG-14/17 was similar
to that previously reported in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and
drug-induced autoimmunity. This is the first report of an association between
autoantibodies directed against HMG and H1 with immunogenetic markers. These data
suggest that a subset of patients with PPH may have an autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC2200573
PMID: 8918589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Immunol. 1996 Oct;33(14):1119-25.

The conserved lymphokine element-0 in the IL5 promoter binds to a high mobility
group-1 protein.

Marrugo J(1), Marsh DG, Ghosh B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21224, U.S.A.

The conserved lymphokine elements-0 (CLE0) in the IL5 promoter is essential for
the expression of IL-5. Here, we report the cloning and expression of a cDNA
encoding a novel CLE0-binding protein, CLEBP-1 from a mouse Th2 clone, D10.G4.1. 
Interestingly, it was found that the CLEBP1 cDNA sequence was almost identical to
the sequences of known high mobility group-1 (HMG1) cDNAs. When expressed as a
recombinant fusion protein in Escherichia coli, CLEBP-1 was shown to bind to the 
IL5-CLE0 element in electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) and southwestern
blot analysis. The CLEBP-1 fusion protein cross-reacts with and-HMG-1/2 in
Western blot analysis. It also binds to the CLE0 elements of IL4, GMCSF and GCSF 
genes. CLEBP-1 and closely related HMG-1 and HMG-2 proteins may play key roles in
facilitating the expression of the lymphokine genes that contain CLE0 elements.

PMID: 9047378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Jun 7;1307(2):213-9.

Intracellular distribution of HMG1, HMG2 and UBF change following treatment with 
cisplatin.

Chao JC(1), Wan XS, Engelsberg BN, Rothblum LI, Billings PC.

Author information: 
(1)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Clinic, Danville, PA 17822, USA.

Cisplatin (CDDP) is a widely used cancer chemotherapeutic agent. CDDP forms well 
characterized intrastrand cross-links between adjacent purines in genomic DNA. In
mammalian cells, these lesions are repaired by the nucleotide excision repair
system. An early event in the recognition and processing of cis-Pt-DNA adducts
may well involve the binding of specific proteins to the sites of damage. Several
proteins have been identified, including high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and
2 and upstream binding factor (UBF), which recognize CDDP-DNA. However, the
physiological significance of this binding has not been established. In this
study, we have utilized antibodies to these proteins to examine the effect of
CDDP on their intracellular distribution. Marked changes in the immunofluorescent
staining pattern of HMG1/HMG2 were noted in cells treated with CDDP. At higher
drug concentrations, the distribution of UBF also changed, from a clustered
appearance associated with the nucleoli to more diffuse nuclear staining. These
results demonstrate that HMG1/HMG2 and UBF respond to drug treatment, presumably 
by recognizing cis-Pt-DNA adduct formation in intact cells. Hence, these proteins
may play an important role in directing the response of tumor cells following
exposure to CDDP.

PMID: 8679707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Genomics. 1996 Jan 15;31(2):264-5.

Mapping of the human HMG2 gene to 4q31.

Wanschura S(1), Schoenmakers EF, Huysmans C, Bartnitzke S, Van de Ven WJ,
Bullrdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Germany.

PMID: 8824816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 1996;38(2):163-8.

Analysis of HMG protein binding to DNA modified with the anticancer drug
cisplatin.

Cryer JE(1), Johnson SW, Engelsberg BN, Billings PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Cisplatin (CDDP) is an effective and widely used cancer chemotherapy drug. High
mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 have been shown to bind with high affinity 
to CDDP-DNA. In this study we analyzed the interaction of HMG proteins with
CDDP-DNA. We demonstrate that after binding, HMG proteins can be removed from
CDDP-DNA leaving the Pt adducts intact and capable of rebinding HMG proteins.
Furthermore, the very HMG proteins that have been removed remain functionally
viable and capable of rebinding CDDP-DNA. We also investigated the role that Cys 
residues play in protein binding. Replacement of Cys 45 or Cys 106 with a Ser
residue reduced HMG2 protein binding to CDDP-DNA. These results indicate that Cys
residues play a critical role in the high affinity binding of this protein to
CDDP-DNA. From these findings, we speculate that the intracellular oxidative
environment could affect the redox state of protein thiols in HMG1 and HMG2 and
in addition, regulate the ability of these proteins to recognize cis-Pt-DNA
adduct formation in tumor cells.

PMID: 8616907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Dev Comp Immunol. 1995 Sep-Oct;19(5):417-23.

Identification of cDNA clones encoding HMG 2, a major protein of the mexican
axolotl hydrocortisone-sensitive thymocytes.

de Guerra A(1), Guillet F, Charlemagne J, Fellah JS.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe d'Immunologie Comparée, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris,
France.

We have identified and analyzed cDNA clones encoding a major 26 kDa protein of
the HMG1-2 family which is abundant in the cytoplasm and nucleus of axolotl
hydrocortisone-sensitive thymocytes. The axolotl HMG2 protein is very similar to 
proteins belonging to the HMG1-2 family, from teleost fish to mammals. All the
molecular features of the HMG1-2 proteins are conserved, including the high
proportion of basic and aromatic residues, and the characteristic acidic
C-terminus tail. The 3'-untranslated region of the HMG2 axolotl cDNA is also
similar to the avian and mammalian HMG2 3'-UT sequences, suggesting that some
selective events have acted at the DNA level to conserve this region, which could
be important in the differential expression of the HMG1 and HMG2 genes. The
axolotl HMG2 protein contains the two well conserved HMG boxes which are thought 
to be the DNA-binding domains of the molecule. Axolotl thymocytes and spleen
cells contain almost identical amounts of HMG2 mRNAs but HMG2 polypeptide is
undetectable in spleen cells using anti-26 kDa antibodies. The reason for the
accumulation of HMG1-2 molecules in vertebrate hydrocortisone-sensitive
thymocytes is discussed, as well as their possible role in apoptosis.

PMID: 8654668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jul 18;92(15):7026-30.

Structure and function of a human transcription factor TFIIIB subunit that is
evolutionarily conserved and contains both TFIIB- and high-mobility-group protein
2-related domains.

Wang Z(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Transcription factor TFIIIB plays a central role in transcription initiation by
RNA polymerase III on genes encoding tRNA, 5S rRNA, and other small structural
RNAs. We report the purification of a human TFIIIB-derived complex containing
only the TATA-binding polypeptide (TBP) and a 90-kDa subunit (TFIIIB90) and the
isolation of a cDNA clone encoding the 90-kDa subunit. The N-terminal half of
TFIIIB90 exhibits sequence similarity to the yeast TFIIIB70 (BRF) and the class
II transcription factor TFIIB and interacts weakly with TBP. The C-terminal half 
of TFIIIB90 contains a high-mobility-group protein 2 (HMG2)-related domain and
interacts strongly with TBP. Recombinant TFIIIB90 plus recombinant human TBP
substitute for human TFIIIB in a complementation assay for transcription of 5S,
tRNA, and VA1 RNA genes, and both the TFIIB-related domain and the HMG2-related
domain are required for this activity. TFIIIB90 is also required for
transcription of human 7SK and U6 RNA genes by RNA polymerase III, but apparently
within a complex distinct from the TBP/TFIIIB90 complex.

PMCID: PMC41464
PMID: 7624363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Gene. 1995 Jun 9;158(2):181-7.

cDNA sequence and structure of a trout HMG-2 gene. Evidence for a trout-specific 
3'-untranslated region.

Stros M(1), Retief JD, Dixon GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

A complete cDNA sequence (1026 bp) and a partial structure of a gene encoding the
trout testis chromosomal HMG (high mobility group) 2 protein (HMG-T2) is
presented. The deduced protein consists of 214 amino acids and shares over 80%
similarity to the trout HMG-1 protein (HMG-T1) as well as to the mammalian or
avian HMG-2 proteins. Northern blot analysis revealed two transcripts, a major
one of 1.2 kb and a minor one of 1.6 kb. Southern analysis and polymerase chain
reaction of trout genomic DNA indicated that the HMG-T2 gene is encoded by
several introncontaining genes. The 5'-UTR (untranslated region) of the HMG-T2 is
interrupted by an intron and the coding region of the HMG-T2 is divided into four
exons by three relatively short introns (173, 91 and 78 bp). The exon/intron
boundaries of trout HMG-2 are identical to those of human HMG-2, as reported
earlier [Shirakawa and Yoshida, J. Biol. Chem. 267 (1992) 6641-6645], suggesting 
the evolution of the HMG-1/2 family genes from a common ancestor. Phylogenetic
analysis indicated that the common ancestor of trout HMG-1/2 genes very likely
diverged from the ancestor of the mammalian (or avian) HMG-1/2 genes before its
separation into two distinct mammalian or (avian) HMG-1 and HMG-2 genes. Sequence
comparisons of the 3'UTR of trout HMG-2 cDNA with the corresponding regions in
the mammalian (or avian) HMG-2 revealed that the trout 3'-UTR was clearly
distinct from the 3'-UTR of the mammalian or avian HMG-2 cDNAs which were
otherwise remarkably well conserved.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7607539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cell. 1995 Jun 2;81(5):705-14.

Molecular basis of human 46X,Y sex reversal revealed from the three-dimensional
solution structure of the human SRY-DNA complex.

Werner MH(1), Huth JR, Gronenborn AM, Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0520, USA.

The solution structure of the specific complex between the high mobility group
(HMG) domain of SRY (hSRY-HMG), the protein encoded by the human
testis-determining gene, and its DNA target site in the promoter of the müllerian
inhibitory substance gene has been determined by multidimensional NMR
spectroscopy. hSRY-HMG has a twisted L shape that presents a concave surface
(made up of three helices and the N- and C-terminal strands) to the DNA for
sequence-specific recognition. Binding of hSRY-HMG to its specific target site
occurs exclusively in the minor groove and induces a large conformational change 
in the DNA. The DNA in the complex has an overall 70 degrees-80 degrees bend and 
is helically unwound relative to classical A- and B-DNA. The structure of the
complex reveals the origin of sequence-specific binding within the HMG-1/HMG-2
family and provides a framework for understanding the effects of point mutations 
that cause 46X,Y sex reversal at the atomic level.

PMID: 7774012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Genes Dev. 1995 Jun 1;9(11):1354-65.

Activation of the TFIID-TFIIA complex with HMG-2.

Shykind BM(1), Kim J, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139-4307, USA.

The nonhistone chromosomal protein HMG-2 was identified as a factor necessary for
activation in a defined transcription reaction in vitro containing RNA polymerase
II and purified factors. Activation occurred on all promoters assayed except that
of the immunoglobulin IgH gene. TFIIA was required for stimulated levels of
transcription. The activation process depended on the presence of TAFs in the
TFIID complex and generated a preinitiation complex from which TFIIB dissociated 
more slowly. However, titration of TFIIB over three orders of magnitude did not
obviate the requirement of activator and HMG-2 to achieve stimulated levels of
transcription. Analysis of the activated reaction identified the TFIID-TFIIA
complex as the first stage of modification during activation. These results
suggest that activation can occur solely in the presence of the basal factors,
activator protein, and an "architectural" HMG factor, which probably stabilizes
an activated conformation of the TFIID-TFIIA-promoter complex.

PMID: 7797075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell Biochem Funct. 1995 Jun;13(2):125-33.

Differential expression of nuclear HMG1, HMG2 proteins and H1(zero) histone in
various blood cells.

Cabart P(1), Kalousek I, Jandová D, Hrkal Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Institute of Hematology and Blood
Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic.

Changes in the levels of chromosomal high-mobility group proteins HMG1, HMG2 and 
histone H1 zero were investigated in blood cells of various types, proliferation 
activity and stage of differentiation. The relative amounts of proteins HMG1,
HMG2 and histone H1 zero were evaluated densitometrically by SDS-PAGE of 5 per
cent w/v perchloric acid extracts of blood cells. Concerning the HMG1 and HMG2,
the main conclusions were: the expression of these HMG proteins was higher in
malignant cells, namely leukemia cell lines, then in lymphocytes or granulocytes 
and the distribution of HMG1 and HMG2 was highly cell-specific. In comparison
with lymphoid cells, the levels of HMG1/2 were higher in myeloid cells. The
results revealed that in myeloid cells HMG2 prevails over HMG1. There was no
direct correlation between HMG1/2 expression and proliferation activity. The
levels of HMG1/2 did not depend on the transcription of chromatin either.
However, there was some connection between irreversibly differentiated
nonproliferating cells and a loss of HMG1/2 proteins. Reversibly differentiated
leukemic cells retain their HMG1/2 levels. Similarly to HMG1/2,H1 zero showed a
strong cell specificity. The level of H1 zero was different in the various blood 
cell types. As compared with lymphoid cells, the level of H1 zero was
several-fold higher in myeloid cells, regardless of whether they were normal or
malignant. Moreover, there was an accumulation of H1 zero in differentiating
HL-60 cells accompanied by only a slight decline in cell proliferation; this
agrees with the idea that H1 zero expression is not directly associated with the 
inhibition of cell growth. Rather higher expression of H1 zero is related to
changes during cell differentiation.

PMID: 7758147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 May 25;210(3):1045-51.

Repression of cell cycle progression by antisense HMG2 RNA.

Yamazaki F(1), Nagatsuka Y, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba, Japan.

The expression level of the HMG2 gene during the cell cycle of rat fibroblast
cell lines was analyzed. Northern analysis demonstrated that the level of HMG2
mRNA was markedly enhanced in the post-S phase and reached a maximum at G2 phase,
suggesting that expression of the HMG2 gene is not coupled with DNA synthesis.
Progression of the cell cycle of COS-1 cells was repressed during G1 to S phase
by expression of the antisense RNA for HMG2, resulting in a decrease of cell
growth. These results suggest that the fluctuation of the HMG2 message during the
cell cycle is not a consequence of but a prerequisite for cell proliferation.

PMID: 7763232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 21;270(16):9272-80.

Stimulation of transcription accompanying relaxation of chromatin structure in
cells overexpressing high mobility group 1 protein.

Ogawa Y(1), Aizawa S, Shirakawa H, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba, Japan.

We developed murine C-127 cell lines that stationarily overexpress high mobility 
group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 by transfecting them with the bovine papilloma virus
plasmid carrying their respective cDNA sequences. Using these cell lines, we
examined the effects of these HMG proteins on the modulation of chromatin
structure that accompanied transcription. The levels of HMG1 mRNA and protein in 
cells overexpressing HMG1 protein were enhanced about 7- and 3-fold,
respectively, in comparison with control cells, whereas those in cells
overexpressing HMG2 protein were enhanced about 17- and 9-fold. The expression of
reporter genes transfected into the cells was enhanced approximately 2-fold in
cells overexpressing HMG1, but not HMG2, in comparison with those in control
cells, irrespective of the sources of the genes and promoters. The minichromosome
derived from the reporter plasmid in cells overexpressing HMG1 protein was more
susceptible to micrococcal nuclease digestion than those in cells overexpressing 
HMG2 protein and control cells. The enhanced accessibility to micrococcal
nuclease was not restricted to the expressing gene and promoter but involved the 
entire minichromosome, suggesting that the enhancement of gene expression
resulted from changes in the condensation of the entire minichromosomal region by
HMG1 protein. Minichromosomes in cells overexpressing HMG contained enhanced
amounts of the respective HMG proteins and simultaneously reduced amounts of
histone H1s. These results suggest that HMG1 and -2 proteins have different
functions in the modulation of chromatin structure, and that HMG1 protein may
sustain the structure of the respective gene to ensure that its activity as a
template is expressed fully. These observations on the modulation of chromatin
structure accompanying gene transcription in cells overexpressing HMG protein may
provide important information on the function of these proteins.

PMID: 7721847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 31;270(13):7394-8.

Increased DNA-bending activity and higher affinity DNA binding of high mobility
group protein HMG-1 prepared without acids.

Wagner JP(1), Quill DM, Pettijohn DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver 80262, USA.

Recently, DNA ring closure assays showed that high mobility group protein HMG-1
and its close homolog HMG-2 mediate sequence-independent DNA flexion. This
DNA-bending activity appears to be central to at least some of the recently
elucidated functions of HMG-1/2, such as the enhancement of progesterone receptor
DNA binding. Here we show that standard purification procedures utilizing
perchloric and trichloroacetic acid can produce HMG-1 significantly deficient in 
its abilities to bind and bend double-stranded DNA, while acid-independent
methods purify HMG-1 that is superior in these respects. Significant losses of
DNA ring closure activity were seen upon limited 2-5-h exposures of
nonacid-purified HMG-1/2 to perchloric acid and/or trichloroacetic acid.
Measurements of the apparent DNA dissociation binding constant (Kd(app)) of
acid-extracted preparations of HMG-1 gave a wide range of values, and only those 
preparations demonstrating little DNA ring closure activity had Kd values near
the previously published value (approximately 10(-6) M). The highest ring closure
activities and lowest Kd(app) (< 3 x 10(-9) M) were obtained for HMG-1 purified
without acids. These combined results support the use of alternative, non-acid
purification procedures for preserving the DNA-bending activity of HMG-1/2 and
suggest that past procedures utilizing acids have led to an underestimation of
the affinity of HMG-1 for DNA.

PMID: 7706284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 15;14(6):1264-75.

HMG-D is an architecture-specific protein that preferentially binds to DNA
containing the dinucleotide TG.

Churchill ME(1), Jones DN, Glaser T, Hefner H, Searles MA, Travers AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Structural Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana
61801, USA.

The high mobility group (HMG) protein HMG-D from Drosophila melanogaster is a
highly abundant chromosomal protein that is closely related to the vertebrate HMG
domain proteins HMG1 and HMG2. In general, chromosomal HMG domain proteins lack
sequence specificity. However, using both NMR spectroscopy and standard
biochemical techniques we show that binding of HMG-D to a single DNA site is
sequence selective. The preferred duplex DNA binding site comprises at least 5 bp
and contains the deformable dinucleotide TG embedded in A/T-rich sequences. The
TG motif constitutes a common core element in the binding sites of the
well-characterized sequence-specific HMG domain proteins. We show that a
conserved aromatic residue in helix 1 of the HMG domain may be involved in
recognition of this core sequence. In common with other HMG domain proteins HMG-D
binds preferentially to DNA sites that are stably bent and underwound, therefore 
HMG-D can be considered an architecture-specific protein. Finally, we show that
HMG-D bends DNA and may confer a superhelical DNA conformation at a natural DNA
binding site in the Drosophila fushi tarazu scaffold-associated region.

PMCID: PMC398206
PMID: 7720717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 15;14(6):1198-208.

High mobility group protein 2 functionally interacts with the POU domains of
octamer transcription factors.

Zwilling S(1), König H, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Germany.

The octamer transcription factors Oct1 and Oct2 are involved in the
transcriptional regulation of both lymphoid-specific and ubiquitously expressed
genes. Their activity depends critically on their interaction with distinct
cellular cofactors. Therefore, we have isolated cDNAs encoding proteins that
physically interact with Oct2. Here we describe the analysis of one such clone,
representing the murine homologue of high mobility group (HMG) protein 2. We have
mapped the interaction domains for both proteins and have shown that HMG2 and
Oct2 interact via their HMG domains and POU homeodomains, respectively. This
interaction is not restricted to Oct2, as other members of the octamer
transcription factor family like Oct1 and Oct6 also interact with HMG2. The
interaction with HMG2 results in a marked increase in the sequence-specific DNA
binding activity of the Oct proteins. Interestingly, the HMG2 protein is not
present in the protein-DNA complex detected by an electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay. The Oct and HMG2 proteins also interact in vivo. A chimeric protein, in
which the strong transactivation domain of VP16 was fused directly to the HMG
domains of HMG2, stimulated the activity of an octamer-dependent reporter
construct upon cotransfection. Furthermore, the expression of antisense RNA for
HMG2 specifically reduces octamer-dependent transcription. These results suggest 
that one of the functions of HMG2 is to support the octamer transcription factors
in their role as transcriptional activators.

PMCID: PMC398197
PMID: 7720710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Biochemistry. 1995 Feb 28;34(8):2521-7.

Existence of a transcription factor for the human HMG2 gene positively related to
the level of HMG2 mRNA in the cells.

Shirakawa H(1), Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba, Japan.

A functional gene encoding high mobility group 2 (HMG2) protein, which is an
abundant eukaryotic DNA-binding protein, has been isolated. The expression of the
HMG2 gene is enhanced in exponentially growing cells and in cells transformed
with various viral genes and oncogenes. We attempted to identify and characterize
the HMG2 gene structure and transcription factor(s) participating in the
expression of the gene. Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase assays to characterize 
the 5'-flanking region of the human HMG2 gene revealed that the nucleotide
sequences in two regions are necessary for expression of the HMG2 gene: one (-85 
to +44 region) as a core promoter, and the other (-621 to -493 region) as a cis
regulatory element(s). Electrophoresis mobility shift assay with a DNA fragment
containing the cis regulatory element and a crude nuclear extract from HeLa cells
gave several complexes. Chemical footprint and competition assays indicated that 
the component giving one of the major complexes recognizes a nucleotide sequence 
of -499 to -486 in the cis regulatory element. Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase 
assay indicated that the component giving the major complex is required for the
effective transcription of the HMG2 gene. The binding component named HMG2TF
(HMG2 transcription factor) contained a protein in apparent molecular size of
85,000, as determined by a UV cross-linking experiment. The amount of HMG2TF in
the growing cells and transformed cells increased in positive relationship to the
level of expression of HMG2 mRNA in the cells. These results suggest that HMG2
gene expression may be regulated by the relative amount of this transcription
factor.

PMID: 7873532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 9;269(49):30828-34.

FKBP46, a novel Sf9 insect cell nuclear immunophilin that forms a protein-kinase 
complex.

Alnemri ES(1), Fernandes-Alnemri T, Pomerenke K, Robertson NM, Dudley K, DuBois
GC, Litwack G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102.

Recently, we identified a 59-kDa nuclear phosphoprotein that is associated with a
recombinant mouse FKBP-52 (Alnemri, E. S., Fernandes-Alnemri, T., Nelki, D. S.,
Dudley, K., DuBois, G. C., and Litwack, G. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
90, 6839-6843). Here we describe the cloning, overexpression, and
characterization of this protein from Spodoptera frugiperda insect cells (Sf9
cells). The cloned cDNA codes for an acidic protein of 412 amino acids with
distinct structural domains. Starting with the N terminus, the first 218 amino
acids contain two highly acidic domains separated by a short basic domain.
Following the second large acidic domain is another basic domain of 87 amino
acids with significant sequence and structural homology to HMG1 and HMG2 DNA
binding proteins. The two basic domains contain several nuclear targeting
signals. The last 108 C-terminal amino acids contain a binding domain for
immunosuppressive drugs FK506 and rapamycin, which makes this protein a new
member of the immunophilin family. We provide evidence that the new immunophilin 
(FKBP46) is a DNA binding protein that can bind immunosuppressive drug FK506 and 
possesses peptidylprolyl isomerase activity. FKBP46 is localized in the nucleus
and is associated with a nuclear kinase that specifically phosphorylates it in
the presence of Mg2+ and ATP. Upon subsequent sequence analysis of the mouse
FKBP52 cDNA used in our previous study, it was observed that a spermatid nuclear 
transition protein 2 (TP2) sequence is fused in frame with the C terminus of the 
recombinant FKBP52 probably as a result of a cloning artifact. We demonstrate
that the FKBP46 does not form a complex with the FKBP52 but rather with the
highly basic nuclear protein TP2. Our data suggest that interaction of FKBP46
with TP2 is mediated by the N-terminal acidic domains of FKBP46. This implies
that the acidic domains of FKBP46 are involved in protein-protein interaction
between nuclear FKBP46 and other basic chromatin proteins.

PMID: 7527037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Rheumatol. 1994 Nov;21(11):2071-5.

Antibodies to high mobility group proteins in systemic sclerosis.

Ayer LM(1), Sénecal JL, Martin L, Dixon GH, Fritzler MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, AB, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of autoantibodies to high mobility group
(HMG) proteins in systemic sclerosis (SSc).
METHODS: One hundred ninety-seven unselected sera from patients diagnosed as SSc 
(n = 180) or Raynaud's phenomenon (RP) (n = 17) were tested for HMG
autoantibodies by ELISA and immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Seventy-one of the 180 (39.0%) SSc sera bound to HMG proteins in an
ELISA: 56 (31%) to HMG-1 and/or HMG-2; 29 (16%) to HMG-14/17. In the same assay, 
7 of 17 RP sera (41%) bound to HMG proteins: 4 (23%) to HMG-1 and/or HMG-2, and 5
(29%) to HMG-14/17. The specificity of HMG binding was confirmed by
immunoblotting.
CONCLUSION: Antibodies to HMG proteins, particularly to HMG-1 and HMG-2 are found
in about 1/3 of SSc Sera. Since HMG-1 and HMG-2 have a role in transcription,
these observations further implicate transcriptional complexes as targets of
autoantibodies in scleroderma. This is the first published report of HMG
autoantibodies in scleroderma.

PMID: 7869312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Oct 15;225(2):581-91.

cDNA sequence and structure of a gene encoding trout testis high-mobility-group-1
protein.

Stros M(1), Nishikawa S, Dixon GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Canada.

Erratum in
    Eur J Biochem 1995 Feb 1;227(3):922.

Perchloric acid extraction of trout testis nuclei revealed the presence of two
large high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins, HMG-T1 and HMG-T2. The sequence of a
complete cDNA (1407 bp) for trout testis HMG-1 protein (referred as to HMG-T1)
has been determined. The deduced HMG-T1 protein contains 203 amino acids with
more than 86% similarity to mammalian HMG-1 proteins. A single-sized mRNA for
HMG-T1 has been detected by Northern-blot analysis consistent with the size
derived from the HMG-T1 cDNA. Amplification of human and trout genomic DNAs by
polymerase chain reaction using primers specific for trout and human HMG-1 cDNAs 
revealed that unlike the human genome, which contains predominantly intronless
HMG-1 sequences, intronless HMG-T1 sequences were not found in the fish genome.
Southern-blot analysis suggested that the trout testis HMG-1 gene is encoded by
at least two sequences with high similarity. A gene encoding HMG-T1 protein has
been isolated from a trout testis genomic library and by PCR of trout genomic DNA
(3879 bp). The trout testis HMG-1 gene is organized into five exons (four exons
corresponding to the protein-coding region) and its exon/intron boundaries are
identical to those of the human HMG-2 gene [Shirakawa, H. & Yoshida, M. (1992).
J. Biol. Chem. 267, 6641-6645] suggesting the evolution of HMG-1 and HMG-2 genes 
from a common ancestor.

PMID: 7957172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. EMBO J. 1994 Oct 3;13(19):4536-48.

Architectural elements in nucleoprotein complexes: interchangeability of specific
and non-specific DNA binding proteins.

Segall AM(1), Goodman SD, Nash HA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIMH, Bethesda, MD 20892-4034.

Integration host factor (IHF) is required in lambda site-specific recombination
to deform the DNA substrates into conformations active for recombination. HU, a
homolog of IHF, can also deform DNA but binds without any apparent sequence
specificity. We demonstrate that HU can replace IHF by cooperating with the
recombinase protein, integrase, to generate a stable and specific complex with
electrophoretic mobility and biochemical activity very close to the complex
formed by IHF and integrase. The eukaryotic HMG1 and HMG2 proteins differ
entirely in structure from HU but they also bind DNA non-specifically and induce 
or stabilize deformed DNA. We show that the eukaryotic HMG1 and HMG2 proteins
cooperate with integrase at least as well as does HU to make a defined structure.
We also find that the eukaryotic core histone dimer H2A-H2B can replace IHF,
suggesting that the histone dimer is functional outside the context of a
nucleosome. HU and the HMG proteins not only contribute to the formation of
stable complexes, but they can at least partially replace IHF for the integrative
and excisive recombination reactions. These results, together with our analysis
of nucleoprotein complexes made with damaged recombination sites, lead us to
conclude that the cooperation between HU and integrase does not depend on
protein-protein contacts. Rather, cooperation is manifested through building of
higher order structures and depends on the capacity of the non-specific DNA
binding proteins to bend DNA. While all these non-specific binding proteins
appear to fulfil the same bending function, they do so with different
efficiencies. This probably reflects subtle structural differences between the
assembled complexes.

PMCID: PMC395386
PMID: 7925295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;126(3):591-601.

Remodeling sperm chromatin in Xenopus laevis egg extracts: the role of core
histone phosphorylation and linker histone B4 in chromatin assembly.

Dimitrov S(1), Dasso MC, Wolffe AP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We find that the remodeling of the condensed Xenopus laevis sperm nucleus into
the paternal pronucleus in egg extracts is associated with phosphorylation of the
core histones H2A, H2A.X and H4, and uptake of a linker histone B4 and a HMG 2
protein. Histone B4 is required for the assembly of chromatosome structures in
the pronucleus. However neither B4 nor core histone phosphorylation are required 
for the assembly of spaced nucleosomal arrays. We suggest that the spacing of
nucleosomal arrays is determined by interaction between adjacent histone octamers
under physiological assembly conditions.

PMCID: PMC2120139
PMID: 8045925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Jul 29;202(2):736-42.

Stimulation of DNA-dependent protein kinase activity by high mobility group
proteins 1 and 2.

Watanabe F(1), Shirakawa H, Yoshida M, Tsukada K, Teraoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan.

After incubation of high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 with DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK) and [gamma-32P]ATP in the presence of double-stranded
DNA, not only phosphorylation of HMG proteins but also enhancement of
autophosphorylation of the catalytic polypeptide of 350 kDa in DNA-PK was
observed. DNA-PK activity determined with a synthetic peptide and alpha-casein as
substrates was stimulated several-fold by HMG1, HMG2, and the DNA-binding
domains. The stimulation was decreased at higher concentrations of HMG proteins, 
and DNA-PK activity was inhibited by histone H1. Electrophoretic mobility shift
analysis suggests that HMG proteins facilitate the binding of DNA-PK to DNA.

PMID: 8048945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Structure. 1994 Jul 15;2(7):609-27.

The solution structure and dynamics of the DNA-binding domain of HMG-D from
Drosophila melanogaster.

Jones DN(1), Searles MA, Shaw GL, Churchill ME, Ner SS, Keeler J, Travers AA,
Neuhaus D.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: The HMG-box is a conserved DNA-binding motif that has been identified
in many high mobility group (HMG) proteins. HMG-D is a non-histone chromosomal
protein from Drosophila melanogaster that is closely related to the mammalian
HMG-box proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2. Previous structures determined for an HMG-box
domain from rat and hamster exhibit the same global topology, but differ
significantly in detail. It has been suggested that these differences may arise
from hinge motions which allow the protein to adapt to the shape of its target
DNA.
RESULTS: We present the solution structure of HMG-D determined by NMR
spectroscopy to an overall precision of 0.85 A root mean squared deviation (rmsd)
for the backbone atoms. The protein consists of an extended amino-terminal region
and three alpha-helices that fold into a characteristic 'L' shape. The central
core region of the molecule is highly stable and maintains an angle of
approximately 80 degrees between the axes of helices 2 and 3. The backbone
dynamics determined from 15N NMR relaxation measurements show a high correlation 
with the mean residue rmsd determined from the calculated structures.
CONCLUSIONS: The structure determined for the HMG-box motif from HMG-D is
essentially identical to the structure determined for the B-domain of mammalian
HMG-1. Since these proteins have significantly different sequences our results
indicate that the global fold and the mode of interaction with DNA are also
likely to be conserved in all eukaryotes.

PMID: 7922039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4712-21.

Repression of basal transcription by HMG2 is counteracted by TFIIH-associated
factors in an ATP-dependent process.

Stelzer G(1), Goppelt A, Lottspeich F, Meisterernst M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Biology-Genzentrum, Ludwig Maximilian University
Munich, Martinsried, Germany.

A basal repressor of class II gene transcription was identified, purified, and
found to be identical to nonhistone chromosomal protein HMG2. HMG2 was shown to
inhibit basal transcription under conditions in which transcription templates
form soluble complexes with HMG2. Order-of-addition experiments clearly revealed 
that HMG2 acted after assembly of a TBP-TFIIA-promoter complex and before
formation of the fourth phosphodiester bond by RNA polymerase II. Subsequently,
an activity that efficiently counteracted repression of transcription by HMG2 in 
both TBP- and TFIID-containing transcription systems was isolated. Several lines 
of evidence suggested that antirepression was mediated by a TFIIH-associated
factor. The antirepressor first coeluted with TFIIH, was depleted from this
fraction by antibodies directed against the TFIIH subunit p62, was dependent on
either ATP or dATP, and then was inhibited by the ATP analogs AMP-PNP and ATP
gamma S. Relief of HMG2-mediated repression as well as basal promoter function of
TFIIH may involve a helicase that coelutes with TFIIH and displays similar
nucleotide specificities. Taken together, these data suggest novel consequences
of chromatin-associated HMG proteins and they provide direct evidence for a role 
of TFIIH-associated enzymes in ATP-dependent antirepression of nonhistone
chromosomal proteins.

PMCID: PMC358844
PMID: 8007973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Plant Physiol. 1994 Apr;104(4):1237-1244.

Involvement of de Novo Protein Synthesis, Protein Kinase, Extracellular Ca2+, and
Lipoxygenase in Arachidonic Acid Induction of 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl Coenzyme
A Reductase Genes and Isoprenoid Accumulation in Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.).

Choi D(1), Bostock RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, California
95616.

A series of inhibitors were tested to determine the participation of de novo
protein synthesis, protein kinase activity, extracellular Ca2+, and lipoxygenase 
activity in arachidonic acid elicitation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A
reductase (HMGR) gene expression and sesquiterpene phytoalexin biosynthesis in
potato (Solanum tuberosum L. cv Kennebec). Gene-specific probes were used to
discriminate effects on the expression of two HMGR genes (hmg1 and hmg2) that
respond differentially in tuber tissue following wounding or elicitor treatment. 
Inhibition of protein synthesis with cycloheximide completely blocked
arachidonate-induced hypersensitive necrosis and browning, including HMGR gene
induction and phytoalexin accumulation. This suggests that proteins necessary for
coupling arachidonic acid reception to HMGR mRNA accumulation are either rapidly 
turned over or not present constitutively and are induced following elicitor
treatment. Staurosporin, a potent inhibitor of protein kinases, and
ethyleneglycol-bis([beta]-aminoethyl ether)-N,N[prime]-tetraacetic acid, a Ca2+
chelator, inhibited arachidonate-induction of hmg2 gene expression and
phytoalexin accumulation but did not inhibit the wound-induced expression of
hmg1. However, staurosporin inhibited arachidonate's suppression of hmg1 gene
expression. Eicosatetraynoic acid, a lipoxygenase inhibitor that suppresses
elicitor-induced phytoalexin accumulation, also inhibited arachidonate's
suppression of hmg1 and induction of hmg2. The results indicate that
arachidonate's suppression of hmg1 and activation of hmg2 depend on a common
intermediate or set of intermediates whose generation is sensitive to the
inhibitors tested.

PMCID: PMC159286
PMID: 12232162  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


263. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Mar 15;91(6):2329-33.

Lipid-derived signals that discriminate wound- and pathogen-responsive isoprenoid
pathways in plants: methyl jasmonate and the fungal elicitor arachidonic acid
induce different 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase genes and
antimicrobial isoprenoids in Solanum tuberosum L.

Choi D(1), Bostock RM, Avdiushko S, Hildebrand DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Induction of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGR; EC 1.1.1.34) 
is essential for the synthesis of steroid derivatives and sesquiterpenoid
phytoalexins in solanaceous plants following mechanical injury or pathogen
infection. Gene-specific probes corresponding to different HMGR genes (hmg1 and
hmg2) were used to study HMGR expression in potato tissue following treatment
with methyl jasmonate, a lipoxygenase product of linolenic acid, or arachidonic
acid, an elicitor present in the lipids of the potato late blight fungus
Phytophthora infestans. Treatment of potato discs (2.2 cm in diameter) with low
concentrations (0.45-45 nmol per disc surface) of methyl jasmonate nearly doubled
the wound-induced accumulation of hmg1 transcripts and steroid-glycoalkaloid
(SGA) accumulation, reduced the abundance of hmg2 transcripts, and did not induce
phytoalexins. High concentrations of methyl jasmonate (2-4.5 mol per disc
surface) suppressed hmg1 mRNA and SGA accumulation but did not affect hmg2 mRNA
abundance or induce phytoalexins. In contrast, arachidonate treatment strongly
suppressed hmg1 and strongly induced hmg2 mRNA in a concentration-dependent
manner. There was a corresponding suppression of SGA accumulation and an
induction of sesquiterpene phytoalexin accumulation by this elicitor.
Lipoxygenase inhibitors reduced the wound-induced accumulation of hmg1
transcripts and suppressed SGA levels, effects that were overcome by exogenous
methyl jasmonate (45 nmol per disc surface). The results (i) suggest that methyl 
jasmonate can function as a signal for hmg1 expression and SGA induction
following wounding and (ii) indicate that the arachidonate- and
jasmonate-response pathways are distinct in relation to HMGR gene expression and 
isoprenoid product accumulation. The results also are consistent with placement
of the HMGR activities encoded by hmg1 and hmg2 within discrete steroid and
sesquiterpenoid biosynthetic channels.

PMCID: PMC43364
PMID: 11607466  [PubMed]


264. Parasitology. 1994 Jan;108 ( Pt 1):43-50.

Characterization of a HMG2-like protein from Schistosoma mansoni.

Fantappié MR(1), Rumjanek FD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica Médica ICB/CCS, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Cidade Universitária, Brasil.

An HMG2-like protein was purified from nuclear extracts of adult Schistosoma
mansoni. Investigation of the amino acid composition of the schistosome HMG2-like
protein showed that glutamic acid, glycine, aspartic acid and lysine were the
most abundant. Carbohydrate analysis showed that the HMG2-like protein presented 
a low degree of glycosylation, galactose or glucose being the major
monosaccharide constituent. Incubation of live schistosomes with 32P followed by 
isolation of nuclear proteins showed that the HMG-2 like protein could be
phosphorylated. Partial sequence analysis of cyanogen bromide peptides revealed
the occurrence of a phosphorylation consensus motif. The schistosome HMG2-like
protein was found to bind preferentially to single-stranded DNA. The results
suggest that the major non-histone S. mansoni nuclear protein belongs to the HMG 
family.

PMID: 8152854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Arthritis Rheum. 1994 Jan;37(1):98-103.

Antibodies to HMG proteins in patients with drug-induced autoimmunity.

Ayer LM(1), Rubin RL, Dixon GH, Fritzler MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of autoantibodies to high-mobility group
(HMG) proteins in sera from patients with drug-induced lupus (DIL).
METHODS: Forty-two patients who developed autoantibodies and/or lupus after
treatment with procainamide or other drugs were tested for HMG autoantibodies by 
immunoblotting and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Twenty-eight of the 42 sera (67%) bound HMG-14 and/or HMG-17. In
comparison, 9 of 42 (21%) bound HMG-1 and/or HMG-2. There was a good correlation 
between ELISA results and binding on immunoblots.
CONCLUSION: The high prevalence of antibodies to the nucleosomal core HMGs
(HMG-14 and HMG-17) in DIL patients adds evidence implicating nucleosomes as
immunogens in drug-induced autoimmunity.

PMID: 7907477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Nematol. 1993 Dec;25(4):507-18.

Regulation of Defense-related Gene Expression during Plant-Pathogen Interactions.

Cramer CL, Weissenborn D, Cottingham CK, Denbow CJ, Eisenback JD, Radin DN, Yu X.

Plants have evolved a broad array of defense mechanisms involved in disease
resistance. These include synthesis of phytoalexin antibiotics and proteinase
inhibitors, deposition of cell wall materials, and accumulation of hydrolytic
enzymes such as chitinases. Resistance appears to depend on the ability of the
host to recognize the pathogen rapidly and induce these defense responses in
order to limit pathogen spread. Application of molecular technologies has yielded
significant new information on mechanisms involved in pathogen recognition,
signal transduction, and defense-related gene activation, and is leading to novel
strategies for engineering enhanced disease resistance. We are using these
approaches to analyze regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase
(HMGR), a key enzyme mediating the production of terpenoid defense compounds.
This enzyme is encoded by four genes in tomato; hmg2 gene expression is
specifically associated with responses to pathogen or defense elicitors.
Transgenic plants containing DNA constructs that fuse the hmg2 promoter to a
reporter gene have been used to analyze both tissue specificity and patterns of
defense-related expression. Because this gene is rapidly induced in tissues
directly surrounding the site of ingress by a variety of pathogens, it may serve 
as a valuable tool in engineering new disease-resistance mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2619434
PMID: 19279804  [PubMed]


267. J Biol Chem. 1993 Nov 15;268(32):23940-5.

Localization of the binding region of high mobility group protein 2 to
cisplatin-damaged DNA.

Lawrence DL(1), Engelsberg BN, Farid RS, Hughes EN, Billings PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104.

Cisplatin (CDDP) is an effective cancer chemotherapeutic drug used in the
treatment of several human malignancies. The effectiveness of cisplatin therapy
is limited by intrinsic resistance of tumors to this drug as well as the
development of secondary tumors, which are also drug resistant. A potential
mechanism influencing the sensitivity of cells to CDDP may result from the
interaction of specific proteins with CDDP-damaged DNA (CDDP-DNA). In an earlier 
report, we demonstrated that high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 bind with
high affinity to CDDP-DNA. In the present study partial proteolytic digestion was
used to localize the binding region of HMG2. A proteolytic fragment of
approximately 20 kDa, containing the amino-terminal region of the protein,
maintains the ability to bind with high affinity to CDDP-DNA, while an
amino-terminal fragment of 14 kDa binds with slightly reduced affinity. In
contrast, a peptide fragment lacking 51 NH2-terminal amino acids from HMG2 has
greatly reduced affinity for damaged DNA. Recombinant peptide fragments
containing HMG box 1 or HMG box 2 bind weakly to damaged DNA, while a recombinant
fragment containing HMG boxes 1 and 2 binds with high affinity. Hence, our
results indicate that the amino-terminal region of HMG2 contains the damaged DNA 
binding recognition site and that both HMG boxes 1 and 2, present in the parental
molecule, are required for high affinity binding of this protein to CDDP-DNA.

PMID: 8226934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Hum Reprod. 1993 Nov;8 Suppl 2:175-9.

Pulsatile gonadotrophin releasing hormone versus gonadotrophin treatment of
hypothalamic hypogonadism in males.

Schopohl J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum Innenstadt, München, Germany.

In this study, pulsatile gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH) therapy and
gonadotrophin therapy were compared for male patients with idiopathic
hypothalamic hypogonadism. Thirty-six patients, 19 with this condition, and 17
with Kallmann's syndrome, were included in the study. Their mean age was 21.1 +/-
3.0 years (+/- SD). They were divided into two groups of similar age, number and 
testicular volume. Pulsatile GnRH therapy was started with 4 micrograms GnRH s.c.
every 2 h using a portable pump and gonadotrophin therapy with weekly i.m.
injections of 3 x 2500 IU human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG). After 8-12 weeks
of HCG treatment, 150 IU human menopausal gonadotrophin (HMG) 2-4 times weekly
were added and the dose of HCG reduced if necessary. Testosterone concentrations 
increased significantly more (P < 0.03) in the gonadotrophin group than in the
GnRH group (22.5 +/- 8.1 versus 16.8 +/- 5.5 nmol/l). The rise in oestradiol
levels was also significantly higher (P < 0.001) in the gonadotrophin group than 
in the GnRH group (150 +/- 70 versus 88 +/- 59 pmol/l). Five patients developed
gynaecomastia during gonadotrophin therapy. An increased testicular volume (TV)
occurred more rapidly (P < 0.001) and was significantly more pronounced (P <
0.001) after GnRH therapy (delta TV = 8.1 +/- 2.0 ml) than with gonadotrophins
(delta TV = 4.8 +/- 1.8 ml). Sperm counts were performed in 14 patients given
GnRH and in 17 patients given gonadotrophins. Ten patients given GnRH had
positive sperm counts, ranging from 1.5 to 14 x 10(6) spermatozoa/ml; eight of
those given gonadotrophins also developed spermatogenesis (2-26 x
10(6)/ml).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8276954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Plant Mol Biol. 1993 Nov;23(4):813-23.

Abundance of an mRNA encoding a high mobility group DNA-binding protein is
regulated by light and an endogenous rhythm.

Zheng CC(1), Bui AQ, O'Neill SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at Davis 95616.

A cDNA clone encoding an HMG1 protein from Pharbitis nil was characterized with
regard to its sequence, genomic organization and regulation in response to
photoperiodic treatments that control floral induction. The HMG1 cDNA contains an
open reading frame of 432 nucleotides encoding a 144 amino acid protein of
approximately 16 kDa. The predicted polypeptide has the characteristic conserved 
motifs of the HMG1 and HMG2 class of proteins including an N-terminal basic
region, one of two HMG-box domains, and a polyacidic carboxy terminus. Within the
HMG-box region, Pharbitis HMG1 deduced amino acid sequence shares 47%, 67% and
69% identity with its animal, maize, and soybean counterparts, respectively.
Southern blot hybridization analysis suggests that HMG1 is a member of a
multigene family. Analysis of mRNA abundance indicates that the HMG1 gene is
expressed to higher levels in dark-grown tissue, such as roots, and at lower
levels in light-grown tissue, such as cotyledons and stems. Following the
transition to darkness, the levels of HMG1 mRNA in cotyledons were initially
stable, however, after a lag time of 8 h or more, HMG1 mRNA increased in
abundance to a peak level at 20 h. A second peak in mRNA levels was observed
about 24 h later, indicating that the expression of the HMG1 gene is regulated by
an endogenous circadian rhythm. Abundance of the HMG1 mRNA during a dark period
was dramatically affected by brief light exposure (night break), a treatment
which inhibits floral induction. These data indicate that the expression of HMG1 
is regulated by both an endogenous rhythm and the light/dark cycle and are
consistent with a role for HMG1 in maintaining patterns of circadian-regulated
gene expression activated upon the transition from light to darkness.

PMID: 8251634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Hum Reprod. 1993 Aug;8(8):1284-7.

Analysis of the risk factors with regard to the occurrence of ectopic pregnancy
after medically assisted procreation.

Verhulst G(1), Camus M, Bollen N, Van Steirteghem A, Devroey P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Reproductive Medicine, University Hospital, Dutch-speaking Brussels
Free University (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Belgium.

In a retrospective study (1985-1989) based on data from the Centre for
Reproductive Medicine in Brussels, a total of 23 ectopic pregnancies (2.24%)
occurred after 3800 embryo, zygote or gamete transfers. This number was low
compared with the data published elsewhere. Tubal damage was a major risk factor 
towards developing an ectopic pregnancy after in-vitro fertilization and embryo
transfer. The number of ectopic pregnancies after the association of clomiphene
citrate and human menopausal gonadotrophin (HMG) was significantly higher in
patients with tubal (7.8%) and non-tubal indications (2.1%) compared with those
stimulated with gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and HMG (2.18% and 0.84%, 
respectively). The number of replaced embryos was not associated with the rate of
ectopic pregnancy and neither did transfer technique (intra-uterine or
intra-Fallopian transfer) influence the ectopic pregnancy rate.

PMID: 8408528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Genes Dev. 1993 Aug;7(8):1521-34.

The nonspecific DNA-binding and -bending proteins HMG1 and HMG2 promote the
assembly of complex nucleoprotein structures.

Paull TT(1), Haykinson MJ, Johnson RC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California Los Angeles 90024.

The mammalian high mobility group proteins HMG1 and HMG2 are abundant,
chromatin-associated proteins whose cellular function is not known. In this study
we show that these proteins can substitute for the prokaryotic DNA-bending
protein HU in promoting the assembly of the Hin invertasome, an intermediate
structure in Hin-mediated site-specific DNA inversion. Formation of this complex 
requires the assembly of the Hin recombinase, the Fis protein, and three
cis-acting DNA sites, necessitating the looping of intervening DNA segments.
Invertasome assembly is strongly stimulated by HU or HMG proteins when one of
these segments is shorter than 104 bp. By use of ligase-mediated circularization 
assays, we demonstrate that HMG1 and HMG2 can bend DNA extremely efficiently,
forming circles as small as 66 bp, and even 59-bp circles at high HMG protein
concentrations. In both invertasome assembly and circularization assays,
substrates active in the presence of HMG1 contain one less helical turn of DNA
compared with substrates active in the presence of HU protein. Analysis of
different domains of HMG1 generated by partial proteolytic digestion indicate
that DNA-binding domain B is sufficient for both bending and invertasome
assembly. We suggest that an important biological function of HMG1 and HMG2 is to
facilitate cooperative interactions between cis-acting proteins by promoting DNA 
flexibility. A general role for HMG1 and HMG2 in chromatin structure is also
suggested by their ability to wrap DNA duplexes into highly compact forms.

PMID: 8339930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Hum Reprod. 1993 Jun;8(6):807-12.

Ovarian stimulation with buserelin/HMG/HCG: prospective randomized study of short
versus long protocol.

Tarlatzis BC(1), Pados G, Bontis J, Lagos S, Grimbizis G, Spanos E, Mantalenakis 
S.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Obstetrics-Gynaecology, Aristotelian University of
Thessaloniki, Greece.

The combined administration of the gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist
buserelin and human menopausal gonadotrophin (HMG) was evaluated in 527 cycles
(428 patients) of an assisted reproduction programme. All women were randomly
allocated according to the ovulation induction protocol into two groups: group I 
(short protocol; 318 cycles) was given buserelin (1 mg/day) intranasally from
cycle day 1 and HMG (2 ampoules/day) from day 3 until human chorionic
gonadotrophin (HCG) administration: group II (long protocol; 209 cycles) was
given buserelin (1 mg/day) intranasally from cycle day 1 for at least 14 days and
then 2 ampoules HMG/day were added, increasing progressively according to the
ovarian response. The number (mean +/- SEM) of follicles developed was higher in 
group II than in group I (9.1 +/- 0.4 versus 7.7 +/- 0.3, respectively; P <
0.05). More oocytes were retrieved in group II (8.4 +/- 0.5) than in group I (6.5
+/- 0.3) (P < 0.001), as well as more embryos (6.3 +/- 0.5 and 4.0 +/- 0.3,
respectively; P < 0.001). Moreover, in group II there was a better correlation
between oestradiol and the total follicular volume (r = 0.5391) on cycle day 0
compared with group I (r = 0.458), while oestradiol values were similar between
the two groups. No differences were observed in the cancellation rate,
fertilization rate and maturity of the oocytes between the two groups. The
pregnancy rate per transfer was slightly better in group II (25.8%) than in group
I (19.4%), but this difference was not significant.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 8345067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 May 25;21(10):2493-501.

Ancestry and diversity of the HMG box superfamily.

Laudet V(1), Stehelin D, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The HMG box is a novel type of DNA-binding domain found in a diverse group of
proteins. The HMG box superfamily comprises a.o. the High Mobility Group proteins
HMG1 and HMG2, the nucleolar transcription factor UBF, the lymphoid transcription
factors TCF-1 and LEF-1, the fungal mating-type genes mat-Mc and MATA1, and the
mammalian sex-determining gene SRY. The superfamily dates back to at least 1,000 
million years ago, as its members appear in animals, plants and yeast. Alignment 
of all known HMG boxes defined an unusually loose consensus sequence. We
constructed phylogenetic trees connecting the members of the HMG box superfamily 
in order to understand their evolution. This analysis led us to distinguish two
subfamilies: one comprising proteins with a single sequence-specific HMG box, the
other encompassing relatively non sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins with
multiple HMG boxes. By studying the extent of diversification of the superfamily,
we found that the speed of evolution was very different within the various groups
of HMG-box containing factors. Comparison of the evolution of the two boxes of
ABF2 and of mtTF1 implied different diversification models for these two
proteins. Finally, we provide a tree for the highly complex group of SRY-like
('Sox' genes), clustering at least 40 different loci that rapidly diverged in
various animal lineages.

PMCID: PMC309552
PMID: 8506143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PCR Methods Appl. 1993 Feb;2(3):218-22.

PCR amplification of SRY-related gene sequences reveals evolutionary conservation
of the SRY-box motif.

Coriat AM(1), Müller U, Harry JL, Uwanogho D, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Structural Biology, University of Manchester, UK.

SRY (sex-determining region of the Y chromosome) has recently been identified as 
a key regulatory gene in mammalian sex determination. The open reading frame of
this gene contains an 80-amino-acid motif, the SRY-box, which shares a high
degree of homology with a DNA-binding domain found in the high-mobility-group
(HMG) proteins HMG1 and HMG2. The SRY box motif is highly conserved in several
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins that are known to act as transcription
factors. Here we describe the use of degenerate PCR primers to identify
SRY-related sequences containing the SRY-box motif from the genomic DNA of a
variety of species. The results of this study suggest that in a diverse array of 
species SRY-related genes may serve as transcription factors that regulate a
variety of developmental pathways, including sex determination.

PMID: 8443573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Int J Biochem. 1993 Jan;25(1):37-41.

HMG-2 protein in developing rat brain cells.

Angelova A(1), Borissova Z, Avramova F, Simeonova V, Stambolova M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Sofia, Bulgaria.

1. The distribution of HMG-2 protein was followed in unfractionated rat brain
cells at different stages of development. Its amount gradually decreased and
reached the lowest level in the terminally differentiated and non-proliferating
cells. 2. In isolated oligodendrocyte nuclei the changes in the content of HMG-2 
followed the same pattern of distribution which corresponded to their stage of
development and proliferative activity, while in the terminally differentiated
and non-proliferating cortical neurons a substantial amount of HMG-2 protein was 
present up to the twenty-eighth postnatal day. 3. In the presence of anti-HMG-2
antibodies the DNA synthetic activity of oligodendrocyte nuclei in vitro was
significantly decreased. The treatment with antibodies affected mainly the DNA
replicative activity of the nuclei, while their DNA repair activity remained
unchanged.

PMID: 8432381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Dec 11;20(23):6413.

A human HMG2 cDNA with a novel 3'-untranslated region.

Alexandre S(1), Li WW, Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Norris Cancer Research Center, University of
Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90033.

PMCID: PMC334538
PMID: 1475204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Nov 16;188(3):1286-94.

Characterization of high mobility group protein binding to cisplatin-damaged DNA.

Billings PC(1), Davis RJ, Engelsberg BN, Skov KA, Hughes EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104.

cis-Diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (cisplatin, CDDP) is a widely used
chemotherapeutic agent. While many tumors are highly responsive to CDDP, certain 
tumors are resistant to this drug, limiting its efficacy. The anti-tumor activity
of CDDP is believed to result from its coordination bonding to chromosomal DNA.
Alterations in tumor cell sensitivity to CDDP may result from the presence or
absence of protein(s) which specifically recognize CDDP-damaged DNA. We have
developed a damaged-DNA affinity precipitation assay that allows the direct
identification of cellular proteins that bind to CDDP-damaged DNA. Using this
procedure, we have identified several proteins which specifically bind to
CDDP-damaged DNA. Two of these proteins have been identified as high mobility
group proteins (HMG) 1 and 2 in the current report, we have characterized the
binding of these proteins to CDDP-DNA. The calculated Kd of binding to
CDDP-damaged DNA was 3.27 x 10(-10) for HMG1 and 1.87 x 10(-10) for HMG2. Using
highly specific chemical modifying reagents, we have determined that Cys residues
play an important role in protein binding. We also observed that HMG2 will bind
to DNA modified with carboplatin and iproplatin although to a lesser extent than 
to DNA damaged with CDDP. Thus, our results indicate that HMG 2 binds with high
affinity to DNA modified with therapeutically active platinum compounds. In
addition, our findings suggest that thiol groups play an essential role in the
binding of HMG1 and HMG2 to CDDP-DNA.

PMID: 1445361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Sep 25;20(18):4927.

Nucleotide sequence of a mouse cDNA encoding the non-histone chromosomal high
mobility group protein-2 (HMG-2)

Stolzenburg F(1), Dinkl E, Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Würzburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res 1992 Oct 11;20(19):5262.

PMCID: PMC334252
PMID: 1408807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Fertil Steril. 1992 Aug;58(2):314-20.

Human chorionic gonadotropin stimulation of relaxin secretion by luteinized human
granulosa cells.

Gagliardi CL(1), Goldsmith LT, Saketos M, Weiss G, Schmidt CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Medicine and Dentistry 
of New Jersey, Newark 07103.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) on
relaxin secretion by long-term cultures of luteinized human granulosa cells (GC).
DESIGN: Luteinized human GC were collected from 10 women undergoing in vitro
fertilization (IVF) cycles. Luteinized human GC from each woman were plated in
replicate wells at 1 x 10(5) cells/well and exposed to medium 199 (GIBCO, Grand
Island, NY), medium 199 with 1 IU/mL hCG, and/or medium 199 with 100 IU hCG/mL.
Luteinized human GC were maintained for up to 40 days in culture. Spent media
were changed every 2 days and assayed for relaxin and progesterone (P) at the
conclusion of each experiment.
SETTING: Tertiary care center.
PATIENTS, PARTICIPANTS: Luteinized human GC were obtained from women undergoing
controlled ovarian hyperstimulation for IVF with one of the following regimens:
(1) clomiphene citrate with human menopausal gonadotropins (hMG); (2) hMG alone; 
or (3) hMG with leuprolide acetate. All women were less than 40 years of age, in 
good health, and were not taking medications other than those used in the
ovulation-induction regimen.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Levels of P and relaxin in spent media.
RESULTS: Relaxin secretion by luteinized human GC was dependent on hCG
stimulation and was detected only after a time lag in culture. After relaxin
secretion was detected, it was maintained throughout the culture period (10 to 22
days). Luteinized human GC produced P immediately under both basal and stimulated
conditions. Progesterone production continued throughout the culture period with 
hCG-stimulated cells producing significantly greater P after 4 to 8 days in
culture.
CONCLUSIONS: Luteinized human GC obtained at the time of oocyte retrieval secrete
relaxin in response to hCG stimulation and secrete P under both basal and
hCG-stimulated conditions, thereby serving as a model to explore luteal function 
and control.

PMID: 1633896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jul 5;267(19):13520-7.

Purification of nuclear proteins that bind to cisplatin-damaged DNA. Identity
with high mobility group proteins 1 and 2.

Hughes EN(1), Engelsberg BN, Billings PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104.

The biochemical processes responsible for the recognition and repair of
cisplatin-damaged DNA in human cells are not well understood. We have developed a
damaged DNA affinity precipitation technique that allows the direct visualization
and characterization of cellular proteins that bind to cisplatin-damaged DNA. The
method separates damaged DNA-binding proteins from complex radiolabeled cell
mixtures and further resolves them into individual polypeptides by sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. This technique is complementary to
gel retardation and Southwestern blotting analyses that have been previously used
to identify cellular components that specifically bind to cisplatin-damaged DNA. 
Using this technique, we have characterized a set of HeLaS3 nuclear proteins of
26.5, 28, 90, and 97 kDa that specifically bind to cisplatin-DNA adducts.
Competition studies with soluble cisplatin-damaged DNA confirmed these findings. 
The major cisplatin-damaged DNA-binding proteins of 26.5 and 28 kDa recognized
adducts of DNA modified with cisplatin but not with its trans-isomer or with UV
radiation. These proteins were purified 450-fold to near homogeneity by
ion-exchange and cisplatin-damaged DNA affinity chromatography. Amino-terminal
sequence analysis showed that the 26.5- and 28-kDa proteins were identical to
high mobility group (HMG) proteins HMG-2 and HMG-1, respectively.

PMID: 1618852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Electrophoresis. 1992 Jun;13(6):397-9.

Tissue-specific pattern of nonhistone high mobility group proteins in various
organs of the chicken.

Pedrini M(1), Grunicke H, Csordas A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Innsbruck,
Austria.

Electrophoretic analysis of tissue-specific differences of nonhistone high
mobility group (HMG) proteins from nuclei of various organs of the chicken
revealed that in organs with a higher proportion of replicating cells (thymus,
Bursa Fabricii, spleen) the relative amount of HMG-17 is considerably higher than
that of HMG-14; however, in transcriptionally active organs with a very small
proportion of replicating cells (glandular stomach, liver) HMG-14 and HMG-17 are 
present at roughly equal and low amounts. In glandular stomach, liver and spleen,
the relative contents of both HMG-1 and HMG-2 are markedly lower than in thymus
and Bursa Fabricii. Moreover, the total amount of HMG proteins is higher in those
organs which contain replicating lymphocytes.

PMID: 1505502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Cell Biochem. 1992 Jun;49(2):172-80.

Extraction and partial characterization of non-histone nuclear proteins of
Schistosoma mansoni.

Rabelo EM(1), Campos EG, Fantappié MR, Rumjanek FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biochemistry, National Institute for Medical
Research, London, England.

A pool of nuclear proteins from adult worms of Schistosoma mansoni was analyzed
for amino acid composition and found to be compatible with high mobility group
(HMG) proteins. One of the schistosome HMG proteins was identified as HMG 2 by
one-dimensional and two-dimensional PAGE. Stage-specific differences in the
HMG-like protein composition were encountered when adult worms were compared to
schistosomula, the larval form. Immobilization of the adult male and female
nuclear proteins onto nitrocellulose, followed by hybridization against 32P-F-10,
a schistosome sex specific gene encoding a major egg shell protein, revealed
distinct banding patterns. On the other hand, a synthetic oligonucleotide,
derived from the 3' untranslated end of the F-10 gene and possibly containing one
regulatory element of the gene, bound mainly to male low MW proteins.

PMID: 1400623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Gene. 1992 May 15;114(2):289-90.

Sequence of a cDNA encoding chicken high-mobility-group protein-2.

Sparrow DB(1), Wells JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, South Australia.

There are several members of the high-mobility-group (HMG) of DNA-binding
proteins, including HMG-1, HMG-2, HMG-14 and HMG-17 [Johns: The HMG Chromosomal
Proteins. Academic Press, London, 1982]. We report here sequences encoding the
chicken HMG-2 protein of 207 amino acids (aa). This assignment is made on the
basis of available data which indicate 89% homology of the chicken aa sequence to
porcine HMG-2. This compares with 78-81% homology to the HMG-1 proteins of rat,
hamster, human, porcine, and bovine origin.

PMID: 1601311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Gene. 1992 Apr 15;113(2):251-6.

Isolation of a chicken HMG2 cDNA clone and evidence for an HMG2-specific
3'-untranslated region.

Davis DL(1), Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111.

HMG1 and HMG2 (high-mobility group proteins) are two of the most abundant
nonhistone chromosomal proteins in higher eukaryotes. Mammalian HMG1 cDNA
sequences have the unusual feature of being conserved not only over their coding 
regions, but also over large segments of their 3'-untranslated regions (3' UTRs) 
as well. In contrast, the only reported mammalian HMG2 cDNA clone has a distinct 
3' UTR. We now report the isolation of a chicken HMG2 cDNA clone and show that it
is markedly similar to the mammalian HMG2 cDNA clone over both its coding regions
and 3' UTRs. We therefore infer that the 3' UTRs of the HMG1 and HMG2 genes are
subject to distinct evolutionary pressures. Our data, along with published data, 
also serve to highlight 26 amino acid positions where HMG1 and HMG2 are
distinctly conserved, and we note that trout HMG-T conforms to the HMG1 paradigm 
at most of these diagnostic positions.

PMID: 1572546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 5;267(10):6641-5.

Structure of a gene coding for human HMG2 protein.

Shirakawa H(1), Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba, Japan.

A human genomic library was screened with the pig thymus cDNA coding for
chromosomal protein HMG2. A 4341-base pair fragment containing the entire gene
encoding this protein was isolated and characterized. The HMG2 gene is 2665 base 
pairs long from the start site to the end of transcription and comprises 5 exons.
The size of mRNA postulated from the exons is 1125 base pairs long, consistent
with that obtained by Northern hybridization analysis. The canonical
5'-regulatory motifs, CCAAT, are present, while the TATA element is absent from
the gene. Southern analysis suggested that HMG2 protein is encoded by a single or
only a few genes of high homology. The primary structure of the human HMG2
protein consists of 208 amino acid residues, deduced from the coding region of
the gene, is different from that of pig HMG2 in only two amino acids; one is
exchanged and the other is missing. The amino acid sequences of two DNA binding
domains, "HMG-box," also recently found in several transcription factors, are
completely homologous in human and pig HMG2. The present study, which is the
first one on the isolation and characterization of complete gene coding for HMG2 
protein, may be useful for evolutional and genomic analysis of the proteins
containing the HMG-box sequences for DNA binding.

PMID: 1551873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1992 Mar 24;1130(2):224-6.

Molecular cloning of chick liver HMG 2a cDNA and developmental expression of HMG 
2a mRNA.

Oka T(1), Endo Y, Ito M, Miyamoto K, Sasakawa T, Suzuki I, Natori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Tokushima, Japan.

The cDNA clone encoding HMG 2a of chick liver was isolated from a lambda gt11
expression library using polyclonal antibodies. DNA sequence analysis revealed an
open reading frame of 201 amino acids. Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of 
cDNA coding for chick liver HMG 2a with pig thymus HMG 2 and human monocytic
leukemia cell HMG 2 showed 70% homology. 2.0 kb and 1.2 kb mRNAs were found in
newly hatched chick liver and decreased during postnatal development of chicks.

PMID: 1562600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Biokhimiia. 1992 Feb;57(2):214-9.

[Effect of HMG proteins and their phosphorylated forms on the process of
transcription in neuronal nuclei of the rat brain (data from an immunochemical
analysis)].

[Article in Russian]

Beliavtseva LM, Kozlov SV, Kulikova OG, Surkova EA, Fedorova NA.

It was found that chromatin transcription in the neuronal nucleus of rat brain is
inhibited by antisera to proteins HMG 14, HMG 17 and HMG 2. It is known that
chromatin transcription of the neuronal nucleus and phosphorylation of
chromosomal proteins are activated by etimizol. The phosphorylation of
chromosomal proteins activated by etimizol is inhibited by the antiserum to HMG
14 (but not to HMG 17). The data obtained are suggestive of a possible role of
HMG proteins and their phosphorylated forms in the regulation of transcription.

PMID: 1525238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 11;19(23):6643.

Sequence of human HMG2 cDNA.

Majumdar A(1), Brown D, Kerby S, Rudzinski I, Polte T, Randhawa Z, Seidman MM.

Author information: 
(1)Otsuka Pharmaceuticals, Rockville, MD 20850.

PMCID: PMC329240
PMID: 1754403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Exp Cell Res. 1991 Dec;197(2):333-4.

Characterization of HMG2 complement changes in chicken tissues.

Boix J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Barcelona School of Medicine, Spain.

Variations in the content of nonhistone proteins high mobility group 2a (HMG2a)
and HMG2b have been determined in several cell types of chicken. HMG2a was found 
to accumulate during erythrocyte maturation. HMG2b is the major HMG2 subtype in
testis and reaches the highest proportion, detected so far, in spermatid cells
obtained by centrifugal elutriation. In hepatocytes HMG2b is barely detectable
and HMG2a is the major subtype. In conclusion, the pattern of HMG2 composition is
different in three quiescent and terminally differentiated cell types, no
correlation between the state of cell proliferation and HMG2 composition can be
established.

PMID: 1959567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Aging (Milano). 1991 Dec;3(4):333-5.

Differential methylation of HMG proteins by dexamethasone in the liver of aging
rats.

Prasad S(1), Thakur MK.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, India.

In vitro methylation of HMG proteins was studied in young and old rats by
incubating liver slices with (methyl-14C)methionine. The level of methylation of 
all the four HMG proteins was relatively higher in young, as compared to old
rats. Dexamethasone stimulated the methylation of HMG 2 to 12-fold, and inhibited
that of other HMGs in young rats. On the other hand, it stimulated all major HMG 
proteins except HMG 2, which remains unchanged in old age. Such differential
methylation of HMG proteins induced by dexamethasone affects the structure and
function of chromatin during aging.

PMID: 1841605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biochem Genet. 1991 Oct;29(9-10):461-75.

High-mobility group and other nonhistone substrates for nuclear histone
N-acetyltransferase.

Wong LC(1), Sharpe DJ, Wong SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Lowell 01854.

A variety of nonhistone proteins and polyamines has been studied for their
substrate activity for nuclear histone N-acetyltransferase. Nonhistone chromatin 
high-mobility group (HMG) proteins are found to be as good a substrate for the
enzyme as histones. The enzyme also acetylates spermidine and spermine. However, 
protamine, bovine serum albumin, and ubiquitin are not substrates. Chymotryptic
peptides of histone and HMGs retained about 64% of the substrate activity, but
trypsin treatment reduced the substrate activity by more than 85%. Both
N-acetyltransferase activities for HMGs and histones are copurified through salt 
extraction, polyethylene glycol fractionation, and chromatography on
DEAE-cellulose, phosphocellulose columns, and a HPLC anionic-exchange column. The
highly purified nuclear histone acetyltransferase shows similar optimal pH and
ping-pong kinetics for both HMGs and histones. The Km for HMG is 0.25 mg/ml. HMGs
are able to accept the acetyl group from isolated acetyl-enzyme intermediate.
Denatured gel analysis shows that HMG 1 and HMG 2 are the major proteins
acetylated. High salt concentrations, mononucleotides, and DNA, which inhibit
histone substrate activity of the enzyme, also inhibit HMG substrate activity.
These observations suggest that there is a major nuclear N-acetyltransferase
which is responsible for the acetylation of both histones and HMGs and perhaps
also of spermine and spermidine. Thus the regulation of the structure and
function of chromatin through postsynthetic acetylation can be achieved by a
single nuclear N-acetyltransferase.

PMID: 1772401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Sep 1;88(17):7864-8.

A close relative of the nuclear, chromosomal high-mobility group protein HMG1 in 
yeast mitochondria.

Diffley JF(1), Stillman B.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724.

ABF2 (ARS-binding factor 2), a small, basic DNA-binding protein that binds
specifically to the autonomously replicating sequence ARS1, is located primarily 
in the mitochondria of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The abundance of ABF2 
and the phenotype of abf2- null mutants argue that this protein plays a key role 
in the structure, maintenance, and expression of the yeast mitochondrial genome. 
The predicted amino acid sequence of ABF2 is closely related to the high-mobility
group proteins HMG1 and HMG2 from vertebrate cell nuclei and to several other
DNA-binding proteins. Additionally, ABF2 and the other HMG-related proteins are
related to a globular domain from the heat shock protein hsp70 family. ABF2
interacts with DNA both nonspecifically and in a specific manner within
regulatory regions, suggesting a mechanism whereby it may aid in compacting the
mitochondrial genome without interfering with expression.

PMCID: PMC52404
PMID: 1881919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Hum Reprod. 1991 Jul;6(6):799-804.

Pregnancy rates after transfer of embryos obtained from different stimulation
protocols and frozen at either pronucleate or multicellular stages.

Demoulin A(1), Jouan C, Gerday C, Dubois M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Liège, Hôpital de la
Citadelle, Belgium.

After in-vitro fertilization, 2161 supernumerary embryos were frozen with
1,2-propanediol and sucrose as cryoprotectants at either pronucleate or
multicellular (2-6 blastomeres) stages. By the end of March 1990, 494 pronucleate
stage embryos and 492 multicellular stage embryos had been thawed and 54 and 47% 
of them, respectively were considered suitable for transfer. Ongoing pregnancy
and implantation rates were 17.9 and 10.7%, respectively for embryos frozen at
the pronucleate stage and 5.5 and 4.7% for embryos frozen at the multicellular
stage. Ovarian stimulation with human menopausal gonadotrophin (HMG) after
pharmacological hypophysectomy with a gonadotrophin releasing hormone agonistic
analogue (GnRHa) using a long protocol permitted us to freeze significantly more 
embryos per cycle (7.2 +/- 4.1) than stimulation with HMG and GnRHa in a short
protocol (4.7 +/- 3.4) or stimulation with clomiphene citrate (CC) and HMG (2.7
+/- 1.9). Ongoing pregnancy rates after transfer during the stimulated cycles
were similar for the three types of treatment (27.1, 27.3 and 32.1%,
respectively). However, ongoing pregnancy rates after frozen-thawed embryo
transfers were significantly higher when originating from GnRHa + HMG treatments 
(14.3 and 14.8%, respectively for long and short protocols) than when originating
from CC + HMG treatment (5.6%). Embryo cryopreservation has permitted the ongoing
pregnancy rate to increase from 28.4 to 36.9% (P less than 0.01) even though more
than half of the embryos have not been thawed. We conclude that embryos obtained 
after stimulation with GnRHa + HMG and frozen at the pronucleate stage are more
likely to result in a pregnancy.

PMID: 1757517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Life Sci. 1991;48(21):2081-7.

Antagonistic effect of the antiestrogen 4-hydroxytamoxifen on
estradiol-stimulated acetylation of nuclear high mobility group (HMG) proteins in
the uterus of newborn guinea-pigs.

Bertrand-Mercat P(1), Pasqualini JR.

Author information: 
(1)C.N.R.S. Steroid Hormone Research Unit, Foundation for Hormone Research,
Paris, France.

The effect of the antiestrogen 4-hydroxytamoxifen on the estradiol-stimulated
acetylation of nuclear high mobility group (HMG) proteins was studied in the
uterus of newborn (3-day-old) guinea-pig. 4-Hydroxytamoxifen (10(-6) M)
selectively inhibits the stimulatory effect of estradiol (5 x 10(-8) M) on the
acetylation of HMG-14 proteins 30 min after incubation with uterine tissue
slices. No effect of 4-hydroxytamoxifen was observed on HMG-1 + HMG-2 or HMG-17
proteins. The data suggest that the blockage of HMG-14 acetylation is an early
event in gene expression which is in relation to the antagonistic effect of the
antiestrogen.

PMID: 2034036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Eur J Biochem. 1990 Dec 27;194(3):811-23.

Factors affecting nucleosome structure in transcriptionally active chromatin.
Histone acetylation, nascent RNA and inhibitors of RNA synthesis.

Boffa LC(1), Walker J, Chen TA, Sterner R, Mariani MR, Allfrey VG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

The nucleosomes of transcriptionally active genes can be separated from those of 
inactive genes by affinity chromatography on organomercury-agarose (Hg-agarose)
columns. The basis for this separation is the difference in accessibility of the 
sulfhydryl groups of histone H3 and certain non-histone proteins in active and
inactive chromatin. A new procedure distinguishing between different modes of
binding of transcriptionally active nucleosomes to the Hg-agarose column has been
applied to study several factors which might influence the binding reaction.
Nucleosomes that bind to the column because of salt-labile associations with
SH-reactive non-histone proteins, such as the high-mobility-group proteins, HMG-1
and HMG-2, were released by adding 0.5 M NaCl to the eluting buffer. The
remaining nucleosomes, in which reactive histone H3 thiol groups can bind
covalently to the organomercury, were then displaced from the column by 10 mM
dithiothreitol. Both Hg-agarose-bound fractions contain the transcriptionally
active DNA sequences of the cell, but inactive nucleosomes, such as those
containing alpha-globin DNA, pass through the column. The histones of both
Hg-agarose-bound fractions have significantly higher levels of acetylation than
do histones of the unbound fraction, but the content of tri- and tetra-acetylated
H3 and H4 is significantly higher in the nucleosomes with reactive H3 thiols. The
rate of turnover of histone N-acetyl groups is also far greater in the
Hg-agarose-bound nucleosomes than in the unbound nucleosomes. Although the
overall levels of histone acetylation can be increased significantly by
incubating HeLa cells in the presence of the deacetylase inhibitor, 5 mM sodium
butyrate, this treatment has little if any effect on the total number of
nucleosomes retained on the Hg-agarose column. However, the ability of Hg-agarose
chromatography to detect localized changes in chromatin structure is evidenced by
an 11-fold increase in the Hg-agarose binding of nucleosomes containing the DNA
of the butyrate-inducible alkaline phosphatase gene, compared to the
Hg-agarose-bound nucleosomes of control cells. Although nascent RNA chains are
present in the Hg-agarose-bound nucleosomes released by dithiothreitol, binding
of the SH-reactive nucleosomes to the Hg-agarose column is not dependent on the
presence of proteins associated with nascent RNA chains, since binding does not
decrease following removal of the nascent transcripts by ribonuclease
treatment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1702716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Arthritis Rheum. 1990 Sep;33(9):1378-83.

Autoantibodies to nonhistone chromosomal proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2 in sera of
patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

Wittemann B(1), Neuer G, Michels H, Truckenbrodt H, Bautz FA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

IgG antibodies against the high mobility group (HMG) nonhistone chromosomal
proteins HMG-1 and/or HMG-2 were detected in the sera of 49 (39%) of 126
antinuclear antibody (ANA)-positive patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
(JRA), by immunoblotting. Clinical diagnosis classified these patients in 2 major
groups, 105 with pauciarticular-onset JRA and 21 with polyarticular-onset JRA.
Anti-HMG-1 and/or anti-HMG-2 antibodies were found in 8 (25%) of 32
pauciarticular-onset JRA patients with uveitis and in 34 (47%) of 73 patients
without uveitis, whereas anti-HMG-1 and/or anti-HMG-2 antibodies were found in 4 
(24%) of 17 children with polyarticular-onset JRA without uveitis. Among 53 sera 
from ANA-negative JRA patients, 3 (6%) were positive for anti-HMG-1 and/or
anti-HMG-2 antibodies, whereas no reactivity to HMG-1 or HMG-2 proteins was
observed in 48 sera from age-matched children with nonrheumatic diseases.

PMID: 2403401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Chromatogr. 1990 Aug 24;530(1):39-46.

Efficient large-scale purification of non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and
HMG2 by using Polybuffer-exchanger PBE94.

Adachi Y(1), Mizuno S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Kyoto University, Japan.

A method for the efficient and practical large-scale purification of
high-mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2, from
porcine thymus applying Polybuffer-exchanger PBE94 gel as anion-exchanger has
been developed. This method affords higher resolution, purity and yield, than the
conventional procedure of CM-Sephadex C-25 ion-exchange column chromatography.
Furthermore, use of Polybuffer-exchanger PBE94 column chromatography led to
direct preparation of HMG1 and HMG2 from loosely bound non-histone chromosomal
protein fraction of chromatin without prefractional precipitation with
trichloroacetic acid or prior extraction with perchloric acid. Thus, the
application of PBE94 gel as an anion-exchanger to the subfractionation of other
kinds of homologous protein is possible.

PMID: 2277118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Nature. 1990 Jul 19;346(6281):240-4.

A gene from the human sex-determining region encodes a protein with homology to a
conserved DNA-binding motif.

Sinclair AH(1), Berta P, Palmer MS, Hawkins JR, Griffiths BL, Smith MJ, Foster
JW, Frischauf AM, Lovell-Badge R, Goodfellow PN.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Lincoln's 
Inn Fields, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1990 Jul 19;346(6281):216-7.

A search of a 35-kilobase region of the human Y chromosome necessary for male sex
determination has resulted in the identification of a new gene. This gene is
conserved and Y-specific among a wide range of mammals, and encodes a
testis-specific transcript. It shares homology with the mating-type protein, Mc, 
from the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe and a conserved DNA-binding
motif present in the nuclear high-mobility-group proteins HMG1 and HMG2. This
gene has been termed SRY (for sex-determining region Y) and proposed to be a
candidate for the elusive testis-determining gene, TDF.

PMID: 1695712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Biochemistry. 1990 May 8;29(18):4419-23.

Primary structure of non-histone chromosomal protein HMG2 revealed by the
nucleotide sequence.

Shirakawa H(1), Tsuda K, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba, Japan.

The isolation and sequencing of a cDNA clone for the entire sequence of pig
thymus non-histone protein HMG2 are described. cDNA the size of 1153 nucleotides 
contains an open reading frame of 627 nucleotides. The 5'-untranslated region of 
146 nucleotides is extremely rich in GC residues whereas the 3'-untranslated
region of 380 nucleotides is rich in AT residues. The open reading frame encodes 
209 amino acids, which contain a unique continuous run of 23 acidic amino acids
at the C-terminal. The deduced amino acid sequence is 79% homologous to that of
HMG1 protein from the same source which we reported [Tsuda, K., Kikuchi, M.,
Mori, K., Waga, S., & Yoshida, M. (1988) Biochemistry 27, 6159-6163]. In
addition, the hydropathy index profiles of both proteins are very similar,
supporting that they have similar structural features. Northern analysis of
poly(A+) RNA reveals that a single-sized mRNA codes for HMG2 protein. Southern
analysis suggests that the HMG2 coding gene is homogeneous within the pig thymus 
genome.

PMID: 2350545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 1990 May-Jun;10(3):231-8.

Effects of spermine and sodium butyrate on the in vitro phosphorylation of HMG
non-histone proteins of the liver of young and old rats.

Prasad S(1), Thakur MK.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Centre of Advanced Study in
Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221 005, India.

The in vitro phosphorylation of high mobility group (HMG) proteins and its
modulation by spermine and sodium butyrate were studied in the liver of young (15
week) and old (138 week) male rats. Except HMG 1 which remained unchanged, the
phosphorylation of other proteins (HMG 2, 14 and 17) decreased drastically in old
age. Spermine stimulated the phosphorylation of HMG 1 and 17 in young but HMG 1, 
2 and 14 in old rats. The incorporation of (32)P into total HMG proteins was
enhanced by butyrate in the liver of both ages. However, the degree of
stimulation was higher in young rats. Particularly, the HMG 1 and 17 of young and
HMG 2 and 17 of old rats showed increased phosphorylation. Furthermore, butyrate 
also inhibited the phosphorylation of HMG 2 in young and HMG 1 and 14 in old
rats. Such alteration in the phosphorylation of major HMG proteins modulates
their interaction with DNA and other components of chromatin. This may account
for changes in the higher order organization of chromatin and expression of genes
during aging.

PMID: 15374498  [PubMed]


301. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1990 Apr;278(1):99-105.

Separate effects of Mg2+, MgATP, and ATP4- on the kinetic mechanism for insulin
receptor tyrosine kinase.

Vicario PP(1), Bennun A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Endocrinology, Merck Sharp & Dohme Research
Laboratories, Rahway, New Jersey 07065.

The separate effects of the equilibrium species Mg2+, MgATP substrate, and ATP4- 
on the reaction catalyzed by insulin receptor tyrosine kinase were examined. The 
separated kinetic constants show that the K0.5 value for Mg2+ decreased from 23
to 0.43 mM and the Hill coefficient for Mg2+ (hMg2+) decreased from 1.43 to 0.668
when the concentration of ATPT (MgATP + ATP4-) was increased from 50 to 1000
microM. The apparent Ki for ATP4- increased from 0.20 to 136 microM and the Hill 
coefficient for ATP4- (hATP4-) decreased from 1.41 to 0.82 as the concentration
of total ATP (ATPT) increased. These findings suggest that the [ATP4-]/[Mg2+]
ratio modulates the shift from positive to negative cooperativity. It was also
shown that the apparent affinity of the kinase for MgATP increased as the
concentration of free Mg2+ increased and that the apparent affinity of the kinase
for free Mg2+ increased as the concentration of MgATP substrate increased. Thus, 
Mg2+ and MgATP interact with the kinase in a mutually inclusive manner which
leads to an increase in the ratio of the enzyme (E) rate-limiting species,
[Mg-E-MgATP]/[E-MgATP]. Free ATP4- not only acts as a competitive inhibitor of
the substrate but also decreases the relative concentration of Mg-E-MgATP.
ATPT-dependent activation of the kinase is, therefore, a result of MgATP's
increasing the affinity of the kinase for Mg2+, thereby leading to saturation of 
the enzyme with Mg2+ at lower concentrations of the divalent metal. This results 
in an increase in the [Mg-E-MgATP]/[E-MgATP] ratio, and therefore decreases
saturation of the kinase with ATP4- inhibitor, not only at the active site but
also at a kinetically distinct regulatory site. This kinetic relationship allows 
not only for the mutually inclusive interaction between Mg2+ and MgATP, but also 
for the mutually exclusive interaction toward ATP4-, hence indicating that the
effect of Mg2+ will be to form an enzyme complex (Mg-E) which will have a higher 
affinity for MgATP substrate and a lower affinity for ATP4- than E alone. The
role of the equilibrium concentrations of Mg-E,E, and ATP-E on the activation of 
insulin receptor tyrosine kinase is discussed which may account, at least in
part, for modulation of cooperativity and the metal-dependent increase in
turnover (VM).

PMID: 2157363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mech Ageing Dev. 1990 Mar 31;53(1):91-100.

ADP-ribosylation of HMG proteins and its modulation by different effectors in the
liver of aging rats.

Thakur MK(1), Prasad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

The in vitro ADP-ribosylation of high mobility group (HMG) non-histone proteins
and its modulation by spermine, butyrate, dexamethasone and 3-aminobenzamide were
studied in the liver of young (14 weeks) and old (113 weeks) male rats.
ADP-ribosylation of HMG 1 was similar in both ages, whereas that of HMG 2 and 14 
decreased but HMG 17 increased in the old. HMG 1 was ADP-ribosylated to a greater
extent in young but to a lower level in the old by different effectors except
spermine which showed no influence in old age. ADP-ribosylation of HMG 2 was
stimulated by spermine, butyrate and dexamethasone in old but only by spermine in
young rats. Other effectors decreased the ADP-ribosylation of HMG 2 in young. The
ADP-ribosylation of HMG 14 was stimulated by spermine in the old but that of HMG 
17 was reduced by butyrate in young and by spermine in the old. Dexamethasone
decreased the ADP-ribosylation of both HMG 14 and 17 in young, whereas this
showed no change in old age. Aminobenzamide inhibited ADP-ribosylation of only
HMG 2 in young but all HMGs except HMG 2 in the old. Such alteration in the
ADP-ribosylation of HMG proteins may affect various cellular and nuclear
functions of rat liver during aging.

PMID: 2325444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 1990;29(3):192-6.

Failure to improve ovarian response by combined gonadotropin-releasing hormone
agonist and gonadotropin therapy.

Bider D(1), Kokia E, Lipitz S, Blankstein J, Mashiach S, Serr DM, Ben-Rafael Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chaim Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

Nineteen women were treated with the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
agonist buserelin in order to suppress the pituitary prior to gonadotropin
treatment. Eight women were oligomenorrheic, 6 had polycystic ovarian disease
(PCOD) and 5 women had normal cycles. Buserelin was administered for 3 weeks
before ovarian stimulation, and the pituitary down-regulation was proven by
provocative tests. Ovarian stimulation was then achieved by human menopausal
gonadotropin (hMG) 2 ampules a day. Several abnormal responses to the combined
buserelin/hMG treatment were noted in some patients. This included a sudden
decrease in E2 level without LH surge (2 patients), induced follicular growth
with buserelin instead of ovarian suppression (2 patients) and ovarian
hyperstimulation syndrome in 3 patients with PCOD. From this we conclude that
although pituitary suppression can easily be achieved by GnRH analog
administration, this does not ensure the prevention of unwanted responses. It is 
possible that the common denominator for these abnormal responses is that they
are ovarian in origin, hence they occur in spite of pituitary down-regulation.
Close monitoring of the suppression and stimulation stages will detect most cases
of such failures. Furthermore it is possible that not all patients are suitable
for the combined treatment of gonadotropin and GnRH agonist.

PMID: 2113505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Eur J Biochem. 1989 Nov 6;185(2):303-10.

Tissue specificity of nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of HMG1 and HMG2 proteins
and their probable functions.

Mosevitsky MI(1), Novitskaya VA, Iogannsen MG, Zabezhinsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Leningrad Nuclear Physics Institute, Academy of Sciences of the USSR,
Gatchina.

The levels and distribution between nucleus and cytoplasm of HMG1 and HMG2
proteins have been investigated in different tissues of mammals. In lymphoid
tissues and testis high amounts of these proteins are present in both nuclei and 
cytoplasm, while in the hepatic tissues and brain they accumulate in cytoplasm,
mainly in the cytosol. In particular, very low amounts, if any, of HMG1 and 2 are
present in the nuclei active for DNA replication (rat regenerating liver and
primary hepatoma) or transcription (adult liver and brain). Therefore, it appears
that HMG1 and 2 are not necessary for these processes. On the other hand, nuclear
(chromosomal) HMG1 and 2 are characteristic for the tissues containing
undifferentiated cells: lymphoid tissues, testis, neonatal liver. These proteins 
are bound to the chromatin regions solubilized early by sonication or DNase
action. Comparison of the data obtained for different tissues shows an inverse
correlation between the amounts of chromosomal HMG1 and 2, on the one hand, and
of histone H1(0), on the other hand. These results suggest that chromosomal HMG1 
and 2 take part in the processes that occur during cell differentiation, while
histone H1(0) is induced to preserve differentiated cells from dedifferentiation.

PMID: 2583185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Jun 30;161(3):1260-6.

Estradiol enhanced acetylation of nuclear high mobility group proteins of the
uterus of newborn guinea pigs.

Pasqualini JR(1), Sterner R, Mercat P, Allfrey VG.

Author information: 
(1)C.N.R.S. Steroid Hormone Research Unit, Foundation for Hormone Research,
Paris, France.

The effect of estradiol on the acetylation of nuclear high mobility group (HMG)
proteins in the uterus of newborn (3 days old) guinea pigs was studied "in vivo" 
and in tissue slices. In the "in vivo" studies after subcutaneous injection of 5 
mCi [3H]-acetate there is a rapid (20 min) uptake of radioactive acetate in the
HMG-1, HMG-2, HMG-14 and HMG-17 high mobility group proteins. In parallel
studies, after administration of the same quantity of [3H]-acetate plus 20
micrograms of estradiol (E2), a selective increase in the acetylation of HMG-14
protein is observed. The preferential acetylation of HMG-14 can also be
demonstrated in uterine tissue slices 20 minutes after exposure to the hormone (5
x 10(-8)M). In conclusion, the present data suggest that the acetylation of HMG
proteins, in particular HMG-14, and like that of nucleosomal "core" histones, is 
an early event in gene activation by estradiol.

PMID: 2742588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Gynecol Endocrinol. 1989 Jun;3(2):107-15.

Programmed oocyte retrieval: clinical and biological effects of oral
contraceptives administered before in vitro fertilization.

Mashiach S(1), Dor J, Goldenberg M, Shalev J, Levran D, Rudak E, Nebel L, Goldman
B, Blankstein J, Ben-Rafael Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Hashomer,
Israel.

We have prospectively compared two regimens of suppression of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis by oral contraceptives (OCs) for 15 or 30
days and two ovarian stimulation protocols. The latent phase, which represents a 
period of ovarian insensitivity, was prolonged and directly correlated to the
duration of suppression. Thirty days' suppression, compared with 15 days',
resulted in the cancellation of more cycles and a lower fertilization and
pregnancy percentage. No significant increase in either serum progesterone or
luteinizing hormone was noted in suppressed cycles. It is concluded that if
programming is desired, OCs should be used for the shortest period possible. The 
variation in the length of the follicular phase indicates that there is a
different 'fixed' day for retrieval for each suppression-stimulation protocol and
this day should be established prospectively.

PIP: 2 oral contraceptive time courses for ovarian suppression and 2 ovarian
stimulation protocols were compared to a control stimulation protocol, for oocyte
retrieval before in vitro fertilization. 77 women with normal ovulatory cycles
and infertility caused by tubal disease were grouped into 5 groups. 2 groups
received Neogynon (50 mcg ethinyl estradiol and 35 mg levonorgestrel) for 15
days, 2 groups received Neogynon for 30 days, 2 groups were stimulated by
clomiphene citrate 100 mg/day for 5 days and 2 ampules/day of human menopausal
gonadotropin (hMG) from Cycle Day 8,2 groups were stimulated by 2 ampules/day of 
hMG and 2 ampules of pure FSH + hMG on Days 5 and 6. Control received clomiphene 
citrate 100 mg/day from Day 5 of the natural cycle and hMG 2 ampules/day from Day
8. hCG was given when serum estradiol levels rose above 400 pg/ml and 2 16-mm
follicles were seen on ultrasound. Those treated with OC for 30 days had a
prolonged latent phase of estradiol increase, lower baseline LH, fewer recovered 
and fertilized oocytes, more cancellations, and a lower pregnancy rate, 5.8%,
compared to 33% in controls, and 34.7% in women suppressed for 15 days. It was
concluded that 15 days of suppression by oral contraceptives was effective and
produced acceptable pregnancy rates. The cancellation rate, normally due to
premature LH surges, was not decreased by suppressing these patients with oral
contraceptives, probably because the ovary was less sensitive to stimulation.
PMID: 2816477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1989 Jun 1;1008(1):52-61.

Non-random reconstitution of HMG1 and HMG2 in chromatin. Determination of the
histone contacts.

Bernués J(1), Querol E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologia Fonamental V. Villar-Palasi, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Spain.

We have studied how non-histone proteins HMG1 and HMG2 interact with rat liver
chromatin using reconstitution and chemical cross-linking procedures. Both
proteins were found to associate to chromatin only to some extent and always with
a marked preference for short oligonucleosomes, mainly mono- and dinucleosomes.
However, a slight reconstitution with the long polynucleosomal fraction can be
observed in H1-depleted chromatin. Reconstitution is non-random and a clear
preference for regions highly sensitive to staphylococcal nuclease (EC 3.1.31.1) 
is observed. Chemical cross-linking has allowed us to identify H1, H2A and H2B as
the histones contacted by HMG1 and HMG2 upon reconstitution. Also, we present
evidence that HMG1 and HMG2 interact with the nucleosomal particle without
replacing H1 or any other histone.

PMID: 2719962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Biochem Int. 1989 May;18(5):971-9.

Release of nucleosomes from nuclei by bleomycin-induced DNA strand scission.

Hamana K(1), Kawada K.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medical Care and Technology, Gunma University, Japan.

Mononucleosomes were released from both isolated mammalian (hog thyroid) and
protozoan (Tetrahymena) nuclei by the bleomycin-induced DNA-strand breaking
reaction. Trout sperm nuclei, on the other hand, were protected from the
bleomycin-mediated DNA degradation. The mononucleosomes released from the
bleomycin-treated nuclei contained the core histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4; while 
HMG1 and HMG2 proteins, in addition to the core histones, were detected in the
mononucleosomes obtained by micrococcal nuclease digestion of nuclei. HMGs, but
not H1 histone, were dissociated into the supernatant by cleavage of chromatin
DNA with bleomycin, whereas both HMGs and H1 were found in that fraction by
digestion of nuclei with micrococcal nuclease. HMG1 and HMG2 were exclusively
dissociated from chromatin with 1 mM bleomycin under the solvent condition where 
the DNA strand-breaking activity of the drug is repressed. These observations
suggest the possibility that bleomycin preferentially binds to linker DNA regions
not occupied by H1 histone in chromatin and exclusively dissociates HMG proteins 
and breaks the DNA strand. The results of the effects on bleomycin-induced DNA
cleavage of nuclei of various drugs including polyamines, chelating agents,
intercalating antibiotics such as mitomycin C or adriamycin, and radical
scavengers are also presented.

PMID: 2476991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mutat Res. 1989 Mar;219(2):107-11.

Age-specific methylation of high-mobility-group proteins of the rat liver and its
modulation by spermine and sodium butyrate.

Thakur MK(1), Prasad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

Liver slices from young (20 weeks) and old (117 weeks) rats were incubated with
[methyl-14C]methionine in the absence or presence of spermine or sodium butyrate.
The high-mobility-group (HMG) non-histone proteins were extracted from the liver 
with perchloric acid and separated by acid-urea polyacrylamide slab gel
electrophoresis. Methylation of HMG proteins decreased drastically in old rats.
Whereas spermine inhibited the methylation of total HMG proteins in young rats,
it had no effect in old age. On the contrary, sodium butyrate did not change the 
incorporation of methyl groups into total HMG proteins of young rats, but
inhibited that of old rats. Particularly, the incorporation of [14C]methyl groups
into HMG 2 was enhanced but into other HMGs it was reduced by both effectors in
young and old age. Such discrepancies in the methylation of HMG proteins and
their differential modulation by spermine and butyrate might affect the
higher-order organization of chromatin and consequently destabilize the
expression of genes during aging.

PMID: 2927415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1989 Mar 1;1007(2):209-14.

Nonhistone proteins HMG1 and HMG2 suppress the nucleosome assembly at
physiological ionic strength.

Waga S(1), Mizuno S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

The effect of nonhistone protein HMG1 and HMG2 from pig thymus on the in vitro
nucleosome assembly has been examined with plasmid pSV2-gpt DNA and pig thymus
core histones in the presence of DNA topoisomerase I. In the absence of core
histones, the direct binding of HMG proteins could induce negative superhelical
turns in DNA at low ionic strength, but not at physiological ionic strength. The 
nucleosome formation in the higher histone-to-DNA ratios at physiological ionic
strength was not facilitated by HMG proteins, in contrast to poly(L-glutamic
acid). HMG proteins suppressed the nucleosome assembly in the moderate
histone-to-DNA ratios, resulting in the reduction of fully supercoiled DNA
topoisomers. The suppression by HMG proteins was not cancelled by poly(L-glutamic
acid). These suggest that the highly acidic carboxy terminal of HMG proteins does
not act as an assembly factor, and that the HMG proteins, on the contrary,
suppress the nucleosome formation, probably by binding to DNA in a way to inhibit
the assembly into core particles.

PMID: 2465778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Chromatogr. 1988 Oct 26;450(3):309-16.

Separation of Friend erythroleukaemic cell histones and high-mobility-group
proteins by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography.

Lindner H(1), Helliger W, Puschendorf B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Innsbruck,
Austria.

A procedure for the rapid separation of histones and high-mobility-group (HMG)
proteins from Friend erythroleukaemic cells (line F4N) by reversed-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography is reported. By using a Nucleosil 300-5 C4
column and a multistep water-acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1%
trifluoroacetic acid, the HMG-1 and HMG-2 proteins, several H1 subfractions
including H1(0), H4, H2B, two H2A variants and two H3 subfractions were
separated. Under changed conditions, by applying a varied acetonitrile gradient
system, even two H2B variants were fractionated. The methods described seem to be
a real alternative to the time-consuming polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

PMID: 3241016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Biochemistry. 1988 Aug 9;27(16):6159-63.

Primary structure of non-histone protein HMG1 revealed by the nucleotide
sequence.

Tsuda K(1), Kikuchi M, Mori K, Waga S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

The isolation and sequencing of a cDNA clone coding for the entire sequence of
pig thymus non-histone protein HMG1 are described. The sequence analysis reveals 
a complete 2192-nucleotide sequence with a 5'-terminal untranslated region of 11 
nucleotides, 642 nucleotides of an open reading frame that encoded 214 amino
acids, and a 3'-terminal untranslated region of 1539 nucleotides. The HMG1
protein, deduced from the nucleotide sequence, has a molecular weight of 24,785
and a C-terminal of a continuous run of 30 acidic amino acids, encoded by a
simple repeating sequence of (GAN)30. The predicted amino acid sequence is
homologous to HMG1, HMG2, and HMG-T sequences from several sources, suggesting
that the protein conformation is under evolutionary constraints. Northern blot
analysis reveals that another hybridizable RNA species of smaller size is
present. Southern blot analyses suggest that pig genome contains several HMG1
gene equivalents.

PMID: 3191113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Cell Biol. 1988 Mar;8(3):1282-9.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae ACP2 gene encodes an essential HMG1-like protein.

Haggren W(1), Kolodrubetz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio 78284.

The high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins, a group of nonhistone
chromatin-associated proteins, have been extensively characterized in higher
eucaryotic cells. To test the biological function of an HMG protein, we have
cloned and mutagenized a gene encoding an HMG-like protein from the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. A yeast genomic DNA library was screened with an
oligonucleotide designed to hybridize to any yeast gene containing an amino acid 
sequence conserved in several higher eucaryotic HMG proteins. DNA sequencing and 
Northern (RNA) blot analysis revealed that one gene, called ACP2 (acidic protein 
2), synthesizes a poly(A)+ RNA in S. cerevisiae which encodes a
27,000-molecular-weight protein whose amino acid sequence is homologous to those 
of calf HMG1 and HMG2 and trout HMGT proteins. Standard procedures were used to
construct a diploid yeast strain in which one copy of the ACP2 gene was mutated
by replacement with the URA3 gene. When this diploid was sporulated and
dissected, only half of the spores were viable. About half of the nonviable
spores proceeded through two or three cell divisions and then stopped dividing;
the rest did not germinate at all. None of the viable spores contained the mutant
ACP2 gene, thus proving that the protein encoded by ACP2 is required for cell
viability. The results presented here demonstrate that an HMG-like protein has an
essential physiological function.

PMCID: PMC363274
PMID: 2835668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. FEBS Lett. 1988 Feb 8;228(1):45-8.

Selective decrease in low-Mr HMG proteins HMG I and HMG Y during differentiation 
of mouse teratocarcinoma cells.

Vartiainen E(1), Palvimo J, Mahonen A, Linnala-Kankkunen A, Mäenpää PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kuopio, Finland.

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett 1989 Jul 17;251(1-2):283.

We have studied the presence of high-mobility-group (HMG) chromatin proteins in
undifferentiated F9 mouse teratocarcinoma cells and F9 cells, which were induced 
to differentiate by treatment with retinoic acid and dibutyryl-cAMP for 5 days.
Acetic acid/urea-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and reversed-phase HPLC
revealed that the induced F9 cells contained 77 and 62% less HMG I and HMG Y,
respectively, than their untreated counterparts. The relative amounts of two
other low-Mr HMG proteins HMG 14 and HMG 17 remained essentially unchanged and
only a minor decrease was observed in the content of one of the high-Mr HMG
proteins, HMG 2. The identity of the low-Mr HMG proteins was verified by amino
acid analysis or partial sequencing. These results suggest that HMG I and HMG Y
are HMG proteins specific for undifferentiated cells.

PMID: 3342876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biochem Int. 1988 Feb;16(2):375-82.

Age-dependent effects of sodium butyrate and hydrocortisone on acetylation of
high mobility group proteins of rat liver.

Prasad S(1), Thakur MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

The in vitro acetylation of high mobility group (HMG) proteins and its modulation
by sodium butyrate and hydrocortisone have been studied using liver slices of
young (13-) and old (114-week-old) rats. Acetylation of total HMG proteins was
significantly higher in young than old rats. HMG 1, in particular, showed greater
acetylation than others. Whereas acetylation of HMG 1 and 2 decreased
drastically, that of HMG 14 and 17 increased in old age. In young rats, sodium
butyrate and hydrocortisone stimulated acetylation of HMG 14 and 17, and
decreased that of HMG 2. Butyrate had no effect on HMG 1, but hydrocortisone
decreased it. In old rats, butyrate and hydrocortisone decreased acetylation of
all HMGs, except HMG 17, which was stimulated to a slight extent by butyrate.

PMID: 3365268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Biochemistry. 1987 Dec 15;26(25):8257-62.

A Chinese hamster ovary cell histone deacetylase that is associated with a unique
class of mononucleosomes.

Mold DE(1), McCarty KS Sr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710.

The chromatin-bound histone deacetylase of Chinese hamster ovary cells has been
studied by using as a substrate an acetylated amino-terminal peptide of histone
H4. These studies demonstrate that histone deacetylase activity is associated
with mononucleosomes solubilized by digestion with micrococcal nuclease. The
deacetylase activity remained bound to the nucleosomes, even in the presence of 1
M NaCl. This unique class of deacetylase-associated mononucleosomes is resolved
from the major classes of mononucleosomes by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. 
These mononucleosomes contain 290 and 190 base pair DNAs and demonstrate the
presence of histone H1 and non-histones HMG-1 and HMG-2 and the absence of HMG-14
and HMG-17. They are further characterized by a specific acetylation pattern of
histone H4 and likely represent a functionally important chromatin-DNA complex.

PMID: 3442654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1987 Dec 10;931(3):376-83.

Phosphorylation of high-mobility-group chromatin proteins by protein kinase C
from rat brain.

Palvimo J(1), Mahonen A, Mäenpää PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kuopio, Finland.

Chromosomal high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins have been examined as substrates
for calcium/phospholipid-dependent protein kinase C. Protein kinase C from rat
brain phosphorylated efficiently both HMG 14 and HMG 17 derived from calf thymus 
and the reactions were calcium/phospholipid-dependent. About 1 mol of 32P was
incorporated per mol of HMG 14 and HMG 17. Phosphopeptide mapping suggested that 
the same major site was phosphorylated in both proteins at serine. The apparent
Km values for HMG 14 and HMG 17 were about 5 microM. HMG 14, HMG 17 and the five 
histone H1 subtypes prepared from rat thymus, liver and spleen were
phosphorylated by the kinase. HMG 14 and HMG 17 from transformed human
lymphoblasts (Wi-L2) were also phosphorylated in a calcium/phospholipid-dependent
manner. HMG 1 and HMG 2 from the tissues examined were found to be poor
substrates for the kinase.

PMID: 3676353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1987 Dec;65(6):1081-7.

Treatment of severe oligospermia with human chorionic gonadotropin/human
menopausal gonadotropin: a placebo-controlled, double blind trial.

Knuth UA(1), Hönigl W, Bals-Pratsch M, Schleicher G, Nieschlag E.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Clinical Research Unit for Reproductive Medicine, Münster, West
Germany.

In an effort to evaluate the effect of hCG/human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG)
treatment on semen parameters in normogonadotropic men suffering from
oligospermia, a double blind, placebo-controlled study was conducted. After 2
basal examinations of seminal parameters and reproductive hormones, 39 men were
recruited for the trial. Nineteen men, allocated randomly to the active drug
group, received im injections of 2500 IU hCG twice a week in combination with 150
IU hMG three times a week for 13 weeks, while 20 men were treated, following the 
same injection schedule, with NaCl only. After the 13-week treatment period,
follow-up examination was performed, followed by 3 additional examinations at
4-week intervals. Of those men receiving hCG-hMG, 2 induced pregnancies in their 
wives, while no pregnancies were reported in the placebo group. Sperm
concentrations, the percentages of motile sperm, and the proportions of normally 
formed spermatozoa, however, were similar in the 2 groups at all times. It was
not possible to predict the outcome of treatment based on results of GnRH and hCG
tests performed before the treatment phase.

PMID: 3119647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1987 Nov 20;910(2):163-70.

Thermal denaturation and fluorescence study of nucleosomes containing non-histone
chromosomal protein HMG2.

Stros M(1), Kleinwächter V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Brno.

Interaction of calf thymus non-histone chromosomal protein HMG2 with
H1,H5-depleted nucleosomes from chicken erythrocytes was studied by means of
thermal denaturation and an N-(3-pyrene)maleimide fluorescence probe. Under low
ionic conditions (2 mM Tris buffer plus EDTA) addition of 1-2 molecules of HMG2
per nucleosome markedly stabilized the segment of the linker DNA against thermal 
denaturation. Under approximately physiological ionic conditions (0.1 M NaCl)
addition of two HMG2 molecules per nucleosome, labeled by N-(3-pyrene)maleimide
at the sulfhydryl groups of Cys-110 of histones H3, resulted in a decrease of the
pyrene excimer fluorescence corresponding to the slight movement of the
sulfhydryl groups of the two histone H3 molecules apart.

PMID: 3676320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Jul 10;15(13):5051-68.

Characterization of cDNA sequences corresponding to three distinct HMG-1 mRNA
species in line CHO Chinese hamster cells and cell cycle expression of the HMG-1 
gene.

Lee KL, Pentecost BT, D'Anna JA, Tobey RA, Gurley LR, Dixon GH.

We have isolated cDNA clones encoding the high mobility group (HMG) protein HMG-1
in line CHO Chinese hamster cells. The cDNA clones correspond to the three HMG-1 
mRNA species detected on Northern blots. Three different polyadenylation sites
are found to be used. The three mRNA species of sizes 1.05, 1.45 and 2.45 kb are 
generated by differential polyadenylation at sites 115 nucleotides, 513
nucleotides and 1515 nucleotides downstream from the stop codon. A perfectly
conserved putative poly(A) signal AAUAAA is present upstream of only one of the
three poly(A) sites. Two homologous but imperfect sequences exist upstream from
the other two poly(A) sites. All three HMG-1 mRNA species maintain significant
levels throughout the M, G1 and S phases of the cell cycle and the rate of large 
HMG protein (HMG-1 and HMG-2) synthesis increases approximately two-fold from G1 
to S phase.

PMCID: PMC305947
PMID: 3601666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Eur J Biochem. 1987 Mar 2;163(2):347-52.

Studies on the stability of the higher-order structure of rat liver chromatin
containing high-mobility-group proteins.

Jose M, Puigdomènech P, Palau J.

The stability of the higher-order structure of chromatin containing
high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins has been studied in rat liver nuclei by mild
micrococcal nuclease digestion at low temperature and fractionation by sucrose
gradient centrifugation. Nuclei preparation and digestion, chromatin
solubilization and analysis have been carried out in two ionic conditions, 140 mM
and 40 mM monovalent cation concentration, avoiding drastic changes in ionic
conditions and temperature during preparation and analysis. During the time
course of digestion at 140 mM ionic strength a material stable at 80 S appears,
whose DNA is cleaved at values around 12 nucleosomes. The distribution of HMG
proteins in different chromatin fractions was analyzed by immunodot using
antibodies elicited against proteins HMG-1, HMG-2, and HMG-14 and 17. It appears 
that these proteins have a distribution distinctly different from the bulk of
chromatin. They are never found in the chromatin fragments that keep their
internucleosomal interactions, indicating that these proteins tend to accumulate 
in points where the chromatin has a less stable structure.

PMID: 3816809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Eur J Biochem. 1987 Jan 2;162(1):111-8.

Interaction of non-histone proteins HMG1 and HMG2 with core histones in
nucleosomes and core particles revealed by chemical cross-linking.

Stros M, Kolíbalová A.

Chemical cross-linking was used to study the interaction of the non-histone
chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 with core histones in H1,H5-depleted
nucleosomes or core particles. Cross-linking with a 'zero-length' cross-linker
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide and with a longer (cleavable)
cross-linker dimethyl-3,3'-dithiobispropionimidate revealed an interaction of
HMG1 and HMG2 with (or proximity to) core histones in both types of particles.
These results indicated that the presence of the 40-50-base-pairs-long segment of
the 'linker' DNA in nucleosomes was not necessary for the establishment of mutual
contacts of HMG1 and HMG2 proteins with core histones. Possible implications of
the interaction of HMG1 and HMG2 proteins with histones for the structure and
functioning of chromatin are discussed.

PMID: 3816775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Comp Biochem Physiol B. 1987;87(2):423-33.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins in the tammar wallaby Macropus eugenii:
quantitative variations between tissues and testis-specific co-extracted
proteins.

Faire RJ, Cooper DW.

1. Tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii, Marsupialia) proteins with similar
electrophoretic mobilities to calf non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG 1, 2, 14 
and 17 are perchloric acid extracted from whole tissues (liver, kidney, spleen,
brain and testis) and purified liver nuclei (using PCA or 0.35 M NaCl). 2. Tammar
and calf HMG 1 have similar amino acid compositions. 3. Two testis-specific basic
proteins co-extracting with HMG-like proteins from both tammar and red kangaroo
(Megaleia rufa) are found in whole testis, purified testis nuclei, but not
epididymis. 4. Tammar HMG 2 separates into two components on both acid urea and
SDS gels. The larger, more basic protein, HMG 2b, is relatively abundant in
proliferating tissues (testis, spleen).

PMID: 3621908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Biochem. 1987 Jan;101(1):175-80.

High glutamic and aspartic region in nonhistone protein HMG(1+2) unwinds DNA
double helical structure.

Yoshida M.

A high mobility group (HMG) nonhistone protein fraction HMG(1+2) from pig thymus,
composed of HMG1 and HMG2, has an activity to unwind the double helical structure
of DNA (Yoshida, M. and Shimura, K. (1984) J. Biochem. 95, 117-124; Makiguchi,
K., Chida, Y., Yoshida, M., and Shimura, K. (1984) J. Biochem. 95, 423-429). The 
HMG(1+2) was cleaved with trypsin, followed by peptide separation by ionic
exchange column chromatography with Polybuffer exchanger PBE94. The effects of
five peptide fractions thus obtained on the thermal denaturation of DNA were
measured. A peptide containing a high glutamic and aspartic (HGA) region, of the 
composition Glu34Asp15Lys3, unwound DNA depending on the presence of Mg2+ or
Ca2+, while other peptide fractions did not, suggesting that the HGA region in
HMG(1+2) is an active site in the unwinding reaction of the double helical
structure of DNA.

PMID: 3571199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Biol Rep. 1987;12(4):273-6.

Dexamethasone-induced phosphorylation of high mobility group nonhistone proteins 
of aging rats.

Prasad S(1), Thakur MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

Phosphorylation of high mobility group (HMG) proteins and its modulation by
dexamethasone were examined in vitro by incubating liver slices of young (15-)
and old (138-week) male rats with (32P) orthophosphate. HMG proteins were
extracted and analyzed by acid-urea polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Phosphorylation of HMG proteins, particularly of HMG2, 14 and 17 decreases
drastically in old rats. Dexamethasone stimulates the phosphorylation of total
HMG proteins in both ages. Individual HMG proteins vary in the extent of 32P
incorporation. Such differential phosphorylation of HMG proteins and its
modulation by dexamethasone may affect chromatin organization and gene expression
during aging.

PMID: 3431543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Prep Biochem. 1987;17(1):51-61.

Fetal and newborn calf thymus as a source of chromatin proteins: purification of 
HMG-1 and HMG-2.

Abdul-Razzak KK, Garg L, Wen L, Reeck GR.

PMID: 3295854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Zh Evol Biokhim Fiziol. 1986 Sep-Oct;22(5):441-4.

[Comparison of the antigenic properties of the HMG proteins composing the
chromatin of tissues differing in levels of transcription activity].

[Article in Russian]

Fedorova NA, Surkova EA.

In experiments on tissues with a high level of transcription (liver, brain) and
with blocked genome (amphibian erythrocytes), it has been shown that the
accessibility of antigenic determinants of HMG14 and HMG17 proteins is decreased 
in a sequence: liver, brain, erythrocytes. No differences in interaction of
antigenic determinants of HMG2 protein with corresponding antibodies were found
in the chromatin of the tissues investigated. Complement binding was higher in
the interaction of chromatin from the liver and brain with antisera to HMG14 and 
HMG17 proteins, than with antiserum to HMG2 protein. No differences in antigenic 
properties of the investigated fractions of HMG proteins were observed in the
amphibian erythrocytes.

PMID: 2431563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biochemistry. 1986 Aug 12;25(16):4562-5.

Native state of high mobility group chromosomal proteins 1 and 2 is rapidly lost 
by oxidation of sulfhydryl groups during storage.

Kohlstaedt LA, King DS, Cole RD.

Oxidized forms of non-histone chromosomal proteins high mobility group 1 (HMG1)
and HMG2 were detected by high-pressure liquid chromatography of preparations
stored at 4 degrees C for 1 day. The oxidized form of each was found to have two 
free sulfhydryl groups, while the freshly prepared native form of each contained 
four. The native, reduced state could be maintained during storage by the
addition of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid or reducing agents.

PMID: 3094576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Cell Biol. 1986 Aug;103(2):465-74.

Dynamic behavior of histone H1 microinjected into HeLa cells.

Wu LH, Kuehl L, Rechsteiner M.

Histone H1 was purified from bovine thymus and radiolabeled with tritium by
reductive methylation or with 125I using chloramine-T. Red blood cell-mediated
microinjection was then used to introduce the labeled H1 molecules into HeLa
cells synchronized in S phase. The injected H1 molecules rapidly entered HeLa
nuclei, and a number of tests indicate that their association with chromatin was 
equivalent to that endogenous histone H1. The injected molecules copurified with 
HeLa cell nucleosomes, exhibited a half-life of approximately 100 h, and were
hyperphosphorylated at mitosis. When injected HeLa cells were fused with mouse
3T3 fibroblasts less than 10% of the labeled H1 molecules migrated to mouse
nuclei during the next 48 h. Thus, the intracellular behavior of histone H1
differs markedly from that of high mobility group proteins 1 and 2 (HMG1 and
HMG2), which rapidly equilibrate between human and mouse nuclei after
heterokaryon formation (Rechsteiner, M., and L. Kuehl, 1979, Cell, 16:901-908;
Wu, L., M. Rechsteiner, and L. Kuehl, 1981, J. Cell Biol, 91: 488-496). Despite
their slow rate of migration between nuclei, the injected H1 molecules were
evenly distributed on mouse and human genomes soon after mitosis of HeLa-3T3
heterokaryons. These results suggest that although most histone H1 molecules are 
stably associated with interphase chromatin, they undergo extensive
redistribution after mitosis.

PMCID: PMC2113811
PMID: 3733875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1986 Jul 31;138(2):910-6.

Supercoil-dependent recognition of specific DNA sites by chromosomal protein HMG 
2.

Butler AP.

The ability of the chromosomal high mobility group protein HMG 2 to recognize
supercoil-dependent structures within the chicken adult beta-globin gene was
investigated by examining its ability to protect such sites from digestion by S1 
nuclease. Low molar ratios of HMG 2 were found to be sufficient for complete
inhibition of S1 cleavage of a supercoiled plasmid containing the globin gene.
Furthermore, HMG 2 protected an S1 cleavage site within the 5'-flanking region of
the globin gene, in preference to a palindromic S1 site within the plasmid
vector.

PMID: 3017344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1986 Jul;248(1):272-81.

The occurrence of extended acidic sequences in nonhistone chromosomal proteins.

Kuehl L, Childers TJ, McCauley RM.

Nonhistone chromosomal proteins and soluble cytoplasmic proteins from rat liver
were treated with a combination of proteases and chemical reagents which split a 
variety of peptide bonds but do not attack sequences consisting predominantly or 
exclusively of acidic amino acid residues. Analysis of the resulting digests by
gel filtration chromatography and column electrophoresis demonstrated that,
relative to cytoplasmic proteins, nonhistone chromosomal proteins are rich in
highly charged, acidic peptides up to 12 residues in length, but rarely contain
very long peptides consisting exclusively of acidic residues such as are found in
the nonhistone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2.

PMID: 2873793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Exp Cell Res. 1986 Jun;164(2):388-98.

Phenotypic analysis of cultured melanoma cells. Expression of cytokeratin-type
intermediate filaments by the M5 human melanoma cell line.

Trejdosiewicz LK, Southgate J, Kemshead JT, Hodges GM.

Expression of intermediate filament (IF) isotypes was studied in six human and
two murine melanoma cell lines. With one exception, these lines expressed IFs
only of the vimentin type; neurofilament peptides, desmin and GFAP were not
detected. However, the M5 human melanoma line also expressed extensive
cytokeratin tonofilament arrays, as visualized by immunofluorescence with a panel
of eleven monoclonal antibodies and hetero-antisera to cytokeratins; only the
keratin 19-specific antibody BA16 did not react. By 2 D gel electrophoresis, five
major keratin peptides were detected (keratins 7, 8, 13, 17 and 18), and an
additional 57 kD peptide was detected on immunoblots with several antikeratin
antibodies. Also observed in M5 cells was focal collapse of tonofilament arrays
in mitotic cells. All the melanoma lines tested were positive for S100; M5 and
two other cell lines were also positive for the 220-240 kD
neuroectoderm-associated cell-surface differentiation antigen defined by
monoclonal antibody UJ 127:11. In all the melanoma cell lines, secretion of
extracellular matrix proteins (fibronectin, laminin and collagen type IV) was
sparse or absent, and all were negative for the epithelial cell markers HMG-1 and
HMG-2. Co-expression of keratin and vimentin by a melanoma cell line is discussed
in the light of recent controversy concerning expression of cytokeratins by other
neoplasms of putative neuroectodermal origins.

PMID: 2423348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1986 May 5;866(4):242-51.

Identification of the core-histone-binding domains of HMG1 and HMG2.

Bernués J, Espel E, Querol E.

High mobility group (HMG) nonhistone chromosomal proteins are a group of
abundant, conservative and highly charged nuclear proteins whose physiological
role in chromatin is still unknown. To gain insight into the interactions of HMG1
and HMG2 with the fundamental components of chromatin we have introduced the
methodology of photochemical crosslinking. This technique has allowed us to study
the interaction of HMG1 and HMG2 with the core histones, in the form of an H2A X 
H2B dimer and an (H3 X H4)2 tetramer, for an effective time of crosslinking of
less than 1 ms and under very mild conditions. This is achieved by using flash
photolysis. With this procedure we found that both HMG1 and HMG2 interact with
H2A X H2B and also with (H3 X H4)2. In the second case, they seem to do this
through histone H3. To obtain more information about the interactions, we split
HMG1 and HMG2 into their peptides using staphylococcal proteinase. The peptides
obtained, which reflect the domain distribution of these proteins, were then used
along with the histone oligomers to elucidate their interactions by means of
photochemical crosslinking. Results obtained indicate that the domain of HMG1 and
HMG2 involved in the interaction with H2A X H2B histones is the highly acidic
C-terminal, whereas the N-terminal is involved in the interactions with (H3 X
H4)2 histones. In all cases, the interactions found appear appreciably strong.
Along with other data published in the literature, these proteins appear to have 
at least one binding site per domain for the chromatin components.

PMID: 3697355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Fertil Steril. 1986 Mar;45(3):372-6.

Positive correlation between body weight, length of human menopausal gonadotropin
stimulation, and oocyte fertilization rate.

Halme J, Hammond MG, Talbert LM, O'Rand M, Bailey L, Sloan C.

One hundred four normally cycling women were treated with fixed low-dose human
menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) (2 ampules/day) in preparation for oocyte
aspiration for in vitro fertilization. The response rate was related to age,
weight, and the ratios weight/height2 and weight/height. The required dose of hMG
was related to total body weight, but not to age or either of the weight/height
ratios. In patients who required fewer than 5 days of hMG (rapid responders), a
significantly higher number (P less than 0.02) of oocytes were harvested,
compared with slow responders. However, a smaller percentage of the oocytes from 
rapid responders fertilized (P less than 0.003) and resulted in a reduced rate of
embryo transfer. The difference in pregnancy rates was not statistically
significant. The results of the study suggest that patients undergoing in vitro
fertilization who weigh less than 55 kg may benefit from treatment with a lower
dose of hMG to prolong the stimulation cycle.

PMID: 3081381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1985 Dec 17;133(2):633-40.

Differential binding of chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 to superhelical DNA.

Bustin M, Soares N.

The binding of chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 to various DNA structures was
examined by a nitrocellulose filter binding assay using a 32P labelled
supercoiled plasmid. Binding assays and competition experiments indicated that
HMG2 has a higher affinity than HMG1 for supercoiled DNA. Studies at various
ionic strengths and pH values reveal differences in the interaction of the two
proteins with DNA. The results suggest that HMG1 and HMG2 are involved in
distinguishable cellular functions.

PMID: 4084291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1985 Oct 4;831(2):207-12.

Physical properties of chicken erythrocyte HMG-1, HMG-2 and HMG-E.

Land MD, Cox DJ, Manning DR, Reeck GR.

HMG-1, HMG-2 and HMG-E were purified from chicken erythrocyte chromatin without
exposure to overt denaturing conditions and subjected to several types of
physical measurement. The principal conclusions drawn from the measurements were:
none of the proteins has a strong tendency to self-associate, although HMG-1 does
weakly self-associate; the frictional properties of HMG-1 and HMG-E (and probably
HMG-2) indicate that the proteins deviate significantly from compact, moderately 
hydrated spheres; and each of the proteins contains approximately 40% helix and
little if any beta-pleated sheet.

PMID: 4041467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Biol Rep. 1985 Oct;10(4):221-6.

Interaction of high mobility group proteins HMG 1 and HMG 2 with nucleosomes
studied by gel electrophoresis.

Stros M, Shick VV, Belyavsky AV, Mirzabekov AD.

The binding of isolated high mobility group proteins HMG (1 + 2) with nucleosomes
was studied using gel electrophoresis. The interaction of HMG (1 + 2) with
mononucleosomes could be detected as a new discrete electrophoretic band with a
decreased mobility only after cross-linking of HMG (1 + 2)-nucleosome complex by 
formaldehyde. Approximately two molecules of the large HMG proteins were bound
per nucleosomal particle of a DNA length of approximately 185 base pairs, lacking
histones H1 and H5. Using the same techniques, no binding was observed with core 
particles of a DNA length of approximately 145 base pairs.

PMID: 4069107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Anal Biochem. 1985 Sep;149(2):316-21.

The effects of oxidation on the reverse-phase high-performance liquid
chromatography characteristics of the high mobility groups 1 and 2 proteins.

Elton TS, Reeves R.

Ion-pair reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography is a quick and
convenient method for obtaining essentially pure preparations of the HMG (high
mobility group)-1 and HMG-2 proteins if dithiothreitol is added to the eluted HMG
protein fractions to prevent oxidation and their subsequent altered migration on 
acid-urea polyacrylamide gels. Unexpectedly, we found that this chromatographic
separation technique can resolve the oxidized and reduced forms of both HMG-1 and
HMG-2 proteins. We show that oxidized HMG-1 and -2 protein subfractions are
responsible for some, but by no means all, of the HMG-1 and -2 protein
heterogeneity previously reported by Elton and Reeves (2). At least two different
HMG-1 protein species (one major and one minor) and at least four different HMG-2
protein species (two major and two minor) are consistently found in fully reduced
"enriched" HMG-1 and -2 pig thymus protein preparations.

PMID: 4073490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Carcinogenesis. 1985 Sep;6(9):1399-401.

Methylating agents: their target amino acids in nuclear proteins.

Boffa LC, Bolognesi C.

We have tried to establish a correlation between the carcinogenic potency of four
methylating compounds and their specific target sites in chromatin. We have
therefore compared the nuclear metabolism of two relatively weak carcinogens
radioactively labelled: dimethyl sulphate (DMS) and methyl methanesulphonate
(MMS), and two potent carcinogens: N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) and
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanosine (MNNG) in cultured primary hepatocytes and
the V79 Chinese hamster cell line. Cysteine (when present), and to a lesser
extent histidine, were methylated by MMS and DMS not only in the total
acid-soluble nuclear protein (H) but also in purified histones H1 and H3. These
compounds had the same effect not only on total non-histone nuclear protein (NH) 
but also on purified HMG1 and HMG2 (nuclear non-histone proteins with high
electrophoretic mobility). Traces of methylarginine and methylated lysine could
be detected in all samples. MNU and MNNG predominantly methylated lysine and
arginine residues, the former being found mostly in acid soluble, the latter in
non-histone nuclear protein. Methylated cysteine and histidine were present in
trace amounts. Our preliminary data suggest specific amino acid methylation at
the nuclear protein level for carcinogens with different potencies, similar to
what has been found for DNA bases.

PMID: 4028338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochem J. 1985 Jul 1;229(1):233-40.

Heterogeneity of high-mobility-group protein 2. Enrichment of a rapidly migrating
form in testis.

Bucci LR, Brock WA, Meistrich ML.

A determination of the absolute amounts of high-mobility-group proteins 1 and 2
(HMG1 and HMG2) in rat tissues demonstrated that amounts of HMG2 were low in
non-proliferating tissues, somewhat higher in proliferating and lymphoid tissues,
but were extremely elevated in the testis. This increase was due to a
germ-cell-specific form of HMG2 with increased mobility relative to somatic HMG2 
on acid/urea/polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis. To determine if the findings in 
the rat were a general feature of spermatogenesis, testis (germinal), spleen
(lymphoid), and liver (non-proliferating) tissues from various vertebrate species
were examined for their relative amounts of HMG1 and HMG2, and for HMG2
heterogeneity. Bull, chimpanzee, cynomologus monkey, dog, gopher, guinea pig,
hamster, mouse, opossum, rabbit, rat, rhesus monkey, squirrel and toad (Xenopus) 
tissues were analysed. Nearly all species showed relatively high contents of HMG2
in testis tissue, whereas HMG1 contents were similar in all species and tissues. 
Ten of thirteen species showed a rapidly migrating HMG2 subtype in testis tissue,
separable by acid/urea/polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis. Xenopus, which lacks
HMG2 in somatic tissues, showed an HMG2-like protein in testis tissue. Although
the rapidly migrating HMG2 subtype in species other than rat was not
testis-specific, it was always enriched in the testis. This study indicates that 
increased amounts of HMG2 and the enrichment of a rapidly migrating HMG2 subtype 
are general features of spermatogenic cells.

PMCID: PMC1145172
PMID: 4038257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1985 May;60(5):922-7.

Ovulation induction in clomiphene-resistant anovulatory women: differential
follicular response to purified urinary follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) versus
purified urinary FSH and luteinizing hormone.

Hoffman DI, Lobo RA, Campeau JD, Tsai HM, Holmberg EA, Ono T, Frederick JJ, Platt
LD, diZerega GS.

We studied 15 anovulatory women undergoing ovulation induction with purified
human urinary FSH or purified human urinary FSH and LH [human menopausal
gonadotropins (hMG)]. All patients had either sporadic or no vaginal bleeding
after progesterone therapy and failed to ovulate after receiving clomiphene (250 
mg for 5 days) plus hCG. Other causes of infertility were ruled out. Sixteen
cycles of FSH and 12 cycles of hMG were administered according to a standard
protocol. Estradiol, progesterone, androstenedione, testosterone, LH, and FSH
concentrations were quantitated by RIA. Follicular diameter was determined using 
ultrasound. There was no significant difference in the amount of FSH or hMG used 
per patient, in the duration of therapy before hCG administration, or in the
length of the luteal phase in any patient. There was a difference in the number
of follicles greater than 1000 mm3 per cycle in those patients receiving FSH
compared to the number in those receiving hMG [2.8 +/- 1.3 (+/- SEM) vs. 4.4 +/- 
1.5 follicles; P = 0.026). The maximum follicular phase serum estradiol (18.3 vs.
34.8 ng/ml) and maximum luteal phase progesterone concentrations (1289 vs. 2808
pg/ml; P = 0.026) were also different between the FSH and hMG groups. Linear
regression analysis revealed a significant correlation between the peripheral
serum estradiol levels and the total follicular volume of follicles in the
hMG-treated group which was not apparent in the FSH-treated group. These findings
suggest that exogenous LH may not be required to induce folliculogenesis in
anovulatory patients.

PMID: 3920235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1985 May-Jun;19(3):722-9.

[HMG protein levels in cell nuclei with different proliferative and transcription
activities].

[Article in Russian]

Mosevitskii MI, Novitskaia VA, Iogannsen MG, Zabezhinskii MA.

It is shown that HMG1 and HMG2 proteins are present in the nuclei of the both
actively proliferating and resting lymphocytes in the equally high amount. On the
other hand, the same proteins are almost or even completely absent from the
nuclei of all kinds of hepatocytes studied: nonproliferating hepatocytes from
calf and rat liver and actively proliferating cells from rat regenerating liver
and primary hepatoma. These results reveal a tissue specific distribution of HMG1
and HMG2 proteins and do not confirm the suggestions that HMG1 and HMG2 proteins 
are necessarily involved in chromatin replication or transcription. In contrast, 
HMG14 and HMG17 proteins have not shown the tissue specificity in our
experiments. Besides, the content of these two proteins does not depend on the
actual transcriptional activity of the tissues. These results confirm the
suggestion that HMG14 and HMG17 proteins are present not only in the genes that
are actually being transcribed, but in a broader set of genes.

PMID: 3839898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochem J. 1985 Apr 1;227(1):271-6.

Phosphorylation of high mobility group 1 protein by phospholipid-sensitive
Ca2+-dependent protein kinase from pig testis.

Kimura K, Katoh N, Sakurada K, Kubo S.

Phospholipid-sensitive Ca2+-dependent protein kinase was partially purified from 
total particulate fraction of pig testis. The enzyme phosphorylated high mobility
group 1 protein (HMG 1), one of the major chromatin-associated non-histone
proteins. Other HMG proteins (HMG 2, 14 and 17) were not phosphorylated by the
enzyme. Exhaustive phosphorylation of HMG 1 revealed that 1 mol of phosphate was 
incorporated/mol of HMG 1. The apparent Km value for HMG 1 was 3.66 microM.
1,3-Diolein stimulated the phosphorylation at 10 microM-Ca2+ in the presence of
phosphatidylserine. The phosphorylation of HMG 1 was inhibited by adriamycin, an 
inhibitor of spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1144836
PMID: 3158310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Anal Biochem. 1985 Feb 1;144(2):403-16.

Microheterogeneity of the mammalian high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2
investigated by reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography.

Elton TS, Reeves R.

Microheterogeneity within the high mobility group (HMG)-1 and HMG-2 groups of
nonhistone chromatin proteins has been investigated using reverse-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) under conditions (acetonitrile
elution with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as the counter ion) which separate
proteins primarily on the basis of differences in their overall hydrophobicity.
RP-HPLC proved to be a fast and efficient means for separating multiple
subspecies of both the HMG-1 and HMG-2 proteins from both crude nuclear extracts 
and from ion-exchange column "purified" protein samples obtained from different
types of mammalian cell nuclei. In crude nuclear extracts at least eight
different HMG-2 protein species (two major and six minor), but only one major
HMG-1 species, could be resolved by RP-HPLC. Three of the minor HMG-2 protein
species could be isolated in "pure" form from crude extracts in one RP-HPLC step 
whereas under the same conditions the two major HMG-2 peaks (as well as the other
minor species) were contaminated with either HMG-1 or HMG-3 (a degradation
product of HMG-1). In crude extracts the major HMG-1 fraction always seems to be 
contaminated with one of the HMG-2 subfractions. RP-HPLC analysis of apparently
"pure" protein preparations isolated by ion-exchange chromatography techniques
revealed that "pure" HMG-1 can be resolved into at least three different protein 
species and "pure" HMG-2 into at least four different species. Amino acid
analyses of different resolvable forms of the HMG proteins were not inconsistent 
with the suggestion that at least some of these may be primary sequence variants 
of the individual proteins, but other possibilities also exist.

PMID: 3993906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Acta Biochim Pol. 1985;32(2):87-94.

High mobility group non-histone chromosomal proteins from chicken thrombocytes
and erythrocytes.

Krajewska WM, Klyszejko-Stefanowicz L.

The high mobility group non-histone chromosomal proteins (HMG) from chicken
thrombocytes were compared with those from chicken erythrocytes. In terms of
their extractability, electrophoretic behaviour in polyacrylamide gels containing
2.5 M-urea, and amino acid composition, the HMG proteins of these cells were
indistinguishable. However, microcomplement fixation assay performed in the
presence of antiserum against HMG-1 and HMG-2 revealed that these high molecular 
weight HMG proteins of chicken thrombocytes and erythrocytes are not
cross-reactive. Electrophoretic analysis of HMG-1 and HMG-2 from these two types 
of cells in polyacrylamide gels containing 6.25 M-urea suggested differences in
the HMG-2 patterns.

PMID: 4036451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Bibl Haematol. 1985;(51):142-9.

RBC-mediated microinjection of chromatin components into cultured mammalian
cells.

Rechsteiner M, Wu LH, Miller AO.

Radiolabeled DNA fragments or nuclear proteins were encapsulated within human
erythrocytes, and the erythrocytes were then fused with cultured mammalian cells 
using Sendai virus. Autoradiography revealed that 125I-labeled DNA fragments
remained dispersed in the cytoplasm and disappeared with a half-life of 24 hours.
In contrast, the nuclear proteins, HMG1, HMG2, HMG17 and histone H1, rapidly
localized within HeLa nuclei and exhibited half lives greater than 80 hours.
Several biochemical criteria indicate that the association of the injected
nuclear proteins with chromatin faithfully mimics the behavior of their
endogenous counterparts.

PMID: 4004757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985 Jan;82(1):168-72.

RAD6 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes a protein containing a tract of 13 
consecutive aspartates.

Reynolds P, Weber S, Prakash L.

The RAD6 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is required for postreplication repair 
of UV-damaged DNA, for induced mutagenesis, and for sporulation. We have mapped
the transcripts and determined the nucleotide sequence of the cloned RAD6 gene.
The RAD6 gene encodes two transcripts of 0.98 and 0.86 kilobases which differ
only in their 3' termini. The transcribed region contains an open reading frame
of 516 nucleotides. The rad6-1 and rad6-3 mutant alleles, which we have cloned
and sequenced, introduce amber and ochre nonsense mutations, respectively, into
the open reading frame, proving that it encodes the RAD6 protein. The RAD6
protein predicted by the nucleotide sequence is 172 amino acids long, has a
molecular weight of 19,704, and contains 23.3% acidic and 11.6% basic residues.
Its most striking feature is the highly acidic carboxyl terminus: 20 of the 23
terminal amino acids are acidic, including 13 consecutive aspartates. RAD6
protein thus resembles high mobility group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2, which each
contain a carboxyl-proximal tract of acidic amino acids.

PMCID: PMC396993
PMID: 3881753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1984 Aug 28;789(1):63-8.

Isolation of high-mobility-group proteins HMG1 and HMG2 in non denaturing
conditions and comparison of their properties with those of acid-extracted
proteins.

Marekov LN, Demirov DG, Beltchev BG.

We describe a method for isolation and purification of the chromosomal proteins
HMG1 and HMG2 in non-denaturing conditions which overcomes the difficulties of
the published methods concerning yield and purity. The method is based on salt
extraction, selective precipitation with ammonium sulfate and DEAE-cellulose
chromatography. All studied properties of these proteins (formation of protein
tetramers, enhancement of micrococcal nuclease digestion of DNA and chromatin,
and protection of 165-basepair DNA in chromatosome) differ significantly from the
properties of HMG1 and 2 isolated under denaturing conditions.

PMID: 6235858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Chromatogr. 1984 Aug 3;297:147-65.

Preparation of histone variants and high-mobility group proteins by
reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography.

Gurley LR, D'Anna JA, Blumenfeld M, Valdez JG, Sebring RJ, Donahue PR, Prentice
DA, Spall WD.

Methods have been developed for the preparation of histone variants and
high-mobility group (HMG) proteins by high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). The individual HPLC fractions were recovered as a dry powder in 95% yield
by direct lyophilization from the column effluent. Perchloric acid-soluble H1
variants and HMG proteins from Chinese hamster cells (line CHO) were separated on
a mu Bondapak CN column using a 0-50% linear acetonitrile gradient in water
containing 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The proteins were eluted in the
following order: HMG-E/G (an HMG-14/17 class proteins from CHO cells), HlO, Hl,
HMG-2, and HMG-l. HMG-E/G, Hl, and an unidentified protein were recovered
electrophoretically pure. HlO contained contaminants which could be removed by
subsequent chromatography on a mu Bondapak C18 Radial-Pak column, but HMG-l and
HMG-2 could not be completely resolved. Nucleosomal core histones were
fractionated on a mu Bondapak C18 Radial-Pak column using a 30-55% linear
acetonitrile gradient containing 0.2-0.3% TFA. They were eluted in the following 
order: H2B, (LHP)H2A, (MHP)H2A, H4, LHP(H3), and (MHP)H3, (where LHP and MHP
refer to less-hydrophobic and more-hydrophobic variants). If the gradient
containing 0.3% TFA was interrupted with an isocratic elution at 43%
acetonitrile, the H2B, (LHP)H2A, (MHP)H2A, and H4 proteins were completely
resolved, thus providing a good preparative method for these proteins. The H2A
class of Drosophila histones was also fractionated on a mu Bondapak C18
Radial-Pak column using a 30-35% linear acetonitrile gradient containing 0.2%
TFA. Drosophila melanogaster H2A, obtained as a single fraction by chromatography
on Biol-Gel P-100, was eluted from the C18 column as three proteins. The order of
elution was identified by electrophoresis to be: H2Aox (an oxidized form of H2A),
D2 (a Drosophila-specific subtype), and H2A.

PMID: 6436280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Cell Biol. 1984 Aug;99(2):648-54.

Concentrations of high-mobility-group proteins in the nucleus and cytoplasm of
several rat tissues.

Kuehl L, Salmond B, Tran L.

Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were isolated from various tissues of the rat
by a nonaqueous technique. The high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins were extracted 
from these fractions with acid and separated by one- and two-dimensional PAGE.
The concentrations of high-mobility-group proteins HMG1, HMG2, and HMG17 in the
nucleus and cytoplasm were then estimated from the staining intensities of the
electrophoretic bands. The cytoplasmic concentrations of these proteins were very
low--usually less than 1/30 of those present in the corresponding nuclear
fractions. For the tissues studied (liver, kidney, heart, and lung), the
concentrations of HMG proteins in the nucleus did not differ significantly from
one tissue to another. Averaged over the four tissues investigated, there were
0.28 molecule of HMG1, 0.18 molecule of HMG2, and 0.46 molecule of HMG17 per
nucleosome. These values are considerably higher than those that have been
reported previously.

PMCID: PMC2113252
PMID: 6235236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Biol Chem. 1984 Jul 25;259(14):8840-6.

Characterization of high mobility group protein levels during spermatogenesis in 
the rat.

Bucci LR, Brock WA, Goldknopf IL, Meistrich ML.

The distribution, quantitation, and synthesis of high mobility group (HMG)
proteins during spermatogenesis in the rat have been determined. HMG1, -2, -14,
and -17 were isolated from rat testes by Bio-Rex 70 chromatography combined with 
preparative gel electrophoresis. Amino acid analysis revealed that each rat
testis HMG protein was similar to its calf thymus analogue. Tryptic peptide maps 
of somatic and testis HMG2 showed no differences and, therefore, failed to detect
an HMG2 variant. Testis levels of HMG proteins, relative to DNA content, were
equivalent to other tissues for HMG1 (13 micrograms/mg of DNA), HMG14 (3
micrograms/mg of DNA), and HMG17 (5 micrograms/mg of DNA). The testis was
distinguished in that it contained a substantially higher level of HMG2 than any 
other rat tissue (32 micrograms/mg of DNA). HMG protein levels were determined
from purified or enriched populations of testis cells representing the major
stages of spermatogenesis; spermatogonia and early primary spermatocytes,
pachytene spermatocytes, early spermatids, and late spermatids; and testicular
somatic cells. High levels of HMG2 in the testis were due to pachytene
spermatocytes and early spermatids (56 +/- 4 and 47 +/- 6 micrograms/mg of DNA,
respectively). Mixtures of spermatogonia and early primary spermatocytes showed
lower levels of HMG2 (12 +/- 3 micrograms/mg of DNA) similar to proliferating
somatic tissues, whereas late spermatids had no detectable HMG proteins. The
somatic cells of the testis, including isolated populations of Sertoli and Leydig
cells, showed very low levels of HMG2 (2 micrograms/mg of DNA), similar to those 
in nonproliferating somatic tissues. HMG proteins were synthesized in
spermatogonia and primary spermatocytes, but not in spermatids. Rat testis HMG2
exhibited two bands on acid-urea gels. A "slow" form comigrated with somatic cell
HMG2, while the other "fast" band migrated ahead of the somatic form and appeared
to be testis-specific. The "fast" form of HMG2 accounted for the large increase
of HMG2 levels in rat testes. These results show that the very high level of HMG2
in testis is not associated with proliferative activity as previously
hypothesized.

PMID: 6235219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1984 May 16;120(3):782-8.

High mobility group proteins HMG1 and HMG2 do not decrease the melting
temperature of DNA.

Marekov LN, Beltchev BG, Pivec L.

High mobility group proteins 1 and 2 isolated in non-denaturing conditions cannot
decrease the temperature of denaturation of DNA. When they are isolated or
treated with tricloroacetic acid a hyperchromic peak below the melting
temperature of free DNA appears in agreement with previous data ( Javaherian et
al. (1979) Nucl . Acids Res. 6, 3569-3580). We show that this is due to light
scattering of aggregated protein at submelting temperatures and not to melting of
DNA.

PMID: 6233973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biol Reprod. 1984 Apr;30(3):564-72.

Identification of a porcine follicular fluid fraction which suppresses follicular
response to gonadotropins.

Kling OR, Roche PC, Campeau JD, Nishimura K, Nakamura RM, diZerega GS.

To evaluate the role of nonsteroidal, follicular fluid proteins in
folliculogenesis, the 10-55% saturated ammonium sulfate fraction of pooled
porcine follicular fluid (PFF) was dialyzed against 0.025 M Tris/HCl, pH 7.5,
using 10,000 molecular weight exclusion membranes, then passed through
agarose-immobilized textile dye. Activity was determined by test fraction
inhibition of human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) [2 U human luteinizing hormone 
(LH)/follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) per day] induced ovarian weight and serum
estradiol increase in hypophysectomized, diethylstilbestrol (DES)-treated,
25-day-old female rats. Specific inhibition (84 +/- 7.4%) of ovarian weight
increase was found in the material (5 ml) eluted from the orange A column with
KCl (1.5 M, pH 6.8). Inhibitory activity of the orange A-bound material which
eluted through a standardized Sephadex G-100 column corresponded to a molecular
weight of 12,000-30,000. Isoelectric focusing (IEF) on a Sephadex G-15 support
bed of orange A-bound material demonstrated inhibitory activity at pH 3.7-4.0.
Serial dilutions of active material from IEF preparations demonstrated a
dose-response relationship in the bioassay. No demonstrable activity was found in
similar fractions eluted through a Concanavalin A-Sepharose 4B column with or
without addition of alpha-methyl mannoside (2 M, pH 7). When active fractions
were heated (56 degrees C, 1 h) or exposed to trypsin (10 mg%), activity was
lost. When aliquots of the saturated ammonium sulfated precipitated, dialyzed,
orange A-bound, Sephadex G-100 (Ve/Vo 1.3-1.7) eluent were separated by
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using gel exclusion columns,
activity in the bioassay was recovered in the 18,000-35,000 molecular weight
range.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6426533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Comp Biochem Physiol B. 1984;78(3):633-41.

Release of ribonucleoprotein during digestion of rat testis chromatin with
deoxyribonuclease II (3.1.4.6).

Grimes SR Jr.

The composition of rat testis chromatin proteins in fractions produced by limited
DNase II digestion followed by differential precipitation with MgCl2 has been
studied. Over 50% of the acid-soluble proteins in the soluble chromatin fraction 
appeared to be quite similar to proteins which are associated with
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) particles in HeLa cells. Although the ratios of the
testis RNP protein components differed from those of HeLa RNP particles, the
three major polypeptides were most similar to the HeLa components designated A2, 
B2, and C1. The soluble chromatin fraction was also enriched in the high mobility
group proteins HMG1 and HMG2.

PMID: 6478794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biochem. 1984 Jan;95(1):117-24.

Unwinding of DNA by nonhistone chromosomal protein HMG(1 + 2) from pig thymus as 
determined with endonuclease.

Yoshida M, Shimura K.

A high mobility group (HMG) nonhistone protein fraction HMG(1 + 2), composed of
HMG1 and HMG2, was prepared from pig thymus chromatin. In order to examine a
possibility that the HMG(1 + 2) participates in the unwinding of the DNA
double-helix, DNA hydrolysis assay systems with the endonucleases specific for
single-stranded DNA were employed. In the presence of HMG(1 + 2), the hydrolysis 
of double-stranded DNA by N. crassa endonuclease was markedly promoted, while the
hydrolysis of single-stranded DNA was hardly enhanced. The reaction kinetic data 
showed that the stimulation of the hydrolysis of double-stranded DNA in the
presence of HMG(1 + 2) was due to the unwinding of the DNA double-helix by the
HMG(1 + 2), and not due to stimulation of enzyme activity of the endonuclease by 
the protein. The unwinding reactions were dependent on the HMG protein
concentration at low weight protein to DNA ratios and reached a maximum at the
ratio of 0.025. The region unwound in the whole DNA was partial. Similar results 
were obtained for experiments with nuclease S1. Isolated HMG1 and HMG2 fractions 
showed DNA unwinding activity of similar extents. The association constant
obtained by fluorescence quenching analysis showed that the HMG(1 + 2) has higher
affinity to single-stranded DNA than to double-stranded DNA. The susceptibility
to the unwinding differed with the DNA source. These results suggest that HMG(1 +
2) at a low weight protein to DNA ratio binds to some limited double-stranded
region in DNA and unwinds the DNA partially.

PMID: 6323390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser. 1984;(15):181-4.

Unwinding of DNA by nonhistone protein HMG1 and HMG2.

Yoshida M, Makiguchi K, Chida Y, Shimura K.

The enzyme kinetic studies with endonucleases specific for single-stranded DNA
and the thermal denaturation analyses of DNA showed that a high mobility group
(HMG) nonhistone protein fraction HMG (1 + 2), composed of HMG1 and HMG2, has an 
activity to unwind DNA partially at low protein-to-DNA weight ratio. Isolated
HMG1 and HMG2 have the same activity. Divalent cations such as Mg++ or Ca++ were 
necessary for the unwinding reaction. A peptide containing high glutamic and
aspartic (HGA) region, isolated from the tryptic digest of HMG (1 + 2), unwound
DNA depending on the presence of Mg++ or Ca++, suggesting that the HMA region in 
HMG protein is the active site for the DNA unwinding reaction. Poly-L-glutamic
acid, employed as a model peptide of the HGA region, showed the activity.
Finally, mechanisms of the DNA unwinding reaction by the HMG protein and possible
role of the divalent cations are discussed.

PMID: 6097882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1983 Nov 14;748(3):436-43.

Production of HMG-3 by limited trypsin digestion of purified high-mobility-group 
nonhistone chromatin proteins.

Isackson PJ, Beaudoin J, Hermodson MA, Reeck GR.

Three isolated nonhistone proteins (HMG-1, HMG-2 and HMG-E) have been purified
from chicken erythrocyte chromatin without exposure to overt denaturing
conditions, and subjected to limited proteolysis. When treated with trypsin, the 
three proteins exhibited similar patterns of degradation, as judged by SDS and
acid/urea gel electrophoresis. In particular, the first product, P1 (a relatively
stable intermediate in each digestion), was a protein analogous to HMG-3, a
principal degradation product in preparations of calf thymus high-mobility-group 
proteins. At least in the case of HMG-E, the products formed by tryptic attack on
P1 are the two individual DNA binding domains of HMG-E. P1 derived from HMG-E and
one of the individual DNA binding domains of HMG-E were purified by
chromatography on columns containing DNA-cellulose or phosphocellulose. The
properties of these two portions of HMG-E are consistent with our recently
postulated three-domain structure for HMG-1 and its homologs (Reeck, G.R.,
Isackson, P.J. and Teller, D.C. (1982) Nature 300, 76-78). Thus, P1 consists of
two DNA-binding domains of approximately equal molecular weight covalently linked
together. From chromatography on DNA-cellulose columns, it is clear that P1 binds
to DNA more tightly than does HMG-E. The highly acidic C-terminal domain of HMG-E
(which is removed by trypsin in generating P1) thus counteracts the DNA binding
of the two other domains of HMG-E (at least in the protein's interaction with
purified DNA).

PMID: 6227338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. FEBS Lett. 1983 Oct 17;162(2):324-8.

Quantitative changes of high mobility group non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1
and HMG2 during rooster spermatogenesis.

Chiva M, Mezquita C.

The quantitative changes of a group of non-histone chromosomal proteins
identified by its solubility, electrophoretic mobility and amino acid analysis as
the high mobility group proteins HMG1 and HMG2, were studied throughout rooster
spermatogenesis. The ratio HMG1/HMG2 remained constant (0.66 +/- 0.04) during the
transition from dividing meiotic and premeiotic cells to nondividing spermatids
and from transcriptionally active cells (spermatogonia, spermatocytes and early
spermatids) to transcriptionally inactive late spermatids. The ratios
HMG1/nucleosomal histone and HMG2/nucleosomal histone increased markedly at the
end of spermiogenesis during the transition from nucleohistone to nucleoprotamine
when nucleosomes are being disassembled. The high mobility group chromosomal
proteins HMG1 and HMG2 were not detectable in the nuclei of rooster spermatozoa.

PMID: 6226537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Cell Biol. 1983 Sep;97(3):838-48.

High mobility group proteins of amphibian oocytes: a large storage pool of a
soluble high mobility group-1-like protein and involvement in transcriptional
events.

Kleinschmidt JA, Scheer U, Dabauvalle MC, Bustin M, Franke WW.

Oocytes of several amphibian species (Xenopus laevis, Rana temporaria, and
Pleurodeles waltlii) contained a relatively large pool of nonchromatin-bound,
soluble high mobility group (HMG) protein with properties similar to those of
calf thymus proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2 (protein HMG-A; A, amphibian). About half of
this soluble HMG-A was located in the nuclear sap, the other half was recovered
in enucleated ooplasms. This protein was identified by its mobility on one- and
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, by binding of antibodies to calf thymus
HMG-1 to polypeptides electrophoretically separated and blotted on nitrocellulose
paper, and by tryptic peptide mapping of radioiodinated polypeptides. Most, if
not all, of the HMG-A in the soluble nuclear protein fraction, preparatively
defined as supernatant obtained after centrifugation at 100,000 g for 1 h, was in
free monomeric form, apparently not bound to other proteins. On gel filtration it
eluted with a mean peak corresponding to an apparent molecular weight of
approximately 25,000; on sucrose gradient centrifugation it appeared with a very 
low S value (2-3 S), and on isoelectric focusing it appeared in fractions ranging
from pH approximately 7 to 9. This soluble HMG-A was retained on DEAE-Sephacel
but could be eluted already at moderate salt concentrations (0.2 M KCl). In
oocytes of various stages of oogenesis HMG-A was accumulated in the nucleus up to
concentrations of approximately 14 ng per nucleus (in Xenopus), corresponding to 
approximately 0.2 mg/ml, similar to those of the nucleosomal core histones. This 
nuclear concentration is also demonstrated using immunofluorescence microscopy.
When antibodies to bovine HMG-1 were microinjected into nuclei of living oocytes 
of Pleurodeles the lateral loops of the lampbrush chromosomes gradually retracted
and the whole chromosomes condensed. As shown using electron microscopy of spread
chromatin from such injected oocyte nuclei, this process of loop retraction was
accompanied by the appearance of variously-sized and irregularly-spaced gaps
within transcriptional units of chromosomal loops but not of nucleoli, indicating
that the transcription of non-nucleolar genes was specifically inhibited by this 
treatment and hence involved an HMG-1-like protein. These data show that proteins
of the HMG-1 and -2 category, which are usually chromatin-bound components, can
exist, at least in amphibian oocytes, in a free soluble monomeric form,
apparently not bound to other molecules. The possible role of this large oocyte
pool of soluble HMG-A in early embryogenesis is discussed as well as the possible
existence of soluble HMG proteins in other cells.

PMCID: PMC2112546
PMID: 6224801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Anal Biochem. 1983 Jul 15;132(2):294-304.

Ionic interactions between proteins in nonequilibrium pH gradient
electrophoresis: histones affect the migration of high mobility group nonhistone 
chromatin proteins.

Wen L, Tweten RK, Isackson PJ, Iandolo JJ, Reeck GR.

In two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of the high mobility group (HMG) proteins,
it has proved necessary to use nonequilibrium pH gradient electrophoresis
(NEPHGE) in the first dimension rather than isoelectric focusing, because of the 
basic character of most of the HMG proteins [D. Tyrell, P. J. Isackson, and G. R.
Reeck (1982) Anal. Biochem. 119, 433-439]. In this paper it is reported that in
samples that contain histones, the mobilities of HMG proteins (particularly
HMG-1, HMG-2, and HMG-E) are severely distorted in NEPHGE. This presumably
results from formation of complexes between histones and HMG proteins through
ionic interactions. Analysis of HMG proteins by NEPHGE/sodium dodecyl sulfate-gel
electrophoresis is thus precluded in samples containing histones. Our results
raise the possibility of similar artifacts occurring in NEPHGE (or isoelectric
focusing) analysis of other proteins with regions of high charge density.

PMID: 6226213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1983 May 30;745(1):70-81.

Comparisons of the structures of the chromosomal high mobility group proteins
HMG1 and HMG2 prepared under conditions of neutral and acidic pH.

Cockerill PN, Goodwin GH, Cary PD, Turner C, Johns EW.

The chromosomal proteins HMG1 and 2 have been prepared by salt extraction and
phosphocellulose chromatography at neutral pH (Isackson, P.J., Debold, W.A. and
Reeck, G.R. (1980) FEBS Lett. 119, 337-342) to minimize protein denaturation. The
structures of these phosphocellulose-prepared high mobility group proteins have
been compared with those of high mobility group proteins using the previously
described acid-extraction conditions which fully denature the proteins. When
compared in the same solvent conditions the acid-extracted proteins did not
refold to give the same level of alpha-helical and tertiary folded structures as 
the phosphocellulose-prepared proteins, suggesting that acid treatment can cause 
some irreversible damage to the proteins. This finding was supported by changes
in the structure observed when phosphocellulose-prepared HMG1 was neutralized
after exposure to acid. Gel filtration studies reveal no differences in the size 
of the high mobility group proteins, phosphocellulose-prepared and acid-extracted
proteins both being largely monomeric in solution. Little difference was detected
in the DNA-binding properties of the two types of protein, nor was there any
difference in the oxidation state of the cysteines. However, isoelectric focusing
analysis revealed differences in the subfractions of HMG2 prepared by the two
methods.

PMID: 6221763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Cancer Res. 1983 Apr;43(4):1688-95.

Binding of benzo(a)pyrene and (+/-)-7 beta,8 alpha-dihydroxy-9 alpha, 10
alpha-epoxy-7,8,9, 10-tetrahydrobenzo(a)pyrene to histones.

Sculley TB, Zytkovicz TH.

AKR-2B mouse embryo cells were incubated for 24 hr with [3H]benzo(a)pyrene, and
the histones were isolated and analyzed using one- and two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis and autoradiography. The results revealed that (a) histones H1,
H2A, and H3 incorporated significant amounts of label whereas little or no label 
was associated with histones H2B and H4 and (b) electrophoresis of the histones
in the Triton:acid:urea gel system caused labeled histones to have a slower
migration than did the corresponding unlabeled histones. Additional studies such 
as incubation of (+/-)-7 beta,8 alpha-[3H]dihydroxy-9 alpha,10
alpha-epoxy-7,8,9,10-tetrahydrobenzo(a)pyrene with nuclei resulted in radioactive
labeling of histones H1, H2A, H2B, and H3 and of high-mobility-group proteins
HMG1 and HMG2. The low levels of label associated with histone H4 in the
whole-cell and nuclear studies were further investigated by incubating isolated
histones with (+/-)-7 beta,8 alpha-[3H]dihydroxy-9 alpha,10
alpha-epoxy-7,8,9,10-tetrahydrobenzo(a)pyrene. Under these conditions, negligible
amounts of radioactivity were associated with H4, while significant labeling of
H1, H2A, H2B, and H3 and other nuclear proteins was observed. The results suggest
that factors other than the presence of suitable nucleophilic acceptor sites on
the histones may be necessary for carcinogen binding.

PMID: 6299528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Biochemistry. 1982 Dec 21;21(26):6773-7.

Antigenic determinants of high mobility group chromosomal proteins 1 and 2.

Bustin M, Dunn B, Gillette R, Mendelsohn E, Soares N.

The antigenic determinants of nonhistone high mobility group chromosomal proteins
1 (HMG-1) and 2 (HMG-2) were studied with rabbit antisera elicited against HMG-1 
and against HMG-2 and monoclonal antibodies elicited by HMG-1. The monoclonal
antibodies did not distinguish between the two proteins, suggesting that they
have specificity toward a shared determinant. Whereas anti-HMG-1 did not,
anti-HMG-2 did distinguish between the proteins, suggesting that the anti-HMG-2
serum contains antibodies against peptides which differ between the proteins.
Peptides were generated from HMG-1 and HMG-2 by controlled digestion with trypsin
and pepsin. Analysis of the digests by ELISA and by sodium dodecyl sulfate
electrophoresis followed by diazobenzyloxymethyl transfer, antibody binding and
autoradiography revealed that most of the antibodies are against sequential
determinants some of which are smaller than 3000 in molecular weight.

PMID: 6186273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Gan. 1982 Dec;73(6):902-6.

Conservation of chromosomal high mobility group proteins HMG1 and HMG2 during
differentiation of mouse myeloid leukemia cells.

Iketani K, Sakagami H, Nakaya K, Konno K.

The possible change in the levels of high mobility group proteins HMG1, HMG2 and 
histone H1 and H1(0) was investigated during mouse myeloid leukemia (M1) cell
differentiation. In contrast to Friend erythroleukemia cells, no change occurred 
in the levels of any of these proteins. However, histone H1 phosphorylation
significantly decreased. The results suggest that the loss of HMG1 and HMG2
proteins is not a generalized marker for cell differentiation.

PMID: 6219031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Eur J Biochem. 1982 Oct;127(3):437-42.

Adenosine diphosphate ribosylation of chicken-erythrocyte histones H1, H5 and
high-mobility-group proteins by purified calf-thymus
poly(adenosinediphosphate-ribose) polymerase.

Poirier GG, Niedergang C, Champagne M, Mazen A, Mandel P.

Poly(ADP-ribosylation) of histones H1, H5 and non-histone chromosomal
high-mobility-group proteins HMG 1, 2, 14 and 17 from chicken erythrocytes by
purified calf thymus poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase was studied using
acid/urea/Triton gel electrophoresis and autoradiography. With histone H1,
besides ADP-ribosylated H1 supporting short chains of polymer, the appearance of 
H1 'dimer' was observed and this reaction was dependent on NAD concentration and 
incubation time. In addition, highly modified and/or aggregated species of
histone H1 were observed. Histone H5 was slightly ADP-ribosylated at low NAD
concentrations. At higher NAD concentrations or after longer incubations the
formation of H5 'dimer' and of more modified forms of H5 could be observed. HMG 1
and HMG 2 were found to be ADP-ribosylated, the reaction being dependent on NAD
concentration and time. Here again some discrete intermediates appeared. HMG 14
and HMG 17 were only slightly ADP-ribosylated under our experimental conditions. 
These results indicate that the purified DNA-independent poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase can catalyse the formation of H1 'dimer' as in nuclei and nucleosomes 
and that H5 and HMG proteins can also be ADP-ribosylated and produce well-defined
higher complexes. These modifications of nuclear proteins may provide a means of 
localized conformational changes of the chromatin structure in vivo.

PMID: 6293814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1982 Sep 27;698(3):303-6.

Solubilization of nonhistone chromosomal proteins by carboxymethyldextran for
chromatography.

Torres AR, Kuehl L, Peterson EA.

Chromosomal proteins extracted from calf thymus by 0.35 M NaCl were insoluble at 
the low salt concentration needed initially for ion-exchange chromatography.
However, the addition of high-affinity carboxymethyl-dextran rendered the
precipitated proteins soluble, permitting them to be fractionated by elution from
DEAE-Sephacel. In this way, the separation of HMG-1 from HMG-2 was achieved, as
well as a partial fractionation of the low mobility group proteins, under
conditions that did not disturb the native conformation of the proteins.

PMID: 6182915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Nucleic Acids Res. 1982 Aug 25;10(16):5059-72.

Influence of nonhistone chromatin protein HMG-1 on the enzymatic digestion of
purified DNA.

Shastri K, Isackson PJ, Fishback JL, Land MD, Reeck GR.

The effect of chicken erythrocyte High Mobility Group protein 1 (HMG-1) on the
enzymatic hydrolysis of purified double-stranded and single-stranded
bacteriophage lambda DNA was studied. HMG-1 was found to inhibit the digestion of
single- and double-stranded DNA by S1 nuclease and DNase I, respectively. HMG-I
increased the rate of hydrolysis of double-stranded DNA by micrococcal nuclease, 
particularly at low HMG-1/DNA ratios, and had little effect on the hydrolysis of 
single-stranded DNA by micrococcal nucleases, even at high HMG-1 DNA ratios. We
also present a semi-quantitative estimate that HMG-1 and HMG-2 occur in chromatin
from rapidly dividing, cultured rat hepatoma cells at about 8 times the level
that they occur in adult rat liver chromatin.

PMCID: PMC320851
PMID: 6291002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 1982 Mar 25;257(6):2722-5.

Identification of a single-stranded DNA binding protein from rat liver with high 
mobility group protein 1.

Bonne C, Sautiere P, Duguet M, de Recondo AM.

The rat liver single-stranded DNA binding protein, S25 and HD25, isolated by
differential DNA cellulose affinity chromatography was compared to the high
mobility group proteins, HMG1 and HMG2, isolated from rat liver chromatin by the 
technique of Goodwin et al. (Goodwin, G. H., Sanders, C., and Johns, E. W. (1973)
Eur. J. Biochem. 38, 14-19). Analysis of their amino acid composition,
electrophoretic mobility, and tryptic peptide map reveal the identity of the
single-stranded DNA binding protein with HMG1 protein, implying that the rat
liver HMG1 protein becomes able both to destabilize a double helix of DNA and to 
stimulate homologous DNA polymerases only when rat liver cells enter a phase of
DNA synthesis, possibly after a specific modification.

PMID: 6460762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Cell Physiol Suppl. 1982;2:51-9.

Chromosomal proteins of mouse teratocarcinoma cells.

Tan KB, Huebner K, Croce CM.

We have analyzed chromosomal proteins extracted from murine
teratocarcinoma-derived stem cell lines (F9 and 12-1) and from their
differentiated derivatives (12-1a) because of the differential sensitivity to
DNase I digestion of these two cell types. The chromosomal DNA of stem cells is
more sensitive to DNase I digestion than that of differentiated cells. Stem cell 
core histones are more highly acetylated than their differentiated counterparts, 
and certain high-mobility group (HMG) proteins from stem cells (HMG 1 and HMG 2) 
are found in greater amounts than in the differentiated cells though others (HMG 
14 and HMG 17) occur in similar amounts. We have also identified a new HMG
protein (HMG 9) that is present in stem cells and is lost following
differentiation.

PMID: 6221027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Nov;78(11):6944-8.

Differential phosphorylation of nuclear nonhistone high mobility group proteins
HMG 14 and HMG 17 during the cell cycle.

Bhorjee JS.

The phosphorylation of the high-mobility group (HMG) proteins at different stages
of the cell cycle was studied in synchronized HeLa cells. HMG proteins were
extracted and analyzed by NaDodSO4/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Although
the molecular weight distribution of HMGs remains unchanged, their total amounts 
increase by as much as 20-25% in the G1 and S phases when compared with amounts
in G2. However, the most significant finding is that there is a 7-fold increase
of 32P incorporation into HMG 14 in the G2 phase compared with that in G1, and a 
2-fold increase of 32P incorporation into HMG 17 in early S phase relative to the
incorporation in the G1 and G2 stages. In contrast, HMG 1 and HMG 2 are not
phosphorylated. The clear demonstration of differential phosphorylation of HMG 14
and 17 at specific stages of the cell cycle warrants a serious consideration of
their role in tissue-specific maintenance of the altered chromatin structure
characteristic of potentially active or actively transcribed chromatin domains.

PMCID: PMC349169
PMID: 6458819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Cell Biol. 1981 Nov;91(2 Pt 1):488-96.

Comparative studies on microinjected high-mobility-group chromosomal proteins,
HMG1 and HMG2.

Wu L, Rechsteiner M, Kuehl L.

The nonhistone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2, were iodinated and introduced
into HeLa cells, bovine fibroblasts, or mouse 3T3 cells by erythrocyte-mediated
microinjection. Autoradiographic analysis of injected cells fixed with
glutaraldehyde consistently showed both molecules concentrated within nuclei.
Fixation with methanol, on the other hand, resulted in some leakage of the
microinjected proteins from the nuclei so that more autoradiographic grains
appeared over the cytoplasm or outside the cells. Both injected and endogenous
HMG1 and HMG2 partitioned unexpectedly upon fractionation of bovine fibroblasts, 
HeLa, or 3T3 cells, appearing in the cytoplasmic fractions. However, in calf
thymus, HMG1 and HMG2 molecules appeared in the 0.35 M NaCl extract of isolated
nuclei, as expected. These observations show that the binding of HMG1 and HMG2 to
chromatin differs among cell types or that other tissue-specific components can
influence their binding. Coinjection of [125I]HMG1 and [131I]HMG2 into HeLa cells
revealed that the two molecules display virtually equivalent distributions upon
cell fractionation, identical stability, identical intracellular distributions,
and equal rates of equilibration between nuclei. In addition, HMG1 and HMG2 did
not differ in their partitioning upon fractionation nor in their stability in
growing vs. nongrowing 3T3 cells. Thus, we have not detected any significant
differences in the intracellular behavior of HMG1 and HMG2 after microinjection
into human, bovine, or murine cells.

PMCID: PMC2111988
PMID: 6458621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Eur J Biochem. 1981 Nov;120(2):363-9.

Characterisation of a chromatin fraction bearing pulse-labelled RNA. 2.
Quantification of histones and high-mobility-group proteins.

Gabrielli F, Hancock R, Faber AJ.

The histone variants and high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins of a transcribing
fraction of chromatin, described in the preceding paper of this journal, have
been analysed qualitatively and quantitatively by a combination of
one-dimensional and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The stoichiometry of the
four core histones (all variants included) in this fraction is equimolar and is
not detectably different from that in the nontranscribing fraction or in total
chromatin. The molar ratio of histone H1 to the core histones is markedly lower, 
by approximately 72%, than that in the nontranscribing fraction. A minor histone 
variant identified as M1 (an H2A variant) is detected only in the transcribing
fraction, while variant H3.1 is found only in the non-transcribing fraction.
Proteins A24, HMG1 and HMG2 are essentially absent from the transcribing
fraction; HMG14 is found uniquely in this fraction, while HMG17 occurs at a
relatively lower level.

PMID: 6172276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1981 Oct 27;655(3):4213-1.

The modulating effect of isoproterenol on DNA replication and protein synthesis. 
Synthesis patterns of the HMG proteins from electrostatically sorted salivary
gland nuclei during the in vivo cell cycle.

Pipkin JL, Hinson WG, Hudson JL, Anson J, Pack LD.

Within 96 h after initial isoproterenol administration, DNA replication and cell 
cycling were activated, as reflected in the bimodal distribution of nuclear
fluorescence determined by flow-microfluorometric techniques. A group of
proteins, the cetyltrimethylammonium bromide extractable nuclear proteins
(CTAB-proteins), isolated form electrostatically sorted nuclei of rat salivary
glands, was shown by staining and autoradiography after two-dimensional
electrophoresis to undergo differential synthesis during various phases of the in
vivo cell cycle after isoproterenol administration. Stained chromatographs
revealed quantitative differences in protein synthesis. Gel autoradiography was a
more sensitive technique than staining for detecting nuclear protein synthesis
during cell cycling. As observed in the autoradiographs of the CTAB-proteins,
isoproterenol initiated two distinct periods of protein synthesis in the salivary
gland cell cycle: one during the 2C population G0/G1), and one during the 4C
population (G2/M). Protein synthesis after isoproterenol administration was much 
more dramatic in the 2C (isoproterenol) population, where five new spots were
seen. There was less radioactive incorporation in the 4C (isoproterenol)
population. Two spots 'a' and 'b' that demonstrate differential protein synthesis
in stained gel chromatographs and gel autoradiographs were shown to have
electrophoretic mobilities, molecular weights and amino acid compositions highly 
similar to those of HMG1 and HMG2, respectively. A positive correlation could
also be drawn between quantitative levels of 'a' and 'b' and their levels of
incorporation during cellular activity with HMG (high mobility group) proteins.
For example protein 'b' (HMG2) was consistently more abundant in proliferating
cell populations than in the quiescent ones. Autoradiographic patterns of the
CTAB-proteins indicated that proteins 'a' and 'b' were synthesized during the
G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle, as were the majority of CTAB-proteins.

PMID: 6456768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Oct;78(10):5988-92.

Loss of chromosomal high mobility group proteins HMG1 and HMG2 when mouse
neuroblastoma and Friend erythroleukemia cells become committed to
differentiation.

Seyedin SM, Pehrson JR, Cole RD.

Chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins HMG1 and HMG2 from mouse
neuroblastoma cells and Friend erythroleukemic cells were analyzed by acetic
acid/urea/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Compared to rapidly growing cells, 
levels of HMG1 and HMG2 were decreased in mouse neuroblastoma cells that had been
induced to differentiate by serum deprivation. This comparison revealed a
reciprocal relationship between these HMG proteins and H10, a histone known to be
in higher concentrations in nondividing cells. When cell growth was inhibited by 
means of density inhibition, however, HMG1 and -2 levels were not affected in
either HeLa or mouse neuroblastoma cells, even though H10 did not accumulate.
This observation establishes that HMG1 and -2 contents are not correlated with
mitotic rate per se. Treatment of mouse neuroblastoma by sodium butyrate, which
stops cell division without commitment to differentiation, had no effect on the
level of HMG1 and -2. However, the level was decreased by dibutyryl cyclic AMP
and dimethyl sulfoxide treatments, which, like serum deprivation, induced
irreversible morphological differentiation in the neuroblastoma cells. Moreover, 
induction of differentiation (hemoglobin synthesis) in Friend erythroleukemic
cells by dimethyl sulfoxide showed a decrease in the contents of HMG1 and -2.
These observations suggest that preferential loss of HMG1 and -2 in mouse
neuroblastoma and Friend erythroleukemia cells may be related to commitment of
these cells to differentiation.

PMCID: PMC348962
PMID: 6458811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Eur J Biochem. 1981 Oct;119(3):545-51.

Structural studies of the non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG-T and H6 from
trout testis.

Cary PD, Crane-Robinson C, Bradbury EM, Dixon GH.

Trout testis contains two proteins of the high mobility group H6 and HMG-T that
have been implicated in the structure of active chromatin. Protein H6 was studied
by high resolution proton NMR and by circular dichroism and showed no evidence of
secondary or tertiary structure formation in free solution. At low ionic strength
protein H6 binds to DNA by a weak interaction in the N-terminal region between
residues 10 and 35. Proteins H6 therefore behaves structurally like the
homologous calf-thymus high-mobility-group proteins HMG-14 and HMG-17. Salt
addition to solutions of protein HMG-T results in secondary and tertiary
structure formation that is accompanied by aggregation. Circular dichroism shows 
that the helical content of protein HMG-T (approximately equal to 9%) is very
much less than that of the homologous calf thymus proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2. At
low ionic strength protein HMG-T precipitates DNA due to the formation of large
scale aggregates that disperse only when the protein is released at approximately
equal to 0.35 M NaCl. The NMR spectrum of the aggregated state does not show the 
presence of a large number of free acidic residues, in contrast to spectra of
soluble complexes of HMG-1 and DNA at the same ionic strengths. It is concluded
that HMG-T lacks the highly acidic domain found in HMG-1 (and HMG-2) that remains
free from DNA under these conditions. It is concluded that the entire chain of
HMG-T binds to DNA. There are therefore major structural differences between
HMG-T and the homologous calf thymus proteins.

PMID: 6273163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 1981 Aug 25;256(16):8801-6.

The large high mobility group proteins of rainbow trout are localized
predominantly in the nucleus and nucleoli of a cultured trout cell line.

Bhullar BS, Hewitt J, Candido EP.

On the basis of immunofluorescence and biochemical studies, it has been suggested
that the concentration of nonhistone chromosomal protein high mobility group 1
may be higher in the cytoplasm than in the nucleus of mammalian cells (Bustin,
M., and Neihart, N. K. (1979) Cell 16, 181-189). In view of the possible
implications of this finding, we have examined the in situ location of trout
proteins HMG-T1 and HMG-T2, which are analogous to the mammalian proteins HMG-1
and HMG-2. Antibodies prepared against purified HMG-T2 were shown to react only
with HMG-T1 and HMG-T2, but not with any other chromosomal proteins from trout.
This has been established using a modified immunoautoradiographic techique
involving CNBr-activated paper transfers of proteins separated on regular sodium 
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. Using the indirect immunofluorescence
technique to examine the subcellular location of HMG-T (T1 and T2) proteins in a 
cultured cell line of rainbow trout, we find that these proteins are located
primarily in the nucleus of these cells. The fluorescence in the nucleolar
regions is even more intense than in the nonnucleolar regions. The cytoplasmic
regions show only a weak fluorescence which may be due to low levels of HMG-T
proteins in the cytoplasm, since preincubation of anti-HMG-T2 with purified
HMG-T2 abolishes the nuclear as well as cytoplasmic fluorescence.

PMID: 6455428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1981 Aug 14;101(3):893-7.

mRNA of chromosomal proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2 are polyadenylated.

Bustin M, Neihart NK, Fagan JB.

PMID: 6118142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biokhimiia. 1981 Aug;46(8):1396-410.

[Chromatin biogenesis in higher animal cells. Acceleration of catabolism and
transport of non-histone proteins into the nucleus under conditions of protein
synthesis inhibition].

[Article in Russian]

Boikov PIa, Sidorenko LI, Shevchenko NA, Todorov IN.

Repression by 95% of protein synthesis in rat liver cells after a single
injection of a sublethal dose of cycloheximide (0.3 mg per 100 g of body weight) 
accelerates the transport of loosely bound to chromatin NHB (sNHB), in
particular, that of proteins HMG 1 and HMG 2 from the cytoplasm into the nuclei. 
The activation of transport of sNHB and HMG proteins is correlated in time with
the increase in activity of chromatin transcription by RNA-polymerase II.
Simultaneously the rate of protein proteolysis in the nucleus is increased. The
half-life time of HMG proteins and some other sNHB in the nucleus is about 1-2
hrs and is close to that of the decrease in activity of chromatin transcription
by RNA polymerases I and II from the 1st to the 3rd hr following cycloheximide
injection. It was assumed that the proteins HMG and other sNHB with a short
life-time are responsible for a rapid positive control of chromatin activity. The
dynamics of nuclear chromatin activity during the first three hours of protein
synthesis inhibition depend on sNHB content in the nucleus, which, in its turn,
depends on the pool of the cytoplasm, correlation of sNHB transport from the
cytoplasm into the nuclei and on their proteolysis in the nucleus.

PMID: 6456021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biochemistry. 1981 Feb 17;20(4):1042-6.

Circular dichroism, thermal denaturation, and deoxyribonuclease I digestion
studies of nucleosomes highly enriched in high mobility group proteins HMG 1 and 
HMG 2.

Jackson JB, Rill RL.

Salt-soluble (S) nucleosomes that contain near equimolar high mobility group
nonhistone chromosomal proteins HMG 1 and HMG 2 and lack histone H1 were isolated
from mouse myeloma nuclei. Comparisons of the sedimentation, near-UV circular
dichroism, thermal denaturation, and pattern of DNase I digestion of S
nucleosomes with these properties of nucleosome cores or "typical" nucleosomes
containing H1 did not detect significant differences. These results indicate that
HMG 1 and 2 do not affect the conformation and stability of nucleosomes or
nucleosomal DNA and are consistent with the proposal that major functions of HMG 
1 and 2 are to replace H1 and maintain the (micro) solubility and accessibility
of local chromatin regions. In contrast to these similarities, the initial rate
of DNase I digestion of S nucleosomes was approximately 3 times that of chromatin
depleted in S nucleosomes. This is consistent with a relation of S nucleosomes to
transcription and suggests that subtle factors (not necessarily HMG 1 and 2)
determine DNase I susceptibility.

PMID: 6260136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1981 Jan 15;98(1):330-6.

Nucleosome cores containing H2B, H3, H4 and HMG2 are reconstituted.

Mita K, Zama M, Ichimura S, Hamana K.

PMID: 7213391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Biochemistry. 1980 Sep 16;19(19):4395-402.

Evidence for a quantitative tissue-specific distribution of high mobility group
chromosomal proteins.

Gordon JS, Rosenfeld BI, Kaufman R, Williams DL.

The quantitative tissue specificity of the high mobility group (HMG) chromosomal 
proteins was investigated. Perchloric acid (PCA) extracts of four different
chicken tissues and erythrocytes contained three proteins which comigrated on
NaDodSO4-polyacrylamide gels with the HMG's 1,2, and E from erythrocyte nuclei.
These three HMG's from embryonic skeletal muscle and erythrocytes also comigrated
on two-dimensional gels, employing an acid-urea system in the first dimension and
an NaDodSO4 system in the second. Interpretation of the two-dimensional gels
suggested that the two low molecular weight proteins of this triplet arose from
the HMG 2 band of the acid-urea gels. These have been designated HMG 2A and HMG
2B. Three proteins of similar molecular weights were also found in the PCA
extracts of calf thymus. They were arranged in a similar but not identical
pattern on two-dimensional gels. Thus, these three HMG's appear to be neither
tissue nor species specific. In addition, the 2.0% PCA extracts of all chicken
tissues examined contain a 38 000-dalton (38K) nuclear protein which coisolates
with the HMG's. These four proteins are found in different relative amounts in
each of the four chicken tissues and erythrocytes. They are found in the same
relative amounts, however, in embryonic skeletal muscles from different chicken
strains with widely different highly repetitive sequence content, suggesting that
none of these individual proteins is selectively localized to constitutive
heterochromatin. The quantitative tissue specificity of the HMG's and the 38K
protein, however, suggests that they may participate in regulating cell-specific 
gene expression.

PMID: 6447510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Biochemistry. 1980 Sep 2;19(18):4331-41.

Amino acid analysis and cell cycle dependent phosphorylation of an H1-like,
butyrate-enhanced protein (BEP; H1(0); IP25) from Chinese hamster cells.

D'Anna JA, Gurley LR, Becker RR, Barham SS, Tobey RA, Walters RA.

A fraction enriched in the butyrate-enhanced protein (BEP) has been isolated from
Chinese hamster (line CHO) cells by perchloric acid extraction and Bio-Rex 70
chromatography. Amino acid analyses indicate that the composition of BEP
resembles that of CHO H1; however, BEP contains 11% less alanine than H1, and, in
contrast to H1, BEP contains methionine. Treatment of BEP with cyanogen bromide
results in the cleavage of a small fragment of approximately 20 amino acids so
that the large fragment seen in sodium dodecyl sulfate--acrylamide gels has a
molecular weight of approximately 20 000. Radiolabeling and electrophoresis
indicate that BEP is phosphorylated in a cell cycle dependent fashion. In
G1-arrested cells, little or no phosphate is incorporated into BEP. As cells
progress through interphase, BEP becomes phosphorylated so that 12--35% of the
BEP molecules are phosphorylated at one to two sites by late interphase. During
mitosis, all BEP molecules become phosphorylated at approximately four sites per 
molecule (BEPM). Electrophoresis and the analysis of cell populations by electron
microscopy indicate that the appearance of BEPM is temporally correlated with the
mitotic phosphorylation of histone H1 (H1M) and with chromosomal condensation
during prophase, metaphase, and anaphase. During exit from mitosis, BEPM
undergoes dephosphorylation. The dephosphorylation of BEPM is temporally
correlated with dephosphorylation of H1M and with the unraveling of fully
condensed chromosomes near the anaphase--telophase transition. These data suggest
that (1) BEP is a specialized histone of the H1 class and (2) BEP is the species 
equivalent of calf lung histone H1(0) [Panyim, S., & Chalkley, R. (1969) Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 37, 1042], rat H1(0) [Medvedev, Zh. A., Medvedeva, M. N., &
Huschtscha, L. I. (1977) Gerontology (Basel) 23, 334], and IP25, a protein
enhanced in differentiated Friend erythroleukemia cells [Keppel, F., Allet, B., &
Eisen, H. (1977) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 74, 653]. The data also indicate
that putative HMG1 and HMG2 proteins do not undergo the extensive cell cycle
dependent phosphorylations measured for histone H1 and BEP.

PMID: 7191324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Nucleic Acids Res. 1979 Dec 11;7(7):1815-35.

Analysis of the high mobility group proteins associated with salt-soluble
nucleosomes.

Goodwin GH, Mathew CG, Wright CA, Venkov CD, Johns EW.

Two methods have recently been described for the isolation of monomer nucleosomes
enriched in transcribed sequences which depend on their solubility in 0.1 M NaCl 
(Levy, W.B. and Dixon (1978), Nucleic Acid Res., 5, 4155-4163) or solutions
containing divalent metal ions (Bloom, K.S. and Anderson, J.N. (1978), Cell, 15, 
141-150). Using these procedures the proteins associated with such nucleosomes
from rabbit thymus, calf liver and hen oviduct nuclei were isolated and analysed.
Increased amounts of proteins HMG14 AND HMG17 and small amounts of HMG1 and HMG2 
were found associated with the four core histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 in these
nucleosomes. HMG14 and HMG17 were found to be enriched 2 - 7 fold, suggesting an 
involvement of these two proteins with transcribed sequences. 0.1 M NaCl-soluble 
monomer nucleosomes prepared by the method of Levy and Dixon were analysed by
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and found to be composed of principally two
types of particle: 1. Core particles of 145 base pairs of DNA associated with the
four core histones only. 2. Nucleosomes with 160 base pairs of DNA associated
with the four core histones, increased amounts of HMG14 and 17, and no H1. Small 
amounts of HMG1 and HMG2 are also detected. These results suggest that HMG14 and 
HMG17 might be interacting with the 15 base pair linker DNA. A model is presented
for the structure of transcriptionally active chromatin.

PMCID: PMC342350
PMID: 537911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Biochem J. 1979 Sep 1;181(3):659-65.

The isolation and partial sequence of peptides produced by cyanogen bromide
cleavage of calf thymus non-histone chromosomal high-mobility-group protein 2.
Sequence homology with non-histone chromosomal high-mobility-group protein 1.

Walker JM, Gooderham K, Johns EW.

Peptides produced by CNBr cleavage of non-histone chromosomal protein HMG 2 (CNBr
peptides) were isolated and characterized, and their partial sequences were
determined. The present sequence data account for over half of the sequence of
the protein HMG (high-mobility-group) 2 molecule, and, together with previously
published results, provide interesting information on the charge distribution
within the molecule. Comparison of the CNBr-peptide-sequence data for protein HMG
2 with the previously published data on the CNBr peptides from protein HMG 1
reveals extensive sequence homology between the two proteins. Detailed evidence
for the amino acid-sequence data has been deposited as Supplementary Publication 
SUP 50095 (6 pages) at the British Library Lending Division, Boston Spa,
Wetherby, West Yorkshire LS23 7BQ, U.K., from whom copies may be obtained on the 
terms given in Biochem. J. (1978) 169, 5.

PMCID: PMC1161205
PMID: 518545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Biochemistry. 1979 Aug 21;18(17):3739-48.

Chromatin fractionation procedure that yields nucleosomes containing
near-stoichiometric amounts of high mobility group nonhistone chromosomal
proteins.

Jackson JB, Pollock JM Jr, Rill RL.

Initial results of an approach to the isolation of functionally active chromatin 
are described. Slight digestion of mouse myeloma nuclei at 0 degrees C with
micrococcal nuclease, followed by dialysis against near-physiological saline
solution containing 1 mM Mg2+, caused release of up to 17% of the nuclear DNA as 
soluble nucleoproteins. This soluble (S) fraction was relatively depleted in H1
histones and methylated DNA (5-methylcytosine) but highly enriched in RNA,
single-stranded DNA, and nonhistone chromosomal proteins, particularly two
species of the high mobility group identified as HMG 1 and HMG 2. The S fraction 
released most rapidly (6--8% of the total DNA) consisted mainly of mono- and
small oligonucleosomes. The mononucleosomes appeared normal in terms of
sedimentation behavior, DNA length, and content of histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4,
but lacked H1, and instead were associated with approximately stoichiometric
amounts of HMG 1 and HMG 2. Studies using isolated, fluorescence-labeled, total
mouse HMG proteins indicated that added HMG 1 and HMG 2 do not bind strongly to
S-fraction nucleoproteins but that two smaller HMG species (probably HMG 14 and
HMG 17) do bind preferentially to S-fraction mono- and dinucleosomes. These
results argue against artifactual redistribution of HMG 1 and HMG 2 during this
fractionation but suggest caution in interpreting the distribution of smaller HMG
proteins after digestion of chromatin. The potential relationship of this soluble
fraction to transcriptionally active chromatin is discussed.

PMID: 476083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Biol Chem. 1979 Aug 10;254(15):7276-81.

Synthesis of high mobility group proteins in regenerating rat liver.

Kuehl L.

Incorporation of [3H]lysine into the non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1, HMG2,
and HMG17 and into each of the five major classes of histones was measured in rat
liver at various times after partial hepatectomy. Histone synthesis was closely
coupled temporally to that of DNA, although a small amount of histone was shown
to be produced before DNA replication began. In contrast, the incorporation
curves for the high mobility group (HMG) proteins showed little correlation with 
that for DNA. At 4 h after partial hepatectomy, protein synthesis had virtually
ceased. Thereafter, the rates of synthesis of the HMG proteins rose steadily so
that by 12 h, well before the onset of DNA replication they had reached about
two-thirds of the maximum rates attained during the first cell division cycle.
Histones had only reached about one-sixth of their maximum rates at this time.
The lack of coupling betweeen the synthesis of the HMG proteins and DNA was
confirmed by experiments with inhibitors of DNA replication. Reduction of DNA
synthesis to less than 10% of the uninhibited rate had little or no effect on
incorporation into the HMG proteins, whereas, under similar conditions, the rate 
of synthesis of histones was reduced by more than 50%.

PMID: 457681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Nucleic Acids Res. 1979 Aug 10;6(11):3569-80.

Nonhistone proteins HMG1 and HMG2 unwind DNA double helix.

Javaherian K, Sadeghi M, Liu LF.

In a previous communication we have shown that both HMG1 and HMG2 nonhistone
proteins change the DNA helical structure and the binding of HMG1 and HMG2 to DNA
induces a net unwinding equivalent of DNA double helix (Javaherian, K., Liu, L.
F. and Wang, J. C. (1978) Science, 199, 1345-1346). Employing melting absorption 
technique, we now show that in the presence of salt HMG1 and HMG2 destabilize DNA
whereas in the absence of salt, they both stabilize DNA molecules. Consequently
the folded structure of HMG must play an important role in melting DNA.
Furthermore, by measuring topological winding number using competition unwinding 
experiments, we conclude that HMG1 has a higher affinity for a single-stranded
DNA relative to double-stranded DNA. These results together suggest that HMG1 and
HMG2 unwind DNA double helix by local denaturation of the DNA base pairs. The net
unwinding angles have been measured to be 22 degrees and 26 degrees per molecule 
of HMG1 and HMG2 respectively.

PMCID: PMC327957
PMID: 226939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Biol Chem. 1979 Jul 10;254(13):5569-72.

Preferential affinity of high molecular weight high mobility group non-histone
chromatin proteins for single-stranded DNA.

Isackson PJ, Fishback JL, Bidney DL, Reeck GR.

We have subjected proteins dissociated from chicken erythrocyte or calf thymus
chromatin by 0.35 M NaCl to sequential chromatography on columns containing
immobilized double-stranded DNA and single-stranded DNA. At 0.2 M NaCl, 1 mM Tris
. Cl (pH 7.5), the high molecular weight, high mobility group proteins (HMG-1,
HMG-2, and HMG-E), were not retained by double-stranded DNA columns, but were
retained by single-stranded DNA columns. Thus, in that solvent, those proteins
exhibit selective affinity for single-stranded DNA. This suggests that the
functions of the high molecular weight, high mobility group proteins might
involve destabilizing the DNA double helix by virtue of their preferential
affinity for single-stranded DNA.

PMID: 447665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1979 Apr 27;87(4):1243-51.

A comparison of the high mobility group non-histone chromatin protein HMG 2 in
chicken thymus and erythrocytes.

Mathew CG, Goodwin GH, Gooderham K, Walker JM, Johns EW.

PMID: 465037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 1979 Apr 25;254(8):2918-22.

Serological analysis of species specificity in the high mobility group
chromosomal proteins.

Romani M, Rodman TC, Vidali G, Bustin M.

The non-histone chromosomal protein of the high mobility group (HMG-1) present in
mouse liver was purified to homogeneity. Antibodies against this protein as well 
as pure HMG-1 derived from calf thymus and HMG-E purified from duck erythrocytes 
were elicited in rabbits. The interaction between the antibodies and the
immunogens was measured by passive hemoagglutination and by quantitative
microcomplement fixation. Quantitative microcomplement fixation assays revealed
that the immunological distance between HMG-1 from calf thymus and HMG-1 from
mouse liver and duck erythrocytes was 15. This corresponds to 3% sequence
differences. It was estimated that amino acid substitution occurred at about
seven positions in the polypeptide chain. Thus, HMG-1 proteins display remarkable
evolutionary conservation in their primary sequence, similar to that displayed by
histones H4 and H3, suggesting that their biological function is dependent on
stringent structural requirements. HMG-E protein is significantly different from 
both HMG-1 and HMG-2 derived from calf thymus. As such, it is a protein unique to
avian erythrocytes.

PMID: 85628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Biochem J. 1979 Apr 1;179(1):253-5.

The isolation, characterization and partial sequence of a peptide rich in
glutamic acid and aspartic acid (HGA-2 peptide) from calf thymus non-histone
chromosomal protein HMG 2. Comparison with a similar peptide (HGA-1 peptide) from
calf thymus non-histone chromosomal protein HMG 1.

Walker JM, Gooderham K, Johns EW.

A 41-residue peptide (HGA-2) containing a continuous sequence of 35 glutamic and 
aspartic residues was isolated from non-histone chromosomal protein HMG 2. This
highly acidic peptide is compared with a similar peptide (HGA-1) isolated from
non-histone chromosomal protein HMG 1.

PMCID: PMC1186617
PMID: 475759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Nucleic Acids Res. 1979 Jan;6(1):167-79.

Studies on the association of the high mobility group non-histone chromatin
proteins with isolated nucleosomes.

Mathew CG, Goodwin GH, Johns EW.

Nucleosomes have been isolated from rabbit thymus by sucrose gradient
centrifugation, and their high mobility group (HMG) protein content analysed by
electrophoresis on polyacrylamide gels. The results suggest that proteins HMG 14 
and HMG 17 are associated with the core particle of the nucleosome, and that
there are two or more sub-populations of both HMG 1 and HMG 2 molecules. One
sub-population appears to be fairly tightly bound to the nucleosome, while
another is rapidly released from the chromatin by digestion with micrococcal
nuclease. The latter fraction may participate in a higher order folding of the
nucleosomes.

PMCID: PMC327680
PMID: 424287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Exp Cell Res. 1978 Sep;115(2):420-3.

Immunochemical studies of high mobility group non-histone chromatin proteins HMG 
1 and HMG 2.

Smith BJ, Robertson D, Birbeck MS, Goodwin GH, Johns EW.

PMID: 357167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biochem J. 1978 Aug 1;173(2):497-505.

Studies on the tissue specificity of the high-mobility-group non-histone
chromosomal proteins from calf.

Rabbani A, Goodwin GH, Johns EW.

The high-mobility-group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins from calf thymus, 
liver, spleen and kidney were extracted, and fractionated by CM-Sephadex
chromatography and trichloroacetic acid precipitation. The isolated proteins HMG 
1, HMG 2 and HMG 17 from the tissues were compared by polyacrylamide-gel
electrophoresis, isoelectric focusing and amino acid analysis. The results show
that the three proteins are very similar in the tissues studied, implying a lack 
of tissue specificity.

PMCID: PMC1185803
PMID: 697733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Can J Biochem. 1978 Jun;56(6):480-91.

A study of the localization of high mobility group proteins in chromatin.

Levy WB, Dixon GH.

High mobility group (HMG) proteins from fetal calf thymus and mouse brain
chromatin were purified and compared electrophoretically. The four major HMG
proteins characteristic of fetal calf thymus chromatin (HMG's 1, 2, 14, and 17)
were also found to be present in mouse brain chromatin. Nuclei from these two
eucaryotic tissues were digested with DNase I and micrococcal nuclease and the
acid-soluble proteins solubilized by the two nucleases in both tissues were
analyzed on starch gels. Limited digestion of fetal calf thymus nuclei with DNase
I led to the solubilization of a substantial fraction of proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2
together with smaller amounts of H1. In addition, limited digestion with
micrococcal nuclease released approximately 70% of HMG's 1 and 2 and variable
amount of H1 into the soluble fraction. The observation that HMG proteins 1 and 2
are selectively solubilized under conditions in which active genes have been
shown to be preferentially digested in various other cell types suggests their
selective association with chromatin regions which are transcriptionally
competent.

PMID: 667694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Science. 1978 Mar 24;199(4335):1345-6.

Nonhistone proteins HMG1 and HMG2 change the DNA helical structure.

Javaherian K, Liu JF, Wang JC.

Two chromatin nonhistone proteins (from calf thymus) of the high mobility group, 
HMG1 and HMG2, reduce the linking number (topological winding number) of a
circular DNA if the covalent closure of the DNA is carried out in their presence.
This indicates that these proteins can either unwind the double helix, or induce 
a supercoiling of the DNA.

PMID: 628842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 1978 Mar 10;253(5):1694-9.

Immunological relatedness of high mobility group chromosomal proteins from calf
thymus.

Bustin M, Hopkins RB, Isenberg I.

The non-histone proteins HMG-1, HMG-2, HMG-3, HMB-8, HMG-14, and HMG-17 (Goodwin,
G. H., SANDERS, C., and Johns, E. W. (1973) Eur. J. Biochem. 38, 14) were
purified from calf thymus. The apparent molecular weights on polyacrylamide gels 
run in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate of the high mobility group (HMB)
proteins were determined. Those for HBG-1 and HMG-2 agreed with the molecular
weights determined by sedimentation; that for HMG-17 was anomalously high.
Antibodies against HMG-1 were elicited in rabbits. The interaction between HMG-1 
and anti-HBG-1 was measured by quantitative precipitation and by the
microcomplement fixation technique. Quantitative microcomplement fixation assays 
revealed that the indices of dissimilarity between HMG-1 and HMG-2, HMG-3, HMG-8,
HMG-14, and HMG-17 were 2.0, 1.0, 3.8, 10.0, and 6.1, respectively. These
correspond to 6%, 0%, 12%, 20%, and 16% sequence difference between HMG-1 and the
other five HMG proteins, although the immunological distance between HMG-1 and
HMG-14 may be too large to allow a good correlation between the sequence and the 
immunological reaction. Antibodies to HMB-1 bind to chromatin purified from calf 
thymus. Therefore, we suggest that the in situ organization of HMG proteins in
chromatin and chromosomes may be studied by serological techniques.

PMID: 75209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Eur J Biochem. 1977 Sep;78(2):497-502.

Interaction of non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 with DNA.

Yu SS, Li HJ, Goodwin GH, Johns EW.

Interaction between non-histone protein HMG1 or HMG2 and DNA has been studied by 
using thermal denaturation and circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. We have made
the following observations. 1. The binding of each of these two proteins to DNA
stabilizes the latter, as shown by an increase in melting temperature of 20
degrees C (from 45 degrees C to about 65 degrees C). 2. There are 6.0 amino
acids/nucleotide in HMG1-bound DNA and 5.0 in HMGI-bound DNA which suggests that 
each HMB1 moleculae would cover about 20 base pairs of DNA and each HMG2 molecule
would cover about 25 base pairs. 3. The alpha-helical content of these two
non-histone proteins in the complexes, estimated from the CD value at 220 nm, is 
about one third to one half that of total proteins in calf thymus chromatin. 4.
DNA conformation is distorted only slightly by the binding of protein HMG1 or
HMG2. 5. Neither the melting nor the CD properties of HMG1-DNA or HMG2-DNA
complexes differ substantially whether they are prepared by NaCl-gradient
dialysis in urea or by direct mixing of protein and DNA at 0.15 M NaCl, followed 
by dialysis against the same buffer i.e. 0.25 mM EDTA (pH 8.0).

PMID: 913411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1977 May 27;492(1):20-8.

The interaction of nonhistone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 with
subfractions of H1 histone immobilized on agarose.

Yu SH, Spring TG.

Chromatographically isolated subfractions of calf thymus H1 histone have been
covalently coupled to agarose beads and tested for their ability to form
complexes with the non-histone proteins HMG1 and HMG2 (High Mobility Group
proteins, Walker, J.M., Goodwin, G.H. and Johns, E.W. (1976) Eur. J. Biochem. 62,
461-469). When a mixture of HMG1 and HMG2 is passed through a column of H1
histone-agarose, the HMG2 does not bind. HMG1 does bind and can be eluted from
the column with NaCl in the range of 0.05 M--0.15 M. The NaCl concentration
required to elute HMG1 from each of the three H1 histone subfraction coulmns is
different, suggesting that HMG1 has a different binding affinity for the three H1
histone subfractions.

PMID: 861248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Eur J Biochem. 1977 Mar 15;74(1):53-60.

The purification, characterization and partial sequence determination of a trout 
testis non-histone protein, HMG-T.

Watson DC, Peters EH, Dixon GH.

A specific non-histone chromatin-associated protein, having a high content of
both acidic and basic amino acids has been isolated from the chromatin of rainbow
trout (Salmo gairdnerii) testis cells. The protein has been prepared by the
extraction of chromatin with 0.35 M sodium chloride and purified by
chromatography on carboxymethyl-cellulose with a gradient of lithium chloride at 
pH 9.0. The amino acid sequence of the first 29 residues of the amino-terminal
region has been determined using an automatic protein sequencer. The primary
structure of this protein differs from that of any of the histones yet sequenced 
and, therefore, cannot be a degradation produce of any of them. Moreover, the
N-terminal amino acid sequence shows considerable similarity to the HMG-1 and
HMG-2 chromosomal proteins described by Goodwin et al. [Eur. J. Biochem. 38,
14-19 (1973)] whose-N-terminal sequences were also determined in this laboratory.

PMID: 852459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1977;9(3):220-3.

A comparison of the amino-terminal sequences of two calf-thymus chromatin
non-histone proteins.

Walker JM, Goodwin GH, Johns EW, Wietzes P, Gaastra W.

The N-terminal sequences of two calf-thymus non-histone chromosomal proteins,
HMG-1 and HMG-2, are compared. Both N-terminal sequences are basic, and differ at
only one position. This contrasts with the C-terminal portion of HMG-1 which we
have previously shown to be high in acidic residues. There is no obvious sequence
homology with any of the known sequences of the histones.

PMID: 844940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Biochemistry. 1976 Sep 21;15(19):4242-7.

Interactions between the subfractons of calf thymus H1 and nonhistone chromosomal
proteins HMG1 and HMG2.

Smerdon MJ, Isenberg I.

The nonhistone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2, interact with the various
subfractions of calf thymus H1 with a high degree of specificity. Subfractions 1b
and 2 interact very strongly with HMG1 to form heterodimers. In contrast,
subfractions 3a and 3b interact much more weakly. HMG2 interacts with 3a and 3b
but shows no detectable complexing with 1a and 2.

PMID: 963033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Biochemistry. 1976 Apr 20;15(8):1645-9.

Physical studies of the nonhistone chromosomal proteins HMG-U and HMG-2.

Baker C, Isenberg I, Goodwin GH, Johns EW.

The nonhistone chromosomal proteins, HMG-1 and HMG-2, have a folded conformation,
with a high alpha-helical content, over a wide pH range. At high and low pH
values, the molecules unfold. Both molecules contain cysteine and tryptophan. The
tryptophans appear to be buried in the folded form. HMG-1 shows aggregation at pH
5.7, as does HMG-2 at pH 9.0. The folded form is insensitive to high
concentrations of salt, suggesting that charge-charge interaction plays no role
in stabilizing the tertiary structure.

PMID: 5107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


