
1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 15;413:13-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.05.038. Epub 
2015 Jun 23.

Expression, regulation and function of Hmgn3 during decidualization in mice.

Li DD(1), Guo CH(1), Yue L(2), Duan CC(3), Yang ZQ(1), Cao H(1), Guo B(4), Yue
ZP(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, PR China.
(2)College of Clinical Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, PR China.
(3)Institute of Agro-food Technology, Jilin Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Changchun, PR China. (4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun, PR China. Electronic address: guobin79@jlu.edu.cn.

Although Hmgn3 is involved in the regulation of development and cellular
differentiation, its physiological roles on decidualization are still unknown.
Here we showed that Hmgn3 was highly expressed in the decidua and decidualizing
stromal cells. Overexpression of Hmgn3 variants, Hmgn3a or Hmgn3b, enhanced the
expression of decidualization markers Prl8a2 and Prl3c1, whereas inhibition of
Hmgn3 reduced their expression. Hmgn3 could mediate the effects of Hoxa10 and
cAMP on the expression of Prl8a2 and Prl3c1. Further study found that Hmgn3
directed the process of decidualization through influencing the expression of
Hand2. Progesterone could induce the expression of Hmgn3 in the ovariectomized
mouse uterus, uterine epithelial cells and stromal cells. Knockdown of Hoxa10
with siRNA alleviated the induction of progesterone and cAMP on Hmgn3 expression.
Simultaneously, siRNA-mediated down-regulation of Hmgn3 in the uterine stromal
cells could attenuate the effects of progesterone, cAMP and Hoxa10 on the
expression of Hand2. Collectively, Hmgn3 may play an important role during mouse 
decidualization.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26112184  [PubMed - in process]


2. Front Behav Neurosci. 2014 Mar 18;8:87. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00087.
eCollection 2014.

Environmental manipulations generate bidirectional shifts in both behavior and
gene regulation in a crossbred mouse model of extremes in trait anxiety.

Chekmareva NY(1), Sotnikov SV(1), Diepold RP(2), Naik RR(2), Landgraf R(2),
Czibere L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Behavioral Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute of
Psychiatry Munich, Germany ; Department of Normal Physiology, Sechenov First
Moscow State Medical University Moscow, Russia. (2)Department of Behavioral
Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry Munich, Germany.

Although gene-environment interactions are known to significantly influence
psychopathology-related disease states, only few animal models cover both the
genetic background and environmental manipulations. Therefore, we have taken
advantage of the bidirectionally inbred high (HAB) and low (LAB) anxiety-related 
behavior mouse lines to generate HAB × LAB F1 hybrids that intrinsically carry
both lines' genetic characteristics, and subsequently raised them in three
different environments-standard, enriched (EE) and chronic mild stress (CMS).
Assessing genetic correlates of trait anxiety, we focused on two genes already
known to play a role in HAB vs. LAB mice, corticotropin releasing hormone
receptor type 1 (Crhr1) and high mobility group nucleosomal binding domain 3
(Hmgn3). While EE F1 mice showed decreased anxiety-related and increased
explorative behaviors compared to controls, CMS sparked effects in the opposite
direction. However, environmental treatments affected the expression of the two
genes in distinct ways. Thus, while expression ratios of Hmgn3 between the HAB-
and LAB-specific alleles remained equal, total expression resembled the one
observed in HAB vs. LAB mice, i.e., decreased after EE and increased after CMS
treatment. On the other hand, while total expression of Crhr1 remained unchanged 
between the groups, the relative expression of HAB- and LAB-specific alleles
showed a clear effect following the environmental modifications. Thus, the
environmentally driven bidirectional shift of trait anxiety in this F1 model
strongly correlated with Hmgn3 expression, irrespective of allele-specific
expression patterns that retained the proportions of basic differential HAB vs.
LAB expression, making this gene a match for environment-induced modifications.
An involvement of Crhr1 in the bidirectional behavioral shift could, however,
rather be due to different effects of the HAB- and LAB-specific alleles described
here. Both candidate genes therefore deserve attention in the complex regulation 
of anxiety-related phenotypes including environment-mediated effects.

PMCID: PMC3957683
PMID: 24672450  [PubMed]


3. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Dec;73(12):2130-6. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-203114. Epub
2013 Aug 29.

A meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies novel variants
associated with osteoarthritis of the hip.

Evangelou E(1), Kerkhof HJ(2), Styrkarsdottir U(3), Ntzani EE(4), Bos SD(5), Esko
T(6), Evans DS(7), Metrustry S(8), Panoutsopoulou K(9), Ramos YF(10),
Thorleifsson G(3), Tsilidis KK(4); arcOGEN Consortium, Arden N(11), Aslam N(12), 
Bellamy N(13), Birrell F(14), Blanco FJ(15), Carr A(16), Chapman K(16),
Day-Williams AG(9), Deloukas P(9), Doherty M(17), Engström G(18), Helgadottir
HT(3), Hofman A(19), Ingvarsson T(20), Jonsson H(21), Keis A(22), Keurentjes
JC(23), Kloppenburg M(24), Lind PA(25), McCaskie A(26), Martin NG(27), Milani
L(28), Montgomery GW(29), Nelissen RG(23), Nevitt MC(30), Nilsson PM(18), Ollier 
WE(31), Parimi N(7), Rai A(32), Ralston SH(33), Reed MR(34), Riancho JA(35),
Rivadeneira F(36), Rodriguez-Fontenla C(37), Southam L(9), Thorsteinsdottir
U(38), Tsezou A(39), Wallis GA(40), Wilkinson JM(41), Gonzalez A(37), Lane
NE(42), Lohmander LS(43), Loughlin J(26), Metspalu A(6), Uitterlinden AG(36),
Jonsdottir I(44), Stefansson K(44), Slagboom PE(5), Zeggini E(9), Meulenbelt
I(5), Ioannidis JP(45), Spector TD(8), van Meurs JB(2), Valdes AM(46).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina Medical School,
Ioannina, Greece Department of Twin Research & Genetic Epidemiology, King's
College London, London, UK. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Population Genetics, deCODE 
Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. (4)Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology,
University of Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina, Greece. (5)Department of
Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Ageing, The Netherlands. (6)Estonian Genome
Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. (7)California Pacific Medical
Center Research Institute, San Francisco, USA. (8)Department of Twin Research &
Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London, London, UK. (9)Department of Human
Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK. (10)Department of
Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (11)NIHR Biomedical Research Unit and ARUK Centre of excellence for 
Sport, Exercise and Osteoarthritis, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK MRC
Epidemiology Resource Centre, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(12)Worcestershire Royal Hospital, Worcestershire Acute Hospitals NHS Trust,
Worcester, UK. (13)Centre of National Research on Disability and Rehabilitation
Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. (14)Musculoskeletal 
Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, UK Wansbeck General Hospital, Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation
Trust, Ashington, UK. (15)Rheumatology Division, Instituto de Investigación
Biomédica-Hospital Universitario A Coruña, A Corunna, Spain. (16)NIHR Biomedical 
Research Unit and ARUK Centre of excellence for Sport, Exercise and
Osteoarthritis, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (17)Department of Academic
Rheumatology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. (18)Department of
Clinical Sciences Malmo, Lund University, Malmo, Sweden. (19)Department of
Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (20)Department 
of Orthopedic Surgery, Akureyri Hospital, Akureyri, Iceland School of Health
Sciences, University of Akureyri, Akureyri, Iceland. (21)Department of Medicine, 
The National University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland Faculty of
Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. (22)Department of Public
Health, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia Orthopedic Surgeons, Elva Hospital,
Elva, Estonia. (23)Department of Orthopedics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (24)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (25)Department of Quantitative Genetics,
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(26)Musculoskeletal Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (27)Department of Genetic Epidemiology, QIMR
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia. (28)Estonian Genome
Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. (29)Department of Molecular
Epidemiology, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(30)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. (31)Centre for Integrated Genomic
Medical Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (32)Worcestershire
Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, Worcester, UK. (33)Institute of Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. (34)Wansbeck General Hospital, 
Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Ashington, UK. (35)Department of
Internal Medicine, Hospital U.M. Valdecilla-IFIMAV, University of Cantabria,
Santander, Spain. (36)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (37)Laboratorio Investigacion 10 and Rheumatology
Unit, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Hospital Clinico Universitario de
Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (38)Department of Population Genetics,
deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland Department of Medicine, The National
University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. (39)Department of Biology,
University of Thessaly, Medical School, Larissa, Greece. (40)Wellcome Trust
Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(41)Department of Human Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(42)Department of Medicine, University of California at Davis, Sacramento, USA.
(43)Research Unit for Musculoskeletal Function and Physiotherapy, and Department 
of Orthopedics and Traumatology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark 
Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(44)Department of Population Genetics, deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland
Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. (45)Department of
Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina, Greece
Stanford Prevention Research Center, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, USA. (46)Department of Twin Research & Genetic Epidemiology, King's
College London, London, UK Department of Academic Rheumatology, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of arthritis with a clear
genetic component. To identify novel loci associated with hip OA we performed a
meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on European subjects.
METHODS: We performed a two-stage meta-analysis on more than 78,000 participants.
In stage 1, we synthesised data from eight GWAS whereas data from 10 centres were
used for 'in silico' or 'de novo' replication. Besides the main analysis, a
stratified by sex analysis was performed to detect possible sex-specific signals.
Meta-analysis was performed using inverse-variance fixed effects models. A random
effects approach was also used.
RESULTS: We accumulated 11,277 cases of radiographic and symptomatic hip OA. We
prioritised eight single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) for follow-up in the
discovery stage (4349 OA cases); five from the combined analysis, two male
specific and one female specific. One locus, at 20q13, represented by rs6094710
(minor allele frequency (MAF) 4%) near the NCOA3 (nuclear receptor coactivator 3)
gene, reached genome-wide significance level with p=7.9×10(-9) and OR=1.28 (95%
CI 1.18 to 1.39) in the combined analysis of discovery (p=5.6×10(-8)) and
follow-up studies (p=7.3×10(-4)). We showed that this gene is expressed in
articular cartilage and its expression was significantly reduced in OA-affected
cartilage. Moreover, two loci remained suggestive associated; rs5009270 at 7q31
(MAF 30%, p=9.9×10(-7), OR=1.10) and rs3757837 at 7p13 (MAF 6%, p=2.2×10(-6),
OR=1.27 in male specific analysis).
CONCLUSIONS: Novel genetic loci for hip OA were found in this meta-analysis of
GWAS.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4251181
PMID: 23989986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 7;288(23):16690-703. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.463315. Epub
2013 Apr 24.

High mobility group N proteins modulate the fidelity of the cellular
transcriptional profile in a tissue- and variant-specific manner.

Kugler JE(1), Horsch M, Huang D, Furusawa T, Rochman M, Garrett L, Becker L,
Bohla A, Hölter SM, Prehn C, Rathkolb B, Racz I, Aguilar-Pimentel JA, Adler T,
Adamski J, Beckers J, Busch DH, Eickelberg O, Klopstock T, Ollert M, Stöger T,
Wolf E, Wurst W, Yildirim AÖ, Zimmer A, Gailus-Durner V, Fuchs H, Hrabe de
Angelis M, Garfinkel B, Orly J, Ovcharenko I, Bustin M.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Section, Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, NCI,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The nuclei of most vertebrate cells contain members of the high mobility group N 
(HMGN) protein family, which bind specifically to nucleosome core particles and
affect chromatin structure and function, including transcription. Here, we study 
the biological role of this protein family by systematic analysis of phenotypes
and tissue transcription profiles in mice lacking functional HMGN variants.
Phenotypic analysis of Hmgn1(tm1/tm1), Hmgn3(tm1/tm1), and Hmgn5(tm1/tm1) mice
and their wild type littermates with a battery of standardized tests uncovered
variant-specific abnormalities. Gene expression analysis of four different
tissues in each of the Hmgn(tm1/tm1) lines reveals very little overlap between
genes affected by specific variants in different tissues. Pathway analysis
reveals that loss of an HMGN variant subtly affects expression of numerous genes 
in specific biological processes. We conclude that within the biological
framework of an entire organism, HMGNs modulate the fidelity of the cellular
transcriptional profile in a tissue- and HMGN variant-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC3675603
PMID: 23620591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Front Cell Neurosci. 2011 Dec 27;5:28. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2011.00028. eCollection
2011.

Identification of Arx targets unveils new candidates for controlling cortical
interneuron migration and differentiation.

Friocourt G(1), Parnavelas JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Histocompatibility Inserm U613, Brest,
France.

Mutations in the homeobox transcription factor ARX have been found to be
responsible for a wide spectrum of disorders extending from phenotypes with
severe neuronal migration defects, such as lissencephaly, to mild forms of
intellectual disabilities without apparent brain abnormalities, but with
associated features of dystonia and epilepsy. Arx expression is mainly restricted
to populations of GABA-containing neurons. Studies of the effects of ARX loss of 
function, either in humans or mutant mice, revealed varying defects, suggesting
multiple roles of this gene in brain patterning, neuronal proliferation and
migration, cell maturation and differentiation, as well as axonal outgrowth and
connectivity. However, to date, little is known about how Arx functions as a
transcription factor or which genes it binds and regulates. Recently, we combined
chromatin immunoprecipitation and mRNA expression with microarray analysis and
identified approximately 1000 gene promoters bound by Arx in transfected
neuroblastoma N2a cells and mouse embryonic brain. To narrow the analysis of Arx 
targets to those most likely to control cortical interneuron migration and/or
differentiation, we compare here our data to previously published studies
searching for genes enriched or down-regulated in cortical interneurons between
E13.5 and E15.5. We thus identified 14 Arx-target genes enriched (Cxcr7, Meis1,
Ppap2a, Slc 12a5, Ets2, Phlda1, Egr1, Igf1, Lmo3, Sema6, Lgi1, Alk, Tgfb3, and
Napb) and 5 genes specifically down-regulated (Hmgn3, Lmo1, Ebf3, Rasgef1b, and
Slit2) in cortical migrating neurons. In this review, we present these genes and 
discuss how their possible regulation by Arx may lead to the dysfunction of
GABAergic neurons, resulting in mental retardation and epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC3280452
PMID: 22355284  [PubMed]


6. Biochem J. 2012 Mar 15;442(3):495-505. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111502.

The chromatin-binding protein HMGN3 stimulates histone acetylation and
transcription across the Glyt1 gene.

Barkess G(1), Postnikov Y, Campos CD, Mishra S, Mohan G, Verma S, Bustin M, West 
KL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life
Sciences, University of Glasgow, UK.

HMGNs are nucleosome-binding proteins that alter the pattern of histone
modifications and modulate the binding of linker histones to chromatin. The HMGN3
family member exists as two splice forms, HMGN3a which is full-length and HMGN3b 
which lacks the C-terminal RD (regulatory domain). In the present study, we have 
used the Glyt1 (glycine transporter 1) gene as a model system to investigate
where HMGN proteins are bound across the locus in vivo, and to study how the two 
HMGN3 splice variants affect histone modifications and gene expression. We
demonstrate that HMGN1, HMGN2, HMGN3a and HMGN3b are bound across the Glyt1 gene 
locus and surrounding regions, and are not enriched more highly at the promoter
or putative enhancer. We conclude that the peaks of H3K4me3 (trimethylated Lys(4)
of histone H3) and H3K9ac (acetylated Lys(9) of histone H3) at the active Glyt1a 
promoter do not play a major role in recruiting HMGN proteins. HMGN3a/b binding
leads to increased H3K14 (Lys(14) of histone H3) acetylation and stimulates
Glyt1a expression, but does not alter the levels of H3K4me3 or H3K9ac enrichment.
Acetylation assays show that HMGN3a stimulates the ability of PCAF [p300/CREB
(cAMP-response-element-binding protein)-binding protein-associated factor] to
acetylate nucleosomal H3 in vitro, whereas HMGN3b does not. We propose a model
where HMGN3a/b-stimulated H3K14 acetylation across the bodies of large genes such
as Glyt1 can lead to more efficient transcription elongation and increased mRNA
production.

PMCID: PMC3713072
PMID: 22150271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Hum Genet. 2012 Mar;131(3):463-9. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1093-7. Epub 2011 Sep
25.

Genome-wide association study identifies HMGN3 locus for spine bone size
variation in Chinese.

Lei SF(1), Shen H, Yang TL, Guo Y, Dong SS, Xu XH, Deng FY, Tian Q, Liu YJ, Liu
YZ, Li J, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Statistical Genetics and the Key Laboratory of
Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of Ministry of Education, College of 
Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, Hunan, People's Republic
of China. lei@hunnu.edu.cn

Bone size (BS) is one of the major risk factors for osteoporotic fractures. BS
variation is genetically determined to a substantial degree with heritability
over 50%, but specific genes underlying variation of BS are still largely
unknown. To identify specific genes for BS in Chinese, initial genome-wide
association scan (GWAS) study and follow-up replication study were performed. In 
initial GWAS study, a group of 12 contiguous single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP)s, which span a region of ~25 kb and locate at the upstream of HMGN3 gene
(high-mobility group nucleosomal binding domain 3), achieved moderate association
signals for spine BS, with P values ranging from 6.2E-05 to 1.8E-06. In the
follow-up replication study, eight of the 12 SNPs were detected suggestive
replicate associations with BS in 1,728 unrelated female Caucasians, which have
well-known differences from Chinese in ethnic genetic background. The SNPs in the
region of HMGN3 gene formed a tightly combined haplotype block in both Chinese
and Caucasians. The results suggest that the genomic region containing HMGN3 gene
may be associated with spine BS in Chinese.

PMCID: PMC4450081
PMID: 21947420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23604. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023604. Epub 2011 Aug 29.

Profiling trait anxiety: transcriptome analysis reveals cathepsin B (Ctsb) as a
novel candidate gene for emotionality in mice.

Czibere L(1), Baur LA, Wittmann A, Gemmeke K, Steiner A, Weber P, Pütz B, Ahmad
N, Bunck M, Graf C, Widner R, Kühne C, Panhuysen M, Hambsch B, Rieder G,
Reinheckel T, Peters C, Holsboer F, Landgraf R, Deussing JM.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. czibere@mpipsykl.mpg.de

Behavioral endophenotypes are determined by a multitude of counteracting but
precisely balanced molecular and physiological mechanisms. In this study, we aim 
to identify potential novel molecular targets that contribute to the multigenic
trait "anxiety". We used microarrays to investigate the gene expression profiles 
of different brain regions within the limbic system of mice which were
selectively bred for either high (HAB) or low (LAB) anxiety-related behavior, and
also show signs of comorbid depression-like behavior. We identified and confirmed
sex-independent differences in the basal expression of 13 candidate genes, using 
tissue from the entire brain, including coronin 7 (Coro7), cathepsin B (Ctsb),
muscleblind-like 1 (Mbnl1), metallothionein 1 (Mt1), solute carrier family 25
member 17 (Slc25a17), tribbles homolog 2 (Trib2), zinc finger protein 672
(Zfp672), syntaxin 3 (Stx3), ATP-binding cassette, sub-family A member 2 (Abca2),
ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 5 (Enpp5), high mobility group
nucleosomal binding domain 3 (Hmgn3) and pyruvate dehydrogenase beta (Pdhb).
Additionally, we confirmed brain region-specific differences in the expression of
synaptotagmin 4 (Syt4).Our identification of about 90 polymorphisms in Ctsb
suggested that this gene might play a critical role in shaping our mouse model's 
behavioral endophenotypes. Indeed, the assessment of anxiety-related and
depression-like behaviors of Ctsb knock-out mice revealed an increase in
depression-like behavior in females. Altogether, our results suggest that Ctsb
has significant effects on emotionality, irrespective of the tested mouse strain,
making it a promising target for future pharmacotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3163650
PMID: 21897848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Cancer. 2010 Jun 21;1:38-50.

Undetectable and Decreased Expression of KIAA1949 (Phostensin) Encoded on
Chromosome 6p21.33 in Human Breast Cancers Revealed by Transcriptome Analysis.

Su YA(1), Yang J, Tao L, Nguyen H, He P.

Author information: 
(1)1. GenProMarkers Inc., Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA;

Cytogenetic aberration and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) are documented on
chromosome 6 in many cancers and the introduction of a neo-tagged chromosome 6
into breast cancer cell lines mediates suppression of tumorigenicity. In this
study, we described the identification of KIAA1949 (phostensin) as a putative
tumor suppressor gene. Our microarray analysis screened 25,985 cDNAs between a
tumorigenic and metastatic breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 and the chromosome 
6-mediated suppressed, non-tumorigenic and non-metastatic derivative cell line
MDA/H6, resulting in the identification of 651 differentially expressed genes.
Using customized microarrays containing these 651 cDNAs and 117 controls, we
identified 200 frequently dysregulated genes in 10 breast cancer cell lines and 5
tumor tissues using MDA/H6 as reference. Our bioinformatics analysis revealed
that chromosome 6 encodes 25 of these 200 genes, with 4 downregulation and 21
upergulation. Northern analysis validated microarray results and was used to
detect the size and number of RNA species of 2 downregulated (KIAA1949, PTK7) and
2 upregulated (SFRS3, HMGN3) genes in the cell lines. Particularly, the KIAA1949 
gene at 6p21.33, a band region with the frequent cytogenetic aberration and LOH
encodes 4 poly(A)-RNA species (4.6-, 4-, 3- and 1.5-kb) in multiple normal and
breast cancer samples. Microarray analysis revealed KIAA1949 downregulation in
86.7% (n=15) of breast cancer cell lines and tumor tissues. Northern analysis
demonstrated undetectable and decreased expression of KIAA1949 in 100% (n=10) of 
breast cancer cell lines. Taken together, these results strongly suggest KIAA1949
is a novel candidate breast cancer suppressor gene.

PMCID: PMC2931353
PMID: 20842223  [PubMed]


10. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;630:33-47. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-629-0_3.

Transcriptome profiling of host-microbe interactions by differential display
RT-PCR.

Fook LW(1), Chow VT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, Singapore.

In recent years, DNA microarray has become increasingly popular as a tool to
investigate global expression patterns compared to differential display RT-PCR.
Although differential display RT-PCR can be labour-intensive, it has its own
merits over those of DNA microarray. While the latter usually consists of a
well-defined set of species-specific genes, differential display RT-PCR allows
the investigation of host-microbe interactions without bias towards any mRNA
transcripts. This means that the regulated transcript expression of both host and
pathogen can be analysed simultaneously. In addition, novel transcripts and
alternate splicing variants pertaining to the infection can also be discovered.
We have investigated the response of rhabdomyosarcoma cells to infection with a
neurovirulent strain of enterovirus 71 (EV71) at different time-points during the
infection process compared with uninfected cells. Using differential display
RT-PCR, we identified mRNAs that were up- or down-regulated. Less than half of
the clones match known genes including those involved in mediating the
cytoskeleton, cell cycle, cell death, protein translational machinery and
cellular transport. The rest of the clones do not match any known genes, of which
several are novel genes. Noteworthy is the discovery of an alternate splicing
form of TRIP7, which is down-regulated during EV71 infection. The differential
display technique has potentially wide applicability to elucidate the gene
expression or transcriptomic profiles of host-microbe interactions, which can
provide a better understanding of microbial pathogenesis.

PMID: 20300989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Jan 1;109(1):49-57. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22377.

The nucleosome binding protein HMGN3 is expressed in pancreatic alpha-cells and
affects plasma glucagon levels in mice.

Kurahashi T(1), Furusawa T, Ueda T, Bustin M.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Section, Laboratory of Metabolism, Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Glucose homeostasis requires the coordinated actions of various organs and is
critically dependent on the proper functioning of the various cell types present 
in the pancreatic Langerhans islets. Here we report that chromatin architectural 
protein HMGN3 is highly expressed in all pancreatic endocrine islet cells, and
that Hmgn3-/- mice which have a mild diabetic phenotype, have reduced glucagon
levels in their blood. To elucidate the mechanism leading to altered glucagon
secretion of Hmgn3-/- mice, we tested whether HMGN3 affect glucagon synthesis and
secretion in alphaTC1-9 cells, a glucagon secreting cell line that is used to
study pancreatic alpha-cell function. We find that in these cells deletion of
either HMGN3 or other HMGN variants, does not significantly affect glucagon gene 
expression or glucagon secretion. Our studies demonstrate a link between HMGN3
and glucagon blood levels that is not directly dependent of the function of
pancreatic alpha-cells.

PMCID: PMC3402347
PMID: 19885867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;29(19):5264-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00526-09. Epub 2009 Aug 
3.

The nucleosome binding protein HMGN3 modulates the transcription profile of
pancreatic beta cells and affects insulin secretion.

Ueda T(1), Furusawa T, Kurahashi T, Tessarollo L, Bustin M.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Section, Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Improper glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells is a
major factor in the onset of type 2 diabetes. We now report that HMGN3, a nuclear
protein that binds to nucleosomes and affects chromatin function, is highly
expressed in beta cells and that in mice, loss of HMGN3 impairs
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and leads to a diabetic phenotype. In
pancreatic beta cells, loss of HMGN3 affects the transcription of several genes
involved in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, including that of the Glut2
glucose transporter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation reveals that HMGN3 and the
transcription factor PDX1 mutually reinforce their specific binding to the
chromatin in the promoter of the Glut2 gene, thereby regulating GLUT2 protein
levels in pancreatic islets and in beta cells. Our results identify a new
regulator of glucose homeostasis and demonstrate a link between the activity of a
nucleosome binding structural protein and the regulation of insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC2747976
PMID: 19651901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Yi Chuan. 2009 Jan;31(1):83-7.

[Screening and identification of differentially expressed genes in Beijing fatty 
and broiler breast muscles].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng HY(1), Miao XY, Wang XB, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100193, China. fhyong82@163.com

mRNA differential display reverse-transcripton PCR(DDRT-PCR) was applied to
identify differentially expressed genes in Arbor Acres broiler(AA) and Beijing
fatty chicken breast muscles in order to find the mechanism which induces the
differential gene expression at the molecular level. A total of 7 ESTs were found
using reverse Northern dot blot, and all of them were compared with the
nucleotide sequences in GenBank database using BLAST. S1 was highly similar to
HMGN3; S3 was highly similar to ChEST294a8 with unknown functions; S4 and S5 were
highly similar to PGM; S6 and S2 had highly similar nucleotide sequences with
unknown functions in nucleotide databases; S7 had no significant similarity with 
existing genes or ESTs and was regarded as a new EST. The new EST was submitted
to GenBank(Accession number: EU594549). This lays a foundation for further study 
on the mechanism of differential gene expression in Beijing fatty and AA breast
muscles.

PMID: 19138906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Jul;8(6):433-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.04.002. Epub
2008 Apr 22.

Differential expression of the HMGN family of chromatin proteins during ocular
development.

Lucey MM(1), Wang Y, Bustin M, Duncan MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, 327 Wolf Hall,
Newark, DE 19716, USA.

The HMGN proteins are a group of non-histone nuclear proteins that associate with
the core nucleosome and alter the structure of the chromatin fiber. We
investigated the distribution of the three best characterized HMGN family
members, HMGN1, HMGN2 and HMGN3 during mouse eye development. HMGN1 protein is
evenly distributed in all ocular structures of 10.5 days post-coitum (dpc) mouse 
embryos however, by 13.5dpc, relatively less HMGN1 is detected in the newly
formed lens fiber cells compared to other cell types. In the adult, HMGN1 is
detected throughout the retina and lens, although in the cornea, HMGN1 protein is
predominately located in the epithelium. HMGN2 is also abundant in all ocular
structures of mouse embryos, however, unlike HMGN1, intense immunolabeling is
maintained in the lens fiber cells at 13.5dpc. In the adult eye, HMGN2 protein is
still found in all lens nuclei while in the cornea, HMGN2 protein is mostly
restricted to the epithelium. In contrast, the first detection of HMGN3 in the
eye is in the presumptive corneal epithelium and lens fiber cells at 13.5dpc. In 
the lens, HMGN3 remained lens fiber cell preferred into adulthood. In the cornea,
HMGN3 is transiently upregulated in the stroma and endothelium at birth while its
expression is restricted to the corneal epithelium in adulthood. In the retina,
HMGN3 upregulates around 2 weeks of age and is found at relatively high levels in
the inner nuclear and ganglion cell layers of the adult retina. RT-PCR analysis
determined that the predominant HMGN3 splice form found in ocular tissues is
HMGN3b which lacks the chromatin unfolding domain although HMGN3a mRNA is also
detected. These results demonstrate that the HMGN class of chromatin proteins has
a dynamic expression pattern in the developing eye.

PMCID: PMC2525792
PMID: 18502697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Int J Med Sci. 2006 Dec 21;4(1):28-35.

Functional genomics analysis of low concentration of ethanol in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells. Role of genes involved in transcriptional
and translational processes.

Castaneda F(1), Rosin-Steiner S, Jung K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Pathobiochemistry and Clinical Research, Max Planck
Institute of Molecular Physiology, Dortmund, Germany.
francisco.castaneda@mpi-dortmund.mpg.de

We previously found that ethanol at millimolar level (1 mM) activates the
expression of transcription factors with subsequent regulation of apoptotic genes
in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) HepG2 cells. However, the role of ethanol
on the expression of genes implicated in transcriptional and translational
processes remains unknown. Therefore, the aim of this study was to characterize
the effect of low concentration of ethanol on gene expression profiling in HepG2 
cells using cDNA microarrays with especial interest in genes with transcriptional
and translational function. The gene expression pattern observed in the
ethanol-treated HepG2 cells revealed a relatively similar pattern to that found
in the untreated control cells. The pairwise comparison analysis demonstrated
four significantly up-regulated (COBRA1, ITGB4, STAU2, and HMGN3) genes and one
down-regulated (ANK3) gene. All these genes exert their function on
transcriptional and translational processes and until now none of these genes
have been associated with ethanol. This functional genomic analysis demonstrates 
the reported interaction between ethanol and ethanol-regulated genes. Moreover,
it confirms the relationship between ethanol-regulated genes and various
signaling pathways associated with ethanol-induced apoptosis. The data presented 
in this study represents an important contribution toward the understanding of
the molecular mechanisms of ethanol at low concentration in HepG2 cells, a
HCC-derived cell line.

PMCID: PMC1752234
PMID: 17211498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Biotechnol. 2006 Oct;34(2):125-40.

Transcriptome and proteome profiling to understanding the biology of high
productivity CHO cells.

Nissom PM(1), Sanny A, Kok YJ, Hiang YT, Chuah SH, Shing TK, Lee YY, Wong KT, Hu 
WS, Sim MY, Philp R.

Author information: 
(1)Bioprocessing Technology Institute, 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01 Centros,
Singapore, 138668. peter_morin@bti.a-star.edu.sg

A combined transcriptome and proteome analysis was carried out to identify key
genes and proteins differentially expressed in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells 
producing high and low levels of dhfr-GFP fusion protein. Comparison of
transcript levels was performed using a proprietary 15K CHO cDNA microarray chip,
whereas proteomic analysis was performed using iTRAQ quantitative protein
profiling technique. Microarray analysis revealed 77 differentially expressed
genes, with 53 genes upregulated and 24 genes downregulated. Proteomic analysis
gave 75 and 80 proteins for the midexponential and stationary phase,
respectively. Although there was a general lack of correlation between mRNA
levels and quantitated protein abundance, results from both datasets concurred on
groups of proteins/genes based on functional categorization. A number of genes
(20%) and proteins (45 and 23%) were involved in processes related to protein
biosynthesis. We also identified three genes/proteins involved in chromatin
modification. Enzymes responsible for opening up chromatin, Hmgn3 and Hmgb1, were
upregulated whereas enzymes that condense chromatin, histone H1.2, were
downregulated. Genes and proteins that promote cell growth (Igfbp4, Ptma, S100a6,
and Lgals3) were downregulated, whereas those that deter cell growth (Ccng2,
Gsg2, and S100a11) were upregulated. Other main groups of genes and proteins
include carbohydrate metabolism, signal transduction, and transport. Our findings
show that an integrated genomic and proteomics approach can be effectively
utilized to monitor transcriptional and posttranscriptional events of mammalian
cells in culture.

PMID: 17172658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(9):3747-56.

Chromosomal proteins HMGN3a and HMGN3b regulate the expression of glycine
transporter 1.

West KL(1), Castellini MA, Duncan MK, Bustin M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Sciences and Molecular Pathology, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, United Kingdom. k.west@clinmed.gla.ac.uk

HMGN proteins promote chromatin unfolding, enhance access to nucleosomes, and
modulate transcription from chromatin templates. It is not known whether they act
indiscriminately as general modulators of transcription or whether they regulate 
specific gene expression. Here, we investigated the role of HMGN3, a recently
discovered HMGN family member, in transcription in vivo. We created cell lines
overexpressing HMGN3a or its splice variant, HMGN3b, and analyzed their gene
expression profiles using microarrays and reverse transcriptase PCR. We found
that ectopic expression of HMGN3a alters the expression of approximately 0.8% of 
genes. Both HMGN3a and HMGN3b upregulate the expression of the glycine
transporter 1 gene (Glyt1). Glyt1 encodes a membrane transporter that regulates
the glycine concentration in synaptic junctions. Both GLYT1 and HMGN3 are highly 
expressed in glia cells and the eye, and we show that both proteins are
coexpressed in the retina. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that HMGN3
protein is recruited to a region of the Glyt1 gene encompassing the Glyt1a
transcriptional start site. These results suggest that HMGN3 regulates Glyt1
expression and demonstrate that members of the HMGN family can regulate the
transcription of specific genes.

PMCID: PMC387732
PMID: 15082770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Yonsei Med J. 2003 Dec 30;44(6):1059-68.

Characterization of the two genes differentially expressed during development in 
human fetal astrocytes.

Lee SS(1), Seo HS, Choi SJ, Park HS, Lee JY, Lee KH, Park JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju,
Korea.

Astrocytes are ubiquitous in the brain and have multiple functions. It is
becoming clear that they play an important role in monitoring the
neuromicroenvironment, information processing, and signaling in the central
nervous system (CNS) in normal conditions and that they respond to CNS injuries. 
During the development of the CNS, astrocytes play a key role as a substrate for 
neuronal migration and axonal growth. To identify genes that could participate in
astrocyte maturation, we used the differential display reverse transcription-PCR 
(DDRT-PCR) method. Human fetal astrocytes were cultured and total RNAs were
isolated at intervals of 5 days for 50 days. Using 24 primer combinations, we
identified a set of 18 candidate cDNAs deriving from the excised DDRT-PCR bands. 
DNA sequencing revealed 16 genes that have been described already. We found that 
RTP, TG, hTM-alpha, SPARC, TRIP7, and RPL7 genes were expressed increasingly,
while HMGCR, RPL27a, NACA, NPM, and TARBP2 genes were expressed decreasingly,
according to their culture stages. We also found two unidentified genes, A3 and
C8, which were expressed differently in culture stages; the former was expressed 
decreasingly and the latter increasingly. These two genes were found in the same 
amount in genomic DNA from various human cells such as astrocytes, astrocytoma,
trophoblasts and lymphocytes. The A3 gene was found only in human genomic DNA,
but not in rat (ATr5), mouse (RAW264.7), or monkey (Vero) cells, whereas the C8
gene was found in human genomic DNA and monkey cells, but not in rat or mouse
cells. We analysed these two genes for identification. There was >92% nucleotide 
sequence identity between the A3 gene (3,626 bp) and the Homo sapiens general
transcription factor 3 (GTF3), and >96% nucleotide sequence identity between the 
C8 gene (2,401 bp) and the transmembrane receptor Unc5h2. These findings suggest 
that these two genes may participate in some functional roles within the cells.

PMID: 14703617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genome Res. 2003 May;13(5):800-12.

Retroposed copies of the HMG genes: a window to genome dynamics.

Strichman-Almashanu LZ(1), Bustin M, Landsman D.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Branch, National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20894, USA.

Retroposed copies (RPCs) of genes are functional (intronless paralogs) or
nonfunctional (processed pseudogenes) copies derived from mRNA through a process 
of retrotransposition. Previous studies found that gene families involved in mRNA
translation or nuclear function were more likely to have large numbers of RPCs.
Here we characterize RPCs of the few families coding for the abundant
high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins in humans. Using an algorithm we developed, we
identified and studied 219 HMG RPCs. For slightly more than 10% of these RPCs, we
found evidence indicating expression. Furthermore, eight of these are potentially
new members of the HMG families of proteins. For three RPCs, the evidence
indicated expression as part of other transcripts; in all of these, we found the 
presence of alternative splicing or multiple polyadenylation signals. RPC
distribution among the HMGs was not even, with 33-65 each for HMGB1, HMGB3,
HMGN1, and HMGN2, and 0-6 each for HMGA1, HMGA2, HMGB2, and HMGN3. Analysis of
the sequences flanking the RPCs revealed that the junction between the target
site duplications and the 5'-flanking sequences exhibited the same TT/AAAA
consensus found for the L1 endonuclease, supporting an L1-mediated
retrotransposition mechanism. Finally, because our algorithm included aligning
RPC flanking sequences with the corresponding HMG genomic sequence, we were able 
to identify transcribed regions of HMG genes that were not part of the published 
mRNA sequences.

PMCID: PMC430908
PMID: 12727900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Histochem Cytochem. 2002 Sep;50(9):1273-5.

Immunohistochemical localization of the nucleosome-binding protein HMGN3 in mouse
brain.

Ito Y(1), Bustin M.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Section, Laboratory of Metabolism, Division of Basic Science, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
yito@lbl.gov

HMGN3 (Trip7) is a member of the high-mobility group N (HMGN) nucleosome-binding 
protein family, which binds specifically to nucleosomes, reduces the compactness 
of the chromatin fiber, and enhances transcription from chromatin templates. By
Western blotting and Northern blotting analysis, we showed that HMGN3 is
expressed in a tissue-specific manner, with the strongest expression in mouse
brain. Here we analyzed the expression of HMGN3 in various regions of the mouse
brain by histological techniques. Enhanced expression of HMGN3 was observed in
the lateral olfactory tract, anterior commissure, corpus callosum, internal
capsule, fornix, stria medullans, optic tract, and axon bundles. The expression
patterns of HMGN3 in the mouse brain was significantly different from that of the
related protein HMGN2 and was very similar to that of the glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP). We suggest that HMGN3 might play a role in astrocyte function.

PMID: 12185205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Virology. 2002 Mar 30;295(1):147-59.

Differential display RT-PCR analysis of enterovirus-71-infected rhabdomyosarcoma 
cells reveals mRNA expression responses of multiple human genes with known and
novel functions.

Leong PW(1), Liew K, Lim W, Chow VT.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Kent Ridge, 117597,
Singapore.

In order to better understand cellular responses to viral infection at the
transcriptional level, we employed differential display RT-PCR to analyze mRNAs
from RD rhabdomyosarcoma cells following infection with a neurovirulent
enterovirus 71 (EV71) strain, compared with mRNAs from uninfected cells. Of 250
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) isolated, sequenced, and identified, all were of
cellular origin except 1 that was of viral origin. Of these, 156 were individual 
distinctive clones, comprising 45 mRNAs showing unaltered expression and 111
mRNAs exhibiting upregulation or downregulation. Of the 45 uniformly expressed
mRNAs, 14 represented unknown genes. Of the 111 differentially expressed mRNAs,
63 did not match any known genes. Forty-eight of the 111 mRNAs modified by EV71
infection matched known genes, including those encoding components of cell cycle,
cytoskeleton, and cell death mediators; protein degradation mediators;
mitochondrial-related proteins; components of protein translation and
modification; and cellular transport proteins. The altered expression profiles of
representative genes were authenticated by semiquantitative RT-PCR and real-time 
RT-PCR. We also identified a novel alternatively spliced transcript of TRIP7
thyroid receptor interactor protein; the putative human homolog of murine mc7
mRNA predominantly expressed in the brain; and a novel mRNA similar to that
encoding vacuolar protein 8 involved in protein targeting. These results
underscore the applicability of the mRNA differential display technique for
elucidating the expression profiles of known and even novel genes in response to 
cellular infection with pathogenic viruses.

PMID: 12033773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Dyn. 2002 Apr;223(4):526-35.

Thyroid hormone regulation of a transcriptional coactivator in Xenopus laevis:
implication for a role in postembryonic tissue remodeling.

Amano T(1), Leu K, Yoshizato K, Shi YB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

Thyroid hormone (TH) affects biological processes by regulating gene
transcription through TH receptors (TRs). In the presence of TH, TR activates
target gene transcription by recruiting one or more transcription coactivators
belonging to diverse groups. Here, we demonstrate that during TH-dependent anuran
metamorphosis, one such coactivator gene, the Xenopus laevis homolog of human
Trip7, is up-regulated by TH. Kinetic studies suggest that Xenopus Trip7 is most 
likely induced indirectly by TH in a tissue-dependent manner. In the intestine,
which undergoes extensive remodeling as the animal changes from being herbivorous
to carnivorous, Trip7 is expressed at high levels during but not before or after 
metamorphosis. It is also up-regulated in other growing or remodeling tissues
such as the brain and limb but not in degenerating tadpole tail skin. By using
frog oocyte as a model, we show that Trip7 influences basal transcription in a
chromatin structure-dependent manner but enhances the function of liganded TR
regardless of the chromatin structure of the target promoter. In vitro studies
indicate that Trip7 interacts directly with TR. These results suggest that during
Xenopus metamorphosis, TH up-regulates, albeit indirectly, Trip7 to enhance TR
function during larval-to-adult tissue transformation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11921340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 13;276(28):25959-69. Epub 2001 May 16.

HMGN3a and HMGN3b, two protein isoforms with a tissue-specific expression
pattern, expand the cellular repertoire of nucleosome-binding proteins.

West KL(1), Ito Y, Birger Y, Postnikov Y, Shirakawa H, Bustin M.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Section, Laboratory of Metabolism, Division of Basic Science, NCI,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
klmarsh@pop.nci.nih.gov

HMGN1 (HMG-14) and HMGN2 (HMG-17) are nuclear proteins that bind specifically to 
nucleosomes, reduce the compactness of the chromatin fiber, and enhance
transcription from chromatin templates. Here we report that many vertebrates
contain an additional type of HMGN protein named HMGN3 (Trip 7). The human HMGN3 
gene is located on chromosome 6 and spans 32 kilobase pairs, which is nearly
10-fold longer than the closely related HMGN2 gene. However, the intron/exon
boundaries of the HMGN3 gene are identical to those of HMGN1 and HMGN2. Unique
within the HMGN family, the HMGN3 transcript undergoes alternative splicing and
generates two different variants, HMGN3a and HMGN3b. The shorter variant, HMGN3b,
arises from an additional splice site that truncates exon V and causes a
frameshift. The resulting HMGN3b protein lacks the majority of the C-terminal
chromatin-unfolding domain. Both splice variants are found in many vertebrates
from frogs to man and are expressed in many tissues. The pattern of
tissue-specific expression differs considerably from those of HMGN1 and HMGN2 at 
both the mRNA and the protein level. Our results expand the multiplicity of the
HMGN protein family and raise the possibility that these nucleosome-binding
proteins function as co-activators in tissue-specific gene expression.

PMID: 11356838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 1995 Jun;47(3):245-52.

[Participation of dopamine on the muscarinergic inhibitory effect of substance P 
on gastric myoelectric activity and motility].

[Article in Chinese]

Jing H(1), Lin KW, Mei MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Dalian Medical University.

Our previous study showed that microinjection of substance P (SP) into caudate
nucleus inhibits gastric myoelectric fast wave and gastric motility, an effect
mediated by muscarinic receptor. The present investigation showed that this
effects of SP could be blocked by coinjected SP antiserum or SP antagonist [Arg6,
D-Trip7,9, MePhe8]-SP6-11 or D2 dopamine antagonist haloperidol. In addition,
microinjection of dopamine (DA) into caudate nucleus could also inhibit gastric
fast wave and motility, an effect again being blockable by coinjected DA
antagonist haloperidol or atropine. Thus, it appears that the muscarinergic
inhibitory effect of SP on gastric fast wave and motility is mediated by D2
dopamine receptor.

PMID: 7570109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Neuroendocrinology. 1990 Jun;51(6):675-82.

Role of substance P in the medial preoptic area in the regulation of gonadotropin
and prolactin secretion in normal or orchidectomized rats.

Picanço-Diniz DL(1), Valença MM, Franci CR, Antunes-Rodrigues J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of São Paulo,
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.

The present studies were designed to evaluate the role of substance P (SP) in the
control of the release of luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle stimulating hormone 
(FSH) and prolactin (PRL). SP was microinjected into the medial preoptic area
(MPOA) of conscious, freely moving intact or orchidectomized (ORCX; 21 days
post-ORCX) adult male rats. Microinjection of SP into the MPOA induced a
significant decrease in plasma LH and FSH concentrations, effects which were
accompanied by an elevation in plasma PRL concentration. To examine the
participation of endogenously secreted SP in the activity of the MPOA neurons
controlling release of these cited pituitary hormones, another study was
performed in which either a potent and specific antagonist to SP (D-Pro2,
D-Trip7,9-SP; SP-ANT) or an antibody against SP (SP-AB), was injected into the
MPOA. SP-ANT and SP-AB both elevated plasma LH, FSH and decreased plasma PRL
concentration. These data suggest that endogenous SP within the MPOA exerts an
important inhibitory tonus over LH and FSH release and an excitatory tonus over
PRL release. In conclusion, SP seems to participate as a neurotransmitter or
neuromodulater in the control of LH, FSH and PRL secretion, at least in part, by 
acting at the level of MPOA, a region in which the neuronal cell bodies that
produce LH-releasing hormone and the associated gonadotropin-releasing
hormone-associated peptide are located.

PMID: 1694573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


