
1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Feb;170(2):403-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37448. Epub 2015 Nov
14.

Craniosynostosis in 10q26 deletion patients: A consequence of brain
underdevelopment or altered suture biology?

Faria ÁC(1,)(2), Rabbi-Bortolini E(3), Rebouças MR(4), de S Thiago Pereira AL(5),
Frasson MG(5), Atique R(6), Lourenço NC(6), Rosenberg C(6), Kobayashi GS(6),
Passos-Bueno MR(6), Errera FI(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Graduação em Biotecnologia, Centro de Ciências da Saúde,
Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo (UFES), Vitória, Espírito Santo, Brasil.
(2)Laboratório de Genética Humana e Molecular, Centro de Pesquisa ICALP, Escola
Superior de Ciências da Santa Casa de Misericórdia (EMESCAM), Vitória, Espírito
Santo, Brasil. (3)Laboratório de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Associação
Educacional de Vitória, Vitória, Espírito Santo, Brasil. (4)Divisão de Genética
Clínica, Hospital Estadual Infantil Nossa Senhora da Glória (HEINSG), Vitória,
Espírito Santo, Brasil. (5)Unidade de Neonatologia, Hospital Santa Casa de
Misericórdia, Vitória, Espírito Santo, Brasil. (6)Centro de Pesquisas Sobre o
Genoma Humano e Células Tronco, Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto De Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brasil.

Approximately a hundred patients with terminal 10q deletions have been described.
They present with a wide range of clinical features always accompanied by delayed
development, intellectual disability and craniofacial dysmorphisms. Here, we
report a girl and a boy with craniosynostosis, developmental delay and other
congenital anomalies. Karyotyping and molecular analysis including Multiplex
Ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and Array Comparative Genomic
Hybridization (aCGH) were performed in both patients. We detected a 13.1<U+2009>Mb pure 
deletion at 10q26.12-q26.3 in the girl and a 10.9<U+2009>Mb pure deletion at
10q26.13-q26.3 in the boy, both encompassing about 100 genes. The clinical and
molecular findings in these patients reinforce the importance of the DOCK1
smallest region of overlap I (SRO I), previously suggested to explain the
clinical signs, and together with a review of the literature suggest a second
3.5<U+2009>Mb region important for the phenotype (SRO II). Genotype-phenotype
correlations and literature data suggest that the craniosynostosis is not
directly related to dysregulated signaling in suture development, but may be
secondary to alterations in brain development instead. Further, genes at 10q26
may be involved in the molecular crosstalk between brain and cranial vault. ©
2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26566760  [PubMed - in process]


2. BMC Evol Biol. 2014 Dec 19;14:261. doi: 10.1186/s12862-014-0261-5.

Divergent evolutionary rates in vertebrate and mammalian specific conserved
non-coding elements (CNEs) in echolocating mammals.

Davies KT(1), Tsagkogeorga G(2), Rossiter SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological & Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London,
Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK. k.t.j.davies@qmul.ac.uk. (2)School of
Biological & Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road,
London, E1 4NS, UK. g.tsagkogeorga@qmul.ac.uk. (3)School of Biological & Chemical
Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK.
s.j.rossiter@qmul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The majority of DNA contained within vertebrate genomes is
non-coding, with a certain proportion of this thought to play regulatory roles
during development. Conserved Non-coding Elements (CNEs) are an abundant group of
putative regulatory sequences that are highly conserved across divergent groups
and thus assumed to be under strong selective constraint. Many CNEs may contain
regulatory factor binding sites, and their frequent spatial association with key 
developmental genes - such as those regulating sensory system development -
suggests crucial roles in regulating gene expression and cellular patterning. Yet
surprisingly little is known about the molecular evolution of CNEs across diverse
mammalian taxa or their role in specific phenotypic adaptations. We examined
3,110 vertebrate-specific and ~82,000 mammalian-specific CNEs across 19 and 9
mammalian orders respectively, and tested for changes in the rate of evolution of
CNEs located in the proximity of genes underlying the development or functioning 
of auditory systems. As we focused on CNEs putatively associated with genes
underlying the development/functioning of auditory systems, we incorporated
echolocating taxa in our dataset because of their highly specialised and derived 
auditory systems.
RESULTS: Phylogenetic reconstructions of concatenated CNEs broadly recovered
accepted mammal relationships despite high levels of sequence conservation. We
found that CNE substitution rates were highest in rodents and lowest in primates,
consistent with previous findings. Comparisons of CNE substitution rates from
several genomic regions containing genes linked to auditory system development
and hearing revealed differences between echolocating and non-echolocating taxa. 
Wider taxonomic sampling of four CNEs associated with the homeobox genes Hmx2 and
Hmx3 - which are required for inner ear development - revealed family-wise
variation across diverse bat species. Specifically within one family of
echolocating bats that utilise frequency-modulated echolocation calls varying
widely in frequency and intensity high levels of sequence divergence were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Levels of selective constraint acting on CNEs differed both across
genomic locations and taxa, with observed variation in substitution rates of CNEs
among bat species. More work is needed to determine whether this variation can be
linked to echolocation, and wider taxonomic sampling is necessary to fully
document levels of conservation in CNEs across diverse taxa.

PMCID: PMC4302572
PMID: 25523630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jul 10;10(7):e1004461. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004461.
eCollection 2014.

Cis and trans effects of human genomic variants on gene expression.

Bryois J(1), Buil A(1), Evans DM(2), Kemp JP(3), Montgomery SB(4), Conrad DF(5), 
Ho KM(6), Ring S(3), Hurles M(5), Deloukas P(7), Davey Smith G(3), Dermitzakis
ET(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva, Switzerland; Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (iGE3),
Geneva, Switzerland; Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Geneva,
Switzerland. (2)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol,
Bristol, United Kingdom; School of Social and Community Medicine, University of
Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom; University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, 
Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (3)MRC
Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom;
School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, United
Kingdom. (4)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva 
Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland; Department of Pathology and Genetics,
Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America. (5)Wellcome 
Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. (6)School of Social and
Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. (7)Wellcome
Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom; William Harvey Research
Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, London, United Kindom; Princess Al-Jawhara Al-Brahim Centre
of Excellence in Research of Hereditary Disorders (PACER-HD), King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. (8)Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland; Institute 
of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (iGE3), Geneva, Switzerland; Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics (SIB), Geneva, Switzerland; Center of Excellence for Genomic
Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Gene expression is a heritable cellular phenotype that defines the function of a 
cell and can lead to diseases in case of misregulation. In order to detect
genetic variations affecting gene expression, we performed association analysis
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs) with
gene expression measured in 869 lymphoblastoid cell lines of the Avon
Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) cohort in cis and in trans.
We discovered that 3,534 genes (false discovery rate (FDR)<U+200A>=<U+200A>5%) are affected by 
an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) in cis and 48 genes are affected in
trans. We observed that CNVs are more likely to be eQTLs than SNPs. In addition, 
we found that variants associated to complex traits and diseases are enriched for
trans-eQTLs and that trans-eQTLs are enriched for cis-eQTLs. As a variant
affecting both a gene in cis and in trans suggests that the cis gene is
functionally linked to the trans gene expression, we looked specifically for
trans effects of cis-eQTLs. We discovered that 26 cis-eQTLs are associated to 92 
genes in trans with the cis-eQTLs of the transcriptions factors BATF3 and HMX2
affecting the most genes. We then explored if the variation of the level of
expression of the cis genes were causally affecting the level of expression of
the trans genes and discovered several causal relationships between variation in 
the level of expression of the cis gene and variation of the level of expression 
of the trans gene. This analysis shows that a large sample size allows the
discovery of secondary effects of human variations on gene expression that can be
used to construct short directed gene regulatory networks.

PMCID: PMC4091791
PMID: 25010687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):1014-20. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2927. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Validation of nucleolar protein 4 as a novel methylated tumor suppressor gene in 
head and neck cancer.

Demokan S(1), Chuang AY(2), Pattani KM(3), Sidransky D(3), Koch W(3), Califano
JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Oncology, Oncology Institute, Istanbul University, Capa,
Istanbul 34093, Turkey. (2)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University,
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and 
Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Methylation of CpG islands in the promoter region of genes acts as a significant 
mechanism of epigenetic gene silencing in head and neck cancer. In the present
study, we assessed the association of epigenetic alterations of a panel of 12
genes [nucleolar protein 4 (NOL4), iroquois homeobox 1 (IRX1), SLC5A8, LRRC3B,
FUSSEL18, EBF3, GBX2, HMX2, SEPT9, ALX3, SOCS3 and LHX6] with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) via a candidate gene approach. After the initial 
screening of methylated CpG islands on the promoter regions by bisulfite
sequencing using salivary rinse samples, only two genes had methylated CpG
dinucleotides on their promoter regions in tumor samples and absence of
methylated CpGs were found in normal salivary rinse samples after bisulfite
modification and bisulfite sequencing. We then performed real-time quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (QMSP) on 16 salivary rinse and 14 normal mucosal
samples from healthy subjects and 33 HNSCC tumor samples for the two genes
selected. After validation with QMSP, one gene, NOL4, was highly methylated (91%)
in tumor samples and unmethylated in normal salivary rinses and minimally
methylated in normal mucosal samples demonstrating cancer-specific methylation in
HNSCC tissues. Although the IRX1 gene was observed as methylated in normal
mucosal and salivary rinse samples, the methylation values of these normal
samples were very low (<10%). In conclusion, we identified NOL4 as a highly
specific promoter methylated gene associated with HNSCC. IRX1 may have potential 
as a biomarker for HNSCC and should be assessed in a larger cohort.

PMCID: PMC3896520
PMID: 24337411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Oct 31;4:e900. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.432.

Gene miles-apart is required for formation of otic vesicle and hair cells in
zebrafish.

Hu ZY(1), Zhang QY, Qin W, Tong JW, Zhao Q, Han Y, Meng J, Zhang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Hearing loss is a serious burden to physical and mental health worldwide.
Aberrant development and damage of hearing organs are recognized as the causes of
hearing loss, the molecular mechanisms underlining these pathological processes
remain elusive. Investigation of new molecular mechanisms involved in
proliferation, differentiation, migration and maintenance of neuromast primordium
and hair cells will contribute to better understanding of hearing loss pathology.
This knowledge will enable the development of protective agents and mechanism
study of drug ototoxicity. In this study, we demonstrate that the zebrafish gene 
miles-apart, a homolog of sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 2 (s1pr2) in mammals, 
has an important role in the development of otic vesicle, neuromasts and survival
of hair cells. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of embryos showed that
miles-apart expression occurred mainly in the encephalic region and the somites
at 24 h.p.f. (hour post fertilization), in the midbrain/hindbrain boundary, the
brainstem and the pre-neuromast of lateral line at 48 h.p.f. in a strict
spatiotemporal regulation. Both up- and downregulation of miles-apart led to
abnormal otoliths and semicircular canals, excess or few hair cells and
neuromasts, and their disarranged depositions in the lateral lines. Miles-apart
(Mil) dysregulation also caused abnormal expression of hearing-associated genes, 
including hmx2, fgf3, fgf8a, foxi1, otop1, pax2.1 and tmieb during zebrafish
organogenesis. Moreover, in larvae miles-apart gene knockdown significantly
upregulated proapoptotic gene zBax2 and downregulated prosurvival gene zMcl1b; in
contrast, the level of zBax2 was decreased and of zMcl1b enhanced by miles-apart 
overexpression. Collectively, Mil activity is linked to organization and number
decision of hair cells within a neuromast, also to deposition of neuromasts and
formation of otic vesicle during zebrafish organogenesis. At the larva stage, Mil
as an upstream regulator of bcl-2 gene family has a role in protection of hair
cells against apoptosis by promoting expression of prosurvival gene zMcl1b and
suppressing proapoptotic gene zBax2.

PMCID: PMC3920936
PMID: 24176858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56274. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056274. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

Headbobber: a combined morphogenetic and cochleosaccular mouse model to study
10qter deletions in human deafness.

Buniello A(1), Hardisty-Hughes RE, Pass JC, Bober E, Smith RJ, Steel KP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.

The recessive mouse mutant headbobber (hb) displays the characteristic
behavioural traits associated with vestibular defects including headbobbing,
circling and deafness. This mutation was caused by the insertion of a transgene
into distal chromosome 7 affecting expression of native genes. We show that the
inner ear of hb/hb mutants lacks semicircular canals and cristae, and the saccule
and utricle are fused together in a single utriculosaccular sac. Moreover, we
detect severe abnormalities of the cochlear sensory hair cells, the stria
vascularis looks severely disorganised, Reissner's membrane is collapsed and no
endocochlear potential is detected. Myo7a and Kcnj10 expression analysis show a
lack of the melanocyte-like intermediate cells in hb/hb stria vascularis, which
can explain the absence of endocochlear potential. We use Trp2 as a marker of
melanoblasts migrating from the neural crest at E12.5 and show that they do not
interdigitate into the developing strial epithelium, associated with abnormal
persistence of the basal lamina in the hb/hb cochlea. We perform array CGH, deep 
sequencing as well as an extensive expression analysis of candidate genes in the 
headbobber region of hb/hb and littermate controls, and conclude that the
headbobber phenotype is caused by: 1) effect of a 648 kb deletion on distal Chr7,
resulting in the loss of three protein coding genes (Gpr26, Cpmx2 and Chst15)
with expression in the inner ear but unknown function; and 2) indirect, long
range effect of the deletion on the expression of neighboring genes on Chr7,
associated with downregulation of Hmx3, Hmx2 and Nkx1.2 homeobox transcription
factors. Interestingly, deletions of the orthologous region in humans, affecting 
the same genes, have been reported in nineteen patients with common features
including sensorineural hearing loss and vestibular problems. Therefore, we
propose that headbobber is a useful model to gain insight into the mechanisms
underlying deafness in human 10qter deletion syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3572983
PMID: 23457544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e51065. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051065. Epub 2012 Nov 30.

Mutanlallemand (mtl) and Belly Spot and Deafness (bsd) are two new mutations of
Lmx1a causing severe cochlear and vestibular defects.

Steffes G(1), Lorente-Cánovas B, Pearson S, Brooker RH, Spiden S, Kiernan AE,
Guénet JL, Steel KP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.

Mutanlallemand (mtl) and Belly Spot and Deafness (bsd) are two new spontaneous
alleles of the Lmx1a gene in mice. Homozygous mutants show head tossing and
circling behaviour, indicative of vestibular defects, and they have short tails
and white belly patches of variable size. The analysis of auditory brainstem
responses (ABR) showed that mtl and bsd homozygotes are deaf, whereas
heterozygous and wildtype littermates have normal hearing. Paint-filled inner
ears at E16.5 revealed that mtl and bsd homozygotes lack endolymphatic ducts and 
semicircular canals and have short cochlear ducts. These new alleles show
similarities with dreher (Lmx1a) mutants. Complementation tests between mtl and
dreher and between mtl and bsd suggest that mtl and bsd are new mutant alleles of
the Lmx1a gene. To determine the Lmx1a mutation in mtl and bsd mutant mice we
performed PCR followed by sequencing of genomic DNA and cDNA. The mtl mutation is
a single point mutation in the 3' splice site of exon 4 leading to an exon
extension and the activation of a cryptic splice site 44 base pairs downstream,
whereas the bsd mutation is a genomic deletion that includes exon 3. Both
mutations lead to a truncated LMX1A protein affecting the homeodomain (mtl) or
LIM2-domain (bsd), which is critical for LMX1A protein function. Moreover, the
levels of Lmx1a transcript in mtl and bsd mutants are significantly
down-regulated. Hmx2/3 and Pax2 expression are also down-regulated in mtl and bsd
mutants, suggesting a role of Lmx1a upstream of these transcription factors in
early inner ear morphogenesis. We have found that these mutants develop sensory
patches although they are misshapen. The characterization of these two new Lmx1a 
alleles highlights the critical role of this gene in the development of the
cochlea and vestibular system.

PMCID: PMC3511360
PMID: 23226461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Yi Chuan. 2012 Sep;34(9):1165-73.

[Toxic effects of trimethadione on zebrafish early development].

[Article in Chinese]

Qin W(1), Hu ZY, Tong JW, Meng J, You XF, Zhang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050,
China. yd06413qw@126.com

To further understand the neural toxicity and teratogenicity of antiepileptic
drugs in clinic, we established a zebrafish model for antiepileptic toxicity
using trimethadione as a probe drug. The results indicated that embryonic
malformation occurred under trimethadione treatment in a concentration-dependent 
manner. The defects included growth retardation, small head, eyes and acoustic
capsule, deficient semicircular canals and otolith, and abnormal cardiovascular
system. The number of hair cells in neuromast ML2 was obviously reduced in the
treated larvae. Whole mount in situ hybridization indicated that the gene
expression patterns of brain marker genes, such as zic1 and xb51, and autophagic 
gene atg5 was changed significantly. The result of RT-PCR showed that the
expressions of hearing genes val and hmx2 were also changed in the
trimethadione-treated embryos. All these findings suggest that brain tissue and
the neural sensors for body balance and hearing are the main targets of
trimethadione toxicity, and that zebrafish is able to mimic mammal responses to
the teratogenicity and the neural toxicity of trimethadione in the embryonic and 
larva development.

PMID: 23017458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 15;340(2):595-604. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.016. Epub 2010
Feb 18.

FGF signaling regulates otic placode induction and refinement by controlling both
ectodermal target genes and hindbrain Wnt8a.

Urness LD(1), Paxton CN, Wang X, Schoenwolf GC, Mansour SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, 15 N 2030 E, RM 2100, Salt
Lake City, UT 84112-5330, USA.

The inner ear epithelium, with its complex array of sensory, non-sensory, and
neuronal cell types necessary for hearing and balance, is derived from a
thickened patch of head ectoderm called the otic placode. Mouse embryos lacking
both Fgf3 and Fgf10 fail to initiate inner ear development because appropriate
patterns of gene expression fail to be specified within the pre-otic field. To
understand the transcriptional "blueprint" initiating inner ear development, we
used microarray analysis to identify prospective placode genes that were
differentially expressed in control and Fgf3(-)(/)(-);Fgf10(-)(/)(-) embryos.
Several genes in the down-regulated class, including Hmx3, Hmx2, Foxg1, Sox9,
Has2, and Slc26a9 were validated by in situ hybridization. We also assayed
candidate target genes suggested by other studies of otic induction. Two placode 
markers, Fgf4 and Foxi3, were down-regulated in Fgf3(-)(/)(-);Fgf10(-)(/)(-)
embryos, whereas Foxi2, a cranial epidermis marker, was expanded in double
mutants, similar to its behavior when WNT responses are blocked in the otic
placode. Assays of hindbrain Wnt genes revealed that only Wnt8a was reduced or
absent in FGF-deficient embryos, and that even some Fgf3(-)(/)(-);Fgf10(-)(/+)
and Fgf3(-)(/)(-) embryos failed to express Wnt8a, suggesting a key role for
Fgf3, and a secondary role for Fgf10, in Wnt8a expression. Chick explant assays
showed that FGF3 or FGF4, but not FGF10, were sufficient to induce Wnt8a.
Collectively, our results suggest that Wnt8a provides the link between
FGF-induced formation of the pre-otic field and restriction of the otic placode
to ectoderm adjacent to the hindbrain.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854211
PMID: 20171206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Dev Genes Evol. 2009 Oct;219(9-10):481-96.

Conservation of gene linkage in dispersed vertebrate NK homeobox clusters.

Wotton KR(1), Weierud FK, Juárez-Morales JL, Alvares LE, Dietrich S, Lewis KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Floor 27 Guy's 
Tower, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London, SE1 9RT, UK.

Nk homeobox genes are important regulators of many different developmental
processes including muscle, heart, central nervous system and sensory organ
development. They are thought to have arisen as part of the ANTP megacluster,
which also gave rise to Hox and ParaHox genes, and at least some NK genes remain 
tightly linked in all animals examined so far. The protostome-deuterostome
ancestor probably contained a cluster of nine Nk genes:
(Msx)-(Nk4/tinman)-(Nk3/bagpipe)-(Lbx/ladybird)-(Tlx/c15)-(Nk7)-(Nk6/hgtx)-(Nk1/s
louch)-(Nk5/Hmx). Of these genes, only NKX2.6-NKX3.1, LBX1-TLX1 and LBX2-TLX2
remain tightly linked in humans. However, it is currently unclear whether this is
unique to the human genome as we do not know which of these Nk genes are
clustered in other vertebrates. This makes it difficult to assess whether the
remaining linkages are due to selective pressures or because chance
rearrangements have "missed" certain genes. In this paper, we identify all of the
paralogs of these ancestrally clustered NK genes in several distinct vertebrates.
We demonstrate that tight linkages of Lbx1-Tlx1, Lbx2-Tlx2 and Nkx3.1-Nkx2.6 have
been widely maintained in both the ray-finned and lobe-finned fish lineages.
Moreover, the recently duplicated Hmx2-Hmx3 genes are also tightly linked.
Finally, we show that Lbx1-Tlx1 and Hmx2-Hmx3 are flanked by highly conserved
noncoding elements, suggesting that shared regulatory regions may have resulted
in evolutionary pressure to maintain these linkages. Consistent with this, these 
pairs of genes have overlapping expression domains. In contrast, Lbx2-Tlx2 and
Nkx3.1-Nkx2.6, which do not seem to be coexpressed, are also not associated with 
conserved noncoding sequences, suggesting that an alternative mechanism may be
responsible for the continued clustering of these genes.

PMID: 20112453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 15;339(2):507-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.028. Epub 2010 
Jan 4.

Pivotal role of hmx2 and hmx3 in zebrafish inner ear and lateral line
development.

Feng Y(1), Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

hmx2 (nkx5.2) and hmx3 (nkx5.1) are highly conserved homeobox transcription
factors required for mouse inner ear development. We have identified four hmx
genes that are expressed in developing mechanosensory organs in zebrafish.
Knockdown of both hmx2 and hmx3 disrupts formation of the mechanosensory
neuromasts and also leads to impaired vestibular function in which utricular
maculae fail to develop and the utricular otolith gradually fuses with the
saccular otolith. We demonstrate that pax5, known to be required for development 
of the utricular maculae, is expressed downstream of hmx2 and hmx3. In addition, 
we show that FGF signaling regulates expression of hmx2 and hmx3 in the otic
vesicle, and conversely, hmx2 and hmx3 maintain the expression of fgf ligands,
thus revealing a novel tissue-specific feedback mechanism. Our data suggest that 
hmx2 and hmx3 act as cell autonomous factors required redundantly for cell fate
specification and differentiation during inner ear and lateral line development.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20043901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 15;69(18):7412-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0116. Epub 
2009 Sep 1.

DNMT1 and DNMT3B modulate distinct polycomb-mediated histone modifications in
colon cancer.

Jin B(1), Yao B, Li JL, Fields CR, Delmas AL, Liu C, Robertson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Cancer Research Center,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

DNA methylation patterns are established and maintained by three DNA
methyltransferases (DNMT): DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B. Although essential for
development, methylation patterns are frequently disrupted in cancer and
contribute directly to carcinogenesis. Recent studies linking polycomb group
repression complexes (PRC1 and PRC2) to the DNMTs have begun to shed light on how
methylation is targeted. We identified previously a panel of genes regulated by
DNMT3B. Here, we compare these with known polycomb group targets to show that
approximately 47% of DNMT3B regulated genes are also bound by PRC1 or PRC2. We
chose 44 genes coregulated by DNMT3B and PRC1/PRC2 to test whether these criteria
would accurately identify novel targets of epigenetic silencing in colon cancer. 
Using reverse transcription-PCR, bisulfite genomic sequencing, and
pyrosequencing, we show that the majority of these genes are frequently silenced 
in colorectal cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Some of these, including
HAND1, HMX2, and SIX3, repressed cell growth. Finally, we analyzed the histone
code, DNMT1, DNMT3B, and PRC2 binding by chromatin immunoprecipitation at
epigenetically silenced genes to reveal a novel link between DNMT3B and the mark 
mediated by PRC1. Taken together, these studies suggest that patterns of
epigenetic modifiers and the histone code influence the propensity of a gene to
become hypermethylated in cancer and that DNMT3B plays an important role in
regulating PRC1 function.

PMCID: PMC2745494
PMID: 19723660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. BMC Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 20;9:27. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-9-27.

Mouse H6 Homeobox 1 (Hmx1) mutations cause cranial abnormalities and reduced body
mass.

Munroe RJ(1), Prabhu V, Acland GM, Johnson KR, Harris BS, O'Brien TP, Welsh IC,
Noden DM, Schimenti JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,
USA. rjm69@cornell.edu

BACKGROUND: The H6 homeobox genes Hmx1, Hmx2, and Hmx3 (also known as Nkx5-3;
Nkx5-2 and Nkx5-1, respectively), compose a family within the NKL subclass of the
ANTP class of homeobox genes. Hmx gene family expression is mostly limited to
sensory organs, branchial (pharyngeal) arches, and the rostral part of the
central nervous system. Targeted mutation of either Hmx2 or Hmx3 in mice disrupts
the vestibular system. These tandemly duplicated genes have functional overlap as
indicated by the loss of the entire vestibular system in double mutants. Mutants 
have not been described for Hmx1, the most divergent of the family.
RESULTS: Dumbo (dmbo) is a semi-lethal mouse mutation that was recovered in a
forward genetic mutagenesis screen. Mutants exhibit enlarged ear pinnae with a
distinctive ventrolateral shift. Here, we report on the basis of this phenotype
and other abnormalities in the mutant, and identify the causative mutation as
being an allele of Hmx1. Examination of dumbo skulls revealed only subtle changes
in cranial bone morphology, namely hyperplasia of the gonial bone and
irregularities along the caudal border of the squamous temporal bone. Other
nearby otic structures were unaffected. The semilethality of dmbo/dmbo mice was
found to be ~40%, occured perinatally, and was associated with exencephaly.
Surviving mutants of both sexes exhibited reduced body mass from ~3 days
postpartum onwards. Most dumbo adults were microphthalmic. Recombinant animals
and specific deletion-bearing mice were used to map the dumbo mutation to a 1.8
Mb region on Chromosome 5. DNA sequencing of genes in this region revealed a
nonsense mutation in the first exon of H6 Homeobox 1 (Hmx1; also Nkx5-3). An
independent spontaneous allele called misplaced ears (mpe) was also identified,
confirming Hmx1 as the responsible mutant gene.
CONCLUSION: The divergence of Hmx1 from its paralogs is reflected by different
and diverse developmental roles exclusive of vestibular involvement.
Additionally, these mutant Hmx1 alleles represent the first mouse models of a
recently-discovered Oculo-Auricular syndrome caused by mutation of the
orthologous human gene.

PMCID: PMC2676275
PMID: 19379485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Feb 15;149A(4):669-80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32705.

Molecular (SNP) analyses of overlapping hemizygous deletions of 10q25.3 to 10qter
in four patients: evidence for HMX2 and HMX3 as candidate genes in hearing and
vestibular function.

Miller ND(1), Nance MA, Wohler ES, Hoover-Fong JE, Lisi E, Thomas GH, Pevsner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205, USA.

We report on the analyses of four unrelated patients with de novo, overlapping,
hemizygous deletions of the long arm of chromosome 10. These include two small
terminal deletions (10q26.2 to 10qter), a larger terminal deletion (10q26.12 to
10qter), and an interstitial deletion (10q25.3q26.13). Single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) studies (Illumina 550 K) established that these deletions
resulted in the hemizygous loss of approximately 6.1, approximately 6.1,
approximately 12.5, and approximately 7.0 Mb respectively. Additionally, these
data establish that Patients 1, 2, and 3 share common, distal, hemizygous deleted
regions of 6.09 Mb containing 37 RefSeq genes. Patients 3 and 4 share a 2.52 Mb
deleted region corresponding to the proximal deleted region of Patient 3 and the 
distal deleted region of Patient 4. This common, hemizygous region contains 20
RefSeq genes including two H6 family homeobox genes (HMX2 and HMX3). Based on
previous reports that Hmx2/Hmx3 knockout mice have vestibular anomalies, we
propose that hemizygous deletions of HMX2 and HMX3 are responsible for the inner 
ear malformations observed from CT images, vestibular dysfunction, and congenital
sensorineural hearing loss found in Patients 3 and 4.

PMCID: PMC2743949
PMID: 19253379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jun 10;306(2):373-9. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Hmx homeobox gene function in inner ear and nervous system cell-type
specification and development.

Wang W(1), Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine and Infertility, Joan and Sanford I. Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, 515E 71st Street, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The Hmx homeobox gene family is comprised of three members in mammals, Hmx1,
Hmx2, and Hmx3, which are conserved across the animal kingdom and are part of the
larger NKL clustered family of homeobox genes. Expression domains of Hmx genes in
distantly related species such as Drosophila and mouse suggest an ancestral
function in rostral central nervous system development. During vertebrate
evolution, the Hmx genes appear to have been recruited into additional roles in
inner ear morphogenesis and specification of vestibular inner ear sensory and
supporting cell types. Being derived from a common ancestor, the vertebrate Hmx
gene family is thus a strong candidate to investigate functional overlap versus
the unique roles played by multiple genes belonging to the same family. The
functions of Hmx2 and Hmx3 were investigated via directed gene mutagenesis and
the primary regions where Hmx2 and Hmx3 exert their individual functions are
consistent with their expression domains, such as the vestibule and uterus.
Meanwhile, it is notable that some tissues where both Hmx2 and Hmx3 are
extensively expressed were not severely affected in either of the Hmx2 or Hmx3
single mutant mice, suggesting a possible functional overlap existing between
these two genes. Compound Hmx2 and Hmx3 double mutant mice showed more severe
defects in the inner ear than those displayed by either single knockout.
Furthermore, novel abnormalities in the hypothalamic-neuroendocrine system, which
were never observed in either of the single mutant mice, confirmed a hypothesis
that Hmx2 and Hmx3 also function redundantly to control embryonic development of 
the central nervous system.

PMID: 15925593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jan;76(1):100-11. Epub 2004 Nov 19.

A whole-genome scan for 24-hour respiration rate: a major locus at 10q26
influences respiration during sleep.

de Geus EJ(1), Posthuma D, Kupper N, van den Berg M, Willemsen G, Beem AL,
Slagboom PE, Boomsma DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, Van der
Boechorststraat 1, 1081-BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands. eco@psy.vu.nl

Identification of genes causing variation in daytime and nighttime respiration
rates could advance our understanding of the basic molecular processes of human
respiratory rhythmogenesis. This could also serve an important clinical purpose, 
because dysfunction of such processes has been identified as critically important
in sleep disorders. We performed a sib-pair-based linkage analysis on ambulatory 
respiration rate, using the data from 270 sibling pairs who were genotyped at 374
markers on the autosomes, with an average distance of 9.65 cM. Uni- and
multivariate variance-components-based multipoint linkage analyses were performed
for respiration rate during three daytime periods (morning, afternoon, and
evening) and during nighttime sleep. Evidence of linkage was found at chromosomal
locations 3q27, 7p22, 10q26, and 22q12. The strongest evidence of linkage was
found for respiration rate during sleep, with LOD scores of 2.36 at 3q27, 3.86 at
10q26, and 1.59 at 22q12. In a simultaneous analysis of these three loci, >50% of
the variance in sleep respiration rate could be attributed to a
quantitative-trait loci near marker D10S1248 at 10q. Genes in this area (GFRA1,
ADORA2L, FGR2, EMX2, and HMX2) can be considered promising positional candidates 
for genetic association studies of respiratory control during sleep.

PMCID: PMC1196413
PMID: 15558495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dev Cell. 2004 Sep;7(3):439-53.

Hmx2 and Hmx3 homeobox genes direct development of the murine inner ear and
hypothalamus and can be functionally replaced by Drosophila Hmx.

Wang W(1), Grimmer JF, Van De Water TR, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, One Gustave L Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The Hmx homeobox gene family appears to play a conserved role in CNS development 
in all animal species examined, and in higher vertebrates has an additional role 
in sensory organ development. Here, we show that murine Hmx2 and Hmx3 have both
overlapping and distinct functions in the development of the inner ear's
vestibular system, whereas their functions in the hypothalamic/pituitary axis of 
the CNS appear to be interchangeable. As in analogous knockin studies of Otx and 
En function, Drosophila Hmx can rescue conserved functions in the murine CNS.
However, in contrast to Otx and En, Drosophila Hmx also rescues significant
vertebrate-specific functions outside the CNS. Our work suggests that the
evolution of the vertebrate inner ear may have involved (1) the redeployment of
ancient Hmx activities to regulate the cell proliferation of structural
components and (2) the acquisition of additional, vertebrate-specific Hmx
activities to regulate the sensory epithelia.

PMID: 15363417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Histochem Cytochem. 2003 Mar;51(3):385-96.

Homeobox protein, Hmx3, in postnatally developing rat submandibular glands.

Shaw PA(1), Zhang X, Russo AF, Amendt BA, Henderson S, Williams V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Anatomy and Functional Morphology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, New York 10029, USA. phyllis.shaw@mssm.edu

Homeobox-containing (Hox) genes play important roles in development, particularly
in the development of neurons and sensory organs, and in specification of body
plan. The Hmx gene family is a new class of homeobox-containing genes defined by 
a conserved homeobox region and a characteristic pattern of expression in the
central nervous system that is more rostral than that of the Hox genes. To date, 
three closely related members of the Hmx family, Hmx1, Hmx2, and Hmx3, have been 
described. All three Hmx genes are expressed in the craniofacial region of
developing embryos. Here we show, for the first time, the expression of the
transcription factor Hmx3 in postnatally developing salivary glands. Hmx3 protein
is expressed in a cell type-specific manner in rat salivary glands. Hmx3 is
present in both the nuclei and cytoplasm of specific groups of duct cells of the 
submandibular, parotid, and sublingual glands. Hmx3 expression increases during
postnatal development of the submandibular gland. The duct cells show increasing 
concentrations of Hmx3 protein with progressive development of the submandibular 
gland. In contrast, the acinar cells of the three salivary glands do not exhibit 
detectable levels of Hmx3 protein.

PMID: 12588966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):5017-29.

Hmx2 homeobox gene control of murine vestibular morphogenesis.

Wang W(1), Chan EK, Baron S, Van de Water T, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

Development of the vertebrate inner ear is characterized by a series of
genetically programmed events involving induction of surface ectoderm,
preliminary morphogenesis, specification and commitment of sensory, nonsensory
and neuronal cells, as well as outgrowth and restructuring of the otocyst to form
a complex labyrinth. Hmx2, a member of the Hmx homeobox gene family, is
coexpressed with Hmx3 in the dorsolateral otic epithelium. Targeted disruption of
Hmx2 in mice demonstrates the temporal and spatial involvement of Hmx2 in the
embryonic transition of the dorsal portion (pars superior) of the otocyst to a
fully developed vestibular system. In Hmx2 null embryos, a perturbation in cell
fate determination in the lateral aspect of the otic epithelium results in
reduced cell proliferation in epithelial cells, which includes the vestibular
sensory patches and semicircular duct fusion plates, as well as in the adjacent
mesenchyme. Consequently, enlargement and morphogenesis of the pars superior of
the otocyst to form a complex labyrinth of cavities and ducts is blocked, as
indicated by the lack of any distinguishable semicircular ducts, persistence of
the primordial vestibular diverticula, significant loss in the three cristae and 
the macula utriculus, and a fused utriculosaccular chamber. The developmental
regulators Bmp4, Dlx5 and Pax2 all play a critical role in inner ear ontogeny,
and the expression of each of these genes is affected in the Hmx2 null otocyst
suggesting a complex regulatory role for Hmx2 in this genetic cascade. Both Hmx2 
and Hmx3 transcripts are coexpressed in the developing central nervous system
including the neural tube and hypothalamus. A lack of defects in the CNS, coupled
with the fact that not all of the Hmx2-positive regions in developing inner ear
are impaired in the Hmx2 null mice, suggest that Hmx2 and Hmx3 have both unique
and overlapping functions during embryogenesis.

PMID: 11748138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mech Dev. 2000 Dec;99(1-2):123-37.

Hmx: an evolutionary conserved homeobox gene family expressed in the developing
nervous system in mice and Drosophila.

Wang W(1), Lo P, Frasch M, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

Three homeobox genes, one from Drosophila melanogaster (Drosophila Hmx gene) and 
two from mouse (murine Hmx2 and Hmx3) were isolated and the full-length cDNAs and
corresponding genomic structures were characterized. The striking homeodomain
similarity encoded by these three genes to previously identified genes in sea
urchin, chick and human, as well as the recently cloned murine Hmx1 gene, and the
low homology to other homeobox genes indicate that the Hmx genes comprise a novel
gene family. The widespread existence of Hmx genes in the animal kingdom suggests
that this gene family is of ancient origin. Drosophila Hmx was mapped to the 90B5
region of Chromosome 3 and at early embryonic stages is primarily expressed in
distinct areas of the neuroectoderm and subsets of neuroblasts in the developing 
fly brain. Later its expression continues in rostral areas of the brain in a
segmented pattern, suggesting a putative role in the development of the
Drosophila central nervous system. During evolution, mouse Hmx2 and Hmx3 may have
retained a primary function in central nervous system development as suggested by
their expression in the postmitotic cells of the neural tube, as well as in the
hypothalamus, the mesencephalon, metencephalon and discrete regions in the
myelencephalon during embryogenesis. Hmx1 has diverged from other Hmx members by 
its expression in the dorsal root, sympathetic and vagal nerve (X) ganglia. Aside
from their expression in the developing nervous system, all three Hmx genes
display expression in sensory organ development, and in the adult uterus. Hmx2
and Hmx3 show identical expression in the otic vesicle, whereas Hmx1 is strongly 
expressed in the developing eye. Transgenic mouse lines were generated to examine
the DNA regulatory elements controlling Hmx2 and Hmx3. Transgenic constructs
spanning more than 31 kb of genomic DNA gave reproducible expression patterns in 
the developing central and peripheral nervous systems, eye, ear and other
tissues, yet failed to fully recapitulate the endogenous expression pattern of
either Hmx2 or Hmx3, suggesting both the presence and absence of certain critical
enhancers in the transgenes, or the requirement of proximal enhancers to work
synergistically.

PMID: 11091080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Acta Otolaryngol. 2000 Jan;120(1):5-10.

Genetic patterning of embryonic inner ear development.

Represa J(1), Frenz DA, Van De Water TR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology & Molecular Genetics, University of Valladolid, Spain.

The commitment of the otocyst to form balance (pars superior) and hearing (pars
inferior) receptors is under the control of patterning genes. Intersecting
patterns of gene expression has been proposed to explain the regionalization of
inner ear sensory receptor development. Insights into the roles of patterning
genes is being acquired from the analysis of inner ear development of null
mutation mice. An example of the consequences of the loss of expression of a
single patterning gene is the effect of a null mutation of paired-box gene 2
(Pax2) on formation of the cochlea. Pax2 transcripts are expressed in the pars
inferior of the otocyst and null mutant inner ears show agenesis of the cochlea. 
This is an example of the profound effect that loss of a single patterning gene
can have on inner ear development. However, more typically there is redundancy of
gene action during inner ear development as exemplified by the overlapping
pattern of expression of two closely related homeobox-containing genes (i.e. Hmx2
and Hmx3) in the pars superior of the otocyst. Hmx2 and Hmx3 genes are both
expressed early in otic development with Hmx3 transcripts present in the placode.
However, null mutation of the Hmx3 patterning gene produced only a limited
vestibular defect, and did not result in the agenesis of the vestibule. This
result suggests that there is redundancy in genes that have similar patterns of
regional expression in the otic anlagen.

PMID: 10779178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biol Chem. 1999 Sep;380(9):1041-8.

Two highly related homeodomain proteins, Nkx5-1 and Nkx5-2, display different DNA
binding specificities.

Mennerich D(1), Hoffmann S, Hadrys T, Arnold HH, Bober E.

Author information: 
(1)Technical University Braunschweig, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Germany.

The mouse Nkx5-1 and Nkx5-2 genes are related to NK genes in Drosophila and
encode proteins with very similar homeodomains. In higher vertebrates Nkx5 genes 
are specifically expressed in the inner ear. Inactivation of the mouse Nkx5-1
gene by homologous recombination revealed a critical role for the formation of
vestibular inner ear structures. Here, we investigated biochemical properties of 
the proteins encoded by the Nkx5 genes. A similar consensus binding sequence was 
isolated for both Nkx5 proteins using binding site selection. This sequence is
related to target sequences previously identified for other Nkx proteins and
contains the conserved homeodomain binding core TAAT. An additional, novel and
unrelated high affinity binding sequence could be identified for the Nkx5-2
protein.

PMID: 10543441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genomics. 1998 May 15;50(1):61-8.

Cloning, characterization, and mapping of the mouse homeobox gene Hmx1.

Yoshiura K(1), Leysens NJ, Reiter RS, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Homeobox-containing genes play an important role in development, including
positional specification of the body plan and organogenesis. We previously
isolated the human HMX1 (H6) gene, a novel homeobox-containing gene of the HMX
family, from a human embryonic craniofacial cDNA library. The closely related
mouse genes Hmx3 (Nkx5.1) and Hmx2 (Nkx5.2) are in the same class as the HMX1
gene and are expressed in the craniofacial region of the developing embryo. To
provide a resource for further characterization of the human HMX1 gene, we
isolated the mouse Hmx1 genomic clone. We show here the mouse Hmx1 genomic
sequence, its gene mapping, and its expression pattern in the developing mouse
embryo. Evidence is presented showing that the three known Hmx genes in the mouse
likely play complementary roles in the development of the second arch, retina,
sympathetic nerve ganglia, and cranial neural ganglia. Hmx1 may play an important
role in the development of craniofacial structures and may interact with Hoxa-2
and Dlx-2 in the second branchial arch.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9628823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Development. 1998 Feb;125(4):621-34.

Inner ear and maternal reproductive defects in mice lacking the Hmx3 homeobox
gene.

Wang W(1), Van De Water T, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Development and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

The Hmx homeobox gene family is of ancient origin, being present in species as
diverse as Drosophila, sea urchin and mammals. The three members of the murine
Hmx family, designated Hmx1, Hmx2 and Hmx3, are expressed in tissues that suggest
a common functional role in sensory organ development and pregnancy. Hmx3 is one 
of the earliest markers for vestibular inner ear development during
embryogenesis, and is also upregulated in the myometrium of the uterus during
pregnancy. Targeted disruption of the Hmx3 gene results in mice with abnormal
circling behavior and severe vestibular defects owing to a depletion of sensory
cells in the saccule and utricle, and a complete loss of the horizontal
semicircular canal crista, as well as a fusion of the utricle and saccule
endolymphatic spaces into a common utriculosaccular cavity. Both the sensory and 
secretory epithelium of the cochlear duct appear normal in the Hmx3 null animals.
The majority of Hmx3 null females have a reproductive defect. Hmx3 null females
can be fertilized and their embryos undergo normal preimplantation development,
but the embryos fail to implant successfully in the Hmx3 null uterus and
subsequently die. Transfer of preimplantation embryos from mutant Hmx3 uterine
horns to wild-type pseudopregnant females results in successful pregnancy,
indicating a failure of the Hmx3 null uterus to support normal post-implantation 
pregnancy. Molecular analysis revealed the perturbation of Hmx, Wnt and LIF gene 
expression in the Hmx3 null uterus. Interestingly, expression of both Hmx1 and
Hmx2 is downregulated in the Hmx3 null uterus, suggesting a hierarchical
relationship among the three Hmx genes during pregnancy.

PMID: 9435283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Chromosome Res. 1997 Nov;5(7):501-2.

Assignment of the murine Hmx2 and Hmx3 homeobox genes to the distal region of
mouse chromosome 7.

Wang W(1), Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

PMID: 9421269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Med Genet. 1996 Dec;33(12):996-1001.

Refined mapping of a gene for split hand-split foot malformation (SHFM3) on
chromosome 10q25.

Raas-Rothschild A(1), Manouvrier S, Gonzales M, Farriaux JP, Lyonnet S, Munnich
A.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique, INSERM U-393, Hôpital des Enfants-Malades, Paris,
France.

Split hand-split foot malformation (SHFM) is a genetically heterogeneous limb
developmental defect characterised by the absence of digital rays and syndactyly 
of the remaining digits. Three disease loci have recently been mapped to
chromosomes 7q21 (SHFM1), Xq26 (SHFM2), and 10q25 respectively (SHFM3). We report
the mapping of SHFM3 to chromosome 10q25 in two large SHFM families of French
ancestry (Zmax for the combined families = 6.62 at theta = 0 for marker AFM249wc5
at locus D10S222). Two recombinant events reduced the critical region to a 9 cM
interval (D10S1709-D10S1663) encompassing several candidate genes including a
paired box gene PAX2 (Zmax = 5.35 at theta = 0). The fibroblast growth factor 8
(FGF 8), the retinol binding protein (RBP4), the zinc finger protein (ZNF32), and
the homeobox genes HMX2 and HOX11 are also good candidates by both their position
and their function.

PMCID: PMC1050809
PMID: 9004130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Biol. 1994 Mar;162(1):288-303.

A novel NK-related mouse homeobox gene: expression in central and peripheral
nervous structures during embryonic development.

Bober E(1), Baum C, Braun T, Arnold HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Technical University of
Braunschweig, Federal Republic of Germany.

We have identified three novel mouse homeobox genes that are related to the
Drosophila NK gene family. Two genes without direct homologues in Drosophila were
designated Nkx-5.1 and Nkx-5.2; the third gene Nkx-1.1 constitutes the mouse
homologue to NK1.Nkx-5.1 and Nkx-5.2 are closely linked on mouse chromosome 7,
whereas Nkx-1.1 is located on a different chromosome. Here, we report the
spatiotemporal expression pattern of Nkx-5.1 during prenatal mouse development.
Nkx-5.1 gene activity begins at Embryonic Day 10.5 in the developing ear, the
neural tube, and dorsal root ganglia. It continues to be active throughout
prenatal life in discrete regions of the brain with an anterior border in the
ventral diencephalon at the optic chiasma and expression domains in
mesencephalon, metencephalon, and myelencephalon. At midgestation, Nkx-5.1 is
also expressed in mesenchyme of the head and branchial arches, and in some
cranial ganglia, as well as in derivatives of neural crest, such as the truncus
sympathicus and myenteric ganglia. The time pattern of Nkx-5.1 expression and its
confinement to primarily postmitotic cells of the central and peripheral nervous 
system suggest that Nkx-5.1 may play a role in the specification of neuronal cell
types.

PMID: 7510254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


